L o u i s  B e n j a m i n
To Denise, with more love than you can imagine. You always inspire me, and any magic in 
these pages comes from you.
And to my parents, who have unwaveringly backed my every escapade.
D e d i c a t i o n

ix
and supported my work at ICP. Per is a master of digital printing, 
and I first learned how to make custom color profiles from him.
I turned the corner and got serious about making artistic 
nudes during a Summer Residency program at the School of 
Visual Arts. Eric Weeks was one of my advisors. His insightful cri-
tiques helped me to sharpen my artistic voice and shape my first 
collection of nude work, and he continues to inspire me now.
Simply put, this book would not have happened without the 
stewardship of Über Mensch Neil J. Salkind, Ph.D., who has 
been an incredible ally. It’s rare to actually have fun talking busi-
ness and even enjoy a pastrami sandwich at the same time, but 
Neil has that capacity — he can take care of business and still 
keep it light.
I will always remember Zack Siegel, who first taught me 
about professional retouching techniques, and who put me in 
touch with Neil, which started this whole ball rolling…
Cameras have been one of my favorite playthings since my 
early teens, and Mom and Dad have provided me with many of 
them, including my very first 35mm and digital cameras.
I cannot finish without recognizing Mika, who got me think-
ing about digital manipulations, whose self-portrait torso graced 
my living room for a long time before I ever owned a digital 
camera.
Throughout the months of the writing process, my wife 
Denise kept asking, “Are you still having fun?” And I was. 
I’m certain that she sacrificed more than I: passing on social 
events, doing all the cooking, and losing me to writing over 
many consecutive weekends and late nights. Her support and 
love never faltered. She has never been threatened by the 
prospect of naked women gracing our living room, and with 
her, I’ve never been a “starving artist,” in either alimentary or 
emotional terms! 
Louis Benjamin
June 2009
This book was only possible through the contributions and inspiration 
of a lot of people, and I’m certain that what I’m writing here will not 
cover everyone, or do justice to the people who are mentioned. You 
all have my gratitude.
The 27 artists who contributed work and participated in the 
interviews are named throughout. They gave this book its real 
substance. I am standing on their shoulders. Their extreme gen-
erosity and talent inspires me.
My own photos could not have happened without the spirit, 
collaboration and inspiration provided by the wonderful people 
who sat in front of my lens, including Denise, Sienna, Isabel, 
Aubrey, Damiana, Moon Marie, Tia, and Nekosi. Sienna graces 
the cover of this book. Isabel brought collaboration to a new level 
and is still one of my favorite models to work with. My brilliant 
friend Damiana was second only to Denise in terms of support 
and positive energy as I brought this book to completion. 
Cara Anderson, Danielle Monroe, and the team at Focal 
Press were my champions from the start, and ­Mission Control 
throughout this project. Alisa Andreola took what was essen-
tially a pile of pictures and pages of raw text and crafted a fin-
ished work. Paul Gottehrer steered the raw manuscript through 
its odessey of editing, proofing, and printing. From proposal to 
finished product, the entire team worked with me on this with 
genuine enthusiasm, vision, and professionalism. I really appre-
ciate their backing and partnership.
I owe a special debt of gratitude to Frank Franca, who is a 
gifted artist and an imaginative and innovative teacher. He shows 
how untrue the phrase “those who can’t, teach” really is. I’ve 
had the privilege of assisting him in his lighting course, where I 
learned much about how to teach lighting and how to allow stu-
dents room to make mistakes. He demonstrated that showing 
archetypes from art and film is probably the most powerful and 
concrete way to drive home the principles of lighting. His exam-
ple inspired much of the material in the chapter on lighting.
Thanks also to H. Eugene Foster and Per Gylfe of the Inter-
national Center of Photography. Eugene has always encouraged 
Acknowledgments

xi
Preface
Beauty is character and expression. However, there is nothing in 
Nature with more character than the human body. By its force or 
its grace it evokes the most varied images. At times, it resembles 
a flower—the flexion of the torso imitates the stem, the smile the 
breasts, the head and the sheen of the hair represent the blooming 
of the corolla… And at other times, the human body curved back 
is like a spring, a beautiful bow on which Eros adjusts his invisible 
arrows. And then there are times when it forms an urn. The human 
body, is above all the mirror of the soul and that is where its greatest 
beauty comes from.
—Auguste Rodin
This is an invitation to come exploring. If you’re interested in shooting 
fine art nudes, whether you have shot some already or not, this book 
is for you. However, it’s as much about art photography as it is about 
nudes per se. At its heart, the book is about four questions: What 
constitutes a fine art nude? How are different artists approaching the 
genre? How does a photo work? And what’s involved in translating 
artistic vision into a picture?
This is an encouragement to color outside the lines. It’s a dem-
onstration of the vast range of approaches to the nude in fine art 
photography. If you have already been shooting nudes and you’re 
looking for inspiration, I hope that some of the examples in this book 
give you fresh ideas. If you are looking for a conceptual foundation 
for your work, and not just a look or a theme to explore, you may be 
especially interested in Parts I and IV. I have also included resource 
lists at the end of each chapter, which may put you in touch with 
other sources of inspiration.
This book is about cross-pollination. We live in a culture that 
often overemphasizes specialization. The “Renaissance” man or 
woman is a rare breed, and if you look at most books on the topic of 
nude photography, they’re narrowly focused. It’s easy to find books 
that are only about lighting, or posing, or retouching, for example. 
You can find books that focus purely on art theory, and you can find 
monographs—the work of a single artist, often about a single project. 
What’s harder to find is a book that attempts to integrate the various 
ways of thinking about making nudes. Instead of focusing narrowly, 
I wanted to trace the overall topography of the world of the fine art 
nude in photography.
It’s also easy to stay anchored in the present, looking only at 
contemporary work, and only at photography. There are many refer-
ences to art history here, beyond the history of photography. I also 
examine some of the technical aspects of a field that has always 
been the product of a marriage between art and technology.
We’re in a culture that is obsessed with surface, and we are 
inundated with disposable imagery. This is a call to create photos 
that offer more in the second and subsequent viewings. In the United 
States, we are also living in a post-Mapplethorpe, post- “wardrobe 
malfunction” era, where nudity is “not safe for work” and censorship 
has an economic motivation. If your ideas are provocative, chances 
are you’ll meet with resistance in showing your work. While I didn’t 
want to grant too much importance to that resistance, I also wanted 
to acknowledge that it is there, and discuss some of its long his-
tory. In the end, it’s about you making the art that you are inspired to 
make. I thought it was important to write a book that emphasizes the 
choices you can make, rather than telling you what to think.
Thus, you are holding my humbly submitted attempt at an inter-
disciplinary approach to the field of the fine art nude photograph, 
drawing from art, science, and history. I hope that you will find it 
interesting, inspiring, and perhaps even liberating.

C H 1  
G a l l e r y

1
C H A P T E R  O N E   |   G a l l e r y
5
Gallery
6
opposite page:  Sienna by Louis Benjamin.
1
above:  Rock N Roll Lifestyle. Photo by Richard Rasner (Unique Nudes) of Nakayama Studios.

6
C H 1  
G a l l e r y

7
C H A P T E R  O N E   |   G a l l e r y
opposite page top:  © 2009 Harvey Stein.
TOP:  La Coupe de Fruits 3. Reproduced by 
 permission of Pascal Renoux.
opposite page bottom:  Reproduced by 
­permission of Barney Cokeliss.
 
 
BOTTOM:  Keonna, Lincoln Beach. Reproduced by 
permission of Saddi Khali.

8
C H 1  
G a l l e r y
 

9
C H A P T E R  O N E   |   G a l l e r y
TOP:  Water Study 5. Reproduced by permission of Steven 
Billups.
opposite page:   Da Plane. Gary Breckheimer/ 
www.GaryBreckheimer.com.
 
 
BOTTOM:  Reproduced by permission of Robert Gregory 
Griffeth.

10
C H 1  
G a l l e r y
 
 
TOP:  Reproduced by permission of 
Nina Pak.
BOTTOM:  Of Mice and Matadors. 
Reproduced by permission of Tobias 
­Slater-Hunt.

11
C H A P T E R  O N E   |   G a l l e r y
 
Reproduced by  
permission of Ned & Aya 
Rosen.

12
C H 1  
G a l l e r y
 
 
TOP:  Jordan Swimming. Reproduced by ­permission of Saelon 
Renkes, www.saelon.com.
BOTTOM:  Reproduced by permission of JD Yezierski.

13
C H A P T E R  O N E   |   G a l l e r y
 
TOP LEFT:  Reproduced by permission of Terry Donovan.
 
BOTTOM LEFT:  Reproduced by permission of Jafar M. Pierre.
ABOVE:  Male Butterfly. Reproduced by permission of Alfred Laij.

14
C H 1  
G a l l e r y
TOP:  Self Portrait. Reproduced by permission of Mayumi 
Yoshimaru.
BOTTOM:  TV Woman. Reproduced by permission of Gaspar 
Marquez.
 
 

15
C H A P T E R  O N E   |   G a l l e r y
 
 
TOP:  Now as Then 2. © 2009 Pet Silvia.
BOTTOM:  My Turn. Reproduced by permission of Steve Cherrier.

C H 2  
U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t

17
    
C H A P T E R  T W O   |   U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t
Undressing Fine Art: 
Approaches to the 
Fine Art Nude in 
Photography
“There is nothing worse than a sharp image of a fuzzy 
concept.”
—Ansel Adams
T
he proposition seems simple enough: ask someone to 
take their clothes off, point a camera at them, and press 
the shutter release. That is the essential gesture of making 
a nude photograph, but we’re also talking about making fine 
art, and that changes things a bit. Making photographic fine 
art nudes is often a more sophisticated prospect than it seems 
at first blush.
2
OPPOSITE PAGE:  Reproduced by permission of Alfred Laij.

18
C H 2  
U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t
Fine Art
Let’s first be clear about how the phrase “fine 
art” is used in this book. These are works of art 
based solely on the vision of the artist and cre-
ated in a process that is concerned with the dis-
cipline of making art. You may have visited the 
web sites of photographers who refer to their 
fine art work as “personal.” We can distinguish 
this from applied arts (commercial work) or 
crafts, where the creative vision and the impe-
tus for making the image might come largely 
from a client, a market segment, or some utili-
tarian purpose.
Fine art only has to do with the expression of 
an idea. The creative process is focused on the 
art object itself, art for art’s sake. Even though 
creating artwork can be deeply personal, with 
the artists essentially making the work for 
themselves, the work only becomes part of the 
larger dialog of fine art when it is shared or made 
public through communities such as the web, 
the gallery system, or museums. At the same 
time, showing the work is often a by-product of 
a fine artist’s process, not the primary objective.
There is an inner game to fine art. The 
strongest fine art work has to do with much 
more than a look, a style, or the surface of the 
work. These works often have to do with a 
statement that the artist wants to make, or a 
question that the artist wants to answer. Even 
in the case of artists who are terrible with words 
and only work visually, you can sense the clarity 
of the ideas that drive their work. Artists often 
work on long-term projects, or work inside a 
theme, exploring ideas that relate their works 
to each other. Working on a long-term project 
also gives the artist time to develop and refine 
the idea that might start out very vague.
Notice that nothing in our working defini­
tion of fine art has anything to do with whether 
the image is pretty, or even whether the image 
is “good.” In fact, some observers think that the 
current art market is interested in anti-beauty 
and unflattering imagery as a reaction to long-
standing conventions of aesthetics. Fine art 
can be about pure beauty and conventional 
aesthetics, but much contemporary work 
is about pushing boundaries, subverting 
Reproduced by permission of Ned 
& Aya Rosen.

19
C H A P T E R  T W O   |   N u d e
about the work. It can be applied in a preten­
tious way, and it is often used to claim legitimacy 
for a work. Some think the phrase “artistic 
nudes” represents a very specific and narrow 
approach. It quickly becomes clear that these 
terms don’t mean the same thing to everyone.
At some level, most images of the nude are 
concerned with beauty, perfection, or propriety; 
all matters that relate to ideals. Kenneth Clark 
wrote in The Nude: A study in Ideal form, “Every 
time we criticize a figure, saying that a neck is too 
long, hips are too wide or breasts too small, we are 
admitting, in quite concrete terms, the existence 
of ideal beauty.” He argued that the nude is not 
the subject of an artwork, but a form in its own 
right—a genre of art—and the unclothed figure 
functions in much the same way as the hero in 
an epic. When we think of nudes as a genre, we 
can identify many subgenres, including portraits, 
figurative works, abstracts, narrative tableaux, 
landscapes, and environmental studies.
Images of the nude convey something more 
than what the body looks like, and the state 
of nudity has symbolic power. It also carries 
Reproduced by permission 
of Alfred Laij.
norms, re-examining assumptions, and seeing 
things with fresh eyes.
Nude
A fair amount has been written about the 
difference between “naked” and “nude.” The 
painter Lucien Freud does not refer to his 
works as nudes, he refers to them as naked 
portraits, and he further breaks from the tradi-
tion of portraiture by avoiding the temptation 
to portray his sitters in a flattering way. Most 
think of nudes as being more about the state of 
undress in an abstract or conceptual way that 
is also stripped of identity, where nakedness is 
simply undressed, but the subject has a clear 
identity. As an extreme example, a contorted, 
faceless body is a nude, while a candid portrait 
of someone skinny-dipping is a naked portrait. 
It’s probably less important to decide which 
designation applies to your work than it is to 
decide which attitude applies. Are you more 
interested in form, or in persona?
The word “nude” is a loaded term that can 
be used to suggest how the viewer should think 

20
C H 2  
U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t
BOTTOM:  Abstract nudes are often created by ­moving in close 
and isolating parts of the body. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
TOP:  Precarious. Many nudes are concerned with the form of 
the body, exaggerating or idealizing its characteristics. Gary 
­Breckheimer/www.GaryBreckheimer.com.
a charge that can be problematic. Much of 
that charge arises from the codified shame of 
being naked that so many of us learn at an early 
age (think Adam and Eve and the Fall From 
Grace). Another source of that charge can be 
seen in the way that fashion operates: if the 
“clothes make the (wo)man,” then stripping her 
clothes also strips away a significant part of her 
social stature. Viewers often place themselves 
in the scene being depicted, and expect that the 
artist or the model would be embarrassed or 
ashamed to make the image. From there, public 
discourse often goes to whether the image 
should be displayed, and whether the work is 
art or pornography. This friction has been an 
ongoing issue with the nude in art.
John Berger, who was writing about 
European painting at the time, suggested that 
the nude is always conventionalized to the 
point of being a form of dress. That holds true 
for the nude in contemporary photography, 
and so does another of his observations: the 
protagonist of these images is the spectator; a 
stranger standing in front of the picture, who 
is presumed to be male and fully clothed. We 
refer to this as the male gaze.
Reading Images
In our highly visual culture, it’s rare to stop and 
think specifically about how we take in photo-
graphs, but there is a form of literacy involved. 
Think of the times you’ve looked at a photo-
graph and remarked that something about the 
image didn’t work: perhaps a hand was cut off 
by the edge of the frame in an unpleasant way, 
something in the background was distracting, 
or some detail was blocked or blown out by 
bad exposure. That’s the result of reading the 

21
C H A P T E R  T W O   |   R e a d i n g  I m a g e s
image. We learn to read photographs—often 
in multiple passes, and in a very complex way 
that involves both the content and the context 
of the image.
In magazines, newspapers, and often even 
on television, pictures are generally expected 
to have captions. But even in the fine art 
world, the words surrounding the picture are 
often just as impactful as the colors and tones 
within the picture. Consider, for example, 
how  often you’ve looked at a photograph 
and been puzzled. You then read the title 
or caption, and it either became completely 
clear or got even murkier. How you title your 
work, or leaving it “Untitled,” can be a very 
important strategy in shaping how your image 
is read. Painter René Magritte understood 
this phenomenon and used it to create a 
powerful effect. His titles are an integral part 
of his work, and were designed to have the 
effect of disorienting the viewer.
TOP:  The “implied nude” is a ­popular 
trope that can ­either ­conform to 
­standards of modesty, or make a 
­statement about them. Photo by  
Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:   Le Salon Rouge. 
­Reproduced by permission of Pascal 
Renoux.

22
C H 2  
U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t
Visual literacy varies just as verbal literacy 
does, and developing an awareness of visual 
language and culture can give your work a 
powerful resonance.
When viewers begin to read a photo for the 
first time, they are often concerned with what is 
being depicted in the image, what those depic­
tions might symbolize, and whether some part 
of the image alludes to something they already 
know in their culture. A woman wearing a 
pointy green crown with green face and body 
makeup is likely to be read as the Statue of 
Liberty. Showing  Lady Liberty “in the buff” 
might be interesting, but placing her naked next 
TOP:  The carrot and the stick are commonly used motivators, but 
so is sex. You probably didn’t need this caption to get that from the 
image. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  By ­referencing the Abu-Ghraib scandal and the ­Pietà 
of Michelangelo, this image calls attention to ideals, ­politics, and 
shame. Reproduced by permission of JD ­Yezierski. 

23
C H A P T E R  T W O   |   V i s i o n
to something that looks like a bomb would spin 
the image in a very different direction, upping its 
ante as both a political and an artistic statement.
Viewers aren’t simply concerned with what 
an image wants to say; they’re also interested 
in what that image conveys about the moment 
it was captured or how it was put together. In 
our guts, we often sense very quickly whether 
an image holds together, and its subtext can 
be more powerful than the intended content. 
If the artist is confused about what the photo 
is about, the viewer will sense that confusion 
in the reading. If the model doesn’t trust the 
photographer, or is nervous for some reason, 
that unease will usually show in an image. For 
many photographers beginning to shoot nudes, 
the first thing to contend with is giving yourself 
permission to make the images you imagine 
making. If you’re playing it safe, that will show 
up in your work, as well.
With the widespread awareness of com­
puter manipulation in photography, a question 
The effect shown here was ­created with a 
projector, rather than ­digital ­manipulation. 
Reproduced by permission of JD 
Yezierski. 
that comes up with increasing frequency is 
whether Photoshop was used to manipulate 
or com­posite an image together, particularly 
when something in the image seems too per­
fect or even slightly implausible. Intentionally 
showing or hiding the “seams” in a constructed 
image can be an important visual strategy.
Vision
You may have noticed that the discussion so far 
has jumped straight from the artist’s concept to 
how the viewer takes in the image, even though 
the practice of photography is heavily involved 
with what’s in between those points—working 
with lighting, posing the subject, making the 
capture, and producing the final image. This is 
because in the most effective bodies of work, the 
clarity and integrity of the artist’s vision is what 
drives everything else and gives it resonance. 
That doesn’t mean that the artist works in a lin-
ear fashion from cerebral concept to finished 
product. The process of many extremely success-
ful and effective artists can be very exploratory 

24
C H 2  
U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t
The color ­relationships  
in this photo are as 
­important as the framing 
or the figure. The clouds 
add an ­allegorical quality. 
Photo by Louis Benjamin.

25
C H A P T E R  T W O   |   V i s i o n
How We Got Here Photographs were not 
always considered an art form, and even as 
recently as the late 1970s, photography was 
still not fully accepted as a fine art medium. 
That view can be traced all the way back to 
the beginnings of photography, when it was 
referred to as “photogenic drawing.” The idea 
was that “nature herself” reached into the 
camera and drew the scene. It was a view that 
invalidated the photographer, and it would be 
some time before the argument was advanced 
that the photographer’s choices of where to 
place the camera and when to trip the shutter 
were important expressions of artistic intent.
As photography gained acceptance as a fine 
art medium, many of the works that helped 
it to gain legitimacy were nudes, perhaps 
because the form alludes to fine art paint-
ings and Greco-Roman statuary. During that 
period, galleries dedicated to photography 
flourished because few photographers could 
get their work shown in fine art galleries.
One of the artists who worked tirelessly to 
legitimize fine art photography was Imogen 
Cunningham, who was still working hard at 
91 years old in 1975. Some of her most cele-
brated images are nudes. Alfred Stieglitz was 
another standard-bearer for photographic 
art. His nude photographs of his wife Geor-
gia O’Keefe, famous as an artist in her own 
right, are part of the canon of art photography. 
­Stieglitz also championed the acquisition of 
photography by major art museums, which fur-
ther legitimized the medium. Other important 
figures in the history of photography include 
Paul Strand, Edward Weston, Man Ray, and 
many of the Surrealists, who all created nudes 
as important parts of their bodies of work.
Art is often about turning convention on its ear. 
Such was the case when 21-year-old Irving Penn 
shot the image known as Nude No 1, 1947. Penn 
was already successful as a fashion photogra-
pher for Vogue, and for the body of work that 
ensued two years later, he instinctively rejected 
the facilities of Condé Nast and the skinny ide-
alized bodies of fashion models to create a 
series of images in collaboration with fleshy art 
models who bore physical resemblance to the 
Venus of Willendorf—a fertility icon thought to 
have been carved somewhere between 24,000 
and 22,000 BC. The images were not embraced 
by everyone, but the process of making those 
images energized and transformed his image 
making and broadened the definition of the 
modern photographic nude.
The case of Penn highlights another fac-
tor in the legitimization of art photography: 
an uncanny alliance between fashion editors 
and artist photographers. Even though fash-
ion photography is about selling clothes, the 
creation of fashion imagery is one of the few 
and improvisational, even accidental, where the 
artist thinks of herself or himself as a conduit for 
the work rather than the producer of the work.
A lot of photographers, if not most, make the 
photos they’re compelled to make in the moment. 
It’s very common for photographers to say that 
they try not to think when they’re composing 
a shot. It’s more about the feeling or gestalt of 
what’s in the viewfinder. For artists that produce 
work that way, the force of vision is applied in 
the editing process, which could happen years 
after the original exposure is made.
(Continued)

26
C H 2  
U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t
TOP:  The figure in the foreground 
­alludes to the painting in the 
­background, which is reminiscent of the 
work of Francis Bacon. Reproduced 
by permission of Daniel Sikorskyi—­
chiaroscurist, www.sikorskyi.ca.
BOTTOM:  A photograph that alludes to 
the work of Gustav Klimt. Photo by Louis 
Benjamin.

27
C H A P T E R  T W O   |   M o M A  a n d  S z a r k o w s k i
arenas of commercial art where editors have 
often turned over complete creative control 
to artists such as Penn, Stieglitz, and diCorcia. 
That alliance is still strong today, and art col-
lectors and dealers are increasingly looking at 
fashion photography as a legitimate art form.
Two other photographers particularly notewor-
thy for their use of the nude in fashion imagery 
are Helmut Newton and Guy Bourdin. After his 
first heart attack, Newton refused to take com-
missions from clients who would not grant him 
creative control. Newton’s genius was in chan-
neling the sensibilities of German aesthetics 
and erotic fetishism into a kind of chic that was 
the antithesis of fashion photography before 
him, and that depicted his women protago-
nists as powerful and independent. Bourdin is 
noteworthy because his highly creative, visu-
ally sophisticated images have had a strong 
and lasting influence on the look of fashion 
and art photography right up to the present.
The implicit promotion of the artistic merit 
of the work of these photographers, and the 
work of other fashion photographers dating 
all the way back to the 1920s, sent a strong 
message to the public about the validity of 
photography as an artistic medium. Today, 
museums and galleries present fashion imag-
ery as works of art, and the nude remains a 
staple of fashion imagery.
Inspired by Penn’s “Earthly Bodies” ­exhibition at the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, New York. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
M oMA and Szarkowski
The Museum of Modern Art in New York, also 
known as MoMA, was an important front in 
the ascendance of photography as a fine art 
medium. Edward Steichen headed its pho-
tography department from 1947 to 1962 and 
curated the exhibit “The Family of Man” in 
1955. It was one of the most widely seen pho-
tographic exhibits ever, and a watershed for art 
photography.
Steichen chose John Szarkowski to be his 
successor. Under Mr. Szarkowski’s leadership 
from 1962 to 1991, MoMA staked out the 
territory of art photography in the early 1960s. 
This was a time when other museums were just 
coming to grips with whether or not to show 

28
C H 2  
U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t
photography at all, few galleries were showing 
photography, and few collectors were buying it; 
art photography was a new frontier.
While no one can lay claim to having single-
handedly defined the entire canon of photog­
raphy, we know of artists such as Ansel Adams, 
Diane Arbus, Eugene Atget, Walker Evans, 
Garry Winogrand, and Cindy Sherman (to name 
a few) largely through the efforts and influence  
of John Szarkowski. Helping to bring the exem­
plary works of those artists to public attention is  
a major contribution to the art of photography, 
but Szarkowski’s contributions in the area of 
criticism have equal if not greater weight.
In 1966, he published The Photographer’s 
Eye, wherein he set forth a framework of five 
dimensions for looking at the artistic qualities 
of a photograph in terms of characteristics and 
problems that are specific to photography. In 
the introduction to the book he wrote that 
he hoped his framework “may contribute to 
the formulation of a vocabulary and a critical 
perspective more fully responsive to the unique 
phenomena 
of 
photography.” 
Szarkowski 
understood that being able to articulate what 
works or doesn’t work about an image, beyond 
whether or not you like it, is an important part 
of developing an artistic vision. His five dimen­
sions are the frame, the thing itself, vantage 
point, the detail, and time. These dimensions 
will be discussed in more detail shortly.
To his credit, Szarkowski didn’t claim even 
then that the five issues he outlined in The 
Photographer’s Eye were the medium’s only issues. 
Art and photography have continued to change 
and expand since he held sway. Conceptualism 
and performance, in particular, have become 
much more important aspects of contemporary 
photography than they were in his time, and 
while they are not unique to photography, they 
TOP and BOTTOM:  Photos by Louis Benjamin.

29
C H A P T E R  T W O   |   L o c a t i n g  N u d e s  i n  S z a r k o w s k i ’ s  D i m e n s i o n s
The hands ­bursting out of the frame dramatize the space. The 
clipped fingers ­emphasize the edge of the frame and the ­difference 
between inside and out. Reproduced by permission of Saddi 
Khali. 
are useful ways of thinking about the artistry of 
a photo. You could argue that they fit within the 
dimension of vantage point, but you could also 
argue for them being something distinct from 
that. Still, his critical approach to art photogra­
phy is well suited to exploring pertinent dimen­
sions of the fine art nude.
Locating Nudes in  
Szarkowski’s Dimensions
The Frame
Szarkowski described framing as “the central act 
of photography, the act of choosing and elimi-
nating, [which] forces a concentration on the 
picture edge—the line that separates in from 
out—and on the shapes that are created by it.”
While framing is the way the photographer 
positions the viewfinder around the scene just 
before he or she trips the shutter, cropping is 
re-interpreting what was shot by cutting down 
the area that will be printed, after the fact. 
Whether by cropping or framing in-camera, 
the important details of a picture are defined 
by means of the resulting frame. The body 
can be enclosed in the frame, constrained or 
truncated by it, or included in an expanse of 
what graphic designers call negative space. 
A small figure near the bottom of the frame 
seems grounded. Placing the figure dead 
center in the frame can create a kind of 
ambiguity. Placing it near the top tends to 
give the impression of floating upward, or of 
an impending plunge.
Another graphic design concept is visual 
tension or imbalance, which is created by 
moving elements away from the center of the 
frame. A  three-quarter portrait nude with 
the same pose and expression will have very 
different visual qualities depending on whether 

30
C H 2  
U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t
TOP:  Shot with a ­Hasselbad 
XPan, the ­cinematic 2.7:1 
aspect ratio of this  
panoramic image comes 
from a 24mm x 65mm film 
frame, nearly double the 
width of a standard 35mm 
frame. Reproduced by 
­permission of Barney 
­Cokeliss.
BOTTOM:  Geisha III, from 
the Iconival series. Shot with 
a Rollei, Brighton studio  
UK 2007. Kendo ­equipment, 
square framing, and elegant 
light ­create a striking portrait. 
Reproduced by ­permission 
of Tobias Slater-Hunt. 

31
C H A P T E R  T W O   |   T h e  T h i n g  I t s e l f
Cropped to 1:1 from the in-camera aspect 
ratio of 2:3, the framing is an important 
compositional foundation for this shot. 
Photo by Louis Benjamin.
it is shot with the bridge of the nose on the 
center line, with the right eye (camera left) on 
the center line, or with the shoulder touching 
the center.
The proportions (aspect ratio) of the frame 
also matter. The aspect ratio of the 35mm 
frame is 2:3, and that’s also what most 35mm-
format DSLRs conform to. That aspect ratio is 
thought to mimic the field of view of normal 
human vision most closely. The square format 
poses very specific compositional challenges, 
while 4 × 5 is considered large format. Point 
and shoot cameras often use a 4:3 frame 
that matches the shape of conventional TV. 
Panoramic cameras create images in a range of 
proportions that are short and wide and have 
a cinematic feeling. HD movies are typically 
cut in 16:9, and 70mm theatrical films like 
“Alien” are in 2.20:1. Still other theatrical films 
are in 2.35:1. Each of these formats creates a 
distinctive compositional space and can have a 
subtle, yet important, impact upon the way an 
image is read.
The Thing Itself
In a famous series of paintings called “The 
Treachery of Images,” the Surrealist René 
Magritte inscribed “Ceci n’est pas une pipe” (This 
is not a pipe) on the canvas beneath an illustra-
tion of a pipe, emphasizing that the illustration 
is not the thing itself. Szarkowski asserted that 
even though the viewer often fails to distinguish 
between the picture and the thing(s) depicted, 
the photographer has to be clear about this dis-
tinction and to think in terms of the photo.
The camera doesn’t see the way we do, enlarg-
ing the distinction between the way we see the 
thing itself and the way its representation appears. 
Artists often make use of the transformation 
inherent in the photographic process. Simply 

32
C H 2  
U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t
by being attuned to the physicality of the subject 
and the play of light, the naked body can be 
rendered in many ways through photography. 
The same body in the same pose can produce 
results that range from a documentary style 
portrait to melodrama, to abstraction; and all 
of these outcomes are the product of artistic 
choices that the photographer makes.
Vantage Point
Alberto Korda’s famous 1960 portrait of Che 
Guevara demonstrates how powerful the low 
“heroic angle” can be in elevating the percep-
tion of the person portrayed. That shot is so 
BOTTOM:  ­Vantage point, framing, and ­high-key lighting combine 
to ­create a striking ­image that borders on the abstract. ­Reproduced 
by permission of John Evans, ­JohnEvansPhotography.co.uk. ­
TOP:  A depiction of a person imitating ­representations of people. 
© 2009 ­Harvey Stein.

33
C H A P T E R  T W O   |   T h e  T h i n g  I t s e l f
iconic that a great number of images imitate it. 
The web is full of amateur cell phone nudes shot 
“Hail Mary” style, with the camera positioned at 
arm’s length, above the head, and tilted down-
ward. Pornography has turned the “upskirt” into 
a pop cliché. Each of these approaches empha-
sizes seeing the subject from a point of view 
that we wouldn’t normally see unless we were 
extraordinarily tall or short at the very least.
Szarkowski suggested that there is also a 
more expansive interpretation of vantage point: 
it can be seen as a particular attitude toward the 
subject. For example, the body can be depicted 
as an inert object, a symbol of sex, or even a non 
sequitur. It can be photographed in a way that 
suggests perfection, or emphasizes deficiency.  
Pictures can be about nudity itself, about moral­
ity, or simply a description of what someone 
looks like. The artistic nude can be about embrac­
ing ideals of beauty or subverting them.
Nudity in a work of art carries a certain 
symbolic power, and one possible vantage point 
of the photographer making nudes can be that 
of exploring the very nature of such power. By  
formulating, articulating, and adopting a partic-
ular vantage point, the artistic photographer can 
build a cohesive and effective body of work.
The Detail
In isolating fragments of the thing itself (by 
means of placing the frame), a photographer 
can elevate what seems trivial, imbuing it with 
symbolic meaning. John Coplans made nude 
self-portraits that famously isolated portions of 
his aging body in surprising ways.
Time
Just as the edge of the camera frame slices 
through space, the opening and closing of the 
shutter slices through time. Photos are never 
really instantaneous, even if they look that way. 
TOP and BOTTOM:  Focusing on small details can elevate their ­ 
significance and transform the mundane. Photos by Louis 
­Benjamin.

34
C H 2  
U n d r e s s i n g  F i n e  A r t
TOP:  The Muybridge photos inspired Marcel Duchamp to paint 
Nude Descending a Staircase, which ­scandalized the 1913 Armory 
Show in New York. This composite image was ­inspired by the 
­Duchamp painting, and used Edgerton’s ­contribution, strobe 
­lighting, to freeze motion. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Using available light and “dragging the ­shutter” at 
1.3 seconds causes the moving figure to blur, producing the ghostly 
look that Francesca Woodman used so effectively. The camera was 
mounted on a tripod. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
They can be made to emphasize the passage 
of time as an impressionistic smear of motion 
blur, or to isolate momentary events that we 
can only appreciate because they were recorded 
in less time than an eye blink.
In 1878, Eadweard Muybridge helped 
railroad baron Leland Stanford (the university 
gets its name from him) to settle a bet by 
photographing a horse at full gallop. He 
produced a succession of frames that froze 
the action and showed without a doubt that a 
horse actually lifts all four feet off the ground 
simultaneously when it gallops.
The Muybridge images are often referred to 
as being stroboscopic, but they are not. They 
are available-light photos. It wasn’t until the 
early 1930s—about 50 years later—that Harold 
“Doc” Edgerton developed the electronic flash. 
For his famous sequences, Muybridge rigged 
an array of 12 stereoscopic cameras with an 
elaborate trip-wire trigger system to capture 
the frames at 1/1000 second.
Using this technique, Muybridge went 
on to document locomotion in animals and 
humans extensively, producing a number of 
sequences that feature male or female nudes. 
The Muybridge photos catered to gender roles 
of the time. His nude men were photographed 
performing feats of strength, such as striking 
a blow or wrestling. His nude women were 
photographed doing things like descending 
a staircase, turning around in surprise and 
running away, receiving a bouquet from a child, 
or pouring a bucket of water onto another 
woman.

35
C H A P T E R  T W O   |   T h e  T h i n g  I t s e l f
From “Waterscape Nude Series.” In this photo, the dragged shutter 
gives ­flowing water an ethereal quality. The ­perfectly still model is 
rendered with sharp clarity. Reproduced by permission of Scott 
Foltz.
In the late 1970s Francesca Woodman made 
groundbreaking images, using her own body as 
subject matter. In some of those images, she 
would move parts of her body during long 
exposures to produce nude self-portraits that 
suggested blending into her surroundings or 
evanescence.
The time frame is an essential component 
of the classic Cartier-Bresson photograph. 
Szarkowski noted that his idea of the decisive 
moment has been misinterpreted. It’s all about 
the photographer’s awareness and exploitation 
of time in the context of composition and the 
visual frame. The photographer waits to trip 
the shutter at the moment when patterns and 
lines emerge from the flux of movement and 
coalesce within the frame to produce a visual 
crescendo.

C H 3  
T h e  B o d y  I t s e l f :  A  S u r v e y  o f  M o d e s

37
    
C H A P T E R  T H R E E   |   T h e  B o d y  I t s e l f :  A  S u r v e y  o f  M o d e s
The Body Itself: 
A Survey of Modes
O
ne way to think about nudes is in terms of modes of 
portrayal, or how the body is shown. Two additional 
aspects to consider are how much of it is shown and 
how clearly it is revealed. In the previous chapter, we looked at 
how the photographic fine art nude can be thought of as its 
own genre. This chapter will briefly outline some of the more 
recognizable modes of portraying the fine art nude. We can 
think of the various modes as subgenres of the nude. Just as 
genres can be combined (e.g., docudrama), modes can be 
combined.
As you explore nude photography, you will probably encounter 
many images that don’t clearly fit any particular mode, and it is doubt-
ful that a comprehensive listing of modes can ever be compiled. How-
ever, thinking in terms of modes can still be an informative way of 
surveying the wide range of approaches.
3
OPPOSITE PAGE:  Photo by Louis Benjamin.

38
C H 3  
T h e  B o d y  I t s e l f :  A  S u r v e y  o f  M o d e s
Naked Portraits
The painter Lucien Freud refers to his works 
as naked portraits and avoids the word “nude.” 
His work resists some of the norms of the art 
world, and Freud isn’t interested in making flat-
tering portraits. Neither was Avedon. It is pos-
sible to portray naked people in ways that are 
more about the person inhabiting the skin and 
less about conforming to a stylistic norm such 
as boudoir, cheesecake, or some other idealized 
representation.
It is worth noting here that people really 
do have at least one “good side,” or perhaps it’s 
more accurate to say that people look better 
from some angles than others. The ­distinctions 
can be amplified by your choice of lens and 
lighting. It’s a good idea to be aware of that, 
and maybe even do a few test shots to evaluate 
first. Once you’ve found those stronger points 
of view, use them, unless you’re out to do some-
thing subversive, in which case you might only 
shoot the “bad” angles. Word to the wise: your 
TOP:  Reproduced by permission 
of Ned & Aya Rosen.
BOTTOM:  Photo by Louis Benjamin.

39
C H A P T E R  T H R E E   |   T h e  B o d y  i n  M o t i o n
sitter might object if they don’t understand 
that you’re turning convention on its ear.
Self-portraits
A number of artists have found that putting 
themselves in front of the lens, rather than 
working with a model, is a more effective way to 
get access to the ideas they are trying to express. 
There are technical challenges to shooting self-
portraits, but for these artists, the benefits are 
worth the trouble.
If you read critiques of photography, you’re 
likely to come across the notion that the photo-
graph itself, and certainly any given photogra-
pher’s body of work, acts as a kind of self-portrait. 
That makes a certain amount of sense, since the 
work is defined by the unique vision of the pho-
tographer. The stronger the artist’s voice in their 
work, the more this holds true.
The Body in Motion
Body movement in contemporary nude pho-
tography borrows heavily from dance. The 
challenge is to find other kinds of activities to 
source our ideas from. Moving the body empha-
sizes the dimension of time, and the reaction 
of photography toward time is either to arrest 
movement or to render the body as evanescent, 
emphasizing how fleeting a moment can be and 
how temporal we are.
Aaron Siskind’s 1956 series entitled 
Pleasures and Terrors of Levitation shows 
­swimming-trunk-clad divers isolated against a 
blown-out white sky, freezing them in mid fall. 
Because there is no indication of up or down, 
the divers seem oddly suspended in time and 
space, limbs projecting in different directions. 
There is no blur. Siskind not only suspended 
time, he also disavowed gravity, and in doing 
TOP:  Packing material makes an interesting alternative draping 
material. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Self-portrait. Reproduced by permission of Mayumi 
Yoshimaru.

40
C H 3  
T h e  B o d y  I t s e l f :  A  S u r v e y  o f  M o d e s
so, emphasized the movements and the form of 
the body as it falls through space.
Covering the Body and 
the “Implied” Nude
In some circles, covered-up nudes are referred to 
as “implied” nudes. This relatively safe approach 
to making nudes can be beautiful, but it is also 
rife with cliché, and runs the risk of being read 
as timidity on the part of the photographer, 
the model, or both. The body can be draped in 
cloth, lit in a way that throws shadows over it, or 
posed in a way that obscures the genitals. They 
can also be covered with a prop, referred to as 
a cache-sexe. The hands can be used to cover the 
breasts—a gesture that some call a “hand bra.” 
In each of those approaches, the suggestion of 
TOP:  © 2009 Harvey Stein.
BOTTOM:  An “implied” nude. Steven Billups, photographer.

41
C H A P T E R  T H R E E   |   C o v e r i n g  t h e  B o d y  a n d  t h e  “ I m p l i e d ”  N u d e
nakedness beneath or behind the covering can 
be very strong.
A variation of this approach is photographs 
where the sitter is actually wearing clothes of 
some sort, but the use of a prop or angle and 
framing obscures the view such that we see only 
skin and imagine the sitter is naked. Sometimes, 
models who want “nudes” in their portfolio, but 
don’t want to be seen as too brazen, will insist 
on shooting only implied nudes.
The phrase “tasteful nudes” is also commonly 
used on networking web sites frequented by 
models and photographers. In many ways this 
term is a bit ambiguous, since tastes vary widely, 
but clearly a tasteful nude is generally not very 
sexual, aggressive, or confrontational in style.
In some of those same communities, people 
use the phrase “artistic nude” in a way that sug-
gests that they believe that artistic nudes are 
always devoid of eroticism. However, anyone 
familiar with the work of Nobuyoshi Araki 
will be aware that his nudes are considered fine 
art and that they are highly eroticized; clearly, 
­artistic nudes are not constrained to being 
chaste and formal images.
Araki coined his name as an allusion to 
anarchy, and he openly acknowledges that he 
intended to objectify women in his early work. 
He was the first to show pubic hair in Japan, 
challenging the laws and creating a bad-boy buzz 
for himself. Araki’s work doesn’t go down easily, 
and some consider it pornographic. There are 
big differences aesthetically between an Araki 
photograph and porn, but that doesn’t make his 
work any less shocking. His work catalogs his 
obsession with women, and especially their vul-
vas, but it also shows a fascination with and love 
for life in Tokyo. His photographs of flowers are 
very different from Mapplethorpe’s work, and 
demonstrate how much the artist’s vision can 
transform the presentation of a subject.
Photo by Louis Benjamin.

42
C H 3  
T h e  B o d y  I t s e l f :  A  S u r v e y  o f  M o d e s
Helmut Newton’s aesthetics were very differ-
ent from those of Araki, but his fine art work 
is certainly erotic, as well. His family referred to 
him as “Dirty Helmy,” and in interviews his wife 
June has said that he sometimes went too far 
with his ideas. His pursuit of ideas near the edges 
of acceptability, coupled with his obvious love of 
women and the female form, produced work that 
still has strength decades after it was produced.
Full-body
Shooting full-body has its specific challenges. It 
places certain constraints on lighting, and often 
requires the photographer to move back from 
the subject. In terms of the language of images, 
it also has a particular impact, putting emotional 
distance between the viewer and the subject, and 
it tends to make the image as much about the 
space around the figure as it is about the subject.
TOP and BOTTOM:  Photos by Louis Benjamin.

43
C H A P T E R  T H R E E   |   A b s t r a c t
Intimacy
As you move in closer and the subject fills more 
of the frame, the viewer often experiences a 
stronger sense of intimacy with the subject. 
Directing the subject’s gaze into the lens can 
intensify this effect, which is usually read as 
an acknowledgment of the viewer’s presence. 
At the same time, it is quite possible to cre-
ate a sense of intimacy without even showing 
the face.
Slightly parting the lips is also read as a kind of 
openness. Eye contact and glossy lips are played 
out in the extreme in cheesecake photography, 
where the model often appears to be seducing 
the viewer with a “come hither” expression.
At the other end of the spectrum are fashion 
nudes, where the model typically breaks eye con-
tact and doesn’t acknowledge the viewer, often 
seeming to look above, beyond, or through the 
camera. John Berger observed that the effect of 
the detached gaze is to trigger a kind of envy 
in the viewer that in turn makes them want 
whatever fashion is being depicted. Romantic 
­longing with a touch of envy is a central theme 
in the work of Bruce Weber, who routinely uses 
nudes and pushes boundaries in his fashion pho-
tography. Advertising, especially in America, is 
increasingly concerned with selling lifestyles and 
attitudes, rather than product benefits. When 
very few clothes or no clothes at all are depicted, 
the message that comes across can be sharply 
focused on attitude or lifestyle.
Abstract
Moving in close to isolate parts of the body also 
tends to create a sense of abstraction. When the 
face is not visible, the contents of the frame tend 
to have more to do with lines, shapes, forms, or 
textures, rather than breasts, buttocks, or geni-
tals. Additional degrees of abstraction can come 
TOP:  Shadows and framing emphasize the abstract ­qualities of this 
torso. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Photo by Louis Benjamin.

44
C H 3  
T h e  B o d y  I t s e l f :  A  S u r v e y  o f  M o d e s

45
C H A P T E R  T H R E E   |   B o d y  v s .  N a t u r e
OPPOSITE PAGE:  Reproduced by permission of Steve Cherrier.
BOTTOM:  Reproduced by ­permission of Terry Donovan.
from throwing the figure out of focus and using 
high-contrast lighting.
Often, the abstraction results at least in 
part from making the body less identifiable as 
a body and relating it to something else, but 
this is not always the case. Henry Horenstein’s 
series, Humans, features isolated parts of mod-
els’ bodies that are clearly recognizable for what 
they are, yet they are presented in a way that 
transcends simple recognition. An image of an 
eye becomes a meditation on form—it is rare 
that we get that close and simply stop and stare. 
A photograph gives us permission to stare and 
to see something anew.
Sculptural
Sculptural nudes derive many of their qualities 
from lighting, the physicality of the poses, and 
the point of view of the camera. They can be 
abstract, but that abstraction is more the result 
of factors like foreshortening and shadow than 
the result of the imposition of the frame.
Some of the earliest works of Kishin Shi-
noyama were concerned with the body as pure 
form, where he posed curled naked bodies on 
boulders to emphasize the similarities. Aus-
trian Andreas Bitesnich has taken a very dif-
ferent approach to the figure, but his works also 
trade on the sculptural qualities of the body.
Body vs. Nature
Shinoyama’s boulder nudes also suggest another 
mode of the nude in fine art photography, which 
is comparing the human form to nature or to 
human-made things. Photos can suggest how 
humans are an extension of nature, or contrary 
to it. The body can blend in, or it can be made to 
stand out starkly. Placing bodies against archi-
tectural elements often exhibits how the entire 
TOP:  © 2009 Harvey Stein.

46
C H 3  
T h e  B o d y  I t s e l f :  A  S u r v e y  o f  M o d e s
scale and proportion of architecture is based on 
the human form.
Skin
Liquid latex, mud, flowers, honey, and other 
substances with strong textures or colors of 
their own can be applied to the skin. In most 
cases they tend to call attention to the form of 
the body by altering the appearance of its sur-
face. Body paint can do that as well, particularly 
if it is a single color (think of the Jill Masterson 
character in “Goldfinger”), but it can also act as 
a kind of camouflage that dominates the picture 
and renders the body unrecognizable in ways 
that most clothing cannot. A potential pitfall 
of working with some styles of body painting 
is that the photograph can become about the 
painting or the painter, reducing the body to 
just another canvas.
Another approach is writing on the body 
and affixing signs. Text tends to dominate an 
image, and the effect is usually more potent 
than attaching a caption. If the text is not 
­legible but is recognizable as text, it creates a 
particular type of visual tension.
As you move in closer, the characteristics of 
the skin become increasingly prominent. Macro 
lenses can be used to bring the viewer so close 
that the skin itself is transformed into something 
abstract. Lighting the skin from the side with a 
directional light source such as a grid spot will 
emphasize its texture. This can be a very power-
ful effect on the faces and bodies of older men, 
but it might bring protests from anyone who 
sees lines and bumps in the skin as flaws.
Gesture
A famous painting in the Louvre from the late 
1500s has been riffed in photography many 
times. It’s referred to as “Portrait presumed 
BOTTOM:  Reproduced by permission of Terry Donovan.
TOP:  Reproduced by permission of Terry Slater.

47
C H A P T E R  T H R E E   |   E r o t i c
to be of Gabrielle d’Estrées and her sister the 
Duchess of Villars.” In it, two apparently nude 
women are standing inside a draped space fac-
ing partially toward each other and partially 
toward the viewer. In a seemingly exhibition-
istic gesture, the sister on the left side of the 
canvas is reaching over to tweak the nipple of 
the sister on the right, whose hand gestures 
suggest that she is poised to respond in kind. 
These gestures meant something very differ-
ent in the time that the painting was made, 
and understanding what the painting intends 
to signify requires a knowledge of its codified 
symbolism—for example, tweaking the right 
nipple apparently meant that the woman in the 
painting was pregnant.
Gestures can be powerful accents in an 
image. They have much richer application across 
the history of painting, especially in religious 
works, than in photography. In such paintings, 
gestures often have specific meanings, such as 
the Holy Trinity, sovereignty, protection, and 
more. Austrian Expressionist painter Egon 
Schiele often used hand gestures to convey 
emotion in powerful ways.
Although glamour photography makes use 
of gestures more frequently than other modes, 
many photographers overlook the hands, mainly 
posing the body and possibly directing the 
facial expression. In glamour shots, the hands 
are often placed to bring attention to the face, 
making use of the principle of leading lines.
Erotic
It has been said that particularly in the United 
States, images of nudity are typically viewed in 
one of only two ways: either as abstract, artistic 
and asexual, or as erotic/pornographic. Aside 
from academic medical imagery, exceptions to 
those two views are hard to find.
TOP:  Reproduced by permission of Ned & Aya Rosen.
BOTTOM:  Photo by Louis Benjamin.

48
C H 3  
T h e  B o d y  I t s e l f :  A  S u r v e y  o f  M o d e s
If you ask ten people what makes a photo-
graph erotic, you’re likely to get a dozen answers. 
If you want to make things more interesting, 
ask them about the difference between erot-
ica and porn. It’s easy to find examples where 
the words erotica and pornography are used 
interchangeably. In 1964, Justice Potter Stew-
art famously declined to give a specific defini-
tion for “hard-core” pornography, but declared 
“I know it when I see it.” This is an important 
distinction, since works deemed obscene are not 
protected as free speech in the United States, 
and various communities have dramatically dif-
ferent standards.
Robert Mapplethorpe famously blurred the 
line between art and erotica. While even his 
photos of flowers could be read sexually, his 
more explicit depictions of sexuality could be 
read aesthetically. He was a master technician, 
and his lighting was outstanding. Mapple-
thorpe was gay and some of his work depicted 
TOP:  Reproduced by permission of 
Alfred Laij.
BOTTOM:  A playful and unusual take 
on eroticism that demonstrates that 
gestures can be done with more than 
the hands. Reproduced by permission 
of Jafar M. Pierre.

49
C H A P T E R  T H R E E   |   B i o l o g y
gay life and sexuality in a very frank and 
unflinching way. Despite the obvious artistic 
and ­technical merit of his work, some people 
took offense with some of his subject matter, 
and because an exhibition that included some 
of his works had received funding from the 
National Endowment for the Arts (the NEA), 
he, along with photographer Andres Serrano, 
became lightning rods in the political move-
ment to limit public financing of works that are 
controversial or portray certain content.
Whether you choose to enter into the art vs. 
pornography vs. obscenity fray or not, we can 
consider what might make an erotic image more 
artful. To the extent that it helps inform your 
artistic vision, it may be useful to come up with 
a personal distinction, but beyond that, the old 
adage applies: “one man’s meat is another man’s 
poison.” If you choose to explore that kind of 
subject matter, be prepared to meet resistance.
Biology
The naked body, especially the female body, is 
often viewed as either a signifier of sex or the 
site of sex. Theorists observe that in advertising, 
even clothed females symbolize sex. If you doubt 
that, visit the New York City subway and take 
note of the graffiti applied to advertising posters 
featuring women: breasts or pubic hair are drawn 
so as to make them appear naked, penises are 
drawn in proximity to their crotches or mouths, 
and lewd captions are often added. These are not 
rare occurrences. One way to read such graffiti is 
that the scrawl is simply ­expressing the subtext 
that is already present in these images.
The act of removing our clothes is often 
elevated to ritual as a precursor to sexual inter-
course, one of the fundamental functions of 
human biology. Beyond depicting copulation, 
many biological functions of the body have 
TOP:  Pubic Display of Modesty? This image would have been 
illegal in 1935. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Reproduced by permission of Saddi Khali.

50
C H 3  
T h e  B o d y  I t s e l f :  A  S u r v e y  o f  M o d e s
been exploited by pornographers, and thus a 
pitfall for fine art photographers who explore 
these themes is that they are likely to have 
their work viewed by some as pornographic. 
Terry Richardson has said that he likes putting 
sexual images in mainstream magazines, not 
porn magazines. His inner game is to push the 
images as far as he can, and still get them run.
Pregnancy and motherhood are two of the 
more obvious potential outcomes of sex, but it 
is noteworthy that representations of sex and 
sexuality are strongly segregated from imagery 
of pregnancy, motherhood, and family. Nudes 
of a pregnant Demi Moore, Cindy Crawford, 
and Heidi Klum have all graced the covers of 
major magazines. The poses of pregnant nudes 
in these settings tend to be very stylized and 
conventional.
Pregnant nudes in fine art are relatively 
rare. One of the more controversial examples is 
Daniel Edwards’ life-size statue of a crowning 
Britney Spears on all fours caressing the head 
of a bearskin rug while giving birth. It was pre-
sented in 2006 as a monument to the pro-life 
movement. The event had a lot of ­photographic 
coverage, and it is worth noting that a high pro-
portion of the published photos of the statue 
were shot from angles that obscured the view 
of the emerging baby’s head.
As problematic as art involving ­pregnant, 
and especially birthing, women can be, the 
depiction of naked children is even more 
treacherous. Jock Sturges’ work with nudist 
families is widely known, as well as the FBI 
raid and the legal case surrounding it, in which 
a San Francisco grand jury refused to indict on 
any charges. Some of the photographs in Sally 
Mann’s “Immediate Family” show her own pre-
adolescent children in scenes that have been 
described by some as sexualizing them.
Artists who explore these areas have to 
become adept at defending themselves. Ironi-
cally, the controversy surrounding such cases 
can increase the cachet of the artist. Sturges 
points out that artists in such situations also run 
the risk of being defined by the scandal instead 
of the art that they produce. Mapplethorpe had 
said that he hadn’t intended to be a poster boy 
for free speech. He just wanted to be written 
about on the merits of his art.
The Male Nude
It is obvious that male nudes in fine art are far 
more rare than female nudes. This may be due 
in part to the dominance of the heterosexual 
male gaze as a point of reference in art culture, 
which may well have had as much of a shaping 
influence on art production as the emergence of 
single-point perspective in Florence during the 
early fifteenth century.
Regardless of the tendencies of the main-
stream, photographers such as Bruce Bellas, 
better known as Bruce of LA, blazed the trail of 
photographing the male nude. Beginning in the 
1940s, he shot for “physique” ­magazines, such as 
those published by Joe Weider, at a time when 
gay pornography was illegal. His campy style 
and the slightly amateurish look of his early 
work helped define the look of male ­homoerotic 
photography and strongly ­influenced the work 
of fashion photographers such as Herb Ritts 
and Bruce Weber. Mr.  Weber changed the  
face of advertising when he ­portrayed a man  
as a sex object for the first time in the iconic 
Calvin Klein underwear campaign. It was the 
look that launched the designer underwear 
business. Weber’s sometimes controversial 
advertising work has continued to push the 
envelope, and includes the catalog he did for 
Abercrombie and Fitch, which featured ath-
letic male nudes.

51
C H A P T E R  T H R E E   |   T h e  M a l e  N u d e
Photo by Richard Rasner (Unique Nudes) of Nakayama Studios.

C H 4  
T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t

53
    
C H A P T E R  F O U R   |   T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
4
The Nude in Context
“Any photographer who says he’s not a voyeur is either stupid 
or a liar.”
—Helmut Newton
T
wo broad approaches that can be taken with nudes have 
to do with whether the image treats the body (which 
happens to be naked) as a formal element, or whether 
the very state of nakedness is the point of the photo. Formal 
images tend to be more restrained, downplaying the erotic, 
and lean toward the abstract. When nakedness itself is the 
point, the intended effect can often be to shock or to appeal 
to the libido, though more sophisticated approaches can be 
humorous, camp, ironic, or dramatic. These are all questions 
of context, and especially in more conceptual work, context is 
key in establishing a contemporary work as art.
OPPOSITE PAGE:  Randy’s Donuts. Gary Breckheimer/www.GaryBreckheimer.com.

54
C H 4  
T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
TOP:  A formal nude that emphasizes curves and flirts with 
­eroticism. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Linda (Plage). A formal nude set in a landscape. 
­Reproduced by permission of Pascal Renoux.
In 2004, The Museum of Modern Art pre-
sented a show called “Fashioning Fiction in 
Photography since 1990,” in which photogra-
phy that was shot for fashion was re-cast in an 
artistic context. In essence those pieces were 
converted into art works, even though they were 
originally created as commercial work accord-
ing to a brief. This appears to be the beginning 
of a shift. In the years to come, curators may 
well view fashion photography primarily as art 
and not commercial work.
It has already been acknowledged that 
American visual culture is highly affected by 
pornography. Although it is doubtful that 
this is an exclusively American phenomenon, 

55
C H A P T E R  F O U R   |   T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
it points to a challenge for photographers, 
­especially heterosexual males who photograph 
naked women: the knee-jerk reaction is to shoot 
and maintain such images in the context of the 
male erotic gaze. To go beyond that default 
context requires the conscious and active cre-
ation of a different context.
Many photographers create their work in 
the framework of a long-term project. This 
approach can help contextualize the image 
before it is made. In some cases, the artist can 
take years to construct a single image from very 
specific visual symbols. Joel-Peter Witkin is 
an example of an artist who works with nudes, 
props, and even cadavers in a very methodical 
way to construct his images over time. Witkin 
has a clear-cut idea in mind, well in advance 
of any shooting. Jeff Wall does not photograph 
nudes, but his process is even more painstaking, 
and he relates his work more to the tradition of 
painting than photography.
TOP:  A dramatic fashion nude features an unusual 
pose and point of view, lighting, and sophisticated 
composition. Reproduced by permission of Ned & 
Aya Rosen.
BOTTOM:  The interaction between the model and the 
mannequin leans toward the surreal. Reproduced by 
­permission of Terry Donovan.

56
C H 4  
T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
photographic object. The techniques of Surreal-
ist photography are probably the most artful of 
all applications of photography. Surrealist pho-
tography redefined the boundaries of lighting, 
of pose, and of what is now post-production. 
While the bulk of the debate of photography as 
an artistic medium centered around questions 
of whether a photograph was anything more 
than a copy of whatever was placed in front of 
the camera, and whether the photograph was 
truthful or not, the Surrealists were interested 
in using the photographic trace as a starting 
point for imagery rather than an end in itself.
As important as the techniques of Sur-
realist image production are, the philosophy 
that gave rise to the Surrealists’ work is just as 
important. André Breton, who wrote the 1924 
Surrealist manifesto, and Salvador Dalí, one 
of Surrealism’s best-known figures, were both 
Other photographers shoot at a particular 
moment because something grabs them; they 
work on gut instinct, and they aren’t trying to 
think too much during the process. Photogra-
pher Tim Davis has lectured about the impor-
tance of shooting the image that gets your 
attention and that you see in the moment, even 
if you don’t know why it calls to you. It might be 
years before you find that it fits into a collection 
with other photos, and that is the moment that it 
becomes art. Working in that way gives a gestalt-
driven process that is related to the work of Dada 
and Surrealism. For such artists, the context in 
which the work is finally presented may not even 
be conceived of when the image is shot, and the 
Surrealists shunned context altogether.
The Surrealists are particularly interesting 
for their use of the nude and for the way they 
broke up notions about photography and the 
LSD & The Mushroom (The 
Sequel). Image by Cheirodon.

57
C H A P T E R  F O U R   |   T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
strongly influenced by the writings of Sigmund 
Freud. The Surrealists, by their very name, were 
after something that was above realism. They 
were interested in the subconscious and the 
­irrational. If anything, theirs was the antithesis 
of the highly conceptual curatorial vision that is 
at the forefront of contemporary art.
One of the nagging critiques leveled against 
the Surrealists is the dominance of the hetero-
sexual male gaze in the genre. Many argue that 
Surrealism’s treatment of the nude objectifies 
and reduces the female body to a fetish object. 
The Surrealists argued that this objectification 
is simply a reflection of the true state of the 
(male) subconscious. We shouldn’t forget that, 
much like the Algonquin Round Table, the 
Surrealists were a male-dominated clique.
Photographer Lee Miller was the photo 
assistant, lover, and model of Man Ray, the best 
known of the Surrealist photographers. She is 
the one who discovered and refined the tech-
nique of solarization, which is generally attrib-
uted to Man Ray. Part of the reason that Miller 
does not receive much recognition is that she 
was ultimately persona non grata among the 
Surrealists when she left him.
Surrealistic imagery is just one mode of nude 
photography that makes heavy use of the sym-
bolic value of the body itself. When the sym-
bolic nature of the body is exploited, the body 
can become metaphoric. Such images may not 
have a caption, but they illustrate the adage 
that a picture is worth a thousand words and 
leverage a strong connection to verbal language. 
Photographs that demonstrate visual puns also 
trade heavily on the crossover between the 
visual and the linguistic.
TOP:  Solarization was one of the signature ­techniques of the 
­Surrealists. This image was created by applying a blue toner to a 
solarized black-and-white photo. Reproduced by permission of 
Terry Slater.
BOTTOM:  Reproduced by permission of Terry Donovan.

58
C H 4  
T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
The idea of narrative in photography is easy 
to see in photographic sequences, where the 
viewer creates the action by deducing what has 
changed between each frame. Within the single 
frame, narrative can arise from the relationship 
between compositional elements, but it also 
often arises out of the way in which the viewer 
processes an image linguistically. This starts 
with mentally naming the objects ­perceived 
within the picture plane.
Environmental portraiture is largely about 
using the surroundings to tell a story about the 
person depicted, and environmental nudes can 
have a similar narrative quality. While a portrait 
tends to be a story about an actual person, envi-
ronmental nudes are more often about a char-
acter in a setting or an idea. Gary ­Breckheimer 
is a master of the form. He describes his work 
as being focused upon the juxtaposition of the 
female form against the environment with erotic 
overtones. His clever work often bristles with 
subtext. Breckheimer has spent 20 years refin-
ing his art, and cites Robert Farber’s “Moon-
scape” as an early inspiration that still calls to 
him today. He considers himself a rule-breaker, 
and he gets a rush from creating his daring and 
beautifully crafted street nudes.
Environmental nudes often place the ­subject 
in a setting where nakedness is not acceptable 
or expected, emphasizing nakedness itself. In 
other instances, the environmental nude is 
more about the sculpture of the body in a space. 
A popular trope is placing a naked woman in a 
dilapidated space. The opposition of decadence 
and the female form in images often drama-
tizes the quality of beauty itself.
Another form of environmental nude is an 
extension of environmental portraiture, where 
TOP:  The setting of this photo compels the viewer to create a 
­narrative that explains it. Photo by Steven Billups. 
BOTTOM:  Chicken Gothic. Gary Breckheimer/ 
www.GaryBreckheimer.com.

59
C H A P T E R  F O U R   |   T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
the subjects happen to be nude. Both Nan 
Goldin and Elinor Carucci use photography 
as a kind of personal journal, photographing 
important people in their lives in an up close 
and personal way. Their photographs represent 
slices of their own lives and the environments 
are pieces of their own worlds.
Props are another means of adding narrative 
to an image. The subject often focuses attention 
on the prop, or uses the prop to relate to other 
characters in the scene or to the viewer. A lot 
of props carry a symbolic charge; for example, 
boas and beads carry a heavy association with 
burlesque. Guns and knives are often cliché, 
and so are crosses, but such props can still be 
TOP:  Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Snakes and moons almost always conjure magical, 
mystical, or religious ­overtones. Though much of the tonality of this 
image is dark, its mood is not ominous. Reproduced by ­permission 
of Nina Pak.

60
C H 4  
T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t

61
C H A P T E R  F O U R   |   T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
OPPOSITE PAGE, TOP:  From the Re-Imagined Heroes series. 
Photo by Richard Rasner (Unique Nudes) of Nakayama Studios.
OPPOSITE PAGE, BOTTOM:  Photo by Richard Rasner (Unique 
Nudes) of Nakayama Studios.
used in ways that transcend. Certain props are 
so loaded with meaning that the challenge in 
shooting with them can be a matter of keeping 
the prop from hijacking the image!
The notion of the bodyscape borrows heavily 
from landscape photography that dates back to 
the beginning of photographic art. In most cases, 
framing, lighting, and surprising points of view 
are often used to turn body parts into visual met-
aphors for mountains, dunes, and other geologi-
cal phenomena. The bodyscape emphasizes the 
body as abstraction, and the form almost requires 
that the figure not have a face; after all, with the 
exception of Mt. Rushmore, Georgia’s Stone 
Mountain, and perhaps a few other sites around 
the world, landscapes usually don’t have faces.
For some, the phrase “fine art nude” is 
almost synonymous with a body in a landscape. 
The framing is generally looser than the body-
scape, and the portion of the image taken up 
by the body varies greatly. The portion of the 
frame taken up by the body helps to define 
the significance or insignificance of the body 
relative to the rest of nature. Landscape nudes 
offer an excellent form to explore questions of 
whether humans are outside of nature or part 
of it. Urban landscape nudes tend to emphasize 
the footprint of humankind on nature.
There are also landscape photographs that 
strongly suggest the human figure, mirroring 
the effect of bodyscapes. An interesting twist 
on the idea of the bodyscape is the hybrid that 
comes about by dominating the foreground of a 
landscape image with a bodyscape. The styles of 
landscape and bodyscape merge, and the body-
scape returns to its roots.
TOP:  Reproduced by permission of Gaspar Marquez.
BOTTOM:  Gass. Gary Breckheimer/www.GaryBreckheimer.com.

62
C H 4  
T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
Reference, parody, and commentary are 
three ways in which images have employed 
the nude very effectively, and often contro-
versially. Terry Donovan’s Model vs. Photog-
rapher series creates a kind of parody rarely 
seen. In it, he has reprised shots he did with 
models with himself as the subject. The project 
was invented out of necessity: he had no one 
to shoot with, and he wanted to keep shoot-
ing. While many photographers of nudes rec-
ommend that we get in front of the camera 
ourselves to experience what it’s like, a male 
photographer assuming the poses of a female 
model is a proposition that ups the ante. In an 
e-mail exchange about the series, Donovan 
said this about his process:
“The early shots were done months, even 
years after the original shot had been taken. 
Most of the recent ones are taken at the same 
time as I’m shooting the model.… The biggest 
challenge is trying to match the pose when I’m 
not using a mirror, and … I have to rely on my 
memory of the model’s pose as my only guide. 
As you can see, I miss more often than hit.”
Donovan eventually took the idea a step 
further with “The Model’s Revenge,” a project 
where he turned over creative control to the 
model and allowed himself to be photographed 
in whatever way the model asked, with no lim-
its. The intention was to make himself as vul-
nerable as the models in his routine shoots.
Renee Cox did a body of work that was 
collectively known as “Flipping the Script,” 
which reinterpreted European religious mas-
terpieces including the Pietà, Adam and Eve, 
and Michelangelo’s David, using contemporary 
African-American figures.
TOP:  Reproduced by permission of Alfred Laij.
BOTTOM:  Diagonal composition, camera tilt, and a sense of deep 
space combine to create a compelling merger of bodyscape 
and landscape. Photo by Richard Rasner (Unique Nudes) of 
Nakayama Studios.

63
C H A P T E R  F O U R   |   T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
The lightning rod of the series is a piece 
called “Yo Mama’s Last Supper,” in which a nude 
Renee Cox stands in for Jesus in a rendition of 
the Leonardo da Vinci work that inspired it. 
When the photo was exhibited at the Brooklyn 
Museum in 2001, New York Mayor Rudolph 
Giuliani labeled it “anti-catholic” and called for 
the formation of a “decency standards” com-
mission to keep such works from being shown 
in any New York museum that received public 
funds. Giuliani’s position echoed the attitude 
of Senator Jesse Helms during the controversy 
over funding the National Endowment for 
the Arts.
TOP:  “I find it amazing that people are so ­concerned about 
whether a complete stranger is fat, or thin, or tattooed,  
or—whatever. As if it’s their business, somehow? Well, if it’s my 
­business, I make sure my models are well-fed.” Model: Kaitlin. Photo 
by Marcus J. Ranum/http://photography.ranum.com.
BOTTOM:  Reproduced by permission of Terry Donovan.

64
C H 4  
T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
Cox says her work is about breaking down 
stereotypes, and describes “Yo Mama’s Last 
Supper” as a tongue-in-cheek piece dealing with 
issues of race, gender, and stereotypes. Provoca-
tive, yes, but she says she wanted to have fun with 
it. She also acknowledges that one of the inspi-
rations for her work is that while Christianity 
is big in the African-American ­community, its 
iconography does not include images of black 
people. As a response, she took it upon herself 
to re-envision those classic images. That is a 
powerful, and controversial, context.
We return to the role of context in validat-
ing a work of art. The painter Gustav Courbet 
was probably courting controversy when he 
painted “L’Origine du Monde” (The Origin of 
the World) in 1866. It depicts a woman’s bushy, 
spread-legged vulva from an up close and per-
sonal perspective. Her torso fills the frame, 
with an undraped nipple kissing the top of the 
canvas.
The interesting thing about this work is 
that it is on open display at the museum, and 
it is not treated as something dirty on the 
museum’s web site. This suggests a difference 
in attitude about exhibitions of art in Euro-
pean culture, and yet the museum’s curators 
seem a little defensive. This disclaimer appears 
on the site:
“… The almost anatomical description of 
female sex organs is not attenuated by any his-
torical or literary device. Yet thanks to Cour-
bet’s great virtuosity and the refinement of 
his amber colour scheme, the painting escapes 
pornographic status. This audacious, forthright 
new language had nonetheless not severed all 
links with tradition: the ample, sensual brush-
strokes and the use of colour recall Venetian 
painting and Courbet himself claimed descent 
from Titian and Veronese, Correggio and the 
tradition of carnal, lyrical painting.
“The Origin of the World, now openly dis-
played, has taken its proper place in the history 
Sister’s Got a Habit. Photo by Gary Breckheimer/ 
www.GaryBreckheimer.com.
of modern painting. But it still raises the trou-
bling question of voyeurism.”
In short, the curators are saying, “folks, this 
is art, not smut, and here’s why, even if there is 
that troubling little issue of the male gaze.”
Contemporary painting has inherited a cer-
tain immunity owing to the legacy of works like 
Courbet’s, and so there is a split: a photograph 
treating the same subject material in this way is 
likely to have its artistic merit more vigorously 
challenged, whether it has a clever title or not.
Though the Greeks idealized the nude form 
and third century Hindus even carved erotic 
statues into their temples, there is a long history 
of societal suppression of imagery that shows 
nudity, especially when it can be read sexually. 
Painters such as Egon Schiele and Amedeo 
Modigliani are celebrated artists today, but in 

65
C H A P T E R  F O U R   |   T h e  N u d e  i n  C o n t e x t
their time, some of their works were removed 
or banned from shows, some had entire shows 
shut down, and some had works destroyed. 
Schiele was jailed for obscenity in 1912.
Photographer Paul Outerbridge is respected 
for his artistic genius today, and was a pio-
neer of color photography, nudes, and fetish 
­photography. In 1935, he sent a roll of film to 
Kodak for processing. When it came back to 
him, the “offending” areas in his images had 
been scratched out. His frustration with what 
he considered to be “infantile and ridiculous” 
attempts to legislate morality caused him to 
retire from photography sometime around 
1945, saying that he felt he was being forced 
into making clandestine a matter that should 
be public.
Charis Weston, the model in some of his 
most famous nudes, recalls that about a year 
after Outerbridge had his Kodak moment, 
Edward Weston was using a magnifying glass 
to carefully inspect his print of “Nude, 1936” 
to decide whether he could ship it through the 
mail. If you look very closely at the image, you 
can see a few pubic hairs.
TOP:  Two Uses of a Word. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Reproduced by permission of Saddi Khali.

C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g

    
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
5
69
Light, Shadow, Color, 
and the Qualities of 
Lighting
I
t may seem to be stating the obvious to say that light and 
lighting are what put the “photo” in photography, but a 
quick survey of the offerings of professional and amateur 
photographers alike suggests that many have an uneasy 
relationship with light and lighting. That’s not meant as an 
indictment; it’s an acknowledgment. Many photographers say 
they only use natural light because they don’t like working 
with flash, and many more admit that they don’t understand 
how to light. Yet many of these same photographers do 
recognize when the available light has a quality they like, and 
use it to their advantage. This chapter is about seeing light 
and describing some of the possibilities of using it. It is also 
more theoretical and less specifically about nudes than the 
preceding chapters have been.
When we start to think about light, it’s useful to differentiate among 
qualities of light. Skiers don’t just see snow; they see hard pack, moguls, 
powder, crud, crust, slush, corn snow, loose or wet granular snow, fresh 
snow, spring snow, and ice. Seasoned skiers may have an even larger 
vocabulary for snow, and each distinct type of snow can have a profound 
OPPOSITE PAGE:  Nu à la Fleur Rose. Reproduced by permission of Pascal Renoux.

70
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
effect on the skiing experience. Developing a 
similar sensitivity to various types of light and its 
visual impact will give you a significant advantage 
in making more effective photographs. To create 
a particular look in location photography, some 
shooters might exploit on-camera flash, while 
others insist on natural lighting. In the studio, 
photographers often choose from window 
light, continuous light, strobes, or a mix of light 
sources. These choices are based upon qualities 
of light and have both technical and aesthetic 
implications. They affect the process of shooting 
and the look of the image, but they can also 
impact the psychology of the interaction between 
the artist and the subject.
When applied artfully, light can profoundly 
affect how we perceive the sculpture and spatial 
qualities of a subject. It can also inject drama 
and establish its emotional tone. Viewed in this 
way, light is as much about visual language as it 
is about registering an image.
Working with light is a bit like cooking. Even 
after you learn how to use the basic utensils and 
figure out a couple of recipes, there is a process 
of experience to go through, and there are no 
shortcuts. Grappling with light is not new. While 
the technology of digital photography dates back 
roughly three decades (longer than many of us 
imagine), many common approaches to lighting 
in use today were established seven centuries ago, 
even before Columbus sailed the ocean blue.
Hard and Soft Light
One of the first aspects of light to contend with 
has to do with how shadows are rendered. Hard 
light creates hard-edged shadows, while soft 
light creates shadows with a diffuse, feathered 
edge. Of course, there is a continuum between 
hard and soft light, and the art of working with 
these qualities is figuring out when to use each, 
and how they can be combined to best effect.
Hard light is sometimes called specular 
light, because it tends to create bright, “hot” 
highlights. The shadows produced under hard 
lighting tend to be dense and show very little 
detail, with a crisp, distinct edge. Shadow play in 
front of a projector works because the light from 
the projector lamp is focused into a hard beam. 
Strong light from camera left 
­illuminates the subject and 
the smoke, which needs to be 
­side-lit or backlit to register clearly. 
Reproduced by ­permission of 
Jafar M. Pierre.
 

71
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   H a r d  a n d  S o f t  L i g h t
Hard  light comes from relatively small light 
sources. On a clear day, the midday sun is a high-
contrast pinpoint light source that creates hard 
shadows that can be very hard to deal with.
Soft light produces shadows that show a lot 
more detail, and tends to make colors look less 
saturated. If the edge is diffuse enough, these 
shadows can be nearly undetectable. Light can 
be softened by shining it through material that 
diffuses it or by bouncing it off a large surface. 
Multiple lighting instruments can be arranged 
behind a large piece of diffusing material to 
create an expansive soft light source. The larger 
the surface of the light source, relative to the 
subject, the softer the light. This means that even 
with a soft light source, the light will gradually 
get harder as you move the light away from the 
subject, because its relative size decreases.
Windows, especially large ones, can be a 
great source of soft light. The softness of the 
light depends on the conditions outdoors and 
the direction the window is facing. North light 
is a favorite among sculptors and is extremely 
TOP:  The hard light of 2 PM 
sunlight creates the dramatic finger 
shadows in this image. Photo by 
Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Soft light can produce 
subtle sculptural effects. Notice the 
gentle tonal gradient on the thigh, 
characteristic of soft light. The light 
source was a window behind and 
slightly above the subject. Photo by 
Louis Benjamin.
 
 

72
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
color temperature and is very blue. North light 
is essentially a variation on open shade.
A ring light or ringflash is a special lighting 
instrument that is mainly used in the studio. 
It was invented for medical photography and 
has been widely adopted by fashion and art 
photographers. It is fitted around the lens of 
the camera and throws light in a pattern that 
causes most of the shadows to be canceled. 
Helmut Newton pioneered the distinctive look 
of the light for fashion. When the subject is 
near a wall, the light creates a halo-like shadow 
that outlines the subject.
If you duck under a canopy of trees, you may 
well get dappled light. This occurs when the 
trees block most of the direct sunlight, but an 
irregular pattern of highlights is projected onto 
your sitter. This can be a beautiful and dramatic 
effect, worth seeking out, or a complete nuisance. 
Keep in mind that the highlights might be very 
bright, and you may have to choose between 
blowing out the highlights or blocking up the 
shadows. The other thing to realize with the 
shade of trees is that the leaves are likely to 
create a strong green color cast in your image, 
which your white balance generally will not 
consistent in intensity throughout the day, 
while windows facing east or west are the most 
variable. Windows facing south tend to have 
hotter, harder light.
On overcast days, cloud cover can diffuse 
the sun’s light to the point where shadows are 
undetectable. This omnidirectional light can 
be used to create great portraits, though it can 
sometimes lack contrast and make colors look 
washed out. When that happens, a bit of fill 
flash, especially off axis, and kept to a minimum, 
can add dimension and put a sparkle in the eyes. 
The light on overcast days is also extremely 
blue, and imparts a cool tone on everything if it 
isn’t compensated for.
Regardless of the cloud cover, open shade 
can be a great lighting condition. Where do you 
find open shade? Look for the shadow side of 
a large building or under a canopy of trees. The 
building obstructs the hard, direct sunlight and 
even, filtered light reflects down from the sky. 
This light can still have some direction to it, so 
you may still get interesting shadows, and color 
saturation is not a problem the way it is with 
extremely diffuse light. As the color temperature 
chart on page 91 shows, open shade has a high 
Medium-soft window light ­creates 
a backlit image with luminous 
­highlights that wrap around the 
surface of the skin. The effect is 
essentially a bodyscape. Photo by 
Louis Benjamin.
 

73
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   H a r d  a n d  S o f t  L i g h t
TOP:  Portrait of a Muse III 2009. Part of the most ­beautiful ­woman in town series, Shot in Justyna’s apartment 2008, Lit with ringflash. 
­Reproduced by permission of Tobias Slater-Hunt.
BOTTOM:  Dappled light is ­produced whenever something blocks the light and casts a rhythmic pattern, whether it is tree leaves or something 
man-made. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
 
 

74
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
 
 
compensate for. In Adobe Camera Raw, you 
can compensate for the green by moving the 
Tint slider toward magenta.
Many nudes with Venetian blind lighting 
take their cue from Man Ray. Venetian blinds 
create a distinctive dappling pattern that has 
been used extensively in figurative photography. 
Lace curtains can also create striking dappled 
effects.
Direction
Where the light is coming from has as much 
impact on your image as how hard or soft the 
light is. Even with simple flash photography, 
moving the light off-camera can substantially 
improve the look of the image. We have an 
expectation that natural light will come from 
above for the most part, firelight being one 
exception.
Because a hard light source throws distinct 
shadows, there is a creative opportunity in 
setting the lights so as to place those shadows 
within the frame. Placing a light at an oblique 
angle to the skin will bring out its texture and 
sculptural form. The harder the light, the more 
pronounced this effect will be.
Soft light from the sides of and slightly 
behind the subject can create the dramatic 
effect known as rim lighting. When a hard 
light source is positioned at an extreme angle 
beneath the subject, the upward shadows can 
be very unsettling. This is known as horror 
lighting. Some lighting teachers declare that 
you should never direct light upward at your 
sitter, but there are exceptions. As one example, 
TOP:   Shadows cast by Venetian blinds add to the visual interest 
in this environmental portrait nude. Reproduced by permission of 
Saddi Khali.
BOTTOM:  Two lights graze the body at oblique angles to bring out 
its sculptural qualities. One light is above and to the right, ­aiming 
downward, and the other is to the left and slightly behind the 
­subject, creating a wraparound light. Photo by Louis Benjamin.

75
 
 
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   D i r e c t i o n
angling a smaller lighting instrument slightly 
upward and focusing a pool of light on just one 
part of the body can produce a striking and 
unusual visual counterpoint or accent that is 
aesthetically pleasing.
You can often read the lighting arrange­
ment used to create a photograph, though 
the clues can sometimes be obscured by post-
production. The two things to look at are the 
catch lights in the subject’s eyes and where 
shadows fall. The size and shape of the catch 
lights can also be a clue as to the type of 
lighting instruments used.
BOTTOM:  Catch lights in the eyes are often a telltale sign of the 
lighting setup. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
TOP:  Rim light effect produced by placing the model almost 
­directly between two vertical strip lights. Moving her so that the 
lights come more from behind would create an effect that is more 
of a silhouette with a bright outline. Photo by Louis Benjamin.

76
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
 
 
TOP:  Soft light from the left and slightly behind the subject 
­emphasizes the curved surface and skin texture. The finger 
­shadows give a clear indication of the location of the light source. 
Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  A single large, soft light source produced this ­intriguing, 
nearly abstract photo. High key lighting and smart framing make 
this composition work. Reproduced by permission of Ned & 
Aya Rosen.
Sculptural and Textural  
Effects
Lighting that comes from a side angle causes 
parts of the body to throw shadows, which 
emphasizes the spatial and sculptural quali-
ties of the body. The harder the light, the more 
pronounced the texture. The feathered shadows 
produced by softening the light can bring out 
the sculpture while minimizing the texture.
One Light
Many well-known portrait photographers’ sig-
nature looks use only one light. It’s a simple, 
unconfused way of lighting. One successful 
strategy is to use a very large, soft light source 
situated behind the photographer. A completely 
different look can be achieved by placing a hard 
source above and to the side of the model.
Key and Fill
When more than one light is used, there is 
generally one dominant light, known as the 
key light. The other lights are typically placed 
for effect, to open the shadows, to separate the 
subject from the background, or to create high-
lights. The strong key light may cast an overly 
heavy shadow on some part of the body. In 
that case, it can be useful to throw light into 
the shadow areas. This can be done with a light 
or with a simple reflector. This technique is 
referred to as filling or opening the shadows.
When working with fill, nuance is often the 
essential difference between an everyday photo 
and one that really stands out. The shadow areas 
provide a sense of depth, which is lost as you 
add more fill. The challenge is to find a balance 

77
 
 
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   K e y  a n d  F i l l
between showing detail in the shadows and 
making the subject look too flat. The relative 
intensities of the lights come into play here. If 
you use a light meter to read the light, you will 
quickly find that you need a difference of at 
least one f-stop for the difference in brightness 
to register clearly, while four or more stops 
creates a high-contrast look. While you need a 
difference of one or more stops between lights 
to clearly register lighting contrast, opening or 
closing the aperture on the camera by as little 
as 1/3 stop can make a significant difference in 
the overall exposure.
TOP:  The main light in this shot is a medium-hard light from above 
and to the left (note the shadow of the clock on her chest). A soft 
fill light from the right and slightly behind opens the detail in her 
face. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:   A pool of light centered on the model’s face creates a 
theatrical chiaroscuro effect. The light falls off quickly, suggesting 
that either a grid or a snoot was attached to the lighting ­instrument 
to constrain the light. Reproduced by permission of Jafar M. 
Pierre.

78
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
 
 
We’re talking about lighting ratios here. 
These are often expressed numerically in terms 
of power, such as 1:2, 1:8, etc., but that can be 
problematic, since you have to first translate the 
different ratios into the number of stops (e.g., 
1:8 is three stops) and then figure out what 
f-number that refers to (e.g., if you want the 
light to be three stops dimmer than f/8, your 
meter should read f/2.8).
Contrast, Chiaroscuro,  
and Noir
The word “chiaroscuro” is Italian for light/dark, 
and it is typically used to describe high-contrast, 
sometimes low-key, images. Sixteenth century 
Baroque and Mannerist painting made heavy 
use of chiaroscuro, and Caravaggio is particu-
larly well known for employing the look. It is a 
useful technique for adding drama to a portrait 
that has been widely adopted by photographers. 
In nude photography, dense shadows are often 
used to create a draping effect for the genitals. 
TOP:  The triangle under the eye that is the ­signature of Rembrandt 
lighting. Traditionally, the eye socket is not blacked out. This look is 
highly dependent upon the shape of the face, and small shifts of 
the head or the light can make dramatic changes in its appearance. 
Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  The intersection of sex and death is a rich vein for 
artistic exploration. Window light from the front and above right is 
cast down in a restricted pool, lighting one side of the skull and the 
model’s haunch brightly. The light falls off gracefully from there. The 
fill in the shadow areas is from a second window. The image was 
shot on slide film. Reproduced by permission of Terry Donovan.
  f-Numbers
0.5, 0.7, 1.0, 1.4, 2, 2.8, 4, 5.6, 8, 11, 16, 22, 32, 45, 64, 90, 128
The range of standard f-numbers. Most lenses do not support the entire range.
  Lighting Ratios
Lighting Ratio
Difference in F-stops
1:1
(Same intensity)
1:2
1 stop
1:4
2 stops
1:8
3 stops
1:16
4 stops
1:32
5 stops
1:64
6 stops

79
 
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   S i l h o u e t t e s
Spot lights, snoots, and grids all focus the 
light in ways that create restricted pools of 
light. Some lights use a lens that can create a 
very sharp-edged area of illumination. Grids 
are generally rated between 10 and 40 degrees, 
and the smaller the number, the narrower the 
spread of the beam. Narrow grids also soak up 
a lot of light, reducing the intensity of the light 
dramatically.
Film noir (French for black film) is known for 
its low-key, high-contrast, black-and-white look. 
Often, scenes are backlit. Noir, however, has as 
much to do with its subject matter and dramatic 
treatment as it has to do with the look.
Rendering an image in black and white 
and using moderate to high contrast tends to 
emphasize the form and space of the figure. 
A soft, feathered light that wraps around the 
figure can have a subtle, sculptural effect, while 
a harder light tends to emphasize edges and 
make the figure more abstract.
Shadow also creates a sense of mystery. Slightly 
opening the shadows, so that we get just hints 
of detail, can pique the viewer’s curiosity.
“Rembrandt” lighting is a specific applica­
tion of chiaroscuro. The light is placed roughly  
45 degrees to the side, and at an elevation 
of about 45 degrees, though this will vary, 
depending upon the shape of the subject’s 
face and the attitude of their head. The key 
characteristic of this style of lighting is that 
one side of the face is illuminated and the 
other side is dark, except for a triangular area 
beneath the eye. The triangle is produced by the 
intersection of the shadow extending from the 
nose and the shadow on the cheek. Ideally, it is 
the same width as the eye. When the subject is 
facing away from the camera, the shadow side 
is closest to the camera.
The silhouette effect in this shot is modified by light wrapping 
around the thigh in the background. A second, much weaker, light 
at camera right gently fills the shadows and shows sculpting on her 
arm and shoulder. Photo by Louis Benjamin.

80
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
 
 
TOP:  Shooting into the shadow of 
a scene illuminated by a light cube. 
The height of the cube causes dif-
fuse light across her torso. Photo by 
Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  An example of Avedon 
lighting. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
Silhouettes
These are simple enough to shoot, but there are 
ways to modulate the look. To make a strong 
silhouette, it’s often necessary to actually light 
the background. When you illuminate a light-
colored background, a fair amount of light 
can bounce around the room. Sometimes that 
bounced light can be strong enough to fill the 
shadows in the foreground and diminish the 
silhouette effect. You can use a “black bounce” 
in front of the model and around the shooting 
area to control the unwanted reflections. Black 
bounce can be a matte black cloth material that 
is taped or draped over walls and surfaces or large 
sheets of foam core with a matte black surface. 
Some studios even paint the ceiling black. Of 
course, you can amplify the effect of the lighting 
with post-production in Photoshop, but it takes 
skill to make the result look convincing.
Even with the black bounce, the light 
bouncing off the background can be a problem 
or a benefit, depending on the look you’re going 
for. Pulling the figure away from the background 
keeps light from spilling around the edges of the 
figure. Conversely, placing the figure close to 

81
 
 
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   S p i l l ,  F l a r e ,  a n d  H a l a t i o n
the background can give the effect of the figure 
merging with the brightly lit background.
The technique that photographer and 
teacher Frank Franca calls “shooting into the 
shadow” is an extension silhouetting. The 
subject is placed between the photographer 
and the lighting instrument so that some light 
spills over onto the camera side of the shot. The 
effect can be very moody, featuring large, dark 
areas that can have a very abstract feel.
Avedon Lighting
Richard Avedon’s signature look was a subject 
standing in front of a plain white background. 
The evenness of that white background and 
the fact that it registers as white in the photo 
are two clues that the look is not as simple to 
achieve as it appears.
If a seamless paper background simplifies the 
image and directs attention to the sitter, then the 
stark white background is the ultimate extension 
of this look. The plain white gives us nothing 
to work with, not even color or tone, and so we 
look that much more closely at the subject.
One way to think of Avedon lighting is as an 
illuminated silhouette. You start by throwing an 
even illumination on the background. Umbrellas 
are particularly useful for this purpose. What 
you’re looking for is a brightness that is at least 
two f-stops brighter than the light reading at the 
model. For best results, you need some distance 
between the sitter and the background, so that 
you don’t have to contend with spill from the 
background wrapping around the sitter. That 
lighting will essentially produce a silhouette. From 
there, you add the appropriate amount and type of 
lighting for the model. Avedon himself typically 
used a large soft box, but your variation on that 
look could use any instrument you like—a grid 
spot in the Rembrandt position, for example.
TOP:  A diagram of Avedon light setup.
BOTTOM:  An example of lens flare. Photo by Louis Benjamin.

82
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
 
 
Spill, Flare, and Halation
When you place the sitter between a light 
source and the camera, there is always the 
potential for some light to travel from the 
light source directly into the lens. If the light 
is strong enough, you will get a colored flare 
pattern in the image. If not, you will generally 
get a soft, foggy, reduced-contrast look known 
as halation.
The wider the focal length, and the more 
wide open the aperture, the more you’ll have 
to contend with flare and halation. You can 
intentionally produce this effect and use it 
artistically, but if you don’t want it, your first line 
of defense is a lens hood. In more difficult cases, 
the important thing to recognize is that these 
effects come from light that is not illuminating 
the scene and is spilling into the lens instead. 
Then you can find the offending light and block 
it from the lens, while still allowing the light to 
fall on the model. This is known as “flagging.” 
Often, it is easiest to put the flag close to the 
lens, but sometimes it is sufficient to place the 
flag on or near the light source.
If the lighting instrument you’re using 
spreads light, there is always the potential for 
spill, meaning light that is falling onto surfaces 
that you didn’t intend to illuminate. Flare and 
halation are two particular issues of spill, but 
the problem can be as simple as too much light 
falling onto the background. The trick is to 
position the light, the camera, or both so as to 
minimize unwanted spill.
Bouncing light off walls is a way to soften 
light that is essentially a creative use of spill; in 
this case you’re intentionally causing it, instead 
of trying to contain the spill. Cinematographers 
often create soft lighting for large areas by 
bouncing lights off a pebbled foam surface 
called bead board. It’s important to consider the 
TOP:  A diagram of flagging.
BOTTOM:  A diagram of feathering.

83
 
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   I n t e n s i t y
color of the surface you are bouncing the light 
off of. It can substantially change the color of 
the illumination with some unpleasant results.
Feathering
A related issue is feathering, which can be used 
to make a subtle improvement in the look of 
your lighting. If you were to illuminate a flat 
wall with an umbrella and take a photo, you 
would notice that the center of the illuminated 
area is “hotter,” or brighter, than the edges. It 
turns out that this edge light is a bit softer and 
tends to have less specular highlights than the 
light from the center of the umbrella. It also 
has lower intensity. Many seasoned photogra-
phers only use the feathered portion of the light 
from an umbrella. The lighting from a soft box 
is more even than the light from an umbrella, 
but you can also position it to take advantage 
of feathering. Lighting your subject with the 
feather has the additional benefit that it throws 
less light onto the background.
Intensity
The brightness of the light source(s) has a few 
important effects upon the shot. The most 
obvious is that the overall intensity of the light 
determines the combination of the ISO, f-stop 
(aperture setting), and shutter speed that will 
be necessary to register your image. Second, the 
intensity of the light can effect how deep, and 
potentially problematic, the shadows in your 
image will be. Bright light can be challenging 
to the eyes, making your sitter squint in the face 
of a bright constant light or cringe in anticipa-
tion of the flash going off. The somewhat dazed 
expression in some old Hollywood portraits was 
a compensation for the intense illumination of 
the lights that were used. As the light becomes 
stronger, there is an increased risk of spill.
To use multiple lights effectively, you will 
need to know how to control the relative 
intensity of the light from each instrument. 
In the digital age, many photographers simply 
take a test shot and look at the histogram to 
determine exposure. That approach can work 
very effectively with a simple light setup, but 
when there are multiple lights involved, getting 
the intensities of the lights into the right 
ballpark can go much faster with the aid of a 
light meter.
Adjusting the intensity of the light can 
be done in different ways, depending on the 
lighting instrument, but you can adjust the 
intensity of any light by simply moving the 
instrument closer to or farther from the subject. 
Even though most strobes allow you to vary the 
intensity of the light over a range of three to 
five f-stops, you may still find that it is easier to 
move the light head, especially if you have two 
heads connected to one power pack.
To increase or decrease the lighting intensity 
by two f-stops, simply double the distance, or cut 
it in half. Doubling the distance decreases the 
intensity, and halving the distance increases it.
It’s slightly less obvious what to do to make 
a one-stop change in intensity. To decrease 
the intensity of a light by one f-stop, increase 
the distance to the subject by 1/2. To increase 
A diagram showing how to move a light source to change its 
­intensity one to two stops.

84
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
 
 
the intensity by one stop, decrease the distance 
by 1/4. In other words, if the light was six feet 
from the model and you want the light one 
stop dimmer, move it to nine feet—an increase 
of three feet. If your light was eight feet from 
the subject and you want to make it one stop 
brighter, move it two feet closer.
We end up with 1/4 and 1/2 for one stop 
because the intensity of the light is related to the 
square of the distance. Since the exact numbers 
are not very memorable and we don’t need to 
be that precise, the rule of thumb numbers are 
rounded for the sake of simplicity.
Low-key, High-key, Mid-key
Low-key images have an overall impression of 
darkness, while high-key images seem bright. 
There are no hard lines between these char-
acterizations. This is not simply a matter of 
underexposing or overexposing the scene, but 
choosing a particular exposure in conjunction 
with setting the lights a certain way.
TOP:  A classic low-key image 
with strong graphic qualities. 
­Reproduced by permission of 
Saddi Khali.
BOTTOM:  This high-key image 
creates mystery with a diffuse glow, 
rather than dense shadows.  
Reproduced by ­permission of 
Gaspar Marquez.

85
 
 
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   O t h e r  W a y s  o f  L i g h t i n g
Low-key images tend to have one or more 
small pools of light that show good detail and 
moderate tone. The lighting in such images is 
often called “mood lighting.” You can create a 
low-key image with a single lighting instrument. 
Often, this is a hard light source with a light-
shaping tool that limits the lighting to one area.
High-key images are bright and have less 
contrast than low-key images. They tend to be 
illuminated with more instruments. There is 
often separate lighting for the background and 
the model, and the model is often pulled away 
from the background to avoid spill.
Most images are mid-key, and as you would 
expect, mid-key falls in between low-key and 
high-key.
Other Ways of Lighting
Anything that emits light can be a light source 
for an art photograph. Light painting with a 
flashlight is an interesting process that truly 
makes one-of-a-kind images. You can also drape 
TOP:  A light-painted nude 
­illuminated with a two-color LED 
flashlight. Thirty-second exposure. 
35mm lens at f/2.0. Photo by Louis 
Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Small globe lights 
turn the body into a light source. 
­Ambient light brings out the details 
of the figure. Reproduced by 
­permission of Barney Cokeliss.

86
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
 
 
lights on the body. If the lights are ­colored, you 
need to carefully control the exposure to cap-
ture the color of the lights. Some of the light 
will illuminate the body, but much more of it 
will illuminate the room, so the body becomes a 
light source. The body becomes even more of a 
light source if you apply fluorescent paint to the 
skin and light it with a black light. Some black-
light nudes aren’t even recognizable as bodies. 
Ultraviolet light is damaging to the eyes, so 
it’s important to take proper precautions if you 
work with this technique.
Exposing to the Right
Sometimes the most compelling elements of a 
photo are the details in the shadows, and shadow 
detail is one of the weakest areas of digital pho-
tography. Many shooters who work with film 
TOP:  Cthulhu’s Canvas. A black-light nude. The glow on the body 
comes from fluorescent paint. Photo by Richard Rasner (Unique 
Nudes) of Nakayama Studios.
BOTTOM:  Camera RAW interface controls.

87
 
 
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   C o l o r
were taught to “expose for the ­shadows and 
process for the highlights,” which is the basis of 
the technique of “exposing to the right,” which 
you can do if you shoot in RAW. It works 
because you can recover the highlight detail in a 
RAW image. Generally speaking, you can over-
expose by nearly one full f-stop, and then use 
the Recovery and Brightness sliders to restore 
the highlight details. By doing this, you are giv-
ing more light to the shadow areas, allowing 
you to register more detail.
Exposing for the shadows is an idea that 
comes from the Zone System, which was 
developed by Ansel Adams to allow film 
photographers to pre-visualize the effect of 
exposure choices on the amount of shadow and 
highlight detail in the final image, as well as the 
tonal balance of the print.
Color
Light also gives us color, from the cool blue of 
the sky to the warm yellow-orange of candle-
light, and color can often convey emotional 
overtones or symbolism. There is a sensory and 
psychological dimension to color, which can 
work entirely at the subconscious level. The 
symbolic use of color is a subject dense enough 
to merit its own book. Certain colors have very 
different meanings in other cultures. One of 
the better-known examples is white, which 
symbolizes purity in many Western cultures, 
but symbolizes death in a number of Asian 
cultures. Limousines are often painted black 
because of the way it conveys power.
Of particular interest to the photographer 
working with nudes is the class of colors that are 
TOP:   This image is rich and layered. The colors of the ball 
and ­bedspread are complementary. Geometric primitives (the 
­triangle and circle) are powerful compositional elements, and the 
­lighting ­reveals textures, translucency, and form. Reproduced by 
­permission of Terry Donovan.
BOTTOM:  The cool blue background enhances the sense of 
warmth in the model’s skin. Rim lighting visually separates her dark 
skin from the dark colored background. The lighting was produced 
with two strip softboxes. Photo by Louis Benjamin.

88
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
 
referred to as memory colors—sky blue is one, 
and healthy skin is another. When these colors 
are off, it can send a strong signal about the 
picture we are viewing. There is even a cultural 
component to these memory colors: the color 
that is preferred in print magazines to represent 
healthy olive skin by Westerners is considered 
dark and cadaverous in many Asian cultures.
Colors also interact, and surrounding one 
color with another can change how we perceive 
the first color. This phenomenon is known as 
simultaneous color contrast. A practical result of 
this is that surrounding your model’s warm skin 
tones with a cool background (e.g., blue sky or 
green foliage) will make his or her skin look even 
warmer. It works the other way, too—your sitter’s 
skin will look cooler when set against a warm 
colored background (e.g., a bright red backdrop).
Color and Mood
Our perception of color arises in the ner-
vous system as a response to stimuli. As such, 
it makes sense that there would be a psycho-
logical aspect to color and that each person’s 
response to color is unique. That’s one reason, 
for example, that people have different favorite 
colors. Black-and-white photographers tacitly 
acknowledge the psychological impact of color 
by embracing the practice of toning prints and 
selecting photographic paper based on its warm 
or cool tonality.
Anecdotal evidence of the emotional aspect 
of color is easy to find. For example, we have 
colorful phrases that describe states of mind, 
such as “got the blues” and “green with envy.” 
During Picasso’s famous “Blue Period,” he 
painted in blues and blue-greens, colors that 
are described as “austere.” One branch of 
psychology studies the impact of certain colors 
upon the emotions and is of particular value in 
the treatment of psychosomatic illness.
In 1810, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 
(probably known more for his literary 
A colored gel was applied to the light that is filling the shadow side 
of this photo. Colored lights lose saturation and become washed 
out as you increase their intensity, so they work best in low-key or 
shadow-side applications. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
contributions than for his scientific work) 
published 
a 
theory 
of 
color. 
Goethe’s 
observations about the emotional impact of 
colors and optical effects still carry weight, 
particularly in the art world, where perception 
is of prime importance.
Master cinematographer Vittorio Storaro 
(whose credits include “The Last Emperor,” 
“Apocalypse Now,” “Reds,” and “Dick Tracy”) 
bases his philosophy of color on Goethe’s work. 
On his web site www.storarovittorio.com/
ingles/index.html, Storaro says, “I have always 
thought that film was capable of registering the 
emotions of the people who participated in the 
making of a movie.… As cinematographers, we 
write with light and motion, using shade and 

89
 
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   W h i t e  B a l a n c e  a n d  C o l o r  Te m p e r a t u r e
applying color to the body, but they can also 
add layers of imagery. The colored elements 
of the image being projected interact with 
the skin pigments, often producing surprising 
results. The three-dimensional form of the body 
also distorts the projection, so that the body 
interferes with the reading of the projection 
and the projection interferes with the reading 
of the body.
White Balance and Color 
Temperature
In practical terms, all light has a color, and each 
type of light source emits light in a characteris-
tic range of colors. For example, daylight is blu-
ish, while candlelight is yellowish orange. If you 
stand outside a building around dusk, you are 
likely to see bluish light coming from the sky 
and yellowish light coming from the fixtures 
inside the building. If you happen to have a 
white handkerchief in your pocket, and look at 
it in the outdoor light, it will look white. If you 
go into the building, the indoor light quickly 
ceases to look yellow, but the handkerchief will 
still look white. This phenomenon is called color 
constancy. Our eyes are constantly adjusting to 
(neutralizing) the color of the ambient light, 
and that is what the white balance controls in 
your digital camera and Photoshop’s Camera 
RAW, as well as the gray balance dropper in 
Photoshop, are intended to do.
By shooting a frame with a spectrally neutral 
gray card, you can have Camera RAW calculate 
a  more accurate white balance than your 
camera’s auto white balance feature can. Once 
you have a white balance for your reference 
frame, you can open groups of RAW files 
together and synchronize their white balance 
settings in Camera RAW.
Film-based photography has a simplified 
version of white balance. There are only two 
choices. In digital, we can be more specific about 
the color of the light that we are compensating 
for. Films for shooting indoors are said to 
color to punctuate one important part of the 
vocabulary of cinema.”
Storaro collaborated with manufacturer 
Rosco to produce a set of colored lighting gels 
called the Storaro Selection. Gels are thin filters 
that can be placed over a lighting instrument 
to color the light. Rosco’s literature describes 
the Storaro gels this way: “These ten colors 
represent key chromatic elements of the visible 
spectrum, and are intended for dramatic effect 
and strong emotional response.” His ten colors 
are red, orange, yellow, green, cyan, azure, blue, 
indigo, violet, and magenta; that’s the R-O-Y-
G-B-I-V we learned in school, plus cyan, azure, 
and magenta.
Projections are another alternative light 
source that can function much like gels by 
Reproduced by permission of JD Yezierski.

90
C H 5  
L i g h t ,  S h a d o w ,  C o l o r ,  a n d  t h e  Q u a l i t i e s  o f  L i g h t i n g
 
 
be tungsten (incandescent light) balanced. 
These films effectively have a blue filter built 
into them, which makes the yellow light look 
neutral. Daylight film “sees” blue light as if it 
is white.
We can exploit the white balance setting 
in the camera creatively. Film photographers 
have often shot indoors with daylight film to 
emphasize the golden color of incandescent 
light, or shot with tungsten film outdoors, 
rendering the entire image a cool blue. There’s 
nothing to stop you from doing the same 
thing in digital. You can use the preset color 
temperatures (typically tungsten, flash, daylight, 
and cloud), or dial in your own numbers.
If you learned about “warm” and “cool” colors 
in art, there’s an obvious discrepancy inherent in 
the way we talk about color temperature: high 
color temperatures describe “cool” hues, and 
low color temperatures describe “warm” hues. 
This is not really a problem, because the white 
balance system compensates for the color of 
the light by reversing this relationship. In other 
words, increasing the color temperature setting 
in the camera (or in Photoshop’s Camera Raw) 
gives the resultant capture a warmer tone, and 
decreasing the color temperature setting gives 
the resultant capture a cooler tone.
If you’re going to use this technique 
aesthetically, you want to pick a color 
temperature that makes it clear that you are 
intentionally pushing the color. If you select a 
value that is only slightly off, it may be lost on 
the viewer or be read as a mistake.
TOP:  A Whi-Bal reference card for getting accurate white balance. 
Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  The color of this photo was manipulated through 
the white balance controls of Camera RAW. Reproduced by 
­permission of Saddi Khali.

91
C H A P T E R  F I V E   |   W h i t e  B a l a n c e  a n d  C o l o r  Te m p e r a t u r e
Sunrise, sunset
3200 K
High noon
5000–5400 K
Open sky
5500–6500 K
Overcast sky
6000–7500 K
Open shade
7000–8000 K
Partly cloudy sky
8000–10,000 K
Blue sky
9000–12,000 K
Match
1700–1800 K
Candle
1850–1930 K
Household bulbs
2500–2900 K
Quartz/Halogen bulbs
2800–3400 K
More on Color Temperature  Color tem­
perature is a simple way of assigning specific 
numerical values to each of the hues in the 
range between matchlight orange and deep sky 
blue. It gets its name from a principle in Physics, 
where heating an object called a “black body” 
to a particular temperature will cause it to glow 
at a specific color. The Kelvin scale is one of the 
main temperature scales used in Physics.
The color temperature of “daylight” varies 
over a range of about 5000 Kelvin! (By the 
way, even though Kelvin is a unit of tempera­
ture, we don’t say the word “degree.”)
Similarly, all incandescent light isn’t one color. 
You may have noticed that a tungsten light on 
a dimmer ranges between a warm amber color 
at low intensity (and temperature) to a very 
pale yellow at high intensity.
There are special fluorescent lights that were 
developed for the film and digital still industry. 
These use bulbs and special electronics that 
have been designed to emit light that is more 
consistent with either daylight or tungsten 
light sources.
The fluorescent lights used in home and insti­
tutional settings are a bit problematic for 
photography. These emit a kind of light that 
is not full-spectrum, and does not fit well into 
the white-balance scheme. While you can 
ascertain a color temperature for these lights, 
the range is extremely broad, and goes from 
3200  K to 7500 K, so one setting does not  
fit all.
In addition, fluorescent light from such fix­
tures tends to have a very strong green com­
ponent, which white balance alone does not 
compensate for. You will notice a green/
magenta tint slider in Adobe Camera Raw. It 
is there specifically to neutralize light that is 
either too green or too magenta. When you 
use the color temperature preset for fluo­
rescent light in Camera Raw, the tint slider 
moves dramatically to the right. If you shoot 
in indoor light or daylight with your white bal­
ance set to fluorescent, your images will have 
a strong magenta cast.

C H 6  
C o m p o s i t i o n

93
    
C H A P T E R  S I X   |   C o m p o s i t i o n
Composition
B
oth photography and painting have a notion of com-
position, and though they are related, they are actually 
different processes. In painting, individual elements of 
the composition are assembled in a layered process of con-
struction, or addition. Often, there are revisions, and elements 
of the painting are moved, added, or even removed. In pho-
tography, the composition is based upon an act of exclusion—
pointing the camera imposes the camera’s frame on the scene, 
and subtracts everything that falls outside of the frame. From 
there, the event being photographed can further be framed 
in terms of selective focus and the duration of the exposure. 
Each of these additional frames is a compositional choice.
In some cases, the photographer can direct some of the action and 
move people or objects on a set to construct the scene in a way that 
is more akin to what a painter does, but more often than not, it is the 
photographer who stands on tiptoe, squats, climbs a ladder, or rolls 
onto his or her belly to find a compelling view.
OPPOSITE PAGE:  The elemental act of photographic composition is framing. Reproduced by permission of Alfred Laij. 6

94
C H 6  
C o m p o s i t i o n
Once the shutter falls, the process of com-
position is complete. Cropping after the fact 
can further reduce the framing, but with the 
exception of montage or some other joining of 
images, no other revision of the latent image 
is possible; there is only starting on a new 
image.
There is a danger in thinking too rigidly 
about composition. We explore principles 
of composition as a way of philosophiz-
ing about what makes a picture work, but 
these principles should be taken as sugges-
tions, not immutable laws. With that caveat 
in mind, we can look at ideas of composition 
that are drawn from graphic design as well as 
photography.
In Chapter 2, we mentioned that for any 
given image, the shape of its frame (its aspect 
ratio) could affect the way the image is per-
ceived. In particular, the corners of the frame 
and its dimensions create expectations in the 
viewer about where important elements should 
fall within the frame.
Students of basic graphic design are taught 
about the “rule of thirds.” To apply this rule, 
we can draw imaginary lines to divide the frame 
into thirds, both vertically and horizontally. 
Some cameras even have an option to display 
grid lines in the viewfinder that illustrate the 
rule of thirds. It is unfortunate that this prin-
ciple is referred to as a rule, since it is no more 
than a suggestion. While the principle gener-
ally works, calling it a rule gives it more weight 
than it deserves.
One successful way of working with the 
rule of thirds is to use the image segments, 
whether vertical or horizontal, as containers. 
For ­example, if your sitter is in an outdoor set-
ting, you might frame the image so that the sky 
occupies the top two-thirds of the frame and 
the ground occupies the bottom third. ­Looking 
­horizontally, the sitter could be positioned so 
that most of the body occupies the middle 
third.
The points where the dividing lines meet 
have additional weight. You could call them 
pressure points. Placing an element of your 
composition on one of these points will focus 
attention upon it. One way to call attention to 
your model’s breast is to place the nipple on 
the pressure point at one of the intersecting 
thirds.
The regimental evenness of 1/3 divisions 
can make composing on the basis of the rule of 
thirds a bit staid. Renaissance artists and archi-
tects, and even Leonardo da Vinci, often used 
Dividing this image into three equal ­segments from top to ­bottom 
demonstrates an ­application of the “rule” of thirds. Photo by Louis 
Benjamin.

95
C H A P T E R  S I X   |   C o m p o s i t i o n
explain what is happening. If a person is fac-
ing right, that is generally interpreted as the 
direction the person is heading. Directing the 
model’s gaze in the same direction strength-
ens the sense of intent. If we place the model’s 
nose against the right edge of the frame, it 
will seem as if she or he has run out of room, 
but if we place her or him on the left side of 
the frame, not only is there tension, there is 
lead room. The viewer looks for open space in 
the direction that the character is expected to 
move.
If we think of a photograph as a kind of dia-
log between the photographer and the viewer, 
composition can be seen as a mechanism for 
telling the viewer where to look. One of the 
constant questions in the mind of the viewer 
is “what is this picture about?” One way of 
answering that question is by isolating the sub-
ject. Techniques such as controlling depth of 
field, selective focus, and placing the focal point 
of the image on one of the pressure points 
direct the viewer’s attention and tell the viewer 
what the image is about. Selective focus works, 
because the eye gravitates toward the sharpest 
part of the image.
Cropping after the fact is a way of rethink-
ing compositional decisions that you made 
when you shot the image. Think of cropping 
as recomposing your image. It’s really restating 
the visual problem you’re setting out to solve. 
Too often, it is done to eliminate a problematic 
element from the frame. That is cropping for 
the wrong reasons. Cropping done in this way 
usually does not respect the proportions of the 
image, and you end up with a composition that 
lacks integrity.
If you must crop, it’s best to perform your 
crop in Camera RAW, because the crop does 
not throw away any of your original image data. 
This is especially useful for JPEG and TIFF 
files, which you can open in Camera RAW. 
the golden ratio as a reference for determining 
proportions that are perceived as being beauti-
ful. The golden section proportion is based on 
the Greek ratio phi, or 1.618. Applied to the 
rectangular frame of a photo, the golden ratio 
lines hug the center more than do the rule of 
thirds lines. The best way to learn to employ 
this proportion is to develop a feel for where 
the proportion lines fall. The extra effort will 
often pay off.
The absolute center of a picture is often 
referred to as “dead center,” and from a per-
ceptual standpoint, placing something in the 
center deadens it. As we move the point of 
interest away from the center, visual tension 
increases.
Related to visual tension is lead room. As 
we read an image, we work out scenarios that 
Rule of thirds (above), versus golden section (below).

96
C H 6  
C o m p o s i t i o n
 
 
TOP:  Visual tension was created by moving the subject to the right, 
though the figure still connects with the center line. Directing her 
gaze to the right suggests something outside the frame. If her body 
were facing that way, she would appear to be out of lead room. 
Reproduced by permission of Saddi Khali.
BOTTOM:  Selective focus and a pool of light emphasize the knee 
bandage over the figure. Photo by Louis Benjamin.

97
C H A P T E R  S I X   |   C o m p o s i t i o n
A good approach is to crop in a way that main-
tains the proportions of the original image. If 
you want to crop to a different shape, consider 
using one of the standard proportions, such 
as 1:1, 4:5, 5:7, or something cinematic, like 
2.2:1. If you crop arbitrarily, you will probably 
find that it is harder to get groups of photos 
to go well together when you exhibit them. It 
will certainly make mounting and framing your 
prints more problematic.
Framing can have a profound effect on 
how the viewer relates to the nude figure. The 
body’s relationship to the space imposed by the 
frame is often critical to how the overall image 
works.
When the full body is shown, we often 
relate to the image as a complete person, not 
an  abstract body. If the face is visible, that 
aspect is even stronger. It is challenging to cre-
ate a sense of intimacy with a full-body view. In 
most cases, that framing puts the viewer in the 
position of the detached observer. If there is a 
lot of space around the figure, the body can be 
read symbolically, and the image often takes on 
overtones about the relationship of humanity 
to the larger environment.
Closeness can be read as either intimacy or 
abstraction, depending on how close the fram-
ing is and whether the face appears or not. 
If the model’s face is not visible, the shot will 
tend more toward the abstract or the erotic. 
Posing, expression, and use of lighting further 
help to establish the tenor that framing creates 
a context for.
If you are interested in creating intimacy, 
an eye-level angle or slightly below is a very 
powerful way of inviting the viewer to relate 
TOP:  Framing proportions can have a profound effect on 
composition.
BOTTOM:  Moving in close omits contextual cues. Often the viewer 
has to read the image carefully to resolve what is being depicted. 
The result is often a compelling abstraction. Photo by Louis 
Benjamin.

98
C H 6  
C o m p o s i t i o n
to the person in the photo and creating a 
sense of involvement. Many classic intimate 
portraits have been shot with the lens posi-
tioned somewhere between the eyes and the 
solar plexus.
Cutting the top of the head with the frame 
can accentuate the emotional dimension of an 
image, especially if the sitter fills most of the 
frame. It imposes a view that is akin to looking 
the sitter in the eye. Viewers with more formal 
sensibilities are likely to object, but having parts 
of the sitter’s body extend beyond the boundar-
ies of the box can also emphasize the imposi-
tion of the frame itself.
“Amputations” are a special case. Some-
times, a hand, foot, or some other part of the 
body collides with the frame so that just a part 
of the extremity is cut. Such framing usually 
looks like a painful amputation and is distract-
ing. The viewer’s attention is focused upon the 
missing body part, instead of whatever else you 
are ­hoping to put across. Such unfortunate 
framing can be avoided by intentionally run-
ning your eye around the edge of the viewfinder 
before you trip the shutter.
When we view the subject from a high 
angle, it often comes across as victimizing, 
especially if the model is a woman in a prone 
position. However, as you elevate the camera, 
the viewer’s perspective becomes increasingly 
detached. If you elevate the camera enough, the 
shot becomes the omniscient bird’s-eye view of 
cinema and graphic novels.
When you are shooting from a low angle, 
the model moves by degrees from being heroic, 
to menacing, to dominating. At some point, you 
get a worm’s-eye view, which is again detached 
and omniscient.
Finally, we come to the question of how the 
rectangular frame is oriented. When the frame 
is taller than it is wide (vertical), we refer to that 
as “portrait,” and when it is wider than it is tall 
(horizontal), we refer to that as “landscape.” 
Our natural perceptual field of view is land-
scape, and so it should be of little surprise that 
cameras create landscape images in their nor-
mal orientation. You have to consciously rotate 
the camera, often jutting your elbow into space, 
to shoot in portrait, but the two orientations 
tell different stories.
There are also practical aspects to shooting 
in portrait versus landscape: if your work is to 
be published in a magazine, the orientations of 
the pages are typically vertical. Portrait images 
are optimal for magazine pages, and landscape 
pictures either have to be run in reduced size, 
or run as a spread across the pages. When that 
­happens, the “gutter” often cuts through the 
middle of the picture and disrupts or obscures 
valuable details. Both the Nikon D3 and Canon 
1D series cameras have an integrated vertical 
grip, which places a second set of controls on the 
camera body so that you don’t have to stick your 
elbow out and reach across the camera when 
you shoot verticals. Many mid-range cameras 
have an optional “battery grip” that attaches to 
the bottom of the camera and provides simi-
lar functionality. This is more than just conve-
nience. Keeping your elbow down gives you a 
more stable shooting posture.
If your intent is about the person, rotating to 
portrait and framing with the pressure points 
in mind can create a powerful portrait that iso-
lates the sitter from the environment and hints 
about their “inner landscape.” If the subject is 
standing, you can pull back to shoot the full 
body in portrait. The body will fill much of the 
frame, and even though the shot includes the 
environment, the emphasis tends to stay with 
the figure.
With landscape framing, there is the issue 
of all that field of view to the left and the right. 
Head and shoulders views can fill the frame 

99
C H A P T E R  S I X   |   C o m p o s i t i o n
Careful ­asymmetrical framing, 
­perspective lines, and dramatic tonal 
contrast add to the mix with bird’s-eye 
perspective to make an eye-catching 
image. Reproduced by permission of 
Daniel Sikorskyi—chiaroscurist,  
www.sikorskyi.ca.
nicely, especially if you are willing to cut the 
top of the head. However, landscape generally 
compels us to either shoot head and shoulders, 
pushing the subject to one side or another, or to 
pull way back and place the figure in a tableau. 
In landscape, the environment naturally domi-
nates the full-body figure.
Particularly when framing in portrait, pho-
tographers often intentionally tilt the camera, 
causing the subject to lean across the frame. 
This  tilt can add a lot of visual energy to 
the shot, but can also come across as a gim-
mick. Formalism often dictates that the hori-
zon should be perfectly horizontal across the 
picture plane, but you do not have to slavishly 
comply with this dictum. An interesting issue 
of framing comes up when shooting with a 
wide-angle lens, particularly if you are tilting 

100
C H 6  
C o m p o s i t i o n
the lens upward or downward. In that case, 
“verticals” in the shot will normally be tilting, 
and the horizon may even look skewed. A great 
way to deal with this circumstance is to find a 
vertical at camera left and close to the model, 
then align that so that it parallels the left side of 
the frame. The other “verticals” are less critical. 
If there is no such vertical in the shot, figure 
out where the dominant vertical should be, and 
make sure it’s vertical.
A Closer Look Inside the 
Frame
The emphasis of the early part of this chapter 
was from the perspective of imposing the pho-
tographic frame on the scene. The remainder of 
the chapter will shift the emphasis and look at 
additional ways to think about what happens 
inside the frame.
In a word, simplify. That is an important, 
and often challenging, mantra. Be clear about 
what your image is about, and try to distill your 
compositions down to the elements that express 
that. Some models react negatively to a seam-
less background because of the way it functions. 
It is a powerful simplification tool that creates 
a quiet, relatively unobtrusive background and 
focuses attention on the model.
Graphic designers often speak in terms of 
negative space. This is a way of thinking about 
the visual problem from the standpoint of shap-
ing the space that surrounds the figure, rather 
than the figure itself. Emphasizing the negative 
space can create powerful sculptural effects, or 
enhance the abstract qualities of an image.
When the model places her hand on her 
hip and pushes her elbow away from her body 
to create a diamond-shaped space between her 
torso and her arm, we are dealing with a specific 
type of negative space, namely, trapped space.
Windows, doors, and mirrors in a shot can 
all have the effect of creating a frame within the 
frame. A framing element does not have to be a 
The trapped space in this image mimics the shape of the breasts. 
­Multiple diagonals add energy to the composition. Photo by Louis 
Benjamin.
literal frame. It can have as few as two sides and 
consist of a striking color, texture, or shape. Por-
trait photographers often project a circular or 
oval pool of light onto the background behind 
the sitter to create a framing element. The frame 
within a frame can be a powerful compositional 
element, because it doubly focuses attention on 
the subject. For fashion, portrait, and glamour 
photos, models often create a framing effect by 
surrounding their faces with their arms. The 
mirror is especially interesting when used as a 
frame, because it can show two perspectives on 
the same scene, perspectives that can even seem 
to disagree. When shot so that you cannot see 
the mirror’s frame, mirrors can be particularly 
disorienting.
Any pronounced line in a photo, such as the 
edge of an object, will lead the eyes somewhere. 

101
C H A P T E R  S I X   |   A  C l o s e r  L o o k  I n s i d e  t h e  F r a m e
When used strategically in a composition, we 
refer to them as leading lines. Leading lines 
often direct the viewer’s attention to the sit-
ter, but they can also help to describe the space 
around the sitter. For example, a model sitting 
on a road can be shot so that the sides of the 
road act as leading lines that emphasize a van-
ishing point. Our eyes are particularly attuned 
to finding lines, especially verticals, horizontals, 
and diagonals. The key thing to watch out for is 
that you don’t capture or emphasize lines that 
lead the eye completely out of the frame.
Sloping, curved, and bent lines are partic-
ularly good for adding a sense of energy and 
TOP:  In this layered image, the concrete cylinder creates a frame 
in frame effect for the figure. The earthen shapes beneath it and 
to the right of the cylinder frame it in turn. Finally, the concrete 
wall in the background reinforces the figure, and the ­sloping roof 
lines direct the eye to the framed body. Photo by ­Richard Rasner 
(Unique Nudes) of Nakayama Studios.
BOTTOM:  The lines in this image add a sense of movement while 
seeming to divide the frame into puzzle-like segments. Photo by 
Louis Benjamin.

102
C H 6  
C o m p o s i t i o n
motion to an image. André Kertész produced 
a dramatic series of distorted nudes, photo-
graphed with the aid of a funhouse mirror. 
These images make lyrical use of curved lines.
The nude offers many compositional oppor-
tunities to isolate and emphasize curved ele-
ments of the body. Gentle curves can have a 
particularly sensual quality. S-curves, Z-curves, 
and zigzag lines inject increasingly more energy 
and edginess into your image.
The linea alba, which literally means “white 
line,” is a visible structure that runs down the 
center of the abdomen between the solar plexus 
and the top of the pelvis. Art students use it as 
TOP:  The limbs and extremities imply lines that can create visual 
rhythms. The linear qualities of the limbs are emphasized here with 
asymmetrical rim lighting. The shadows indicate that the light on the 
left is ­stronger than the light on the right. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  The composition here is based on a strong diagonal 
that flirts with the frame’s built-in diagonal. The model’s head and 
arms interact strongly with the edge and upper corner of the frame. 
Photo by Louis Benjamin.

103
C H A P T E R  S I X   |   A  C l o s e r  L o o k  I n s i d e  t h e  F r a m e
a key reference point in learning to draw, and it 
can be a powerful focus in photographic com-
positions. Posing and lighting your model in a 
way that emphasizes the linea alba can produce 
lyrical and sculptural results.
Your compositions can also be made up of 
implied lines, such as the line that connects 
the pupils, the line that connects the nipples, 
and the vertical from the forehead to the chin. 
Objects inside the frame can function as anchor 
points for imaginary lines that provide struc-
ture to the image and keep circulating the eye 
inside the frame.
Triangles, diamonds, circles, and squares are 
all primitive, flat shapes that our eyes are partic-
ularly attuned to find. Many Renaissance paint-
ings were composed on the basis of triangles. 
TOP:  The folded figure creates a family of curved lines that gives a 
swirling spiral effect. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  The model’s hair suggests a gentle reverse-S curve, 
which interacts with the curve of the yellow seat. Photo by Louis 
Benjamin.

104
C H 6  
C o m p o s i t i o n
These shapes do not have to literally appear in 
the image, but can be implied. For example, 
Weston’s famous Nude, 1936, strongly suggests 
a triangle connecting the top of Charis’ head to 
each of her feet. Part of what makes that tri-
angle more interesting is that none of its sides 
parallels any edge of the frame. The triangle is 
also not equilateral.
Spatial dividers are lines that separate a 
­picture into two parts. The division can be fore-
ground/background, right/left, above/below, 
or  anything else. A doorway is an obvious 
example (inside/outside), but the water line of 
a stream also functions as a spatial divider. A 
shadow can work in this way, too.
In a photo, 3-D form is, of course, an illu-
sion, but it can be an important pictorial ele-
ment. Form is revealed by shadow, and the 
deeper the shadow, the greater the depth of the 
image. Flat, soft lighting reduces the sense of 
form, while higher contrast, edge-wise lighting 
brings out the sculptural form. Texture is really 
a special case of form. It is three-dimensional, 
and is brought out strongly by hard side light-
ing. Sculpture and texture are both powerful, 
and often sensual, compositional elements.
Patterns are about repetition, and work a bit 
like texture. Lighting effects like louver slats 
and dappled light are examples of patterns, but 
artists such as Spencer Tunick are able to make 
patterns out of whole bodies. Using shallow 
depth of field, backgrounds can be reduced to 
patterns of repeating soft forms.
Patterns are generally perceived on the basis 
of similar shapes, but the shaped elements in 
a pattern do not have to be the same size. For 
example, a vanishing-point perspective shot of a 
BOTTOM:  Hard light coming from the 2 PM sun casts a shadow that 
suggest an angel’s wing and outlines the linea alba, running between 
the model’s navel and solar plexus. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
TOP:  Overlapping zigzag lines are the primary impression of this 
strongly chiaroscuro image. Photo by Louis Benjamin.

105
C H A P T E R  S I X   |   A  C l o s e r  L o o k  I n s i d e  t h e  F r a m e
stone path shows the pattern of stepping stones in 
decreasing size. An interesting set of size relation- 
ships to be aware of is the Fibonacci (pronounced 
fib-uh-nah-chee) sequence. It is a pattern that  
can be seen in natural structures such as the 
inside of a sunflower, the spiral of shells, and 
the branching of trees, and it can be applied to 
the graphic design of a photograph. This princi-
ple probably has greater application in manipu-
lated images than in directly shot situations.
The first part of the Fibonacci sequence is 0, 
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13. You can find the next number in 
the sequence by adding the previous two num-
bers together (e.g., 13 + 8 = 21, then 21 + 13 = 
34, etc.). The sequence is employed throughout 
architecture and manufacturing. For example, 
the sizes of 3 × 5 and 5 × 8 index cards are an 
expression of Fibonacci proportions.
Using Fibonacci in a composition could 
involve scaling the proportions of shapes 
according to the sequence, or dividing the space 
into appropriately scaled sections. A simplistic 
example of how this might work is to create a 
composite, showing the body in different scales 
within the frame. You could pick any dimen-
sions as your reference scale, then distribute 
figures that are twice, three times, five times, 
and eight times that size around the frame.
An image can often benefit from balance, 
which is perceived primarily along the hori-
zontal axis and can be achieved in a number 
of ways. Symmetrical balance is the easiest 
to understand and the most straightforward. 
With symmetry, the elements being balanced 
are equally distributed on either side of the ver-
tical centerline of the picture. It’s no muss, no 
fuss, and too often it can be boring.
TOP:  Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  An image that relies heavily on shape and color. The 
trapped spaces all approximate triangles. The model interacts with 
the yellow sphere and the frame. The sphere and the background 
are complementary colors. The soft lighting emphasizes the three-
dimensional form of the figure and the sphere. Photo by Louis 
Benjamin.

106
C H 6  
C o m p o s i t i o n
TOP:  An office chair creates a diagonal spatial divider with curved 
overtones. The perforated back spills dappled light onto the skin. 
Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Related elements in the frames create a pattern effect 
reminiscent of cubism. Reproduced by permission of Gaspar 
Marquez.
Earlier, we talked about creating tension in 
an image by pulling the sitter off the centerline. 
As you pull the sitter farther from the center, the 
composition becomes increasingly asymmetri-
cal, and yet many of the most effective of such 
images will still be balanced. There are no hard 
and fast rules to define how to achieve asym-
metric balance, but balance works on the basis 
of visual weight. The trick in creating this type 
of balance is in learning how to read the rela-
tive weight of the elements you are framing.
A small object with a lot of visual weight 
can balance a large object that is not as visu-
ally dense. Visual weight is often determined by 
color or complexity. Mondrian was a master at 

107
C H A P T E R  S I X   |   A  C l o s e r  L o o k  I n s i d e  t h e  F r a m e
balancing images based on the relative weights 
of the colors that he used in his compositions.
Another balancing strategy is to think in 
terms of a lever. If you think of the centerline 
of your image as the fulcrum, and you place the 
sitter slightly left of center, a smaller object, 
such as a pillow, placed to the extreme right 
will balance the image. Asymmetric balance is 
something that is done by feel, and once you 
get it, you will find it relatively easy to do.
Color is one of the most powerful and con-
founding elements that you can work with in 
your compositions. Color in photography is 
relatively “new school” and was not taken seri-
ously in art circles until the late 1970s, when 
artists such as William Eggleston emerged.
We are speaking here of the creative uses of 
color, which sometimes means manipulating 
colors in ways that no photojournalist would. 
Some photographers have completely avoided 
color and work purely in black and white, 
because color can easily overpower an image. 
While we have indicated elsewhere that some 
images really do work best in black and white, 
there are a number of ways to make the color 
of a straight “capture” work better, rather than 
stripping it of its color.
Monochromatic doesn’t have to mean black 
and white. Toning or split toning a black-and-
white image can add an emotional dimension 
and richness to an image. Toning was a technique 
that was popular among the Surrealists and the 
Photo Secessionists. With split toning, generally 
the highlights are given one color tone, and a 
complementary tone is applied to the shadows. 
In Camera RAW, you can use the HSL/Gray-
scale tab to convert to black and white, and then 
use the Split Toning tab to create the effect.
TOP:  The centerline is strongly indicated in this image that 
­demonstrates asymmetrical balance. Reproduced by permission 
of Saddi Khali.
BOTTOM:  Photo by Louis Benjamin.

108
C H 6  
C o m p o s i t i o n
In comparing digital and analog photogra-
phy, one observation that many photographers 
have made is that digital color is often much 
more saturated than film-based work. This may 
be due in part to the nature of color capture 
in digital in the first place, but the differences 
are often unwittingly amplified further in post-
production. As one adjusts the ­tonality of an 
image with curves or levels in ­Photoshop, the 
saturation often increases. The hue/saturation 
adjustment can help you to create a more 
restrained color palette. Some photographers 
TOP:  An analogous color scheme, ­selective desaturation, 
and motion blur combine to create a dreamlike composition. 
­Reproduced by permission of Terry Donovan.
BOTTOM:  The Split Toning controls in Adobe Camera RAW allow 
you to assign different hues to the highlights and shadows of 
your image. You can also control the saturation of those hues and 
where the crossover between shadow and highlight happens. The 
example above assigns a warm tone to the shadows and a cool 
tone to the skin. Photo by Louis Benjamin.

109
C H A P T E R  S I X   |   A  C l o s e r  L o o k  I n s i d e  t h e  F r a m e
The Two Color Wheels The RGB color 
wheel is based on mixing prismatic light. It is 
the cleanest, most mathematically consistent 
color model, and it is an additive color model. 
You can mix R, G, and B to get any color, even if 
you can’t find a monitor capable of displaying 
it. The RYB color wheel, sometimes known as 
the psychological color wheel, is based upon 
mixing pigments, and is a subtractive color 
model. An important practical implication of 
mixing pigments is that the resultant color is 
always darker than the two colors it was mixed 
from, which means that certain colors cannot 
be achieved by mixing pigment colors.
RYB has its origin in the work of Johann Wolf-
gang von Goethe and Michel-­Eugène Chevreul 
(1786–1889). In Chapter 5, we touched upon 
the work of Goethe, who made important 
observations about how people perceive color 
and developed theories on the psychology of 
color. Chevreul was a French chemist who was 
interested in solving problems related to dye-
ing fabric. In his research, he realized that when 
colors are placed next to each other, they have 
a reaction that has nothing to do with the pig-
ments interacting chemically. From that real-
ization, he set off to study the phenomena in a 
scientific way. His observations in The Law of 
Simultaneous Color Contrast, first published 
in 1839, influenced the Impressionists, Seurat, 
and Delacroix.
The preceding information implies that for 
practical purposes, much of our work needs 
to be based in the RGB color wheel, but that 
for artistic purposes, learning to exploit the 
RYB color wheel will provide opportunities to 
work more effectively within the psychologi-
cal dimensions of color.
only decrease the saturation enough to com-
pensate for any changes induced by tonal 
adjustments, while others seek a more desatu-
rated look, reminiscent of the work produced 
by German photographers in recent years.
A different color strategy is to intentionally 
induce a color cast. Many Photoshop students 
are taught to remove color casts, but those casts 
are generally accidental casts created either by 
camera errors or lighting problems, and are 
often aesthetically unpleasant. Inducing a color 
cast is equivalent to what some painters do by 
putting a colored glaze over a painting: it uni-
fies the color palette. One way to do this is by 
intentionally assigning a white balance in Cam-
era RAW that drives the color toward either 
amber or blue, as we’ve seen elsewhere. Other 
techniques include either applying a photo filter 
adjustment layer or using the colorize effect in a 
hue/saturation adjustment layer.
Up to this point, we have talked in terms of 
making pictures that use a limited color palette. 
Other color strategies involve being aware of 
opposing, or “complementary,” colors. Opposing 
colors are the basis of color contrast, and oppos-
ing colors are set out for us on the color wheel. 
However, there is a problem—there are several 
color wheels, and they don’t match up. The dif-
ferent color wheels arise from different ways of 
looking at color, whether it’s mixing light, mix-
ing pigment, or working with perception. For 
our purposes, the main concerns are the RGB 
color wheel that we use in Photoshop and the 
RYB color wheel that is taught in art classes.

110
C H 6  
C o m p o s i t i o n
Your compositions can be based on color 
contrasts and color harmonies, and there are 
essentially three types of color contrast. The first 
is a nonspecific warm/cool contrast. Warm col-
ors are on the redder end of the spectrum, and 
cool colors tend toward blue or blue-green.
The second type of color contrast is a har-
monic scheme based upon opposing hues on 
the color wheel of your choice. Simple color 
harmonies are based on opposing pairs of col-
ors such as orange and blue, but color harmo-
nies based on different triads of colors are also 
possible.
A third type of color contrast opposes sat-
urated and desaturated color. A near-cliché 
example of this is the effect of showing a black-
and-white figure holding a bright red apple.
A ­sophisticated approach to saturation ­contrast. 
Reproduced by permission of Nina Pak.
  Opposing Colors on the RGB and RYB Color Wheels 
	RGB Opposing Colors	
RYB Opposing Colors
Red: Cyan	
Red: Green
Green: Magenta	
Yellow: Violet
Blue: Yellow	
Blue: Orange

111
C H A P T E R  S I X   |   A  C l o s e r  L o o k  I n s i d e  t h e  F r a m e
Color harmony is a very large territory to 
explore. If this is of interest to you, there are 
dozens of books that elaborate on approaches 
to color harmony.
In some cases, you may encounter a photo 
where most of the colors work, but one particular 
color is a problem. It may be a pool of light that 
has too much or too little color, or maybe there 
is a red jacket that has a bit too much orange in 
it. You can target these specific ­colors in Pho-
toshop and change them with a hue/saturation 
adjustment. As the name suggests, you can shift 
the hue a tiny bit, or change it altogether, and 
you can increase or decrease the saturation. The 
adjustment can be further constrained by using 
the adjustment layer’s mask.
We come full circle to simplification. Just as 
the visual layout of your image can benefit from 
simplification, the color palette of your image 
can be simplified. If you look critically at the 
colors in your photo and see that one doesn’t fit 
with the dominant colors, you can target that 
color and shift it to a more harmonious hue or 
reduce its saturation to make it less obvious.

C H 7  
T h e  C a m e r a  I s  N o t  a n  E y e

113
    
C H A P T E R  S E V E N   |   T h e  C a m e r a  I s  N o t  a n  E y e
7
The Camera Is 
Not an Eye
“The camera is something of a nuisance in a way. It’s ­recalcitrant. 
It’s determined to do one thing, and you may want to do some-
thing else. You have to fuse what you want and what the cam-
era wants.”
—Diane Arbus
T
he camera has often been viewed as a stand-in for the 
human eye. It has also been held out as a validation of 
single-point perspective. Neither view is really accurate, 
but it’s instructive to think about these factoids, because it 
opens the door to a more artistic relationship with the camera. 
The camera’s dynamic range is more limited than that of the 
eye, and unlike the eye, most lenses are sharp across the entire 
image plane. Those are just some initial differences. A lot of 
discussion about creative image production revolves around 
Photoshop and post-production, but there is much that can 
and probably should be done in-camera.
OPPOSITE PAGE:  This layered image was produced in-camera with a projector. Reproduced by permission of  
JD Yezierski.

114
C H 7  
T h e  C a m e r a  I s  N o t  a n  E y e
A key element of many artistic photographs 
is a sense of atmosphere and mood. While light 
and color often has a lot to do with that, the 
contrast, sharpness, or softness of the image can 
be key factors, too. Those factors are all products 
of the lens. The lens also affects the rendering of 
space, essentially folding or bending space onto 
the picture plane in different ways.
Shoot Like a Pictorialist
A big reason for the popularity of the 35mm 
format, which ultimately gave rise to DSLRs, 
was the development of extremely sharp lenses, 
but for some artistic approaches, a concern with 
sharpness is anathema.
Around the beginning of the twentieth cen-
tury, the Photo-Secessionists took up the cause 
of Pictorialism, which aimed to make photo­
graphy emulate painting and etching, two dom-
inant forms of art that had legitimacy at the 
time. Many of the techniques of ­Pictorialism 
involve darkroom work, but soft focus, effects 
filters, and lens coatings were popular in-­camera 
techniques.
Many effects approximating Pictorialist 
work can be accomplished by placing an inex-
pensive UV or skylight filter over your lens and 
applying clear nail polish to it. Once the nail 
polish is hardened, you can scratch it to modify 
the effect. To reuse the filter, be sure to take 
it off your lens first, and clean with nail pol-
ish remover or acetone. Another technique is 
to spray a fine mist of hairspray up into the air, 
and wave a skylight filter under the mist until 
you’ve built up the right thickness. The hair-
spray washes off with warm water.
You may have heard that cinematographers 
smeared Vaseline over their lenses (skylight fil-
ters) to get a soft focus effect. Vaseline works, 
but believe it or not, K-Y Jelly works better, and 
it’s easier to remove. You can try applying it 
Reproduced by permission of Alfred Laij.

115
C H A P T E R  S E V E N   |   S h o o t  L i k e  a  P i c t o r i a l i s t
around the edge of the filter, leaving the center 
clear, or you can spread it more evenly and then 
smudge it with your thumb. Another way to 
alter your camera’s vision is to attach a skylight 
filter and stretch a translucent material such as 
pantyhose or tulle over the lens. This is purely 
improvisational, and anything goes.
Smoke creates a layered atmospheric effect 
that can reveal the shape of light beams and 
functions something like a variable filter. It is 
heavily used in cinema, and also in fashion pho-
tography. It is almost invisible when lit from 
the front, but shows up clearly when lit from 
the side or behind. Beyond the more obvious 
applications, it can be used in subtle ways.
TOP:  Reproduced by permission of Alfred Laij.
BOTTOM:  Genie. Photo by Richard Rasner (Unique Nudes) of 
Nakayama Studios.
Bokeh We refer to the quality of the part 
of the image that is out of focus as the 
bokeh, or boke (pronounced “boke-uh”), 
an obscure term that apparently origi-
nated in Japan. Lenses render images by 
creating thousands of tiny circles, and 
these circles become more apparent in 
the part of the image that is out of focus. 
With bad bokeh, these circles have hard 
edges, or worse, edges that are brighter 
than the center. The look of bad bokeh 
creates distracting highlights that can 
undermine the image. With good bokeh, 
the circles are soft-edged. This charac-
teristic actually has to be designed into 
the lenses, and certain lenses have a 
reputation for either good or bad bokeh. 
Interestingly, Nikon makes a range of 
lenses with “defocus control,” designed 
to let you vary the bokeh.

116
C H 7  
T h e  C a m e r a  I s  N o t  a n  E y e
Selective Focus
Selective focus is a variation of soft focus. One 
type of selective focus can be achieved by creat-
ing a very shallow depth of field, using a fast 
lens with the aperture opened wide (e.g., an 
85mm lens at f/1, f/1.4, or f1.8). An example 
of an image using this technique might be a 
person holding their hands out, with the hands 
in sharp focus while the body is blurry. In that 
case the selective focus is based on foreground 
vs. background.
Lensbabies
A different type of selective focus happens when 
you have an island of sharp focus in the image, 
and everything around it is defocused. That is 
a bit more like the way we actually see, in that 
we have foveal and peripheral vision. Foveal 
vision is sharp, and peripheral vision is much 
softer. The two work a bit like picture in picture, 
and our attention can be focused on one or the 
other, but most of the time we’re seeing both.
The Lensbaby Composer was introduced 
in 2008, and it offers a complete, easy-to-use 
selective focus system based on the idea of tilt-
ing the lens, a technique that has essentially 
been available only through the use of expensive 
precision bellows attachments. The manual-
­focus Lensbaby is available in both Canon and 
Nikon mount, and consists of a lens barrel that 
holds interchangeable optics, fitted into a ball 
and socket joint. The lens barrel has a knurled 
focusing ring, and there is a locking dial for the 
ball and socket joint.
Each optic produces a central sweet spot 
of sharp focus surrounded by a field of bokeh 
that gradually gets softer as you move toward 
the edge of the frame. You can move the sweet 
spot around the frame by applying tilt. To do 
TOP:  Reproduced by permission of Alfred Laij.
BOTTOM:  Shot with the Lensbaby Composer double-glass optic at 
f/2 (wide open). Photo by Louis Benjamin.

117
C H A P T E R  S E V E N   |   L e n s b a b i e s
so, you loosen the locking dial on the ball joint 
and push the barrel in any direction. The lock-
ing dial can also be set to a gentle friction that 
holds the barrel where you put it, but allows you 
to reposition it without having to constantly 
lock and unlock the ball.
The interchangeable optics have a focal 
length of 50mm and include double glass, sin-
gle glass, plastic, and pinhole/zone plate. The 
out-of-focus area of each of the optics has very 
different characteristics, which impart very dif-
ferent moods or attitudes. The pinhole/zone 
plate optic produces a very striking look, but it 
is literally an open hole into the camera body, 
and that raises some concern about introducing 
dust into the camera.
The sharpness of the optics also increases as 
you make the aperture smaller. You control the 
aperture by placing little numbered rings into a 
recess at the front of the optic, using a magnetic 
wand. The rings are held in place by magnetic 
levitation. The approach works and keeps the 
engineering of the lens simple, but there is a 
risk of losing aperture rings. You should proba-
bly plan on replacing them from time to time.
The lens requires you to practice your manual 
focusing skills, but remember, only the sweet spot 
gets completely sharp, and the nature of the lens 
means that focusing is a bit more forgiving.
On some cameras, attaching the Composer 
switches off the metering system altogether, 
but on cameras such as the Nikon D200, D300, 
and D700 the metering works, and switches 
into a mode that indicates that only the shutter 
speed is under your control.
The Lensbaby system has several conversion 
lenses that screw onto the front of the basic 
50mm optic. An available macro kit has +4 
and +10 filters that can be used together, and 
TOP:  The Lensbaby plastic optic at f/8. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  The plastic optic at f/2 produces a much more 
­atmospheric effect. Photo by Louis Benjamin.

118
C H 7  
T h e  C a m e r a  I s  N o t  a n  E y e
TOP:  Captured with a 12–24mm 
­wide-angle zoom at 13mm on a Nikon 
D100. The focal length is equivalent to 
a 19mm lens on a full-frame camera. 
Photo by Louis Benjamin.
BOTTOM:  Shot with a 28–105mm 
zoom at 62mm ­(equivalent to 92mm) 
at f/4.3. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
a wide-angle/telephoto kit comes with a 0.6× 
wide-angle lens and a 1.6× telephoto lens.
More on Lenses
In the 35mm film world, lenses with a focal 
length around 50mm are called “normal” lenses, 
because their spatial perspective best matches 
“normal” vision. Lenses in the 28mm to 35mm 
range are typically thought of as wide-angle 
lenses, and wider lenses, such as 12mm, are 
described as “fish-eye” lenses. As the lens gets 
wider, you will notice that objects that appear 
straight to the eye begin to appear curved in a 
wide-angle photo, and the wider the lens, the 
greater the curvature.
Foreshortening is also emphasized in wide-
angle images, meaning that objects in the 
­foreground appear exceptionally large, and 
objects in the background appear exceptionally 
small. If you take a picture of someone’s face 
with a wide-angle lens, their nose is likely to 
dominate the frame, and their ears might look 
minuscule. Tilting a wide-angle lens also exag-
gerates the proportions of people and things.

119
C H A P T E R  S E V E N   |   M o r e  o n  L e n s e s
Lenses have a “sweet spot.” Even if we have 
a lens that can open all the way to f/1.0, its per-
formance may be slightly degraded when it is 
“wide open,” and lenses often show degrada-
tion when they are “stopped down” all the way, 
as well. The sweet spot is the range of apertures 
between the extremes, where the optical per-
formance of the lens is at its peak.
In normal and telephoto lenses, aperture 
strongly affects depth of field, while with wide-
angle lenses, the effect is far less pronounced. 
Depth of field describes the parts of the image 
that are in focus, relative to the parts that are 
out of focus. The longer (higher focal length) 
the lens, the more pronounced the effect. With 
a shallow depth of field, the sitter’s eyes could 
be tack-sharp, while his or her ears are “soft.”
In the 1970s and 1980s, advances in lens 
design made the zoom lens standard fare for 
35mm cameras, and today, the “kit lenses” sold 
with most cameras are zooms. While zoom 
lenses are convenient, single focal length “prime” 
lenses are much lighter and cheaper.
Sharpness is another reason to like prime 
lenses. Even with the sharpest zoom lenses, a 
quality prime lens at the same focal length will 
be sharper and substantially cheaper. If that 
hasn’t piqued your interest enough, prime lenses 
can typically be made much faster than zooms 
at a fraction of the weight. If you’re interested 
in handheld low-light photography, switching 
to a prime lens will allow you to make images 
that are far sharper, with dramatically less cam-
era shake. For example, a number of Nikon 
prime lenses, including a 50mm f/1.4 and an 
85mm f/1.8, can easily be purchased new for 
under $500, while an 80–200 f/2.8 zoom costs 
nearly twice as much.
It’s often still a good idea to have a zoom lens 
in your arsenal. Something to be aware of is that 
some zooms lose as much as two stops over the 
range of the zoom. As the lens stops down, the 
shutter speed has to decrease to compensate.
Dragging the shutter emphasizes the ­difference between what is 
moving and what is stationary. Photo by Louis Benjamin.
Lenses with focal lengths of 80mm and 
above are considered telephoto lenses. These 
lenses compress space, and the effect of fore-
shortening is minimized. Lenses in the range 
of 85mm to 150mm are particularly popular for 
portraiture, because they can bring you in close 
to the face, without distorting it.
That brings us to the “speed” of the lens. 
“Fast” lenses are lenses with a low-numbered 
maximum aperture, such as f/1.4 or f/1.8. 
Canon once marketed a 50mm f/1.0 lens, and 
Stanley Kubrick had a 50mm f/0.7 lens fitted 
to a movie camera for the making of “Barry 
Lyndon.” In the case of “Lyndon,” the fast lens 
allowed Kubrick to shoot scenes that were lit-
erally candle-lit. To make a lens fast requires 
larger, heavier optics, and consequently, such 
lenses can be much more expensive.

120
C H 7  
T h e  C a m e r a  I s  N o t  a n  E y e
Dragging the Shutter
Dragging the shutter is the term used for work-
ing with low shutter speeds, primarily to take 
advantage of motion blur. You can place the 
camera on a tripod and have the subject move, 
you can have the subject sit still and move the 
camera, or you can move both subject and cam-
era. You can even do drag shutter work ­outside 
in strong sunlight. To make the sunlight dim, 
place one or more neutral density filters over 
the lens. Combining drag shutter effects 
with selective focus has the potential to cre-
ate some extremely compelling images. Many 
early street photographs show what appear to 
be empty streets. The sensitivity of early film 
required such long exposures that only objects 
that remained completely stationary registered 
an image.
Often, high-contrast light will make drag 
shutter results more interesting. If you mix 
ambient light and flash, and have the subject 
move, the flash will freeze the subject and the 
ambient light will record a ghost trail.
Light Painting
Light painting is an interesting application of 
dragging the shutter. It works best if you black 
out the windows, place the camera on a tripod, 
and pre-focus the camera. Set the exposure 
to 30 seconds, and when you trip the shutter, 
begin to move the flashlight around to illumi-
nate your subject from different directions.
Be careful about standing too long in one 
place, or you may be recorded in the image. If 
you let the light stay for a while in one place, 
you’ll get a hot spot. Diffusion material and 
colored gels can also be used to modify the 
look and output of your flashlight. You can also 
use cardboard or Cinefoil to make a snoot that 
keeps the flashlight beam narrow. The light 
Light painting can have the look of ­conventional lighting, or the 
light source can be made very obvious. Photo by Louis Benjamin.

121
C H A P T E R  S E V E N   |   Yo u r  C h o i c e  o f  W e a p o n
Projections
A projected image can be used to create layered 
images in-camera. More than one projector can 
be used, and the resulting image can be a chal-
lenging visual puzzle. The relatively dim light 
of the projector opens the possibility of having 
the subject move, adding a layer of movement.
Your Choice of Weapon
Depending on the kind of work you intend 
to produce, your choice of camera can be very 
important. The ease of use and responsiveness 
of the camera affect the flow of the shoot and 
even the images that you are able to produce.
Infrared film radically changes the way the 
camera sees, and offers rich aesthetic opportu-
nities. There are a few digital alternatives. Tech-
niques in Photoshop, mainly centered around 
emphasizing the red channel content over oth-
ers, attempt to emulate the look of infrared, 
but they are not the same thing. Fuji makes the 
FinePix IS-1 (www.fujifilmusa.com), a nine-
megapixel digital camera designed specifically 
for IR photography. Its target market is law 
enforcement, but it certainly has artistic appli-
cations. Other ways of doing digital IR involve 
either adding filters that make the viewfinder 
useless and require tediously long exposures, or 
modifying your camera for dedicated use. (See 
www.wrotniak.net/photo/infrared/.)
When your sitter is aware that you’re using 
a special camera, they’re likely to relate to you 
in a different way, and that will come across in 
your photos. Timothy Greenfield-Sanders, who 
did the book XXX: 30 Porn Star Portraits, uses 
a vintage 8 × 10 Deardorf view camera. The 
antique-looking plain wooden box with a lens 
in the front and a bulb shutter release is a very 
different animal from the present-day DSLR 
that most sitters are used to.
Many photographers have said that they 
chose large-format cameras because it forces 
them to slow down their process. The nature 
Reproduced by permission of JD Yezierski.
source can be shaded to prevent light trails from 
showing up in the image, or you can intention-
ally allow the flashlight to register, and even 
point it directly at the camera.
You can have your sitter hold still for part of 
the time, then quickly change position and hold 
again, to create images that look like step-wise 
superimpositions. Alternately, you can have the 
model move slowly and constantly for a differ-
ent effect. Turning the light on and off during 
the process can allow your subject to change 
position without registering a motion trail.
The results of this technique are extremely 
variable. To succeed with it requires a willingness 
to give up control to some degree, and experi-
ment. Even successful results are hard to dupli-
cate, a process that is artistic at its very heart.

122
C H 7  
T h e  C a m e r a  I s  N o t  a n  E y e
and expense of operation of those cameras 
demanded a careful, thoughtful approach. The 
long exposures needed when the early photo-
graphs were made also affected the behavior of 
the sitters: photographers would tell the sitters 
not to smile, because it made them look like 
corpses, and of course they had to sit very still. 
Stephen Shore continues to apply the lessons 
he learned over his years of shooting with an 
8 × 10 camera to his work with a digital camera: 
“I never bracket, and never take more than one 
picture of the same thing,” he says (Image Mak-
ers/Image Takers, p. 51).
Employing an approach that is quite diff­
erent from the likes of Shore, Leica shooter 
Garry Winogrand typically shot three rolls of 
Tri-X (at least 108 frames) every single day 
(Modern Photography, 06/1988). It has been 
widely reported that when he died in 1984, he 
left 2500 rolls of undeveloped film, 6500 rolls of 
processed film that he had not proofed, and 3000 
rolls of contact sheets that he apparently had not 
looked at. Part of the reason he could produce 
so many images was the relatively economical 
cost of 35mm film and the ease of operation of 
the camera. It was also because his fundamental 
process was about seeing in the edit, rather than 
shooting with preconceived notions about the 
images he wanted to make. He also knew the 
workings of his camera extremely well.
The advent of the Leica transformed pho-
tojournalism because its exceptionally sharp 
optics, small size, and nearly silent opera-
tion made it fast and unobtrusive. The M4 
rangefinder camera was the camera of choice of 
a legion of photojournalistic photographers. It 
remains to be seen whether Leica’s M8 digital 
camera will enjoy anything close to the popu-
larity and cult status of the M4.
The digital SLR is very popular in today’s 
market, in part because the SLR format doesn’t 
have the potential problems of parallax that are 
inherent in rangefinder (e.g., Leica M series) 
and twin-lens reflex designs. Most think the 
term SLR means a camera based on the 35mm 
format, but it simply means single-lens reflex.
There are really two distinct SLR formats in 
the digital world. Cameras like the Hasselblad 
H3D, the Mamiya ZD, and the Sinar Hy6 are 
all medium-format digital SLR cameras. Phase 
One and Leaf also make digital backs that fit 
onto cameras that were originally designed to 
shoot medium-format film, and in recent years, 
they have entered into partnerships to build 
new camera bodies.
The excitement over medium-format digi-
tal has some technical merit as well as psycho-
logical weight, but it comes at a price: these 
cameras can cost anywhere from $20,000 
Luminous white skin and coal-black eyes were rendered with 
­infrared film. © 2009 Harvey Stein.

123
C H A P T E R  S E V E N   |   Yo u r  C h o i c e  o f  W e a p o n
to $44,000 with just one lens. These cameras 
derive most of the technical benefits from their 
larger sensors, which exhibit better shadow 
detail because of larger pixels in the sensor. The 
cameras also capture true 16-bit color, while 
35mm-style DSLRs like the Canon 1D series 
and the Nikon D3x have 14-bit color. The extra 
two bits of color depth are marginal relative 
to the jump between 8-bit and 14-bit, but the 
psychological benefit cannot be understated. 
When you’re using a special camera, that affects 
your attitude, which in turn affects the sitter.
Digital cameras based on the 35mm format 
have really split into two categories at this point. 
Canon and Nikon both offer several models 
with “full-frame” or “FX format” sensors. The 
full-frame sensors are about the size of a full 
35mm film frame, while earlier cameras are 
based on sensors that are at least 1/3 smaller. 
As we saw with the even larger sensors found 
in the medium-format cameras, full-frame 
sensors offer larger pixels with better shadow 
detail than their smaller predecessors. They also 
produce dramatically less digital noise at ISO 
settings as high as 3200. This means that in low 
light, they are capable of making noise-free 
images at much higher shutter speeds. When 
you consider that some of the low-end cameras 
exhibit noise issues at ISO 800, that’s at least 
three stops—which could mean the difference 
between having to shoot at 1/15 second and 
being able to shoot at 1/125.
The size of the sensor also has a cropping 
effect on the image, which is where the focal 
length multiplier comes from. On all Nikon 
models, cameras with the smaller-format sen-
sors are designated “DX” format, and the multi-
plier is 1.5. On Canons, the equivalent multiplier 
is usually 1.6. On cameras equipped with an FX 
sensor, there is no multiplier. That means that a 
50mm lens on a DX camera is effectively 75mm, 
and a 100mm lens is effectively 150mm.
The practical implication of this is that FX 
cameras have complete optical parity with film-
based cameras, and can use any lens that was 
designed for a film-based 35mm camera. There 
are no special “digital” lenses for these cameras. 
Lens manufacturers can design lenses for the 
smaller DX sensor that project an image that 
covers a smaller area on the film/sensor plane. 
Such lenses can be made smaller, lighter, and 
cheaper than the equivalent lenses designed for 
use with an FX sensor or film. And since DX 
lenses can’t cover the full area of an FX sen-
sor, Nikon’s cameras automatically crop down 
when you attach a DX lens to an FX cam-
era. The issue is most acute with wide-angle 
lenses, and most, if not all, DX-type lenses are 
­wide-angle.
We’ve seen that for certain technical appli-
cations and ways of working, a specific type 
of camera can make a huge difference, but for 
the rest of us, the way you use the camera mat-
ters far more than what camera you use. While 
high-end cameras will likely be of interest to 
well-heeled hobbyists and photographers who 
shoot both art and commercial campaigns, lots 
of high-quality fine art work will continue to 
be shot with cameras like the Canon Digital 
Rebel XSi (450D) and the Nikon D60, which 
both sell for well under $1000. Some artists are 
even using cheaper, simpler, point-and-shoot 
models very effectively.
One key to making better photos with 
your camera is to learn the essential controls 
so that it vanishes as much as possible. The 
array of features can be overwhelming, so it’s 
a good idea to prioritize the features of inter-
est and learn how they work one at a time. If 
you’ve always only used program mode, learn 
to use manual mode. Play with over- and 
underexposing images to understand how 
the camera sees and how exposure relates to 
expression.

C H 8  
W o r k i n g  w i t h  M o d e l s

127
    
8
C H A P T E R  E I G H T   |   F i n d i n g  M o d e l s
Working with Models
Finding Models
F
inding a sitter is essentially a casting process. Even in 
a ­portrait, you’re telling a kind of story, and not every-
one can express the qualities that you’re looking to show. 
Thus, it helps to be clear about what you’re looking for, and 
be selective. Some photographers prefer novices or amateurs, 
because they haven’t developed ingrained habits and precon-
ceived notions about how to model. Sometimes new models 
can bring a little nervous energy to a shoot that can be good 
for the images.
One of the simplest ways to find models is to join a networking 
web site and build a profile with a portfolio of your images. Many  
sites have a free membership option and make this easy to do. Sites 
such as ModelMayhem.com, OneModelPlace.com, and Book.fr 
are specific to modeling, while others such as deviantART.com are 
OPPOSITE PAGE:  “Working title: ‘After Rheims’ in honor of one of my favourite photographers.” Part of the “Most 
­Beautiful Woman in Town” project, a collaboration with Justyna Neryng, 2007, UK. Reproduced by ­permission of 
Tobias Slater-Hunt.

128
C H 8  
W o r k i n g  w i t h  M o d e l s
broader, but still have an artistic focus. Sites 
like Facebook and MySpace are broader still. 
Finally, sites such as meetup.com have inter-
est groups organized around activities like 
photography or modeling. On Craigslist, you 
can find listings by models who want to build 
their portfolios, and you can place your own 
listings. It is not uncommon for these listings 
to include links to a portfolio page.
Whatever online presence you establish, you 
will find that prospecting for people to work 
with is not a passive process. No matter how 
good your photos are, people are not likely to 
just show up asking to be photographed, at least 
not until you have a lot of friends and links to 
lots of other profiles. It’s best to make a habit 
of browsing the site from time to time to make 
new contacts. Some sites allow you to search 
for models within a certain number of miles, 
and some allow you to search by criteria such as 
models who pose for art nudes.
There is a certain etiquette to having an 
online presence. If you see someone online that 
you’re interested in working with, it’s helpful 
to give some indication of what you like about 
that person’s modeling. Most of the sites allow 
you to leave public comments on the images 
themselves. They also have some sort of private 
message mechanism. Some have something 
akin to the friends feature on MySpace. It’s a 
good idea to post a comment or establish some 
other communication with the model before 
you send a friend request.
What you see is not necessarily what you 
get. Operating through the networking sites 
can put you in touch with a lot of models fast, 
but that doesn’t mean that you’ll get the best 
results. Expect no-shows, last-minute cancel-
lations, and awkward novices among the good 
connections. You may get in touch with a model 
who seems enthusiastic to work with you at the 
start, but somehow never manages to schedule 
a shoot. Other seemingly good prospects will 
just delete their profiles without notice, leaving 
you with no way to keep in touch with them.
Web sites are not the only way to network. 
Finding sitters through your own social circles 
can often put you in touch with more interesting 
people who will even afford you a certain amount 
of trust up front. You can literally meet subjects in 
a coffee shop or a bar. Justine Kurland, who has 
made a name for herself making photographs of 
earthy mothers in wilderness settings, describes 
prospecting for subjects this way: “I hang out in 
health food stores and ­playgrounds with a box 
of prints and talk to strangers, try to show them 
pictures, tell them what it’s about. The ones who 
believe in the vision are the ones who come.” 
(New  York Times, 2/25/07, “So They All Get 
Naked and Play, Like Mom Did.” www.nytimes 
.com/2007/02/25/arts/design/25kino.html.)
Modeling agencies understand the value of 
high-quality photos for their models’ portfolios 
and they often send them out for test shoots. 
Some test shoot models will agree to do nude 
or semi-nude shots after the portfolio work is 
done. The fashion model look isn’t what every 
fine art photographer is looking for, but if it 
fits your aesthetic, all you need to get started is 
about a dozen quality samples of your work to 
show the agencies.
The expectation is that you will shoot some 
number of photos that they can use in the mod-
els’ books. If you do great work, you can have access 
to a large pool of talent that has been vetted and 
has high professional standards, but if you don’t 
produce images of high enough quality and in a 
timely fashion, you won’t have the opportunity to 
shoot any more tests with their models.
In larger cities, photographers often arrange 
meet-‘n-greet events and shoot-offs, where 
you have the opportunity to bring a portfolio, 
business cards, or leave-behinds, and even your 
camera. These can be great events for finding 
new talent to work with, and even for shooting 
new portfolio images.

129
C H A P T E R  E I G H T   |   A  M a t t e r  o f  C o m f o r t ,  C o l l a b o r a t i o n ,  a n d  Tr u s t
A Matter of Comfort, 
Collaboration, and Trust
Perhaps the most important thing to be aware 
of is that your sitter brings expectations to the 
shoot, and it is important to manage those expec-
tations. If you’re offering photos as any part of 
the compensation for shooting, it’s important to 
get the images to the model in a timely fashion. 
A kind of negotiation happens whenever you 
make a picture of someone, and that involves 
reconciling the image that you want to make 
with the way that person wants to be seen. You 
can often see this in play after the shoot. If you 
give the model the opportunity to select photos 
for his or her portfolio, very often, he or she will 
select different photos than you would.
The words “model,” “subject,” and “sitter” are 
all somewhat problematic as a way of referring 
to the person who will be in front of the cam-
era, because each term implies a certain power 
relationship and almost constrains the nature of 
the ways in which the person on either side of 
the camera will think about the collaboration.
In a similar way, we often talk in terms of 
the model “posing,” a concept that has its own 
built-in limitations. As you read the rest of this 
chapter, it is hoped that you will take these 
terms in the most expansive context. A lot of 
creative juice comes from bending or breaking 
with the norms. The model does not have to be 
a plastic figure that strikes poses. Certainly, in 
the case of a portrait, you’re trying to capture 
some “realistic” aspect of a personality that will 
communicate visually. In the case of a tableau, 
the sitter can breathe life into a believable char-
acter that you create collaboratively and photo-
graph in the context of a kind of performance. 
The photographer does not have to play the 
detached observer, but can operate more like 
a stage or screen director who gives the actor 
what they need to elicit the best performance. 
You can be coach, cheerleader, or provocateur, 
as well.
A condition of trust is crucial. It’s unfortu-
nate that art models, whether they model for 
drawing studios or photographers, are compelled 
to protect themselves from predatory behavior. 
GWC, short for “guy with camera,” is a term 
models have for hacks that use their cameras as 
a pretense to leer at them naked or to get them 
into bed. Art history may be full of lore about 
sexual liaisons between artists and their muses, 
but it’s risky. Bear in mind that word about any 
transgressions can spread widely and efficiently 
with the aid of social networking sites.
Some models will want to meet, and some 
will want to talk on the phone in advance of 
shooting for the first time. This is often so that 
they can give you a “sniff test.” If you’re shoot-
ing with a model for the first time, she or he 
may want to bring someone along for security.
During the shoot, you shouldn’t forget that 
even without clothing, your sitter has a personal 
space that you don’t want to violate. Touch-
ing is risky and should be avoided, but if you 
feel you must touch in a way that gives direc-
tion, ask permission, and don’t forget that “no” 
means “no.”
Models on some of the networking sites 
will often post disclaimers like “no pornogra-
phy” or “tasteful nudes only.” These statements 
are boundary markers, and because everyone 
defines concepts like pornography and taste-
fulness differently, it’s important to come to an 
understanding of what your potential model 
means by that language ahead of time. In the 
worst case, not doing so could mean a complete 
waste of time.
It is often useful to show your sitter work 
samples, sketches, or reference material in 
advance of shooting, so that they will have an 
idea of where you are going with your concept, 
but don’t overwhelm them. The British have a 
lyrical phrase for giving too much information: 
“you’re blinding me with science.” You want 

130
C H 8  
W o r k i n g  w i t h  M o d e l s
the shoot, there is sill some cost associated with 
each shoot. There are a number of books that 
devote one or more chapters to assessing your 
cost of doing business, so we won’t go into that 
here. However, it is important for you to make 
some determination of the value of your images 
based in part on your cost of producing work 
when you develop your TF policy.
Whether you’re doing TF or licensing your 
images to a client, the same pricing consider-
ations should apply. This includes the basic cre-
ative fee, any retouching and post-­production 
fees, and licensing fees based on usage. A fair deal 
works out to parity between what you  would 
charge and what the model would charge. Any 
model that describes a TF arrangement as 
“working for free” does not see any value in the 
photographer’s work.
Some models expect to leave a TF shoot with 
a CD containing every frame that was captured 
during the session. That is tantamount to using 
your talents as a photo booth. If you are inter-
ested in promoting your work and developing 
your reputation based on the quality of your 
images, it’s never a good idea to agree to that 
sort of arrangement. Often, those same mod-
els will take your images and edit them. The 
result can be a bad image that is attributed to 
you. Some photographers have all models sign 
a release that stipulates that the images cannot 
be edited and are licensed to the model only for 
specific uses, such as self-promotion. We will 
discuss more on releases shortly.
Consider these figures: in New York, there 
are a number of portfolio photographers who 
charge about $250 to $500 for a portfolio ses-
sion. You review the images and pick your 
favorites. The photographers will in turn do 
“basic retouching” on a limited number of 
images, usually four to eight. They charge extra 
for more involved retouching and for additional 
finished images. Advanced retouching varies 
widely in price, but can often go for something 
to develop a sense of how much information 
your model wants and needs, and keep them 
in the loop without overdoing it. Particularly 
with more conceptual or performance-oriented 
work, your model may need more background 
information to strike the right tone, but too 
much info will probably have the opposite 
effect.
Compensation
You can expect to negotiate the terms of com-
pensation every time you book a shoot. There 
are professional art models who make a living 
from posing, there are hobbyist models who 
just do it for the love and adventure of it, and 
there are novice models who hope to be paid 
well in the future, but need a portfolio to get 
started. You can expect to pay as much as $150 
per hour or more for high-end models, while 
some other models just want good pictures out 
of the deal. Art models often work for schools 
and drawing or painting sessions at $25–$50 
per hour, but charge substantially more to be 
photographed.
Another form of compensation in com-
mon use on the networking sites is abbrevi-
ated TFCD or TFP. The abbreviations mean 
time for CD and time for print, respectively, 
and they  are sometimes shortened to TF or 
TF*. Agency models will often agree to simi-
lar arrangements as a test shoot or a trade. The 
idea is that the model gives his or her time in 
exchange for images. The phrases mean very 
different things to different people. If you plan 
to shoot with these kinds of agreements, you 
should develop your own clear and consistent 
set of terms for entering into them, and state 
your policy before you begin your shoot.
The essence of a TF agreement comes down 
to the value of your images and time versus the 
value of the model’s time and talent. In valu-
ing your images, you should consider that even 
if you don’t pay out of pocket at the time of 

131
C H A P T E R  E I G H T   |   C o p y r i g h t
even including limited edition sales of prints, 
is not “for purposes of trade.” The case lasted 
from 2005 through most of 2007, when the 
New York Court of Appeals ruled in favor of 
diCorcia. The cost of Philip-Lorca diCorcia’s 
defense had to be enormous. As an established 
A-list artist, he had the resources of the Pace/
MacGill gallery at his disposal, something that 
most of us do not.
Thus, it’s a good idea to have your model 
sign a release anyway, as a way of having the 
model acknowledge how the photos might 
be used. You can get language for your model 
release from a number of places, including the 
ASMP (American Society of Media Photog-
raphers) web site. The language doesn’t vary 
much between the different sources.
You may also encounter models (usually 
early in their careers) who want you to sign a 
release form that they have prepared, in addi-
tion to your own. It is likely that the document 
contains stipulations about how you can use the 
photos. It is probably not a good idea to sign 
such documents. Maybe you can amend your 
own release to address any concerns the model 
may have; otherwise, it’s best to walk away from 
such arrangements.
Copyright
Standard model releases only contain language 
about the photographer’s use of the image. It 
is a good idea to add language to the release 
or have the model sign a second document 
that makes it clear that you are the copyright 
holder and stipulates the usage rights granted 
to the model. Many photographers state that 
the model has the right to use the photos for 
self-promotion only, and even stipulate that the 
images cannot be edited.
Some models believe that they are the author 
or co-author of a photo, based either on the fact 
that their likeness appears in the image, or on 
the degree of collaboration in creating the idea. 
in the range of $50 per image. Some, but not 
all, portfolio photographers will also release a 
CD of all the frames from the shoot in low-
resolution web-size files. Typically, the photog-
raphers retain the copyright to the photos and 
only grant the model the right to use the pho-
tos for self-promotion and portfolio usage.
Most models who have a pricing policy 
have a two-hour minimum, and some give 
a price break for three or more hours. So the 
model’s fees  for a three-hour session might 
range anywhere from $300 to $450. That’s 
about parity with the fees for a basic portfolio 
package including about six images with basic 
retouching.
Some models maintain portfolios on sites 
like deviantART, where they have the ability 
to resell prints. Others may want the option to 
license the images from a session for a mag-
azine, a book, or a pay site. The economics of 
each of these scenarios can vary widely, but 
it is worthwhile to research these media and 
develop your own pricing policy for licensing 
these ancillary rights.
Releases
U.S. law governing model releases has to do 
with granting the photographer permission to 
use a photo for purposes of trade. Specifically, 
you can’t use someone’s image in a way that 
implies that they endorse a product or demon-
strate its benefits without their permission in 
the form of a release.
Editorial use of a person’s image, which 
includes fine art, does not require a release 
and is protected under the first amendment. 
However, even though the fine art use of 
an image may place you on solid legal foot-
ing, that doesn’t  ­prevent you from having to 
defend  ­yourself in the event that someone 
brings a lawsuit over the use of their image. 
Nussenzweig v. diCorcia is a celebrated case that 
concluded that the fine art use of an image, 

132
C H 8  
W o r k i n g  w i t h  M o d e l s
© + year of first publication + your name. This 
­format is recognized internationally. Be sure 
to  use the copyright symbol—circle c—not 
parentheses (c).
2257 Regulations
If the work you undertake is of a sexual nature, 
there is one other legal matter that war-
rants attention. Imagery that depicts “sexually 
explicit conduct,” whether it’s real or simu-
lated, including masturbation and “lascivi-
ous exhibition of the genitals or pubic area” 
falls under the regulation of the United States 
Code, Title 18, Section 2257. You will need 
to maintain records documenting the age and 
names of the performers at the time the imag-
ery was made.
The vast majority of nude art, and even erotic 
art photography, is not affected by this code, but 
these regulations are in a constant state of flux, 
and it is a good idea for the erotic artist to keep 
an eye on the latest developments.
It is important to recognize that copyright law 
is designed to protect the unique expression of 
the idea and not the idea itself, and that it auto-
matically recognizes the copyright as belong-
ing to the photographer from the moment the 
exposure is made.
If you feel generous and want to declare that 
you and the model jointly own the copyright, 
you can, but joint ownership means that either 
party can do whatever they like with the image, 
without securing the permission of the other, 
and without sharing in any benefits of that usage. 
Instead of joint copyright, you might consider 
retaining the copyright and granting broad but 
specific usage rights to the model instead.
What if your copyright is infringed? Even 
though copyright is automatically granted, you 
can’t recover much in the way of damages unless 
you register your images. The easiest and most 
economical way to register is in bulk, before 
the images are published. Your pictures should 
always run with a copyright notice that reads 

C H 9  
T h e  S h o o t

135
    
C H A P T E R  N I N E   |   T h e  S h o o t
9
The Shoot
I
n a shoot, all of the equipment is in service of getting the 
image, and an effective image requires the right connection 
with the model. If you get lost in dealing with the camera, the 
lights, or any of the logistics of shooting, your chances of get-
ting a strong image are greatly reduced. We looked at various 
qualities of light in Chapter 5, and much of this chapter will 
discuss some of the equipment that can be used to produce 
those qualities. The equipment described here ranges from 
items that you might use in a small, intimate setting to equip-
ment for a major production shoot with multiple models.
Some photographers always work with a minimalist camera and 
lighting arrangement as a way of keeping the equipment from damp-
ening the interaction. Richard Avedon would set his camera on a tri-
pod and never look through the viewfinder (or at the ground glass of 
his view camera) while he was shooting, because he felt it imposed too 
great a separation. He used a remote shutter release, moved around the 
room, and often used psychology to provoke responses in his ­sitters. 

136
C H 9  
T h e  S h o o t
The more you can make the equipment and 
process disappear, the stronger your connection 
to the subject.
If you’re working with more elaborate set-
ups, it’s helpful to minimize the downtime of 
futzing with equipment by planning and pre-
paring ahead of time. If your camera is new, 
learn as much as you can about how to perform 
the operations you’ll need before the shoot. Or, 
if you’ve got the finances, hire a skilled assistant 
who’ll take care of it all for you!
You will probably need to break the ice 
before you do any actual shooting. This may be 
as much for you as for the model. Lots of pho-
tographers who are beginning to shoot nudes 
are actually nervous being around naked mod-
els. You want to be relaxed and confident. Con-
versation can be almost anything, but it helps if 
you’re genuinely interested in your sitter. It can 
be just small talk, but if you say too little, that 
almost guarantees that your model will be stiff 
and ill at ease, or just plain bored. Talking about 
current events can be tricky, because it can stray 
into hot-button topics like religion and politics. 
If your model volunteers information about a 
girlfriend or boyfriend, it’s probably okay to 
talk cordially about the subject, but you don’t 
want to give the impression that you’re prying 
or coming on to them.
For nudes there is the practical issue of skin. 
Tight-fitting clothing leaves marks. Experi-
enced nude models often arrive at the shoot 
wearing loose-fitting clothing and no under-
wear. If your model arrives wearing tight 
clothes, offer her or him a robe and plan to wait 
around half an hour for the marks to go away. 
Otherwise, you’ll probably have some work to 
do in Photoshop with the healing brush after 
the fact.
Preparation and giving good direction can 
make a big difference in your shoot. No one 
directorial style works for all situations. Irving 
Penn’s book A Notebook at Random shows pre-
paratory sketches he used for some of his fash-
ion shoots next to the finely crafted finished 
product. These are examples of pre-­visualization 
and shooting with a clear end in mind, where 
the model almost functions as a prop. On the 
other hand, various accounts of his “Earthly 
Bodies” sessions describe his interactions with 
his models as being highly collaborative and 
almost nonverbal, where Penn communicated 
with them in a primal way using “coos, mur-
murs, and supportive breathing to convey that 
everything was wonderful, just right in this 
perfect situation.”
Sometimes, it helps to show a few photos of 
poses and concepts that are interesting before 
you start shooting, but photos can have too 
much specific information. Sketching or trac-
ing shots and poses you’re interested in can 
simplify the image so that your sitter will relate 
only to the form of it. Don’t show too many, 
and remember that you can always refer back 
to your collection of posing ideas and introduce 
new ones during the shoot if you have extra 
time or start to lose momentum.
Once you start shooting, it’s important to 
keep the communication open. Directing the 
model during the shoot can work in a num-
ber of ways. The approach depends somewhat 
on the model’s style of working. Many expe-
rienced models know what sides to show, and 
are also aware of how light falls on their bod-
ies. On the other hand, many models can fall 
into rote poses. Look for ways to coach them 
to strengthen the poses, or suggest alternatives 
that build on their strong points. If your sitter 
is new to modeling, it’s especially important to 
keep your input to small chunks, interspersed 
with banter. You want to use simple directives 
like “Turn your head a little more” or “Can you 
bring your chin down a bit?” For more elabo-
rate poses, be ready to act out your idea, even 
badly.

137
C H A P T E R  N I N E   |   N a t u r a l  L i g h t  v s .  C o n t i n u o u s  L i g h t  v s .  S t r o b e s
Your sitter wants confident, competent direc-
tion, a sense of where your shoot is going, and 
an opportunity to collaborate. Paraphrasing a 
post from a model in an online forum, a great 
photographer does the following:
• Comes to the shoot with creative and 
innovative ideas
• Listens to a model who is creative
• Does not make the model come up with all 
the ideas
• Tells a model “chin down,” “soften your 
eyes,” “pop your hip, push out your pelvis, 
and twist to elongate”
• Tells a model “you have a hair out of 
place,” then comes and fixes it
Music can help to create atmosphere dur-
ing the shoot and take some of the pressure off 
you for creating banter. Some models routinely 
bring music, and others will bring it if asked. 
You can play your own music, but always be sen-
sitive to how it affects the space of the shoot. If 
it’s too loud, is too distracting, or doesn’t seem 
to suit the sitter’s tastes, turn it down, change it, 
or turn it off.
There can be a lot to think about, prepare, 
and manage before, during, and after a shoot. 
But a shoot shouldn’t be overly stressful, and 
even if it’s not giddy fun, it should be enjoyable, 
and the results should be satisfying.
Studio or Not
Both the benefit and the challenge of the studio 
is that it starts as a blank canvas. Many photog-
raphers simply put up some muslin or seamless 
paper and a light or two and shoot in a mini-
malist style, but it can be useful to think of a 
studio as something more akin to a movie sound 
stage. Some photographers even construct sets 
inside the studio. A bit of ­wainscoting and 
some vintage-looking wallpaper on a piece of 
sheetrock with a support can transform a bare 
white-painted cinder block space into the wall 
of a country cottage. The studio is a place where 
you can build illusions.
In the early part of David LaChapelle’s 
career, he converted a very small apartment 
into a studio, and had to find creative ways of 
working within the small space. After he had 
gained a degree of success and moved into a 
much more expansive space, he felt compelled 
to build a small set that approximated the tiny 
space he was used to working inside. He fed 
creatively off the constraint.
Spencer Tunick creates spectacles with hun-
dreds of naked bodies sprawled across expanses 
of terrain, populating famous locales, or filling 
the voids of striking pieces of architecture. The 
studio setting is far too restricted for the kinds 
of images he is interested in creating. His is 
location shooting in the extreme.
Natural Light vs. 
Continuous Light vs. 
Strobes
Some photographers swear by natural light, 
and it is the only light they use. Paolo Roversi is 
known for his elegant nudes, shot mostly with 
window light. Photographers who work with 
natural light become keenly aware of how it 
changes and moves throughout the day. Many 
shoot mainly in the “golden hours” near the 
break of day and sunset, and many more have a 
strong appreciation for how much the sun can 
change within just 15 or 20 minutes.
Helmut Newton did a series of diptychs 
involving the opposition of “naked” and 
“clothed.” He shot part of the series at a villa 
in northern Italy in 1981. In one of his first 
diptychs, he shot the same woman clothed and 
undressed (except for high heels) in similar poses 
and in the same location. He didn’t try to make 

138
C H 9  
T h e  S h o o t
we’re talking about dragging the shutter to 
emphasize motion blur and camera shake, or 
speeding up the shutter to freeze motion. Drag 
shutter effects only work with a certain amount 
of ambient or continuous light present.
Aperture preferred mode is best for situa-
tions where the primary concern is depth of 
field. The camera will set the shutter speed for 
you. When shooting in this way, you can antici-
pate what will be in focus. With sufficient depth 
of field, you can pre-focus the camera and just 
shoot without having to wait for auto-focus. 
This can be particularly useful in low-light 
situations where auto-focus systems sometimes 
struggle to get a lock. The downside is that 
your shutter speed can drop to the point where 
motion blur and camera shake are a problem.
Exposure, the Histogram, 
and Manual Mode
Your camera’s metering system generally makes 
a “correct” exposure by calculating the shutter 
and aperture setting so that the resulting tones 
in the image average out to 18% gray. To prop-
erly register a low-key image, we need to tell 
the camera to underexpose the image. Simi-
larly, we need to tell the camera to overexpose 
in order to register a high-key image properly. 
That’s where exposure compensation comes in.
Exposure compensation tells the camera to 
over- or underexpose the image in program, 
shutter, or aperture mode. There is no exposure 
compensation in manual mode, but if you want 
to over- or underexpose in manual, you can 
use the built-in metering system to determine 
exposure or use a handheld meter, then simply 
adjust either the aperture or shutter speed.
As you increase or decrease the exposure, 
the peaks in the histogram will move accord-
ingly. While a “normal” histogram should not 
show spikes, or clipping, on either end, it may 
be appropriate to have such spikes in low-key 
and high-key images.
a strict duplication of the pose, in part because 
he realized that the light would change, and he 
didn’t want the light to be the only difference in 
the images. In essence, he was acknowledging 
and embracing the constantly changing char-
acter of natural light and emphasizing that the 
two moments were unique.
Some photographers prefer to have more 
controlled lighting. Continuous lights offer 
visual confirmation of what you’re going to get 
before you trip the shutter, while strobes offer 
intensity and the power of stopping motion. 
Strobes also offer a range of light-shaping tools 
that are not available with continuous lights. 
We’ll cover a number of lighting instruments 
and light-shaping tools later in this chapter.
Program and Preferred 
Modes
One way to take creative control of your shots is 
to override program mode on your camera. This 
doesn’t necessarily mean switching completely 
to manual, and it really works by degrees.
The first degree of override might be called 
P* mode, because many cameras put an aster-
isk next to the program mode indicator when 
you override the default setting. In the old days, 
when you put your camera in program mode, 
you simply had to accept the determination of 
shutter speed and aperture made by the camera. 
Many current models have a thumb wheel that 
allows you to bias the choice that the camera 
makes: press the shutter button halfway down 
to get a meter reading, then spin the wheel one 
way to get equivalent exposures with faster 
shutter speeds, or the other way to get equiva-
lent exposures with wider apertures. When you 
get to the aperture or shutter speed you like, 
press the shutter button the rest of the way.
Shutter preferred mode is best for situations 
where you are most concerned with the dura-
tion of the exposure and you are willing to let 
the camera determine the aperture. Very often, 

139
C H A P T E R  N I N E   |   M i x i n g  A m b i e n t  L i g h t  w i t h  F l a s h
at 1/15 at f/5.6, which is an equivalent expo-
sure to 1/30 at f/4. The intensities of the ambi-
ent light and the flash would combine, and 
you would end up with an image that is over- 
exposed by one stop. That only happens when 
the intensities of the ambient light and the 
flash are at parity.
Assuming that your indoor lights are tung-
sten and you set your white balance to the color 
temperature of your flash, the color of the ambi-
ent light would take on a yellow-orange hue. 
If you had a tungsten white balance instead, 
the light of the flash would have a pronounced 
bluish cast. If you want less of an apparent dif-
ference in color temperature, you could put an 
orange filter over the flash to bring its color 
temperature closer to that of the tungsten light. 
Then you could use either a high color tem-
perature setting to emphasize the golden color 
of the light or a tungsten color temperature to 
make all of the light neutral.
Outdoors, you have a lot more power from 
the sunlight, but the same principles apply. 
You’re likely to want to use a lower ISO to keep 
your shutter speeds and aperture in a manage-
able range. In this case, your camera’s maximum 
flash sync speed is a concern. For many DSLR 
cameras, the maximum sync speed is 1/125, but 
for some it’s 1/250. You’ll need to check your 
camera’s manual, though, because some cam-
eras only sync up to 1/60.
With that in mind, one interesting look is 
where the ambient light is underexposed by 
about two stops. Let’s say you are able to get 
a reading of 1/125 at f/8. If you set your flash 
to register f/16 and shoot at 1/125, you’ll get 
the two stops underexposed look you’re going 
for. If that doesn’t render your background 
dark enough, and your maximum sync speed 
is 1/250, you can increase your shutter speed 
a little more. If you can’t, you’ll want to try to 
get more light from your strobe, increasing it 
to f/19 or f/22, for example, and then setting 
When shooting in RAW, the histogram 
shows the distribution of tones as they would 
occur in a JPEG file shot with that exposure. 
While that might sound like a problem, it’s 
not. The distribution of tones in an unpro-
cessed raw file doesn’t make sense to our eyes; 
they are recorded in the language of machin-
ery. A RAW file captures light impressions in 
a linear fashion, but a JPEG file, and any pho-
tographic image, is the product of a nonlinear 
response curve. The only way that a histogram 
makes sense is by applying a response curve to 
the data first.
Mixing Ambient Light  
with Flash
The short duration of a strobe’s light makes 
it operate as if it has its own shutter. This is 
very useful when you want to mix flash with 
ambient light, because it means that you can 
put your camera in manual mode and let the 
aperture control your flash exposure while the 
shutter speed controls the mix of ambient light. 
Decreasing the shutter speed captures more 
ambient light, and increasing the shutter speed 
captures less of it.
Using studio flash, the process starts with 
taking a reading of the ambient light. Let’s say 
that your light meter tells you that a proper 
exposure would be 1/30 (second) at f/4. Since 
you want the flash to be at least one stop more 
powerful than the ambient light, you can set up 
the flash so that its intensity reads f/5.6, one stop 
over the ambient light reading. That means that 
if we set the camera to f/5.6 and shoot at 1/30, 
the image would register the ambient light one 
stop underexposed, and at 1/60 it would be two 
stops underexposed. You can experiment with 
different shutter speeds until you find the one 
that gives you the most pleasant mix.
If you were to slow the shutter down to 
1/15, an interesting thing would happen. At 
that point, the ambient light would be recorded 

140
C H 9  
T h e  S h o o t
As we saw in Chapter 5, color temperature 
can vary over a wide range for any particular 
type of light source, so the preset color tem-
peratures in your camera may not do such a 
great job of neutralizing the whites. Auto white 
balance can work better, but it generally doesn’t 
work so well in low-light situations, and in 
mixed light situations, the white balance can 
shift a lot between frames.
Before shooting, you can choose a particular 
preset white balance in your camera, or use a 
gray card to set a custom white balance, just so 
that all of your captures have a consistent color 
when you start reviewing them. This is not crit-
ical, but it is often useful, even if you plan to 
correct the color in post-production.
Another significant difference between 
shooting with a particular white balance in 
your camera versus neutralizing in Camera 
RAW is that most cameras do not have sepa-
rate adjustments for color temperature and tint, 
while Photoshop does. It’s not uncommon for 
the camera to get the color temperature right, 
but skew either green or magenta. Greenish 
skin always looks sickly.
Lights and Light Modifiers
Having looked briefly at the overall shoot and 
some of the techniques, we now turn to some 
of the lighting equipment involved. Of course, 
the treatment here cannot do justice to the 
entire subject of lighting equipment. Hope-
fully, the following will provide some with new 
ideas about lighting that are worth exploring 
further.
Continuous, or “Hot,” Lights
The phrase “hot lights” is slowly being phased 
out and these lights are increasingly referred 
to as continuous lights because color-balanced 
fluorescent systems are becoming increasingly 
popular, meaning that not all “hot” lights get 
hot. These lights are the most straightforward 
your camera’s aperture accordingly. If two stops 
under (1/125 at f/16) renders the ambient light 
too dark, you can slow the shutter down by 
degrees until you achieve a pleasing balance.
A different look is fill flash, where the ambi-
ent light dominates. In that case, you would 
simply set your aperture and shutter based on 
the ambient light reading, then set your strobe’s 
output to read one or more stops under. So, if 
the ambient light reads 1/125 at f/8, a flash 
reading of f/5.6 or lower will provide fill.
These calculations can be done automatically 
using a TTL flash such as Nikon’s SB-800 and 
Canon’s 580EX. For details on using fill flash 
mode, check the manual. To make the ambi-
ent light underexpose and the flash overexpose, 
there are two possible routes. The first is to set 
your camera in manual mode, set your flash 
in TTL mode, then experiment with aperture 
and shutter speed. Because the flash is in TTL 
mode, it will increase output as much as it can 
as you increase the aperture number.
The other route to take with TTL is to set 
your camera in either program mode or aper-
ture mode. From there, you can use exposure 
compensation to decrease the exposure of the 
ambient light and increase flash compensation 
to increase the output of the flash. Start with an 
exposure compensation of –2 and a flash com-
pensation of 0, and see how that looks.
Gray Card for White 
Balance
Using a Camera RAW workflow, it’s extremely 
easy to get consistent, accurate white balance for 
all of your shots by taking one reference frame 
with a special neutral gray target. Since color 
temperature can change as you vary the mix of 
lights or the power setting on your strobes, it 
is best to take a reference shot each time your 
lighting setup changes significantly. If you plan 
to shoot with colored gels, though, be sure to 
take your reference shot with the gels removed.

141
C H A P T E R  N I N E   |   L i g h t s  a n d  L i g h t  M o d i f i e r s
halogen light, and they produce light with a 
color temperature of daylight. Even small HMI 
fixtures can produce very intense light, so they 
are typically bounced onto the scene from a wall 
or bead board.
Some Manufacturers of 
Continuous Lights
Smith-Victor’s lighting tools have been around 
for many years. They make a wide range of inex-
pensive reflectors, fixtures, and stands that typi-
cally use household bulbs. These instruments 
generally produce low-intensity light that is 
relatively hard. You will probably want to put 
your camera on a tripod for best results.
Lowel produces a range of lights that are 
­particularly popular in film production. These 
lights typically use halogen bulbs and are 
designed for varying applications. The Tota 
light is designed to fold up and be extremely 
portable. It features a pair of reflectors arranged 
in a V and is made to throw a wide, even pool 
of light, which can be useful for lighting back-
grounds. The Rifa light folds up like an umbrella, 
making it quick to set up and take down, and it 
is extremely portable. It has a panel of diffusion 
material across the front and produces a soft 
light that is great for portraits.
Arri and Mole Richardson make the lights 
that are probably most associated with film-
making. When you see shots of movie lights 
or scenes of the inside of a television studio, 
you’re likely to see lights by one or both of these 
manufacturers. The Arri 650 is a relatively small 
unit that throws a good amount of light. It can 
be used for lighting a person or throwing light 
onto a background. It features a Fresnel lens 
(pronounced fruh-nell), which allows you to 
focus the light. The quality of Fresnel light is 
very distinctive, and many of the classic Holly-
wood portraits were shot with this kind of light. 
The beam can be set to a tight, bright spot or 
opened up to produce a softer flood. Thus, the 
spot/flood knob can also be used as an intensity 
to work with, because you have a fairly clear 
idea of what the camera will record as soon as 
you set them up and turn them on. This makes 
them great tools to learn lighting techniques 
with, because you don’t even have to make an 
exposure to see the result.
The simplest and least expensive lighting 
setups use a metal parabolic reflector, possibly 
an umbrella, and household bulbs for illumi-
nation. The tungsten filament in a household 
bulb slowly evaporates as it ages, and the color 
temperature of the bulb will change over time 
as tungsten deposits develop on the glass. Hal-
ogen bulbs are filled with a gas that interacts 
with the tungsten vapor. A chemical reaction 
causes the tungsten to be deposited back onto 
the filament instead of adhering to the glass. 
These bulbs do not shift color as much when 
they age, and they also burn brighter and at a 
higher color temperature.
Fixtures employing halogen bulbs can be 
simple affairs with just a reflector or a more 
elaborate design that has a focusing mecha-
nism. Halogen bulbs emit a high amount of 
UV light, and they should always have protec-
tive glass or a diffuser in front of the bulb.
Lighting systems that use special fluorescent 
bulbs have come on the market in recent years. 
These are different from household fluorescent 
fixtures in several important ways. First, the 
lights are available in daylight or tungsten color 
temperatures. Second, they don’t exhibit the 
greenish cast of household fluorescents. Last, 
they cycle much faster than household fluores-
cents, so that they don’t appear to flicker. This is 
more of an issue for the film industry than for 
shooting stills.
HMI lights are a descendent of the carbon-
arc lights used in filmmaking from the early 
days. They are expensive and hot, and are less 
likely to show up in the studio of a starving artist, 
but they have advantages for some applications. 
They use a lot less energy than the equivalent 

142
C H 9  
T h e  S h o o t
control. You can also replace the 650-watt bulb 
with a lower-intensity bulb.
Kinoflo and Rololight specialize in fluores-
cent lighting systems. These units feature arrays 
of fluorescent tubes that produce a broad, soft 
light. The Rololight system allows you to sepa-
rate the individual tubes and arrange them in 
different ways. The fixture also rolls up and 
stows in a bag for easy portability. The light 
from these units is good for portraits and 
figurative work, and they are popular because 
of their low-temperature operation and low 
power consumption. They can also be used in 
places where tungsten-based lighting would 
blow the fuses.
Studio Strobes
Studio strobes work by storing substantial 
amounts of energy from the wall in capacitors, 
then dumping it on command into a gas-filled 
tube. (A capacitor is different from a recharge-
able battery in that batteries trickle out the 
energy they have stored up, while capacitors 
release their energy all at once like a lightning 
bolt.) The resulting flash of light is very bright, 
and typically lasts 1/1000 of a second or less. As 
mentioned earlier, that’s faster than most cam-
era shutters, and so the strobe functions as if it 
has a shutter of its own.
Because the flash of a strobe is so brief and 
intense, it freezes action. The impressionistic 
blurring of continuous lights is not available 
with strobes. If your room is dark, and your sub-
ject’s pupils are dilated, the flash will switch on 
and off faster than they can constrict, causing 
red-eye. A number of photographers have used 
this fact to their advantage, intentionally induc-
ing red-eye, especially for fashion photography. 
Moving the light off-axis and keeping the cam-
era is close can create a very different effect, and 
the appearance can be striking.
Strobes generally have output switches or 
dials that allow you to control the intensity of 
the light in increments over a range of three to 
five stops, often in increments of 1/3 stop.
Most studio strobes have a modeling light 
that can be turned on or off. The light is usu-
ally 150 to 250 watts. With some light-shaping 
tools, that’s barely enough intensity to be vis-
ible. It is usually enough to tell you if you’re 
aiming the head in the right direction, though. 
To see what the light is really doing, you need 
to take a test shot.
There are two main designs for studio 
strobes: pack and head systems and monolights. 
With pack and head systems, a power pack 
(sometimes referred to as a generator) houses 
the capacitors and controls, and you attach a 
separate head to the pack by means of a power 
cable. Most packs can control two or three 
heads, and are designed so that the power can 
be divided evenly or asymmetrically between 
the heads. One advantage of this design is 
that the heads are light and the controls stay 
on the floor. With only one head connected to 
the pack, a substantial amount of power can be 
delivered to the head.
Monolights are self-powered heads. They 
contain a set of capacitors and controls, which 
makes them a bit less convenient for appli-
cations like placing a light on a boom, both 
because of the added weight and because you 
have to climb a ladder to adjust them. On the 
other hand, they tend to be more affordably 
priced than pack and head systems. Their inte-
grated design also makes them convenient to 
travel with.
The power output of studio strobes is gen-
erally rated in watt seconds, abbreviated ws. 
A 600-ws or 750-ws monolight is a very ver-
satile unit. Packs rated at 1200 ws are good for 
most digital applications and are smaller and 
lighter than 2400-ws packs. The extra head-
room of a 2400-ws pack can be useful, especially 
with power-hungry light-shaping tools or in 

143
C H A P T E R  N I N E   |   L i g h t s  a n d  L i g h t  M o d i f i e r s
­outdoor applications, but there are times where 
it is a challenge to reduce the power enough, 
especially when working in a small space. 
High-power packs mean that you can keep the 
ISO setting low on your digital camera. Some 
cameras begin to show noise problems at ISO 
800. Since you generally won’t be using these 
packs at full power, it’s also likely that your pack 
or monolight will recycle faster.
Raw power output, whether in watt seconds 
or any other measure, is not really what we are 
concerned with, since much of that power can 
be soaked up by the light-shaping tools we use. 
What we really care about is the intensity of the 
light that results and the corresponding f-stop 
that will produce a correct exposure. If the full 
power of a 1200-ws pack in a particular setup 
gives a reading of f/5.6, substituting a 2400-ws 
pack at full power will give f/8. If you need f/11, 
it’s time to move the light in about 1/4.
When you are working with two or more 
lights, you can use a light meter to get your 
lighting design working the way you want it 
to much more quickly than with test shots. 
Bearing in mind that you need at least a one-
stop difference in intensity to register notice-
able lighting contrast, you can hold the meter 
close to the subject and take readings of each 
light source, adjusting one light at a time as 
needed.
The usual way of triggering a strobe is with a 
sync cable, which is notorious for breaking and 
failing at the worst possible moment. The tiny 
connection is fragile, and so are the wires inside 
the cable itself. If you use sync cables, be sure 
to have a spare handy. There is an alternative, 
and it is called the Pocket Wizard. It is a small 
radio transmitter that attaches to your camera 
via the hot shoe and a receiver that attaches to 
your power pack or monolight. This radio con-
nection replaces the physical cable.
There are times where one pack is not suffi-
cient to do the job. How do you get both packs 
to fire? Trigger one with the camera, and let the 
light of the first one firing trigger the second. 
You do that by switching on the slave (unfor-
tunate term) feature of the second unit. Virtu-
ally all flash systems have this feature, but if you 
ever encounter a system that does not, you can 
buy a small photocell that plugs into the sync 
socket and triggers the unit.
The Sekonic L-358 is a workhorse light 
meter that has an optional Pocket Wizard 
module to run your metering process wirelessly. 
It has a flat disc mode that allows you to shield 
the light dome so that it reads one light at a 
time in multi-light setups.
One performance characteristic that sepa-
rates different strobes is recycle time. Better 
systems can recycle extremely fast, even at full 
power, while other systems can take several 
seconds to do so. That may not seem like a lot 
of time, but if you are trying to photograph 
intricate movement on the fly, the lag between 
flashes can seem interminable. Some systems 
will flash before they are fully charged, but the 
output is dimmed, and generally the color tem-
perature decreases.
Most strobes temporarily turn off the mod-
eling light when the flash fires and turn it back 
on when the unit is fully charged. In cheap sys-
tems, this is the only indication that the system 
is ready to fire. Better systems have the option 
to switch off the modeling light and beep when 
the system is ready. This can be important in 
applications where you are mixing the strobe 
with ambient light and you don’t want the 
modeling light to affect the scene.
Some Makers of Studio Strobes
Swedish manufacturer Profoto is one of the 
top brands. Their units are solidly constructed, 
and the systems are designed for performance, 
ease of use, and safety. Profoto also manufac-
tures an extremely wide range of specialized 
light-shaping tools. They make several systems, 
including Acute, Compact, and the Pro-7.  

144
C H 9  
T h e  S h o o t
The Acute systems are in wide use in photogra-
phy schools. The Compact systems are Profoto’s 
line of monolights. Pro-7s are nearly ubiquitous 
among high-end rental studios in the United 
States and are very popular among fashion 
photographers. Profoto offers many models 
with Pocket Wizard receivers built in.
Broncolor is also a Swedish manufacturer 
that competes with Profoto at the high end 
of the market. It is the other brand that fash-
ion photographers most often use. While their 
units are available in the United States, they are 
much more widely available in Europe.
Dynalite is an American maker known 
for its small, rugged, and extremely portable 
systems. The emphasis on portability makes 
Dynalites particularly good for location shoot-
ing. The company offers many models with 
Pocket Wizard receivers built in.
Travelites are a line of monolights made 
exclusively for Calumet by Bowens. They are 
economical, solidly built, and well priced. Calu-
met also offers the Traveler series of pack and 
head systems built by Bowens. The Calumet 
designs have some features that are distinct 
from the Bowens offerings. It is worth compar-
ing the two.
Hot Shoe Flash
Advanced hot shoe flashes such as Nikon’s 
SB-800 and Canon’s 580EX are often referred 
to as speed lights. It is well known that these 
are sophisticated flash systems that can com-
municate with the camera to automatically set 
their own power output in situations like event 
photography. It is not as well known that they 
can be placed on light stands and used as man-
ual studio strobes. In manual mode, the power 
on the SB-800 can be adjusted over a range of 
six stops in 1/3 stop increments.
You can even trigger the SB-800 with a 
Pocket Wizard. The sync cord plugs into a 
­terminal on the side of the SB-800, and you 
put the unit into SU-4 mode. In this mode, 
the SB-800 can be triggered by the Pocket 
­Wizard or by the light of another strobe. 
That’s fine if you’re the only shooter, but if 
other people are setting off their flashes, it 
can be a bit of a problem. Covering the elec-
tric eye and the red lens on the front of the 
unit  with gaffer tape will blind it to other 
flashes.
The power output of speed lights is rated 
differently from studio flashes. Instead of a ws 
rating, the flashes’ output is measured with a 
guide number, which relates to the brightness 
of the light at full output at a certain distance. 
This doesn’t translate directly into watt seconds, 
but the SB-800 and 580EX compare favorably 
to a monolight in the range of 80 to 160 watt 
seconds.
Ring Lights
The ring light, or ringflash, is an interesting 
device. You can see an example of the light it 
produces in Chapter 5. It’s part flash head and 
part modifier. The light was a staple of Helmut 
Newton’s lighting style for several years. The 
basic ring light is a circular light source that 
surrounds the lens and attaches to the camera 
by way of a bracket that screws into the tripod 
mount. Because the light comes from equal 
distances all around the lens, most shadows are 
canceled, and the illumination has a distinctive 
look. When your subject is close to a wall, it 
will create a shadow that looks like you out-
lined him or her with a thin, dark marker. The 
outline expands to some degree as you move 
away from the wall.
The original ring light design was a special 
flash head with a large circular flash tube that 
attached to a power pack. Profoto, Broncolor, 
and Elinchrom all make versions of this design. 
The basic design is essentially a bare dough-
nut, but different manufacturers offer a range 
of diffusers and soft light reflectors that further 
soften the look.

145
C H A P T E R  N I N E   |   L i g h t s  a n d  L i g h t  M o d i f i e r s
Expo Imaging is marketing the Ray Flash, 
an interesting converter that clips onto the front 
of your hot shoe flash and turns it into a ring 
flash. Canon, Nikon, and Sunpak also have ring 
light attachments that work with your camera’s 
hot shoe, but these are primarily designed for 
macro shooting.
Light Modifiers
A number of photographers have successfully 
exploited the aesthetic potential of a raw light 
source, but light modifiers dramatically expand 
the creative potential of working with light. 
Through light modifiers, you can harden, soften, 
focus, constrain, color, and shape light.
Umbrellas are extremely simple to use and 
among the least expensive of the light-shaping 
tools. Their function is to soften and spread 
light. Bouncing the light from a silver-lined 
umbrella gives a light that has brighter high-
lights and more saturated color. It’s a slightly 
harder look than the light from a white-lined 
umbrella, which generally has a slightly warmer 
look, as well. There are also translucent “shoot-
through” umbrellas. These produce a flatter, 
lower-contrast look than what you get with the 
bounce-style umbrellas.
Size matters. As you increase the size of 
the umbrella, relative to the subject, the light 
becomes softer. So a 45-inch umbrella gives a 
softer light than a 30-inch umbrella at the same 
distance. The shorter the distance to the subject, 
the larger the relative size of the umbrella, too, 
so closer and bigger means softer. However, you 
want to consider the application. It is possible 
to have too big an umbrella, and it is possible to 
move the instrument too close.
Photoflex and Westcott are two manufac-
turers that make convertible umbrellas with 
a translucent interior and a detachable black 
cover. These easily switch between bounce style 
and shoot-through use. Some manufactur-
ers make heat-resistant umbrellas designed to 
work with high-temperature lights.
Umbrellas spread light over a wide area, 
producing a lot of spill, which can be hard to 
control, but that also makes them excellent 
for illuminating backgrounds, floors, and large 
areas. You may recall from the end of Chap-
ter 5 that the feathered edge or penumbra of a 
bounce-style umbrella’s light has a softer qual-
ity than the light reflected from the middle. 
You will generally get better, more control-
lable results with an umbrella if you don’t tilt 
it down toward the subject. Draw an imaginary 
line between the tips and across the opening of 
the umbrella, and keep that line parallel to the 
vertical pole of your light stand. To adjust the 
light, just move it from side to side or vertically 
until you get the look that you want.
To use an umbrella with a hot shoe flash, 
you need an umbrella swivel adapter with a cold 
shoe. The foot of the flash slips into the shoe 
and locks in place. The shoe fits into the swivel 
in turn, and the umbrella fits into an angled 
hole in the swivel and is held in place with a 
thumbscrew.
Softboxes, sometimes called light banks, are 
effectively an extension of umbrellas, and some 
even retain the parabolic shape of an umbrella. 
However, they improve on the idea in several 
key ways. With a softbox, the softening of the 
light is achieved by bouncing the light around 
the inside of the box and then passing the light 
through translucent diffusing material that is 
stretched across the front of the tool. Many 
softboxes have the option to install a second 
layer of diffusion, known as a baffle, inside. The 
shape of the softbox and the diffusion material 
causes most softboxes to create a pool of light 
that falls off more quickly than the light from 
an umbrella, meaning that you’ll have inher-
ently less spill to contend with when using a 
softbox. The soft, diffused light of a softbox 
has one effect that can sometimes be an issue: 
colors are less saturated in this kind of light.
Size matters with softboxes, just as with 
umbrellas. They are typically described as small, 

146
C H 9  
T h e  S h o o t
medium, and large, though the dome-type 
softboxes are often specified by size. Larger 
is softer, and softboxes have a “sweet spot,” or 
optimum distance. A good rule of thumb is to 
place the surface of the softbox at a distance 
from the subject equal to the longest dimension 
of the softbox. In other words, if you’re using a 
medium rectangular softbox (roughly 36 inches 
× 48 inches), you’ll get optimum results with 
the light about 48 inches from the subject.
The basic shape of a softbox is rectangular, 
with a more boxy shape than an umbrella; how-
ever, there are several useful variations on that 
form. Strip lights are tall and thin, and create 
a narrow plane of soft illumination with very 
limited spill. They are very useful for creat-
ing rim lighting effects with the figure. Octas 
have the shape of large umbrellas, and typi-
cally have eight sides. They can be very large, 
and are sometimes used without the diffusion 
material across the front. The shape of the light 
source shows up in the catch lights of the sit-
ter’s eyes, so fashion and beauty photographers 
who do not like the look of rectangular catch 
lights tend to quickly embrace the octas. Some 
octas even have a bezel with a circular cutout 
that attaches to the front of the diffusion panel 
to make the catch light perfectly round, instead 
of octagonal.
Several manufacturers make softboxes out 
of Nomex, a heat-resistant material that can be 
used with high-temperature continuous lights.
The softbox attaches to a lighting fixture by 
way of an adapter called a speed ring. In this 
way, you can use the same softbox with an array 
of fixtures; you just need the appropriate speed 
ring for each type of fixture. The speed rings 
are not really brand-specific. For example, you 
can use a Chimera speed ring with a Photoflex 
softbox.
Chimera makes a lightweight, high-quality 
range of softboxes called Pro II. These are inte-
grated units that allow you to add the interior 
baffle for extra diffusion, but they do not come 
completely apart the way more expensive soft-
boxes do. Chimera also makes speed rings that 
adapt the SB-800 and the 580EX to a softbox. 
Photoflex makes moderately priced 5 foot and 
3 foot octa softboxes.
The beauty dish, sometimes called a soft 
light reflector, attaches to a strobe. It is a hard 
metal parabola, usually painted white inside, 
with a reflector suspended over the center. Light 
from the head bounces off the reflector in the 
center and back into the dish before it is radi-
ated out to the sitter. The light has a very soft, 
luminous quality, especially when used close to 
the subject. It creates distinctive catch lights in 
the eyes.
Grids focus and harden the light, instead 
of spreading it. They fit on the front of stu-
dio strobes by way of an adapter or a reflec-
tor designed specifically for grids, although in 
a pinch, you can also attach a grid to a plain 
umbrella reflector with gaffer tape. The grid 
works by soaking up the light beams that are 
not heading in a more or less straight path from 
the light source to the subject. Some grid reflec-
tors can additionally accept a snoot or a set of 
barn doors.
Grids are usually sold in sets, and are graded 
in degrees for the amount of spread they 
allow, typically 10, 20, 30, and 40 degrees. The 
more spread, the brighter the light that passes 
through the grid, and the more feathered the 
edge of any shadows will be. Because the grids 
restrict the spread of light, they are useful for 
controlling spill.
Egg crates and louvers are essentially grids 
designed for softboxes. They further reduce the 
spill of light, and have the additional effect of 
making colors more saturated, while maintain-
ing much of the soft quality of the light.
Several manufacturers, including Bowens 
and Profoto, make Fresnel attachments for 

147
C H A P T E R  N I N E   |   L i g h t s  a n d  L i g h t  M o d i f i e r s
their strobe heads. These are focusing lenses for 
the strobe that give the distinctive light quality 
of the hot lights.
Snoots are funnel-shaped devices that fit 
onto the front of a lighting head. The small 
aperture allows just a small circle of light to 
pass through. This can be used to create a bright 
highlight, isolating or emphasizing one part of 
the body. The edge of the circle of light pro-
duced by the snoot can be made harder by put-
ting a snoot over a grid. There are also snoots 
designed to fit over Fresnel hot lights like the 
Arris.
Expo Imaging distributes the Honl Photo 
Speed system, an assortment of light modifi-
ers for hot shoe flashes including two different 
grids and a snoot.
Barn doors are more commonly seen on 
lights like the Arris and movie lights, but 
they are often available for many other types 
of lighting equipment, including strobes. They 
generally have either two or four wings that 
swivel to allow you to block the spill of light in 
one direction or another. With the light source 
above the camera and pointed down toward the 
subject, you can position the barn door so that 
much of the background is in shadow. This will 
make the subject’s face pop out from the back-
ground, especially if the background is dark. 
This technique generally works with head and 
shoulders and even 3/4 portraits.
Gels are thin sheets of translucent material 
that are used to color a light source. Many are 
heat-resistant and work with either strobes or 
constant lights; just be sure that you don’t put 
the type that is not heat-resistant on a high-
temperature light. There are holders for gels, 
but many photographers simply use clothes-
pins, box clips, or gaffer tape to hold the gels 
in place.
CTO (color temperature orange) and CTB 
(color temperature blue) gels are designed to 
convert color temperature. Placing a CTO gel 
over a strobe makes the light more consistent 
with tungsten light, and placing CTB over an 
Arri tungsten light, for example, will make its 
light more consistent with strobe or daylight. 
You can get 1/4, 1/2, or full CTO or CTB gels, 
and you can double up the gels to control the 
degree of color shift.
There is a wide range of other colored gels, 
including the Storaro gels by Rosco, mentioned 
in Chapter 5. These gels color the light for vari-
ous aesthetic purposes. One caveat about col-
ored light is that color becomes desaturated 
and blows out as you increase exposure. Under-
exposure works better for colored lights. If you 
want your colored light to look colored, use it 
as a fill on the shadow side or shoot your image 
low-key.
Using neutral density (ND) gels is a way 
to decrease light output without moving your 
lighting instrument. They are neutral in color 
and soak up light. Depending on how much 
you need to cut the light, you can build up mul-
tiple layers of ND gels.
Scrims are often made of metal screen and 
are generally used to cut the light output from 
hot lights. Full scrims cut one stop, and half 
scrims cut half a stop. There are also scrims that 
physically cover only half the light implement. 
These are good for taming the light in one part 
of the scene when everything else is lit just 
right. Because they are made out of mesh, they 
do not produce a hard shadow line.
Cookies create the effect of dappled light in 
the studio. The term is a nickname for the actual 
name of the device: a cuculoris. You can make 
or buy these. They’re essentially a piece of ply-
wood, foam core, or other opaque material with 
shapes cut out to let some light pass through 
and produce a pattern of shadows. Or you can 
attach shapes to a piece of window screen. These 
can simulate the way light spills through trees, 
or can be cut to more specific geometric shapes. 

148
C H 9  
T h e  S h o o t
The harder the light source, the more defined 
the projected shapes will be. If the cookie is 
used close to a high-temperature light source, 
it’s important that it be fire resistant, but if not, 
it can be placed on a stand a bit farther from 
the source.
Reflectors, used to fill shadows, are com-
monly made of fabric stretched over a flexible 
circular frame that twists and collapses into a 
smaller shape for easy transportation. The reflec-
tive surface can be used to bounce light into the 
shadow areas of a shot, to open a face, for exam-
ple. They are especially useful in natural light 
settings where fill flash is not available or not 
wanted, but they work great in a studio setting 
with flash, too. Reflectors are typically white, 
silver, gold, or zebra colored. Some companies 
make a frame with interchangeable coverings. 
The gold and zebra colors add more warmth 
to the reflected light. A number of companies, 
including Photoflex, make reflectors.
Bead board is a foam material with a peb-
bled surface that is also used for bouncing light, 
especially from a light fixture. It is widely used 
in movie production.
Silks and butterflies are pieces of translu-
cent material that can be fastened to a frame 
or taped over a window to provide diffusion. 
They  are particularly useful in settings where 
bright outdoor sun is too hard and high- 
contrast. California Sunbounce makes a num-
ber of products for both diffusion and bounce.
V-flats are made from two large pieces of 
foamcore taped together to form a hinge. The 
flats will then stand on their own when unfolded 
and stood on their end. They fold flat for stor-
age. Foamcore is available in white, black, and 
black on one side. The black-and-white version 
can be taped together so that when folded to 
show the white side, it serves as a bounce for 
light sources, and when folded to the black side, 
it becomes a black bounce. Black bounces are 
also sometimes known as B-flats.
Flags are particularly useful in situations 
where you are working with back lighting and 
have issues of spill. A flag can be a notebook 
held in your hand to block the light from the 
lens, or it can be a cloth or plastic piece made 
for that purpose, attached to a stand.
You can also make your own flags out of Cine-
foil, a heavy aluminum foil painted flat black. It 
is easy to cut and shape, and stiff enough to hold 
its shape. It is also lightweight, so it can easily 
be taped to things. For example, it could be used 
to create a skirt along one edge of a softbox or 
umbrella to kill a troublesome bit of spill.
Light Stands
Beyond understanding the various types, the 
biggest thing to know about light stands is 
how to use them safely and properly. There is 
a temptation to use stands that are not rigid 
enough, because they are lighter to carry and 
easier on the wallet, but puny stands can cause 
accidents.
With tripod-style stands, the stand is most 
stable when the stays that attach the legs to the 
vertical bar form a right angle with the vertical. 
They can angle downward from the legs, but 
they should never angle upward.
When working outside, even a light wind 
can turn softboxes and umbrellas into sails. The 
higher you hoist the lights, the bigger the prob-
lem. It’s a good idea to use sandbags to weight 
the bases of light stands outdoors and to have a 
spotter or two to keep an eye on the equipment 
in case the wind kicks up.
Convertible 
stands 
like 
the 
Bogen/ 
Manfrotto 420B have an articulated joint that 
allows the top portion of the stand to swivel 
and become a boom arm or function as a con-
ventional stand when you don’t need the boom. 
The extended boom on this model can only 
hold 11 pounds. The stand comes with an empty 
counterweight sandbag. You just add sand.

149
C H A P T E R  N I N E   |   R e n t i n g  v s .  O w n i n g
Full booms have longer arms and can sup-
port a little more weight, but they also have 
controls that allow you to rotate and tilt the 
instrument at the tip of the boom. Often, the 
boom arm and stand can be purchased sepa-
rately. An example is the Bogen/Manfrotto 
025BS Super Boom with 008BU Stand, which 
supports 15 pounds when extended. The stand 
has one leg that can be extended for leveling 
and has casters.
Booms are very useful, because they allow 
you to place light above your sitter without the 
stand being in the shot. It’s important to prop-
erly counterweight your light and sandbag the 
base when you use such setups. Also, make sure 
that the head is securely attached to the boom 
arm. Pay attention to the maximum loads—
the extended boom on the 420B can hold just 
11 pounds.
An interesting variation on the standard 
boom arm is the Red Wing, which is an articu-
lated arm that can be used with any appropriate 
base, including the 008BU mentioned above. 
The arm is cantilevered so that it can easily be 
repositioned during a shoot. As it tilts, the head 
rotates so that the lighting instrument at the 
end continues to point in the same direction. 
This comes at a price, but for some applications, 
it makes switching setups almost trivial.
C-stands, also called Century stands, are 
sturdier and more stable than tripod stands. 
They come with a mini boom called a Holly-
wood arm, which attaches to the vertical sup-
port with a swiveling clamp called a knuckle. 
The arm has a bare end and a knuckle on the 
other end. The knuckle on the arm can be used 
to hold flags or cookies, and the head of a flash 
easily attaches to the bare end. They are most 
stable when the you load them so that the 
weight leans over the long leg.
Standard backdrops can be seamless paper 
or simple muslin, but you can get creative 
and use anything from newspaper to shower 
­curtains to bubble wrap. Sometimes, it makes 
a tremendous difference to add just a touch of 
illumination for the background itself.
Many vendors will cut your seamless paper 
to size. One standard width for seamless is nine 
feet, but if 6.5 feet works better, stores such as 
the Set Shop will cut it down at your request. 
It’s relatively easy to put seamless paper on 
a wooden bar and hold it in place with an A 
clamp, but often the paper spins around and 
gets torn. Manfrotto’s 046MC Expan Drive 
paper holders fit inside the core of the seam-
less roll and allow you to easily raise and lower 
the paper by pulling a metal chain. The paper 
is held in place by adjustable friction, and the 
holders can easily be attached to light stands, 
autopoles, or a wall with the appropriate adapter 
and hooks.
Muslin can be plain or dyed in different 
ways. The danger of dyed muslin backdrops is 
that they have been used for so long that they 
can easily impart that department store portrait 
studio look to your images. Pattern-dyed muslin 
works best if you keep the depth of field shal-
low so that the background is rendered slightly 
out of focus. This is hard to do with some lenses 
and lighting, because you can easily find your-
self shooting at f/8 or f/11, which is likely to 
make the background sharp. Plain muslin can 
be especially interesting if you crumple it so 
that it has lots of wrinkles and texture. Lighting 
it from the side will then drive up the texture.
Renting vs. Owning
If you are so inspired, you might research the 
cost of purchasing some of the more interesting 
items mentioned here, and it is likely that you 
will quickly discover that it adds up to a not-
so-small fortune. Many of the items are avail-
able for rent, especially if you live near a major 
city, and companies like Profoto have leasing 
programs. You can lose a lot of time picking up 
and returning rental equipment, so it does make 
sense to own a minimal lighting setup of your 

150
C H 9  
T h e  S h o o t
own. Don’t forget that you can do a lot with 
speed lights and that good used equipment can 
be found online. If you do decide to buy used, 
caveat emptor—research what you’re buying 
carefully, so that you know what you’re getting.
Parting Tips
We close with some last reminders about safety. 
Hoisting lighting equipment above the ground 
can be risky stuff, for both people and equip-
ment. The higher you hoist things, the more 
unstable they become, and the more important 
it is to properly sandbag the base. Be sure to 
take precautions.
Tungsten hot lights, and even the quartz 
modeling lights on most strobes, can put out 
a lot of heat. Snoots and grids get hot, even 
on strobes. Handle carefully. It’s a good idea 
to have work gloves, oven mitts, or some kind 
of heat protection when you’re adjusting such 
lights.
Strobe heads often have plastic protection 
cones for transportation. Be sure to remove 
those cones before plugging in the head, or you 
could have a meltdown or a fire on your hands.
Wires are a tripping hazard. Route them 
carefully. If you run the power cable for a strobe 
under the leg of your light stand, kicking the 
cable is more likely to make the stand slide than 
tip over. Avoid tangling your cables, and it’s a 
good idea to tape them down in areas that will 
receive a lot of foot traffic. If you have something 
like a boom with an end that juts out, mark it 
with something brightly colored, so that no one 
accidentally walks into it. As the old saying goes, 
it’s all fun until somebody loses an eye.

C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e

153
    
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
10
Digital Technique
W
hether you shoot digital or scan film to create a digi-
tal file, once you open that file in a digital post-pro-
duction tool, there are two very different routes you 
can travel. The first route is to produce work that emulates 
the look and feel of imagery that is done completely with film. 
The other route is to take advantage of the digital environ-
ment to create work that is difficult or impossible to do in the 
darkroom. A major challenge of making digital art echoes the 
challenge that art photography itself faced at its inception, 
namely, avoiding the perception that the machine, and not the 
artist, is creating the work. We begin with a few examples of 
different approaches.
Matthew Barnes shot the chapter-opening image. He put a paper 
ray gun in model April’s hand and they improvised from there. Matt 
decided later that she should be holding a chainsaw instead. Her hand 
was in the perfect position for it. Matt describes himself as a sponta-
neous person, so he doesn’t carefully pre-plan his images.
OPPOSITE PAGE:  Model: April Hutchinson. Photo by Matt Barnes/ThatsTheSpot.com.

154
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
The scene was lit from the left with a mag-
num deep-dish reflector fitted with a grid, and 
a backlight was added to make the smoke stand  
out. It was shot against a gray background with 
a Hasselblad 503 CW and a Phase One P45 
digital back. The initial processing was done 
through Capture One, and then post-­production 
was done in Photoshop CS3.
The post-production began with general 
cleanup and contrast. The chainsaw was shot 
separately and pieced in. Finally, the original 
background was replaced with a clean one.
Gaspar Marquez creates polyptychs, which 
he calls bodyscapes, in-camera using film and 
shooting intuitively (see the photo below). He 
scans the resulting contact sheet and works in 
digital from there. In Photoshop, he cleans up 
dust spots and blemishes and tweaks the light. 
He often makes digital prints as big as 46 inches 
in the longest dimension.
The triptych in the top figure on page 155 
is reminiscent of the more elaborate “photo-
cubist” images of David Hockney. Cokeliss 
­primarily uses digital to show his work online. 
Reproduced by ­permission of Gaspar 
Marquez.

155
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
The triptych was scanned from three separate 
prints and was made the largest possible size 
that would fit on the flatbed scanner at his ser-
vice bureau. His exhibition prints are typically 
16 × 20, ­making this triptych a bit more than five 
feet wide when presented in a gallery setting. 
The gallery piece would be mounted by hand 
and assembled from three separate prints.
For complex projects Cheirodon pre-plans 
everything down to where individual strands of 
hair should be. Sketches and rough animated 
plots are made in advance of the shoot. He also 
often has many hours of discussions with the 
model prior to shooting.
For Cello Player (the bottom photo), the 
model literally bent over backwards across a 
stool that held her several inches above the 
ground to create the illusion of being sus-
pended in mid-air. The photographer was on 
a ten-foot ladder, using a Canon 1D fitted 
with an 85mm lens at f/5.6. The background 
was white, and illumination came from two 
softboxes approximately ten feet from the 
model.
TOP:  Reproduced by ­permission of 
Barney Cokeliss.
BOTTOM:  Cello Player.
Image by Cheirodon.

156
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
In post-production, the model was carefully 
cut out—the hair being the difficult part—and 
then the gradient background and other ­elements 
were added. The wire coil was created with Bryce 
5 and the editing was done in Corel 14.
Nina Pak routinely photographs textures 
that she incorporates into her composites ­(top 
photo). In an e-mail exchange about her work, 
she said, “For the Nude in New Mexico and 
the Sky Above Her, I made a textural layer 
in my painting studio using molding paste 
and brown stain, (the kind you use to paint a 
wooden deck), I layered molding paste from 
Golden with a pallet knife, onto heavy water-
color rag stock and waited for it to dry. Then 
I covered it with the stain using a rag. I rubbed 
off the excess but let the stain fill the cracks to 
give it the antique feeling, and tore the edges 
of the paper around where the molding paste 
had dried, leaving a thicker layer. I went over 
the edges again with the stain. Later I photo-
graphed those various pieces of textured paper 
and put them into my textures file, which I use 
with the photographs in the layering process.”
The digital compositing process can be very 
exploratory. Terry Donovan described the cre-
ation of the light bulb image (in the photo to 
the right) in an e-mail exchange: “The body shot 
had intrigued me to start out with, but seemed 
like it needed something other than the busy 
kitchen background I origi­nally had. So I erased 
everything but the body, and made the back-
ground white. The shape instantly reminded me 
of a light bulb…” He remembered an old shot of 
a colored light bulb that he had shot many years 
earlier….
“I threw it in as a layer [probably in overlay 
mode], but it didn’t fully work until I inverted 
TOP:  Nude in New Mexico and the Sky Above Her. Reproduced by 
permission of Nina Pak.
BOTTOM:  Reproduced by permission of Terry Donovan.

157
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   T h e  Tw o  P a t h s
Photographers in both movements had a vision 
of the photograph as something more than a 
direct transcription of whatever tableau was 
laid out in front of the lens. The Pictorialists 
felt that the act of altering the photograph is 
what made it art, and the Surrealists completely 
deconstructed photography to create works that 
sometimes defied the category.
By combining technique and technology, 
both groups produced images that used the 
photographic process, but were intended to look 
like something other than plain photographs. 
Their techniques included cropping, toning, 
burning, dodging, and combining images, either 
by collage or by multiple exposure. A mainstay 
of Surrealist technique is solarization—perhaps 
the artistic effect most specific to photography.
If you have ever seen the dreamlike Sur-
realistic work of Jerry Uelsmann, it’s easy to 
think that it is a masterful application of Pho-
toshop, but it was all produced in the darkroom 
through an elaborate process involving multiple 
negatives and as many as seven enlargers. It is 
a technique that he refined in 1960, predating 
the first personal computers by nearly 20 years, 
about 30 years before Photoshop 1.0, and it 
is the process that he continues to use today. 
It is likely that his work was a point of refer-
ence for the developers of Photoshop, setting 
the standard for the blending effects it had to 
be capable of producing.
Uelsmann’s first big break came from John 
Szarkowski, who gave him a solo show at 
MoMA in 1967. He describes the experience 
as akin to being blessed by the Pope. It’s inter-
esting to note that when he first began showing 
his work, many people felt that it wasn’t pho-
tography, a point of view that is echoed today 
in people’s attitudes toward digital work. Even 
Uelsmann’s earliest work does not look dated 
and can be a source of inspiration and a point 
of departure for digital artists.
the body and white background and got the 
black. Having the ‘light’ between the legs 
[which resulted from inverting the shadow] 
reminded me of a filament and seemed like it 
just completed the picture.”
The Two Paths
One way to approach digital processing is 
to make it completely transparent, with the 
resulting image as indistinguishable from ana-
log photography as possible. The look of digi-
tal output has now achieved a high degree of 
parity with images produced through the wet 
darkroom process. There are even specialized 
tools to make images look like they were shot 
on specific film stocks, and your prints can even 
feel like they came out of the darkroom. You 
can make ink-jet prints on fiber-based paper or 
stock that resembles resin-coated papers. You 
can also have C-prints made from your digital 
files—these are photographic prints that use 
silver-based paper and wet chemistry.
Shooting “straight” nude portraits digitally 
would typically entail some adjustments to 
color and contrast and possibly exposure, and 
little else. In this application, digital is essen-
tially a streamlining tool used for retouching, 
color correction, and printing. From there, 
digital images can be made to look more like 
they were shot on film by reducing the satu-
ration and adding grain. Scanned transpar-
encies, negatives, or prints are the basis of a 
hybrid workflow that is common today. Print-
ing from a digital file makes large-scale prints 
much more accessible than when working with 
enlargers.
If you are interested in work that goes 
beyond “straight” imagery, two groups of pho-
tographic artists that might provide inspiration 
for a digital art-making process are the mem-
bers of the Photo Secession, who advanced the 
philosophy of Pictorialism, and the Surrealists. 

158
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Into the Computer
After the camera or the scan, the first stop in a 
digital workflow is storage and cataloging. This 
can be accomplished with a number of tools, 
but we’ll focus mainly on Adobe Bridge, which 
comes with Photoshop and allows you to orga-
nize, assign metadata to, search, and preview 
your images. You can also use Bridge to gener-
ate web galleries, slide shows, and image collec-
tions in PDF format.
Adobe Photoshop Lightroom is an alter­
native to Bridge. It stores thumbnails and 
metadata in its own database, making some 
operations faster, and it also has the capabilities 
of Camera RAW built in. If your photographic 
practice emphasizes creating work in-camera, 
it is possible to use just Lightroom, bypassing 
Photoshop altogether, but if you need to do 
localized adjustments or build up an image using 
layers, then you will ultimately need to work in 
a tool with the capabilities of Photoshop.
Exploring a Digital 
Workflow
Whether you shoot film and scan to digital files 
or shoot digital directly, the digital workflow is 
largely the same. The stages are as follows:
• Archive and catalog source files
• Pre-edit with Camera RAW
• Photoshop editing and post-production
• Printing and export to web
There are various approaches and tools to 
manage the workflow. Regardless of which 
tools and methods you use, a common thread 
is color management. Most workflows also 
favor nondestructive editing techniques such 
as using adjustment layers rather than apply-
ing adjustments to pixels, and using layer masks 
instead of erasing. Much of the remainder of 
this chapter will move through a digital work-
flow in sequence.
Adobe Bridge helps you preview, organize, and find images.

159
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   E x p l o r i n g  a  D i g i t a l  W o r k f l o w
 1. In Adobe Bridge, select a group of images, 
including the one containing the gray card.
 2. Use Command [Ctrl] + R to open the 
images in Camera RAW. The images will 
appear in a strip down the left of the Cam-
era RAW interface.
 3. Scroll through the list of thumbnails to 
locate the frame containing the gray card 
and click on it to display it in the preview.
 4. Click the White Balance dropper tool to 
activate it.
 5. Click the gray card in the image to set the 
white balance.
 6. Click the Select All button.
 7. Click the Synchronize … button. The syn-
chronize dialog will appear.
 8. Choose White Balance from the synchronize 
menu at the top of the dialog.
 9. Click OK.
Techniques in Camera RAW
Camera RAW was originally designed specifi-
cally for editing RAW files, but it has evolved 
so that you can use the same pre-processing 
interface for JPEG and TIFF files, if you like. 
Opening these files in Camera RAW doesn’t 
make them equivalent to RAW files, though. 
There are a number of Camera RAW features 
that are not available when you are working on 
a JPEG or TIFF file, but the ability to edit these 
files is equivalent to that feature in Lightroom.
White Balance
In a “straight” digital process, it’s useful to start 
with an accurate white balance. You can shoot 
a reference frame with a gray target such as the 
Whi-Bal gray card shown in Chapter 5 and the 
opening of Chapter 9. To use the reference image 
in Camera RAW, simply select the White Bal-
ance dropper tool and click on the gray card in 
the image. Once you have established the white 
balance for that image, you can synchronize 
other files to that white ­balance. Using Adobe 
Bridge, the process works as follows:
Using the White Balance dropper.

160
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Camera Profiles
One of the criticisms of Photoshop for process-
ing RAW files prior to Camera RAW 4.5 was 
that the color rendition and contrast was dull. The 
proprietary routines that Canon and Nikon, for 
example, used to interpret color from their RAW 
file formats had a ­characteristic way of tweaking 
the colors. As a result, files that were processed 
through converters such as Nikon’s Capture NX 
looked better than the same file processed with 
the default settings in Camera RAW.
Adobe has substantially addressed this issue 
with camera profiles. To use them, you click on 
the Camera Calibration tab in Camera RAW 
and choose a profile from the Name menu. If 
you like, you can further tweak the tint in the 
shadows and the hue and saturation of the red, 
green, and blue primaries.
Color Manipulation
Camera profiles, used in creative ways, open the 
door to manipulating the color of your image 
beyond a neutral or “straight” interpretation. That 
is just the beginning. It has been mentioned ear-
lier that you can intentionally push the color tem-
perature. You can use the White Balance dropper 
to sample a gray card, then slightly warm or cool 
the result for a subtle effect. A more dramatic 
effect can be accomplished by simply dragging 
Synchronizing White Balance with multiple images.

161
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   E x p l o r i n g  a  D i g i t a l  W o r k f l o w
the color temperature slider strongly to the right 
or left. A third approach is to click on something 
in the image that is not neutral, such as the skin.
If you sample the skin with the White Bal-
ance dropper, the tones will be adjusted to make 
the skin neutral, and the image will take on an 
overall cool tone. If you sample something that 
has a cool tone, the image will become warm. 
The overall color cast that results will be the 
opposing color of the area that you clicked on.
The HSL/Grayscale tab allows you to sepa-
rately adjust the hue, saturation, and ­luminance 
of key bands of color in your image: reds, 
oranges, yellows, greens, aquas, blues, purples, 
and magentas. These sliders can be worked indi-
vidually to either enhance or diminish the sig-
nificance of various fields of color in the image.
The HSL/Grayscale tab is just one place 
in the Photoshop workflow that gives you the 
ability to make black-and-white images. Many 
photos look best as either black and white or 
color, so it makes sense to make that decision in 
Camera RAW, but you can also use a Black & 
White layer in Photoshop to produce the effect. 
The interfaces in each are the same. The Gray-
scale Mix sliders allow you to specify how light 
or dark each of the spectral colors are represented 
in the image. The result can be a conventional-
looking black-and-white image, an emulation 
of infrared film, or something unique.
There is one significant difference between 
using the Grayscale option in Camera RAW 
and using a Black & White layer on a color 
image in Photoshop: when you check Convert 
to Grayscale in Camera RAW, the image will 
open in Photoshop in Grayscale mode. If you 
want to do colorizing effects later on, you’ll need 
to switch to RGB Color mode in Photoshop. If 
you use a Black & White layer, the image will 
still be in its original color mode.
Camera profiles allow for different preset looks when rendering RAW files.

162
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Use Split Toning
Camera RAW’s Split Toning tab does not have 
a direct equivalent in Photoshop. In Chapter 6, 
it was introduced as a tool for color composition. 
You can apply split toning to any image, but it 
generally works better over an image that has been 
converted to black and white with the Grayscale 
option in the HSL/Grayscale tab first.
The effect tends to look strongest with 
opposing colors, e.g., red vs. cyan or yellow vs. 
violet, but it is conceivable that two adjacent 
colors could be used effectively. The easiest way 
to establish the effect is as follows:
 1. Push the saturation higher than needed 
for both the highlights and shadows.
 2. Pick the hues for highlights and shadows.
 3. Use the balance slider to set the crossover 
point.
 4. Adjust the saturation levels for highlights 
and shadows until you have a pleasing mix.
Use Presets and Snapshots
If you are experimenting with several set-
tings together to determine which is the best 
­combination for your image, you can quickly 
save a snapshot for each potential group of set-
tings. To create a snapshot, do the following:
 1. Click on the Snapshots tab.
 2. Click on the new Snapshot icon at the  
bottom of the tab.
 3. Enter a name.
 4. Click OK.
To use a snapshot, click on it in the snapshot 
list. The snapshot’s settings will immediately be 
applied. To delete the selected preset, click the 
trashcan icon at the bottom of the tab.
Snapshots record all of the settings in all 
tabs, while presets allow you to select which 
settings will be recorded. Presets are available 
any time, while snapshots are attached to each 
individual RAW file. To record a preset, do the 
following:
 1. Click on the Presets tab.
 2. Click on the New Preset icon at the bottom 
of the tab.
 3. Enter a name and select check the settings 
you wish to record.
 4. Click OK.
The HSL/Grayscale tab.

163
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   E x p l o r i n g  a  D i g i t a l  W o r k f l o w
TOP:  Creating a snapshot. 
Snapshots are attached to 
individual images.
BOTTOM:  Creating a preset.

164
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Use Workflow Options
Before Camera RAW hands off the converted 
image to Photoshop, there are a few ­important 
decisions for you to make. These choices are 
established in the workflow options. The most 
critical choices to make are color space and 
bit depth. You can also resample your image 
and specify the print resolution ahead of time 
through the workflow options. To enter the 
workflow options, click the underlined text at 
the bottom of the Camera RAW dialog.
In terms of color space and bit depth, Adobe 
RGB in 16-bit mode is the best general-purpose 
color space in which to work. If your machine 
has limited computing power, you might con-
sider Adobe RGB in 8-bit mode. The space you 
choose is dependent on what you plan to do 
with the image after it leaves Photoshop. If you 
know you only plan to make web files out of the 
image, sRGB in 8-bit mode is probably a bet-
ter choice. ProPhoto can hold some saturated 
hues—blues, greens, and maybe magentas— 
that your monitor can’t display but that your 
printer can print. If your work involves those 
strongly saturated colors—such as lush green 
landscapes and saturated skies—you may find it 
beneficial to work in ProPhoto in 16-bit mode.
If you choose ProPhoto RGB, be sure to use 
16-bit mode all the way to printing, and do not 
switch to 8-bit. Switching to 8-bit in ProPhoto 
The workflow options in Camera RAW allow you to select color 
space, bit depth, and resolution before opening in Photoshop.

165
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
RGB is especially likely to cause posteriza-
tion. Epson’s current print drivers have a 16-bit 
option, and it should be used whenever you are 
working in 16-bit.
The size options are a convenience feature. 
Camera RAW can re-sample your image to make 
it larger or smaller. The re-sampled size options are 
all marked with either a plus sign or a minus sign. 
It’s generally better to re-sample in Photoshop 
when you need to, so if you don’t have a special 
purpose for doing so, be sure that the size setting 
you choose does not show a plus or minus.
The PPI setting in the Workflow Options is 
another convenience feature, and is not critical. 
The only places that the PPI setting has any 
effect are in the option to view at print size 
and when you send your image to the printer. 
Chances are that you will change the setting 
before you print the image.
Techniques in Photoshop
Once you have set your workflow options in 
Camera RAW, you can click the Open button 
to render the file and transfer it to Photoshop’s 
editing environment. In the next part of this 
chapter, we will primarily focus on techniques 
for creative expression with Photoshop.
Refine the Color Palette  
of an Image
One of the reasons many photographers prefer 
black and white is that color in the real world can 
quickly muddy things up. When you look at a 
color image, sometimes there is a dominant set of 
colors. The image will become much stronger if 
you can diminish the effect of competing colors.
In the example in the photo below, the color 
in the composition was altered to emphasize 
Before and after selective color adjustments.

166
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
the red/green color contrast. There was also 
a slight yellowish cast on the skin that com-
plicated the composition. Reducing the yel-
low and changing the green of the artichoke 
to a slightly unnatural color strengthened the 
image. Here’s how to do this:
 1. In the Layers panel, choose Selective Color … 
from the Add a New Fill or Adjustment Layer 
menu at the bottom of the panel.
 2. With the colors menu set to Reds, set 
the following adjustments: Cyan +6, 
Magenta –2, Yellow –11.
The Layers panel featuring a Hue/Saturation and Selective Color 
adjustment layer. The adjustments panel displays the controls for 
the selected layer. Adjustment layers can be added through the 
menue icon at the bottom of the panel.
 3. With the colors menu set to Yellows, set the 
Black slider to –24.
 4. In the Layers panel, choose Hue/Saturation 
… from the Add a New Fill or Adjustment 
Layer menu.
 5. Select Greens from the menu at the top of 
the Adjustments panel.
 6. Click the finger icon to activate the click 
and drag feature.

167
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
 7. Click on the artichoke to target a color. 
Notice that the dialog adjusts, and the 
­colors menu shifts to Yellows.
 8. Adjust the sliders as follows: Hue +29, 
­Saturation +19, Lightness –4.
Convert Color Images to Black 
and White
Photoshop’s black-and-white adjustment layers 
were introduced in CS3, and they completely 
altered the nature of converting images to black 
and white in Photoshop. There were techniques 
such as using the channel mixer or applying 
a grayscale gradient that worked reasonably 
well, but the black-and-white adjustment layer 
eclipses all other techniques for intuitiveness 
and ease of use.
There are a few ways to add a black-and-
white adjustment layer to a color file:
 1. Go to the Adjustments panel and click on 
the Black & White Layer button.
 2. In the Adjustments panel, click on the 
triangle next to Black & White Presets to 
show the list, and then click on a preset.
 3. In the Layers panel, hold the mouse button 
down on the Create a New Fill or Adjust-
ment Layer icon to display its menu, and 
then select Black & White … from the menu.
Excellent color and black and white images can be obtained from 
the same file through the Black and White adjustment layer.

168
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Once you have the adjustment layer in place, 
you can adjust the sliders manually to get a 
pleasing tonal distribution, or you can select a 
preset effect, such as Infrared, from the menu 
at the top of the Adjustments panel.
Tweak Tones with Curves
Often, the tones you establish with the black-
and-white adjustment might need an addi-
tional boost with a curve. That could simply 
mean lightening the image a bit, or making an 
adjustment to the overall contrast. You can do 
the following:
 1. Make the Adjustments panel visible.
 2. If it is showing a set of controls instead of 
the adjustment list, click on the arrow in the 
lower left corner of the panel.
 3. Click on the Curves button at the top of the 
Adjustment panel, or click the triangle next 
to Curves Presets and select a preset from 
the list.
Once the curve is added, you can edit its 
control points to further refine the effect.
There is another way to add contrast to 
your image with a curve, which is less obvious. 
Rather than adjusting the control points of the 
curve, you can leave the graph unadjusted and 
change the blending mode of the adjustment 
layer to one of the contrast blending modes. 
Those modes are as follows:
• Overlay
• Soft Light
• Hard Light
• Vivid Light
• Linear Light
• Pin Light
• Hard Mix
You may find that one of the contrast blend-
ing modes is the right general idea, but the 
effect is too strong. In that case, you can use the 
opacity slider to reduce the effect.
When the Adjustments panel is ­showing 
controls for the current layer, click the 
arrow at the bottom of the panel to 
return to the adjustment list.

169
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
TOP:  The menu at the bottom of the Layers panel 
allows you to add a Black & White adjustment layer. 
When the layer is selected, the adjustment panel 
allows you to apply a preset, such as infrared.
BOTTOM:  In addition to the curve presets in the 
Adjustments panel, the tonal effect of a curve can be 
modified by changing the blending mode and opac-
ity of the layer via the Layers panel.

170
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Colorizing Black and White
The black-and-white layers can be used to cre-
ate beautiful neutral-tone black-and-white 
images, or they can be the basis for color 
effects beyond split toning, which was dis-
cussed earlier in the Camera RAW section 
of this chapter. Any black-and-white conver-
sion can be used to modulate the tonality of 
the underlying colors in a file. Just change the 
blending mode of the black-and-white layer 
to Luminosity. The colors from the underlying 
layer will take on the tones of the black-and-
white layer.
Earlier, we looked at how the curves adjust-
ment allows you to alter the tonality of an 
image,  but curves can also be used for color 
adjustment. By default, the Adjustments panel 
for a Curves layer applies changes equally to 
the red, green, and blue channels, but a menu 
in the panel allows you to curve each channel 
separately. If you set the blending mode of a 
The ­black-and-white conversion used the Red Filter preset. When 
that layer was set to Luminosity mode, the effect was too strong. 
Panel 3 shows the layer in Luminosity mode with the opacity 
reduced to 60%.
Curves layer to Color, you can curve each chan-
nel without changing the luminosity (light/
dark values) of the image. In this way, curves 
can be used for color correction, or they can be 
used for creative color applications.
Curves presets can be saved and loaded, 
allowing you to easily reuse curves effects. 
­Figure 10.21 is an example of that application. 
In the wet darkroom, selenium toning is more 
common than sepia toning, but in the digital 
world it is the other way around. That’s because 
sepia toning can be effectively simulated with a 
simple brown overlay, but selenium toning col-
ors the highlights differently than it does the 
shadows, and the effect is subtle. That’s a job for 
curves.

171
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
world of wet photography, cyanotypes are 
made as a contact print, often using objects 
laid directly on the photosensitized material, 
rather than being projected onto the surface via 
an enlarger. The high-contrast medium tends 
to show minimal fine detail, and the shadow 
areas tend to block up to solid blue very eas-
ily. You can achieve the coloration of cyano-
type with a Hue/Saturation preset, but if you 
are out to make images that are not simply the 
color of cyanotype, it makes sense to look for 
ways to increase contrast, plug up the shadows, 
and reduce fine details. The best ways to reduce 
detail in the mid-tones and highlights will vary. 
A curve layer set to hard light will give a pro-
nounced weight to the shadows.
Use the Threshold Adjustment
The Threshold adjustment creates a strong break 
between light and dark and can be used in con-
junction with effects like cyanotype to make 
dramatic and moody images.
 1. In the Layers panel, click on the topmost 
layer.
 2. In the Layers panel, hold the mouse button 
down on the Create New Fill or Adjust-
ment Layer icon and select Black & White … 
from the menu. A new adjustment layer will 
appear in the layer stack.
 3. In the Adjustments panel, use the sliders 
and presets in the dialog as needed to make 
a satisfying black-and-white conversion.
 4. In the Layers panel, hold the mouse button 
down on the Create New Fill or Adjustment 
Layer icon and select Threshold … from the 
menu. A new adjustment layer will appear 
in the layer stack.
 5. In the Adjustments panel, move the slider 
until you find a visually pleasing break in 
the tones.
Simulated selenium toning. To create the effect, a preset Curves 
adjustment was placed over a black-and-white adjustment layer.
Color Effects with the Hue/
Saturation Adjustment Layer
Two colorization effects that are relevant to 
black-and-white images are emulations  of 
effects that come from the world of wet 
photogra­phy, namely, cyanotype and sepia 
­toning. To use them:
 1. Click on the topmost layer in the stack to 
select it.
 2. Hold the mouse button down on the Cre-
ate New Fill or Adjustment Layer icon to 
display a menu and select Hue/Saturation….
 3. Choose either Cyanotype or Sepia from the 
menu at the top of the adjustment panel.
Cyanotype is an alternative photographic 
process that is a relative of blueprints. In the 

172
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
TOP:  Applying Cyanotype or 
sepia effects with Hue/Saturation 
adjustment layer.
BOTTOM:  Setting a Curves 
adjustment layer to the Hard Light 
blending mode adds ­contrast 
without shaping the curve.

173
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
 6. In the Layers panel, change the blending 
mode of the threshold layer to Overlay.
 7. In the Layers panel, hold the mouse button 
down on the Create New Fill or Adjustment 
Layer icon and select Hue/Saturation … 
from the menu. A new adjustment layer will 
appear in the layer stack.
 8. In the Adjustments panel, select Cyanotype 
from the presets menu at the top of the 
panel.
Adding Textures
Textures can be an important dimension in con-
structed images. You can photograph or scan 
textures to add to your files, or you can generate 
them. Three main tools for creating textures in 
Photoshop are the Clouds, Noise, and Fibers 
filters. Each of these creates random texture 
effects that can be used as is or modified and 
combined in different ways.
Each time you choose Filter > Render > 
Clouds, you get a different arrangement of light 
and dark. An example of using Clouds to create 
a texture effect follows, but the key is to experi-
ment and find your own effects.
 1. In the Layers panel, click on the topmost 
layer.
 2. In the Layers panel, click on the Add New 
Layer icon. A new layer will appear in the 
stack.
 3. Tap the D key to set the default colors.
 4. Choose Render > Clouds from the menu 
bar. A random cloud pattern will fill the 
layer. If you don’t like the pattern, choose 
An image that combines Threshold and Cyanotype, using layer 
blending modes.

174
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Render > Clouds repeatedly until you get a 
pattern that you like.
 5. Choose Filter > Other > Maximum … to 
alter the transition to the highlights in your 
image. A dialog will appear.
 6. Choose a radius and click OK to apply the 
effect.
 7. Choose Filter > Noise > Median … to smooth 
the tonal transitions. A dialog will appear.
 8. Choose a radius and click OK to apply the 
effect.
 9. Choose Filter > Stylize > Emboss … to make 
the tonal effect look three-dimensional. 
A dialog will appear.
10. Change the angle, height, and amount as 
desired, then click OK to apply the effect.
Noise can be used to add a fine texture to 
your images. Blurring it slightly makes it look 
more like film grain.
 1. In the Layers panel, click on the topmost 
layer to select it.
 2. Hold down the Option [Alt] key and click 
on the Create a New Layer icon to add a 
layer. A dialog will appear.
 3. Change the mode to Overlay.
 4. Check the box marked Fill with Overlay-
neutral color (50% gray).
 5. Optional: name your layer, e.g., Noise Layer.
 6. Choose Filter > Noise > Add Noise….
 7. Set the distribution and then the amount. 
Gaussian produces a randomized effect 
more akin to film grain.
 8. Optional: check the box marked Mono-
chromatic. Leave it unchecked to create an 
effect that emulates color film.
TOP:  A random cloud pattern.
BOTTOM:  The cloud pattern after applying the Maximun filter.

175
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
 9. Choose Filter > Blur > Gaussian Blur … to 
smooth the edges of the noise and make it 
look more like film grain.
10. Enter a radius. A small radius (e.g., 0.8) 
works best for a film grain effect.
 11. Click OK to apply the effect.
 12. Optional: if the effect is too strong, you 
can either change the layer blending mode 
to Soft Light or reduce the opacity of the 
layer.
Noise patterns can be used to create a wide 
range of pattern and texture effects. Applying 
motion blur to noise can make it look like rain 
or brushed metal.
Filter > Render > Fibers … creates a random-
ized fiber effect. The colors of the pattern come 
from the current foreground and background 
colors in the Tools panel. The effect replaces pix-
els already present in the layer, so unlike Clouds, 
it won’t work on a blank layer.
 1. In the Layers panel, hold down the Option 
[Alt] key and click on the Create a New 
Layer icon. A dialog will appear.
 2. Set the layer mode to Overlay or Soft Light.
 3. Check the box that says Fill with Layer 
mode-neutral color (50% gray).
 4. Name the layer, if you like, and click OK.
 5. Check the foreground and background 
colors. Hit the D key to select the default 
colors (black and white), or click on each 
of the color chips to pick foreground and 
background colors individually.
 6. Select Filter > Render > Fibers … to gener-
ate the effect. A dialog will appear.
 7. Adjust the Variance and Strength sliders 
to define the effect.
TOP:  The Median filter smoothes the squarish forms of the 
­Maximum filter.
BOTTOM:  The Emboss filter creates a dimensional effect.

176
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
 8. If you want a different pattern, click the 
Randomize button as many times as 
needed.
 9. Click OK to apply the effect.
The Fibers filter always generates a vertical 
pattern. You can change the orientation of the 
pattern by rotating and scaling the layer:
 1. If the Fiber layer is not selected, click the 
layer to select it.
 2. Zoom out so that some gray space is visible 
around the outside of the image.
 3. Choose Edit > Free Transform. Handles will 
appear around the corners of the image.
 4. Place the cursor near one corner. When the 
cursor changes to a bent double-ended 
arrow, it is ready to rotate.
 5. Drag the corner in an arc to rotate it to the 
desired orientation.
The rotated pattern will not cover the entire 
image. To fix that, we’ll scale the effect.
 6. Place the cursor near one corner. When the 
cursor changes to a double-ended diagonal 
arrow, it is ready to scale.
 7. Hold the Shift key down and drag the 
corner outward to expand the coverage. 
Repeat with other corners until the scaled 
effect covers the entire image.
 8. Hit the Return key to commit the  
changes.
Sometimes, you only want the effect you’re 
adding to be applied to part of the image. 
A valid criticism of a lot of digital art is that 
it looks as if someone simply poured one or 
two effects over the entire image like a glaze. 
TOP:  You can add noise to an image by using a layer set to the 
Soft Light or Overlay blending mode. Once you select the mode, 
you can check the box to fill the layer with 50% gray.
BOTTOM:  Applying noise to the 50% gray layer.
You can add a mask and paint it black to hide 
the effect and remove it from parts of the 
image.
 1. In the Layers panel, click the layer to  
select it.
 2. In the Layers panel, click the Add Layer 
Mask icon. A white layer mask thumb-
nail will appear next to the layer’s pixel 
thumbnail.
Notice that there are bracket marks sur-
rounding the corners of the layer mask thumb-
nail. This means that your painting will affect 

177
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
the layer mask, and not the pixels in the layer. 
If the brackets are around the main thumb-
nail, you will be painting on the pixels. Click 
any layer mask thumbnail to make sure you are 
painting onto the mask and not the pixels.
3. In the Tools panel, select the Brush tool.
4. In the Tool Options panel, click the Brush 
button to show the Brush Preset picker.
5. Check to see that the hardness is set to 0%. 
Hit the Return key to close the picker.
6. In the Tool Options panel, set the opacity  
of the brush lower—somewhere around 
30% will do.
 7.  Make sure the foreground color is black. 
You can tap the D key to select the default 
colors and the X key to swap foreground 
and background colors.
TOP:  Applying the Fibers filter.
BOTTOM:  Rotating the Fibers 
layer.

178
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
TOP:  Add a Layer Mask 
with the icon at the bottom 
of the Layers panel, and 
paint the mask black to hide 
pixels instead of erasing.
BOTTOM:  With the Brush 
tool selected, the Tool 
Options bar allows you 
to use brush presets and 
specify opacity. The black 
and white color chips near 
the bottom of the Tools 
panel indicate the selected 
foreground and background  
colors.

179
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
The fiber pattern in the overlay mode vanishes in the shadow areas, 
but needs to be masked out of the upper left corner of this image.
More on Masks Simply put, a layer mask is 
a bitmap that describes what parts of a layer 
are visible, or what parts of an image will be 
affected by an adjustment layer. The ability to 
create and edit masks may be one of the most 
powerful features of Photoshop and is one of 
the features that distinguish it from Lightroom.
The rule for masking is “black blocks”; in other 
words, wherever the mask is completely black, 
the pixels will be hidden or the adjustment 
does not apply. Wherever the mask is pure 
white, the effect is applied 100%. If the mask 
is any shade of gray in between, the effect is 
applied partially.
Selections can become masks, and masks can 
become selections. If you make a selection and 
then add a new adjustment layer or add a layer 
mask to a pixel layer, the white parts of the 
mask will correspond to the selected parts and 
the rest of the mask will be black. Any areas 
that are partially selected will be represented 
by shades of gray. You can Command [Ctrl]-
click on a mask to load it as a selection. Chan-
nels are actually a special type of mask. You 
can load a channel as a selection, allowing you 
to use the image itself to help you create pre-
cise masks and refine areas of the image.
Once a mask is attached to a layer, there will 
be times when you want to see where the 
mask is affecting the layer, what the mask 
looks like, and what the image looks like with-
out the mask. Photoshop has features to help 
you visualize masks in a number of ways.
8. Use the square bracket keys to change the 
size of the brush. ] makes the brush larger, 
and [ makes it smaller.
9. Stroke and release the mouse button 
repeatedly to hide the effect in parts of the 
image. The effect will build gradually.
If the effect goes too far, you can reverse it 
by painting over the area in white. If your fore-
ground colors are black and white, just tap the 
X key to swap to white, and paint over the mask 
as needed. After that, you can tap the X key to 
go back to black and continue hiding the effect 
as needed.

180
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
 1. To view and edit a mask directly, hold the 
Option [Alt] key down and click on the 
mask thumbnail. Photoshop will display 
the mask instead of the image, and you 
can edit the mask the same way you do 
any pixel layer. Option [Alt]-click on the 
mask thumbnail again to return to normal 
viewing.
 2. To view a mask as a colored overlay,  
hit the \ (backslash) key. The default color 
is bright red at 50% opacity. This rarely 
needs to be changed, but there is a prefer-
ence for it. Hit the \ (backslash) key again 
to return to normal.
 3. To temporarily disable a mask, hold the 
Shift key down and click on the mask 
thumbnail. A red X will appear through 
the mask, and the mask will have no effect. 
Shift-click the mask thumbnail again to 
restore its functionality.
Create a Double Exposure 
Effect
Double exposure can produce a dramatic and 
somewhat mysterious effect that moves away 
from the literal transcription of an object or 
person and into the realm of dreams. If you 
have ever tried to emulate double exposure 
in Photoshop, you have seen that it is more 
complicated than placing one image over the 
other and lowering the opacity of the top 
layer. A double-­exposed image is not a simple 
overlay of the two exposures; instead, the two 
images in a double exposure actually interact. 
In essence, the highlights of the first exposure 
punch through the details of the second expo-
sure, and the second exposure registers most in 
the shadow areas of the first exposure.
So, to simulate double exposure in Photo-
shop, the tonality of the bottom layer has  to 
serve as the template for a layer mask that hides 
parts of the top layer. The effect works best when 
the base image has strong contrast and one or 
more areas that contain dense, dark tones. An 
example follows.
 1. Open the image that will act as your base 
image.
 2. Open the image that will act as the second 
exposure.
 3. Holding the Shift key down, drag the sec-
ond exposure image onto the base image.
When you release the mouse button, the 
second image will snap into alignment with the 
first on the canvas.
 4. Click the eyeball icon on the top layer to 
temporarily hide it.
 5. Go to the Channels panel and hold down 
the Command [Ctrl] key and click the 
RGB channel. The “marching ants” pattern 
indicating an active selection will appear.
Command [Ctrl]-clicking the RGB chan-
nel is a shortcut for loading a selection based 
on the tonality of the image. That means that 
the brightest parts of the image will be most 
selected, and the darkest parts will be least 
selected. That’s the inverse of what we want. 
We’ll deal with that next.
 6. Choose Select > Inverse from the menu bar. 
Now, the darkest parts of the image are 
most selected, and the brightest parts are least 
selected.
 7. Go back to the Layers panel and click on 
the top layer to select it.
 8. Click on the Add Layer Mask icon at the 
bottom of the Layers panel.
 9. Click the eyeball button to reveal the 
double exposure.
From this point, there are several additional 
tweaks that can be applied.

181
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
The layers panel shows 
the top layers with its 
­visibility turned off. Holding 
down the command key 
and clicking on the RGB 
channel selects areas of 
the image based on their 
tonality.
• If needed, you can decrease the 
superimposition of the top layer by 
­decreasing its opacity.
• Generally, the problem will be that your 
layer mask is not dense enough, but if it is 
too dense, you can click on the Masks panel 
and decrease its density.
• You can adjust the contrast of the layer 
mask, making the blacks denser or 
­driving the highlights brighter.
 1. Click on the layer mask thumbnail for the 
top layer. You will know that it is selected 
because angle brackets will surround the 
four corners of the mask thumbnail.
 2. Select Image > Adjustments > Curves from 
the menu bar.
 3. Adjust the curve and watch the image 
change. Try any of these adjustments: slide 
the black point or white point along the 
bottom, or push the black point up the left 
edge of the curve, or pull the white point 
down the right edge of the curve.

182
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Creating double exposure effect.

183
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
 4. When you have a result that is satisfactory, 
click OK.
 5. That last move altered the pixels in your 
mask. If you don’t like the result, use undo 
or step backward in the history panel to 
revert.
• You can adjust the contrast of the top 
layer, separately from the bottom.
 1. Hold the Option key down while you select 
Curves from the Create New Fill or Adjust-
ment Layer icon at the bottom of the  
Layers panel.
 2. When the New Layer dialog opens, check 
the box marked Use Previous Layer to 
­Create Clipping Mask. This makes the 
curves adjustment apply to only the top 
layer.
 3. Click OK.
 4. Watch the effect as you adjust the curve 
in the Curves panel. Use a preset, drag the 
points, or start with a preset and modify it.
The Layer Blending Options control pro-
vides a second, slightly less flexible way to blend 
layers based on the tonality of either layer.
 1. In the Layers panel, click on a layer to 
select it.
 2. At the bottom of the Layers panel, press 
the mouse button down on the fx menu 
and select Blending Options.... A dialog will 
appear.
 3. In the section marked Blend If, leave the 
menu set to the default (Gray).
TOP:  Click on the layer mask to select it. Brackets will appear 
around the mask to indicate that it is active for editing.
BOTTOM:  The Curves dialog, ready to adjust the tones in the mask.

184
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
TOP:  Adding a curve with a clipping 
mask. Note the indicator next to the 
layer thumbnail.
BOTTOM:  The fx menue icon allows 
you to apply layer styles and control 
­blending options for the layer.

185
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
 4. Move the black point or white point slider 
for either layer to determine which parts 
break through.
The sliders have two parts. To break them 
apart, hold down the Option [Alt] key and 
click on one side of a slider, then push it away. 
Moving the two halves separately creates a 
more gradual transition for the blend.
 5. Click OK when you have a satisfactory 
result.
A Cubist-Inspired Image
The main idea behind this example is to dem-
onstrate some ways of making a photograph 
look more “painterly” by evening tones and 
selectively layering effects. It is more of a start-
ing point for exploring such techniques than a 
definitive approach.
 1. In the Layers panel, duplicate the back-
ground layer by dragging it to the Create 
a New Layer button at the bottom of the 
panel.
 2. Select Filter > Other > Maximum … from the 
menu bar. A dialog will appear.
 3. Choose a radius that creates an interesting 
effect, and click OK.
 4. Select Filter > Noise > Median … from the 
menu bar. A dialog will appear.
 5. Choose a radius that creates an interesting 
effect, and click OK.
At this point, we have an image that looks 
somewhat like it was painted. We’ll add back a 
little bit of the original texture to create a cross 
between painterly and photographic.
The starting image and a finished example.

186
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
 6. In the Layers panel, drag the background 
layer to the Create a New Layer icon to  
create a second copy of the background 
layer.
 7. In the Layers panel, drag the new back-
ground copy layer to the top of the layer 
stack. Make sure the new background copy 
layer is selected.
 8. Select Filter > Other > High Pass … from the 
menu bar. A dialog will appear.
 9. Choose a radius that shows some edge 
detail but not enormous haloes,  
e.g., 12.5 pixels.
10. Click OK to apply the effect.
 11. In the Layers panel, change the blending 
mode for the High Pass layer to Overlay.
 12. In the Layers panel, drag the High Pass 
layer to the Create a New Layer icon to 
duplicate the layer.
Duplicating the overlaid High Pass layer 
strengthened the effect. We’ll group the High 
Pass layers so that they’re a bit easier to work 
with.
 13. Hold the Shift key down and click on the 
layer thumbnail of the first High Pass layer 
so that both are selected.
 14. Use Command [Ctrl] + G to create a 
new group containing the two High Pass 
layers.
Adding a mask to the group will allow you 
to apply the overlay effect selectively.
 15. In the Layers panel, click on the Add Layer 
Mask icon at the bottom of the panel. 
A layer mask thumbnail will appear on 
the group.
 16. Paint in black using a brush with a hard-
ness of 0% and varying opacities to remove 
part or all of the overlay effect in different 
parts of your image, leaving texture only in 
selected areas.
Drag the background layer thumbnail to the create a New Layer 
icon to make a copy.

187
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   Te c h n i q u e s  i n  P h o t o s h o p
Note: If you think the texture is too strong, 
reduce the opacity of the group.
The image that we have at this point is good 
in its own right, and you can save a copy, if you 
like, allowing you to take the image in several 
directions from here. The next step is to add the 
elements that are inspired by Cubism.
For the next step, we need to combine all 
the elements into a single layer. Instead of flat-
tening the image and losing all the layers, we 
will stamp a composite layer that contains the 
combined result of all the layers below. We’ll 
work with the stamped layer from then on. To 
stamp a layer, do the following:
17. In the Layers panel, click on the topmost 
layer to select it.
18. In the Layers panel, click the Add a New 
Layer icon. A new blank layer will appear at 
the top of the layer stack.
19. Hold down the Option [Alt] key and select 
Merge Visible from the flyout menu in the 
upper right corner of the Layers panel. 
Don’t release the Option key too early, or 
your image will flatten instead of stamping.
Now, we’re ready to create the Cubist-in-
spired elements.
20. Select View > Show > Grid from the menu 
bar.
21. Hold down the View menu, and check to 
see that Snap is checked. If not, select 
View > Snap.
22. In the menu bar, pull down the View menu 
and slide the cursor down to View > Snap 
To, but don’t release the mouse.
23. Check to see that a check mark appears 
next to Grid; if not, select View > Snap To > 
Grid from the menu bar.
Steps 2 and 4: Applying the Maximum filter creates squarish 
­highlight areas. You can smooth that effect by applying the Median 
filter,

188
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
24. In the Tools panel, select the Rectangular 
Marquee tool.
25. Drag a selection that isolates an interesting 
part of the body. The selection will conform 
to the grid.
26. Use Command [Ctrl] + J to create a new 
layer with the selected pixels.
27. In the Layers panel, press the mouse button 
down on the fx menu at the bottom of the 
panel to reveal the layer styles menu and 
choose Inner Glow. A dialog will appear.
28. In the dialog, click the colored square in the 
Structure section of the dialog to select the 
color for your glow.
29. Set the Blend mode to Multiply, Technique 
to Softer, and Source to Edge.
30. Experiment with the other sliders to find an 
effect that works for you.
31. Click OK to commit the changes.
32. Select View > Snap from the menu bar to 
temporarily turn off snap to grid.
33. Select Edit > Free Transform from the menu 
bar. Handles will appear around the slice.
34. Rotate, skew, or reposition the slice as you 
like. As an option, you can Control-click 
[right-click] inside the handles to show a 
menu and use one of the other transforma-
tion modes.
35. Hit the Return key to commit the 
transformation.
36. Select View > Snap from the menu bar to 
switch snap to grid back on.
Repeat steps 24–35 above as many times as 
you like to create more cutouts. You can sim-
ply use the Move tool to reposition elements 
without transforming them. Use Command 
[Ctrl] + H to hide or show the grid lines.
TOP:  Step 7: The Background Copy layer in position for the High 
Pass filter.
BOTTOM:  Step 8: The Background Copy layer with the High Pass 
filter applied.

189
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   C o l o r  M a n a g e m e n t
Color Management
Color accuracy is at least somewhat impor-
tant to most artists who work in color, and it 
is extremely important to some. Using a color-
managed workflow can give you a high degree 
of confidence about color fidelity when you 
­display your work or print it.
Digital color is essentially a variation on 
paint-by-numbers. Every pixel in an image is 
tagged with RGB numbers that are supposed 
to represent specific colors, but those numbers 
are only one part of the equation. The other 
part of the equation, and the part that’s critical 
for accurate color, is the color profile. When an 
image is tagged with an accurate color profile, 
devices that use color management can ensure 
that we see the correct colors. If the image has 
no profile, all bets are off, and if it has the wrong 
profile, the colors are guaranteed to be wrong.
Select two or more layers and use Command [Ctrl] + G to place 
them in a new group.
Filters and 16-Bit Mode A number 
of Photoshop’s filters are only available 
in 8-bit mode, which presents a small 
problem if you are working in 16-bit and 
want to use them. The temptation is to 
convert the file to 8-bit so that the filters 
are available and then switch back to 
16-bit mode afterward, but that doesn’t 
work. When you switch to 8-bit, data are 
thrown away, degrading the image, and 
switching back to 16-bit does not restore 
the data that were thrown away.
The best thing to do is to make a copy of 
the file and convert that to 8-bit. You can 
run the filter on the copy and then con-
vert it to 16-bit and combine the layer 
back into your composition.

190
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
For color management to work, it’s also crit-
ical that you have accurate profiles for your dis-
plays and for your printers. In fact, every printer 
has a different profile for each type of paper that 
you can print on. With accurate color profiles 
for each device in the post-production chain, 
the color management system ensures that the 
color you see is the color that was intended.
However, there is a catch. When a device 
can’t print or display a certain color, we say that 
color is out of gamut, and color management 
uses a strategy called a rendering intent to deal 
with those colors. The relative colorimetric ren-
dering intent replaces each out-of-gamut color 
with the nearest in-gamut color, while the per-
ceptual rendering intent tries to maintain color 
relationships and gradients by compressing the 
color space of the image to a set of colors that 
are all in-gamut. With relative colorimetric, 
the color of the overall image doesn’t shift, but 
TOP:  Step 16: A layer mask applied to a group. 
The back areas of the mask hide the effect 
completely, and the gray areas partially hide the 
effect. 
BOTTOM:  Hold the Option key down and 
choose Merge Visible from the menu to stamp 
a composite of all visible layers. If you don’t hold 
the Option key down, the layers will flatten.

191
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   D i s p l a y  P r o f i l e s
Converting from a small space to a larger space 
(e.g., sRGB to Adobe RGB) is less of a prob-
lem than going the other way, but it’s best to 
convert as little as possible.
Display Profiles
Profiling your monitor is the most important 
thing you can do for a color-managed workflow. 
If your monitor is not representing color accu-
rately, then any adjustments in color you make 
are arbitrary, and you stand a chance of making 
things worse, not better. With an accurate profile, 
the color management system will make sure that 
you are seeing the color that was intended, as long 
as it is in-gamut. More on that in a moment.
Profiling tools like the i1 Display from 
X-Rite sell for less than $200. The i1 is a small 
puck-shaped sensor that hangs over your LCD 
display and measures the colors that it sees. 
Software that comes with the i1 sends a series 
of color patches to the screen to measure how 
accurately it displays those colors, and then 
builds a profile. Devices in this class are based 
on sensor technology that resembles the sen-
sors in a camera or scanner.
More accurate profiling tools are based on 
a spectrophotometer. These were much more 
expensive devices until X-Rite introduced the 
ColorMunki Photo system, which has a sug-
gested retail price of $500. The unit can create 
print profiles as well as monitor profiles, and it 
is simple to use. The software has two modes: 
easy and advanced. It’s best to use the advanced 
mode, because it has the option to create pro-
files based on your display’s native white point. 
The easy mode uses the D65 white point, 
which tends to look a bit bluish. If you work in 
the pre-press industry, D65 is important, but 
it’s not the best standard for evaluating images 
that will eventually hang in galleries or on liv-
ing room walls.
Step 20: Use View > Show > Grid in conjuction with the Snap 
­feature to aid in selecting portions of the image.
there is a risk that some gradients can become 
posterized. Perceptual compresses the color 
space by altering even some in-gamut colors, 
often resulting in a noticeable color shift.
Neither rendering intent is a one-size-fits-
all solution. For critical color output (particu-
larly when printing), it’s important to run tests 
using each rendering intent to see which works 
best in that specific case. Because the relative 
colorimetric intent clips colors, it’s potentially 
most problematic when you convert between 
ProPhoto RGB and sRGB.
Working Space Conflicts
Whenever you open a file that is in a different 
color space than the working space you selected 
in your color settings, Photoshop offers to con-
vert the color space for you. It’s generally best 
not to convert. Each time you convert the color 
space in a file, you run the risk of degradation. 

192
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Advanced mode also has an option to set the 
optimal brightness and contrast of your moni-
tor, which is a good idea. Many displays have no 
contrast controls, and you can skip that when it 
comes up in the software. In advanced mode, 
the ColorMunki software also has the option 
to set the luminance of your display based on 
ambient lighting conditions. That option is best 
used only in settings where the light is well 
controlled and relatively subdued.
Step 27: Use the fx menu to add an innner glow efffect to the new 
cubist element.

193
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   D i s p l a y s
TOP:  Step 34: Control-click (right-click) inside 
the transform handles to change the mode of 
transformation.
BOTTOM:  The Embedded Profile Mismatch 
dialog allows you to decide whether to 
­convert to the working space when you open 
a file that is in a different space.

194
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Profiling a display with ColorMunki. The advanced options allow you to optimize brightness and use the native white point of the display.
Mac OS X has a button marked Calibrate … 
in the Displays system preference. A similar tool 
for Windows users is Adobe Gamma. These tools 
can easily produce results that are worse than 
not profiling your display at all, and they are not 
recommended.
Displays
Profiling doesn’t make all displays equal, and the 
quality of your display can make a big ­difference 
in the results you get. Simply put, laptops are 
not great for image editing, mid-range cinema 
displays are a good value that are excellent for 
general-purpose image editing, and high-end 
displays are primarily for color pros.
Laptop monitors are problematic for color-
critical work. The first issue is that the color 
gamuts of laptop screens are significantly 
smaller than those of desktop displays like the 
Apple LED Cinema Display. A second issue 
is that the appearance of an image on a laptop 
monitor changes dramatically as your angle of 
view toward the screen becomes more oblique. 
Even when viewing the screen slightly off-axis, 
the colors and tones begin to change. A third 
problem is the newer glossy screens, which 
boost contrast to a point where dark tones 
are exaggerated. Glossy screens are also much 
more reflective, meaning that reflections and 
ambient lighting conditions can be a problem. 
The limitations of working with laptop screens 
illustrate some of the qualities that differentiate 
better-quality monitors: edge-to-edge unifor-
mity, viewing angle, and gamut.
Many laptops make it extremely easy to 
connect a desktop monitor to them, and many 
can be set so that the two screens work inde-
pendently. With that configuration, you can 

195
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   D i s p l a y s
Avoid using the Display 
­Calibrator Assistant in Mac OS X.
run Photoshop on a wide-gamut screen of its 
own, and keep everything else on the laptop 
screen. Working with two monitors is great, 
regardless of the configuration; adding a sec-
ond monitor to your desktop tower produces 
a great working environment as well. The dis-
play built into an iMac is essentially a desktop 
display with a color gamut that is superior to 
a laptop display. The caveat is that iMacs have 
glossy screens.
It is worthwhile to invest in a screen that is 
large enough to give an uncluttered view of a 
substantial portion of your image at print reso-
lution, and mid-range monitors will display 
even middle tones more accurately. A 24-inch 
display such as the Apple LED Cinema display 
can show virtually the full area of a 13 × 19 
image at print resolution. For about $900, you 
will be able to get much better results in both 
printing and preparing images for the web.

196
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Color space comparisons. It’s not simply a matter of relative size of the spaces; it’s a matter of which colors are available. Epson can print a lot of 
colors that can’t be seen on a monitor. Clockwise from upper left: 20" Apple Cinema vs. Adobe RGB, MacBook Pro vs. Adobe RGB, MacBook Pro 
vs. 20" Apple Cinema, Epson 2880 + Ultra-Premium Luster @ Photo vs. 20" Apple Cinema.
In some circles, monitors that can display 
90% or more of the Adobe RGB color space are 
practically treated as fetish objects. The 22-inch 
Eizo ColorEdge CG222W is more reasonably 
priced than larger screens in the line and some 
of its predecessors, but it still costs more than 
twice the price of an Apple 20-inch Cinema 
Display. The strength of the wide-gamut moni-
tors is their ability to display highly saturated 
colors and show shadow detail. In pre-press sit-
uations where the cost of running color proofs 
can add up quickly, a wide-gamut display will 
easily pay for itself. In other settings, the ben-
efits of these displays are not as cost-effective.

197
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   P r i n t i n g
Ambient lighting is also an important issue 
in doing color-accurate editing work. It’s best to 
work in slightly subdued light, and try to keep 
that lighting as consistent as possible. Avoid 
working in a place where a light source is aimed 
at your screen. As we have seen elsewhere in 
this book, the intensity and color temperature 
of sunlight change during the course of the day, 
so it’s best to avoid daylight illumination.
Printing
Accurate profiles ensure that your printer is 
printing the right colors. It is worth repeat-
ing that for a given printer, each combination 
of ink and paper has a different color profile. 
Printer and paper manufacturers generally 
offer free printer profiles on their web sites, but 
the quality and accuracy of these vary greatly. 
If you bought an Epson printer, the profiles 
that shipped with the unit are okay, but Epson 
America posts better profiles on their web site. 
For their new Exhibition Fiber paper, Epson 
refers customers to high-quality profiles built 
by Pixel Genius.
To use a printer profile, store them in a 
­particular directory on your computer. If you 
are working on Mac OS X, you can put them 
either in /Library/ColorSync/Profiles, or /Users/ 
<username>/Library/ColorSync/Profiles. If you 
are on Windows XP or Vista, place them in\
Windows\system32\spool\drivers\color.
Custom profiles often produce much bet-
ter results than many canned profiles, especially 
those from paper manufacturers. The printer 
profiling feature in ColorMunki photo makes 
high-quality profiles and is easy to use. It works 
by printing out a color target that you let dry, 
then scan with the ColorMunki. That builds 
your basic profile. From there, you can refine 
the profile by printing out color targets that are 
based on the colors in specific images. So if you 
are shooting outdoor nudes, you can use photos 
that have a lot of sky, skin, and foliage colors to 
tweak your profiles.
You can also have custom profiles built for 
you. Companies such as Cathy’s Profiles and 
Dry Creek Photo will send you a file to print 
and instructions on how to print it out. You 
send that print back to them, and they build 
the profile for you. If you need profiles for only 
one or two types of paper on one printer, this 
can be a reasonable option, but most of these 
services charge anywhere from $50 to $100 per 
profile, so it is easy to spend hundreds of dollars 
on custom printer profiles.
With quality printer profiles installed, mak-
ing an accurate print with Photoshop is a pretty 
straightforward affair.
 1. Select Image > Image Size … from the menu 
bar. A dialog will appear.
 2. Make sure Resample Image is unchecked.
3. Enter an appropriate width or height for 
your image. The other dimension will 
be constrained. For example, a good height 
for printing on a U.S. letter-sized page 
(8-1/2 x 11) would be 10".
4. Check the pixels per inch that result. If the 
resolution is well below 240 ppi, then you 
need to resample your image for high-
­quality output.
A 10-megapixel image can be printed 16 
inches wide at 242 ppi, so you won’t generally 
need to resample for printing.
5. Click OK.
6. Optional: flatten your image before print-
ing. This can speed up the printing time.
Make sure not to save this flattened file, 
though!
 7.  Select File > Print … from the menu bar. The 
first print dialog will appear.
8. Be sure the printer you wish to use is 
selected in the menu at the top of the 
dialog.
9. Click the Page Setup button.

198
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
10. Select the printer and paper size you wish 
to use.
11. The rest of the page layout settings are 
optional.
12. Make sure the menu at the top of the  
right side of the dialog reads Color 
Management.
13. The circle next to Document should be 
filled in.
14. Set the Color Handling menu to Photoshop 
manages colors.
15. Select the appropriate printer profile.
Note: Most printer profiles are named accord-
ing to the convention <printer name> <paper> 
<resolution>.icc. For example, SPR2880 UPrm-
Mtte Photo.icc translates to an Epson Stylus 
Photo 2880 using Ultra-Premium Matte paper 
with a print quality setting of Photo (1440 
dpi). The names of profiles from different 
sources vary a little, but they typically follow 
this format.
16. Choose a rendering intent: either relative 
colorimetric or perceptual.
Note: See the discussion of rendering intent 
earlier in this chapter.
17. Make sure Black Point Compensation is 
checked.
18. Click Print…. The second print dialog will 
appear.
The first print dialog was Photoshop’s print 
dialog. The second dialog belongs to the printer 
driver and will vary, depending on the make 
and model of printer you are using and on the 
operating system you are running. The example 
here is with an Epson Stylus Photo R2880 on 
Mac OS X version 10.5.
19. Select Print Settings from the menu in the 
center of the dialog.
20. Select a media type that corresponds to 
the type of paper you are using.
If you are using a non-Epson paper, you 
won’t see the name of your paper here. Just 
choose the one that describes a paper most like 
the one you are using.
21. Choose color or grayscale.
The Advanced B&W Photo option allows 
you to colorize your image in the print driver. 
It’s better to apply those effects in Photoshop 
and use a color-managed workflow.
You can change print size without resampling, 
which can degrade the image. Increasing the size 
decreases the resolution, but as long as resolution is 
approximately 240 ppi or greater, you won’t need to 
resample.

199
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   P r i n t i n g
Printing with Photoshop color management depends on selecting the right high-quality color profile. The contents of the profile menu will vary, 
depending upon which color profiles have been installed on your computer.

200
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
22. If you’re printing from a 16-bit file, be sure 
16 bit/Channel is checked.
23. Make sure the Color Settings menu reads 
Off (No Color Adjustment).
That setting is crucial. If you leave it on, 
the print driver will attempt to color-correct 
the color-corrected information coming from 
Photoshop. This generally results in prints that 
have a strong magenta cast.
24. For Print Quality, make sure you select the 
setting that matches the profile you have 
selected; e.g., if you selected a Photo (1440 
dpi) profile, set the Print Quality to Photo—
1440 dpi.
25. With newer printers like the Epson 2880, 
you should be able to print with High 
Speed checked.
Fine horizontal lines in your prints can 
sometimes be caused by high-speed printing. 
If you notice them, uncheck High Speed, and 
see if the situation improves.
26. Press Print. Your image will now be sent to 
the printer.
27. If you flattened your file in step 6, use the 
History panel to restore your layers.
Graphics Tablets
A lot of editing techniques in Photoshop 
involve tools that emulate brushes and pens, 
which require a stroking motion to apply them. 
A mouse, or worse, a track pad, does not give 
the optimum feel or control for these tools. 
A tablet like the Wacom Intuous has a stylus 
that rests in your hand the way a real pen or 
When Photoshop manages colors, it is ­important 
that the printer driver’s color settings are 
switched off.

201
C H A P T E R  T E N   |   B a c k u p
brush does. The tablet takes a little getting used 
to, but once you get the hang of working with 
it, many editing gestures become much easier. 
Wacom tablets also come with a multi-button 
wireless mouse, allowing you to switch off 
between pen- and mouse-controlled activities.
Processing Power
The most important computing capabilities 
for running Photoshop CS4 are RAM, video 
RAM (VRAM), and a GPU-equipped video 
card that supports OpenGL. Photoshop will 
take advantage of 4 GB or more of RAM 
and gets an additional performance boost 
when you give it 512 MB of VRAM. Certain  
features in Photoshop CS4 are only available 
when your machine is equipped with a video 
card from companies such as NVIDIA and 
AMD/ATI.
It is plausible that a few filters will run faster 
on an 8-core tower, but for the most part, there 
is not a lot of difference between running Pho-
toshop on a high-end tower and running it on a 
laptop with a 2.5-GHz core duo processor.
Backup
If you read the stories of enough photographers, 
you will find that many have lost substantial 
portions of their life’s work to fire, flood, or 
some other disaster. In the digital realm, fire 
and flood are still potential hazards, but a far 
more likely disaster is a hard drive crash. In fact, 
it’s not a question of whether your hard drive 
will fail; it’s a question of when. It has been said 
that if you don’t have two copies of your digi-
tal files, they don’t really exist, and that under­
scores how essential backup is.
There are two strategies for backing up files, 
which offer a broad safety net when combined. 
The first is mirroring your files, and the second 
is a regimen of incremental backups. Mirroring 
your files is simply duplicating them on a ­second 
storage medium. You can do this by manually 
copying them, or you can use a backup utility, 
but the most foolproof way to mirror is to use a 
RAID system set to level 1.
If you copy your files to separate media and 
store them, it is a good idea to create an index-
ing system so that you can easily retrieve the 
files when you need them. Some backup utili-
ties make managing the indexing a bit simpler. 
If you are backing up to CDs or DVDs by 
hand, you have to cluster your files so that they 
fit the media. Ideally, you don’t want to leave 
too much free space, and you won’t be able to 
burn the disc if you have too many files. Backup 
utilities will typically take care of allocating files 
for you.
RAID stands for redundant array of inde-
pendent drives, and there are several levels or 
modes of configuration. Level 1 does mirror-
ing, and other levels are for faster performance. 
When you save a file to a RAID system config-
ured to level 1, it is automatically saved on two 
separate drives. If one of the drive mechanisms 
in a level 1 RAID fails, you simply replace the 
failed mechanism and the system will rebuild a 
new mirror image on it. With a ­mirroring RAID, 
the second mechanism is invisible to your com-
puter, and it appears as one drive. These systems 
are generally rated based on the total amount of 
storage in the drives, so a 1TB RAID system set 
to level 1 offers 500 GB of storage.
A number of manufacturers now sell rea-
sonably priced plug and play external RAID 
systems that hold one or more pairs of drive 
mechanisms in a single housing. The control-
ler inside the enclosure handles the mirroring, 
meaning that there is no load on your comput-
er’s processor. Different models can attach via 
USB 2.0, Firewire, or eSATA interfaces. There 
are also network RAIDS that can be shared 
over Ethernet, meaning that they can even be 
accessed by WiFi. The G-Technology G-Safe 
line and the La Cie 2-Big line are examples of 
external and network RAID systems.

202
C H 1 0  
D i g i t a l  Te c h n i q u e
Mirroring provides insurance against drive 
crashes, but it doesn’t protect you from a situ-
ation where a file has been inadvertently flat-
tened, re-sampled, or damaged. Some backup 
utilities, including Apple’s Time Machine (built 
into Mac OS X 1.5, a.k.a. “Leopard”), make 
incremental backups. This backup strategy cop-
ies only the files that have changed or have been 
added since the last backup, capturing snapshots 
of your work in process. Incremental backups 
allow you to recover in the case where you dis-
cover that a file that was fine prior to your last 
backup is no good now. The key to success with 
such systems is having the discipline to run the 
backups in a timely and routine manner.
What’s the ideal arrangement for storing 
your working files and backups? Put your work-
ing files on a large RAID level 1 drive and do 
incremental backups to a second RAID level 
1 drive. As a final bit of insurance, periodically 
copy all critical files to a freestanding hard drive 
that is stored off-site.
Backups are only as reliable as the media they 
are stored on. Burnable CDs and DVDs can be 
susceptible to degradation, especially from UV 
light. Blu-Ray DVDs are reputed to be more 
archival than the original burnable DVDs. For 
greatest longevity, regardless of the media you 
use, your backup discs should be stored in acid-
free plastic containers in a cool, dry, dark place. 
Avoid marking your discs with solvent-based 
marker pens like the Sharpie. The ink’s solvent 
can attack the surface of the disc and cause 
deterioration. Delkin is one company that is 
making solvent-free pens for marking CDs.
There are cases where CDs have degraded in 
as little as three years, and most burnable DVDs 
are even more prone to degradation than CDs. 
This is because the burnable part of the CD is 
an organic dye that can break down and fade, 
ultimately making the disc unreadable. CDs 
and DVDs also have a reflective metal layer, 
and that reflective layer can oxidize, causing the 
disc to fail.
Better-quality CDs will tend to last lon-
ger, but if you want to be assured that your 
media is more reliable, Delkin is one manu-
facturer that makes a line of CDs and DVDs 
that are rated to last 100–200 years or more. 
The ­Delkin Archival Gold CDs and DVDs use 
gold metal for the reflective layer (gold doesn’t 
oxidize) and use phthalocyanine dye, which is 
much more stable than the cyanine dye used 
in cheaper CDs. Mitsui Gold archival CDs are 
also made with phthalocyanine dyes, and Mit-
subishi manufactures CDs that are based on 
extremely stable azo dyes. The azo-based discs 
are blue, rather than gold.
Research carefully, though—some manu-
facturers have added coloring agents to their 
conventional discs to mimic the appearance 
of archival discs; color alone doesn’t tell the 
whole story. Archival CDs are now easier to 
find in stores. It has been clear all along that 
DVDs were less archival than CDs, but the 
validity of archival CDs was contested until 
recently.
Archiving onto CDs or DVDs, especially 
manually, can be tedious and take a lot of time. 
As the price of hard drives continues to drop, it 
makes increasing sense to simply use an extra 
hard drive for backup. You connect it to your 
drive chain, copy your files onto it, then discon-
nect it and put it away for safekeeping.

C H 1 1  
I n t e r v i e w s

    
1
C H A P T E R  E l e v e n   |   I n t e r v i e w s
207
Interviews
11
T
he interviews in this chapter give a brief glimpse into 
how a few artists make their work. Through the course 
of this book, we have broken down photographs of the 
nude into an array of conceptual and technical elements. It’s 
time to look at the different ways that various artists put those 
elements together to create strong work with a distinctive 
voice. Questions were selected and tailored for each artist 
and designed to explore the ideas and process behind their 
work, enquiring into background, philosophy, aesthetics, and 
how they shoot. Vision and craft come together in very dif-
ferent ways for every artist—this is not a one-approach-fits-all 
proposition. Their ways of making their art are as different and 
unique as their personalities. 
Nine exceptional photographers from around the world—Barney 
Cokeliss, Robert Gregory Griffeth, Nina Pak, Saelon Renkes, Pascal 
Renoux, Pet Silvia, Tobias Slater-Hunt, Harvey Stein, and Mayumi 
Yoshimaru—generously participated in e-mail interviews for this book 
but there was not enough room to print all of them. You can read the 
remaining interviews and browse additional resource materials on the 
companion web site, www.TheNakedAndTheLens.com.
OPPOSITE PAGE:  Muse 02. Reproduced by permission of Tobias Slater-Hunt.

208
C H 1 1  
I n t e r v i e w s
Interview with Barney 
Cokeliss (www.
BarneyCokeliss.com)
Barney Cokeliss grew up in London and was 
shooting record covers and book jackets as a 
photographer before he left school. He studied 
English Literature at Oxford and spent a year 
at Princeton in the Film and Creative Writ-
ing departments before winning a place on the 
prestigious BBC TV training scheme.
His directing career began with “Tea,” a 
short commissioned by MTV Europe, which 
went on to be the shortest film selected at Sun-
dance. Barney then wrote and directed “Queen’s 
Park Story” for BBC 2’s 10 x 10 strand. The 
Observer called it “the best British drama on 
television this year.” It was in the official selec-
tion at the Venice Film Festival and won Best 
Director at Toronto.
Barney is represented by Ridley Scott Asso-
ciates for commercials, and by United Agents for 
film and television. He has directed ­commercials 
for clients such as Volkswagen, Lexus, Typhoo, 
Toyota, and BMI Airlines. His films for the 
National Health Service have won advertis-
ing awards year after year and his ­safe-sex film 
“Spoiled” was voted Scotland’s Favourite Ad.
Last year, Taschen America published 
­Barney’s photographic nudes alongside Jan 
Saudek’s and Terry Richardson’s. His portrait 
subjects have included Gil Scott-Heron, Ravi 
Shankar, John le Carré, Ray Liotta, and Jacques 
Derrida among many others. A monograph of 
his nudes is in preparation.
Barney is currently finishing a new short 
film for Hill Holiday in New York, sponsored 
by Liberty Mutual, and has two feature films 
in development: one original and one based on 
a short story by the celebrated British author 
J.G. Ballard.
Q: You have a lot of commercial work 
and  portraiture in your CV. How does your 
experience of making that work affect the way 

209
C H A P T E R  E l e v e n   |   I n t e r v i e w  w i t h  B a r n e y  C o k e l i s s
that you approach shooting nudes, and what 
impact do your nudes have on your commercial 
work?
I moved through portraiture to nudes—
a lot of my early work was of famous people 
and making nudes was a way of getting around 
the focus on the individual that’s inherent in 
portrait photographs of eminent people. At the 
same time, I like my nudes to feel in some way 
like portraits—I don’t want the model to seem 
anonymous or just there to provide a body or an 
abstract form—but portraits of people whose 
identity isn’t known. Portraits and nudes are on 
the same spectrum for me—essentially the fas-
cination is in taking pictures of people and of 
human situations. I still love both.
As for my commercial work, that’s mostly 
moving image so it doesn’t relate directly to my 
photographs. I’d love a commercial brief that fit 
the style of my nudes, but often the commer-
cials have another focus—comedy, storytelling 
and so on. Maybe the closest I’ve come in my 
commercials to the look of my nudes is a safe 
sex ad I shot for the NHS (National Health 
Service) in Scotland: there’s a contemplative-
ness in that one that has something in common 
with my pictures.
Q: Your images seem to have a very strong 
sense of subtext. Is that a result of the discipline 
of filmmaking? Are there specific story lines 
driving your images?
I love images that imply a narrative, even if 
it’s not clear what exactly the story is. The ten-
sion between feeling there’s a story there and 
not being able to say for sure what it is can be 
a real force in an image. This preference may 
be related to my film work, though in film the 
aim is usually to tell a story, not just hint at 
one! Painters like Kitaj and photographers like 
­Lorca-Di Corcia are certainly an influence in the 
kind of suspended narratives they conjure. As 
for the parallel with film, I find it really exciting 
that, say, “The Piano” was apparently inspired 
by a photograph. But sometimes “cinematic” 

210
C H 1 1  
I n t e r v i e w s
can be too obvious an effect for a photographer 
to aim for—unless you’re Cindy Sherman and 
you’re subverting the whole thing. I suppose 
my photography keeps my film-making image 
conscious, and my film-making keeps my pho-
tography aware of narrative. What I don’t do 
is work out elaborate plots which I try to rep-
resent in the pictures—I’m more interested in 
leaving part of the story open to interpretation. 
Photo-stories can be wonderful—I’ve loved 
Duane Michals’ work since I first saw it as a 
kid—but that’s a whole other thing.
Q: How would you say your photographic 
consciousness has changed over time?
I think I started out, like a lot of beginner 
photographers, very focused on composition 
and form. Over time I’ve got more interested 
in atmosphere and implied story and let the com-
positional elements become more submerged. 
I think a good photograph has to be interestingly 
composed, but it doesn’t have to make a big deal 
out of it.
Q: Did Duane Michals or some other pho-
tographer inspire you to pick up the camera?
Drtkol and Duane Michals were probably 
the two photographers that most impressed me 
when I was first picking up the camera—they 
don’t have much in common! Cartier-Bresson 
is unavoidable too—I spent a few of my teen-
age years taking pseudo-Cartier-Bresson por-
traits of all my friends.
Q: How much pre-visualization goes into 
your nudes? Do you go so far as to sketch or 
storyboard what you plan to shoot? How much 
do improvisation and “happy accidents” figure 
into your work?
It varies. I always spend some time think-
ing about what I want to achieve from a shoot, 
and I have a bank of references for poses and 
situations that I’d like to explore. But I spend 
a lot of time trying to work against anything 
that looks posed. Often it’s the position the 
model takes between rolls of film that I end up 
focusing on. So in that respect I try and find a 
little bit of documentary in what is essentially 
an artificial situation. One reason I don’t tend 
to do sketches in advance is that my film work 
is very thoroughly prepared—it has to be given 
the number of people involved—and I like my 
photography to be opposite to that.
Q: Still shooting all film? What type? 
Medium format?
I only use digital as a prep tool—for casting 
photos, location recces, etc. All my “real” pictures  
are shot on film, and most are 6 x 7 or 6 x 9 cm.
Q: When and how do you decide that a 
story should be told as a still, or perhaps a series 
of stills, rather than as a film?
Right at the beginning—I think the ideas 
come from different parts of my brain. But, 
now that you mention it, cross-pollinating them 
might be a good idea!

211
C H A P T E R  E l e v e n   |   I n t e r v i e w  w i t h  B a r n e y  C o k e l i s s
Q: When you shoot stills, are you thinking 
in terms of capturing a single image? When 
do you know that you have something that 
works?
I certainly feel that I only need one success-
ful image for a shoot to be success—sometimes 
having too many from one shoot feels like a 
waste as it’s harder to use them all without 
seeming repetitive. But I try to leave space to 
see what happens spontaneously, rather than 
just homing in on one key shot. I can know very 
early if I’m getting something that works—if 
the model and the location are right then the 
odds are very good. I rely a lot on casting and 
locations, so when one or both is disappoint-
ing then it can be a struggle. The location 
has to have a tonality that lets me create some 
­contrast (so many rooms have pale walls, which 
make things much harder for me) and the 
model has to have something truthful about 
them—my biggest struggle is when the model 
is too professional-seeming: I’m not interested 
in pictures of models modeling.
Q: Light seems to be an important part of 
your shots. Is everything lit, or do you rely on 
available light? How much does the lighting 
affect the amount of work you can produce in 
a session?
I work with as little additional lighting as 
possible. I’ve been lucky enough to work with 
some of the great cinematographers (people 
like Eduardo Serra) and I’ve learned that it’s 
often a case of what you don’t add rather than 
what you do.
Q: Has working with cinematographers 
strengthened your ways of thinking or commu-
nicating about visual ideas?
Working with cinematographers can be 
a wonderful dialogue—it’s a collaboration 
you don’t really experience as a photographer. 
There’s always a dual aspect to the dialogue—
it’s partly about story-telling and partly about 
aesthetics. Good cinematography is when the 
aesthetics are a key part of the storytelling, and 
not merely decorative.

212
C H 1 1  
I n t e r v i e w s
Q: Many of your photos have a look that 
evokes the painted portraits of the likes of van 
Dyck, and possibly Sargent. They also remind 
me somewhat of Tina Barney’s photographs, 
and she has said outright that she was influ-
enced by Dutch painting. Is this semblance 
in your work the result of a conscious intent? 
What would you say are your primary visual 
influences?
My primary influences probably aren’t 
directly comparable to my own pictures. I’m 
certainly not trying to restage the masters. 
Tina Barney’s work has a different texture to 
mine but the way she presents people is very 
interesting and unforced so I’m flattered by the 
comparison. Aside from the people I’ve already 
mentioned, I’d say Kirchner, Hockney, and 
Modigliani are painters that I love. Photogra-
phers I’d mention are Drtkol, Goldin, Roversi, 
Penn, Brandt. More recent enthusiasms for me 
have been the photographs of Bill Henson, 
David Hilliard, and Eleanor Carucci.
Q: If your influences are not visible in the 
look of your work, then your connection to 
them is not about the surface. Can you say a 
little more about some of the ideas that come 
from these influences?
I think the biggest influence I get from look-
ing at other people’s work is in expanding my 
idea of what can make a photograph. It’s easy 
to get caught up in your own spiral of obses-
sions, and seeing another photographer create 
fascinating images from something totally dif-
ferent can free you up a bit.
Q: What do you think is the value of being 
aware of your influences?
Being aware of your influences can help you 
avoid merely aping them.

213
C H A P T E R  E l e v e n   |   I n t e r v i e w  w i t h  B a r n e y  C o k e l i s s
goes, right? How do you go about networking 
to find models, makeup, etc. and put together a 
shoot with such short notice?
I usually know in advance that I’ll have a 
day that I can schedule a shoot for, so it’s not 
all conjured instantaneously. My models are a 
mixture of friends, colleagues, actresses, sing-
ers, and professional models. I’m lucky in that 
I tend to have more people who want to model 
for me than I have time to shoot.
Q: Can you describe the sort of direction 
that you give to your nude subjects? Do you 
direct your subjects for still shots in the same 
way that you direct film actors?
I think the fundamental interaction is similar 
in that you’re trying to relax people so that they 
can give of themselves unselfconsciously. But 
I don’t put my nude subjects through the kind of 
exploratory, improvisational process that I find 
Q: Your images seem to be set in pretty 
affluent surroundings. Are you trying to make 
a ­particular statement or portray a particu-
lar idea? Is there a central theme uniting your 
images?
There’s no statement in the location choice 
whatsoever. The affluence of the surround-
ings is coincidental and the result of upmarket 
hotel rooms of a certain sort being one of the 
surest sources of mid-tone (or darker) walls, 
deep colours, and a bit of window light. A lot 
of my shoots are quite opportunistic—I’ll find 
myself in a strange city with maybe one day 
to spare and there won’t be time to do a big 
location recce, so I often end up in a hotel. But 
my mental list of locations to explore next is 
hotel-free.
Q: So you’re free for a day, and you only 
found out the day before—that’s usually how it 

214
C H 1 1  
I n t e r v i e w s
works well for actors. Maybe I should. Then 
again, I often find inexperienced models produce 
the best results and they’ve usually got enough on 
their mind doing their first photo shoot without 
me throwing drama games at them.
Q: What do you think your sitters need 
from you to give a great portrayal in front of 
the camera, and how does one learn to be an 
effective director?
Actors often tell me that they like working 
with me, and hopefully they’re mostly sincere! 
But it’s hard to know why or how you’re effec-
tive as a director as it’s quite rare to see other 
directors or photographers in action. I think 
I have good instinctive communication skills 
with actors, so I don’t try to impose a system. 
I think actors need to feel simultaneously that 
you know what you want but that you are 
also open to what they want to try. With my 
­photographs there’s an element of trying to 
normalize an odd situation—the model is in a 
strange place with someone they don’t neces-
sarily know well, possibly taking their clothes 
off in front of the camera for the first time. So a 
large part of my direction is just maintaining a 
normal, relaxed interaction. I’ve had some first-
time models move, in just a few minutes, from 
apprehension about being naked to actually 
forgetting that they’re naked and wondering 
why passers-by look at them strangely if they 
stand by the window during a break. I think 
this has a lot to do with the atmosphere you 
create.

215
C H A P T E R  E l e v e n   |   I n t e r v i e w  w i t h  S a e l o n  R e n k e s
Interview with Saelon 
Renkes (www.saelon.com)
My photos are most often about the kind of 
world I want to live in. Photography gives me 
a way to connect to this world—a world with 
quiet places of beauty, places of wonder, places 
that make me want to drink them in deeply—
and to share them with others. I’m in love with 
the natural world, with the diversity in all its 
forms of life (both plants and animals), and 
with all the real people and real shapes within 
it. I’m fascinated by the emotional range of the 
human temperament, and by finding its reflec-
tions in the poses and expressions that people 
take on naturally.
After getting a B.A. in Biology, I joined 
the Peace Corps and lived in Guatemala for a 
while, where I fell in love with travel as well. 
I took photos all the time and became fasci-
nated with the variety of human culture, but 
then had a very bad accident. It was during 
the time of surgeries and learning to live with 
pain and physical limitations that I discovered 
my art. Making art is an amazing process, hard 
to understand or really describe. There are lots 
of techniques to learn, lots of processes to fig-
ure out, and lots of studies to be made, but in 
the end I find that all that stuff only helps one 
to give the art a voice that is recognizable by 
others. The art itself comes from somewhere 
within and can scarcely be shaped or planned 
in a fully conscious manner.
Ruth Bernhard has been one of my strongest 
influences, and I’ve been particularly affected 
by the theme of one of her books, The Gift of 
the Commonplace. In her work this often refers 
to commonplace objects, and in the work-
shop I took with her she challenged us to find 
something beautiful to photograph within a 
limited number of feet of our meeting room. 
I love working this way, and I love to take this 
same approach with photographing the human 
body. Like many feminists who came of age in 
the 1970’s, I came into photography with my 
own biases about nude photography, and from 
the beginning I wanted to pursue work that 

216
C H 1 1  
I n t e r v i e w s
affirmed the beauty of ordinary human bodies, 
rather than contribute to a process that would 
further the insecurities the average woman has 
about her own body. Perfect bodies are beauti-
ful, and they are lovely to photograph, but when 
I can find expressions of extraordinary beauty in 
a completely real-world body is when I feel that 
I am doing my best and most significant work.
I’ve studied photography, painting and print-
making with David Bayles, Ruth Bernhard, 
Lucien Clergue, Steve Kiser, Alan May, Ted 
Orland, Holly Roberts and Brian Taylor, in pri-
vate workshops, at UC Santa Cruz Extension, 
the Pacific Art League, and at Foothill College.
I’ve taught workshops for UC Santa Cruz 
Extension, St. Mary’s Art Center and privately. 
I’ve been exhibiting my work since 1994, on the 
web and in galleries, and it has been included 
in many private collections. I’m currently living 
in Los Gatos, California (about 25 miles south 
of San Francisco), with my husband, Steve 
Fend (a USGS stream ecologist). I’m repre-
sented by The Main Gallery in Redwood City, 
and I exhibit my work in other places when the 
opportunity presents itself.
Q: How do your painting and printmaking 
studies relate to or impact the photographic 
work you produce?
In addition to straight photography, I’ve 
also studied oil painting (mostly on photo-
graphs, but with a little work on regular blank 
canvas), printmaking (including monotypes, 
linoleum block prints, and various etching 
processes) and encaustic painting (beeswax on 
various surfaces). These processes very much 
enrich one’s vision, opening it up to new pos-
sibilities—even when you aren’t actually mix-
ing these techniques with photography it still 
opens one’s eyes a little more to colors, color 
depth, compositions, and constructions. To date 
the influence has been of that kind, as I haven’t 
yet produced enough work mixing these addi-
tional media with ­photography to have a body 
of ­mixed-­media work to show—but I expect 
that to happen somewhere down the road.
Studying these techniques also left me with 
much deepened respect for those who can actu-
ally draw well. When combined with photogra-
phy you can do quite a lot without being able to 
draw particularly well as the photograph sup-
plies as many of the lines as you wish, but that 
can also be a trap, as it is all too easy to simply 
slap something on top of the photo without 
integrating the two media. If it means no more 
than a bit of lipstick, then I think it detracts 
rather than adds to the image.
Q: Your hand-painted and digitally manip-
ulated images are clearly constructed; is there a 
kind of construction that goes into your other 
images, or are they more “readymade”?

217
C H A P T E R  E l e v e n   |   I n t e r v i e w  w i t h  S a e l o n  R e n k e s
I’m afraid the answer here is both—many 
are found images, while some are definitely 
­constructed. I know some photographers feel 
that they are bound to show the truth, the whole 
truth and nothing but the truth, to make no 
real changes in the material they photograph, 
but this stricture has never been able to gain 
a foothold in my own thinking. The only rules 
I’m willing to follow are those that make the 
image work and help it to say what I’m trying 
to say. That said, I still admit that the majority 
of my images tend to be found images. I think 
that is the path of least resistance, and really, 
there are so many wonderful images out there 
just waiting to be discovered. Most of the time 
all it takes is a really open mind.
Q: How much do you pre-visualize?
I do a lot of pre-visualization in the field and 
in the studio. It is an extremely useful process 
that saves time by making it far easier to get 
the best print in the darkroom or at the com-
puter, and also prevents a lot of garbage from 
ever making it to the proof sheets (or folders 
full of digital files). So much of good photog-
raphy comes down to severe and careful edit-
ing, and pre-visualization is the first step in that 
process. Even in the digital age, with so many 
image adjustments possible, the final images are 
always better if they’ve been created with the 
right ­values in the first place. On the other hand, 
I still do a fair amount of post-­visualization too, 
and refuse to take on any sort of guilt over that. 
The creative process doesn’t stop with the click 
of the camera shutter. If I  can create a final 
image that works, I don’t care if it is the same 
thing I pre-visualized or not.
Q: How do you create narrative in your 
pictures?
I wish I could lay this out better. Creating 
narrative is something that I struggle to do 
and yet have very little idea how to accomplish 
effectively. I am a very intuitive sort of worker, 
so even when I have a pretty specific idea to 
work with I can only go so far with pre-planning 
the layout. I try to plan out several approaches 
with a few different layouts and lots of different 
props as possibilities, then I bring in my models 
and we set things up together, trying out dif-
ferent variations using all the ideas that come 
up between us. By including the models in the 
process the end result is often different from 
what I first had in mind, but it always works 
better than trying to force everything to fit my 
initial vision. It can work especially well when 
the narrative is something that is really part of 
the model’s own story—though that is not a 
necessity, it is really a great benefit when it does 
work out that way and it makes for the simplest 
process.
Q: How would you describe the relationship 
between you and the sitter; can you say some-
thing about how you interact during a shoot?
I especially enjoy working with non-pro-
fessional models—friends or acquaintances—
because they tend to bring more spontaneity 

218
C H 1 1  
I n t e r v i e w s
to the photo sessions, and they are less likely 
to offer me a repertoire of the same old poses. 
They also tend to be more nervous about the 
sessions at first—they may not be comfortable 
with having me really look hard at their body, 
or they may be shy about offering up poses or 
thoughts. I work hard to establish some level 
of comfort; I really don’t like to make people 
uncomfortable in the first place, but also the 
kinds of images I am trying to make almost 
always require relaxation on the part of the 
models. This is where the photographer really 
needs to know what they are trying to achieve 
though, as I have one photographer friend who 
is completely the opposite—he is particularly 
interested in capturing that very same discom-
fort that I am trying to banish.
As a general rule, I prefer to have models in 
poses that are natural and comfortable to them, 
and to be as at ease as possible. Photographs 
always have a lot of the photographer in them, 
and while I feel that when the model is ill-at-
ease the photograph becomes even more about 
the photographer and less about the model, it 
is also possible that my preference has more to 
do with my own search for emotional ­comfort. 
At any rate, I do try to help the model feel 
comfortable and relaxed, and I like to sort of 
experiment slowly until we find the poses that 
come most naturally to the model.
My usual process is to try to have a few 
­simple ideas planned out to start the session 
out, where I just tell them what I want them 
to do, as a means of breaking the ice and giving 
me a chance to see what their bodies are really 
like. If I haven’t worked with the model before, 
these are almost never the images that work 
best, but they do serve an important function 
in getting things warmed up.
For those models who stay nervous a lit-
tle longer and are still somewhat stiff while 
being observed with the camera, I find that it 
can work wonders to stop to change film (or 
change the memory card or battery). Tension 
is fatiguing, so those particularly nervous mod-
els often sigh a great sigh of relief when the 
camera is finally turned away, and really relax. 
A few glances in that direction while fussing 
over the camera can sometimes reveal a really 
great pose, and I’ve often done an abrupt shout 
of “wait, don’t move at all, that’s a fantastic 
pose.” Most models are even more relaxed once 
they’ve seen that you are really happy with what 
you are getting.
Q: How did your self-portrait work inform 
the way you interact with models?
I’ve actually done very little in the way of real 
self-portraits—only a few as needed for business 
uses. I have, however, used myself as a model 
occasionally in the past. I don’t think of these 
as self-portraits, but just as myself standing in for 

219
C H A P T E R  E l e v e n   |   I n t e r v i e w  w i t h  S a e l o n  R e n k e s
a model. I found this to be excellent ­training 
early on. I modeled for other photographers 
and for myself, and I learned more about how to 
work with models by being one than from any-
thing else.
Q: How do being a feminist and your train-
ing in biology affect your work?
It took me a bit longer to gravitate towards 
nudes because of my concern with exploitation 
of the female body. I struggled with that one for 
a little while, but I was especially interested in 
the timelessness that one can get with the nude 
figure. My feminism surely has guided some  
of my approach in how I work with the models. 
For instance, my insistence on providing what 
they need for their own comfort, both physical 
and emotional. I don’t want to make a photo-
graph that either of us is not comfortable mak-
ing. It is always a collaborative effort and the 
model has as much say as possible. Originally 
I put some effort into finding male models as 
well, as part of a feminist urge to keep things 
equal. I didn’t really keep this up very long 
though—since I do prefer working with friends 
or friends of friends, and those males very rarely 
are willing to model. To my mind it is still a bit 
odd, but men are often more shy about being 
photographed nude than most women.
I don’t think my training in biology has an 
effect on my work with nudes, though it certainly 
does influence my work in other genres, par-
ticularly my wildflower series. Perhaps I should 
consider ways to bring it into play in my work 
with nudes—that could be interesting.
Q: What impact do Uelsmann and Bernhard 
have on your work today?
Both are (or were, in the case of Bernhard) 
absolute masters of printing, and both have 
been incredibly generous to students of pho-
tography, sharing freely of their techniques 
and insights. Both have provided considerable 
inspiration—Uelsmann with working beyond 
the normal constraints of reality, and Bernhard 
with the art of finding beauty in the common-
place. Bernhard gave especially good workshop 
assignments, such as to find a number of good 
images within 25 feet of the classroom, or a 
number of good images without getting out of 
bed, things like that. These are excellent exer-
cises, and ones I repeat frequently on my own. 
There are incredible photographs right under 
our noses all the time!
Q: How has teaching informed or changed 
your practice?
I’m not sure how teaching has changed my 
practice. I’ve certainly learned a lot from it. 
First of all, I always feel like I have to study 
really HARD before teaching, so I won’t give 
the students any wrong technical informa-
tion (or at least none that I can avoid). Sec-
ondly, I’ve discovered that there are a lot of 
unexpected reasons for signing up for a photo 
workshop, and it is not uncommon to discover 
that some of the participants have at least 
as much to teach the group as the instruc-
tor does. Once I figured this out I started to 
lean more towards leading “artist’s retreats” 
instead of regular workshops, with a configu-
ration that allowed all of the participants to 
teach from their own strengths and everyone 
to learn from each other. Third, teaching photo 
workshops made me finally get over being shy 
about having people watch me make a pho-
tograph. I think there is a great deal to learn 
by watching other photographers go through 
their process of creating a photograph, and 
teachers should always provide an opportunity 
for their students to watch them and to watch 
other students when possible too.
Q: Do you have advice for beginning nude 
photographers?
Yes indeed! I strongly believe that anyone 
who wants to do nude photography should 
experience being on the other side of the lens 
as well. This is the very best way to learn about 

220
C H 1 1  
I n t e r v i e w s
working effectively with a model. I think it’s 
most effective as a learning tool if you model 
nude for another photographer, but it is also 
good to practice by using yourself as a model. 
What do these suggestions bring up in your 
mind? This in itself is useful to know, as it may 
offer a little insight into the things that come 
up in a model’s mind. Do you think your body 
isn’t attractive enough? Try to find innovative 
ways to use only parts of your body—there are 
many ways to make a beautiful photograph with 
a human body. Are you concerned with being 
recognized in ways that might be embarrassing? 
Think about ways to make it not recognizable 
by using only part of the body, or by manipu-
lating the lighting or the focus, or by cropping 
to the point of abstraction. More tips to make 
this exercise more successful: use a tripod for 
the camera and place a large mirror behind it to 
get a better idea of what your layout is looking 
like. A second tripod can be used as a stand-in 
for yourself, to give you something to focus on, 
while also marking exactly where you need to 
place yourself when you get back on the lens 
side of the camera. A self-timer can be used to 
release the shutter, but it sometimes is difficult 
to get everything completely arranged quickly 
enough. In that case a very long cable release 
cord or a remote control can be a blessing. This 
whole process can be a bit complex and some-
times frustrating, but it is really an excellent 
way to learn and get some practice without the 
pressure of worrying about another person who 
might be getting impatient or bored.

221
Nina Pak
Robert Gregory Griffeth
Pascal Renoux
Pet Silvia
Visit www.TheNakedAndtheLens.com for interviews with the following 
photographers:
C H A P T E R  E L E V E N   |   I n t e r v i e w s  o f  t h e  P h o t o g r a p h e r

222
C H 1 1  
I n t e r v i e w s
Mayumi Yoshimaru
Tobias Slater-Hunt
Harvey Stein

223
Conclusion
Art is life seen through man’s inner craving for perfection and beauty—
his escape from the sordid realities of life into a world of his imagining. 
Art accounts for at least a third of our civilization, and it is one of the 
artist’s principal duties to do more than merely record life or nature. To 
the artist is given the privilege of pointing the way and inspiring towards 
a better life.
—Paul Outerbridge
This book is just one by-product of a personal odyssey. That 
journey began with plastic cameras bought in drugstores and rolls of 
film where one shot in twenty even came out. There were various pic-
tures of naked girlfriends, and one who considered herself a charter 
member of the “No Nude Photos” club. I had an early fascination with 
“trick” photography, and was blown away the first time I saw a Jerry 
Uelsmann photograph. Somewhere in that mix of early influences, of 
course, were the images of Playboy and first issues of Club.
As my appreciation for art developed, there were visits to 
photo galleries on Newbury Street in Boston in the early 1980s, 
and the chance discovery of a Modigliani print in the poster shop of 
the ­Beaubourg Museum in Paris. During that same trip, I visited the 
Musée Rodin, saw Iris, Messagère des Dieux (Iris, Messenger of the 
Gods), and a light went on—art wasn’t just about beautiful images 
or safe subject matter, it was about mixing things up, challenging 
norms, and breaking taboos, too.
My hope is that by reading this book, you have gotten inter-
ested in exploring your own influences and curious about trying 
new  ideas. As Barney Cokeliss said in his interview, it’s good to 
know your ­influences so that you don’t ape them. Beyond that, con-
sciously embracing your influences can be a rich vein to mine for 
ideas, whether it’s exploring your personal peccadilloes, reacting to 
something you can’t stand or referencing the work of someone you 
admire.
Maybe you’ll get out and see something that inspires your work, 
in a museum, a gallery, or even on the street. I hope you’ll remember 
that too many photographers only look at photography, and that at 
its heart, the camera is a copying machine. By its nature, the camera 
invites us to copy—it almost induces us to mimic whatever we see—
thus, it takes something extra to go beyond knee-jerk imitation.
Two artists that continue to inspire me today are Egon Schiele 
and Helmut Newton, and there are two books by other artists that I 
still refer back to because they demonstrate that nudes don’t have 
to stick to well-worn norms. The first is Chambre Close by Bettina 
Rheims and Serge Bramly, and the second is Lee Friedlander’s book 
of nudes. The Friedlander book has an attitude and energy that I still 
rarely see in photos of the nude. A third book that inspires me is Flor 
Garduño’s Inner Light, because of its poetic treatment of the figure 
and its minimalist graphic sensibilities.
In writing this book, I got more in touch with some of my own 
interests and influences. Perhaps the phrase “the journey is the 
reward” has been overused, but it certainly has the ring of truth. 
There is much more to shoot, and even more to delve into and write 
about. I wish you luck and creativity on your own journey.

225
Bibliography
20th Century Photography by Museum Ludwig Cologne, Taschen, 2001
Adobe Photoshop CS4 for Photographers, Focal Press, 2009
Adobe Photoshop CS4 for Photographers: The Ultimate Workshop by Martin Evening and Jeff Schewe, Focal Press, 2009
The Adobe Photoshop Lightroom 2 Book: The Complete Guide for Photographers by Martin Evening, Adobe Press, 2008
Adobe Photoshop Master Class: John Paul Caponigro, Adobe Press, 2003
Adobe Photoshop Master Class: Maggie Taylor’s Landscape of Dreams by Amy Standen, Adobe Press, 2005
The Annotated Mona Lisa: A Crash Course in Art History from Prehistoric to Post-Modern by Carol Strickland,  
Andrews McMeel Publishing, 2007
Araki by Araki: The Photographer’s Personal Selection, Kodansha International, 2003
Araki by Taschen, 2007
Art & Fear: Observations On the Perils (and Rewards) of Artmaking by David Bayles, Image Continuum Press, 2001
Art and Photography by David Campany, Phaidon Press, 2007
Art and Photography by Aaron Scharf, Penguin, 1991
Art & Today by Eleanor Heartney, Phaidon Press Inc., 2008
Art and Illusion by E.H. Gombrich, Princeton University Press, 2000
Art and Photography by David Campany, Phaidon Press, 2007
Art and Visual Perception: A Psychology of the Creative Eye by Rudolf Arnheim, University of California Press, 2004
Art Photography Now by Susan Bright, Aperture, 2006
The Artist’s Voice: Talks With Seventeen Modern Artists by Katherine Kuh, Da Capo Press, New York, 2000
ASMP Professional Business Practices in Photography, 7th Edition by American Society of Media Photographers, Allworth Press, 2008
Richard Avedon: Photographs 1946–2004, Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, 2007
Ruth Bernhard: The Eternal Body: A Collection of Fifty Nudes, Chronicle Books, 1994
The Body: Photographs of the Human Form by William A. Ewing, Chronicle Books, 1994
Guy Bourdin: A Message For You, Steidl/Dangin, 2006
Harry Callahan (Aperture Masters of Photography) by Jonathan Williams and Harry Callahan, Aperture, 2005
Harry Callahan by Sarah Greenough, National Gallery of Art, Washington, DC/Bullfinch Press, 2001
Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography by Roland Barthes, Richard Howard (Translator), Hill and Wang, 1982
Henri Cartier-Bresson (Aperture Masters of Photography) by Henri Cartier-Bresson, Aperture, 2005
Chambre Close by Bettina Rheims and Serge Bramly, Schirmer/Mosel, 2007
A Choice of Weapons by Gordon Parks, Minnesota Historical Society Press, 1986
Cinematic Storytelling: The 100 Most Powerful Film Conventions Every Filmmaker Must Know by Jennifer Van Sijll, Michael Wiese 
Productions, 2005
Cinematography: Third Edition by Kris Malkiewicz and M. David Mullen, Fireside, 2005
Color by Betty Edwards: A Course in Mastering the Art of Mixing Colors, Tarcher, 2004

226
B i b l i o g r a p h y
Color Choices: Making Color Sense Out of Color Theory by Stephen Quiller, Watson-Guptil, 2002
Comics and Sequential Art: Principles and Practices from the Legendary Cartoonist by Will Eisner, W.W. Norton & Co., 2008
Creative Digital Printmaking by Theresa Airey, Amphoto Books, 2001
Creative Photoshop Lighting Techniques, Revised and Updated by Barry Huggins, Lark Books, 2005
Creativity: Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Harper Perennial, 1997
Dali by Robert Descharnes and Gilles Neret, Taschen, 2006
The Devil’s Playground (Nan Goldin Photographs), Phaidon Press Inc., 2008
The New Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain by Betty Edwards, Tarcher, 1999
Each Wild Idea: Writing, Photography, History by Geoffrey Batchen, The MIT Press, 2002
The Elements of Color by Johannes Itten, Wiley, 1970
The Elements of Photography: Understanding and Creating Sophisticated Images by Angela Faris Belt, Focal Press, 2008
Erotic Ambiguities: The Female Nude in Art by Helen McDonald, Routledge, 2000
Erotic Art by Angelika Muthesius and Gilles Neret, Taschen, 1998
Erotic by Nature: A Celebration of Life, of Love, and of Our Wonderful Bodies by David Steinberg, Red Alder Books, 1988
Essential Klimt by Laura Payne, Parragon Publishing, 2002
The Essential René Magritte by Todd Alden, Harry N. Abrams, 1999
Fashion Theory: A Reader by Malcolm Barnard, Routledge, 2007
Film Lighting by Kris Malkiewicz, Fireside, 1986
Fine Art Printing for Photographers: Exhibition Quality Prints with Inkjet Printers, 2nd Edition by Uwe Steinmueller, Juergen Gulbins,  
Rocky Nook, 2008
Lee Friedlander Nudes, Pantheon, 1991
Flor Garduno: Inner Light by Flor Garduno and Veronica Volkow, Bullfinch Press, 2002
Graphic Storytelling and Visual Narrative by Will Eisner, W.W. Norton & Co., 2008
Graphis Nudes, Vols. 1–4, Graphis Publishing
H2O by Howard Schatz, Bulfinch, 2007
Half Past Autumn: A Retrospective by Gordon Parks, Bulfinch, 1998
Eikoh Hosoe, Aperture, 1999
How to Cheat in Photoshop CS4: The art of creating photorealistic montages by Steve Caplin, Focal Press, 2008
Ideals & Idols: Essays On Values in History and in Art by E.H. Gombrich, Phaidon Press, 1994
Immediate Family by Sally Mann, Aperture, 2005
Interaction of Color: Revised and Expanded Edition by Josef Albers and Mr. Nicholas Fox Weber, Yale University Press, 2006
Andre Kertesz: His Life and Work by Laszlo Beke, Dominique Baque, Jane Livingston, and Pierre Borhan, Bulfinch, 2000
Andre Kertesz (Phaidon 55s) by Noel Bourcier, Phaidon Press, 2001
Light: Science and Magic: An Introduction to Photographic Lighting by Fil Hunter, Steven Biver and Paul Fuqua, Focal Press, 2007
Lighting for Nude Photography, Revised Edition by Rod Ashford, Rotovision, 2007
Lighting the Nude: Top Photography Professionals Share Their Secrets by Roger Hicks and Frances Schultz, Rotovision, 2006
Making Comics: Storytelling Secrets of Comics, Manga and Graphic Novels by Scott Mccloud, Harper Paperbacks, 2006
Man Ray (Aperture Masters of Photography) by Jed Perl and Man Ray, Aperture, 2005

227
B i b l i o g r a p h y
Man Ray: In Focus: Photographs From the J. Paul Getty Museum, Getty Publications, 1999
Meditations On a Hobby Horse and Other Essays On the Theory of Art by E.H. Gombrich, Phaidon Press, 1994
A Notebook at Random by Irving Penn, Bulfinch, 2004
The Photographer’s Eye by John Szarkowski, Lee Friedlander, Walker Evans, and William Klein, The Museum of Modern Art, New York, 2007
Photographs by Man Ray: 105 Works, 1920–1934, Dover Publications, 1980
The Photography Book by Editors of Phaidon Press, Phaidon Press, 2005
Man Ray: Photography and Its Double by Alain Sayag, Gingko Press, 1998
Matters of Light & Depth by Ross Lowell, Lower Light Management, 1999
Modigliani by Carol Mann, Thames & Hudson, 1980
More Nudes by Andreas H. Bitesnich, teNeues, 2008
The Naked Eye: Great Photographs of the Nude by David Bailey and Martin Harrison, Amphoto, 1987
The Nature of Photographs by Stephen Shore, Phaidon Press, 2007
Nerve/The New Nude by nerve.com and Genevieve Gield, Chronicle Books, 2000
The New Erotic Photography by Dian Hanson and Eric Kroll, Taschen, 2009
Helmut Newton: Big Nudes by Karl Lagerfeld and Helmut Newton, Schirmer/Mosel, 2004
The Best of Helmut Newton: Selections From His Photographic Work, Schirmer/Mosel, 2004
The Nude: A Study in Ideal Form by Kenneth Clark, Princeton University Press, 1972
The Nude: The Cultural Rhetoric of the Body in the Art of Western Modernity by Richard Leppert, Westview Press, 2007
The Nude Female Figure: A Visual Reference for the Artist by Mark E. Smith, Watson-Guptill, 2007
Nude Photography: Masterpieces from the Past 150 Years by Peter-Cornell Richter, Prestel Publishing, 1998
On Being a Photographer: A Practical Guide by David Hurn, Lenswork Publishing, 2007
On Photography by Susan Sontag, Picador, 2001
Other Realities by Jerry Uelsmann, Bulfinch, 2005
Perception and Imaging, Third Edition: Photography—A Way of Seeing, 3rd Edition by Richard D. Zakia, Focal Press, 2007
The Photograph: Composition and Color Design by Harald Mante, Rocky Nook, 2008
The Photograph as Contemporary Art by Charlotte Cotton, Thames & Hudson, 2004
The Photographer’s Eye by John Szarkowski, Lee Friedlander, Walker Evans, and William Klein, The Museum of Modern Art, New York, 2007
The Photographer’s Eye: Composition and Design for Better Digital Photos by Michael Freeman, Focal Press, 2007
Photographic Lighting Simplified by Susan McCartney, Allworth Press, 2003
Photography and Society by Gisele Freund, David R Godine Pub, 1980
The Photography Reader by Liz Wells (Editor), Routledge, 2002
Photography: A Very Short Introduction by Steve Edwards, Oxford University Press, 2006
Photoshop LAB Color: The Canyon Conundrum and Other Adventures in the Most Powerful Colorspace by Dan Margulis, Peachpit Press, 2005
The Photoshop Lightroom Workbook: Workflow not Workslow in Lightroom 2 by Seth Resnick and Jamie Spritzer, Focal Press, 2008
Photoshop Masking & Compositing by Katrin Eismann, New Riders Press, 2004
Phototextualities: Intersections of Photography and Narrative by Alex Hughes and Andrea Noble, Editors, University of New Mexico Press, 2003
Picasso: Art Can Only Be Erotic by Diana Widmaier Picasso, Prestel Publishing, 2005
Picture Theory: Essays on Verbal and Visual Representation by W.J.T. Mitchell, University of Chicago Press, 1995

228
B i b l i o g r a p h y
Picture This: How Pictures Work by Molly Bang, SeaStar Books, 2000
Pixel Surgeons: Extreme Manipulation of the Figure in Photography by Martin Dawber, Mitchell Beazley, 2005
The Politics of Aesthetics by Jacques Ranciere, Continuum, 2006
Portraits of an Age: Photography in Germany and Austria 1900–1938, Hatje Cantz Publishers, 2005
The Power of the Center: A Study of Composition in the Visual Arts: The New Version by Rudolf Arnheim, University of California Press, 1988
Principles of Color: A Review of Past Traditions and Modern Theories of Color Harmony by Faber Birren, Schiffer Publishing, 1987
Radiant Identities by Jock Sturges, Aperture, 2005
Robert Mapplethorpe by Richard Marshall, Bullfinch Press, 1990
Saudek by Daniela Mrazkova, Taschen, 2006
Egon Schiele by Tim Marlow, Mallard Press, 1990
Semiotics: The Basics by Dani Chandler, Routledge, 2007
Setting Up Your Shots: Great Camera Moves Every Filmmaker Should Know by Jeremy Vineyard and Jose Cruz, Michael Wiese 
Productions, 2008
Skin: The Complete Guide to Digitally Lighting, Photographing, and Retouching Faces and Bodies by Lee Varis, Sybex, 2006
Alfred Stieglitz (Aperture Masters of Photography) by Dorothy Norman and Alfred Stieglitz, Aperture, 2005
The Story of Art: Pocket Edition by E.H. Gombrich, Phaidon Press, 2006
Roy Stuart: Volume 1, Taschen, 2007
Jock Sturges: Twenty-Five Years, Paul Cava Fine Art, 2004
Surrealism and Painting by Andre Breton, Alain Masson, Joan Miro, and Salvador Dali, MFA Publications, 2002
Take Your Photography to the Next Level: From Inspiration to Image by George Barr, Rocky Nook, 2008
Uncommon Places: The Complete Works by Stephen Shore, Aperture, 2005
Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art by Scott Mccloud, Harper Paperbacks, 1994
Understanding Composition: The Complete Photographer’s Guide by Steve Mulligan, Photographers’ Institute Press, 2009
The Uses of Images by E.H. Gombrich, Phaidon Press, 2000
Vision and Art: The Biology of Seeing by Margaret S. Livingstone, Abrams, 2008
Visions from Within the Mechanism: The Industrial Surrealism of Jeffrey Scott by Jeffrey Scott, Baby Tattoo Books, 2007
Visual Language by Peter Bonnici, Rotovision, 1999
Visual Thinking by Rudolf Arnheim, University of California Press, 2004
Jeff Wall, The Museum of Modern Art, New York/San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, 2007
Ways of Seeing: Based on the BBC Television Series by John Berger, Penguin, 1990
Edward Weston’s Book of Nudes, Getty Publications, 2007
What Do Pictures Want?: The Lives and Loves of Images by W.J.T. Mitchell, University of Chicago Press, 2006
Joel-Peter Witkin, Photology, 2007
Francesca Woodman by Chris Townsend, Phaidon Press, 2006

229
16-bit mode (Photoshop), 191
35 mm format cameras, 123
A
Abercrombie & Fitch, 50
Abstract nudes, 20, 43, 45
Abu-Ghraib scandal, 22
Acute systems (Profoto), 143–144
Adams, Ansel, 17, 28, 87
Adobe Bridge, 158, 159–160
Adobe Gamma, 194
Adobe Photoshop
	
B&W colorization, 171–173
	
camera profiles, 160
	
color into B&W, 167–170
	
color effects, 171
	
color manipulation, 160–161
	
color palette, 165–167
	
color strategies, 109, 111
	
cubist-inspired image, 185–188
	
digital technique, 154
	
digital workflow, 158
	
double exposure effect, 180–185
	
filters and 16-bit mode, 189
	
infrared look, 121
	
Lightroom, 158
	
photo manipulation, 23
	
printer profiles, 197–200
	
and processing power, 201
	
shoot preparation, 136
	
silhouettes, 79
	
textures, 173–180
	
Threshold adjustment, 171–173
	
tonality, 108
	
tones via curves, 168–169
	
workflow options, 164–165
	
working space, 191
Adobe RGB, 164–165, 196
Advertising, 43, 50
Ambient light
	
and displays, 196
	
with flash, 139–140
American Society of Media Photographers (ASMP), 131
“Amputations,” via composition, 98
Angle, implied nude, 41
Aperture preferred mode (camera), 138
Apple LED Cinema Display, 194
Apple Time Machine, 202
Araki, Nobuyoshi, 41–42
Arbus, Diane, 28, 113
Arri lights, 141–142
“Artistic nude,” 41
Art photography
	
light painting, 85–86
	
ring light, 72
ASMO, see American Society of Media Photographers 
(ASMP)
Aspect ratio (proportions), 31
Atget, Eugene, 28
Avedon, Richard, 38, 80–81, 135
Avedon lighting, 80–81
B
Backdrops, 149
Backups, 201–202
Bacon, Francis, 26
Balance, in composition, 105–107
Ballard, J.G., 208
Barn doors, 147
Barnes, Matthew, 153
Barney, Tina, 212
Barry Lyndon (Kubrick), 119
Bayles, David, 216
Bead board, 148
Beauty dish, 146
Bellas, Bruce, 50
Benjamin, Lou, 5, 49
Berger, John, 20, 43
Bernhard, Ruth, 216, 219
B-flat, see Black bounce
Billups, Steven, 9, 40, 58
Biology-based nudes, 49–50
Bit depth, 164
Bitesnich, Andreas, 45
Black-and-white (B&W)
	
from color, 167–168
	
colorization, 170–173
	
color and mood, 88
	
and light, 79
Black blocks (Photoshop), 179
Black bounce, 79–80, 148
Black-light nudes, 86
Body in motion, 39–40
Body vs. nature, 45–46
Body paint, 46
Bodyscapes, 61–62, 72, 154
Index

I n d e x
230
Bogen/Manfrotto light stands, 148–149
Bokey, 115
Booms, 148–149
Bourdin, Guy, 27
Bowens equipment
	
Fresnel attachments, 146–147
	
strobes, 144
Brandt, 215
Breckheimer, Gary, 9, 20, 53, 58, 61, 64
Breton, André, 56–57
Broncolor lights, 144
Burning digital technique, 157
Butterflies, 148
C
Cache-sexe, 40
California Sunbounce, 148
Calumet strobes, 144
Calvin Klein underwear campaign, 50
Camera RAW (Adobe)
	
camera profiles, 160
	
color compensation, 74
	
color manipulation, 160
	
color strategies, 109
	
cropping, 97
	
gray card, 140
	
interface controls, 86
	
split toning, 162
	
techniques, 159
	
toning, 107–108
	
white balance/color temperature,  
89–91
	
workflow options, 164–165
Cameras
	
35 mm, 123
	
aspect ratio, 31
	
bokey, 115
	
camera profiles, 160
	
“dragging the shutter,” 120
	
as eye, 113
	
formats and choices, 121–123
	
hot shoe flash, 144
	
Lensbabies, 116–118
	
lenses, 118–119
	
light painting, 120–121
	
medium-format, 122–123
	
pictorialist shots, 114–115
	
prime lenses, 119
	
projected images, 121
	
ring lights, 145
	
selective focus, 116
	
shot modes, 138
Canon cameras
	
camera profiles, 160
	
formats, 123
	
hot shoe flash, 144
	
Lensbabies, 116
	
lenses, 119
	
ring lights, 145
Capacitors, studio strobes, 142
Captions, fine art nude, 21
“Carrot and stick” imagery, 22
Cartier-Bresson photograph, 35
Carucci, Elinor, 59, 212
Catch lights, 75
Cathy’s Profiles, 197
CD backup, 201–202
Cello Player (Cheirodon), 155
Centerline, in composition, 107
Century stands, 149
Cheirodon, 56, 155
Cherrier, Steve, 15, 45
Chevreul, Michel-Eugène, 109
Chicken Gothic (Breckheimer), 58
Chimera softboxes, 146
Cinefoil, 148
Clark, Kenneth, 19
Clergue, Lucien, 216
Closeness, in composition, 97–98
Cloud cover, and light, 72
Clouds filter (Photoshop), 173–174
Cokeliss, Barney, 7, 30, 85, 154–155, 208–214
Collaboration, model expectations, 129–130
Collage, digital technique, 157
Color
	
into B&W, 167–168
	
in composition, 107–111
	
fine art nudes, 24
	
manipulation, 160–161
	
and mood, 88–89
	
symbolism, 87–88
Color contrasts, in composition, 110
Colored lighting gels, 88–89, 147
Color effects (Photoshop), 171
Color harmony, in composition, 110–111
Colorization, black-and-white, 170
Color management, digital technique, 189–191
ColorMunki Photo system (X-Rite), 191, 192, 197
Color palette (Photoshop), 165–167
Color temperature
	
light quality, 90
	
light types, 91
	
open shade, 72
Color temperature blue (CTB), 147
Color temperature orange (CTO), 147
Color wheels, 109–110
“Come hither” expression, 43
Comfort, models, 129–130
Commentary, 62–64
Commercial art, 25, 27, 54
Compact systems (Profoto), 143–144
Compensation, models, 130–131
Composition
	
3D form, 104
	
angle shots, 98
	
balance, 105–107
	
closeness, 97–98
	
color strategies, 107–111
	
cropping, 95, 97
	
Fibonacci sequence, 105–107

I n d e x
231
	
framing overview, 93
	
implied lines, 103
	
leading lines, 100–102
	
linea alba, 102–103
	
negative space, 100
	
patterns, 104–105
	
portrait and landscape orientation, 98–100
	
rule of thirds, 94–95
	
shapes, 103–104
	
spatial dividers, 104
Computers
	
digital workflow, 158
	
monitors, 194–197
Conceptualism, 28–29
Context
	
and art, 53
	
bodyscape, 61–62
	
fashion as art, 54
	
via gut instinct, 56
	
long-term framework, 55
	
narrative photography, 58–61
	
reference, parody, commentary, 62–64
	
and societal suppression, 64–65
	
surrealism, 56–57
	
as validation, 64
Continuous light, 137–138, 140–142
Contrast blending modes (Photoshop), 168–176
Cookies, 147–148
Cool hues, 90
Coplans, John, 33
Copyright, 131–132
Courbet, Gustav, 64
Cox, Renee, 62–64
C-prints, 157
Crawford, Cindy, 50
Cropping, 95, 97, 157
C-stands, 149
CTB, see Color temperature blue (CTB)
Cthulhu’s Canvas (Rasner), 86
CTO, see Color temperature orange (CTO)
Cubism, Photoshop techniques, 187–189
Cunningham, Imogen, 25
Curves layer (Photoshop), tones, 168–169
Cyanotype, 171–173
D
Dada, 56
Dalí, Salvador, 56–57
Da Plane (Breckheimer), 7
Da Vinci, Leonardo, 63, 95
Daylight, color temperature, 91
Dead center, definition, 95
Depth of field
	
aperture effects, 119
	
aperture preferred mode, 138
	
and backdrops, 149
	
backgrounds, 104
	
and composition, 95
	
selective focus, 116
“The Detail” (Szarkowski dimensions), 33
diCorcia, Philip-Lorca, 131, 209
Digital backs, 122
Digital compositing process, 156–157
Digital manipulation, 23
Digital single-lens reflex (DSLR)
	
aspect ratio, 31
	
camera choices, 122–123
	
pictorialist shots, 114
Digital technique
	
artists’ approaches, 153–157
	
backups, 201–202
	
color management, 189–191
	
display profiles, 191–194
	
displays, 194–197
	
graphics tablets, 200–201
	
paths, 157
	
Photoshop, see Adobe Photoshop
	
printer profiles, 197–200
	
processing power, 201
	
working space, 191
Digital workflow
	
Camera RAW, 159
	
color manipulation, 160–161
	
computer input, 158
	
options, 164–165
	
presets and snapshots, 162–163
	
split toning, 162–163
	
stages, 158
	
white balance, 159
“Dirty Helmy,” 42
Displays
	
profiles, 191–197
	
quality, 194–197
Dodging, digital technique, 157
Donovan, Terry, 13, 45, 46, 55, 57, 62, 63, 87, 108, 156
Double exposure effect (Photoshop), 180–185
Double glass optics, 117
“Dragging the shutter,” 34, 120
Drtikol, Frantisek, 210, 212
Dry Creek Photo, 197
DSLR, see Digital single-lens reflex (DSLR)
Duchamp, Marcel, 34
DVD backup, 201–202
DX cameras, 123
Dynalite strobes, 144
E
Earthly Bodies (Penn), 27
Edgerton, Harold “Doc,” 34
Edwards, Daniel, 50
Egg crates (grids), 146
Eggleston, William, 107
Electronic flash, development, 34
Elinchrom ring lights, 144
Environmental nudes, 58–59
Environmental portraiture, 58–59
Erotic fetishism, 27
Eroticism, 54

I n d e x
232
Erotic nudes, 47–49
Evans, John, 32
Evans, Walker, 28
Expo Imaging, 145, 147
“Exposing to the right,” 86–87
Exposure, shoot basics, 138–139
Eye
	
camera as, 113
	
UV damage, 86
F
The Family of Man, 27
Farber, Robert, 58
Fashioning Fiction in Photography Since 1990 (MoMA), 54
Fashion photography, 25, 27, 43, 55, 72
Fast lenses, 119
Feathering, 82–83
Fibers filter (Photoshop), 173, 175
Fibonacci sequence, in composition, 105
Fill light, 76–77
Film-based photography, white balance, 89–90
Film noir, 79
Filters
	
Photoshop, 173–179, 189
	
pictorialist techniques, 114–115
Fine art nude basics
	
abstract, 43, 45
	
biology, 49–50
	
body in motion, 39–40
	
body vs. nature, 45–46
	
bodyscapes, 61
	
erotic, 47–49
	
full-body, 42
	
gesture, 46–47
	
historical perspective, 25, 27
	
implied nude, 40–42
	
intimacy, 43
	
John Szarkowski, 27–29
	
male nude, 50–51
	
MoMA, 27–29
	
naked portraits, 38–39
	
nude concept, 19–20
	
reading images, 20–23
	
sculptural, 45
	
self-portraits, 39
	
skin, 46
	
Szarkowski’s dimensions, 29, 31–35
	
vision, 23, 25
	
working definition, 18–19
FinePix IS-1 (Fuji), 121
Fish-eye lenses, 118
Flagging, 82
Flags, 148
Flare, 81–82
Flash, and ambient light, 139–140
Flashlight, 120–121
Flipping the Script (Cox), 62–64
Flowers, 46
Fluorescent light, 91, 141
f-numbers
	
ambient light with flash, 139–140
	
lighting ratios, 77
	
and light intensity, 83–84
	
selective focus, 116
Foamcore, 148
Foltz, Scott, 35
Foreshortening, 118–119
“The Frame” (Szarkowski dimensions), 29, 31
Framing, see also Composition
	
abstract qualities, 43
	
implied nude, 41
	
orientation, 98–100
	
overview, 93
	
viewer relationship, 97–98
Franca, Frank, 80
Fresnel attachments, 146–147
Freud, Lucien, 19, 38
Freud, Sigmund, 57
Full-body nude, 42
FX cameras, 123
G
Gass (Breckheimer), 61
Gay lifestyle depiction, 48–49
Geisha III (Slater-Hunt), 30
Gels
	
lighting gels, 88–89, 120–121
	
types, 147
Genie (Rasner), 115
Geometric primitives, 87
Gesture, 46–47
The Gift of the Commonplace (Bernhard), 215
Giuliani, Rudolph, 63
Glamour photography, 47
Golden section proportion, 95
Goldfinger, 46
Goldin, Nan, 59, 212
Graphic design concepts, 29
Graphics tablets, 200–201
Gray card, 140
Greenfield-Sanders, Timothy, 121
Grids, 78–79, 146
Griffeth, Robert Gregory, 9
Guevara, Che, 32
Gun props, 59–60
“Guy with camera” (GWC), 129
H
Halation, 81–82
Halogen bulbs, 141
“Hand bra,” 40
Hard light
	
characteristics, 70–74
	
in composition, 104
	
direction, 74
Hasselblad cameras, 122, 154

I n d e x
233
HD, see High-definition (HD) movies
Helms, Jesse, 63
Henson, Bill, 212
High-definition (HD) movies, aspect ratio, 31
High-key images, 84–85
High Pass layer (Photoshop), 186
Hilliard, David, 212
Histograms, shoot basics, 138–139
HMI lights, 141
Hockney, David, 154, 212
Honey, 46
Honl Photo Speed system, 147
Horenstein, Henry, 45
Hot lights, 140–141, 150
Hot shoe flash, 144
HSL/Grayscale tab (Adobe), 161
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer  
(Photoshop), 166, 177
Humans series (Horenstein), 45
I
Image Makers/Image Takers (Shore), 122
Images, reading, 20–23
Imbalance, 29, 31
Immediate Family (Mann), 50
Implied nude, 21, 40–42
Incandescent light, color temperature, 91
Infrared film, 121
Inner landscape, via composition, 98
Interviews
	
Barney Cokeliss, 208–214
	
Saelon Renkes, 215–220
Intimacy, 43, 98
ISO value
	
and lighting, 139
	
and light intensity, 83
	
medium-format cameras, 123
	
studio strobes, 143
J
Jordan Swimming (Renkes), 12
JPEG, 97, 139, 159
K
Kelvin scale, 91
Keonna, Lincoln Beach (Khali), 7
Kertész, André, 102
Key light, 76–77
Khali, Saddi, 7, 29, 65, 74, 84, 90, 96, 107
Kinoflo lights, 142
Kirchner, Ernst Ludwig, 212
Kiser, Steve, 216
Kitaj, R.B., 209
Kit lenses, 119
Klimt, Gustav, 26
Klum, Heidi, 50
Knife props, 59
Korda, Alberto, 32
Kubrick, Stanley, 119
K-Y Jelly, 114–115
L
LaChapelle, David, 137
La Coupe de Fruits 3 (Renoux), 7
Laij, Alfred, 11, 17, 19, 48, 93, 114, 115, 116
Landscape orientation, 98–100
Landscape photography, 61–62
Laptop monitors, 194–195
Large-format cameras, 121–122
The Law of Simultaneous Color Contrast, 109
Layer Blending Options (Photoshop), 183–185
Layer Masks (Photoshop), 176–186, 190
Leading lines, 100–102
Lead room, 95
Leaf digital backs, 122
Leica cameras, 122
Lensbaby system, 116–118
Lenses, 46, 118–119
Le Salon Rouge (Renoux), 21
Light
	
Avedon lighting, 80–81
	
chiaroscuro, 78–79
	
Cokeliss’ work, 211
	
and color, 87–88
	
color temperature, 90–91
	
contrast, 79
	
differentiation, 69–70
	
direction, 74–76
	
“exposing to the right,” 86–87
	
feathering, 82–83
	
hard and soft, 70–74
	
intensity, 83–84
	
key and fill, 76–77
	
low-, high, mid-key images, 84–85
	
mood and color, 88–89
	
one light, 76
	
and perception, 70
	
sculptural/textural effects, 76
	
silhouettes, 79–80
	
and skin, 46
	
spill, flare, halation, 81–82
	
white balance, 89–90
Light banks, see Softboxes
Lighting gels, 88–89, 120–121, 147
Lighting ratios, 77
Light modifiers
	
barn doors, 147
	
beauty dish, 146
	
cookies, 147–148
	
Fresnel attachments, 146–147
	
gels, 147
	
grids, 146
	
scrims, 147
	
snoots, 147

I n d e x
234
	
softboxes, 145–146
	
umbrellas, 145
Light painting, 85–86, 120–121
Light stands, 148–149
Linea alba, 102–103
Liquid latex, 46
L’Origine du Monde (Courbet), 64
Louvers (grids), 104, 146
Louvre, 46–47
Lovely Limbs (Cherrier), 45
Lowel lights, 141
Low-key images, 84–85
LSD & The Mushroom (Cheirodon), 56
M
Macro lens, 46
Magritte, René, 21, 31
Male Butterfly (Laij), 11
Male gaze, 20
Male nude, 50–51
Mamiya cameras, 122
Manfrotto backdrops, 149
Mann, Sally, 50
Manual mode, shoot basics, 138–139
Mapplethorpe, Robert, 48–49, 50
Marquez, Gaspar, 14, 84, 106, 154
Masks (Photoshop), 176–186, 190
May, Alan, 216
Medical photography, 72
Medium-format cameras, 122–123
Medium-soft window light, 72
Michal, Duane, 210
Mid-key images, 84–85
Miller, Lee, 57
Mirroring backups, 201–202
Modeling agencies, 128
Model vs. Photographer series (Donovan), 62
Models
	
behavior, 122
	
Cokeless interview, 208–214
	
compensation, 130–131
	
copyright, 131–132
	
expectations, 129–130
	
finding, 127–128
	
regulations, 132
	
releases, 131
The Model’s Revenge (Donovan), 62
Modigliani, Amedeo, 64–65, 212
Mondrian, 106–107
Monitors
	
profiling, 191–197
	
quality, 194, 197–200
Monolights, 142–143, 144
Mood, and color, 88–89
Mood lighting, 85
Moons, 59
Moonscape (Farber), 58
Moore, Demi, 50
Motherhood, 50
Mud, 46
Multiple exposure, 157
Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), 27–29, 54, 157
Muslin, 149
Muybridge, Eadweard, 34
The Muybridge photos, 34
My Turn (Cherrier), 15
N
Naked
	
vs. nude, 19
	
portraits, 38–39
Narrative photography, 58–61
National Endowment for the Arts (NEA), 49, 63
Natural light, 137–138
Nature vs. body, 45–46
ND, see Neutral density (ND) gels
NEA, see National Endowment for the Arts (NEA)
Negative space, 100
Networking sites, models, 127–128, 130
Neutral density (ND) gels, 147
Newton, Helmut, 27, 42, 53, 72, 137–138, 144
Nikon cameras
	
bokey, 115
	
camera profiles, 160
	
formats, 123
	
hot shoe flash, 144
	
Lensbabies, 116–117
	
prime lenses, 119
	
ring lights, 145
Noir, 79
Noise filter (Photoshop), 173–176, 185
Nomex, 146
Normal lenses, 118
North light, 71–72
A Notebook at Random (Penn), 136
Now as Then 2 (Silvia), 15
Nu à la Fleur Rose (Renoux), 69
Nude, 1936 (Weston), 65, 104
Nude concept, 19–20
Nude Descending a Staircase (Duchamp), 34
Nude in New Mexico and the sky above her (Pak), 156
Nussenzweig v. diCorcia, 131
O
Of Mice and Matadors (Slater-Hunt), 10
O’Keefe, Georgia, 25
Online presence, 128
Open shade, and light, 72
Orientation, in composition, 98–100
Orland, Ted, 216
Outerbridge, Paul, 65
P
Pack and head systems, 142
Pak, Nina, 10, 59, 110, 156
Panoramic cameras, aspect ratio, 31

I n d e x
235
Parody, 62–64
Patterns, in composition, 104–105
PDF format, 158
Penn, Irving, 25, 27, 136, 212
Performance, 28–29
Phase One digital backs, 122
Phi, 95
Photoflex
	
reflectors, 148
	
softbox, 146
	
umbrellas, 145
The Photographer’s Eye (Szarkowski), 28
Photo Secession, 114, 157
Photoshop, see Adobe Photoshop
Physique magazines, 50
The Piano, 209–210
Picasso, Pablo, 88
Pictorialism, 114–115, 157
Pierre, Jafar M., 13, 48, 70, 77
Pietà (Michelangelo), 22
Pinhole/zone plate, 117
Plastic optic, 117
Pleasures and Terrors of Levitation (Siskind), 39–40
Pocket Wizard, 143, 144
Point-and-shoot cameras, aspect ratio, 31
Polyptychs, 154
Pool of light, 75, 77–78, 85, 111
Pornography
	
cultural influences, 54–55
	
model expectations, 129
Portrait of a Muse III (Slater-Hunt), 73
Portrait orientation, 98–100
Portrait Presumed to be of Gabrielle d-Estrées and Her Sister 
the Duchess of Villars, 46–47
Post-production
	
color management, 189–191
	
digital technique, 154, 158
	
and Photoshop, 113, 154
	
pricing considerations, 130
	
silhouettes, 79
	
and surrealism, 56
	
white balance, 140
Power output
	
speed lights, 144
	
studio strobes, 143
Precarious (Breckheimer), 20
Pregnancy, 50
Presets, digital workflow, 161–163
Pre-visualization
	
Barney Cokeliss, 210
	
Saelon Renkes, 217
	
shooting basics, 136
	
Zone System, 87
Prime lenses, 119
Printer profiles, 197–200
Processing power, 201
Profoto
	
Fresnel attachments, 146–147
	
rental equipment, 149–150
	
ring lights, 144
	
strobes, 143–144
Program mode (camera), 138
Projections
	
layering, 121
	
as light source, 89
ProPhoto RGB, 164, 191
Proportions
	
aspect ratio, 31
	
in composition, 97
Props
	
implied nude, 41
	
narrative photography, 59–60
Pro-7 systems (Profoto), 143–144
Public Display of Modesty? (Benjamin), 49
Q
Queen’s Park Story (Cokeliss), 208
R
RAID systems, 201–202
RAM, 201
Randy’s Donuts (Breckheimer), 53
Ranum, Marcus J., 63
Rasner, Richard, 5, 51, 61, 86, 115
RAW, 139, 159
Ray, Man, 25, 57, 74
Ray Flash, 145
Reading images, fine art nudes, 20–23
Recycle time, strobes, 143
Red Wing, 149
Reference, 62–64
Reflectors, 146, 148
Regulations, Section 2257, 132
Re-Imagined Superheroes (Rasner), 61
Releases, models, 131
Rembrandt lighting, 78
Renkes, Saelon, 12, 215–220
Renoux, Pascal, 7, 21, 54, 69
Rental equipment, 149–150
RGB color wheel, 109–110
Richardson, Arri, 141–142
Richardson, Mole, 141–142
Richardson, Terry, 50, 208
Rifa light, 141
Rim light, 75
Ring light, 72, 144–145
Ritts, Herb, 50
Roberts, Holly, 216
Rock N Roll Lifestyle (Rasner), 5
Rololight, 142
Rosen, Aya, 11, 18, 38, 55, 76
Rosen, Ned, 11, 18, 38, 55, 76
Roversi, Paolo, 137, 212
Rule of thirds, 94–95
RYB color wheel, 109–110
S
Safety, 150
Sargent, John Singer, 212

I n d e x
236
Soft light
	
characteristics, 70–74
	
creation, 82
	
direction, 74–76
	
reflector, 146
Solarization technique, 57
Spatial dividers, in composition, 104
Speed lights, 144
Spill, 81–82
Split toning, 107–108, 162
Spoiled (Cokeliss), 208
Spot lights, 78–79
sRGB, 164, 191
Stanford, Leland, 34
Statue of Liberty, 22–23
Steichen, Edward, 27
Stein, Harvey, 7, 32, 40, 45
Stewart, Potter, 48
Stieglitz, Alfred, 25
Storaro, Vittorio, 88–89
Storaro gels, 147
Storaro Selection, 89
Strand, Paul, 25
Studio strobes
	
advantages, 138
	
makers, 143–144
	
safety, 150
	
shoot basics, 142–143
Sturges, Jock, 50
Subject, see Models
Sunpak, ring lights, 145
Surrealism, 25, 56–57, 157
Symbolism, via color, 87–88
Szarkowski, John, 27–29, 157
Szarkowski’s dimensions
	
“The Detail,” 33
	
“The Frame,” 29, 31
	
“The Thing Itself,” 31–32
	
“Time,” 33–35
	
“Vantage Point,” 32–33
T
“Tasteful nudes,” 41
Taylor, Brian, 216
Tea (Cokeliss), 208
Telephoto lenses, 119
Television, aspect ratio, 31
Textural effects, and light, 76
Textures (Photoshop)
	
Clouds filter, 173–175
	
Fibers filter, 173, 175–177
	
masks, 176–186, 190
	
Noise filter, 173–176, 185
TFCD, see Time for CD (TFCD)
TFP, see Time for print (TFP)
“The Thing Itself” (Szarkowski dimensions), 29
Three-dimension form, in composition, 104
Threshold adjustment (Photoshop), 171–173
TIFF, 97, 159
“Time” (Szarkowski dimensions), 33
Saudek, Jan, 208
Schiele, Egon, 47, 64–65
Scrims, 147
Sculptural effects, and light, 76
Sculptural nudes, 45
Selective focus, 116
Self-portraits, 33, 35, 39, 218
Self Portrait (Yoshimaru), 14, 39
Sensors, camera formats, 123
Serrano, Andres, 49
Sexuality depiction, 48–49
Shadows
	
abstract qualities, 43
	
fill light, 76–77
	
Rembrandt lighting, 78
	
Venetian blinds, 74
Shapes, in composition, 103–104
Sharpness, lenses, 119
Sherman, Cindy, 28, 210
Shinoyama, Kishin, 45
Shoot basics
	
ambient light and flash, 139–140
	
camera modes, 138
	
continuous lights, 141–142
	
exposure, histogram, manual mode,  
138–139
	
gray card, 140
	
hot lights, 140–141
	
hot shoe flash, 144
	
lighting, 137–138
	
light modifiers, 145–148
	
light stands, 148–149
	
rent vs. own, 149–150
	
ring lights, 144–145
	
safety, 150
	
setup and preparation, 135–137
	
studios, 137
“Shooting into the shadow,” 80
Shore, Stephen, 122
Shutter preferred mode (camera), 138
Shutter speed, 83
Sienna (Benjamin), 5
Signs, on skin, 46
Sikorskyi, Daniel, 26, 99
Silhouettes, 79–80
Silks, 148
Silvia, Pet, 15
Sinar camera, 122
Single-glass optics, 117
Siskind, Aaron, 39–40
Sister’s Got a Habit (Breckheimer), 64
Sitters, see Models
Skylight filter, 114–115
Slater, Terry, 46, 57
Slater-Hunt, Tobias, 10, 30, 73
Smith-Victor lights, 141
Smoke effect, 115
Snakes, 59
Snapshots, digital workflow, 162–163
Snoots, 78–79, 147
Softboxes, 145–146
Soft focus effect, 114–115

I n d e x
237
Time for CD (TFCD), 130
Time for print (TFP), 130
Tones, curve adjustment, 168–169
Toning
	
in composition, 107–108
	
digital technique, 157
Trapped space, in composition, 100
Travelites, 144
The Treachery of Images (Magritte), 31
Triptych, 154–155
Trust, models, 129–130
TTL flash, 140
Tungsten light, 139, 141, 150
Tunick, Spencer, 137
TV Woman (Marquez), 14
Two Uses of a Word, 65
U
Uelsmann, Jerry, 157, 219
Ultraviolet (UV) light
	
CD/DVD degradation, 202
	
eye damage, 86
	
halogen bulbs, 141
	
pictorialist work, 114
Umbrellas
	
Avedon lighting, 81
	
light modifiers, 145
V
van Dyck, Anthony, 212
“Vantage Point” (Szarkowski’s dimensions), 32–33
Vaseline, 114–115
Venetian blinds, lighting, 74
Venus of Willendorf, 25
V-flats, 148
Video RAM (VRAM), 201
Viewers, reading images, 23
Vision, fine art nudes, 25
Visual literacy, 22
Visual tension, 29, 31, 95–96
Von Goethe, Johann Wolfgang, 88, 109
W
Wacom tablets, 201
Wall, Jeff, 55
Warm hues, 90
Waterscape Nude series (Foltz), 35
Water Study 5 (Billups), 9
Weber, Bruce, 43, 50
Web sites, models, 127–128
Weider, Joe, 50
Westcott umbrellas, 145
Weston, Charis, 65
Weston, Edward, 25, 65, 104
White balance
	
color manipulation, 160–161
	
color strategies, 109
	
digital workflow, 159
	
gray card, 140
Wide-angle lens, 118–119
Windows, as light source, 71–72
Winogrand, Garry, 28, 122
Witkin, Joel-Peter, 55
Woodman, Francesca, 34, 35
Working space (Photoshop), 191
Writing, on skin, 46
X
X-Rite, 193
XXX: 30 Porn Star Portraits  
(Greenfield-Sanders), 121
Y
Yezierski, J.D., 12, 22, 23, 89, 113, 121
Yo Mama’s Last Supper (Cox), 63–64
Yoshimaru, Mayumi, 14, 39
Z
Zone System, 87
Zoom lenses, 119

