



CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
About the Author
Introduction
How This Book Is Organized
How to Use This Book
Aspirin-Free Workflow Sidebars
Special URLs
Lesson Files
How to Contact the Author
Please Leave a Review
Chapter 1 eReading Devices & Their Capabilities
Device Classes
eReaders
Tablets
eReading on Tablets
Tablet Operating Systems
Apple iOS
Android OS
Windows
Amazon Fire OS
Tablet Sizes
Computers
Mobile Phones
Future Devices
Designing for Devices
Chapter 2 Digital Publishing Formats and Their Capabilities
Quick Reference: Format Capabilities
Reflowable EPUB
What Reflowable EPUB Offers
What Reflowable EPUB Does Not Offer
EPUB Examples
EPUB Production Roles
Fixed-Layout
What Fixed-Layout Offers
What Fixed-Layout Does Not Offer
Fixed-Layout Examples
Fixed-Layout Production Roles
Kindle Formats

AZW, MOBI, and PRC Formats
KF8 Format
PDF
What PDFs Offer
What PDFs Do Not Offer
PDF Examples
PDF Production Roles
Digital Replica
What Digital Replica Offers
What Digital Replica Does Not Offer
Digital Replica Examples
Digital Replica Production Roles
Interactive Magazine
What Interactive Magazine Offers
What Interactive Magazine Does Not Offer
Interactive Magazine Examples
Interactive Magazine Production Roles
HTML5
What HTML5 Offers
What HTML5 Does Not Offer
HTML5 Publication Examples
HTML5 Production Roles
Chapter 3 Digital Publication Types and Their Markets
Quick Reference: Publication Types in Format Classes
Ebook
Fixed-Layout Ebook
Ejournal
Emagazine
Ecatalog
Enewspaper
Etextbook
Digital Comic Book
Chapter 4 The Facts, Figures, and Financials of ePublishing
People and Their Device Usage
The Business of eBooks
The Business of Children’s & Young Adult eBooks
Authors and Their Incomes
The Missing 30 Percent of the Data
Self-Publishing
Hybrid Authoring—Traditional and Self-Publishing
Traditional Publishing to Self-Publishing
Self-Publishing to Traditional Publishing

The Business of eTextbooks
The Business of eMagazines
Be Alerted to Revisions & Updates
Glossary of Terms

Development Editor: Michael Taylor
Copy Editor: Rick Thomas
Book design and cover design: Pariah S. Burke
Published by Pariah S. Burke
© Copyright 2015 Pariah S. Burke
™ The titles “ePublishing with InDesign” and “The Business of ePublishing” and their indicia and the
InDesign to iPad illustration are trademarks or registered trademarks of Pariah S. Burke in the United States
and other countries, and may not be used without prior written permission. InDesign is a registered
trademark of Adobe Systems, Incorporated.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted
under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written
permission of the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions
Department and sent via email to permissions@iampariah.com or by telephone to (503) 422-7499.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author make no representations or
warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically
disclaim all warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is
not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional services. If professional assistance is
required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the
author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. The fact that an organization or Web site is referred to in
this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the
publisher endorses the information the organization or Web site may provide or recommendations it may
make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Web sites listed in this work may have changed or
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.

To Schentel and Mikayla. This book exists because of your unflappable faith,
love, and support.

Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I want to acknowledge my fans. You honor and humble me with all the wonderful
reviews on Amazon, GoodReads, Twitter, and elsewhere. Thank you for attending my presentations and
conference sessions. Thank you for the flowers and peanut brittle.
When you choose to write a book about not one or two but about a dozen different cutting edge technologies
that change faster than the wind… Well, if you choose to do that, you must be insane. I can now say that
with confidence because I’ve written this book about the biggest moving target since 1984—thrice! But stick
with me, folks; I’ll keep you from falling being that moving target.
My wife Schentel, thank you, thank you, thank you for your bountiful patience, understanding, and faith.
Thank you for putting up with my long hours at work, darling, and for being everything I ever wanted in a
wife, a friend, and a partner.
Mikayla, I know you didn’t understand why a book takes so much concentration and time, but now your
name is in another published book that you friends can buy on Amazon.
My friends, Anna Gauthier, Chris Bellido, Liz Schmidt, Tom Green, Bob Levine, Samuel John Klein, A.J.
Wood, Justin Seeley, Rufus Deuchler, Kevin Stohlmeyer, Scott Valentine, Branislav Millic, Nancy Smith
Burleson, Rob Huddleston, Jim Babbage, and too many others to name, thank you for the commiseration,
support, and the well-timed jokes.
Thank you Johannes Gutenberg, Aldus Manutius, Claude Garamond, John Warnock, Chuck Geschke, Paul
Brainard, Tim Gill, Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, and everyone else who got us to the ePublishing Revolution.
About the Author
Pariah Burke is a speaker, consultant, author, and trainer specializing in design, the

design business, and print and digital publishing workflows. All of his work and his
20+ year career is motivated directly by a strong passion to inspire, inform, and
empower creative professionals. Pariah has over 20 years’ experience as a graphic
and publication designer, is an Adobe Community Professional, and was the trainer
and technical lead for Adobe’s technical support teams for InDesign, InCopy,
Illustrator, and Photoshop. A prolific author, Pariah literally wrote the book and the
curriculum for learning and teaching digital publishing from InDesign, ePublishing
with InDesign (http://iamPariah.com/books), wrote the first book for experienced
InDesign users, Mastering InDesign for Print Design and Production, has authored
and co-authored other books on epublishing, Creative Suite, Adobe Illustrator, and
QuarkXPress, and has published more than 450 tutorials and articles in the
industries most prestigious magazines. He is the co-author of InDesign, InCopy,
and Illustrator Adobe Certified Expert exams, the tests Adobe administers to gauge
the skill levels of InDesign and Illustrator instructors and experts. When not
traveling, Pariah lives in the greater Boston area where he writes (a lot) and creates
(many) projects and publications for Inspiring, Informing, and Empowering
Creative Professionals™.
Connect with Pariah S. Burke
 @iampariah https://twitter.com/iampariah
 https://www.facebook.com/PariahSBurke
 Official Website at http://iampariah.com
 Amazon Author Page http://www.amazon.com/Pariah-S.-
Burke/e/B001KEA1BS/
 GoodReads Author Page
https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/753029.Pariah_S_Burke
 https://www.linkedin.com/in/pariahburke
 https://www.pinterest.com/iampariah/

Introduction
Print is dead! they cry.
They. Are. Wrong.
No, print is emphatically not dead. Print-only publishing, however, is dead.
If you (or your clients) publish anything with a larger distribution than a church
bulletin only in print, then your publication will be dead before the end of the decade. We
are hip-deep in the largest shakeup in the publishing world since the Desktop Publishing
Revolution of the 1980s. This book you’re now reading is part of a comprehensive
educational system that covers the entire epublishing spectrum, from ebooks to fixed-
layout picture books, from print-to-tablet digital replica publications to fully interactive
tablet magazines, from periodicals to ecatalogs, and from ebooks to digital yearbooks. I
say “comprehensive educational system” because this book is only the tip of the iceberg.
ePublishing with InDesign is not just a book but a full, ready-to-deploy epublishing
curriculum. And it goes beyond that, as well.
Digital publishing is a wide and rapidly evolving set of industries. Some segments
change so frequently that I had to take this book to self-published. The first edition, in
2012 and 2013, was published traditionally, through a major technical book publication
house. Unfortunately for me and for my readers, that publisher couldn’t be nimble enough
to publish this book the way it needed to be, as rapidly as it needed to be. By way of
example is the fact that I proposed that first edition of the book in October 2011; it wasn’t
published until December of the following year. I had wanted to publish chapter-at-a-time,
putting each chapter out to be read and used as my editorial team and I finished it. The
publisher didn’t know how to do that, so they held chapters for up to 12 months until
every little bit was finished. By then, some information in early chapters was outdated.
In February of 2013 I self-published a chapter they publisher felt not important
enough to include in the printed book. That chapter was Creating Fixed-Layouts with
InDesign, and it sold more copies than my previous two traditionally published books.
That experience, my knowledge of how rapidly epublishing industries change, and the
need readers like you have for frequently updated information cemented my belief that the
only way to do epublishing education correctly was to self-publish on a rapid release
schedule. Thus you now hold a book that was written not 3–6 months ago, then run
through corporate layout departments backed up with dozens of other books. This book
was written mere days before it went on sale. Some I published the day I finished laying
them out in InDesign, with layout coming immediately after my editors and I finish text

revisions.
In this way I can keep such mercurial topics like fixed-layout ebooks (Chapter 8) and
the business of digital publishing (Chapter 4) fresh and relevant so that you can keep up
with the latest mission-critical information about epublishing industries, formats, and
workflows, and so that you can consistently produce the most powerful, most marketable
epublications possible, using the most efficient and cost-effective methodologies
available.
If keeping current is important to, watch the ePublishing with InDesign Series website
at http://abbrv.it/ePubInD, or, better yet, get notifications of book updates and revisions
sent to you by subscribing to the spam-free ePublishing with InDesign Alerts email
newsletter at http://iampariah.com/newsletters.
How This Book Is Organized
This book covers four overarching topic areas: the world and economics of
epublishing, ebook creation, going beyond basic ebook creation, and rich-media
interactive publications. Each section focuses on a different area of epublishing—from the
business, market, devices, and formats of epublications; then going into ebooks; on to
fixed-layout ebooks, fully interactive PDF epublications, and publishing books to print-
on-demand, and; wrapping up with the area I’m most excited about, fully interactive
periodicals, catalogs, and enhanced ebooks.
How to Use This Book
You could, of course, use the print version of this book as a doorstop or to squish a
bug—the aqueous coating on the cover will enable the guts to be easily wiped off if you
don’t leave them sitting too long. It’s just thick enough that, should one of the casters fall
off your office chair, this book could keep your chair perfectly balanced until it’s fixed. If
you find yourself trapped in the woods during the winter, there are plenty of pages herein
to burn or to crinkle up and use as insulation inside your clothes.
Candidly, I prefer you read the book and use it to help you begin or expand your
epublishing efforts. With that in mind, what follows is an explanation of the special way
I’ve handled URLs in the book, a note about the lesson files, and a reminder that there’s
much more content available than what is directly between the bug-squishing covers of
this individual printed book volume.
Aspirin-Free Workflow Sidebars
In addition to the standard tip boxes and sidebars you’ll see throughout the book, I’ve

included special Aspirin-Free Workflow sidebars to call extra attention to pointers that
will make your production work a little less stressful and more efficient.
Special URLs
Throughout this book I’ve included a number of hyperlink addresses. To make it as
easy as possible for you to use those hyperlinks while working with this book, they have
been specially created and organized. Each URL is written out so that you can type it into
a web browser or make note of it for future use. In most cases, the URLs begin with
http://abbrv.it/, which is the author’s own custom URL-shortening service. These shorter
URLs make it easier for you to retype what otherwise might be very long and complicated
addresses. Also, because the URLs employ my own URL shortener, should the address on
a third-party website change, I can update the shortened URL without invalidating the
address provided in this book. Should you discover a broken link, please alert me
immediately by emailing ePublishingIND@iampariah.com (subject: “Broken Link in
ePublishing with InDesign”) so that I can fix the shortened link.
Lesson Files
Obviously, the best way to learn some of the techniques presented in this book is by
going hands-on, and you will, through numerous step-by-step tutorials. To make your
hands-on learning easier, you are, of course, encouraged to work with your own
production documents, but I’ve also provided copious examples you can dig through,
manipulate, and test-publish. Note that I tried to use only the fonts automatically installed
with InDesign. That way, when you open the INDD lesson files, you won’t have to hassle
with font substitution or text reflow; unless you chose not to install the Adobe Fonts or
removed or deactivated them later, you already have the fonts I used installed and ready
for your use.
How to Contact the Author
Questions?
Epiphanies?
Knock-knock jokes?
Want to hire me for direct consulting on your publishing workflow?
Examples of your digital publications I can use in a future edition of this book?
Contact me:
Email me: ePublishingIND@iampariah.com
Visit my website: http://iamPariah.com

Follow me on Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/PariahSBurke
Connect with me on Twitter @iampariah https://twitter.com/iampariah
Follow my InDesign, epublishing, and other pins on Pinterest:
https://www.pinterest.com/iampariah/
Please Leave a Review
Book reviews on ebookstores are incredibly important for the success of books. If you
like this book, please, take a moment to leave a review where you bought it, whether that’s
Amazon.com, iBooks, B&N.com, Kobo, Google Play Books, or elsewhere. If you feel so
inclined, feel free to leave the same review in multiple ebookstores. Amazon.com, of
course, is the most important, as the data in Chapter 4, “The Facts, Figures, and Financials
of ePublishing” proves again and again.

The ePublishing 2015 Series by Pariah S. Burke is built to provide you, the
reader, with the ultimate in flexible choices.

Complete 14-Chapter Book
The complete ePublishing with InDesign 2015 Edition includes all 14 chapters and the glossary, and is available in print,
PDF, and ebook formats from Apple iBooks, Amazon Kindle, Barnes & Noble NOOK, Kobo, and Google Play Books.
Instructor Edition
An instructor edition of ePublishing with InDesign 2015 Edition by Pariah S. Burke is available to teachers and private
instructors with a qualifying purchase. The Instructor Edition includes additional materials and resources to help
educators effectively teach epublishing.

Standalone Section Editions
If you don’t need all 14 chapters described in the Contents At-a-Glance on the following few pages, ePublishing with
InDesign 2015 Edition comprises four sections, with each section and its constituent chapters available separately in
print, PDF, and ebook formats.
Single Chapters

Additionally Each of the following chapters is available by itself for chapter-at-a-time purchase in PDF and ebook
formats.
All editions and formats are available at:
http://abbrv.it/ePubInD

Book 1 The Business (and World) of
ePublishing
Chapter 1: eReading Devices and Their Capabilities
The first thing to understand about digital publishing is what devices people use to consume digital content, including
what types of publications each device class can support, how people use the devices, and where ereading hardware is
headed. You will find a startling array of devices on the market, but ultimately there are only four classes of devices on
which digital publications are consumed.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following:
Device Classest
eReaders
Tablets
Computers
Mobile Phones
Hybrid Devices
Future Devices
Designing for Devices
Chapter 2: Digital Publishing Formats and Their Capabilities
Like devices, epublication formats are numerous and varied, with differences, sometimes subtle, between them, but large
divergences in purpose, capability and device support. Consequently, it’s most logical and productive to think of
epublications in terms of format classes, with each class offering a particular combination of purpose, capability, and
device support.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following formats:
Reflowable EPUB
Fixed-Layout
Kindle Formats
PDF
Digital Replica
Interactive Magazine
HTML5
Chapter 3: Digital Publication Types and Their Markets
Now that we’ve examined the characteristics and capabilities of the available digital publication formats, it’s time to
think about the kind of content you want to disseminate digitally. It’s all rather subjective, but I’ll identify the purpose,
character and use of different publication types as well as explain which format classes are best suited to each type.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following publication types:
eBook
Fixed-Layout eBook
Emagazine

Enewspaper
Etextbook
Digital Comic Book
Chapter 4: The Facts, Figures, and Financials of ePublishing
Whether you are an aspiring self-publisher or the CEO of a major publishing house, a freelance designer or sales person,
this chapter will provide statistics, figures, and examples to help you make sense of the business, economic, and
marketing concerns of epublishing. Whether your intent is to sell yourself, your boss, or your clients, or if you just want
to educate yourself about the realities of the world of epublishing, you’ll find in this chapter an abundance of important,
relevant data.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following:
People and Their Device Usage
The Business of eBooks
The Business of Children’s & Young Adult eBooks
Authors and Their Incomes
The Missing 30 Percent of Data
Self-Publishing
The Business of eTextbooks
The Business of eMagazines
Enewspaper
Etextbook
Digital Comic Book

Book 2 Creating eBooks
Chapter 5: Creating Basic eBooks
Whether creating ebooks from TXT files or word processor documents or converting existing print publications to
EPUB, the basics are all the same. You must learn to think in terms of EPUB, to reevaluate how your content is
organized, and to know how to structure it using InDesign’s built-in tools in order to produce well organized, readable
ebooks. The yellow brick road to becoming a wizard of ebook production starts with this chapter and proceeds through
the next several chapters, creating progressively more interesting, more marketable ebooks and other EPUB-based
publications.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following:
Creating an eBook from Scratch
Testing Your EPUB
Styling Your eBook
Converting a Print Publication to an eBook
Etextbook
Digital Comic Books
Chapter 6: Working with Images and Multimedia in eBooks
Although the majority of ebooks are text-only novels and short stories, many ebooks—across all genres—includes
photographs, illustrations, charts, graphs, maps, and all sorts of other imagery, and even audio and video. Moreover,
even novels and short stories typically have at least cover images. Whether your publication merely needs a cover or
requires lots of figures, creating and using them in ebooks differs in several distinct ways from creating and using
graphics for print or multi-media for other digital formats.
In this chapter you will learn about:
Exporting Images to eBooks
Preparing Images for eBooks
Adding Audio and Video to eBooks
Adding Scalable Vector Graphics to eBooks
Chapter 7: Fine-Tuning EPUBs
Successful, efficient EPUB production begins in, and centers on, InDesign and the toolset InDesign brings to the
business of ebook publishing. However, InDesign isn’t the only tool you’ll need to produce ebooks of the highest
quality, maximum compatibility, and utmost reader engagement. At a certain point you’ll need to go inside the EPUB to
edit and massage the components InDesign can’t reach, often working in conjunction with the original files in InDesign
to build an ebook that takes fullest advantage of ereader to provide an ideal reading experience.
In this chapter you will learn about
Getting Inside the EPUB
Editing Files inside the EPUB
Editing eBook Metadata
Creating Multiple-Chapter eBooks
Creating Tables of Contents

Book 3 Advancing Beyond Reflowable
eBooks
Chapter 8: Creating Fixed-Layout eBooks
Often referred to as “children’s ebooks,” “picture ebooks,” “photo books,” and similar monikers, fixed-layout ebooks are
visually-rich layouts that offer much more than standard EPUBs. Although they’re only supported on tablets and certain
other devices, the popularity of fixed-layout ebooks has exploded among both readers and publishers.
In this chapter you will learn about:
Understanding Fixed-Layout eBooks
Planning a Fixed-Layout eBook
Creating Fixed-Layout in InDesign
Adapting the HTML
Editing the CSS
Adding Advanced Features
Creating Read Aloud Narration
Creating Fixed-Layout for Kindle
Converting Fixed-Layout for Nook
Creating Fixed-Layout for Kobo
Other Fixed-Layout Creation Tools
Chapter 9: Designing Interactive PDF Publications
PDF (Portable Document Format) publications are still a viable—indeed, a popular—distribution format. PDFs support
rich multi-media, hyperlinks, variable-visibility objects, some pretty cool interactivity, scripting, reflowable text like
EPUBs, and electronic forms. PDF viewers are available for all computer and mobile platforms, though feature support
varies by platform. In this chapter we’ll use PDF to its fullest epublishing potential while defining the restrictions placed
on it by certain devices. We’ll also look at some successful PDF-based publications that have been going strong for
years.
In this chapter you will learn about:
Planning a PDF Publication
Starting a New Document
Exporting to Interactive PDF
Creating External Hyperlinks of All Types
Adding Audio and Video
Devising Intra-Document Navigation
Creating Advanced Interactivity
Finalizing the Publication
Chapter 10: Producing Digital Replicas for Tablets
With pixel-perfect layout control, unrestricted font, color, and aesthetic choices, and a minimal cost in both dollars and
time to go from print-ready layout to tablet viewable, digital replica format publications are fast, cost effective, and easy
to produce. They lack the ability to fit different screen sizes automatically, as well as interactive features beyond basic
hyperlinks and embedded audio and video, but can be the perfect solution for publications that don’t require those

features.
In this chapter you will learn about:
Digital Replica Systems & Services
Converting Print to Digital Replica
Planning New Publications
Creating Hyperlinks
Adding Audio and Video
Chapter 11: Going to Press with Print-On-Demand Books
Self-publishing, whether for mass market consumption or private distribution, doesn’t mean publishers have to forgo
print editions. Nor does having printed books mean large up front investments in printing and inventory storage.
Simultaneous to the explosion of digital publishing, print-on-demand services have risen to provide anyone with low
cost, short run and on-demand book printing. While some services charge a small fee, others are completely free to the
publisher and author, requiring payment only when a printed book is ordered by a customer.
In this chapter you will learn about:
Print-On-Demand Services
Planning a Print-On-Demand Book
Starting a New Document
Converting from eBook
Preparing Cover Art for All Three Sides
Exporting for Print-On-Demand

Book 4 Developing Interactive Tablet
Publications
Chapter 12: Mastering the Fundamentals of Interactive Magazines
In this chapter we’ll focus on the basics of interactive-magazine creation with InDesign as a lead-in to the following two
chapters, which delve into the nuts and bolts of interactivity using Adobe Digital Publishing Suite and its principal
competitor, Aquafadas Digital Publishing System.
In this chapter you will learn about the following:
Planning an Interactive Publication
Creating Multiscreen Layouts
Adapting Designs to Various Layouts and Tablets
Using Liquid Layout Behaviors
Employing Scrolling Page Regions and Content Replacement
Utilizing Hyperlinks of All Types
Inserting Audio and Video
Integrating Live Web Content
Chapter 13: Creating with Adobe Digital Publishing Suite
Adobe Digital Publishing Suite is the tablet publishing system most everyone has heard about. It’s also the most widely
used with more than 850 publishers using it to produce more than 1,700 titles worldwide. This capable system offers
strong interactivity integrated tightly into InDesign.
In this chapter you will learn about the following:
Starting a Publication
Adding a New Layout
Live-Testing Your Publication
Panning and Zooming Images
Creating Slideshows and Galleries
Incorporating Audio and Video
Creating 3D Panoramas and spaces
Using Content Replacement
Including Offline HTML and Widgets
Applying the Finishing Touches
Chapter 14: Creating with Aquafadas Digital Publishing Suite
Competing head to head with Adobe Digital Publishing Suite is a comprehensive but relatively unknown challenger
from France, Aquafadas Digital Publishing Solution. Although not as popular as Adobe DPS, Aquafadas offers a much
richer set of interactive elements for incorporation into digital magazines. Also working as an InDesign add-in, the
Aquafadas system is more polished and professional looking than Adobe’s DPS tools, and, in nearly all other aspects,
Aquafadas is arguably a better, more intuitive, more feature rich system for producing digital magazines.
In this chapter you will learn about the following:

Installing Aquafadas DPS
Starting a Publication
Adding a New Layout
Live-Testing Your Publication
Panning and Zooming
Understanding Picture-Enrichment Options
Creating Slideshows and Galleries
Incorporating Audio and Video
Incorporating External Publications
Building Read-Along Text
Using Content Replacement
Adding Live Web Content
Including Offline HTML and Widgets
Adding Actions & Advanced Buttons
Applying the Finishing Touches

CHAPTER
1
eReading Devices & Their
Capabilities
The first thing to understand about digital publishing is what devices people use
to consume digital content, including what types of publications each device
class can support, how people use the devices, and where ereading hardware is
headed. You will find a startling array of devices on the market, but ultimately
there are only four classes of devices on which digital publications are consumed.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following:
Device Classes
eReaders
Tablets
Computers
Mobile Phones
Hybrid Devices
Future Devices
Designing for Devices

Device Classes
There is an ever-increasing variety of devices on which to read electronic
publications. And the more devices that are out there, the more frequently those devices
are upgraded, competing with one another, forcing each other to innovate and improve,
and driving the price of ereader ownership lower and lower while making electronic
content more and more accessible to consumers. That’s good for consumers and for
content producers like you and me; competition in ereader hardware, ereader software,
tablets, and other devices does most of the work of opening up markets for us. More of
these devices are being devised and released every month. In fact, by the time you’ve
finished reading this sentence, there will be another—Whoop! There it is! BestBuy.com
just listed the newest, greatest ereading device to kill all prior devices! And now—the
newest, greatest to kill that one!
Of course, there’s also a downside to the feverish pace of device creation and
improvement: Creating content that takes full advantage of, or even just fits perfectly on
the screen of, the current or next generation of devices is like trying to shoot a bull’s-eye
while blindfolded and hanging from the flank of a bucking bronco.
Stay Up to Date as the Landscape Changes
To keep pace with the changes in the digital publishing landscape, I provide periodic updates on the latest
devices (and many other sections from this book) on the book’s website, http://abbrv.it/DigiPubID.
As with all media and business revolutions, the bronco will eventually be tamed and
set upon a stable, predictable path around the corral, making bull’s-eyes easier to land for
everyone. That happened with the Desktop Publishing Revolution in the 1980s as well as
the Web Publishing Revolution in the late 1990s and early 2000s. For now, the best
strategy for landing bull’s-eyes in this Electronic Publishing Revolution lies in
understanding classes of digital content consumption devices and the individual
characteristics of devices in those classes.
But first, Table 1.1 presents a quick reference of device class capabilities. The
specifics of the various publication formats are discussed in Chapter 2, “Learning About
Digital Publishing Formats.”
Table 1.1: Device Class Characteristics
eReaders Tablets Computers Phones
Can display EPUB/Kindle ebooks
Can display interactive PDFs

Can display digital replicas
Can display digital magazines
Can display HTML5 epublications
Has full-color display
Can display dynamic, server-fed content
Legend:
 Yes, the device class supports this option.
 The device class supports some but not all features of the option, and/or some devices in the class supports the
option while others do not.
eReaders
The first class of digital content-consumption device is handheld ereaders. These
devices support the inclusion of imagery and media to one degree or another, but they’re
built for reading novels, novellas, short stories, newspaper articles, and other text-heavy
content. You wouldn’t, for example, target ereaders for your coffee-table picture book or
image-laden fashion magazine.
There are more brands and models of handheld ereaders available than most people
would imagine, though only a few manufacturers are building new ones. Amazon and
Kobo are the only ones still building handheld ereaders with any significant market share
after Sony quit the business and NOOK keeps code-blueing on life support (see the
sidebar “A Shrinking Field of Play”). Even without many new devices entering the
market, sales of the offerings that are out there are still healthy. Consumers love their
ereaders—new or old—even carrying them in addition to iPads and other tablets.

A Shrinking Field of Play
When I published the first edition of ePublishing with InDesign in 2012, there were more manufacturers of
handheld ereaders than there are now.
Sony was actively promoting its Sony Reader devices—several different sizes—and offered its own
ebookstore to compete with the likes of Amazon’s Kindle and Apple’s iBookstore. In March 2014 Sony
ended its line of Sony Readers and closed the Reader Store, transferring customer accounts to Canadian
competitor Kobo. Unfortunately, the ebooks and other content customers had purchased from the Reader
Store was not transferred; access to all content was simple cut off.
Back in 2012 I predicted in these very pages that Barnes & Noble’s NOOK, then massively popular and the
leading competitor to Amazon’s Kindle, would die within five years. I was a little too generous in my
prediction. NOOK effectively died in 2013. Barnes & Noble tried to resurrect it twice (so far) by turning it
from a dedicated ereader into a full-fledged Android-based 7-inch tablet with a focus on, but not limited to,
ebook consumption. NOOK Tablets were sold at a deep discount, attracting mostly DIYers who rooted the
devices, wiped away all NOOK-related content, and used them as standard Android tablets. Later, after
briefly and publicly considering ending NOOK, Barnes & Noble offloaded manufacturing to Samsung. The
two re-released the NOOK as the “NOOK Powered by Samsung.” Like the previous iteration, this new
version was 7-inch Android tablet with all the capabilities of a good Samsung tablet while funneling ebook,
movie, and music consumption to Barnes & Noble’s electronic store. Even Samsung’s popular hardware and
customized version of Android couldn’t attract enough buyers to save the NOOK. As of this writing, though
NOOK is still for sale, a few Barnes & Noble stores have replaced the large NOOK kiosk with more book
tables.
Figure 1.1 shows a number of ereaders in active use—and being actively sold and
supported by their manufacturers—in 2015. These are only a portion of a much larger
selection of handheld ereaders in use around the world.

Figure 1.1: A selection of current generation handheld ereaders
Upper row, left to right: Kindle PaperWhite, Barnes & Noble NOOK GlowLight, Kobo Aura, Ectaco JetBook Color, an
Bookeen Cybook Ocean. Lower row, left to right: BQ Cervantes, iRiver Story HD, Hanlin v60, Onyx BOOX T68, and
PocketBook Touch Lux 2.
Photos courtesy of the device manufacturers.
The popularity of ereaders lies in their simplicity. They don’t play movies or have lots
of apps. The most used ereaders don’t even have color screens; many of the biggest
manufacturers do offer color versions of their ereaders, but those are far outsold by their
greyscale or black-and-white counterparts. Instead, using proprietary technology and a
lack of backlighting, ereaders provide on a handheld screen a remarkably close replica of a
printed book page—one that is no more difficult for, or taxing on, the human eye while
reading for extended periods than ink on a novel’s pulp page. Of course, ereaders weigh
very little—typically 6 to 8 ounces—and can contain thousands of books, making them far
more convenient to tote around than a stack of printed books. Bookmarking, full-text
searching, instant word and phrase definitions, user-defined type size, week- and month-
long battery lives, and the ability to browse and purchase a vast array of modern books
and an ever-increasing library of older titles round out a list of the top advantages over
printed books cited by ereader owners.
Tablets
Tablet computers are the youngest class of digital content-consumption device, but in
only a few years they have already become ubiquitous. Contrary to popular belief, the
device class was not devised by, and did not originate with, Apple; tablets and slates have
existed in several forms, most running the Windows Mobile operating system, since the
turn of the 21st century. They were, however, very low-profile and marketed primarily to
industrial, medical, and high-tech enterprise customers, all but completely ignoring the
rest of the potential market. It wasn’t until the iPad’s sleek form factor and consumer-
targeted advertising campaign that the general public saw tablets as potential everyday
devices. From there, businesses began adopting them, too—an inverse of the way prior
tablet devices (also called slates) were marketed.
Kicked off (officially) by the release of Apple’s iPad in the spring of 2010, the tablet
market has exploded with additional operating systems (see the “Tablet Operating
Systems” section) and dozens of different devices being released—and purchased—at
breakneck speeds. (See Figure 1.2 for a small sampling of such devices.) In general, tablet
devices offer consumers a smaller, lighter device to tote around than a laptop while
sacrificing little of the convenience and power of having a laptop on hand. From a tablet
device a person can read and compose email, write and collaborate on documents, play

games and watch videos, surf the web and interact with social networks, participate in
video conferencing, work with database content such as medical records or pharmacy
dispensary systems, manage point-of-sale and retail inventory, edit and organize
photographs, and even create and edit new graphic, art, or technical designs. In other
words, tablets are for many professionals and students a replacement for laptops and a
replacement for any standard computer for the average consumer whose computing
requirements are limited to these abilities (which is most consumers).
Figure 1.2: A few of the many currently available tablets and mini-tablets
Clockwise from top-right: Amazon Kindle Fire HDX 8.9, Microsoft Surface Pro 3, NVidia Shield Tablet, Apple iPad Ai
2, Google Nexus 9, and Samsung Galaxy Tab 4.
Photos courtesy of the device manufacturers.
Though tablets were once limited to running only apps not applications, Microsoft’s
Surface Pro 3, released in late 2014, proved that a full-fledged laptop can be contained
within a tablet form factor when it demonstrated the ability to run power-hungry Adobe
Photoshop and full versions of Microsoft’s Office applications. The Surface Pro 3 then
inspired Apple and other mobile operating system manufacturers to follow suit with their
own bigger, more powerful tablets. Still, as of this writing, the manufacturers are still
working out the kinks for laptop-powerful tablets, especially with regard to building
hybrid operating systems that combine the power of full computers with the ease of use
consumers love with designed-for-mobile operating systems like Apple iOS and Android.
Tablets offer support for the largest selection of digital publication formats, including
those (such as interactive magazines and digital replicas) that were created specifically,
and solely, for tablets. (We’ll get into the topic of formats in Chapter 2.) Digital publishers
who want to compete in today’s and tomorrow’s worlds need to target their publications to
tablets now. The early-adopter mind-set ran tablets in 2010 and 2011. Now, all of your
readers have tablets, and many of them read ebooks exclusively on tablets. Tablets are
consistently one of the biggest sales items of any holiday shopping season, followed

closely by handheld ereader devices.
Because so many people read ebooks and digital publications on tablets, while many
such formats simply can’t be consumed on full computers, it’s crucial that we, as digital
publishers, closely watch the evolution of laptop-powerful tablets. Microsoft’s Surface Pro
3, for example, cannot, as of this writing, display interactive magazines or digital replicas
natively or with any third-party app or application. Will next generation laptop-powerful
Apple and Android-based mobile devices be able to display all the same content their
current tablets and smartphones can?
eReading on Tablets
When compared to handheld ereaders, there are pros and cons to tablets for ereading.
First, tablets support a much wider variety of epublication formats. With installable or
preintegrated versions of iBooks, Kindle, NOOK, Kobo, Google Play Books, and more,
the entire world of ebooks is available to tablet owners (Figure 1.3). And tablets can have
several of those ereader applications and libraries installed at the same time, putting every
ebook for sale at Amazon, Barnes & Noble, Kobo, Google Play Books, and so on (and on
iPads, iBooks) readily available on one device. Typically users stick with one, though,
especially if one is preinstalled when they purchase the tablet, like iBooks is on the iPad,
Kindle is on Amazon’s Fire tablets, Kobo is on the Vox, and Google Play Books is on
most Android tablets. Thus, if you publish ebooks, make them available for sale in all of
those stores and consider carefully whether it’s ultimately worth it to participate in an
exclusivity program offered by one ebookstore or another.
Figure 1.3: Various ebookstores available on tablet devices
Upper row, left to right: iBooks and Kindle Book Store. Lower row, left to right: NOOK Store, Kobo Store, and Google
Play Books.

The act of reading for extended periods on tablets is much the same as reading on a
computer and nowhere near as comfortable for most people as reading on handheld
ereaders. Handheld ereaders typically don’t include backlighting. (eReaders that do
include illuminated screens, like the Kindle Paperwhite and Kobo Aura HD, employ
lighting systems developed specifically for greyscale ereader displays and to be easy on
the eyes.) The screens on these devices are usually anti-glare, and they use proprietary
display technology to simulate the look of real ink on real paper, which enables them to be
comfortably read in all the same lighting conditions in which printed books are read
comfortably. Computers and tablets are backlit, which is why they strain the eyes after a
while, and in order to display multimedia, games, and the widest array of content, they use
a completely different anti-aliasing technology that cannot simulate ink on paper. Tablets,
being portable and almost always bearing polished glass faces, often also carry a glare or
reflect too much light for comfortable extended reading. Tablets just are not ideally suited
to the act of reading long, continuous flows of text like novels and other common ebooks.
Despite the science disproving the comfort of reading on tablets, 57 percent of iPad
owners report that they read ebooks on the iPad (SalesForce 2014 Mobile Behavior
Report, October 2014).
Magazine, catalog, yearbook, newspaper, and comic book reading is another matter
entirely. While the same limitations of backlighting, lack of E Ink-optimized text display,
and screen glare still exist no matter what type of publication one is reading on a tablet,
these types of publications are not long, continuous, text-only reading experiences.
They’re usually visually rich layouts augmenting copy with color, imagery, multimedia,
and, in the better ones, touch interaction. Tablets are ideally suited for displaying these
media-rich publications because the media richness was built specifically for tablets, and
consumers adore reading, watching, and interacting with digital magazines, catalogs,
yearbooks, newspapers, comics, and even “enhanced” ebooks that go beyond the norm.
Figure 1.4 shows a digital replica–format publication (Redbook) as viewed landscape; an
app-based enhanced ebook (Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer) that includes hotspots,
read-to-me, and auto-page capabilities; a highly interactive digital magazine-format
periodical (National Geographic) containing animations, video, hotspots, panoramic
pictures, 3D-rotatable imagery, and more; a digital catalog (Brookstone) using TheFind
Newsstand app, which allows customers to order directly from within the catalog; and an
HTML5-based newspaper (USA Today) including scrollable and slideshow regions and a
preference system that uses the user’s desired locations for the weather, sports leagues for
scores, and other customizable content. (Go, Bruins!)

Figure 1.4: Tablets displaying media-rich publications
Upper row, left to right: Redbook, August 2011 and National Geographic, February 2011. Lower row, left to right:
Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer, Brookstone Catalog, January 2012, and USA Today, January 4, 2012.
If you intend to publish visually rich or media-rich periodicals or other publications,
tablets are, and will increasingly be, the primary device class you should target.
Tablet Operating Systems
There is a variety in tablet operating systems driving tablets and give them their
capabilities. I’d like to take a moment to run through what these operating systems are,
what devices they power, and some of the important characteristics of each that a digital
publisher should know.
Let’s start with a quick market share breakdown of the major tablet operating systems.
Figure 1.5 is a chart providing a simple breakdown of web traffic by tablet operating
system from January 2014 through January 2015. Using this data we can reasonably infer
tablet market share.

Figure 1.5: Web traffic by Tablet OS
Web traffic by tablet operating system from January 2014 through January 2015.
Source: StatCounter Global Stats (February 2015)
Apple iOS
iOS runs all of Apple’s mobile products, not just the iPad but also the iPhone and the
iPod Touch (which is, for all intents and purposes, an iPhone without dialing and texting
capabilities).
Apple tightly controls both the hardware and operating systems on its mobile devices,
as with its computers. All versions of iOS and all iOS devices may install apps from the
Apple App Store and, beginning with iOS 4, iBooks. All content available through the
App Store and iBooks is strictly regulated by Apple. Apps and epublications must pass
through a review process prior to being made available to iOS users, and Apple reserves
(and has often exercised) the right to remove apps or publications, for any reason and at
any time, from the App Store and/or iBooks. Rumors abound as to reasons every time
Apple denies or removes a particular app or ebook, but in general Apple wants content
available through iOS to be “family-friendly,” legal, and of “the highest quality.” The
subjectivity of these descriptions has led to many dissatisfied publishers. Ultimately, iOS
is what is called a walled garden: Only Apple-approved content gets in, which creates a
predictable and consistent user experience.
EPUB and PDF digital documents can be loaded onto iOS devices without going
through iBooks, though the process is too complex for the average iOS device consumer
and thus isn’t viable for a widespread publication distribution method. Individual users
and corporate IT departments can add EPUB and PDF files to iTunes or third-party iOS-
management applications on their computers, which then pushes those files to the iPad or

iPhone iBooks app during device-computer synchronization. Similarly, EPUB and PDF
files can be added to individual’s iCloud online storage service and then synchronized to
an iOS device without the need to physically connect the device to a computer.
The iPad (all versions) is the gold standard in tablets and tablet publishing (Figure
1.6). It has the highest market share among all tablets—twice that of all Android tablets
combined—and is consistently ranked as being the fastest, most responsive user interface,
though several Android tablets are often praised as having more user-friendly and intuitive
user interfaces.
Figure 1.6: iPads
iPad Air 2 (left) and iPad Mini 3 (right).
Photo courtesy of Apple
Android OS
Android is the big competitor and formerly would-be “iOS killer” in both the
smartphone (“iPhone killer”) and tablet (“iPad killer”) markets. As the tablet and

smartphone markets have matured, showing that both iOS and Android can survive with
healthy market share, the “iOS killer” moniker, once thrown around weekly by tech
journalists, has all but disappeared. Both iOS and Android are are popular platforms,
running numerous devices, with user bases measured in the hundreds of millions.
Created and sponsored largely by Google (as a member of the Open Handset
Alliance), Android is an open source operating system free from licensing fees, which
enables many tablet manufacturers use it—stock or customized—in their devices (see
Figure 1.7). Samsung is arguably the largest, best-selling manufacturer of Android tablets
and smartphones, with Google itself, Amazon, Motorola, and dozens of other
manufacturers also competing based on hardware capabilities and user-interface tweaks.
Figure 1.7: A sampling of Android-powered tablets
Clockwise from top-right: Google Nexus 9, ASUS Eee Pad Transformer, Dell Venue 8 7000, and Samsung Galaxy Tab
S.
Photos courtesy of the device manufacturers
The Google Play app store (formerly Android Market) is open, enabling any publisher
or developer to distribute her creation to all Android tablets and smartphones. This is a
double-edged sword. Unlike with iOS-based content, there are no reviewers or censors to

clear content through and no issue with releasing apps and publications that may impact
the financial interests of the platform maker. However, the openness of the Play Store and
its Play Books sub-store can create the impression that the selection of apps and
publications is of an inferior quality to those available in Apple’s strictly controlled App
Store and iBooks. Regrettably, there’s some truth in that perception. The Google Play
Books store has seen a flood of adult-content apps and publications, many included under
ambiguous or intentionally misleading names, as well as an avalanche of unwanted, often
duplicate ebooks. Public domain classic books such as A Tale of Two Cities, Moby Dick, A
Christmas Carol, and hundreds of others are frequently converted to ebook format of
varying qualities by unassociated individuals and placed in the Google Play Books store in
hopes of making a quick, often undeserved buck. On the other hand, the openness of
Google Play creates more variety in apps, more choice, and access to apps and
publications that Apple wouldn’t allow on iOS because the functionality or content might
compete with Apple’s or its partners’ interests. The average Android app and publication
also costs significantly less than its iOS equivalent in head-to-head comparisons.
Because Google Play is open to any content a developer wants to publish, and
because the Android operating system is being actively improved by so many different
device manufacturers and programmers, it has real potential to improve faster and more
often than iOS. Thus, it’s entirely possible that Android-powered tablets could at any time
take top market share from iPad even though history shows iOS maintaining dominance.
From the perspective of an epublisher, that means you must take Android seriously, and
even if you don’t target Android readers right now (a mistake in my opinion because
Android tablets typically account for 30–40 percent of the tablet market), you must at least
be ready to do so at a moment’s notice.
Windows
Microsoft Windows has been powering mobile devices for more than a decade. First
there was Windows Mobile, which ran on PDAs—personal digital assistants, not public
displays of affection; people do that with Apple or Android, but no one commits public
displays of affection with Microsoft products, not even bored employees of the always
empty Microsoft Stores. Later, Windows Mobile powered smartphones, but with the
release of Windows 8, the “Mobile” and “Phone” monikers were dropped, leaving a
hybrid mobile and desktop Windows 8 (Figure 1.8).

Figure 1.8: A Microsoft Surface Pro 3 running a full version of Adobe Photoshop
Photo courtesy of Microsoft
The biggest distinction between Windows-powered tablets and its competitors is
Windows’s ability to run full applications, not just apps. In fact, at least on the array of
tablets identified as “Pro” models (e.g. the Microsoft Surface Pro 3), Microsoft boasts that
if you can run it on a Windows 8 or 10 desktop computer, you can run it on a Windows
tablet. That includes full versions of Microsoft Office applications like Word, Excel, and
PowerPoint rather than the limited-functionality Office knockoff apps you’ll find available
for use on the iPad and Android tablets. You can also run full graphics software like
InDesign; Adobe even collaborated with Microsoft to build a touch-optimized optional
user interface for Photoshop CC (late-2014 edition and later).
Combine Windows (Pro) tablets’ full application support with their heretofore
unheard-of multitasking and split-screen application-usage features, and you have a tablet
operating system steadily grabbing market share among professionals and the enterprise.
Note
With earlier editions of Windows-powered mobile devices Microsoft offered two distinct versions of
Windows, Windows RT and Windows, with devices using the former bearing the suffix “RT”. While non-
suffixed devices were the full hybrid mobile- and desktop-version of Windows, RT designated that the
device used the less powerful, mobile-only Windows RT version that could run mobile apps but not desktop
applications. The naming scheme lead to a great deal of consumer confusion as well as many disappointed
Windows RT device owners who were expecting the power of non-RT devices. Microsoft has since cleared
up all confusion and consternation by adopting the naming scheme of “Windows” for lower-powered tablets
as well as fully-powered desktop and laptop computers while the laptop-powerful tablets get the “Windows
Pro” appellation.
Yes, that was sarcasm. Leave it to Microsoft to establish confusion as a standard, and then, just as people are
finally getting a handle on the confusion, reverse the standard to create more confusion.

Amazon Fire OS
In late 2011 Amazon debuted a potent entry into the tablet market with its 7-inch
Kindle Fire tablet, which has since grown to a line of tablets of various sizes. Fire runs on
Android, but it’s a modified implementation with a uniquely Amazon user interface hiding
all but a few small parts of Android (see Figure 1.9). In fact, Amazon doesn’t even
promote the fact that Fire uses Android; customers don’t even think about the Fire’s
operating system, but those who do just think of it as Amazon’s original creation
unencumbered by any opinions—negative or positive—associated with Android. With the
second version of the Fire tablet Amazon branded their heavily modified version of
Android the Fire OS, now running on Android 4.0 instead of the first generation Fire’s
Android 2.2 implementation.
Figure 1.9: The Kindle Fire
Built on Android but with a twist.
Photo courtesy of Amazon
Now a line of tablets ranging from 6-inches up to 8.9-inches and offering a special
Kids Edition with an even more deeply modified user interface, Fire tablets are positioned
as entertainment device. Amazon’s marketing states but downplays that Fire OS devices
(except the Kids Edition) are as powerful as any Android tablet, including the ability to
handle productivity and work tasks; instead, Amazon emphasizes the entertainment value
of Fire OS devices, focusing on content, offering books, movies, music, and periodicals
exclusively from Amazon’s library. The Fire OS itself is a custom user interface on top of
Android, limiting user access to Amazon’s own app store rather than to Google Play, thus
eliminating the flooding of bad content in favor of a curated selection. Thus, Fire OS is an

Android-powered walled garden like iOS but backed by a much larger, long-established,
curated collection of Amazon-approved apps, ebooks, movies, music, and more.
Amazon did everything right with the first version of the Fire, because by February
2012, only three months after its debut, the Kindle Fire had captured over 50 percent of
the market among all Android tablets (comScore April 2012). Since then, market share has
fluctuated, but always remained strong for Fire OS devices, especially as head-to-head
competitor NOOK from Barnes & Noble has struggled and ultimately become a non-
threat.
Moreover, Amazon has not limited Fire OS and its access to Amazon’s books,
periodicals, and other content to tablets. Although a resounding failure by all significant
measurements, the first generation Fire Phone in 2014 showed that Amazon continues to
innovate and seek new platforms for its greatest asset—its vast inventory of content. The
latest Amazon product, Fire TV, capitalizes on the exploding streaming media, cord-
cutting movement. With settop boxes and an HDMI-connector dongles, Fire TV devices
put Fire OS and all its content, including ebooks and periodicals, on consumer televisions.
So significant is Amazon’s position in the digital content distribution market on
tablets and other devices that I strongly recommend digital publishers think of Fire OS as
a completely different operating system separate not only from Android but from Kindle
as well—the way consumers think of it. When publicizing that their epublications are
available for or “run great on” iPad and Android tablets, I recommend they list Amazon’s
platforms by name as well. For example: “built for iPad and iPad Mini, Android, Fire OS,
and Fire TV.” With ebooks I suggest a similar approach, for instance “available for Kindle,
iBooks, Kobo, NOOK, Google Play Books, Fire, Fire TV, and other ebookstores.”
Obsolete Mobile Operating Systems
Previous editions of this book discussed other mobile operating systems such as the BlackBerry Tablet OS,
webOS, and Android 2.2 have been removed because they’re as relevant to the world as the cast of Jersey
Shore. A few devices running these defunct mobile operating systems are still in use, but their combined
activity in consuming modern epublications is now such a small percentage that it’s insignificant, like the
careers of the cast of the aforementioned TV show.
Tablet Sizes
Another important factor to consider when designing for tablets is their screen sizes.
Because there are not yet any standards, screen sizes vary wildly, though two brackets
have become common. First you have full-sized tablets, those with screens around 10
inches diagonally, with resolutions ranging between 2048×1536, 1280×800, and
1024×768. The second common bracket is about 7 inches diagonally, with screen

resolutions in the range of 1024×600 to 800×480, though some, like recent versions of the
iPad Mini, can match the resolution of full-sized tablets. I call tablets in the 7-inch range
mini-tablets, as they strike me in form and observed consumer usage as being halfway
between a smartphone and a full-sized tablet. Of course, there are phablets like the
Samsung Galaxy Note, so named because they’re too large to be phones, too small to be
tablets… Oy! Things have gotten complicated!
Although tablets (and phablets) come in 5-, 6-, 8-, 11-, and 12-inch sizes, their screen
resolutions typically match either 7- or 10-inch models. Thus, digital publishers and
designers need to focus their energies on those two central sizes (see Figure 1.10).
Figure 1.10: Comparing different device screens at scale.
Left to right: an iPhone 4S, an HTC Evo 3D, a Kindle Fire, an iPad 3, and an ASUS Eee Pad Transformer.
Full-sized tablets include the original iPad and iPad Air line (9.7 inches), Samsung
Galaxy Tab S (10.5 inches), ASUS Eee Transformer line (10.1 inches), and Motorola
XOOM (10.1 inches); they offer a pretty comfortable reading experience for media-rich
digital publications. Even with interactive replicas, which are basically print magazines
displayed on a tablet screen and don’t reflow to fit the screen, reading one page displayed
full-screen is comfortable for most people. Reading is almost impossible without pinch-
zooming when a full spread is shown on the tablet screen, though. In my experience, full-
sized tablets are viable replacements for most tasks formerly handled by laptops, which is
what makes them marginally more popular than mini-tablets.
On the other hand, mini-tablets like the iPad Mini, the Kindle Fire HD, Samsung
Galaxy Tab 7, the Kobo Aura HD, and the Google Nexus 7—all 7 inches—are even more
portable than full-sized tablets. Many people love the small form factor, easily deposited
in a purse, backpack, or large coat pocket. Typically mini-tablets are used for media
viewing (Netflix, YouTube, Hulu, and so on) and general Internet usage (browsing, social
media, email), but owners of these devices just as often will read digital publications on
them. Naturally, ebooks work great on these devices because mini-tablets are about the
size of handheld ereaders, which are themselves about the size of paperback books.

Although many digital replicas are available on mini-tablets, media-rich digital
publications don’t often sell well on these devices because such publications tend to be
designed specifically for larger screens and resolutions. This leaves mini-tablet owners
feeling left out by many publications. For epublishers, that presents an opportunity. Given
the popularity of smaller tablets, I strongly suggest designing versions of publication
specifically to fit 7-inch screens.
Computers
You might be tempted to skip this section, thinking it’s a no-brainer that standard
computers would support all the digital publication classes and be ideally suited to display
any type of digital publication you might want to publish. If that’s what you’re thinking,
you’d be in error.
True, there are software-based and in some cases even web-based ereaders available.
You can download the Kindle, NOOK, or Kobo ereader software free for Windows, Mac
OS X, and even for many flavors of UNIX. Mac OS X offers iBooks natively. You can
also read many ebooks directly in your web browser, without installing any software, such
as with Amazon’s Kindle Cloud Reader. Dozens of other ebook readers—some
commercial, most free or open source—abound as well. Adobe even makes one, called
Adobe Digital Editions. Despite the selection of ereader software, the big stores like
Amazon’s Kindle, Apple’s iBooks, and Kobo dominate ebook reading on desktop, laptop,
and netbook computers just as they rule the handheld ereader and tablet classes (see
Figure 1.11).

Figure 1.11: Examples of desktop ereaders
Top to bottom: iBooks on Mac OS X (James’ Journey by Helen Lundström Erwin), Kobo Desktop on Windows (Pride
& Prejudice by Jane Austen), and Kindle Cloud Reader running inside Google Chrome on Mac OS X (Great
Expectations by Charles Dickens).
As reading ebooks becomes more popular in general, so does the portion of
consumers reading ebooks on computers. This is deceptive, however, because that’s the
smallest and slowest-growing segment. More and more people are reading ebooks, true,
and naturally many of them start out using their office, school, or home computers for that

purpose. However, computer monitors are not built to comfortably accommodate extended
periods of reading (trust me, I have to write and edit this book on standard monitors).
Eventually, the majority of consumers who read more than the occasional ebook tend to
purchase either a handheld ereader or a tablet, doing the bulk of their reading on those
devices. Thus, as you begin to create ebook content, you may be tempted to design for the
flexible, high-resolution, full-color world of computer-based ereaders, but the reality is
that only a small portion of your audience is likely to view your publication within that
environment. The rest will be using, in order of frequency, the following: handheld
ereaders, tablets, and mobile phones.
The shift away from standard computers for reading digital content is being sped
along by the fact that app-based interactive magazines are all but completely unusable on
computers. Sports Illustrated, Oprah Magazine, Maxim, Popular Science, Wired, and a
host of other big-brand magazines publish digitally only or primarily in formats that work
on tablets, as folios or apps. Adobe DPS, one of the leading interactive magazine
publishing systems, offers publishers the option of making their media-rich digital
magazines (and catalogs, enhanced books, and so on) to be viewed on computers in a web
browser with the Adobe Content Viewer for the Web. The experience isn’t perfect, of
course, because such publications are built for the touchscreen environment of tablets, but
it is a way to deliver the same content to computers—Windows, Mac, UNIX, Chrome, and
so on—without having to build a separate desktop-compatible version. Still, most
consumers prefer to read such publications in their native environment of tablets. Many
publishers, too, opt to ignore the Adobe Content Viewer for the Web option.
In short, reading for long periods of time on a computer isn’t ideal, but we all do it
(you’ve seen the web, right?). Publishing ebooks to computers is easy; in fact, the same
files created for handheld ereaders and tablets typically work just fine on computers
without any extra effort or additional formatting. PDF-based publications work better and
with greater support for interactivity on computers than on mobile devices (except those
mobile devices using full laptop-powerful operating systems). Digital replicas and folio-
or app-based interactive publications are seldom usable on computers. We’ll talk more
about these different types of publications and the pros and cons of each in Chapter 2,
“Learning About Digital Publishing Formats.”
Mobile Phones
Because one of the main characteristics of standard (i.e. EPUB-format) ebooks is their
ability to reflow and adapt to the size of any screen, many people choose to do some or all
of their ebook reading on mobile smartphones (see Figure 1.12). To be specific, 43% of
smartphone owners read on their phones daily; 57% read daily on their tablets (Source:

Salesforce.com’s 2014 Mobile Behavior Report). (Personally I can’t read more than a few
passages from a book on a phone without risking carpal tunnel syndrome. I read rather
fast, and with so little text fitting on a phone screen, the result is that I’m nearly constantly
swiping to advance pages.)


Figure 1.12: Reading on a Smartphone
Amazon Kindle app on a Samsung Galaxy S5 (The Crystal Crypt by Philip K. Dick)
iBooks dominates Apple’s iPhone and iPod Touch while Kindle dominates everything
else and boasts a large user base on iPhones and iPod Touches. One might expect Google
Play Books to be the standard on Android devices where it’s preinstalled, but its library
isn’t quite as large as Amazon’s or Barnes & Noble’s. Neither is iBooks’, but that’s
changing rapidly. Through the NOOK and NOOK Kids apps, Barnes & Noble can also be
found on a large number of mobile phones from all manufacturers. Kobo, too, maintains a
strong presence. Of them all, only iBooks is device-specific; even Google Play Books is
available on Google’s own Android as well as iOS.
Most of the ereader apps for all devices also support fixed-layout and picture ebooks
(discussed in great detail in Chapter 8, “Creating Fixed-Layout eBooks”), though anything
but fully reflowable ebooks is harder to read on the small screen of a mobile phone than
on any other device. Consequently, very few people will use a mobile phone, even if they
don’t have ready access to a larger-screened device, to read more advanced, more
interactive, or fixed-layout publications. Even Apple’s own fixed-layout ebooks are almost
impossible to read on an iPhone. Such epublications can be specifically designed for small
phone screens, but unless there’s a specific need to reach phones, it’s best to limit non-
reflowable epublications to larger screens such as tablets and mini-tablets.
Future Devices
In the future of digital-publication delivery devices, we’ll see slimmer, lighter
devices; devices without practical internal storage; and devices with not just touch
interaction but possibly distortion interaction, too. About a dozen different companies,
from LG to MIT splinter foundations, have epaper concepts gradually coming to market.
These are one-, two-, or full-color displays ranging from about 4×6-inches (the average
size of a handheld ereader) up to 11×17, and they are flexible, rollable, and even foldable.
The idea is that content will live in the cloud (yeah, I’m a little sick of that phrase, too, but
what can we do?). Instead of storing publications on the device, epaper readers will
function more like handheld ereaders do now, with an always-on, dedicated wireless
connection similar to today’s Kindles and other ereader devices.
With current ereaders you have to download books, stories, articles, and so on, to the
device, which are kept in internal storage. Epaper will keep your books and more in the
cloud—out on the Internet—and download to the epaper device one page at a time via an
always-on background connection. The process will be quick; you won’t notice a delay

between pages. Some of the epaper solutions under development actually hold the next
page in cache so it’s already there when you swipe to it. And most epaper is being
developed to be as thin as just a few sheets or even a single sheet of regular copier paper.
Some can be rolled up and stuck in your back pocket, while others can be folded and
slipped into a wallet. Either way, when you want the latest book, magazine, catalog, or
even newspaper, with up-to-the-minute article updates, you just have to open the page
again.
Curved screens are making their way into our devices after years of expectation. As
are flexible devices that have users actually bend flexible phones to zoom in or out on
pictures, web pages, and other content and twist the phone to scroll or move through a list
such as a photo album, an email inbox, or the pages of a digital magazine. Gestures, or
touchlessly controlling devices by moving the hands, head, or eyes in specific ways in
front of the device, are already entrenched in Samsung and other manufacturers’ devices.
Gesture and voice control continues to grow in popularity.
These future devices are coming—some are here already—but even with them on the
horizon, the basic classes of ereading devices remain relatively stable with handheld
ereaders, tablets, mobile phones, and computers.
Designing for Devices
As you write and produce digital publications, you’ll begin testing on your computer
just as a matter of convenience. Computer-based ebook readers, for example, can provide
instant results when creating and modifying an EPUB-based publication. Just don’t rely on
what you see on-screen; computer-based ebook readers, even those such as Kindle,
NOOK, and Kobo, which have corresponding handheld ereaders, contain display and
formatting variances that won’t match the ebook’s presentation precisely between devices.
Always test your ebook on as many devices as you possibly can before calling it ready for
publication. At the very least, test your ebooks—and explore the differences in other
publishers’ ebooks—on each class of ereading device.
The same holds true, though often with a smaller selection of compatible devices,
when creating rich-media publications. Test digital magazines on iPad, Android-powered
tablets (several, if you can), the BlackBerry Playbook, and so on. PDF- and HTML5-based
digital publications should be tested on, well, everything. All computers, the big-name
tablets, and most smartphones will display PDFs and HTML5. If a device displays the
format, consumers will view your publications on that device. Even if a device doesn’t
support a given format, consumers will try to view your publications on it.
Most important, know your audience. If you want to distribute a digital edition of the

Journal of the American Medical Association or a similarly specific trade or academic
publication, then you know that nearly all of your affluent audience will be consuming
that content on the best-of-breed tablet devices. You can then design specifically for those
environments without worrying too much about also designing versions for the features
and screen sizes of the second and third most popular tablets. However, if your job is to
digitize a general-interest periodical, then you need to take into account, and design for, a
much broader selection of devices. That may entail limiting your publication to a single
semi-universal file format such as PDF or HTML5, or you may want to create several
editions that take advantage of the strengths of each format—separate digital magazine
format editions or interactive replicas for iPad, Fire HD, Surface Pro, and Galaxy Tab;
PDF or HTML5 for desktop and laptop computers; and EPUB-based for handheld devices.
What and how you design is determined as much by your audience’s device
preferences as by your desires for the content, presentation, and level of interactivity of
your publications. Naturally, you can elect to force your market to adopt one format or
another, but that usually backfires; people have a tendency to use what they want to use
and to expect your content to adapt to their devices rather than the other way around. The
demise of Flash as a file format (discussed in Chapter 2, “Surveying Digital Publishing
Formats”) is proof enough of that.
Your Audience Already Told You What Devices They Use
If you have a website—and, really, who doesn’t?—then the audience for your digital publications is already
telling you what devices they use. Working on the (usually) solid assumption that most of the people who
would consume your epublications will also visit your website, then all you have to do is check your site’s
server logs or analytics. One of the first things a web server logs is the user agent through which people
access your site. A user agent is the combination of a site visitor’s web browser and operating system. For
example, you might see an entry like the following, which indicates that the user visited your site on an iPad
running iOS version 3.2, a first-generation iPad that hasn’t been upgraded (iPad 2s shipped with iOS version
4, iPad 3s shipped with iOS 5, and iOS 5 was released as a free upgrade for all iPads prior to the third
generation).
Mozilla/5.0 (iPad; U; CPU OS 3_2 like Mac OS X; en-us) AppleWebKit/531.21.10 (KHTML, like Gecko)
Version/4.0.4 Mobile/7B334b Safari/531.21.10
Use the user agent data to inform your decisions about the devices, operating systems, and file formats to
support in your publications.

CHAPTER
2
Digital Publishing Formats and Their
Capabilities
Like devices, epublication formats are numerous and varied, with differences,
sometimes subtle, between them, but large divergences in purpose, capability and
device support. Consequently, it’s most logical and productive to think of
epublications in terms of format classes, with each class offering a particular
combination of purpose, capability, and device support.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following formats:
Reflowable EPUB
Fixed-Layout
Kindle Formats
PDF
Digital Replica
Interactive Magazine
HTML5

Quick Reference: Format Capabilities
Table 2.1 offers a quick reference to the capabilities of each epublication class to help
you determine the best format for your epublications. In the future, referring to this chart
may save you from a lot of rereading just to refresh your memory about what features a
specific format class does and does not support.
Table 2.1: Content and Interactivity Support per Format
Interactivity Feature
EPUB Fixed-
Layout
Kindle
Formats
PDF Digital
Replica
Interactive
Magazine
HTML5
Reflowable text
Audio
Video
Video—Link to specific frames or time points
Hyperlinks (URL, email, telephone, SMS, Apple App
Store/Google Play)
Hyperlinks to internal content
Publication-page thumbnails
JavaScript
Forms
Button actions
Multiple actions per button
Zoomable
Image panning
Image slideshows
Video slideshows
Content replacement
In-page embedded web content
Panoramas
3D rotatable images
In-page scrollable content
Vector graphics

In-page animated objects
Drag-and-drop objects
Dynamic server-fed content
Attachments
Legend:
 Yes, the format supports this type of content or interactivity.
 The format supports some but not all features of the content or interactivity, and/or some systems or software
that produce the format support the option while others do not.
Reflowable EPUB
EPUB is the international standard for ebooks as read by ereaders and ereader
software. EPUB is a shortened form of “electronic publication,” though that’s a misnomer
because everything you read on a screen is technically an electronic publication. EPUB is
the standard for ebooks, which, with a couple of exceptions I’ll discuss in Chapter 3,
“Surveying the Digital Publication Types,” is all it’s currently suited for, though that may
change in the future.
Note
You’ll see EPUB capitalized in a variety of ways, including ePUB and ePub, but according to the standards
body that maintains it, it is properly written as EPUB.
There are two separate classes of EPUBS—reflowable and fixed-layout. The former
is dynamic, allowing the text of the ebook to fit any screen size and font size combination,
breaking lines of text and reflowing the text as necessary to fit the exact screen without the
need for horizontal scrolling. Fixed-layout ebooks, by contrast, do not dynamically adapt
to fit the device screen, nor can their text size be altered by the reader. I’ll discuss fixed-
layout ebooks in depth in the next section.
The current version of EPUB is 3, which was officially ratified in October 2011 by
the International Digital Publishing Forum, the standards body that defines the EPUB file
specification. It hasn’t changed very much since. Because of the length of time between
file spec ratification and updates to ereader software, firmware, and, in some cases,
hardware, it’s entirely possible that some of your audience will be able to read only in
EPUB 2 for some time yet to come. That’s OK, because EPUBs degrade gracefully for the
most part, meaning that you should design for EPUB 3, and any features not understood
by the ereader should be ignored while everything else does display.

EPUB is effectively a web page, albeit with much less ability than the average site
you might visit in a browser. The format is structured through XML and XHTML, the latter
being a subset of the former’s language, while content is styled within the ebook via CSS
just like any web page. When viewing an EPUB, you are effectively reading a web page
whose entire text, images, and other assets are localized and wrapped up into a single
EPUB-format archive file, much like a ZIP or RAR archive. Inside the EPUB is at least the
XHTML comprising the text of the book, a CSS stylesheet file controlling the presentation
of the book text, and a manifest file that informs the ereader hardware or software about
the existence of the other files. We’ll get into those components and others in depth in
Chapter 6, “Fine-Tuning EPUBs.”
Because EPUBs are XHTML and CSS, they are designed and styled like web pages
but without many of the bells and whistles possible with pages on the web. They can be
created from InDesign (of course), Apple Pages, QuarkXPress, and other software without
the need to ever touch their XHTML and CSS markup or code (see Chapter 4, “Creating
Basic Ebooks,” for guidance on doing it with InDesign). To go beyond a basic, bland
ebook and add color, font variance, imagery, audio, and more, you’ll need to get into the
XHTML and CSS markup of the ebook—which isn’t as scary or as difficult as many
think. In Chapters 5 through 7, we’ll do just that, with hands-on, easy-to-follow step-by-
steps and measurable results. Then, in Chapter 8, “Creating Fixed-Layout Ebooks,” we’ll
go step by step through creating an exciting subclass of ebooks that bridges the gap
between standard, feature-limited EPUB and more advanced, more interactive, more
controllable user-experience epublications.
Despite the ability to control the layout to a degree with XHTML and CSS, ebook
presentation is primarily dependent on the reading device and the person wielding it.
EPUB text (except fixed-layout, which, again, we’ll talk about in Chapter 8) always
adapts to fit the screen on which it’s viewed, which is perhaps the greatest strength of the
format class, and that text can be dynamically resized by the person reading it, growing or
shrinking the font size for that individual’s optimal reading experience. The dynamic
reflow naturally causes changes in the way elements are displayed; images may get moved
around; drop caps may show differently on different devices, at different sizes; columns
may or may not show as designed; and so on. The bottom line is that, by design, ebooks
are fluid and adaptive to their reading environments. Consequently, the control designers
have over their layout and appearance is minimal when compared to print publications and
even most other digital publication format classes.
Here is a quick look at the advancements in EPUB 3 compared to its previous version,
EPUB 2.0.1.
Support for the CSS3 version specification, including better line break

and hyphenation control as well as right-to-left text display for
languages such as Hebrew, Arabic, and Japanese
Support for multiple CSS stylesheets, which can be used to alter the
display of an ebook for different display devices, sizes, and horizontal
and vertical orientations as well as give users a choice of background
and foreground colors and fonts
Support for HTML5
Support for JavaScript
Expanded metadata
Embedding of fonts in OTF and WOFF formats
Inline vector graphics in SVG format
Direct embedding of MathML rather than images of mathematic
equations
Inline HTML5 rich-media audio and video elements
Text-to-speech and synchronized text and audio functionality
What Reflowable EPUB Offers
Here are the big characteristics of the reflowable EPUB format:
Typical use: ebooks, ejournals, enewspapers (see definitions in Chapter
3)
Ideal for mostly text content
Text automatically reflows to fit any screen
User-adjustable font sizes for maximum reading comfort
CSS-based styling
Supports image inclusion
Supports video inclusion (in EPUB3 and depending on reading device)
Supports audio captioning and read-aloud ability (in EPUB3 and
depending on reading device)
Supports server-fed dynamic content (with live connection)
Supports limited JavaScript functions (in EPUB3 and depending on
reading device)
Very small file sizes
No publication or technology licensing fees

What Reflowable EPUB Does Not Offer
Conversely, if you want any of the following characteristics in your digital
publication, then EPUB is decidedly not the right format to choose.
Precise layout control
Touch interactivity (beyond tapping to change pages and activate
hyperlinks and embedded audio or video)
Nonlinear reading experience
Mostly photographic or illustrative book
Embedded games
A large amount of video content
EPUB Examples
The best way to understand the characteristics of the EPUB type is to look at
examples. If you’re familiar with ebooks at all, you’ve probably already looked at many. If
not, refer to Figure 2.1, which shows a few examples across fiction, nonfiction, and
children’s genres. Naturally you’ll need the most modern ereader software you can get
your hands on, and you should ideally try the different examples in as many classes of
devices as possible.
Figure 2.1: Examples of Reflowable EPUBs
Left to right: Mastering InDesign CS5 for Print Design & Production by Pariah S. Burke, Side Jobs: A Novel of the
Dresden Files by Jim Butcher, and Richard Scarry’s Bedtime Stories by Richard Scarry.

EPUB Production Roles
Because EPUB ebooks may be produced in a wide variety of software and are less
difficult to create than the average simple website, like websites, they can be created by
individuals or teams. Depending on the content of the ebook, some or all of the following
roles will need to be filled by team members or the individual self-publisher:
Note
If you’re a self-publisher (or want to be), don’t let the list of EPUB production roles intimidate you. You
don’t need to be, or hire someone to fill, all those positions. They are merely the types of roles that may be
required, depending on the number and type of books you might want to publish. Self-publishing a simple,
text-only novel, for example, requires only writing, editing, and EPUB creation tasks, all of which can (and
frequently are) handled by a single person. For a more concrete example, take me, your humble author. I
have personally fulfilled every one of those roles in the production of digital publications.
Author/copywriter
Developmental editor
Copyeditor
Technical editor
Indexer
Compositor
Production artist
Illustrator
Graphic designer
Photographer
Photo retoucher
Videographer
Video editor
HTML/XHTML designer
CSS styler
Fixed-Layout
Often referred to as “children’s ebooks,” “picture ebooks,” “photo books,” and similar
appellations, fixed-layout ebooks are visually-rich layouts that offer a very different set of
features from reflowable EPUBs. Though a relatively new format, the popularity of fixed-

layout ebooks has exploded among both readers and publishers.
Tip
FXL is growing among the publishing community as an abbreviation or shorthand for fixed-layout ebooks.
Keep an eye out for it as well as fixed-layout’s many other monikers.
Fixed-layout ebooks are those that don’t automatically reflow to fit the device on
which they’re viewed. Instead they behave very much like PDFs or even digital
magazines, displaying the design, typography, and page geometry exactly as designed on
all devices. Screen fitting is limited to zooming and whether to show a single page or a
two-page spread.
This specialty type of ebook tends to be very reliant on imagery, either or both as
inline graphics or page background images, and sometimes even as spread-spanning
images. They support advanced typographic control and pixel-precise layout, and they can
contain read-a-long, on-demand, or ambient audio. Limited interactivity may also be
achieved through JavaScript integration. Objects can be placed anywhere on the page,
aligned relative to one another, with absolute precision, and type control goes far beyond
standard, flowable EPUB in the forms of support for any font (with embedding), accurate
line wrapping, hyphenation, leading control, tracking (letter spacing), and even multiple
columns. Fixed-layout EPUBs may have real sidebars, note or tip boxes, and live text
image captions. And, like flowable EPUBs, all the text—even in such special features—is
searchable, live text.
All of these features make fixed-layout ebooks ideal for such projects as children’s
books, cookbooks, travel journals, photography and design books, game guides, and any
other project where page presentation is paramount. (Alliteration! Thank you!
[Paraphrasing Jon Lovitz’s character “the Thespian” from Saturday Night Live.].)
Few handheld ereader devices support fixed-layout ebooks, but that’s a relatively
minor downside for three reasons: First, a fixed-layout ebook is still an EPUB; if the
device doesn’t support the “fixed-layout” portion of the title, it will still display the
content as a regular EPUB. Granted, the layout may look horrible with elements displayed
individually and sequentially, but the important thing is that it will still be readable.
Second, most people don’t expect to be able to read image-heavy fixed-layout ebooks on
greyscale handheld ereaders; they typically elect to read such books on most robust
devices like tablets and computers. Third, those devices that currently support the format
are from the top ebook stores already dominating most markets. As of this writing that list
includes iPad (all generations with iBooks 1.2 or later), iPhone, and iPod Touch, as well as
the entire lines of tablets from Amazon (Fire OS, including the first generation Kindle Fire
tablet), Barnes & Noble, and Kobo, and any Android 2.2 or later device with Google Play

Books. Additionally, fixed-layout is supported by the Kindle, NOOK, Kobo, and Google
Play Books apps for Android, iOS, Mac OS X, and Windows.
Fixed-layout is the format for open standards, widely-distributable content when page
design is important or when the content includes animation, audio, video, read-a-long
capability, or lots of imagery. It is the format of choice for numerous types of books
including, but not limited to, photo books, graphic novels, children’s books, and
educational books.
It is increasingly replacing PDF or proprietary formats for etextbooks. Moreover,
even many digital replica and interactive magazine format publications are being rebuilt as
fixed-layout. As subset of the open standard EPUB 3, fixed-layout is freely extensible,
consumable on a vastly largely number of devices and software, and is free from licensing
costs, unlike interactive magazine format and most kinds of digital replicas.
What Fixed-Layout Offers
Here are the big characteristics of the fixed-layout ebook format:
Typical use: highly visual or moderately interactive publications such as
photo or picture books, graphic novels, children’s books, etextbooks,
cookbooks, travel guides, and more
Ideal for media-heavy content
Uses EPUB 3 specifications
Degrades poorly when viewed devices that do not support EPUB 3 and
fixed-layout
Page design is fixed and unalterable by the reader
Page size may be portrait (taller than wide) or landscape (wider than
tall)
Text will not reflow
Text size does not change
Will zoom proportionately to fit different screen sizes, which typically
renders text too small to read on phones
CSS-based styling
Supports multiple CSS stylesheets to automatically reformat the
document to fit specific devices or device classes
Supports text in non-straight lines (e.g. type on a path and text
contained in non-rectangular shapes)

Supports image inclusion
Supports background images
Supports animation
Supports video inclusion
Supports audio captioning and read-aloud ability
Supports limited JavaScript functions
Can be set to right-to-left reading order for languages such as Hebrew,
Arabic, and Japanese
No publication or technology licensing fees
What Fixed-Layout Does Not Offer
As I noted above, fixed-layout is rapidly growing in popularity on its own and as a
replacement for many publications formerly using digital replica and interactive magazine
formats. The love affair with fixed-layout has as much to do with its slim list of limitations
below as it does the long list of strengths above.
Nonlinear reading experience
Embedded games
A large amount of video content
Fixed-Layout Examples
If you’ve never looked at fixed-layout ebooks before, the best way to understand how
they work and what they’re capable of is to examine them live on a compatible device.
Take a look at the images and captions of Figure 2.2. They show pages from several fixed-
layout EPUBs as viewed on different tablets. If you have the device identified, grab a copy
of, or sample from, the book in that device’s ebook store to get a deeper understanding of
how fixed-layout ebooks behave on that device than I could possibly give you in static
screenshots.

Figure 2.2: Examples of Fixed-Layout eBooks
Upper row, left to right: Yellow Submarine by the Beatles, Phineas and Ferb: Oh, Christmas Tree! by Scott Peterson, an
The Tale of Peter Rabbit by Beatrix Potter. Lower row, left to right: Missed Connections by Sophie Blackall, Barcelona
Beyond Gaudi by Elizabeth Castro, and Digger the Dinosaur, I Can Read! by Rebecca Kai Dotlich
Fixed-Layout Production Roles
Because EPUB ebooks may be produced in a wide variety of software and are less
difficult to create than the average simple website, like websites, they can be created by
individuals or teams. Depending on the content of the ebook, some or all of the following
roles will need to be filled by team members or the individual self-publisher:
Author/copywriter
Developmental editor
Copyeditor
Technical editor
Indexer
Compositor
Production artist
Illustrator
Cartoonist
Graphic designer
Photographer

Photo retoucher
Videographer
Video editor
HTML/XHTML designer
CSS styler
Kindle Formats
Amazon.com, which parlayed online printed book sales into an emporium (some
might say imperium) offering everything from computer components to clothing, is
inarguably one of the largest providers of both digital publications and products on which
to consume those digital publications.
One of the reasons why Amazon became so successful in the digital-publication
distribution space is its creation of proprietary formats that didn’t wait for international
standards bodies in order to innovate. For instance, while the rest of the world was still
trying to define digital rights management, Amazon had already built and implemented its
own DRM system within ebooks sold through its Kindle devices and software.
Using Amazon devices and software to read econtent is a seamless, virtually bug-free
experience, with digital-content features leading the industry or trailing behind other
innovators by only a short time. For publishers, supporting proprietary file formats
typically means redundant workflows or at least content-conversion headaches—which is
true of fixed-layout ebooks for Amazon devices but not of standard ebooks. Amazon
carefully crafted its proprietary formats and its publication system to reduce the amount of
work for publishers. While Amazon’s Kindle devices don’t use the industry-standard
EPUB ebook format, there are a number of tools, including Amazon’s own publication
process, to convert valid EPUB files (reflowable and fixed-layout) into Kindle formats
without significant work. One such tool is a command-line utility called KindleGen that
will convert EPUBs, even fixed-layout EPUBs, into Kindle-ready MOBI, AZW, PRC and
KF8 formats.
Each of the Kindle formats detailed in the following sections are roughly equivalent
to more standardized formats. For example, EPUB has never been a natively supported
file format, but MOBI, PRC, and AZW can everything reflowable EPUB can. KF8, the
most modern of Kindle formats, can also be used for reflowable EPUB, though, unlike the
other formats, it also supports fixed-layout ebooks. Thus, for fixed-layout distributed
through Kindle, you’ll need to create KF8 files. As long as you read the earlier sections on
reflowable and fixed-layout EPUBs, you’ll understand the Kindle formats as well. For this
reason, I’ll keep the discussion of the Amazon formats brief, noting only the differences

Amazon’s formats bring to the equation.
AZW, MOBI, and PRC Formats
The first generation of Kindle devices uses Amazon’s DRM-enabled AZW file
format, which is based on the Mobipocket type, which can be MOBI or PRC file formats;
the Mobipocket type of ebook is most commonly referenced as simply MOBI in
recognition of the more commonly seen of the two file extensions. Amazon owns both the
Mobipocket books and AZW file formats. MOBI is an unprotected format, free from
digital rights management, which is why free online libraries often distribute MOBI files
alongside EPUB editions of their ebooks. AZW, conversely, is DRM-restricted, enabling
Amazon to control access to paid content, including preventing Kindle ebooks from being
opened in other applications or transferred to other Kindle users (outside Amazon’s
lending system). Consumers never see the AZW file extension and typically have no idea
it exists; for them, the experience is that they purchase an ebook through the Kindle store,
and that ebook is delivered, ready to read. For publishers, AZW enables content protection
without impeding user experience (unlike DRM efforts in other media, such as music and
films), creating trust with publishers, and is therefore creditable with building much of the
foundation of the ebook industry.
KF8 Format
The latest ebook format for Amazon is KF8 (Kindle Format 8), built for Kindle
tablets and the fourth generation of Kindle handheld ereaders and software, which include
current generation Kindle ereader devices and Fire OS tablets, television products, and
other devices. All of these devices still also support AZW and MOBI (including PRC
format Mobipocket ebooks) natively and transparently. Amazon had stated an intent to
transition away from AZW and MOBI into KF8 for current generation and future devices,
but the entrenchment of the older formats coupled with the fact that they gain nothing
being converted to the newer format, has slowed and perhaps stalled the smiling giant’s
intent. At some point in the future Amazon may forcibly retire its older formats, though
that may not be until KF9 or KF10 or some completely different format is devised. For
now, you are perfectly free to use AZW and MOBI if your publication doesn’t need the
advanced features of KF8.
The KF8 format is roughly equivalent to EPUB 3, with support for CSS3, HTML5,
fixed layouts, embedded fonts, SVG graphics, and more advanced audio and video
inclusion. Thus, KF8 is the format to use when creating fixed-layout ebooks.
As you get into advanced ebooks or seek to take advantage of the unique capabilities
inherent in Amazon’s proprietary formats, you will need to work directly with the code of

the MOBI, AZW, and KF8 formats. We’ll talk about doing just that in context as we build
publications in Chapters 5 through 8.
Kindle Publishing and Conversion Utilities
Because of Amazon’s leadership position in the ebook market and the fan base its Kindle devices have built,
Amazon’s devices are consistently the most widely used for ebook consumption. Most ebook stores closely
guard their sales figures, but according to numerous sources, including eBook Architects (February 2014),
Kindle is estimated to own 50—70% of the U.S. ebook market with iBooks, NOOK, Kobo, and Google Play
Books all dividing the remaining percentage. Moreover, self-publishers report that 85% of their ebook sales
come from Amazon with Barnes & Noble, Apple, Kobo, Google, Smashwords, and others all combining to
only 15% of self-publishers’ ebook sales (2013 eBook Self Publisher Survey by Sellbox.com, October 2013)
It’s also interesting to note that Kindle’s market share estimates haven’t changed significantly since I wrote
the first edition of ePublishing with InDesign in 2011–2012, which was before Amazon became embroiled in
disputes with several publishing houses (most notably Hachette) and was accused of anti-competitive price-
fixing.
Consumers love buying their ebooks from Amazon, and that means only a fool wouldn’t publish ebooks
through Amazon, even if they do take a little more effort than all the other ebook stores. Fortunately,
converting standard reflowable and fixed-layout EPUBs to Kindle equivalent formats is usually relatively
painless. Amazon makes conversion tools available, and, in fact, some of the most popular third-party
utilities also support relatively easy conversion of standardized formats (EPUB, PDF, HTML, and so on) into
these proprietary formats. Calibre, a third-party EPUB editor and converter we’ll make use of in later
chapters, can convert EPUB and many other formats into AZW, MOBI and KF8, as can Amazon’s own
KindleGen tool. If you attempt to upload a reflowable EPUB to Amazon for publication, Amazon’s own
servers will do the conversion automatically to AZW, though the result sometimes contains errors. I strongly
advise against letting Amazon’s servers automatically convert fixed-layout ebooks; the results are typically
disastrous.
You can access KindleGen, Calibre, and many other tools at http://abbrv.it/DigiToolsIDTools.
PDF
PDF has long been the format of choice for a wide array of digital publications, from
books and manuals to magazines and catalogs and everything in between. It supports all
modern media and a good deal of interactivity, is relatively easy to create, and is readable
by just about every screened device—even most handheld ereaders.
Ironically, people dismiss PDF as a viable digital-publication format because of how
common and pervasive PDF is in the modern world. We so frequently deal with PDF
contracts, user manuals, reports, design proofs, email archives, web page captures, and all
sorts of other simple, “flat” PDFs that many forget or never learn that PDFs can be so
much more. They can contain audio and video—and with more precise control than that
offered in most other formats, including digital magazines; they support in-the-page

slideshows, rollover effects, and content replacement; text can be built to reflow to fit the
screen on which the PDF is displayed; users can bookmark, highlight, and annotate the
content; hyperlinks in PDF can execute multiple actions simultaneously (such as play a
video and launch a URL or zoom into a specific area of an image and activate an audio
track), something no other format except HTML5 can do, and if the built-in interactivity
isn’t sufficient, PDFs are scriptable via JavaScript for advanced interaction and function.
PDFs also have built-in security features that can be augmented with DRM via the Adobe
LiveCycle Server product.
Most importantly, PDF is a near-universal format. Who doesn’t have a PDF reader on
her computer? Mac OS X even comes with one built in. Everyone else—and Mac users
who want the full PDF experience—can easily install the free Adobe Reader, which is
available for Windows, Mac, UNIX, iOS, Android, Fire OS, and so on, for a total of 23
different operating systems and platforms. Just about any Internet-connected screen in the
world can display a PDF. Note that many mobile devices don’t fully interactivity and
media embedded within PDFs, but the text, imagery, and other basic functions of a PDF
receive universal support.
From the design and production point of view, PDF is already a familiar format with
which we work every day; making it interactive is a little more effort, but far less work
than creating tablet-only interactive digital magazines. Designing the interactivity into a
PDF happens in InDesign, just like everything else; you add a video here, create a
slideshow on this page, and make multistate objects over there (as discussed in detail in
Chapter 9, “Creating PDF Publications for Digital Delivery”).
I am not trying to persuade you to use PDF over any of the other formats discussed in
this section. What I am pointing out is that PDF offers so much more than most realize,
that it is still viable as a digital-publication format, and that the newer formats and devices
don’t automatically make PDF obsolete.
Publishing a PDF also doesn’t require any additional licensing fees. Although PDFs
usually can’t be distributed through ebook stores or app stores, you can certainly publish
both a fixed-layout EPUB version and a PDF for everywhere else. In fact, with the first
edition of this book and the later ePublishing with InDesign: Creating Fixed-Layout
eBooks I self-published, I was often asked for PDF versions by readers. Hence the
availability of this very book in EPUB and PDF.

Figure 2.3: Examples of PDF publications
TipSquirrel Magazine, February 2015 (top left), InDesign Magazine, January 2012 (top right; article by yours truly,
Pariah Burke), Learn Hot English, November 2014 (middle left), Adobe Proxy, May 2006 (middle right), X-Ray
Magazine, Vol. 5, No. 1 (bottom left), and Model Railroad Hobbyist Magazine, February 2015 (bottom right).
PDF is also the basis for the digital replica format discussed next. Typically digital
replicas are created directly from a PDF, with many simply being an app wrapper
surrounding the original PDF.
Tip
Subsequent mentions of the Apple App Store will use the term App Store while the Google Play app store
will be called simply Google Play.

What PDFs Offer
In Chapter 9, we’ll go step by step through creating PDF-based books, magazines,
catalogs and other digital publications while discussing the strengths and weaknesses of
the format in depth. For now, here are the big characteristics of PDF-based publications.
Note that some of them are not available for all platforms.
Near-universal device support (some features are not available on all
devices)
Precise layout control
Optional reflow of text to fit any screen
Highly interactive
Supports images, audio, video
Supports vector graphics
Supports rollovers and content replacement
Supports integrated forms
Supports JavaScript
Supports zooming
Optional in-publication subscription and ordering system (via
integration with web-based ecommerce system)
Enables user annotation, bookmarking, and highlighting
Built-in table of contents
Built-in navigational system
Linear and nonlinear reading capabilities
Ability to include attachments
Quick conversion from print edition layouts
No publication fees

Flash-Powered Digital Publications
Flash is dead. Long live Flash. And, no, I don’t mean Sam Jones’s title character in the 1980 film Flash
Gordon and immortalized in 2012’s Ted (Flash! Ah, ahhh, savior of the universe). I mean Adobe Flash,
formerly Macromedia Flash, formerly FutureSplash.
Once upon a time Flash was the future (again, not Flash Gordon, though he’s supposed to be from the future,
too). Once, Flash was the de rigueur technology for website design. An untold number of online games were
built in Flash and continue to run in Flash…but not on iOS. That’s the crux of it. Apple—specifically late
cofounder and CEO Steve Jobs—said no to Flash when the iPad was released, and he and Apple never
relented. The ability to play Flash-powered animations, video games, videos, websites, and even web banner
ads was never an option on iPads, iPhones, or iPod Touches. Eventually, the popularity of those devices led
Adobe to discontinue the mobile viewer for Flash content—for any platform. Thus, iOS killed Flash
(something even Ming the Merciless couldn’t do) for every mobile device but only as a delivery format;
Flash is still alive and very well as a development platform, and some of the most popular games and apps
running on mobile devices—even iOS-powered devices—were built using Flash.
Flash also used to be a format option for digital publication delivery. It was extraordinarily well suited to that
purpose, in fact, given that Flash SWF files could contain multiple pages (as frames on the timeline),
included typographic support that was better than HTML offered, and, of course, supported multimedia and
virtually any type of interactivity one could want. Several companies banked on Flash-powered magazines,
in fact, offering issue-distribution services and software to create them from scratch or through conversion
from PDF.
A few Flash-based delivery systems still exist, and for now, Flash is still almost universally supported as a
content-delivery format (for web stuff and epublications) on computers, which is why the Flash-based
service providers continue to make sales, but without mobile-device support, it just doesn’t make sense for a
serious publisher to choose Flash for any epublication delivery.
What PDFs Do Not Offer
The following are features you won’t get in even the most advanced PDF-based
publications:
Multiple layouts for horizontal and vertical device orientations
Scrolling areas
Embedded web content
3D rotatable objects
Delivery via major ebook and app stores
PDF Examples
There are several publications going strong in PDF, though far better on computers
than tablets or other mobile devices. Figure 2.2 shows such publications.

PDF Production Roles
Creating a basic digital-distribution PDF requires no additional skills or personnel
beyond what is required to create a print publication. After all, from InDesign, PDF
creation is a simple export operation. However, taking full advantage of the format with
multimedia and interactivity will require some or all of the following additional skills for
an individual or team:
Author/copywriter
Developmental editor
Copyeditor
Technical editor
Indexer
Layout designer
Illustrator
Photographer
Photo retoucher
Videographer
Video editor
Voiceover talent
Audio mixer
Form designer
JavaScript programmer
Web analytics expert
Digital Replica
A common format that rose to overuse almost instantly at the dawn of the Age of
Tablets but that is, thankfully, calming down to only appropriate uses is digital replica.
You might also see referred to as interactive replica, print replica, or other similar names.
A digital replica epublication is what I call “an app via PDF”—it is the print version of the
publication displayed on a digital device, typically through export from the layout
program to PDF, which is then wrapped in a viewer app that is released to the public.
Another method of creating a digital replica includes converting all the pages in the
publication into JPEG or PNG images and then displaying them sequentially within the
viewer app, with or without reflowable text backing up the page image. This latter method

is common for digital replicas of books where the appearance of the book page is as
important to the book’s value as the text in the book—for example, digital editions of
historically significant texts or non-interactive graphic novels.
Digital replica publications are easy and quick to move to digital formats because
they require little extra work as long as the design is already done for the print edition.
Depending on the software and service used for the PDF or image conversion, additional
features may be added—features such as the inclusion of hyperlinks within the content,
the addition of videos and audio as overlays or separate pages, and EPUB-like views of
article copy (without images). Digital replicas are not very engaging to readers because
they simply mimic the passive reading experience of printed magazines, but if a
publication doesn’t need the extra interactivity and embedded media, a digital replica
might be the ideal format. Moreover, priced appropriately and marketed well, a digital
replica can be a successful companion or even replacement for a print publication without
production workflow retooling. When compared to interactive digital-publication systems,
digital-replica publications are also usually quite a bit less expensive to produce and
distribute.
What Digital Replica Offers
At a glance, here are the big characteristics comprising the digital-replica publication
type:
Viewable almost anywhere (as PDF or through web-based viewers) or
only on tablets (as app-via-PDF)
Obtained as single-issue/one-off standalone apps; as single-title, multi-
issue, branded newsstand apps; or as part of a newsstand of multiple
titles
Available in-publication or in-app subscription ability
Option for issues delivered automatically to subscribers
Precise layout control
Supports limited audio, video
Supports hyperlinks
Optional built-in table of contents
Built-in navigational system
Linear and nonlinear reading capabilities
User-selectable, optional EPUB-like text-only display of articles

What Digital Replica Does Not Offer
Conversely, if you want any of the following characteristics in your digital
publication, then digital replica is decidedly not the right publication class to choose:
User-adjustable font sizes (except in optional text-only display of
articles)
Text automatically reflows to fit any screen (except with optional text-
only article display)
Touch interactivity (beyond simple tap/swipe for page turning and
activating hyperlinks, audio, and video)
Embedded games, forms, or web content
A large amount of video content
Digital Replica Examples
The list of periodicals publishing digital replicas to a wide array of devices is
staggering, but below is a quick list off the top of my head. Note that several of these also
publish interactive magazine format versions as well. You should be able to find these and
many others in the App Store or Google Play. Figure 2.4 shows a few other examples as
well.
Advanced Photoshop
Cosmopolitan
Esquire
Harper’s Bazaar
Maxim
Motor Trend
National Geographic
Oprah
Rolling Stone

Figure 2.4: Digital replica publication examples
Shape, March 2015 (top left), Men’s Fitness, March 2015 (top right), Inc, February 2015 (middle left), Total Film,
February 2015 (middle right), Coffee Magazine, March 2015 (bottom left), and Apple Magazine, February 20, 2015
(bottom right).
Digital Replica Production Roles
Digital replicas are, as the name implies, merely replicas of print publications. Thus,
there is very little work involved in their creation and publication after the print edition
has been finalized. Someone merely exports the print edition to PDF, uploads it to a
conversion and distribution service, adds a minimum of interactivity, and clicks Publish.
Assuming you want to add as much interactivity as possible to your digital replicas, you
may need to hire or train for the following additional roles beyond developing the print
publication:

Author/copywriter
Developmental editor
Copyeditor
Technical editor
Indexer
Layout designer
Illustrator
Photographer
Photo retoucher
Videographer
Video editor
Voiceover talent
Audio mixer
Form designer
JavaScript programmer
Web analytics expert
Interactive Magazine
When the iPad was first released, major magazines like Wired and Sports Illustrated
were the first out of the gate, with interactivity and media-rich publications utilizing the
full array of touch interactivity inherent in the iPad’s design. Because of this, as well as
the rapid succession of other magazines to adopt the technology even in its alpha and beta
stages, the format, which actually lacks a formal name even half a decade past its debut,
has come to be commonly called the interactive magazine format, and for the duration of
this book I will use that nomenclature. (However, it is also often described as the fully
interactive, media-rich, or app-based publication format, though none of those fully or
accurately describe it either.) Despite the name, the interactive magazine format is not
limited to magazines. The format class is ideal for ecatalogs, eyearbooks, richly interactive
ebooks, and many other types of publications. Unfortunately, its moniker tends to make
creators of other types of publications shy away from interactive magazine. I hope that
won’t be you, now that I’ve defined the full use of the term.
The name interactive magazine is not official, though it is widely used and is
immediately understood by anyone in the publishing industry. Companies like Adobe,
Aquafadas, Mag+, and others all tend to identify their own versions of interactive

magazine publications with names meant to strengthen the brands of their propriety
creation systems—“Adobe DPS apps,” for example. Moreover, there is no common file
extension to refer to as there would be with PDF or EPUB publications. Some digital-
magazine creation systems create .Folio files, others .Issue files, but none of those formats
are actually used on a tablet; rather, those .Folio, .Issue, or other intermediary formats are
converted into apps for distribution through the Apple Newsstand or App Store, Google
Play Newsstand or Apps Store, and similar parts of the Amazon App Store and Windows
Store. Calling them “app-based publications” would be misleading because several
publications are available as apps that don’t use this particular class of format but instead
have been custom-coded from scratch to do something unique.
Unlike the other format classes discussed in this chapter, all of which can be used
across a range of devices, interactive magazine is a class built specifically and solely for
mobile operating systems and the tablet and smartphone devices that run on them. It has
no support whatsoever on handheld ereaders or even on computers (see the sidebar
“Interactive Magazine Conversions for Computer Viewing”). It’s built specifically for
tablets’ touch interfaces, fully interactive, media-rich, app-based digital magazines fully
exploit the multimedia and user-interactivity features of tablets by offering not only pixel-
precise layouts equivalent to print magazines but also audio, video, slideshows, 3D
rotating objects, zooming, panning, replaceable content, scrolling regions, live web
content, and on-the-page video games. All of these features (and more) function with the
reader’s direct physical interaction—interaction more involved than simply clicking a
mouse button or swiping to turn the page. They draw readers into the content through their
interactivity, making the process of reading such a publication more of a collaborative,
personal, and active experience than the passive reading experience inherent in print
publications, reflowable EPUBs, and digital replicas.
Interactive Magazine Conversions for Computer Viewing
As I stated, the interactive magazine format class cannot be viewed on computers—in their native format.
Depending on the system used to create the interactive magazine publication, there may be available a means
of publishing it for display on computers. Adobe DPS, for instance, provides the option of publishing to the
Adobe Content Viewer for the Web. Publications using this distribution channel are viewable within web
browsers on computers, tablets, smartphones, and other devices, but do not include as rich an interactive
experience as their tablet versions. Similarly Aquafadas DPS, Adobe DPS’s largest competitor, offers Web
Reader distribution. Unfortunately this distribution method converts Aquafadas DPS publications into Flash
SWF publications, something I’ve already strongly cautioned you against using (see the sidebar “Flash-
Powered Digital Publications” earlier in this chapter). Thus there are means of viewing interactive magazine
content on computers, but they don’t really count because these web-viewable versions are not the same
format and lack the full breath of features of the native tablet versions.

What Interactive Magazine Offers
Tablet-based interactive magazine-formatted publications can contain a great deal of
interactivity, including hyperlinks that open web pages, hyperlinks that send email and
SMS text messages, hyperlinks that dial the phone, audio and video, image and video
slideshows, panoramic images, 3D rotatable objects, scrollable areas, content replacement
to create areas of pages that change based on user interaction, and embedded web content
such as live Twitter streams, RSS feeds, video games, web pages, shopping carts, and
anything else you can do on the web. All of this is wrapped into an app with swipe-to-
page and pinch-to-zoom capabilities and visual tables of contents, with or without page
thumbnails.
We’ll go step by step through creating all of those types of content and interactivity in
Chapters 12–14. At a glance, here are the big characteristics of the interactive magazine
publication type:
Viewable only on tablets
Typically delivered via newsstand or as app
Available in-publication or in-app subscription ability
Issues promoted automatically to subscribers
Obtained as single-issue/one-off standalone app; as single-title, multi-
issue, branded newsstand app; or as part of a newsstand of multiple
titles
Precise layout control
Optional separate or adaptive horizontal and vertical article layouts
Optional multiple layouts for different tablets and screen sizes
published and managed as one unit
Fully interactive
Supports images, audio, video, animation
Supports content replacement
Supports server-fed dynamic content (with live device connection)
Built-in table of contents
Built-in navigational system
Linear and nonlinear reading capabilities
What Interactive Magazine Does Not Offer

Conversely, if you want any of the following characteristics in your digital
publication, then the interactive magazine format is decidedly not the right one to choose:
User-adjustable font sizes
Text automatically reflows to fit any screen
Very small file sizes
Viewing on computers (except with conversions)
Viewable on handheld ereaders
Quick conversion from print edition layouts
No publication fees
Interactive Magazine Examples
There are tens of thousands of magazines and non-magazines using this format class
as of this writing, with more launching monthly. I couldn’t possibly include them all, but
Figure 2.5 shows a few you should look at to see what they’re doing right and what
they’re doing wrong.

Figure 2.5: Examples of the interactive magazine format
Empire, March 2015 (top left, note the playable podcast recordings in the center panel), Adobe Inspire Magazine,
February 2015 (top right), Vogue, March 2015 (middle left), Condé Nast Traveler, March 2015 (middle right), The
Essential Guide to TRON: Legacy (bottom left, a single-edition book using the interactive magazine format), and
National Geographic, March 2015 (bottom right).
Interactive Magazine Production Roles
Interactive magazines are creatively and logistically the most demanding of all types
of digital publications to produce. They must be designed almost entirely separately from
their print editions, with page sizes and orientations specifically geared toward one or
more tablets’ resolutions and capabilities, often with multiple versions of every article, and

interactivity and media features built by hand for each issue, each article. In Chapter 12,
“Covering the Basics of Interactive Magazines” we’ll use InDesign’s built-in multiple
layout and layout conversion techniques to dramatically reduce the amount of effort
required to adapt page designs to different sizes and orientations, but even with those
tools, creating high quality, engaging interactive magazines takes roughly three times the
time and effort as building an equivalent print edition.
Depending on the content of your particular interactive magazine, some or all of the
following roles will need to be filled by team members or the individual self-publisher.
The payoff, of course, is a reader experience wholly different from the print edition, one
that can engage your readers in more active, more personal ways than any other format
class.
Writer
Story editor
Managing editor
Layout artist
Production artist
Paginator
Illustrator
Photographer
Photo retoucher
Videographer
Video editor
Voiceover talent
Audio mixer
HTML programmer
HTML5 programmer
Developers for Java, JavaScript, PHP, Ruby, ColdFusion, Oracle,
MySQL, IIS, and others
Web server administrator
Web analytics expert

Custom-Coded Apps
If none of the other format classes fit your publication needs, consider building (or hiring a programmer to
build) it as a custom app. Custom-coded apps offer the ultimate freedom in functionality, doing whatever
you need your publication to do and presenting your publication in any manner you desire. You can locate
quite a few custom-app developers with just a moment or two spent with Google, or you can place ads for
them on Monster.com, CareerBuilder.com, oDesk.com, and other common creative and programming job
listing sites.
Because a custom-coded app will be built to your unique requirements and specifications and could literally
be and do anything, I won’t cover that particular subject in detail in this book.
HTML5
HTML5—Hypertext Markup Language, version 5—is a radical departure from
previous versions of HTML. When the World Wide Web was first devised and used by
government agencies and universities, it was text-only, with minimal formatting support—
HTML, version 1. Quickly its users realized that, even for academic documentation, they
needed to incorporate imagery, tabular data, color, and more customizable content
markup; thus, HTML 2.0 was born. HTML 2.0 allowed for the use of images and basic
text styling including several styles the world would rather forget, such as the <blink> the
<marquee> tags.
The web continued to improve every few years up through HTML 4.01, which was
the version feature-rich enough to spawn Internet application and social media websites
like Facebook, Twitter, adaptive content pages, and so on. Think about everything you saw
on the web, all the things that were possible, back between 2007 and 2010. That was all
HTML 4.01.
Now enter HTML5, which is as far beyond HTML 4 as HTML 4 was beyond HTML
2. Of course, HTML5 still runs websites and web applications, but it is much more
feature-rich than the code needed to produce a simple shopping website, blog, or even
microblogging service like Twitter. HTML5 includes a plethora of multimedia and rich
interactivity features, features that used to require add-on technologies like Flash, Java,
and Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML). Complex animation, dynamic content
replacement and modification, slideshows, and much more are built directly into HTML5.
HTML5 can do just about everything Flash can, but in a file format that is semantic,
internationally approved and fully compatible with modern computers, tablets,
smartphones, and even many handheld ereaders.
With such universal support and flexible capabilities, it’s no wonder that HTML5 is
rapidly becoming one the best formats for digital publications. Many publications are

being created in HTML5, and readers are being given access through the web, which, of
course, usually entails no publication licensing fees; App Store, Google Play, or Windows
Store royalties; or other expenses common with the creation of apps. Distributing via the
web means publishers have to get creative about enticing mobile users to find and visit the
publications, though.
Other publishers are producing HTML5-based publications as apps available for sale
in the App Store, Google Play, or Windows Store. Some of these are self-contained,
meaning that once the user installs the app and downloads a publication or issue, the entire
content of the publication is stored in the device’s memory. Some apps are merely
wrappers that store none of a publication’s content beyond perhaps a thumbnail of its
cover; rather, these wrappers are chrome-less, custom-branded web browsers that link
directly to HTML5 publications located on publishers’ or service providers’ websites. In
these cases, the removal of the browser chrome, title bar, bookmarks bar, and so forth
convince readers that they’re reading directly inside a custom app; they’ll never realize
they’re actually reading content sitting on a web server and not on a device’s internal
storage. Adobe Digital Publishing Suite and Aquafadas Digital Publishing Suite, the two
tools to which Chapters 12–14 are devoted, are frequently used to build such HTML5
publications.
HTML5 content can be designed with almost as much precise control over the layout
as you’d have with a PDF or interactive magazine or as a layout that adapts to the screen
on which it’s viewed. With its full support of modern media and built-in code for
animations and interactivity, it can be every bit as engaging to readers as any other format.
What HTML5 Offers
At a glance, here are the big characteristics of HTML5 relative to digital publishing:
Viewable on tablets, computers, smartphones, and some handheld
ereaders
Can store publication content on the web or contained within app
Web-based versions can be instantly updated without App Store,
Google Play, or Windows Store update notifications
Obtained as single-issue/one-off standalone app; as single-title, multi-
issue, branded newsstand app; or as part of a newsstand of multiple
titles
Available in-publication or in-app subscription ability
Available issues delivered automatically to subscribers
Precise layout control

Liquid (screen-adaptive) layouts
Supports audio, video, animation, rich interactivity
Supports forms, games, web content
Supports dynamic, server-fed content
Can be database-driven
Content may be fully customized by reader
Linear and nonlinear reading capabilities
What HTML5 Does Not Offer
Conversely, if you want the following characteristic in your digital publication, then
HTML5 is decidedly not the right format to choose.
Readable by web browsers or devices released prior to 2013
HTML5 Publication Examples
Figure 2.6 shows a few titles published in HTML5, as either web-based or app-based
content.

Figure 2.6: HTML5-based publication examples
Top to bottom: iFly KLM, January 2015, Aside Magazine (demo, date unspecified), DPS Tips Overlay Basics, by Bob
Bringhurst (a book built using Adobe DPS with pages built as embedded HTML5), and LIFE Wonders of the World (a
single-edition book built as an HTML5 book format).
HTML5 Production Roles
Because HTML is a markup language and HTML5 is even more programming-centric
than previous versions of the language, you’ll need to either learn or hire the requisite

skills. Even though InDesign can create HTML5-based digital publications publications
that adapt to the screen on which they’re viewed, other programs, such as Dreamweaver
and Muse, offer HTML5 creation in similarly graphical user interfaces; some even include
direct PDF-to-HTML5 conversion ability. Despite the availability of WYSIWYG layout
applications that will export to HTML5, it’s important to know the HTML5 language itself
in order to tweak code and accomplish effects not yet possible via layout application
export.
Specifically, you’ll need your team to cover the following roles, depending on which
forms of interactivity and media you want to include:
HTML5 developer
Writer
Story editor
Managing editor
Layout artist
Production artist
Illustrator
Photographer
Photo retoucher
Videographer
Video editor
Voiceover talent
Audio mixer
Developers for JavaScript, PHP, Ruby, ColdFusion, Oracle, MySQL,
IIS, and others
Web server administrator
Web analytics expert

CHAPTER
3
Digital Publication Types and Their
Markets
Now that we’ve examined the characteristics and capabilities of the available
digital publication formats, it’s time to think about the kind of content you want
to disseminate digitally. It’s all rather subjective, but I’ll identify the purpose,
character and use of different publication types as well as explain which format
classes are best suited to each type.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following publication types:
Ebook
Fixed-Layout Ebook
Emagazine
Enewspaper
Etextbook
Digital Comic Book

Quick Reference: Publication Types in
Format Classes
Table 3.1 provides you with an at-a-glance reference to the format classes and the
publication types that will work with them.
Table 3.1: Format classes and suitable publication types
EPUB Fixed-
Layout
Kindle
formats
PDF Digital
replica
Interactive
magazine
HTML5
Ebook (text-heavy, minimal imagery, minimal layout
control)
Ejournal (text-heavy, moderate layout control, minimal
interactivity)
Emagazine (absolute layout control, little or no
multimedia and interactivity)
Emagazine (absolute layout control, fully interactive)
Ecatalog (absolute layout control, image-heavy)
Eyearbook (absolute layout control, image-heavy)
Enewspaper (text-heavy, moderate layout control,
minimal interactivity)
Etextbook (nonproprietary system)
Digital Comic Book (full-page imagery)
Legend:
 The indicated format class is suitable (but not necessarily ideal) for the publication type.
Ebook
An ebook is a publication that is primarily text, such as a novel or other book
designed to be read in its entirety, cover to cover. Ebooks may include images or videos
here and there but are not by any means considered image-heavy. The content of ebooks
follows a simple layout structure. For instance, in the case of a novel, you may have
chapter numbers, chapter titles, the first paragraph of a chapter (for example, one that
doesn’t indent its first line), and then the average paragraph. A nonfiction ebook, say a
history book or a book about digital publishing with InDesign, might have a slightly more
complicated structure that includes multiple levels of headings and quite a few images and
captions. Ebooks can be created using any digital format, but typically use, and are best

suited for, the EPUB format, making them readable by a wide range of devices, including
handheld ereaders and ereading software available for nearly every computer, tablet, and
smartphone (see Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1: Examples of ebooks
Left to right: The New Oxford American Dictionary on a Kindle 7-inch tablet; The Murder of the Century by Paul
Collins, as displayed in the B&N Nook app on a 10.1-inch Android tablet; Evangelists of Art by Rev. James Patrick,
B.D., B.Sc., as displayed in iBooks on an iPad, and; Gulliver’s Travels by Jonathan Swift, viewed on an iPhone using th
Kobo Reader app.
Producing ebooks is relatively easy compared with other types of digital publications
and doesn’t require much of an investment beyond a computer and an Internet connection.
Ebooks may be produced with InDesign or with a variety of other programs, including
free and simple text-editing programs. Moreover, there are usually no fees required to
publish an ebook in the major ebookstores, unlike more media-rich publications, whose
requisite formats often entail a publishing license, costs per copy distributed, and other
fees.

What is an Enhanced Ebook?
Enhanced ebook is a nebulous term, which, thankfully, is beginning to fade out of the publishing lexicon.
When EPUB 2.01 was the current version, enhanced ebook was a term often applied to ebooks that used the
upcoming but not yet finalized EPUB 3 specification to include things like audio captioning or the equation
language MathML. You’ll also find apps in the Apple App Store, Google Play app store, or Windows Store
that use digital magazine–class interactivity features within a media-rich book; those apps, too, are
considered enhanced ebooks. Thus, any book-style content presented in a technology beyond the capabilities
common to the ebook publication type or the EPUB standard can be considered an enhanced ebook.
Consequently, there are no hard-and-fast rules about what the enhanced ebook publication type is or is not,
nor is there an easy way to define production roles or the business of the enhanced ebook publication type.
Rather, you have to look at the definitions and information of the publication type each individual enhanced
ebook most closely matches—if it’s an EPUB with a little JavaScript thrown in to provide extra functions,
then, for all intents and purposes, it’s an ebook; if the book includes lots of interactivity, touchscreen
features, and multimedia, then it is more accurately categorized as the digital magazine type, and so on.
Fixed-Layout Ebook
Fixed-layout or picture-book ebooks are those that, unlike a standard ebook, are
heavily dependent on imagery and have risen in a very short time to a level of popularity
that sets them apart as their own unique publication type. They’re so image-dependent, in
fact, that this class of publication often displays on every page background images or full-
page photographs or illustrations that serve to tell the story at least as much as included
text does. Examples of such publications include many children’s books or so-called
coffee-table books, wherein imagery is paramount and text is of equal or lesser
importance. Although based on EPUB, fixed-layout ebooks do not automatically adapt to
fit the screen on which they’re viewed. Most of them are designed to fully fit the most
popular device screen sizes, but they won’t automatically adapt to other screen sizes;
instead, readers may have to zoom or scroll horizontally and/or vertically to view the
entirety of each page, though smart fixed-layout ebook designers are careful to create
versions that don’t require manual zooming or scrolling.
Fixed-layout ebooks are effectively a hybrid between feature-slim reflowable ebooks
and the precision design and interactivity possible in the interactive magazine class. A
fixed-layout book can contain not just numerous and heavy imagery, but also sound
effects, read-a-along audio, and narration; videos and animations; touch-interactive
elements that activate audio, video, animation, or other effects; text with advanced styling
including type set in non-rectangular areas and type that flows along circles, spirals,
waves, stair-steps, and other directions, and; all the imagery, multimedia, and text objects
can be laid out with absolute, pixel-perfect exactitude with reliance that it will display that
way on all the devices that can display fixed-layout ebooks.

Chapter 8, “Creating Fixed-Layout eBooks,” builds on the skills you’ll obtain in
building and publishing reflowable ebooks in Chapters 5–7 to create fixed-layout ebooks
for Kindle, iBooks, Kobo, NOOK, and more.
Ejournal
The ejournal publication type is for multistory periodicals that are very heavy on text
with only a few images and illustrations here and there, as one might find in industry,
trade, scholarly, or academic publications such as the Journal of the American Medical
Association, The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, and similar publications (see
Figure 3.2). Ejournals are, in essence, ebooks that, instead of being broken into chapters,
use the same function to separate articles, with each article having a table of contents entry
and, within the EPUB archive itself, created as a separate XHTML file. Images, audio,
and/or video are included inline within the content. Issues may be purchased one at a time
or delivered to subscribers automatically via subscription.
Figure 3.2: Examples of ejournals
Left to right: Linux Journal, September 2011, as viewed in Sony Reader for PC, The Magazine of Fantasy & Science
Fiction, March 2015, and National Geographic, December 30, 2011, as published to Kindle through the Kindle
Newsstand,
Of course, electronic journals can be published in format classes other than EPUB, as
well—as interactive magazines, as digital replicas, as HTML5, as PDF, and so on. Their
content, however, makes them ideally suited for publication as EPUB, which maximizes
their reach across devices. Many publishers produce them in multiple formats—as visually
rich interactive magazines and HTML5 for devices that support those formats, as EPUB
for ereader access, and as PDF for general computer use.
On the flip side of the equation, many normally image-heavy periodicals even decoct
their stories and photos down to ejournal format to take advantage of the additional
distribution channels offered by the EPUB-powered class. National Geographic (Figure

3.2b) is the perfect example of this tactic. One would be hard-pressed to name a periodical
more renowned for photography than National Geographic, yet there it sits on Kindle,
NOOK, and other handheld ereaders, in EPUB format, with a scant one image per article.
And it does well, commercially, in this format in addition to, and separate from, the other
publication format types employed to disseminate the same issues to readers—those
classes being print, of course, as well as digital magazine and digital replica editions.
Tip: Using Ejournal Styling for Non-journal Content
If you want to publish journal-style content, look to the preceding chapter’s lists of things the various
publication types do and do not offer to help you decide on the best format (or formats) for your journal.
Your original content need not be in journal format to be publishable as an ejournal; look to the example of
National Geographic discussed in this section.
Emagazine
Emagazines have been around for decades in different formats, but they exploded
with the debut of the iPad, expanding as fast as the tablet industry itself—with no signs of
slowing
Magazines are multistory publications that mix many photographs and illustrations
with text, often with visually rich page design and advanced typography. When moved
into the digital realm, all those attributes remain but are augmented by multimedia (audio
and video), hyperlinks, and, depending on the format class, often a good deal more
multimedia and interactivity.
The best format class for a digital magazine depends on the nature of the content, the
level of interactivity desired, the magazine’s audience and distribution, and the budget for
the publication. Depending on those criteria, digital magazines can use nearly all format
classes, including EPUB, PDF, HTML5, digital replica, interactive magazine, and custom-
coded app (see Figure 3.3).

Figure 3.3: Examples of digital magazines using different digital publishing formats
Left to right: PDF format (TipSquirrel Magazine, February 2015), digital replica format (SciFiNow, March 2015),
Interactive magazine format (Mac|Life, March 2015), and HTML5 format (Aside Magazine, demo, no date specified).
The most successful emagazines are those that target multiple platforms and devices
through several different format classes. For instance, PC Magazine (Ziff Davis Media), a
monthly for computer, tablet, and gadget enthusiasts and professionals, publishes an
EPUB-based version (almost certainly a relatively simple export of an issue’s stories, with
their lead images inserted at the beginning) through Amazon, Barnes & Noble, and Sony
for reading on Kindle, NOOK, and Sony Reader ereaders and ereader software, and a
digital replica of its print edition (the print edition is exported to PDF and from there
converted to flat digital replica), published also through Amazon and Barnes & Noble for
viewing on their respective tablets, client software, and web clients, as well as via the
Zinio newsstand and viewer app, which reaches iOS, Android, FireOS, Windows, and
Mac OS X.
The digital replica version doesn’t even fully take advantage of the format—the
emagazine doesn’t include media not in the print edition, and it doesn’t make URLs within
its content into clickable or tappable hyperlinks. Despite this failure to take full advantage
of the medium, PC Magazine is reaching a broad audience with its two electronic versions
(in addition to publishing articles on its website).
National Geographic has virtually the same multiformat/multidevice distribution
method, sending EPUB versions to devices that support them and digital replicas to more
advanced devices. Other publications are following suit, but not all of them are stopping at
digital replicas. Many are also incorporating the rich interactivity in the interactive
magazine format class to exploit the full potential and user interaction possible on tablets.

Tip
As you consider publishing your digital magazine, heed the example set by others: If possible, don’t limit
your publication to just one format. Publish it in as many formats as possible to reach the widest possible
readership. Multiple formats can even mean multiple sales of the same ad spaces to different advertisers who
want to target different demographics.
Ecatalog
A typical catalog is a publication that lists products for sale and provides a means for
readers to purchase those products. Tablets represent a tremendous opportunity for
publishers to take their catalogs digital, though few have as yet taken advantage of the
possibility. Ecatalogs (and electronic magalogs) can be produced as ebook-like EPUBs
and, of course, the old standby PDFs, though the interactivity and advanced content
possible with interactive magazines is often the best way to go.
Just think about it: In a clothing catalog readers could touch color swatches beside a
photograph of a jacket to make the photograph change, displaying the garment in the
selected color. Perhaps the reader can even watch a commercial for the product right on
the product page. Or maybe the reader is a returning customer, whom you ask to log into
her account directly within the ecatalog. Once a customer is logged in, the ecatalog
communicates with a web-based database to populate a sidebar or other section of the
page with items based on the customer’s previous purchase history. How about a sale? On
the Friday after Thanksgiving all the prices in the ecatalog app you began distributing six
months ago automatically update to reflect Black Friday or holiday-season sales—without
requiring the reader to download an update to the ecatalog app. Conversely, maybe you
want to force the reader to update the ecatalog app after that edition of the catalog expires,
thus making sure that every potential customer is looking at the latest selection of
products, the most up-to-date pricing. All of this and a great deal more is possible in the
digital magazine publication type, so why limit that type to only magazines? It works just
as well—if not better—for catalogs.
There are many, many ecatalogs out there (see Figrue 3.4). Most are digital replicas of
print editions, often distributed as part of dedicated catalog newsstand apps such as
CoffeeTable, TheFind, and Google Catalogs. A few ecatalogs, like Land’s End and Ikea,
go beyond the app via PDF that is digital replica, leveraging the capabilities of the mobile
platform to enhance user experience and increase sales. Lands’ End, for instance, lets the
shopper try different colors and styles directly on the model in photographs via touch
triggers. Ikea’s famous decor catalog lets users photograph their own rooms and place
certain catalog products in the photograph.

Figure 3.4: Examples of ecatalogs
Left to right: Land’s End March 2015 catalog as published to, and viewed through, the CoffeeTable app on iPad; IKEA
Catalog 2015 USA, part of the IKEA Catalog newsstand app, viewed on iPad, and; Eddie Bauer Winter Active 2014
catalog as published to, and viewed through, the Catalogue app on iPad.
The Promise of Eyearbooks
The digital magazine publication type could be used to create richly interactive eyearbooks. Instead of
giving students, alumni, and faculty flat and costly printed yearbooks that they sign with pens, give them
interactive, tablet-based eyearbooks that, upon launch, play the school anthem and that they can sign with a
stylus or via form field. Rather than flat grids of headshots and captions, create dynamic fly-bys of student
photos, complete with hypertext that, when tapped, locates mentions of the student throughout the entire
eyearbook, plays a video greeting by the student, peeks inside the student’s virtual locker of mementos,
opens the student’s resume, or initiates a secure email to the student.
Although there are fees associated with publishing a digital magazine type of publication, unlike an EPUB,
those fees, when divided amongst and passed along to students, are far below the average $50–70 per copy
for print yearbooks.
When I wrote the first edition of this book in 2012 there were no companies offering eyearbooks. I suggested
at that time that the lack of companies offering such a product was an opportunity for readers to blaze a new
trail. I don’t know how many of the more than dozen eyearbook producers started as a result of that advice,
but I do know that, three years later, there’s still plenty of room for more. The overhead is low, the profit
potential high, even while undercutting traditional yearbook prices per copy.
Enewspaper
Any publication type or format class can be used to format content like a newspaper
or newsletter. When I talk about the enewspaper publication type, I specifically mean
publications with lots of articles, running on short lead times between content creation and

publication. Not every enewspaper is a daily, but every enewspaper has to move fast to
create, edit, publish, and distribute its content.
Most successful enewspapers follow the lead of digital magazines (or vice versa),
targeting multiple formats, devices, and distribution channels. For example, The New York
Times is available on Kindle and NOOK ereaders, ereader software, and tablets by those
manufacturers as an EPUB-based collection of articles. Naturally the EPUB version is
very stripped down, owing to the limitations of the format and the devices; it offers text
articles with minimal imagery and few, if any, inline hyperlinks. The Times also reaches
out to more capable devices with an HTML5-based edition that runs through a branded
app on iOS, Android, and Windows OS phones and tablets, and the web version at
http://nytimes.com. Figure 3.5 displays the Times in several formats on different devices.
Figure 3.5: The New York Times daily newspaper in various distribution channels and formats
Left to right: EPUB-based running on Kindle handheld ereader, EPUB-based on Kindle Fire 7-inch tablet, HTML5-
based presented within the New York Times iPad app, and the live NYTimes.com web version.
Etextbook
An etextbook is mostly prose text but also relies heavily on other types of content,
including tables, photographs, illustrations, charts, graphs, mathematic or scientific
equations, captions, audio clips, video segments, self-test quizzes, and other features
beyond the ken of the average ebook. Often the layout requires absolute control over
element positioning in order to effectively present the content. The structuring of
etextbooks’ content is more complex than ebooks because the content itself is more
complete, requiring not just chapter number and names, basic headings, figures, and
captions, but numerous other repetitive element styles. Etextbooks can be created from
any of the available digital format classes, with varying features and drawbacks. Figure
3.6 shows a few etextbooks currently available from the various ebookstores.

Figure 3.6: Examples of etextbooks
Upper row, left to right: Creative Writing: Learning from the Masters, published by Academy of Achievement; Digital
Literacy & Citizenship Teacher Edition: Grades 6–8, published by Common Sense Media, and; Hacking Electronics, an
Illustrated DIY Guide for Makers and Hobbyists, by Simon Monk. Lower row, left to right: Current Medical Diagnosis
& Treatment 2015 by Maxine A. Papadakis and Stephen J. McPhee; Copyright Basics from Ohio State University Press
and; Biochemistry Free and Easy 2.0, by Kevin Ahern and Indira Rajagopal.
Even though I consider the etextbook to be one of the four major digital publication
types (accompanying books, magazines/catalogs/yearbooks, and newspapers), it’s also the
most volatile of all the classes. Numerous polls and studies of educators and students from
just about every level of education reveal and continuously reinforce two interesting and
all but conflicting facts. First, educators and students want more textbooks and educational
material made available electronically, on tablets, ereaders, and/or computers. Second,
neither educators nor students want to use the electronic textbooks and educational
materials already widely available today. They don’t like the limited layout control of
ebook formats—even fixed-layout EPUB—nor do they like the narrow selection of
compatible devices for interactive magazine tablet publications. Similarly, PDF, HTML5,
digital replica, and other formats fail to satisfy the needs of academia because of those
formats’ limitations in terms of interactivity, device availability, reader annotation, or
content customization by educators themselves, whether in the K–12 or higher education
brackets.
Given that the textbook market for higher education alone is worth more than $7

billion (The San Diego Union-Tribune, February 27, 2012 and holding steady into 2015),
several companies are working very hard to build a format and publishing process to
address all the needs of educators and students. Though some (outdated) predictions
suggest that etextbooks will account for as much as 50% of academic book sales by 2018,
today’s figures have it in the low single-digits. Why doesn’t digital have a bigger chunk of
the $7 billion textbook market? Because no one seems to have built the right format yet,
though everyone is trying.
Barnes & Noble has been trying for several years, with its NOOK Study etextbook
application for Mac and Windows. Unfortunately, just as NOOK Study started gaining
brand recognition, B&N rebranded it the confusingly named Yuzu. Yuzu overcame NOOK
Study’s computer-only limitation by offering etextbooks on iOS and the Web, but, like the
rest of the NOOK line, it isn’t fairing well compared to the competition.
Two etextbook systems took early leads in the market, though they have no shortage
of competition for them. The first early leader was Kno, which offered etextbooks in a
format almost identical to rich-media tablet digital magazines but ran not only on an iPad,
but also because they’re HTML5-based, in any modern web browser on any device,
including desktop and laptop computers, Android or other tablets, and even smartphones.
Kno also offered the same textbooks as PDFs for those who prefer that format and the
annotation and markup features inherent in Adobe Reader and Acrobat. Kno briefly
offered its own hardware in the form of a dual-screen, folding tablet aimed squarely at
students who want to be able to access two textbooks or two places in a text
simultaneously—a common need identified by many students. The device fizzled because
it lacked the ability to do much more than work with digital textbooks, and tablet owners,
particularly college students, want a do-it-all tablet—astrophysics and Flappy Bird, if you
will.
The other early leader, Inkling, approached the problem of etextbook adoption from
the perspective of the professors and faculty rather than from that of publishers or even
students. Inkling claimed that educators want to be able to fully customize textbooks,
dropping chapters or sections the educators don’t feel are relevant to their courses adding
material from other sources, often material the educators themselves author. Thus, Inkling
offered a library of customizable educational material. Educators could purchase, build,
and push to students’ tablets digital textbook content à la carte, adding in their own essays,
articles, chapters, notes, highlights, text, video, audio, quizzes, and other types of content.
Those customized texts could then be saved and reused by professors, shared with their
colleagues, or given back to Inkling to offer to its other customers, often with royalties
paid back to the original educator for their contributed content. Needless to say, educators
loved this approach, though some traditional textbook publishers had difficulty seeing
how Inkling’s method could ensure protection of their content from intentional or

unintentional piracy, as well as secure adequate royalties for them, when educators could
customize just about everything within publishers’ materials.
Ingram, CafeScribe, CourseSmart, and several others devised their own digital
textbook systems, competing to meet the needs of educators, students, and publishers and
find that magic combination of features that would make their etextbooks the official
system.
In January 2012 Apple introduced its solution to the etextbook market, and, in
standard Apple style, declared its solution would “reinvent the textbook.” The solution
came in the form of iBooks 2.0 and iBooks Author, a free, Mac-only tool that enables
anyone to create etextbooks (see Chapter 8 for a brief discussion of iBooks Author).
Targeted first at etextbooks for high-school students, Apple’s strategy mentions
“potential” for higher-education applications of iBooks etextbooks. The initial response to
the announcement was stunning, with 350,000 etextbooks sold through iBooks in the first
three days following the announcement (All Things D, January 23, 2012). As was the case
with all preceding etextbook technologies, however, educators were quick to point out the
flaws in Apple’s etextbook strategy. First and foremost, iBooks etextbooks run only on
iPads, meaning that until every public-school child in the interested nation owns a
personal iPad, the school can’t standardize on iBooks. The school can’t even incorporate
those titles as secondary or even tertiary educational materials, because laws require that
every student be given access to the same resources as every other student. Whether you
want to call America’s tough economic times a recession or not, unemployment and
poverty are simply not compatible with 100 percent K-12 iPad ownership.
The CEO of educational publisher McGraw Hill said in an interview that a typical
school pays $75 per textbook and uses that same book for five years, working out to a $15
cost per student, per year. Even with an educational discount, Hillsborough County,
Florida, paid $479 each for 900 iPads it bought from Apple in May 2011. The iPads were
distributed to only two middle schools in the district, and funding for the purchase came
from the federal Title (i) and Magnet Schools Assistance Program grants rather than from
the district’s own shrinking operating budget (Tampa Bay Times, May 19, 2011).
Assuming students never break their iPads, the same units can be utilized for five years
(it’s a real stretch for technology of that grade to be usable that long, but let’s assume).
That makes the cost of one iPad $60 per year, which is just a little less than the five-year
cost of a printed textbook. Now we can add the per-annum cost of $9.99, $14.99, and
$19.99 iBooks etextbooks on top of that, one each for English, math, science, social
studies, and so on. Then there are secondary language textbooks, elective class textbooks,
and on and on. The cost for one student’s iPad adds up pretty quickly.
If Apple provided iPads and etextbooks to schools at costs competitive with print
textbook purchases—meaning iPads and all the textbooks for less than $200 per year—or

if Apple opened iBooks etextbooks up to being read on other platforms like Android
tablets, FireOS devices, or Windows computers, then maybe iBooks textbooks could see
widespread adoption in K-12 education. As the system stands now, only private schools
and more affluent public school districts can take advantage of iBooks. Until every child
has a tablet or Mac, iBooks etextbooks are all but useless to K-12 on a large scale.
Higher education, which sees a greater number of students able to attend class with
tablets or laptops, offers a greater potential for the format in the near future. Of course,
requiring a college freshman to buy a new iPad for $399–$829 on top of the cost of books,
room and board, and everything else the student needs would be a tough sell to some
colleges, but it’s a far easier pitch than in the K-12 arena, especially if Apple follows
Amazon’s lead and offers etextbooks for rent at lower prices than outright purchases.
Some colleges are even providing students with iPads, passing the cost back to students as
part of tuition fees.
Costs alone aren’t the only problem cited by iBooks critics in the educational
industry. Apple maintains absolute control over any content distributed through the
iBookstore (or the App Store or iTunes). That means Apple directly control which
etextbooks are available to schools and which aren’t; Apple is in a position to subtly or
not-so-subtly influence education by tailoring its etextbook offering. Personally, I think a
tech company like Apple might do a better job than the U.S. government has done at
influencing public education in the U.S., but that’s still way too much power to put in the
hands of a private-sector company whose primary responsibility is a financial one to its
shareholders, not a moral one to our children.
Are iBooks etextbooks the future? Well, they certainly aren’t the present. With
changes to Apple’s content control policies, government-appointed textbook reviewers,
major pricing incentives, and the expansion of iBooks onto other platforms the way Apple
did with iTunes, then I can easily see iBooks becoming the standard in etextbooks. But
remember that while Apple is rushing to incorporate educational publishing into its
empire, Barnes & Noble, Amazon, Kno, Inkling, and more are driving toward the same
goal.
Amazon has long sold textbooks as ebooks for Kindle devices and software, but they
lacked features critical to academia, features such as full annotation and content
highlighting, copying of content with citation, and, of course, advanced layout control. In
the first quarter of 2015 Amazon launched two simultaneous programs relevant to
textbooks. The first sought to overcome the limitations of ebook-style etextbooks in the
form of Kindle Textbook Creator, a proprietary application to create etextbooks from
PDFs for distribution on Kindle and FireOS devices. The second initiative leverages print
textbook sales by Amazon operating campus bookstores starting with pilot locations at the
University of Massachusetts at Amherst, the University of California at Davis, and Purdue

University. Amazon’s operation offers students faster textbook delivery and discounted
prices. The two efforts, though at first glance opposed to one another, may instead push
Amazon to the lead in the etextbook market. Lightning may then strike twice with the
company that all but single-handedly built the ebook into a universally accepted type of
publication doing the same for etextbooks. The future will tell.
Given how fragmented and varied the ecosystem of etextbooks currently is, there is
no one system or digital-content publisher I can advise you to use. None of the solutions
currently available satisfies all the needs of its would-be markets, and each uses closely
guarded proprietary publishing methodologies. If you’d like to distribute your etextbooks
in a more open, less proprietary format class, however, such as PDF, digital magazine, or
HTML5, then you’ll find exactly what you need in this book.
Digital Comic Book
Though people have read digital comic books for years on their computer screens, the
advent of the iPad and other tablets heroically rocketed digital comics into their golden
age (pun intended). Rather than making a weekly trip to the comic-book shop, which, like
the brick-and-mortar bookstore, is (sadly) a dying breed, comic fans can have digital
editions of comic books delivered directly to their tablets. Tablets can store hundreds, even
thousands, of comic books in a slim, light, and eminently portable package.
This golden age of digital comic books has lifted the barrier of the previously high
cost of entry to would-be comic creators and publishers. Without the cost of printing and
mailing their comics, any comic creator can now self-publish or work with one of several
emerging small comic publishers and newsstand app makers to distribute their titles. In
fact, beyond the cost of the Photoshop, Illustrator, or similar graphics programs that comic
creators would have to own to design their panels and pages anyway, there are often no
additional costs to epublish their comics. This allows them to keep cover prices down,
which, of course, drives sales and generates profit.
Unfortunately, the two big comic-book companies, Marvel and DC, haven’t yet
learned that lesson. You would think that titles like The Guardians of the Galaxy, The X-
Men, Batman, and Justice League would be among the first to find great success as digital
comics, but alas, that’s not the case—but not for lack of customer interest. Rather, the
problem is that Marvel and DC, which now charge a $3.99–$5.99 cover price per printed
32-page comic book, are often charging the same rates for each digital comic. For 80 years
the comic-book industry has justified every increase in issue cost by citing the rising cost
of paper—and, more recently, fuel for trucks to ship cases of comic books from printers to
retail outlets. The paper and fuel costs are irrelevant to the world of digital comics, so how
can the big companies justify the same per-issue price? This question perplexes readers.

Digital comic books are usually simple JPG or PNG images of each page, with all the
pages of a given issue compiled into a CBR or CBZ archive file. These two formats are
simply renamed RAR and ZIP archives, respectively. Each page of an issue is a separate
image, numbered sequentially, and then archived to RAR or ZIP. After archiving, the RAR
or ZIP file is renamed CBR or CBZ, which is then read by any of several free or
commercial digital comic-book readers available for computers and tablets. The series of
images is then presented sequentially by the comic-book reader software—a glorified
image previewer. In this way the average digital comic or graphic novel is a digital replica
format rather than ebook format (see Figure 3.7).


Figure 3.7: Digital comic book examples
Above: Carnival of Souls: Welcome to the Show (Carnival Comics Entertainment), viewed on a 7-inch Kindle Fire table
in self-contained app, and; below: X-Men, Vol. 2, No. 89 (Marvel Comics), viewed in the Perfect Viewer comic book
viewer app on a 10.1-inch Android tablet.
Digital comics in CBR and CBZ are just a series of images without interactivity. More
interactivity is possible, however, with more advanced digital comic formats including
fixed-layout EPUB and KF8 formats. Readers can be presented with multimedia graphic
novel experiences that include music, sound effects, narration, animation, video, and
directed reading that moves through the comic book page one panel at a time (see Figure
3.8). In Chapter 8, “Creating Fixed-Layout eBooks,” we’ll talk more about digital comic
books and graphic novels and how to build them for publication to Kindle, iBooks,
NOOK, and more. Additional digital comic book publishing tools are available from a
variety of vendors; those proprietary tools are not covered in this book.

Figure 3.8: A digital comic book that offers panel-at-a-time reading
The graphic novel Star Wars: Darth Vader and the Ghost Prison (Dark Horse Comics) offers both full-page mode (left)
and panel-at-a-time reading mode (right).

CHAPTER
4
The Facts, Figures, and Financials of
ePublishing
Whether you are an aspiring self-publisher or the CEO of a major publishing
house, a freelance designer or sales person, this chapter will provide statistics,
figures, and examples to help you make sense of the business, economic, and
marketing concerns of epublishing. Whether your intent is to sell yourself, your
boss, or your clients, or if you just want to educate yourself about the realities of
the world of epublishing, you’ll find in this chapter an abundance of important,
relevant data.
In this chapter, you will learn about the following:
People and Their Device Usage
The Business of eBooks
The Business of Children’s & Young Adult eBooks
Authors and Their Incomes
The Missing 30 Percent of the Data
Self-Publishing
The Business of eTextbooks
The Business of eMagazines

Note
In previous editions of ePublishing with InDesign the types of statistics and data in this chapter were spread
throughout the first three chapters or available only within the Teacher’s Edition. For the first time all the
facts, figures, and examples—and many completely new this edition—are consolidated into a single chapter
to make it easy for professionals and educators alike to evaluate and reference a variety of data.
People and Their Device Usage
Before we get into specific market segments, financials, and examples, let’s look at a
few facts that impact all areas of epublishing.
32 percent of American adults own an ebook reader, up from 26 percent
in 2013 and 19 percent in 2012 (Pew Research, January 2014).
42 percent of American adults own a tablet, up from 31 percent in 2013
and 19 percent in 2012 (Pew Research, January 2014).
85 percent of people say that mobile devices (smartphones, cell phones,
tablets, and handheld ereaders) are a central part of their everyday lives
(SalesForce 2014 Mobile Behavior Report, October 2014).
90 percent of people aged 18–24 stated that mobile devices are a central
part of their everyday lives (SalesForce 2014 Mobile Behavior Report,
October 2014).
81 percent of people who earn $75,000–$100,000 annually own tablets
(SalesForce 2014 Mobile Behavior Report, October 2014).
79 percent of people earning more than $100,000 per year own tablets
(SalesForce 2014 Mobile Behavior Report, October 2014).
81 percent of consumers age 35–44 own tablets (SalesForce 2014
Mobile Behavior Report, October 2014).
57 percent of tablet owners read on their tablets (SalesForce 2014
Mobile Behavior Report, October 2014).
43 percent of smartphone owners read on their phones (SalesForce 2014
Mobile Behavior Report, October 2014).
43 percent of smartphone owners read on their devices at least once per
day (SalesForce 2014 Mobile Behavior Report, October 2014).
57 percent of tablet owners read on their tablets at least once per day
(SalesForce 2014 Mobile Behavior Report, October 2014).
More than 90 percent of consumers surveyed reported that access to the
same content across multiple devices is somewhat or very important

(SalesForce 2014 Mobile Behavior Report, October 2014).
The Business of eBooks
Is there money in producing ebooks? You betcha! Here are some facts to establish that
point right up front:
$27 billion in net revenue to reporting publishers for the U.S. book and
journal publishing industry for 2013 (AAP report U.S. Publishing
Industry Annual Survey, June 2014).
89 percent of 16 and older U.S. ereader (and tablet) owners read ebooks
for pleasure (Pew Internet & American Life Project, April 2012).
71 percent of 16 and older U.S. ereader (and tablet) owners read ebooks
for work or school; 49 percent report doing so daily (Pew Internet &
American Life Project, April 2012).
49 percent increase in adult (all, fiction and non-fiction) ebook sales
between January 2011 and January 2012 (AAP, March 2012).
150 percent increase in religious segment ebooks between January 2011
and January 2012 (AAP, March 2012).
67 percent of U.S. public libraries offer ebooks for lending to privately
owned ereaders, up from 38 percent in 2008 (American Library
Association [ALA], State of America’s Libraries Report, April 2012).
28 percent of U.S. public libraries lend ereader and mobile devices for
ebook consumption (ALA, April 2012).
94 percent of academic libraries offer ebooks (Library Journal and
School Library Journal survey, November 2010).
By 2020 80 percent of academic library budgets are expected to be
allocated for electronic content (U.S. Dept. of Education, NCES,
Academic Libraries Survey, 2011).
Consumers who subscribe to an ebook subscription service like Kindle
Unlimited, Scribd, and others spend an average of $58 per month on
ebooks (Nielsen Books & Consumer Research, January 2015).
The Business of Children’s & Young Adult
eBooks

The largest and fastest growing segment of all epublishing is in the combined
Children’s and Young Adult genres, as evidenced by Figures 4.1 and 4.2. This segment
includes reflowable and fixed-layout ebooks, as well as more interactive publications
using interactive magazine, app, and HTML5 formats.
Figure 4.1: U.S. ebook marketshare by audience.
Children’s/Young Adult is the fastest growing share of the United States ebook market of the last decade.
Source: Jonathan Nowell (Neilsen Book Pres.), January 15, 2015 presentation to Publishers Launch Conferences

Figure 4.2: U.K. ebook marketshare by audience.
Children’s/Young Adult is the fastest growing share of the British ebook market of the last decade.
Source: Jonathan Nowell (Neilsen Book Pres.), January 15, 2015 presentation to Publishers Launch Conferences
475 percent increase in children’s and young adult market ebooks
between January 2011 and January 2012 (AAP, March 2012).
71 percent of children ages 6–17 read books for fun (Scholastic Kids &
Family Reading Report, January 2015).
93 percent of children 2–13 read ebooks at least once per week (January
2015 report from PlayCollective and Digital Book World The ABCs of
Kids and E-Reading: Volume 4–Devices)
82 percent of children read ebooks on tablets at least once per week, up
from 76 percent the year prior (The ABCs of Kids and E-Reading:
Volume 4–Devices, January 2015).
64 percent of children read ebooks on handheld ereaders at least once
per week (The ABCs of Kids and E-Reading: Volume 4–Devices,
January 2015).
81 percent of preschool children are likely to read the same ebook
multiple times (The ABCs of Kids and E-Reading: Volume 4–Devices,
January 2015).
$8.29 is the average price parents expect to pay for a children’s ebook
(The ABCs of Kids and E-Reading: Volume 4–Devices, January 2015).
$13.00 is the average monthly fee parents will pay for an all-you-can-
read children’s ebook subscription that includes access to the latest titles
(The ABCs of Kids and E-Reading: Volume 4–Devices, January 2015).

Figure 4.3: Parents expectation for average ebook purchase price
The average expected price of children’s ebooks continues to rise year over year.
Source: January 2015 report from PlayCollective and Digital Book World The ABCs of Kids and E-Reading: Volume 4–
Devices.
Parents report no preference of format (ebook or printed) for their
childrens’ books except for reading with their children, in which case
print books are preferred even at a slightly higher price than ebook
editions (The ABCs of Kids and E-Reading: Volume 4–Devices, January
2015).

Figure 4.4: Who chooses children’s ebook purchases
Parents are involved in children’s choices of new ebooks but are no longer shopping alone.
Source: January 2015 report from PlayCollective and Digital Book World The ABCs of Kids and E-Reading: Volume 4–
Devices.
35 percent of parents report a willingness to buy ebooks with enhanced
features and greater child engagement (formats: fixed-layout,
interactive magazine, HTML5, and custom app), up 27 percent from
2013 (The ABCs of Kids and E-Reading: Volume 4–Devices, January
2015).
66 percent of 6–8 year old children prefer to read print books at least
some of the time (Scholastic Kids & Family Reading Report, January
2015).
56 percent of 9–11 year old children prefer to read print books at least
some of the time (Scholastic Kids & Family Reading Report, January
2015).
Kids 6–17 who participated in the October 2014 Scholastic Kids &
Family Reading Report survey stated they like to read books that:
“Make me laugh,” (70 percent).
“Let me use my imagination,” (54 percent)
“Have characters I wish I could be like because they’re smart,
strong, or brave,” (48 percent).
“Teach me something new,” (43 percent).
“Have a mystery or a problem to solve,” (41 percent).

Authors and Their Incomes
The data throughout this section is for anyone involved in book production and sale—
publishing, sales, design, marketing, and so on—but of particular interest to authors and
those who recognize author satisfaction as a crucial component in the ebb and flow of
publishing, are the below statistics.
Figure 4.5: Author Satisfaction with Book Quality
Self-published authors are clearly more satisfied with their level of creative control, though traditional publishers do find
some satisfaction in the ability to pass along tasks like layout and ebook preparation to publishers’ staff.
Source: Digital Book World Author Survey 2014


Figure 4.6: Author Satisfaction with Book Marketing and Promotion.
No one is happy with the current levels of book marketing and promotion, whether done by the author or the publisher.
Source: Digital Book World Author Survey 2014
Figure 4.7: Amount Self-Publishers Spent on Book Cover Design
Nearly half (42 percent) of self-publishers spent nothing on their book cover designs, often doing it themselves. The
other 58 percent hired out, spending mostly less than $250.
Source: 2013 eBook SelfPublisher Survey, October 2013.

Figure 4.8: Who Edited Self-Publishers’ eBooks
More than one-third of self-publishers unfortunately chose to edit their own books while 46 percent hired professional
editors and the remaining 20 percent asked friends to edit.
Source: 2013 eBook SelfPublisher Survey, October 2013.


Figure 4.9: Author Satisfaction with Book Financials.
With only single digits of authors reporting satisfied, neither self-published nor traditionally published authors are happy
with book sales or earnings. Self-published authors are much happier with the percentage of their royalties and with the
prices set for their books than traditional authors. Naturally traditionally-published authors, who pass all expenses for
editorial, creative, and distribution to the publisher, feel a greater satisfaction than self-publishers who must incur such
costs directly.
Source: Digital Book World Author Survey 2014
Figure 4.10: Author Preferences for Publishing Next Book
Comparing the preferences of authors who have only published through publishing houses (Traditionally-Published),
Self-Published authors, and Hybrid, those authors who have experienced both traditional and self-publishing.
Source: Digital Book World Author Survey 2014

Figure 4.11: Annual Writing Income by Author Type
Although some authors—including traditionally-published authors with print books—make less than $1 per year, the
vast majority of all three author types earn something annually from their books. More than half of self-publishers earn
less than $1,000 while one-third of traditionally-published and one-third of hybrid (authors with both self-published and
traditionally-published books) also fall into that income segment. After the first thousand dollars hybrid authors’ annual
incomes begin to edge ahead of traditionally-published authors’. Indeed, there are three times as many hybrid as
traditionally-published authors earning more than $100,000 annually from their books. Even a small percentage of self-
published authors earn six-digits from their annual sales.
Source: Digital Book World Author Survey 2014

Figure 4.12: Total Trade Net Revenue by Categories for All Formats (eBook, Hardcover, and Paperback)
This chart shows the most complete snapshot of the net revenue for book publishing in the U.S. as a whole, including
books sold as ebooks, hardcovers, and paperbacks. For those who don’t want to count the zeroes, the top figures are in
the billions of dollars.
Source: Information Today, January 13, 2015

Figure 4.13: Total Trade Net Revenue by Format
Here the sales data is broken down by format, showing how many dollars (again, in the billions) are spent on ebooks
versus hardcover and paperback for the same periods. The big takeaways from this chart are the amount of money being
spent on ebooks—$1.1 billion in quarters 1–3 2013 and $1.2 billion during the same period in 2014—and that ebooks
can and do coexist with healthy print book sales. Digital publishing is not the print killer so many pundits desperately
insist that it is.
Source: Information Today, January 13, 2015
The above sets of data relate primarily to U.S. authors. Here are a few facts about
their counterparts across the Atlantic:
In 2005 40 percent of U.K. authors earned their income solely from
writing though that percentage dropped to 11.5 percent by 2013
(Authors’ Licensing and Collecting Society [ALCS] 2014 report What
Are Words Worth Now?).
70 percent of U.K. authors who published traditionally and who

exercised the rights reversion clause with their publishers went on to
earn money from their works (ALCS report What Are Words Worth
Now?, July 2014).
U.K. writers who self-publish typically earn a 40 percent return on their
investment (ALCS report What Are Words Worth Now?, July 2014).
85 percent of U.K. self-publishers said they would self-publish again
(ALCS report What Are Words Worth Now?, July 2014).
The Missing 30 Percent of the Data
According to Author Earnings Report, 30 percent of ebooks purchased in the U.S. do
not use ISBN numbers and thus can’t be counted by official market surveys and reports
from Bowker, AAP, BISG, Nielsen/BookScan, and others. Consequently, those agencies
official reports—the ones most publicized in the media—are statistically incomplete. Is
this correct? It would seem so. None of the major ebookstores require an ISBN number for
self-publishing; that includes Amazon Kindle, Apple iBooks, Kobo, B&N NOOK, and
Google Play Books. And, without the requirement, many self-publishers are saving
themselves the expense of buying an ISBN. Because the leading agencies like Bowker
(which is the ISBN agency), BookScan, and the rest only count sales of ebooks by ISBN,
sales of those books without an ISBN—as much as 30 percent of all ebooks—go
uncounted.
Author Earnings Report seeks to provide more accurate data, rectifying the non-ISBN
accounting gap, but analyzing data directly from ebookstores’ bestseller lists. The
following findings are based on that data.
20 percent of Amazon’s overall Top 10 bestselling ebooks do not have
ISBN numbers (Author Earnings Report, January 2015).
16 percent of consumer dollars were spent on ebooks without ISBN
numbers (Author Earnings Report, January 2015).
28 percent of ebook authors’ earnings came from ebooks without ISBN
numbers (Author Earnings Report, January 2015).
One-third of Amazon.com’s paid ebook sales are self-published ebooks
(Author Earnings Report, January 2015).
20 percent of all consumer dollars spent on ebooks on Amazon.com are
spent on self-published ebooks (Author Earnings Report, January
2015).
87 percent of ebooks published in 2014 by self-publishers did not have

ISBNs (Author Earnings Report, January 2015).
When sales figures are calculated by number of ISBN-equipped units
sold, only 10 percent of all ebook sales and 7 percent of gross consumer
ebook dollars appear to be generated by self-published ebooks, thus
dramatically undervaluing overall self-published sales and dollars spent
(Author Earnings Report, January 2015).
40 percent of all ebook author earnings go to self-published ebook
authors (Author Earnings Report, January 2015).
35 percent is the total earnings of all ebooks sold by the Big Five
publishers on Amazon (Author Earnings Report, January 2015).

Figure 4.14: Share of Amazon’s Book Bestseller Lists by Publisher Type
This chart shows the shares by publisher type of Amazon’s 120,000 bestselling fiction and non-fiction book titles, books
that account for approximately 50 percent of Amazon’s entire ebook revenue. According to the report more than half of
Amazon’s bestselling books are published by small and medium publishers, with the Big Five and self-publishers
virtually tied with 19 and 18 percent share of sales respectively.
Source: Author Earnings Report, January 2015
Figure 4.15: 12-Month Trends in Market Share of Amazon Bestselling eBook Sales by Publisher Type
Looking at the 12-month trends in market share from February 2014 through January 2015, self-publishing is steadily
increasing its market share while other publisher types lose market share. Amazon’s own publishing system sharply rise
in mid-2014, seemingly in correspondence with the plateauing of market share from Uncategorized Single-Author
Publishers. This is most likely a direct correlation owing to Amazon’s push for Amazon Direct Publishing and other
programs.
Source: Author Earnings Report, January 2015

Figure 4.16: Percentage of Amazon’s Daily Bestselling eBook Sales by Publisher Type
Looking at the daily sales of ebooks on the Amazon bestseller lists it’s interesting to note that self-published ebook sales
are again nearly tied with sales of ebooks published by the Big Five, but now those two dominate the daily sales. This is
disproportionate to the number of such ebooks occupying the bestseller lists.
Source: Author Earnings Report, January 2015

Figure 4.17: Daily Gross Amount of Sales from eBooks on Amazon’s Bestseller Lists by Publisher Type
More than half of daily gross sales dollars go to the Big Five while books from small- to medium-sized publishers and
self-publishers also earn healthy shares.
Source: Author Earnings Report, January 2015

Figure 4.18: Average Book Price of Top 7,000 Amazon Genre eBook Bestsellers
This chart shows the average unit price of ebooks for the 7,000 bestselling genre (all fiction) ebooks listed on Amazon.
Armed with the average ebook price, it’s now possible to fully interpret the meanings inherent in daily gross and author
revenue shares.
Source: Author Earnings Amazon 7K Report, February 2014

Figure 4.19: 12-Month Trends in Daily Gross Sales of Amazon Bestselling eBooks by Publisher Type
Gross sales of bestselling ebooks consistent net the Big Five publishers the biggest share of the pie. Self-published gross
sales dollars maintain a steady, gradual rise through the year from February 2014 through January 2015, seemingly
cannibalizing sales by other publisher types.
Source: Author Earnings Report, January 2015

Figure 4.20: Daily Percentage of Revenue to Authors from Sales of eBooks on Amazon’s Bestseller Lists by
Publisher Type
Compare the daily gross amount of sales per publisher type to the percentage of gross dollars earned by authors.
Source: Author Earnings Report, January 2015

Figure 4.21: 12-Month Trends in Daily Percentage of Revenue to Authors from Sales of eBooks on Amazon’s
Bestseller Lists by Publisher Type
Overall author earnings by publisher type closely follow the gross sales percentages by publisher type except for self-
published works. Naturally sales of self-published books returns the highest percentage of revenue to the author directly
but this trend goes beyond that mere fact to point at authors earnings rising above simple gross sales adjusted to self-
publishers. Whereas the Big Five publishers maintain a large selection of higher-priced books (typically in non-fiction)
in addition to the average $7.15 per copy fiction genre books, most self-publishers’ sales average $3.20 per unit range.
Thus, for self-published authors to own such a large percentage of daily revenue, they must not only keep a higher
portion of unit sales but also sell a large quantity of units, which is born out by daily unit sales shares (see Figure 4.16:
Percentage of Amazon’s Daily Bestselling eBook Sales by Publisher Type.).
Source: Author Earnings Report, January 2015

Figure 4.22: Share of Barnes & Noble’s (NOOK) Genre (Fiction) eBook Bestseller Lists by Publisher Type
Analysis of publisher type share of Barnes & Noble’s bestseller lists differs greatly from similar data taken from
Amazon. Whereas Small- to Medium-Sized Publishers dominate the Amazon bestseller lists with 54 percent of the 5,00
titles on the list, that group is in third place on B&N’s bestseller lists. Self-published books compose more than half of
the number of titles.
Source: Author Earnings Barnes & Noble Report, July 23, 2014

Figure 4.23: Daily Unit Sales Share of Barnes & Noble’s Genre eBook Bestsellers by Publisher Type
Of the 5,000 bestseller titles on the list, the Big Five publishers account for 51 percent of the daily total unit sales. This
isn’t surprising. Self-published titles take a healthy second place with 35 percent of all daily bestselling ebook sales.
Source: Author Earnings Barnes & Noble Report, July 23, 2014

Figure 4.24: Daily Gross Amount of Sales from eBooks on B&N’s Genre eBook Bestseller Lists by Publisher Type
Getting into the financials, we can see that, of all dollars spent on bestselling ebooks, the Big Five get slightly more than
two-thirds (69 percent) , which is apt given that the Big Five own such a big share of daily sales and that their average
unit price is approximately twice the average unit price set by Self-Publishers and Small- to Medium-Sized Publishers.
Source: Author Earnings Barnes & Noble Report, July 23, 2014

Figure 4.25: Daily Percentage of Revenue to Authors from Sales of eBooks on B&N’s Genre Bestseller Lists by
Publisher Type
This chart shows the breakdown by publisher type of all funds earned by authors for daily sales of ebooks on the 5,000
genre bestseller lists. Comparing to the same breakdown for Amazon, traditionally-published ebooks with the Big Five
earn authors a greater share on Barnes & Noble, though both venues earn self-publishing authors the same percentage of
daily dollars (40 percent on Amazon and 42 percent on B&N). It’s clear from all four B&N charts that Small- to
Medium-Sized Publishers don’t have as strong a presence on B&N as on Amazon.
Source: Author Earnings Barnes & Noble Report, July 23, 2014
Self-Publishing
Vanity press has been as dirty a phrase in literary circles as military intelligence is
within the military and law-enforcement arenas. For decades, only the most desperate oft-
rejected would-be authors, or extremists with manifestos to disseminate, self-published
particularly in ebook format. The conventional thinking was that if you self-published, it
was because you weren’t a good enough writer to be signed by a publishing house. The
world has clearly changed, as have the reasons people self-publish.

“Self-publishing now outstrips all the combined titles put out by
conventional publishers like Random House and Simon & Schuster”
(John Schmid, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, August 14, 2014)
More than 391,000 books were self-published in the U.S. in 2012, up
422 percent since 2007 (Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, August 14, 2014).
17 percent is the percentage of growth of self-published titles from
2012 to 2013 (Bowker report Self-Publishing in the United States,
2008–2013, October 2014).
65 percent of self-publishers are women (The Guardian, November 8,
2014).
Nearly two-thirds of self-publishers are in the 41 to 60 age range (The
Guardian, November 8, 2014).
27 percent of self-publishers are older than 61 (The Guardian,
November 8, 2014).
Half of self-publishers are employed full-time (The Guardian,
November 8, 2014).
32 percent of self-publishers have a degree while 44 percent have a
higher degree (The Guardian, November 8, 2014).
287 percent is the percentage the number of self-published books grew
during the five years from 2006 through 2011 (Bowker press release,
October 24, 2012).
Only an average of 25 percent of authors (self-published, traditionally
published, and hybrid) write as a means to earn money as reported by
Dana Beth Weinberg, Ph.D, (January 15, 2014 presentation at Digital
Book World). The following are other goals for writing cited by
published authors in Dr. Weinberg’s study:
59 percent, to publish a book that people will buy.
47 percent, to build my career as a book writer.
43 percent, to satisfy a lifelong ambition.
42 percent, to share my story with others.
27 percent, to see my book in a bookstore.
25 percent, to obtain validation for my work.
21 percent, to share my expertise on a particular subject with
others.
12 percent, to build my brand for purposes other than my writing

career.
7 percent, to gain prestige.
Hybrid Authoring—Traditional and Self-Publishing
A hybrid author (or simply hybrid) is someone who has both self-published and
published through traditional channels with an established house. Once a rarity, hybrid
authoring is becoming as common and popular as people like both Left and Right Twix.
Like that famously dualistic candy bar, there are two sides from which authors approach
becoming a hybrid—starting with traditional publishing or starting with self-publishing
and then moving into the other.
Keeping the Labels Straight
Self-publishing writers are, most accurately, labeled as self-publishers, though that term isn’t indie rock
enough for some, so the terms independent author and indie author—or the most hip, simply indie—were
created. They’re a bit confusing, though, because before authors wanted to be called indie the small- to
medium-sized publishers claimed the term for themselves. They were indie publishers, independent from
large publishing houses, especially the Big Five. What’s worse, is that authors who worked with indie
publishers were often called indie authors. So no we have authors called indie because they self-publish and
authors called indie because they publish through small houses.
Of course, out in the world, the nebulous term causes only slight confusion. In this tome, however, we’ll be
discussing a number of areas in which drawing a distinction between self-published and traditionally
published with small- to medium-sized publishing houses is important. Within the tables and charts in this
chapter, for instance, there are large differences between those two segments.
Similarly, though hybrid author is becoming the norm, sales figures, market share, gross sales dollars, and
author royalties are all computed relevant to the manner in which a book is published. Thus, throughout the
rest of the chapter and this book, books that are published by their authors are described as “self-published”;
books published with smaller houses are labeled as being from “small- to mid-size publishers,” and; books
traditionally published are termed “traditionally published.” Indie authors can focus on the figures in the
self-published and/or small- to medium-sized publishers columns. Hybrid authors will want to evaluate the
data in all columns.
Traditional Publishing to Self-Publishing
Some hybrids, like yours truly, start by eating the Right Twix…er, I mean, by
becoming traditionally published authors who later expand into, or move completely over
to, self-publishing. There are many varied reasons why a traditionally-published author
would choose to self-publish. A few of the top ones tend to be to have more creative
control, the ability to experiment with different publishing and distribution models, to
publish shorter works, to publish longer works, shortening production time and publishing

sooner, and many other reasons.
Whatever their reasons, there are a number of excellent examples of traditionally
published authors who went hybrid. As you can see in the profiles below, many
traditionally published authors have also embraced self-publishing. Note that the profiles
list only a few titles per author; each has numerous other titles, either or both traditionally
and self-published, to his or her name.
Randy Ingermanson
Photo from author’s Amazon author page.
Traditionally Published
Who Wrote the Bible Code? A Physicist Probes the Current Controversy (WaterBrook Press/RandomHouse, 2013)
Writing Fiction for Dummies (For Dummies, 2009)
Self-Published
Double Vision: A Quantum Suspense Novel (2013)
City of God Trilogy (2014)
How to Write a Novel Using the Snowflake Method (2014)
Joe Simpson

Traditionally Published
The Sound of Gravity (RandomHouse, 2012)
The Beckoning Silence (Mountaineers Books, 2012)
Self-Published
Touching the Void (2012)
This Game of Ghosts (2013)
Storms of Silence (2014)
Helen Hollick

Photo from author’s Amazon author page.
Traditionally Published
Come and Tell Me: Be Sensible and Safe (Happy Cat Books, 2002)
A Hollow Crown: The Story of Emma, Queen of Saxon England (William Heinemann, LTD, 2004)
Self-Published
The Kingmaking (Pendragon’s Banner Trilogy, 2009)
The Forever Queen (2010)
I Am the Chosen King (2011)
Pariah S. Burke (Me)
Photo from author’s Amazon author page.

Traditionally Published
Mastering InDesign for Print Design and Production (Sybex, 2007, 2010)
ePublishing with InDesign CS6 (Sybex, 2012)
Self-Published
Creating Fixed-Layout eBooks (2013)
ePublishing with InDesign: 2015 Edition (2015)
InDesign Master Class: Print Design and Production (2015)
Self-Publishing to Traditional Publishing
Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa Clause.
On the other half of the hybrid author label are those who start out self-publishing and
later sign with a publishing house—the Left Twix first-eaters, if you will. Those deals can
have authors publishing all or some of their future books through the publisher, like
Amanda Hocking, or the deal could simply be to allow the publisher to distribute a book
already successful in its self-published form, such as with Fifty Shades of Grey.
Initially, especially with such famous examples as E.L. James, publishing went
through a phase where every self-published author sought to build up the audience for a
book in a quest for that Holy Grail of Publishing, the traditional publishing contract. A few
made it, of course, but a funny thing happened at the end of their journeys: few of them
stopped self-publishing. As Indiana Jones discovered on his quest (before The Kingdom of
the Crystal Skull ruined the franchise), the Holy Grail isn’t without cost. Publishers have
to make money, too, so authors can’t have anywhere near as much of the book cover price
as they can with self-publishing. There are advantages to traditional publishing, of course,
but those advantages rarely get hybrid authors thriving through self-publishing to publish
exclusively through a publishing house.
Instead, like hybrids who started out with traditional publishing, having found success
in both publishing models, authors carefully evaluate their options on a per book basis.
The question becomes, Am I more likely to reach my goals for this book with a publisher
or without one?
Here are a few out of a growing list of authors who began their hybrid success by
self-publishing.
E.L. James

Photo from author’s Amazon author page.
Erika Leonard “E.L.” James wrote and self-published Fifty Shades of Grey in 2011. It sold more than 70 million copies
as an ebook and print-on-demand before Vintage Books bought the distribution rights. All told, it has sold more than 100
million copies, been translated into 52 languages, and turned into a major motion picture release in February 2015 from
Universal Studios. The book spawned two other self-published books, Fifty Shades Darker and Fifty Shades Freed,
which have also been optioned for feature films.
Lisa Genova

Photo from author’s Amazon author page.
Neuroscientist Lisa Genova wrote Still Alice, the story of a 50-something Harvard professor dealing with early onset
Alzheimer’s disease. When traditional publishers declined to buy Still Alice, Genova self-published it in 2007 against
the advice of her agent. Two years later it was acquired for a reported $500,000 by Simon & Schuster and debuted under
the Pocket Books imprint in January 2009 at number five on the New York Times bestseller list. It has since been
translated into more than 20 languages around the world. Genova has written two additional novels, Left Neglected
(2011) and Love Anthony (2012).
Ronald H. Balson
Photo from author’s Amazon author page.
Once We Were Brothers is a novel about two brothers in Poland during World War II finding themselves on opposite
sides of the Holocaust. After numerous rejections from traditional publishers, Chicago attorney Ronald H. Balson
teamed up with his son to found their own publishing company and self-publish Once We Were Brothers. Within two
years they had sold more than 100,000 copies in print and ebook. St. Martin’s Press later acquired the book and reissued
it in the Fall of 2014.
Robin O’Bryant

Photo from author’s Amazon author page.
In 2011 Robin O’Bryant self-published Ketchup is a Vegetable: And Other Lies Moms Tell Themselves, a satirical and
often sarcastic look at daily life for a mother of three. By September 2013 Ketchup is a Vegetable was sitting on the
bestsellers lists for the New York Times, the Wallstreet Journal, and USA Today. One month later she signed a two-book
deal with St. Martin’s Press.
Colleen Hoover
Photo from author’s Amazon author page.
Colleen Hoover is the author of six New York Times bestselling novels, the first two of which were self-published when

they made the list. Her first two books, Slammed, and its sequel, Point of Retreat, both made the NYT bestseller list in
August 2012, at number 8 and number 18, respectively. Only seven month after releasing Slammed, Hoover signed with
Simon & Schuster.
Amanda Hocking
Photo from author’s Amazon author page.
In April 2010, unknown 26-year-old group home worker Amanda Hocking began self-publishing Young Adult
Paranormal genre ebooks on Amazon for $0.99–$3.99 per copy. A year later she had made $2 million from an average of
100,000 copies sold per month. That sparked a bidding war between Random House, Simon & Schuster, HarperCollins,
and Macmillan. Ultimately St. Martin’s Press, an imprint of Macmillian, signed Hocking to a reported $2 million
contract for a new series of four books. She also sold the film rights.
The Business of eTextbooks
In Chapter 3, “Surveying the Digital Publication Types,” I explained how there’s
plenty of money to be made in etextbooks, but that no one had figured out how. Here are
plenty of facts and figures to back up both assertions.

Figure 4.26: Shares of $7.18 Billion Annual U.S. Textbook Market Expenditures
Out of a total of $7.18 billion spent in the U.S. textbook market in 2013, only $54 million was spent on etextbooks.
Digital Learning Materials, however, which encompass apps, web-based content, non-linear educational materials,
videos, interactive games, and other forms of highly interactive content, rose to take a sizeable share at $1.08 billion.
Source: Campus Technology, December 3, 2014
“Textbooks are dead. They’re dinosaurs.” (Brian Kibby, president of
McGraw-Hill Higher Education, speaking at EDUCAUSE 2014,
October 2014).
$54 million, the amount of money consumers spent on digital versions

of print textbooks out of overall 2013 textbook expenditures of $7.18
billion (Campus Technology, December 3, 2014).
$1.08 billion, the amount of money consumers spent on “digital
materials,” or etextbook material that isn’t simply ebooks with
annotation and a few other tools tacked on (Campus Technology,
December 3, 2014).
“At [the present] rate of growth and shrinkage, sales of etextbooks will
surpass used textbooks in 27 years.” (Campus Technology, December 3,
2014).
96 percent of undergraduate college students own a laptop (Campus
Technology, August 25, 2014).
44 percent of college students assigned to use an etextbook for a course
were “at least somewhat or very happy” to be using it (Campus
Technology, August 25, 2014).
39 percent of college students assigned to use an etextbook for a course
were “somewhat or very unhappy” to be using it (Campus Technology,
August 25, 2014).
$520, the average amount spent per college student during the 2013–
2014 school year for course materials, including print textbooks,
etexbooks, used textbooks, and rentals (AAP, August 11, 2014).
17 percent, the percentage of drop in annual college student spending
for course materials since 2010 (AAP, August 11, 2014).
The Texas Education Agency credits a complete transition to etextbooks
in science classes through eighth grade and in high school physics
classes for the 13 percent rise in science and 3 percent rise in match
scores on the 2014 state standardized tests over the previous year’s
scores (The Associated Press, September 25, 2014).
“Publishers are turning themselves into software companies. They’re
fundamentally changing themselves from publishing organizations to
software development houses.” (Kent Freeman, COO of Vital Source
Technologies as quoted by Campus Technology, December 3, 2014).
80 percent of publishers believe a subscription model for textbooks is
“inevitable,” (BISG report Digital Books and the New Subscription
Economy, July 2014).
38,200 employees make up the workforce of scholarly and scientific
publishing across 43 of the United States (7 states abstained from the
survey, AAP, January 16, 2015).

$2.3 billion is the annual payroll impact of that scholarly and scientific
publishing workforce (AAP, January 16, 2015).
“It takes $500,000–$3 million, up to 7,000 hours’ research and writing,
and nearly 200 scholars to produce a new textbook or revise an existing
one,” (AAP, August 11, 2014).
The Business of eMagazines
Digital magazines are not flourishing, but they aren’t dead, either. In fact, there
encouraging signs of growth as well as optimistic forecast for the next few years.
Consumers have finally begun to accept—and in some segments embrace—both digital
replica and interactive magazine formats on their tablets.
Speaking first to digital replica format publications are the following figures:
3.8 percent is the percentage of total circulation occupied by digital
replica editions for magazines in the first half of 2014, up 0.5 percent
from the first half of 2013 (Alliance of Audited Media, August 2014).
15.2 percent is the percentage of year-over-year increase in digital
magazine circulations in early 2014 (Mequoda, October 7, 2014).
12 percent of total circulation is digital (Next Steps Digital Magazine
Dashboard, October 2014).
2.5 percent rise in year-over-year in digital subscriptions between June
2012 and June 2014 (Next Steps Digital Magazine Dashboard, October
2014).
17 percent rise in single-copy sales of digital edition magazines
between June 2012 and June 2014 (Next Steps Digital Magazine
Dashboard, October 2014).
6.6 percent is the increase in total units of digital magazines sold
between June 2013 and June 2014 as reported by Next Steps’s Digital
Magazine Dashboard, October 2014.
1 in every 8 copies of magazines sold is digital (Next Steps Digital
Magazine Dashboard, June 2014).
The top 10 U.S. consumer magazines by digital replica circulation for
January–June 2014 (according to an AAM report published August
2014) are:
1. Game Informer Magazine

2. Shape
3. Star Magazine
4. OK! Weekly
5. Working Mother
6. Maxim
7. National Geographic
8. Taste of Home
9. Men’s Fitness
10. Cosmopolitan

Figure 4.27: Top Digital Magazines Ranked by Ad Revenue
Clearly ad revenue isn’t in line with what it should be if the highest grossing publication only makes $15 million per
annum.
Source: Yudu Magazine Industry 2014, October 2014
Moving now into combined data for both formats of emagazines, let’s talk about
revenue, circulation share, and finally, how individual newsstand services perform for
various categories of digital periodical. Note that, though the actual numbers differ,
several sources are predicting significant rises in revenue in the near future.
In 2016, total magazine revenue worldwide will reach $97.3 billion
(FIPP World Magazine Trends 2014–15, December 2014).
$1.5 billion by 2018 is the digital circulation revenue
PricewaterhouseCooper projects (Ad Age, June 3, 2014).
$5.2 billion, the revenue expected to be earned in 2016 by global digital
magazine circulation, rising 43.4 percent from 2013 (FIPP World
Magazine Trends 2014–15, December 2014).
$7.6 billion is PricewaterhouseCooper’s forecast for magazine digital ad
revenue by 2018 (Ad Age, June 3, 2014).
$13.4 billion, the revenue projected to be earned worldwide from
advertising sales for electronic editions of magazines (FIPP World
Magazine Trends 2014–15, December 2014).
Table 4.1: Top 24 Magazines Percentage of Digital Edition Versus Print Edition Sales (as of June 2013)
Subscription
Single Copy
Publication
Print % Digital % Print % Digital % Total Digital %
NYLON
50%
38%
9%
3%
41.1%
Game Informer
59%
41%
0%
0%
40.8%
Ok! Weekly
36%
38%
26%
1%
38.6%
Star Magazine
39%
29%
32%
0%
29.3%
Working Mother
74%
25%
0%
0%
25.7%
Men’s Fitness
64%
20%
11%
5%
25.0%
Shape
72%
16%
10%
2%
18.1%
Wired
84%
9%
4%
3%
11.6%
GQ
78%
8%
12%
1%
9.8%

Maxim
86%
9%
5%
0%
9.2%
Motor Trend
87%
7%
5%
1%
8.4%
Popular Science
87%
7%
5%
1%
7.9%
Men’s Health
78%
6%
15%
2%
7.3%
HGTV
71%
5%
22%
2%
6.8%
Food Network
71%
5%
23%
2%
6.7%
Women’s Health
76%
4%
18%
0%
6.7%
Taste of Home
91%
6%
3%
0%
6.4%
ESPN The Magazine
94%
6%
0%
0%
5.8%
Cosmopolitan
70%
4%
25%
1%
5.1%
US Weekly
76%
4%
20%
1%
4.8%
National Geographic
92%
5%
4%
0%
4.6%
Oprah
84%
3%
12%
1%
4.2%
Reader’s Digest
91%
4%
5%
0%
3.9%
BHG
97%
1%
2%
0%
1.5%
Total:
79.8%
11.3%
8.1%
0.7%
12.0%
Source: Next Steps Digital Magazine Dashboard, October 2014
Table 4.2: Top 24 Magazines Percentage of Digital Edition Versus Print Edition Sales (as of June 2014)
Subscription
Single Copy
Publication
Print % Digital % Print % Digital % Total Digital %
Game Informer
62.0%
38.0%
0.0%
0.0%
38.0%
NYLON
44.7%
36.2%
18.8%
0.3%
36.5%
Ok! Weekly
38.7%
26.8%
34.3%
0.2%
27.0%
Working Mother
78.5%
21.5%
0.0%
0.0%
21.5%
Star
44.0%
14.5%
41.4%
0.1%
14.6%
Wired
82.6%
10.2%
5.4%
1.8%
12.0%
Maxim
81.9%
10.6%
7.4%
0.2%
10.8%
GQ
74.7%
8.7%
15.0%
1.6%
10.3%
Cosmopolitan
57.4%
7.7%
34.2%
0.7%
8.4%

Men’s Fitness
76.7%
6.6%
15.1%
1.6%
8.1%
Popular Science
86.3
7.5%
5.8%
0.2%
7.7%
Taste Of Home
85.6%
6.9%
3.3%
0.1%
7.0%
Reader’s Digest
77.0%
6.2%
3.3%
0.1%
6.2%
Men’s Health
75.7%
5.5%
18.3%
0.5%
5.9%
Food Network
69.2%
4.7%
25.5%
0.7%
5.3%
ESPN The Magazine
94.7%
4.9%
0.4%
0.0%
4.9%
US Weekly
67.0%
4.6%
25.1%
0.3%
4.9%
HGTV
71.0%
3.6%
24.3%
1.0%
4.7%
Women’s Health
76.7%
4.2%
18.7%
0.4%
4.6%
National Geographic
92.3%
4.5%
3.1%
0.1%
4.5%
Oprah
81.9%
3.7%
14.0%
0.4%
4.1%
Motor Trend
89.7%
3.9%
6.3%
0.1%
3.9%
Shape
83.7%
3.6%
12.5%
0.2%
3.7%
BHG
97.4%
0.7%
1.8%
0.1%
0.7%
Total:
79.9%
10.5%
9.4%
0.3%
10.7%
Source: Next Steps Digital Magazine Dashboard, October 2014
Apple Newsstand, though often the target of neglect criticism by both publishers and
consumers, is by far the single largest source of digital magazine titles. As Figure 4.28
shows, Apple’s share of the digital magazine market is massive with 13,355 different titles
as of October 2014. Google Play Newsstand offers 1,118 titles, and Amazon Kindle
Newsstand half as many as that with 545 periodical titles.

Figure 4.28: Digital Magazine Marketshare by Number of Available Titles (October 2014)
Source: Next Steps Digital Magazine Dashboard, October 2014
Table 4.3: Apple Newsstand Number of Magazines Available by Category
Category
2012 Jan 1 2013 Jun 7 2013 Oct 15 2014 Mar 21 2014 Oct 3
Arts & Photography
188
269
321
386
410
Automotive
265
394
493
581
631
Brides & Weddings
45
55
72
87
109
Business & Investing
445
707
904
1079
1202
Children’s Magazines
70
104
134
165
165
Computers & Internet
225
321
373
421
468
Cooking, Food & Drink
135
225
298
366
401
Crafts & Hobbies
176
231
266
299
326
Electronics & Audio
67
96
119
121
133

Entertainment
438
574
691
834
887
Fashion & Style
415
621
770
893
1042
Health, Mind & Body
234
348
491
667
704
History
39
58
74
98
115
Home & Garden
212
306
382
486
555
Literary Magazines & Journals
 
181
229
253
Men’s Interest
 
263
325
347
Movies & Music
 
240
293
323
News & Politics
 
849
970
1085
Outdoors & Nature
 
140
173
183
Parenting & Family
 
120
154
169
Pets
 
69
89
88
Professional & Trade
 
484
580
674
Regional News
 
151
163
190
Science
 
235
382
463
Sports & Leisure
 
907
1022
1099
Teens
 
45
48
56
Travel & Regional
 
601
723
790
Women’s Interest
 
374
437
487
Total
2954
4309
10,047
12071
13355
Source: Next Steps Digital Magazine Dashboard, October 2014

Figure 4.29: Apple Newsstand Number of Magazines Available by Category
Here is a visualization of the data from Table 4.3, “Apple Newsstand Number of Magazines Available by Category.”
Source: Next Steps Digital Magazine Dashboard, October 2014
From the data we can draw the following conclusions:
An 11 percent growth trend continues.
Nearly all categories of titles see consistent growth in the Apple
Newsstand despite frequent complaints by publishers and consumers
that Apple neglects the function and marketing of Newsstand.

The most populated categories of titles, and thus likely the areas in
which readers most embrace digital periodicals, are those with time-
sensitive, short lifespan content. Business & Investing (1,202 titles in
3Q2014), Sports & Leisure (1,099 titles), News & Politics (1,085 titles),
Fashion & Style (1,042 titles), and Entertainment (887 titles) are the top
five most populated categories for the last three polling periods.
Teen magazines are the fewest, though rising slightly.
Brides & Weddings and Science exhibit the largest category growth up
25 percent and 21 percent, respectively.
Table 4.4: Google Play Newsstand Number of Magazines Available by Category
Category
2012 Jan 1 2013 Jun 7 2013 Oct 15 2014 Mar 21 2014 Oct 3
Arts & Photography
32
48
51
57
61
Automotive
54
57
69
82
78
Business & Finance
12
15
15
15
16
Crafts & Hobbies
23
90
105
120
118
Entertainment
42
72
100
111
113
Food & Drink
15
27
56
59
65
Health & Fitness
20
35
42
49
44
Home & Garden
39
58
86
93
108
Men’s Lifestyle
10
29
42
46
42
News & Politics
12
20
24
27
27
Parenting & Children
12
12
17
17
19
Science & Technology
30
53
76
89
99
Special Interest
19
41
56
67
69
Sports
66
98
112
126
136
Travel
8
13
14
17
20
Women’s Lifestyle
52
77
95
101
119
Total
446
745
960
1076
1134
Source: Next Steps Digital Magazine Dashboard, October 2014

Figure 4.30: Google Play Newsstand Number of Magazines Available by Category
Here is a visualization of the data from Table 4.4, “Google Play Newsstand Number of Magazines Available by
Category.”
Source: Next Steps Digital Magazine Dashboard, October 2014
Conclusions we can draw from the Play Newsstand data include:
Growth remains steady between periods at 5 percent.
With an 18 percent percent increase each, Women’s Lifestyle and
Travel are the fastest growing categories.
Conversely to the figures from the Apple Newsstand, periodicals
containing time-sensitive, short lifespan content are not numerous on
Google Play Newsstand. From this we might cautiously infer that the

average person who consumes digital magazines on Android devices
does not read, or does not read in digital form, periodicals about
finance, business, news, and politics.
Sports is an exception as it is time-sensitive, short lifespan content
while also being the most populated category.
Also highly-populated by titles are categories typically lumped together
as “women’s interests”, including Women’s Lifestyle with 119 titles as
of 3Q2014, Crafts & Hobbies with 118 titles, Entertainment containing
113 titles, and Home & Garden with 108 titles.
Those same categories often overlap heavily with the “senior living”
designation, though so does the Travel category, which only contains 19
titles (the second least in the list). For that reason I’m hesitant to assume
merely from this data that seniors (of both genders) are a significant
audience for digital magazines sold through Google Play Newsstand.
Table 4.5: Amazon Kindle Newsstand Number of Magazines Available by Category
Category
2012 Jan 1 2013 Jun 7 2013 Oct 15 2014 Mar 21 2014 Oct 3
Arts & Photography
 
20
20
19
43
Automotive
 
33
33
31
36
Business & Investing
42
35
35
33
41
Children & Teens
 
 
 
 
29
Computers & Gaming
 
14
14
13
16
Cooking, Food & Wine
 
24
32
29
28
Crafts & Hobbies
 
11
40
39
39
Entertainment
167
22
22
18
17
Family & Parenting
 
8
10
25
25
Fashion & Beauty
 
 
 
 
29
Health & Fitness
 
34
25
41
42
Home & Garden
 
34
33
28
31
Lifestyle
273
41
41
33
29
Men’s Interest
 
25
83
78
63
Music
 
7
6
6
6
News, Politics & Opinion
60
76
76
70
71

Religion & Spirituality
 
16
17
17
17
Science, Technology & Nature
46
24
24
22
21
Sports
111
65
63
61
76
Travel & Adventure
45
16
16
15
22
Weddings
 
 
 
 
10
Women’s Interest
 
35
35
20
18
Total
744
540
625
598
709
Source: Next Steps Digital Magazine Dashboard, October 2014
Figure 4.31: Amazon Kindle Newsstand Number of Magazines Available by Category
Here is a visualization of the data from Table 4.5, “Amazon Kindle Newsstand Number of Magazines Available by
Category.”
Source: Next Steps Digital Magazine Dashboard, October 2014
This data lends itself to some very obvious conclusions:

Amazon Kindle Newsstand has never offered a comprehensive
selection of digital magazine titles.
Between the last two periods the overall growth trended upward 5
percent.
Even breaking up the Entertainment and Lifestyle categories into more
focused categories in 2Q2013 didn’t lure significantly more titles to
Amazon.
The category with the highest growth is Arts & Photography with a 126
percent increase to 43 titles in 3Q2014.
Sports leads the categories with 76 titles as of 3Q2014, followed by
News, Politics & Opinion with 71 titles, and Men’s Interest with 63.
Although Men’s Interest closed 3Q2014 with the third largest selection
of titles, it’s clearly declining with previous title counts of 83 one year
before and 78 six months before.
Need More?
Need more statistics, demographics, and other hard data about digital publication sales, adoption rates, and
forms of revenue? Sign up for my The ePublishing Briefing daily or weekly email newsletters at
http://iamPariah.com/newsletters . The newsletters are free, spam-free, and chock full of the very latest
epublishing news, facts, and tutorials I find online from hundreds of sources.

Be Alerted to Revisions & Updates
Sign up for the free (and spam-free) ePublishing with InDesign Series email newsletter to be alerted about
updates and revisions on in this book. Sign-up here: http://iampariah.com/newsletters
The newsletter is used only for alerting readers to updates, revisions, and spin-offs from this book (and its
exercise files). Subscribers’ information is never sold, rented, or used for any other purpose.


Glossary of Terms

alpha
In terms of software, an alpha release is one that is an early version of the software
produced primarily for the testing by developers. Among the characteristics that mark
software as alpha version are known bugs, incompatibilities with other software and
possibly with hardware as well, and the absence of certain features planned for the retail
release of the software. After alpha version is beta version, a more stable version of the
software produced for wider distribution and testing, often in real-world workflows by a
select group of experts and clients. Adobe broke with the alpha and beta tradition with
Digital Publishing Suite by providing the alpha version of DPS, including the InDesign
plug-in Folio Producer Tools and the online DPS dashboard interface, to several large
publishers. Those publishers produced the earliest DPS-powered interactive magazine–
format publications despite the alpha status of the software. See also: beta.
anti-aliasing
Because square pixels comprise computer screens and rectangular pixels comprise
television screens, an effect called aliasing (or stair-stepping or jaggies) occurs when the
edges of objects don’t perfectly align with the pixel grid. For example, with a capital A,
the crossbar aligns perfectly horizontally with the pixel grid, but the lines that form the
majority of the shape are diagonal, which means they cut across several columns of pixels.
A single pixel may be only one color and cannot be bifurcated; thus, if a diagonal stroke in
the A falls partially within the pixel, then the entire pixel must be colored. As the strokes
progress diagonally, a series of pixels fills in, converting a smooth diagonal stroke into a
stair-stepped series of square (or rectangular) pixels. Anti-aliasing is the method (with
several submethods) of trying to reduce the appearance of this stair-stepping effect in
pixels. The method of reduction works within the requirements of each pixel being a solid
color by altering the color of pixels to match the percentage of the pixel that would have
been used were pixel division possible. For example, if part of the A’s black diagonal
stroke fills only half of the pixel, then the color of the pixel is changed to 50 percent gray,
tricking the mind into interpreting the pixel as only half-filled. Anti-aliasing also colors
pixels outside where the strokes of a letter or object land with small percentages of color
to help convey the illusion of smoothness.
apps
With the rise of smartphones and tablets with limited capacity for RAM and storage
space has come the age of apps. An application in the computer world is a fully functional,
often complex program with many functions and features. An app, by contrast, is a
specialized program that is small in terms of storage space and system requirements

compared to applications and limits its features to a niche function. Although the mobile
industry didn’t invent the concept of apps, it did popularize it because the software we
install on our smartphones and tablets consists of, by necessity, apps and not applications.
The slogan most responsible for rise of the term app in popular culture was Apple’s,
accompanying its first-generation iPhone: “There’s an app for that.” The term app became
even more part of the social consciousness when Apple’s slogan was satirized and adapted
to many other, often humorous, situations and products, including besmirches of Apple
itself.
ATOM
ATOM refers to both an XML-based method of feeding web content and a publishing
protocol used for creating and updating web resources. It’s the former I most often
reference in this book. ATOM was created as replacement to Really Simple Syndication
(RSS), which was the standard at the time for pushing content from a Web server to
readers and their software clients rather than awaiting readers to visit the website and
consume the content there. The function of ATOM is the same as that of RSS,
differentiated only by the geeky bits of how the two systems work. Suffice it to say that
ATOM and RSS are nearly interchangeable, and any website or web-based server content
can be delivered in either or both formats. See also: RSS.
backlighting
In terms of mobile devices, backlighting means that the device screen is illuminated
from behind (the screen appears self-illuminating). Mobile phones and tablets contain
backlighting, while ereaders typically don’t, which is what makes them to the average
person comfortable for long reading sessions. eReaders like the nontablet NOOK and
higher-end Kindle devices, omit backlighting to simulate the appearance of a printed book.
beta
Beta-version software is a not-ready-for-sale release of the software, often with
known bugs and incompatibilities and often lacking certain features and functions planned
for the retail release. Software companies such as Adobe produce beta software for release
to a select but often large and well-rounded group of experts and clients so that they may
test the software under real-world conditions, in real-world workflows, and provide
feedback to the software maker to aid in the fixing of bugs and incompatibilities and the
finalizing of the product’s feature list in an expected full retail version.
Big Five

In the publishing industry, Big Five is the term used to collectively identify the
world’s five largest book and textbook publishers, Penguin Random House, Macmillan,
HarperCollins, Hachette, and Simon & Schuster.
bit rate
This is the rate at which bits of data are transferred from one place to another. For
example, take an MP3 file with a bit rate of 128 bits per second (BPS). The quantification
means that 128 bits of data will be transferred per second from the MP3 reader to the MP3
player module; thus, 128 bits of audio data may be played every second. A 256BPS MP3
song will result in twice as much audio data as a 128BPS version, creating a more rich and
vibrant sound.
carry-over
This is a notation to readers that the current point in a threaded story is not the
beginning of the story; instead, it continues here from an earlier place, as in “continued
from page 10.” This is also known as carry-over line, continued line, or continue head.
See also: jumpline.
cloud
The word cloud as used in phrases such as “the cloud” and “cloud storage” refers to
the manner in which digital storage space is delivered as a service. This storage space is
typically redundant and noncentralized, meaning that the data exists simultaneously on
several hard drives, on several servers, and often in several global locations
simultaneously to mitigate the risk of data loss or data inaccessibility due to a hard drive
or connective failure at the server level. For example, with the purchase of an iPad,
owners are given access to cloud-based, or online, file storage in Apple’s iCloud service.
All files stored in the iCloud service are available from any Internet connection in the
world to all iOS devices running iOS 5 and newer, as well as computers that install the
iCloud client software. Google, Microsoft, ASUS, Dropbox, Box.net, Rackspace, and
numerous other companies offer cloud-based file storage and often other cloud-based
services, some free and some paid.
Creative Commons
Creative Commons is a digital-era attempt at defining and enforcing intellectual-
property law in a manner that is relevant to a world in which content is now available via
electronic means to everyone, everywhere. Unlike precedent-based U.S. and international
intellectual-property law, which is complex, incomplete, and inconsistently applied not
only between different countries but often between similar situations in the same country,

Creative Commons offers an internationally consistent set of licenses that group rights and
privileges content creators and content users can easily understand and use. The system is
backed by an informative website at http://creativecommons.org that succinctly and in
plain English (or Spanish or French or Japanese or…) describes what allowances content
creators are granting to users and what those users may and may not legally do with the
content under the chosen Creative Commons license. Tools on the website, such as a short,
question-based license selector, help creators quickly and without risk grant certain
licenses to their work—such as the license to distribute the work or the license to allow
commercial use of the work—while retaining all other rights under U.S. and international
copyright law. Some of the images used in this book and in its lesson files were used
under Creative Commons licenses.
cord-cutter
A cord-cutter is someone who cancels traditional cable or satellite television services
in favor of using Internet-based, streaming video services such as Hulu.com, Netflix.com,
HBO GO, and similar on-demand entertainment services.
cord-cutting
See cord-cutter.
CSS
CSS stands for Cascading Style Sheets, the means by which styling is accomplished
in HTML-based content. CSS style definitions and attributes such as font size, color, and
much more are applied to HTML content tagged or named a particular way. CSS figures
heavily into EPUB design because EPUBs are, like HTML, XML-tagged.
digital replica
Digital replica is a format of electronic publication that is effectively the print version
of the publication viewed on screen. It is a replica of the print version in digital format. I
often call digital replicas “app via PDF” because most digital-replica systems directly
convert a PDF of a publication into an app capable of running on mobile devices.
Depending on the system employed, digital replicas can often include basic interactivity
such as hyperlinks and sometimes embedded audio and video objects.
Because of the rapidity with which digital-replica systems are changing at the time of
this writing, coverage of this particular format is limited in this book. I do go in depth into
the various digital-replica systems as well as how to incorporate digital-replica publishing
into your workflow in webinars, on-site consulting and training, and articles. See my

website at http://iamPariah.com for further digital-replica and digital-publishing education
and workflow needs.
digital rights management
A system of controlling users’ access to digital content such as as ebooks, music,
video, and other content. A DRM (digital rights management) system restricts content
access to the users who have the right to access via purchase, rental, or other authorized
means, and may limit the actions authorized users may perform with and on the content
based on a set of administrator-defined rules. Amazon.com is one of the more prominent
examples of successful digital rights management in the ebook space. Amazon’s DRM
systems enable access to the same ebook, at the same point in the ebook, across all devices
employing the authorized user’s account without allowing the user to share the content
with unauthorized users. Moreover, Amazon’s DRM usage has been expanded in recent
years to allow rental check-in/check-out services in the form of the Kindle Owners’
Lending Library, a service that enables purchasers of ebooks to lend (at no cost) or rent
(for a fee to be paid to the original purchaser) ebooks to other Kindle account holders.
DRM is often derided as unnecessary and intrusive, but that belief is largely a result
of attempts to apply DRM to music and video content. In such cases, the DRM often
interferes with authorized users’ ability to use the content in authorized ways. DRM
systems in use on DVD and Blu-ray videos has historically been particularly disruptive
and frustrating to users. In the epublishing industries, however, including ebooks and
digital periodicals, DRM has been quite effective for publishers while simultaneously
being non-distruptive and often invisible to authorized users.
DRM
The abbreviation for digital rights management.
Dublin Core Metadata
Refers to Dublin Core Metadata Element Set, which is an international standard set of
properties or information forms that describe types of resources. Dublin Core Metadata is
the set of metadata included in various documents, images, and epublications (including
EPUBs), that communicate where the content came from, who created it, when it was
created, who owns the rights to it, and various other relevant information describing, but
not necessarily included within, the content. You can learn more about Dublin Core
Metadata at http://dublincore.org.
Although you may think the initiative is named for the city in Ireland, its origins are
less exotic—it began at a 1995 workshop in Dublin, Ohio.

end sign
This is a symbol, mark, or icon used to indicate the end of an article, particularly
when the article jumps between pages.
enhanced ebook
This is a nebulous term that refers to any ebook that contains more interactivity or
multimedia than a typical novel in ebook form that is merely text and basic pictures. The
term is most often used in marketing to communicate to the would-be buyer of an ebook
that it includes such extra features. Some consumers have consequently come to adopt the
term, though, as the definition of “ebook” evolves to include more media and interactivity
as standard elements, so must evolve the definition of “enhanced ebook.” Ergo, there isn’t
really such a thing as an enhanced ebook.
fixed-layout ebook
Often referred to as children’s ebooks, picture ebooks, photo books, and similar
monikers, fixed-layout ebooks are visually rich layouts that offer much more than standard
EPUBs. Unlike standard EPUB-based ebooks, fixed-layout ebooks don’t automatically
reflow to fit the device on which they’re viewed. Instead, they behave very much like
PDFs or even digital magazines, displaying the design, typography, and page geometry
exactly as designed on all devices that support fixed layout. Screen fitting is limited to
zooming and whether to show a single page or a two-page spread.
This specialty type of ebook tends to be very reliant on imagery, either or both as
inline graphics or page background images and sometimes even as spread-spanning
images. They support advanced typographic control and pixel-precise layout, and they can
contain read-along, on-demand, or ambient audio. Limited interactivity may also be
achieved through JavaScript integration. Objects can be placed anywhere on the page,
aligned relative to one another, with absolute precision, and type control goes far beyond
standard, flowable EPUB in the forms of support for any font (with embedding), accurate
line wrapping, hyphenation, leading control, tracking (letter spacing), and even multiple
columns. Fixed-layout EPUBs may have real sidebars, note or tip boxes, and live-text
image captions. And, like flowable EPUBs, all the text—even in such special features—is
searchable, live text.
At the time of this writing, fixed-layout ebooks are entirely proprietary with limited
device support. They can be viewed on iOS devices, Kindle Fire, NOOK tablet, and Kobo
Vox, though each device manufacturer has its own unique system and format for creating
fixed-layout ebooks. For instance, to make a fixed-layout ebook available in the iOS

iBookstore, it must be built completely differently than the KF8-format version created to
sell through the Amazon Kindle store for viewing on a Kindle Fire.
Because of the frequent changes inherent in the formats, device support, and
workflows for creating the highly profitable and popular fixed-layout ebooks, fixed-layout
ebooks are not discussed in detail in this book. Please consult http://iamPariah.com for
information on the latest industry changes you need to know in order to make fixed-layout
ebooks a profitable part of your business.
flush
This is the clean edge of type. For example, this page is printed with type flush left,
meaning that the type aligns along the left to create a clean edge.
folio
In the Adobe Digital Publishing Suite, a folio is one or more articles or layouts built
for DPS deployment.
FXL
This is a shorthand name for fixed-layout ebook growing in popularity among the
publishing community.
glyph
This is a single character, pictogram, mark, or entity within a font or language.
HTML5
This is the latest generation of the Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). HTML5
supports animation, multimedia, and advanced adaptive content. When incorporated into
epublications such as interactive magazines, HTML5 can fill in interactive or content-
presentation features and effects that the native interactive magazine–format tools like
Adobe DPS, Aquafadas DPS, and others cannot natively create. HTML5 is also an iOS-
supported alternative to Adobe Flash–format animations, multimedia, and games, and it
can do nearly everything Flash can do.
hybrid author
Authors who have self-published and published through traditional means with an
established publishing house.
hybrids

Generally this is used as an alternate term when referring to hybrid author.
indie author
Indie author is the new de rigueur term for someone who self-publishes and/or
publishes with a small- to medium-sized publishing house, also called an independent or
indie publisher.
indie
The term indie can mean either an independent author or a small- to medium-sized
publisher. See indie author.
interactive magazine
Interactive magazine is a format of digital publication optimized for touch-based
navigation and tablet viewing and may contain a great deal of interactivity, including
hyperlinks, audio and video, image and video slideshows, panoramic images, 3D rotatable
objects, scrollable areas, content replacements, and embedded web content. All of this is
wrapped into an app with swipe-to-page and pinch-to-zoom capabilities and visual tables
of contents with or without page thumbnails. As of this writing, interactive magazines are
viewable only on tablets and certain smartphones; they are not accessible on standard
computers.
interactive replica
This is an alternate term for digital replica.
JavaScript
Developed initially by Netscape (remember that?), JavaScript is an open scripting
language designed to add and control dynamic content in websites and HTML-based
content and user interfaces. In terms of epublishing, JavaScript is a very popular scripting
language that can be used, to varying degrees, within ebook, fixed-layout ebook, and
interactive magazines.
jumpline
This is a directive to readers that a threaded story resumes at a later point, as in
“continues on page 83.” This is also known as a continue line or jump head. See also:
carry-over.
KF8

This stands for Kindle Format 8, the file format launched in the first quarter of 2012
as the new standard for ebooks, fixed-layout ebooks, and other digital publications
produced for the newest generation of Kindle devices.
lossless
In the context of this book, the term lossless refers to a type of image compression
that reduce the file size of images without reducing the quality. PNG-24 is a lossless
format, while JPEG is the opposite, employing a lossy compression method that discards
pixel data in order to achieve compression.
magalog
This is an industry term describing a publication formatted as, or including, editorial
content but whose primary purpose is to sell or advertise products. The term is a mash-up
of magazine and catalog.
MathML
Mathematical Markup Language is a recommendation (not a standard) of the W3C for
describing mathematical and scientific programs and formulae on the Web and in
electronic publications. It has been under development since 1998.
open source
This refers to software whose code has been made available for use or modification
without use or licensing restriction or fee to the general public. The popular blog and
content-management software WordPress is an example of open source software.
OpenType
This is an intelligent font software based on Unicode. OpenType fonts (or simply
OpenTypes) have predefined spaces for more than 65,000 glyphs from more than a dozen
languages. These fonts often contain variant designs such as true small caps, swashes,
contextual alternates, ordinals, and several versions of numerals in a single file, replacing
several separate fonts required to achieve the same functionality in Type1 or TrueType
fonts. OpenType fonts are identified on a computer by the extension .otf, although in many
cases they bear the old TrueType .ttf file extension revealing the fact that, at their cores,
OpenType fonts are structured as either Type1 or TrueType. OpenType fonts are 100
percent cross-platform; the same font functions and renders identically on Windows, Mac
OS 9, Mac OS X, and several flavors of Unix.
OTF

This is a file extension for OpenType fonts. See: OpenType.
overrides
In terms of styles, an override is a formatting option not specifically defined in the
style assigned to the text, object, table, or cell. For instance, using the
Cmd+Shift+I/Ctrl+Shift+I keyboard shortcut to apply italic to text is an override of a
paragraph style in which the text is defined to be roman, or not italic. Overrides are
indicated by a plus sign (+) beside the style name in Paragraph Style, Character Style,
Object Style, Table Style, and Cell Style panels.
phablet
A mashup of the word’s “phone” and “tablet,” the word phablet identifies touchscreen
devices larger than standard smartphones but smaller than tablets. Most phablets have
screens measuring between 4.8 and 6.5 inches.
picture-book ebook
This is an alternate term for fixed-layout ebook.
pilcrow
This is a paragraph mark (¶).
poster
When working with multimedia a poster is the static image used to represent video,
animation, or audio before or during playback. In other contexts, it may be a really large
picture of One Direction, Zac Efron, or that Hunger Games guy tacked up on your
daughter’s bedroom wall.
posterization
The term posterization has many definitions in various contexts ranging from
photography to basketball (check http://urbandictionary.com). In this book I’ve used it in
the graphic-design sense, which means the process of reducing tonal values to create
sharp-contrast, poster-like areas of color. Often the process of posterization is a negative
consequence of tonal and color correction actions such as using Levels or Curves in
Photoshop.
print replica
This is an alternate term for digital replica.

public domain
Referring to intellectual property rights, public domain is the total absence of
intellectual property rights. A work of any type that is no longer eligible for copyright or
trademark protection is “placed into the public domain,” meaning that any member of the
public may do anything she desires with the content, including, but not limited to, reusing
the work with or without modification for commercial purposes. For example, many of the
resources provided throughout this book’s lesson files—particularly those from The
Wonderful Wizard of Oz—are in the public domain, which enables me to distribute those
files to you, and you to use them, without restriction or cost.
RAR
RAR is an acronym for Roshal Archive, a compression and archival scheme
developed by Eugene Roshal. Like ZIP, RAR is a method for collection multiple files into
a single archive file and compressing the original files so that the archive takes up less
disk space than the files its contains. See also: ZIP.
raster
This means pixel-based, typically in terms of imagery, as opposed to vector or
mathematic-based.
resolution-independent
Typically used in reference to imagery, this means that the artwork has no inherent
resolution or reliance on pixels and will output to the highest resolution of the output
device.
RSS
This is an abbreviation for RDF Site Summary, though just as often interpreted as
Really Simple Syndication. RSS is an XML-based web content distribution format and
method that “pushes” content to readers and their software rather than waiting for readers
to voluntarily visit the website or other source of the content. It is the standard for such
content distribution despite the emergence of would-be replacement ATOM. In
epublishing, RSS is used in numerous places including as a means of pushing content into
interactive magazines created with Aquafadas DPS and pushing newspaper and other
periodical content into EPUB-based newspapers. See also: ATOM.
SMIL

An abbreviation for Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language, SMIL is a W3C-
recommended markup language for describing and controlling multimedia content in a
variety of digital publication formats. Although not yet widely used, SMIL has the
potential to become a powerful component of digital publishing because of its nature of
homogenizing audio, video, animation, and transcripts and closed-captioning from such
multimedia so that they can be accessible to a large variety of devices, applications, apps,
and technologies.
spread
This is what Mom lays out for Thanksgiving dinner. Also, any set of two facing-pages
displayed on screen simultaneously.
subset
As used herein, this refers to font embedding. When fonts are embedded in any
document—PDFs, interactive magazines, EPUBs, and so on—the entire font file is
included, adding the font file’s size to the overall publication size. With only a few fonts,
this can dramatically increase the file size and transfer rate of digital publications.
Subsetting was created to mitigate file size by including only the glyphs actually used
from the font. For example, if a publication includes the letters A–Y, there’s no need to
include Z. Thus, the subset of the font, the letters A, B, C, and so on down through Y will
be extracted from the font and included in the publication so that those letters may render
correctly, but Z and any other glyphs not used in the publication but present in the font
will be excluded from embedding.
SVG
This is an abbreviation for Scalable Vector Graphics and is a resolution-independent,
vector-based, XML-based file format initially designed to supplant then Macromedia
Flash as the dominant online vector graphics format. Although Adobe dropped out as one
of the chief architects and proponents of SVG following Adobe’s acquisition of
Macromedia for, in large part, the Flash technology, the SVG format has continued to
flourish, owing in large part to its status as open source. SVG is an important part of
epublishing because it’s the only vector-based format supported across all tablets and
smartphones (iOS devices don’t do Flash). Vector-based artwork in EPUBs must be in
SVG format.
tall-screen video
As a consequence of the proliferation of mobile devices and consumers’ predilection
to shoot and watch video on these devices in a portrait orientation, as well as the fact that

most digital publications are created in portrait orientation, video that has been rotated 90
degrees from the normal landscape, wide-screen view is becoming very popular. Tall-
screen video is video recorded with a taller-than-wide orientation, which fits very nicely
into portrait-oriented ebook, PDF, and interactive-magazine pages.
type on a path
Type set on a path, or line that may or may not include corners and curves, follows the
shape of that path. For example, a sentence placed on a spiraling line would flow from left
to right along the spiral until the entire sentence is paid out or the line ends. InDesign and
many other creative applications allow type to be set on a path to create what are often
referred to as Path Type Objects or Type On A Path Objects. In epublishing, setting type
on a path is particularly effective in children’s books, educational volumes, and digital
magazines.
URI
An abbreviation for Uniform Resource Indicator, URI is an address or string of
characters leading or identifying a resource in a computer network including—and usually
—on the Internet. URI and URL are often used interchangeably, though there is a subtle
difference between them. A Uniform Resource Locator (URL) specifically supplies an
address to a resource without naming it. A URI, by contrast, can be either or both a
location and a name. Also related is a Uniform Resource Name (URN), which identifies or
names a resource without providing a location for that resource. Thus, URI encompasses
both URL and URN and is therefore the more generic term to use when the meaning can
be either or both identifying and locating a resource in a computer network.
UUID
UUID is an abbreviation for Universally Unique Identifier, which is a string of
characters used to provide a relatively unique identity to objects or, as used in this book,
epublications. InDesign will automatically generate a UUID upon export to EPUB when a
more specific identifying number such as an International Standard Book Number (ISBN)
has not been provided. I say that the UUID is “relatively unique” because, as designed,
there is no central system assigning and guaranteeing the uniqueness of the string of
alphanumeric characters. InDesign will generate a unique UUID, but you can rely on its
uniqueness only among other UUIDs generated by your single installation of InDesign on
your computer. My copy of InDesign might generate the same UUID for one of my
publications. Therefore, the name Universally Unique Identifier is a misnomer; it should
be Locally Unique Identifier or Relatively Unique Identifier Within a Given Closed

Environment. Don’t rely on any UUID as being actually unique outside the immediate
environment of the software and computer that generates it.
vanity press
A largely retired term once used to describe self-publishing. The term is derisive,
implying that a self-publishing author is vain, usually because self-publishing was
primarily performed by those writers whom publishers had rejected.
vertical video
This is another name for tall-screen video.
walled garden
A walled garden in the physical world is one in which the garden has been completely
enclosed by a wall of stone, wood, shrubbery, or some other substrate. Plants cannot
escape the garden, nor can the garden be invaded by plants that originate outside the wall.
That concept has been applied to software, hardware, and epublications, as well, with the
most famous example being Apple. Apple manufacturers the iPhone and iPad hardware,
develops the operating system for both devices (iOS), and directly controls which apps
and publications are allowed to be made available to owners of those devices. By
controlling all aspects of the devices, including the content allowable on those devices,
Apple maintains a walled garden. The iOS operating system and its features are designed
to run only on Apple devices, preventing the plants from escaping the garden; by
reviewing every app and epublication made available to iOS device users, Apple prevents
plants that originate outside the wall from coming in without approval. Amazon, too,
maintains a walled garden, though it’s to a lesser degree—think slatted fence surround.
Devices like the Kindle Fire have access only to Amazon’s curated App Store, but apps
from outside the App Store can be sideloaded onto the Kindle Fire even though Amazon
could prevent that but apparently chose against it. Moreover, the same content available to
the Kindle Fire is usually available outside of that device as well; Amazon’s ebooks,
emagazines, enewspapers, video, music, and other content are available to users of non-
Amazon devices and operating systems, often, depending on the content type, without the
need to even use Amazon-owned assets beyond the point of purchase.
widget
A widget is an app (applet before popularization of the term app) comprised of a
preconfigured chunk of code and designed to perform a specific task. For example, the
Facebook Like button on a website is a chunk of HTML and JavaScript code provided by
Facebook and pasted into the code of millions of other websites. It’s a widget that doesn’t

need to be configured by the user, merely copied and pasted. Widgets are also often
employed in epublishing to add functions, behaviors, and dynamic content in a manner
already figured out by someone else—in other words, widgets are the wheel you don’t
have to reinvent. Millions of widgets are available online to perform numerous functions
on websites, mobile apps, and epublications, and many organizations create their own
widgets for internal use, creating copy-and-paste functionality to ease workflow.
WOFF
This is an acronym for Web Open Font Format, a font format bearing additional
metadata and designed to be embedded in a web page or other XML-based content and
downloaded from a server to a web browser or other client as a means of enabling web
and ebook designers to use a greater variety of typefaces in designs without fear of client-
side font substitution. WOFF fonts are OpenType, TrueType, or Open Font Format
compressed and encoded using special algorithms. Although WOFF is not yet an
international standard, it has been published by the World Wide Web Consortium Web
Fonts Working Group as a Candidate Recommendation. It is already supported by all the
major desktop browsers, and support is rapidly spreading through mobile browsers and
ereaders. See also: OpenType.
XHTML
This is an abbreviation for Extensible Hypertext Markup Language. XHTML is an
extension to standard HTML that makes web pages more semantically standardized and
organized based on an XML framework. HTML, prior to HTML5, which was built with
standardization in mind, required a specialized markup parser for devices like web
browsers to display as intended. Many offshoots and proprietary bastardizations of HTML
evolved, which created a situation in which HTML pages would not reliably render the
same across all devices. XHTML was devised to address such inconsistencies by
wrangling web-page markup into a single, universal entity that was based on the accepted
standard of XML. The result was that XHTML could be parsed by device that understood
XML, which was almost universal by that point anyway, and it would display exactly the
same across all such devices. Because of this cosmopolitan and consistent support for
XHTML, EPUB and other digital publication formats require that XHTML, not HTML,
be used.
XML
An abbreviation for Extensible Markup Language, XML is a markup language
designed to be both human- and machine-readable. It is designed to tag, identify, and
create a hierarchy from textual content. Those tags, identifications, and hierarchical

indicators can then be used to organize, modify, and style the content in any number of
ways by applications, apps, and devices that recognize XML. The “extensible” part of the
name refers to the fact that XML is built to be a foundation markup methodology from
which both specialized and more generalized systems may later be developed, and many
have. XML is the basis for XHTML, RSS, ATOM, EPUB, and even less obvious file
formats such as those created by Microsoft Word, Excel, and other Office products.
ZIP
A ZIP file (extension .zip) is a compressed archive containing other files. The format
was developed in the 1980s by Phil Katz and later placed in the public domain and is the
world’s most widely used format for compressing and distributing a collection of files. So
efficient and popular is the ZIP archival and compression methodology that it is
incorporated into many other file formats, including Microsoft Word DOCX files, JAR
archives, and even, as an optional compression algorithm, TIFF images. See also: public
domain.

