
II
The Art of RAW Conversion 
Optimal image quality from Photoshop CS2 and leading RAW converters. 
Uwe Steinmuller, Jürgen Gulbins
Publisher:  Steinmueller Photo 
Find us on the World Wide Web at: www.outbackphoto.com
Uwe Steinmueller 
uwe@outbackphoto.com 
Jürgen Gulbins  
juergen@gulbins.de
Copyright © 2005 by Uwe Steinmueller and Jürgen Gulbins.
1. EDITION MAY 2005, CS 200505-0.
NOTICE OF RIGHTS
All rights reserved. No part of this e-book may be reproduced or transmitted 
in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recorded, or 
otherwise, without the prior written permission of the authors. For 
information on getting permission for reprints and excerpts, contact the 
authors at the address given above.
NOTICE OF LIABILITY
The information in this e-book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without 
warranty. While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of the 
book, the authors shall not have any liability to any person or entity with 
respect to any loss or danger caused or alleged to be caused directly or 
indirectly by the instructions contained in this book or by the computer 
software products described in it.
TRADEMARKS
Throughout this e-book, trademarks are used. Rather than put a trademark 
symbol in every occurrence of a trademark name, we state that we are using 
the names in an editorial fashion only and to the beneﬁt of the trademark 
owner with no infringement of the trademark.

III
Contents
Contents
 
Preface
1 
Introduction
1.1 
Introduction to RAW ﬁles or digital negatives 
1-1
1.2 
How to use this book, how this book is organized 
1-2
1.3 
Using PCs and Macs 
1-3
1.4 
Computer conﬁguration 
1-3
1.5 
What are RAW ﬁles? 
1-4
 What are the RAW ﬁle advantages? 
1-5
 Digital camera artefacts  
1-11
 Color aliasing / moirés 
1-11
1.6 
The digital negative/slide 
1-12
1.7 
Some strategic reasoning 
1-13
 Which RAW converter to use 
1-14
2 
Basic Color Management
2.1 
Understanding the diﬀerent color modes 
2-2
 RGB color model 
2-3
 LAB color model 
2-3
 CMYK color model 
2-4
 Grayscale mode 
2-5
 Color spaces 
2-5
2.2 
Understanding color management 
2-6
 Why you need to understand color management 
2-6
 The challenge 
2-7
 The solution 
2-7
 ICC-proﬁles 
2-7
 What is a color management system? 
2-8
 Color working spaces 
2-10
 Visualization of color spaces 
2-11
 Color space mapping 
2-14
 Creating device proﬁles 
2-15
 Camera proﬁles 
2-16
 Printer proﬁles 
2-17

IV
Contents
2.3 
Proﬁling your monitor 
2-17
 Calibration by eye 
2-18
 Hardware based calibration 
2-18
 Calibration settings 
2-18
 Calibrating and proﬁling using Eye-One Display 2 
2-19
2.4 
Photoshop color and monitor proﬁle settings 
2-23
3 
Basic RAW workﬂow
3.1 
Setup the camera for RAW ﬁle photographs 
3-2
 Set your camera to RAW mode 
3-2
 Exposure, Exposure, Exposure 
3-2
 Optimize exposure using your camera’s histogram  
3-3
 “Expose to the right” rule 
3-4
 Color channel clipping 
3-5
 The "before/live" histogram 
3-7
 Correct white balance (WB) for optimal color quality  
3-7
 Understand objective and subjective white balance 
3-8
 Adjust your camera’s sensitivity: selecting the right ISO  3-8
3.2 
Camera to computer: enter the digital darkroom  
3-9
 Manage your image storage  
3-9
 Computer transfer and organizing your photos 
3-9
 Renaming 
3-11
 Securing your valuable photos: Backup 
3-12
3.3 
Setting up your digital darkroom 
3-12
3.4 
Browse and evaluate your RAW ﬁles 
3-13
3.5 
Essential image corrections 
3-14
 White balance (WB) 
3-14
 Tonality 
3-17
 Exposure, Contrast & Brightness 
3-18
 Adaptive tonality controls 
3-19
 Color corrections 
3-24
3.6 
Advanced image corrections 
3-24
3.7 
Extra workﬂow support 
3-25
Adobe Camera Raw
4.1 
Quick ACR real life workﬂow  
4-3
4.2 
Browse and evaluate your RAW images with “Bridge” 
4-15
4.3 
Adobe Camera Raw 3.x user interface overview 
4-18
 Workﬂow options 
4-21
 Camera Raw’s main image correction controls 
4-22

V
Contents
 How to process the images ﬁnally 
4-34
 Saving and reusing settings 
4-36
 Recording Adobe Camera Raw settings    
4-37
 Batch conversion 
4-37
 Advanced image corrections 
4-38
4.4 
Extra workﬂow support 
4-39
4.5 
RAW ﬁles embedded in Photoshop "Smart Objects" 
4-42
 Creating a Smart Object layer that contains a RAW ﬁle 4-42
 Exporting RAW ﬁles from a Smart Object 
4-46
5 
Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
5.1 
Quick RawShooter real life workﬂow  
5-2
 Transfer your images to your computer 
5-2
 Browse your RAW ﬁles using the RS RAW ﬁle browser 
5-2
 Tune tonality 
5-7
5.2 
Getting started (setup RawShooter) 
5-14
5.3 
Inspect and browse your ﬁles with RawShooter 
5-15
 Preview size 
5-19
 Deletion workﬂow 
5-19
The “Correct” toolbar: 
5-20
 Some useful keyboard shortcuts 
5-20
5.4 
Image corrections 
5-20
 Setting white balance (WB) 
5-21
 
Exposure and tonality 
5-22
 Saturation and Hue 
5-27
 Sharpness and Detail 
5-27
 
Noise reduction 
5-29
 
Batch processing 
5-30
 
Slide show 
5-30
5.5 
Advanced image corrections 
5-32
5.6 
Extra workﬂow support 
5-32
6 
More RAW Converters
6.1 
Phase One’s Capture One DSLR (Capture One) 
6-2
 Capture One Setup 
6-3
 Capture One RAW ﬁle browser 
6-5
 Image Processing 
6-6
 Gray/White Balance (WB) 
6-7
 Tone Curves 
6-8
 Exposure 
6-8

VI
Contents
 Focus and Sharpening 
6-9
 Develop tab 
6-9
 What’s More? 
6-10
6.2 
Bibble version 4 (B4) 
6-11
 Bibble Setup 
6-12
 Main features of Bibble 4.x 
6-13
 Picture Options 
6-15
 Workﬂow with Bibble 4 
6-17
6.3 
Canon Digital Photo Professional (DPP) 
6-19
 Setup 
6-19
 DPP – main features 
6-21
 Saving converted ﬁles 
6-26
6.4 
Nikon Capture 
6-28
 Setup 
6-29
 Main features 
6-30
 Advanced RAW 
6-30
 White Balance (WB) 
6-32
 Save and load settings 
6-33
7 
Perfecting Images
7.1 
Do you really need to bother with this? 
7-1
7.2 
The art of sharpening 
7-3
 USM (Unsharp Mask) 
7-4
 How Photoshop “Unsharp Mask” works 
7-4
 The two step approach 
7-8
 Photoshop CS2: Smarter Sharpen 
7-8
 Other Sharpening Tools 
7-9
7.3 
Noise reduction 
7-9
 Photoshop CS2: Reduce Noise 
7-12
 Noise is in the shadows 
7-12
 Other Useful noise removal ﬁlters 
7-12
7.4 
Reduce chromatic aberration (CA) and purple fringing  
7-13
 Heal chromatic aberration (CA) 
7-13
 Photoshop CS2: Lens Correction 
7-15
 Heal purple fringing 
7-15
7.5 
Distortion 
7-19
 Proﬁle based corrections 
7-19
 Photoshop CS2: Lens Correction 
7-22
7.6 
Vignetting 
7-23
7.7 
Correcting tilt and perspective corrections 
7-24

VII
Contents
 Rotation (correcting tilt) 
7-24
 Perspective corrections 
7-24
7.8 
Removing dust spots 
7-26
 Patch tool 
7-28
 Using Selection with the Healing Brush 
7-29
8 
Batch Processing techniques for RAW ﬁles
8.1 
Basic batch processing pattern 
8-2
8.2 
Batch Processing with Adobe Camera Raw 
8-5
8.3 
Smooth Batch Processing 
8-13
8.4 
Batch Processing with Capture One Pro 
8-13
8.4 
Batch Processing with RawShooter 
8-16
9 
DNG – Digital Negative Format
9.1 
DNG – its potentials 
9-1
9.2 
Usage of the Adobe DNG Converter 
9-5
9.3 
Advantages and disadvantages of converting to DNG 
9-8
10 
Metadata
10.1 Metadata for Photographs 
10-1
10.2 Metadata usage in Adobe Camera Raw and Bridge 
10-5
10.3 Retrieving ﬁles by searching for metadata 
10-9
11 
Proﬁling and calibrating for your RAW Converter
11.1 The problem with camera proﬁles 
11-1
11.2 Camera proﬁling using Eye-One Photo and ProﬁleMaker 
11-3
11.3 Camera proﬁling using InCamera. 
11-8
11.4 Shooting for a neutral gray 
11-10
11.5 Calibrating Adobe Camera Raw 
11-11
12 
Creating B&W photos from color images
12.1 Turn color images into Black & White 
12-1
12.2 B & W workﬂow with ACR, Capture One and RawShooter 
12-3
 Color conversion techniques  
12-3
 B & W with ACR 
12-4
 B & W with Capture One DSLR 
12-7
 Working in color and Black&White 
12-10
 B & W with Raw Shooter 
12-12
 
Glossary/Abbreviations

VIII
Contents
A 
Resources
B.1 
Recommended Books 
B-1
B.2 
Useful resources in the Internet 
B-2
C 
Index

IX
Preface
 
Preface
Literally dozens of books on digital photography are currently being 
published. Both authors Uwe Steinmueller and Jürgen Gulbins (until 
now only available in German) have contributed to this growing list. 
These books largely cover photographing aspects or image process-
ing. An amazing list of hundreds of books exist on Photoshop. This 
book, however, focuses on an important step connecting shooting 
and image processing (and possible manipulation). It deals with the 
conversion of images shot using RAW format into images in a stan-
dardized image format, such as TIFF or JPEG. In our experience, 
shooting photographs using RAW format is strongly recommended. 
Doing so allows getting the highest quality from your camera and its 
images. It lets you decide on many image settings apart from the 
moment you took your photo and reduces the pressure and haste 
possibly existing as you took the picture. For many camera settings, 
RAW processing lets you reconsider and even revise settings made 
during shooting. This ability need not encourage sloppy photogra-
phy, yet it gives you substantially more control of your pictures.
In this book, we mainly restrict our close scrutiny to the process 
of RAW conversion: What you should consider when shooting RAW, 
how to prepare ﬁles for conversion and how to set up an eﬃcient 
conversion workﬂow as part of your total image workﬂow.
We will not go deeply into image processing and image manip-
ulation in Photoshop, but we will discuss image enhancement 
either done in the camera, in the RAW converter or perhaps later in 
Photoshop.
The king of all image editors is Photoshop. It may not be the 
best solution for all image operations, but it provides an overall 
high level of functionality, an excellent integration of those various 
functions and deﬁnitely is the trendsetter for these kinds of applica-
tions. We believe these qualities justify its hefty price. Adobe 
Camera Raw, an excellent RAW converter, is provided as part of 
Photoshop CS. Of all RAW converters Camera Raw supports one of 
the broadest range of RAW formats, and is updated regularly in 
order to support newly released RAW camera formats. For this rea-

X
Preface
son, we delve deeper into details of Adobe Camera Raw than we do 
other RAW converters. Be aware that there are a number of RAW 
converters available, and some of them are quite good concerning 
resulting image quality and workﬂow integration. It may well be 
worth evaluating other RAW converters, as well and even using sev-
eral for diﬀerent situations and workﬂows. We focus on those we 
judge the best and most often used.
This book is not intended as a substitute for the program manual. 
Some programs would very likely be worth a book of their own. 
Instead, you will receive a thoughtful overview plus hints and recom-
mendations allowing you to set up your own RAW workﬂow and 
adapting it to your personal preferences and kinds of work. We are 
focusing on getting the best possible images from the RAW ﬁles your 
camera produces.
The workﬂow we present is based on practical work with thou-
sands of real-world RAW photographs.
This book is quite technical and deals with many aspects of various 
programs and techniques. Don’t become confused: The goal is tak-
ing good photographs. Don’t get lost in technique, spending time 
ﬁddling with programs and settings.
You can be more productive shooting good photographs, 
being creative, looking for appropriate light, ﬁnding the right angle 
of view and optimal settings. What we hope to show you in this 
book is making the most of the creative work done previously with 
your digital camera.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to our many inﬂuencers and friends, but especially to:  
Bill Atkinson, Paul Caldwell, Jim Collum, Charles Cramer,  
Antonio Dias, Katrin Eismann, Jack Flesher, Mac Holbert,  
Michael Jonsson (creator of RawShooter),  
Thomas Knoll (original creator of Photoshop and Camera Raw), 
 Phil Lindsay,  Daniel Stephens, and Ben Willmore.
Last but not least we want to thank Bill Horton for correcting 
our somewhat german English.
Uwe Steinmueller, San Jose (California)  
 
 
June 2005 
Jürgen Gulbins, Keltern (Germany)

1-1
Introduction
Camera: Canon 10D
1.1 Introduction to RAW ﬁles or digital negatives
What is the digital photography workﬂow? All you want is to take a 
picture and get a great output. Yet, this process should be:
r Fast
r At reasonable cost
r Getting optimal quality
Chapter 1
 
Introduction

1-2
Chapter 1: Introduction
Digital workﬂow includes everything from the moment you take a 
picture until you print and archive it. Unfortunately there is no silver 
bullet to guarantee success in all of these areas. This book will not 
presume to sell you this illusion. What we can do is present a proven 
workﬂow that enables you to:
r Improve your output quality
r Save you time by avoiding costly personal exploration
This book tries to be as simple as possible but not simpler. The goal 
is not to become the great master in Photoshop or other tools. We 
hope to teach you how to use all necessary imaging tools in a man-
ner allowing you to create the images you want without undue trial 
and error.
1.2 How to use this book, how this book is organized
In this book we attempt to cover the Microsoft Windows platform, 
as well as, Macintosh (Mac OS X). The two use some diﬀerent key-
board shortcuts. In most cases, substitute the Windows K key 
with the Mac Â key (labeled Ä and also known as command key) 
and the Windows À key with the Mac Á key (called option key). 
When you read a key sequence like K/Â-(S) it means you have 
to press K and (S) together in Windows and Â together with (S)  
with Mac OS. Q is the symbol used for the shift key.
Some of our photographic artwork is included to remind you that it 
is all about good pictures and not just technique. We prefer a great 
vision not perfectly executed, over a technically perfect ,boring pic-
ture. We trust you understand what we mean by this. In the end, 
your eyes are the most important tools to succeed in photography.
  Keep your vision fresh!

1-3
1.3 Using PCs and Macs
1.3 Using PCs and Macs
We – Bettina and Uwe Steinmueller – work on PCs most of the time. 
Fortunately, Photoshop CS is pretty much the same for PCs and 
Macs (apart from some diﬀerent keystrokes). This makes all 
Photoshop content valid on both platforms. Author Jürgen Gulbins 
uses a Macintosh as his primary platform. So, both systems are used 
in this book – without any serious incompatibilities or problems. A 
few tools we use are available only for the PC. In most cases, you can 
locate an equivalent tool for the Mac platform. As for the computer 
conﬁguration, dealt with in the following section, the requirements 
are very much the same for a Windows PC or a Macintosh.
1.4 Computer conﬁguration
Image processing is often quite demanding of your computer hard-
ware. Some guidelines (valid for both Macs and PCs):
r 1 GB of memory is a good start (0.5 GB is the bare minimum, 
(While 1 GB is good, more is even better)
r Don’t settle for a low-quality monitor. 1 280 × 1024 is an accept-
able resolution. Again, more is better (we use 1 600 × 1 200). High 
resolution should accompany a suﬃciently large screen (19" or 
more is suggested)
r Having USB 2.0 and Firewire ports are a plus
r Dual Processors is a plus, utilized by Photoshop
r Disks space: 
– 1 × 80 GB or more for your operating system 
– 1 × 80 GB or more for working ﬁles 
– 2 × 120 GB or more for archiving  
  (external USB 2.0 or Firewire drives are ﬁne)
r External Compact Flash (CF) card reader with USB 2.0 or Firewire 
connection (USB 1.0 is considerably slower)
r DVD reader/writer (external Firewire is ﬁne)
r Device for monitor proﬁling (see chapter 2.3)

1-4
Chapter 1: Introduction
In all cases, “more” is better. The result is faster operation, a more 
comfortable workﬂow and a more pleasant working environment. 
Doing color work, the importance of a good large monitor should 
not be underestimated. When, in previous years, CRT monitors had 
advantages over LCDs – especially concerning color conﬁdence – 
this is no longer true. There are many very good LCD monitors on 
the market. You have to spend up to 3 times the amount of money 
to get an LCD with the same size and quality of a CRT. For color work, 
laptop screens are usually not as eﬀective as stand-alone monitors. 
In most cases, their contrast is lower and in almost all cases their 
color quality is of lower quality.
1.5 What are RAW ﬁles?
In many ways, using a ﬁlm camera and a digital camera is identical. 
This section concentrates on the things that are diﬀerent and must 
be known to start the digital workﬂow with the best possible photo-
graphic material. As always, the optimal framing and exposure lead 
to better images. Otherwise, ‘garbage in means garbage out.’ This 
does not mean, however, that you cannot get great pictures from 
less than optimal shots. But be prepared. This requires much more 
work in the digital darkroom
The most common image format today with digital cameras is 
JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group). The obvious limitation of 
JPEGs are that they are most often used for their excellent, but lossy 
compression format (there are also lossless JPEGs rarely used in 
cameras). Even at low compression rates, an image degrades 
slightly. A more important point is the fact that an image under-
goes heavy color/exposure/noise/sharpening processing within the 
camera. These adjustments reduce the ability to make further post-
processing corrections. JPEG compression works best for images 
with no need of further substantial post-processing (his is rare if 
you are demanding) or under circumstances where such post-pro-
cessing is prohibited. 
Many photographers try to get the best possible quality out of 
their cameras using the TIFF selection, or if supported by the cam-
era, a vendor-speciﬁc RAW ﬁle format. As you will see, RAW ﬁle for-
mats allow for the greatest post-processing ﬂexibility.

1-5
1.5 What are RAW files?
If you decide to continue using only JPEGs, this does not mean 
you cannot use our workﬂow. In this case, you will have used the 
RAW converter built into your camera. All steps that are applied 
after a  RAW conversion are valid for JPEG images. Even if you don’t 
use RAW, it probably is helpful to better understand what RAW is all 
about. 
 
What are the RAW ﬁle advantages?
To better understand what these magic RAW ﬁle formats are, you 
must understand how the majority of today’s digital cameras work. 
All new digital cameras capture color photos, right? Well, you ulti-
mately get color prints, yet most modern digital cameras use sen-
sors that only record grayscale values (the Foveon X3 sensor, digital 
scanning backs and multi-shot digital backs are exceptions). 
Assume you want to photograph a box of Crayola crayons:
 
l Figure 1.1:   
Full colored 
sample target
A gray scale sensor would see the picture as in the ﬁgure 1.3. You 
would never see any color photos at all. 

1-6
Chapter 1: Introduction
 
l Figure 1.2: 
›Grayscale 
picture‹ seen 
by the sensor
How do you use a grayscale sensor to capture color photos? 
Engineers at Kodak came up with the following method called Bayer 
Pattern. Dr. Bayer is a Kodak scientist who invented this novel Color 
Filter Array conﬁguration back in the eighties. Hence the name 
Bayer pattern. There are also other pattern variations used): 
B-G-B-G-B-G 
G-R-G-R-G-R 
B-G-B-G-B-G 
G-R-G-R-G-R  
 
l Figure 1.3:  
Bayer pattern 
achieved by a 
matrix of color ﬁlters
First, it is interesting to note that 50 % are green and only 25 % for 
each red and blue. The reason for this is that the human eye can dif-
ferentiate far more green shades than red or blue. Not really a sur-
prise if you look at nature. Green also covers the most important 
and widest part of the visible spectrum.
Now our sensor captures gray values ﬁltered by these color ﬁlters:

1-7
1.5 What are RAW files?
 
l Figure 1.4: 
Color mosaic 
seen through 
the color ﬁlters
However, you want to have a photo with full-color information for 
every pixel. Here a software trick comes into play called Bayer 
Pattern demosaicing or color interpolation. What actually happens 
is that the missing RGB information is estimated from neighboring 
pixels.
A good demosaicing algorithm (the method of turning the 
RAW data into a full color image) is actually quite complicated, and 
there exist many proprietary solutions on the market. The problem 
is to resolve detail and maintain correct colors. To illustrate some of 
the challenges, think of capturing an image of a small black & white 
checker pattern, small enough to just overlay the sensor cells:

1-8
Chapter 1: Introduction
white
black
white
red
black
blue
subject
ﬁnal  
image
CCD-array 
response
color ﬁlter 
array
Figure 1.5: CCD / color mosaic sensor with color interpolation errors
subject
white
black
white
ﬁnal  
image
white
black
white
Figure 1.6: X3 sensor with no color interpretation errors
blue  
sensitive 
layer
green  
sensitive 
layer
red  
sensitive 
layer
As the neighboring green ﬁltered photo site does not add new 
information, the algorithm would not know whether it would be 
some kind of “red” (if the white hits a red ﬁlter) or “blue” (if the white 
hits the blue ﬁlter). In contrast, for example, a Foveon sensor would 
capture white and black correctly as all three color channels are cap-
tured at the same photo site. The resolution captured by the Bayer 
sensors would drop if the subject only consists of red and blue 
shades, since the green channel could not add any information. For 
monochromatic Red/Blue (very narrow wavelengths) the green sites 
get absolutely no information. But such colors are rare in real life. In 
reality, there is information in both green, and to a much lesser 
extent, even blue, if the sensor samples very bright and saturated 
red colors. The problem in our example above is the fact that esti-
mating the color correctly requires a certain amount of spatial infor-
mation. If only a single photo site samples the red “information” 

1-9
1.5 What are RAW files?
there will be no way to reconstruct the correct color for that particu-
lar photo site.
The above next cropped illustrations are from real samples that 
were made in a studio to show a practical eﬀect. Of course, these 
test photos here show an extreme situation. In reality the failure is 
less dramatic but is still visible by our eyes and deﬁnitely not to be 
ignored.
 
      Canon EOS 10D 
 Sigma SD9 using the Foveon sensor
Figure 1.7: Fooling a Bayer sensor
Some of these challenges result in image artefacts like moirés and 
color aliasing (shown as unrelated green, red, blue pixels or result-
ing in discoloration). Most cameras ﬁght the aliasing problem by 
putting an AA (Anti-Aliasing) ﬁlter in front of the sensor. This ﬁlter 
actually blurs the image and distributes color information to the 
neighboring photo sites. As you know, blurring and photography 
aren't compatible. To ﬁnd the right balance between blurring and 
aliasing is a camera design challenge. In our experience, the Canon 
1Ds does this job well. Finally the image needs stronger sharpening 
to re-create much of the original sharpness. To some extent AA 
ﬁltering degrades the eﬀective resolution of a sensor.
This appears as a complicated mission. Indeed it is, but works 
surprising well in the end. Every technology has to struggle with its 

1-10
Chapter 1: Introduction
inherent limitations. In many aspects, digital photography can beat 
ﬁlm today because ﬁlm has its own limitation to contend with.
We can state what the RAW data are for any given digital cam-
era. The RAW data are, in fact, all the data for gray values captured 
on a chip. To produce a ﬁnal image, these RAW data require 
processing (including the demosaicing) by a RAW converter. To pro-
duce JPEG images, the camera must have a full RAW converter 
embedded within the camera’s ﬁrmware.
What are the limitations of using camera-produced JPEGs:
r JPEG artefacts, due to lossy compression
r Although most sensors capture 10–14 bit color (grayscale) infor-
mation only 8 bits are used in the ﬁnal ﬁle
r The in-camera RAW converter can only use limited computing 
resources but good RAW conversion can be very complex and 
computer intensive. As software technology evolves, it is much 
more eﬃcient to have the conversion done on the host com-
puter instead of the non-upgradeable ASIC commonly used 
today.
r The in-camera set or estimated white balance (WB) is applied to 
the photo within the camera. The same is true for color process-
ing, tonal corrections, and in camera sharpening. This limits the 
post-processing capabilities, because a previously corrected 
image must be corrected again. The more processing done on a 
photo (especially 8 bit) the more it can degrade.
Next we explain the diﬀerent RAW ﬁles formats. The formats store 
only RAW data (plus additional metadata to describe properties of 
the RAW data in EXIF section of the ﬁle – the EXIF sections hold infor-
mation, such as camera type, lens used, shutter speed, f-stop and 
more). All the processing previously done shooting JPEGs or TIFFs in 
the camera are now ready to be performed on a more powerful 
computing platform with:
r No JPEG compression
r Full use of the 12-bit color information (10–12 bit)
r Use of very sophisticated RAW ﬁle converters (as an example, 
Adobe Camera Raw, Phase One’s Capture One DSLR or 
Pixmantec’s Raw Shooter Essential)

1-11
1.5 What are RAW files?
r White balance, color processing, tonal/exposure correction, 
sharpening and noise processing can be processed later on in 
the computer
r The RAW ﬁles also resemble a digital version of an undeveloped 
ﬁlm negative. Over time, there are improved RAW ﬁle converters 
that give better and better results from the same data.
This all conﬁrms the fact, that shooting in RAW gives you much 
greater control while processing your images.
In-camera JPEGs are similar to shooting a Polaroid (where you 
simply shoot and receive your image processed immediately) while 
RAW is more like a ﬁlm that can be developed and enhanced in the 
dark room. Raw converters like Phase One’s Capture One DSLR 
mimic a magic formula for ﬁlm developer. 
What is the advantage of 12-bit data? The main advantage 
exists if you need to make major corrections to the white balance, 
exposure and color corrections. During processing of an image, you 
lose bits of image data due to data clipping (accumulating over 
multiple steps). The more bits you have in the beginning the more 
data you have in your ﬁnal corrected image. 
What about using TIFF ﬁles in the camera? Actually TIFF ﬁles 
only solve the lossy compression issue, but are still converted to 
8-bit inside the camera. Most TIFF ﬁles are larger than RAW ﬁles 
(remember RAW ﬁles only hold one 12-bit gray value per pixel) and 
don’t have the other beneﬁts of RAW. I would go so far as to say 
that an 8-bit in-camera processed TIFF ﬁle is only slightly better 
than a high-quality / high-resolution JPEG.
 
Digital camera artefacts 
Current sensors do not record full RGB color but only interpolate the 
color but, at a price.
 
Color aliasing / moirés
What happens when a ﬁne red line crosses a green photo-site but 
not any neighboring red photo-sites? There would be no indication 
of this red line in RAW data. To combat this eﬀect, most cameras 
have ﬁxed-mounted AA ﬁlters. These AA ﬁlters blur the image so 
that neighboring photo-sites also acquire some red line informa-
tion. 

1-12
Chapter 1: Introduction
While the AA ﬁlter ﬁxes one problem, it introduces a diﬀerent 
one, a loss in sharpness. This means that some strong sharpening is 
needed later during the RAW workﬂow. Keep in mind, lost detail 
cannot be recaptured later regardless of whatever fancy sharpen-
ing methods are used. Sharpening does, however, do quite a good 
job, and digital cameras work much better than this description of 
it sounds.
1.6 The digital negative/slide
What you now have on your computer when shooting RAW are 
often called “digital negatives”. We recommend you keep these RAW 
(or original JPEG or TIFF) ﬁles as they hold all the information cap-
tured in the ﬁeld. You may want to revisit these original RAW ﬁles in 
case:
r You improved your own digital workﬂow over time (very likely)
r Better RAW converter software will be available. We have seen 
many improvements over the last four years and expect more to 
come.
r You lost your derived ﬁles
Actually, a RAW ﬁle is even more like a latent image and the RAW 
converter software acts like your preferred magic developer. The 
only big diﬀerence in digital is that you can do multiple kinds of 
development over time.

1-13
1.7 Some strategic reasoning
1.7 Some strategic reasoning
Like many pads lead to Rome, there are many ways to shape your 
digital workﬂow. The most appropriate way for you depends on the 
kind of photographs you shoot, the purpose you intend for your 
images, on your equipment and on personal preferences, as well. To 
setup a workﬂow that suites your work best, you might give diﬀer-
ent workﬂow variations a trial, then ﬁnally settle on a workﬂow, 
which can be adapted in special cases:
Several steps in the processing of an image – e.g. white bal-
ance, sharpening, contrast enhancement, saturation enhance-
ments, …) may be done at three diﬀerent stages:
r Inside the camera (some of the operations mentioned above, 
even if you shoot RAW ﬁles)
r Inside your RAW converter
r Using Photoshop or some Photoshop Plug-in
Doing an operation at an early stage doesn’t necessarily mean you 
may not do it again at a later stage. For example, there are reasons 
to do some sharpening globally with the RAW converter and add 
more sharpening with Photoshop. In Photoshop, sharpening may 
be applied to either the whole image or to certain edges or areas. 
You may even want to do some ﬁnal sharpening when preparing for 
a dedicated form of output (e.g. an image printed using an inkjet 
printer or oﬀset printing requires more sharpening than an image 
presented on screen or using a light jet printer). Inside the camera 
or a  RAW converter, you may apply changes only globally (to the 
whole image) while Photoshop allows selective corrections using 
selections, masks, layers or ﬁlters.
The general rule is that corrections done in the camera or 
– with more control  – in the RAW converter will result in less loss of 
quality. This is especially true concerning good exposure, which 
correction should be done within the camera. But correcting expo-
sure values with the RAW converter is much better than done 
within Photoshop. 
White balance r When you shoot RAW ﬁles, it is useful to set a 
proper white balance in the camera, because this value will be used 
as a default and starting point for your white balance inside the RAW 

1-14
Chapter 1: Introduction
converter – however it is only a starting point and may be changed 
without loss of color quality. White Balancing is one of the most 
important tasks in a RAW converter and should largely be done 
there.
With those cameras that support Black&White (B&W) shooting, 
you may consider a B&W setting if your are sure, you only want 
B&W. Shooting color however gives more control and more options. 
You may do a color to B&W conversion either inside the RAW con-
verter or do it in Photoshop (see chapter 12).
Sharpening, saturation, contrast enhancements r Apart from 
the exposure and white balance settings, all other settings, such as 
sharpening, saturation and contrast enhancements should be deac-
tivated or set to the lowest possible value when you shoot RAW ﬁles. 
Up- or Down-sampling r As for scaling, we recommend using the 
highest resolution available with the camera, and do up- or down-
sampling either in the RAW converter or in Photoshop. Photoshop, 
as well as Capture One and Raw Shooter, support a reasonably good 
up-sampling, however oﬀer only some ﬁxed sizes. If you wish to pre-
pare an image for large-scale printing, it may be helpful to do a 
rough up-sample in Adobe Camera Raw and a ﬁnal sizing in 
Photoshop.
Cropping r Cropping is oﬀered by Adobe Camera Raw 3 (or 
newer), by Nikon Capture and by Raw Shooter Essentials if you are 
certain your image needs cropping. This results in smaller image 
ﬁles, thus faster processing.
 
Which RAW converter to use
There are several RAW converters available, and their number is 
increasing over time. Almost all DSLRs come with a native RAW con-
verter. This may be a Photoshop Plug-in or a standalone RAW con-
verter (or both). E.g. Canon cameras supporting RAW format come 
with Canon EOS Viewer Utility (EVU for short) and Canon Digital 
Photo Professional (DPP for short) – both applications are a free part 
of the camera package. If you use Photoshop CS1 (alias Photoshop 8) 
or CS2 (alias Photoshop 9) or even Photoshop Elements 3 (or later) a 
good RAW converter is included, as well. If you use a picture data-
base or good picture ﬁle browser – also referred to as “Digital Asset 
Management Systems” (or DAMS for short), it probably will have a 

1-15
1.7 Some strategic reasoning
RAW converter of its own. There are some optional RAW converters 
as well – e.g. Capture One (by Phase One), Nikon’s Capture, Bibble 
(by Bibble Labs) or Raw Shooter by Pixmatec, just to name a few. 
Which one should you use?
There is no single answer to that. It very much depends on your 
requirements and work – and it may change over time.
Those RAW converters that are part of a DAMS system such as 
ThumbsPlus, iView Media Pro or Extensis Portfolio are primarily 
intended to produce a reasonable preview. Though they may be 
used to convert a RAW ﬁle to TIFF or JPEG, that is not their primary 
focus. For that reason, you seriously consider doing your actual 
RAW conversion using one of the “real” RAW converters. The range 
of formats and cameras supported by the various RAW converters 
diﬀers. Nikon’s tools, for example, only support Nikon cameras. The 
same is true for Canon’s tools with Canon’s cameras. Adobe Camera 
Raw, Capture One, Raw Shooter and Bibble all support a wide 
range of formats – however, be sure you check to see if they sup-
port your camera. Some converters are faster than others, and 
some oﬀer a better workﬂow integration than others. For that rea-
son alone, we recommend you read the description of all the RAW 
converters we include in chapter 3 to 6, do some testing (a trial ver-
sion of most converters is downloadable from the internet) and set-
tle on that converter that best ﬁts your needs and budget. 
Sometimes it may be useful to use more than one converter, 
depending on the type of work and the images you have to pro-
cess.

1-16
Chapter 1: ›Introduction
Intentionally left blank

2-1
Basic color management
Chapter 2
 
Basic Color Management
Camera: Canon 1D Mk. II
Usually, when working with photos, we work in color. Thus, it is very 
important that the color we see on our monitor closely matches the 
color seen by the camera when a photo is taken.
Likewise, when white balancing, ﬁddling with color saturation, 
or performing other color corrections or contrast enhancements, 
we want to be sure that the color we see on our monitor represents 
the color values of our image, and that if we print our image (once 
all optimizations and enhancements are ﬁnished), the colors in our 
print will be very close to those we saw on our monitor. This is what 
color management is all about. Of course, in order to do eﬃcient 

2-2
Chapter 2: Basic color management
color work, you must understand the basics of color and color 
management.
Color management is one of the more demanding subjects in 
digital photography, and has, itself, been the subject of entire 
books. Because of this, we give you only a short introduction to 
color management, with a focus on those parts important to our 
workﬂow. It is strongly recommended that you read more about 
color management. There are several good books on color manage-
ment, such as Color Conﬁdence by Tim Grey ([1]) or Real World Color 
Management by Bruce Fraser ([2]).
2.1 Understanding the diﬀerent color modes
Photoshop supports several diﬀerent color models. A color model 
deﬁnes how colors in an image are described using numerical val-
ues. The main color models for photographers are these:
r RGB
r LAB
r CMYK
r Grayscale
Photoshop oﬀers additional color modes, but photographers rarely 
use them, thus a discussion of them is beyond the scope of this 
book. These include Bitmap for pure black or white (bitonality) 
images, and Index mode, used primarily for web graphics (if you can 
live with fewer than 256 diﬀerent color values). Duotone is used for 
B&W images and allows for the addition of a second color to give 
the print more depth.
Color depth: Returning to the term color model, you may use either 
8-bit (one byte) to specify the amount (or percentage) of a single 
value (e.g. red) or 16-bit (2 bytes). Thus you may have your image in 
8-bit or 16-bit mode. A diﬀerent bit length is possible, but not sup-
ported by most applications. Using 16-bit doubles the space needed 
to store the values, but gives you more headroom when it comes to 
diﬀerentiating color values and allows for a more precise calculation 
with less rounding errors. Using 8-bit, the value of a single compo-
nent may vary from 0 to 255 (using integers), using 16-bit, the range 
runs from 0 to 65,536 (actually only 15-bits are used, so the range 

2-3
2.1 Understanding the different color modes
becomes 0 to 32.768). Though we recommend using 16-bit when-
ever possible and reasonable, for most explanations we use 8-bit 
values (0–255). This is common practice. For most issues in color 
management, it doesn’t matter which mode you use. When produc-
ing ﬁnal output, e.g. printing, you will be required to reduce your 
image to 8-bit mode, since nearly all real devices can’t actually pro-
duce more than 256 diﬀerent shades of a color (taking into account 
a combination of the three primary colors of RGB, this adds up to 
16.777.216 diﬀerent colors). Even our eyes can only diﬀerentiate 
about 120–200 diﬀerent shades of a color, depending on illumina-
tion. During the phase of color optimization, however, where a large 
amount of color shifting and transformation and lots of calculation 
of color values is done, 16-bit is the better mode.
 
RGB color model
All colors in the RGB color model 
are created from three primary 
colors: red, green, and blue. 
RGB is the color mode most 
commonly used today in digital 
photography. We will perform 
our workﬂow mainly in this 
mode. RGB is an additive color 
model, meaning that the sum 
(addition) of all three basic col-
ors at full strength (100 per-
cent) will add up to pure white. 
Figure 2-1: The RGB Color Model
Green
Red
Blue
Cyan
Magenta
Yellow
Triple (0, 0, 0) deﬁnes black while (255, 255, 255) is bright white 
(Either should rarely occur in any photo).
As you will learn a bit later, pure RGB values without an addi-
tional reference to the device or color space these values are used 
for, do not deﬁne colors in an unambiguous way.
 
LAB color model
The CIE-LAB color model (often spelled Lab, LAB or L*a*b*) separates 
colors (chroma, A+B) from the detail and brightness (luminance, L) 
in images. As in RGB, Lab uses three basic components to build (or 
describe) a color: L (for Luminance), ranging from Black (0 = no light) 

2-4
Chapter 2: Basic color management
to white (100), and two color axes: a and b. The a-axis is a Green to 
Red and the b-axis, Blue to Yellow.
100
0
L*
-a
-b
b
a
 
l Figure 2-2: LAB color model
 
CMYK color model
The CMYK color model uses 
four primary colors to deﬁne 
a color: Cyan (C), Magenta (M) 
and Yellow (Y) and Black. 
CMYK was designed for print-
ing, where incoming light is 
reﬂected by the print. 
CMYK is a subtractive color 
model, as each of these col-
ored inks absorbs (subtracts) 
a certain spectrum of light. As 
you see in ﬁgure 3, mixing 
cyan and magenta gives you blue, and when you add magenta to 
yellow you get red. In theory, the combination of the colors C, M, 
and Y alone should be suﬃcient to produce black, but due to cer-
tain impurities in inks, they produce a dark muddy brown instead. 
To solve this problem, a fourth color, black, is added, and is called 
the key color (K for short). 
Figure 2-3: CMYK Color Model
Magenta
Yellow
Cyan
Red
Green
Blue
Although CMYK is an important color model for the printing 
press, it is not used much in digital photography. Though inkjet 
printers are technically CMYK printers (most are even CcMmYK with 

2-5
2.1 Understanding the different color modes
additional light Cyan and Magenta inks), they provide an RGB inter-
face to the user and the transformation from RGB to CMYK is done 
by the printer driver in an almost transparent way. 
We rarely use the CMYK color model in our workﬂow. Even if 
you intend your images for printing preparation, which requires 
CMYK, you should stick with RGB mode images whenever possible 
and resort to an RGB to CMYK conversion as the very last step 
(some additional sharpening and some slight increasing of satura-
tion may be required afterwards for the ﬁnal touchup). Working on 
photos in CMYK mode has some disadvantages:
r CMYK images are larger than RGB (with four color values per 
pixel instead of three with RGB).
r Some photo ﬁlters won’t work in CMYK mode.
r The CMYK color space usually has fewer colors than most RGB 
color spaces. Thus, when you convert from RGB to CMYK, you 
probably lose some colors, and there is no way to retrieve them 
should you want to later use your image for something such as 
lightjet printing (used by photo services to output your image 
on photographic paper) or a digital presentation using a monitor 
using RGB colors.
 
Grayscale mode
Photoshop also works with images in pure black and white (B&W) or 
grayscale. However, when working in grayscale, the color of a pixel  
only describes a single (gray) value. Consequently, even when you 
intend to produce a B&W photo (grayscale photo), it is recom-
mended using RGB mode, to preserve color information.
When using Photoshop’s bitmap mode, a picture has only two 
possible color values: black and white, no gray. Bitmap mode is 
rarely used for photographs, and most imaging techniques and ﬁl-
ters do not support bitmap mode.
 
Color spaces
A color space is the total range of colors (or color values) real devices, 
such as a monitor or printer or a virtual device (such as a theoretical 
average monitor, represented by the sRGB color space) can record or 
reproduce. This range deﬁnes the gamut of the device. 

2-6
Chapter 2: Basic color management
Every real device has a unique color space, and even identical 
devices (of the same make and model) have slightly diﬀering color 
spaces, e.g. due to diﬀerent age, production tolerances and so on. 
These diﬀerences increase with variations in user selected hard-
ware- or software-settings, such as diﬀerent monitor resolution, dif-
ferent printer inks or paper, or even a diﬀerent brightness setting 
on a monitor.
To improve our ability to work with colors, the International 
Color Consortium (ICC for short, see also [13]) and some other com-
panies (e.g. Adobe, Kodak, Apple) have deﬁned virtual color spaces 
that represent the gamut of a virtual, rather than a real device. We 
will see later, what the advantage of those virtual, standardized 
color spaces really are.
2.2 Understanding color management
Color correction and color management (CM) are two of the most 
important and diﬃcult areas to master in digital photography. As 
stated earlier, the goal of color management is ensure that the 
photo you see on your monitor looks as much as possible like the 
print you’ll get from your printer and very much the same when you 
send it to a photo service that will reproduce it using a lightjet 
printer. Color management helps to reproduce colors as truthfully as 
possible across a broad range of diﬀerent devices. As an identical 
reproduction is often impossible due to diﬀerent ways diﬀerent 
devices produce color, you should at least be able to predict the color 
you’ll get when printing from the color you see on your monitor.
The ability of a color managed application to show (simulate) 
on your monitor the colors and the impression that an image will 
have when printed on a speciﬁc printer or other output device is 
called soft prooﬁng. If you actually print using the same inks and the 
same paper used for ﬁnal output, this is called hard prooﬁng.
 
Why you need to understand color management
If you post a photo on the web and ask diﬀerent people to discuss 
its color quality, responses will be altered by the fact that when the 
image is displayed on diﬀerent monitors (without using color man-
agement), the result will show colors, which are at least slightly dif-

2-7
2.2: Understanding color management
ferent on all monitors. The viewers will actually see diﬀerent ver-
sions of the same photo. In fact, the monitors may not even be 
capable of rendering some RGB values at all. It is the domain of color 
management to signiﬁcantly reduce the problem described here.
 
The challenge
Your challenge is to have a monitor present the correct impression 
of how a certain photo would print on a color printer. The latest 
inkjet printers can produce amazing results, but without proper 
color management, color printing remains trial and error. You end 
up changing the printer’s color settings for every print, with usually 
less satisfaction. 
 
The solution
The solution to the color problem is to determine the color charac-
teristics of a device and to take those characteristics into account 
when reading colors form an input device or when sending color to 
an output device. Additionally you put a tag on color images that 
deﬁne how the color values of the image are to be interpreted.
 
ICC-proﬁles
An important concept of color management is the production of a 
standardized description of a device, called an ICC proﬁle; the format 
of these proﬁles is deﬁned by the ICC. The ICC color proﬁle describes 
a device’s color characteristics, such as the colors the device can 
record or reproduce and the values recorded for a perceived color 
(input device) or the values you must send to an output device to 
produce a certain color. These proﬁles are either from the device 
manufacturer  (usually called generic proﬁles), or you produce your 
own using special proﬁling hardware and software. A proﬁle pro-
duced for your speciﬁc device is called a custom proﬁle. Almost all 
color management systems today use ICC proﬁles. With the help of 
such a proﬁle, the color values required to produce a speciﬁc color 
on device A (e.g. a monitor) can be translated to values that will 
reproduce that speciﬁc color an device B (e.g. a printer) as close as 
technically possible. It also describes the gamut of the device.
Note: While a raw RGB value does not deﬁne color in an absolute 
way, the color produced is very much dependent on the device 

2-8
Chapter 2: Basic color management
used or on the device that recorded that value. An RGB value in the 
context of a color space (deﬁned by the ICC proﬁle of the color 
space) however, does deﬁne an absolute color!
Note: Because most people use their monitor as their soft prooﬁng 
device, the ﬁrst step toward complete color management is to pro-
ﬁle your monitor. 
Let’s return to the problem when receiving a sent image that (with-
out color management) displaying diﬀerent colors on diﬀerent 
monitors. With the help of the input proﬁle, a color management 
system may correctly interpret the RGB values of the (input) image 
and, with the aid of an ICC proﬁle for your monitor, may transfer 
them to color values producing (nearly) the same color on your out-
put device. How this is done, we  see in the next section.
 
What is a color management system?
A color management system (CMS) is a set of program modules that 
handle color translation. These modules are often part of the oper-
ating system but may be provided by applications, as well (Adobe 
does this). If an application is used to display or print a color image, 
it calls up these functions and hands over the image values and ICC 
proﬁle information and tells the CMS what function should be per-
formed. The central part of the CMS is a module called color man-
agement module (CMM). This does the calculations needed to trans-
late (transform) a color from color space A to color space B. Here’s 
how it works:
1. First the color management module (CMM) translates the device 
dependent color values of the image to a device independent 
color space, using the description of the source ICC proﬁle. Now 
the color values of the image are in Lab color space, which is de-
vice independent. This intermediate space is called transfer color 
space or proﬁle connection space (PCS for short). 
2. Next, these LAB-values are translated to color values that will 
produce a color on the output device that is as close to the origi-
nal color impression as possible. If the output device cannot pro-
duce the very same color, the CMM will try to ﬁnd a close match. 
How the best match is achieved, is determined by the translation 
intent (which we will explain at page 2-14).

2-9
2.2: Understanding color management
The ICC proﬁles used in this scheme are actually simple translation 
tables. They support translation from device dependent color values 
to the device independent color values (and vice versa).
#--
#OLOR -ANAGMENT -ODULE	
IMAGE FILE
2'"	
XX2'"
)##
XY2'"
)##
MONITOR )## PROFILE
YX2'"
)##
SCANNER
)## PROFILE
YY2'"
)##
PRINTER PROFILE
IMAGE IN DEVICE INDEPENDENT INTERNAL COLOR SPACE
EG  ,AB	
PREPRESS PROFILE
#-9+
)##
 
 
Figure 2-4:  How color proﬁles function with a color management system
Photoshop, and other applications that support color management, 
embed the ICC proﬁle data within the image ﬁle, and the ﬁles with 
this embedded information are called tagged ﬁles (or tagged images). 
When you pass the tagged image along, the proﬁle information is 
passed along as well. You should be beware that not all image ﬁle 
formats can include ICC proﬁles. While TIFFs and JPEGs can, GIFs can-
not.
Note: Avoid applications not using or creating these embedded 
proﬁles and also do not support use of monitor proﬁles. The color of 
the image they display on the monitor or print may or may not be 
correct or even close to the true colors. You will not know. Some 
applications may even remove the proﬁles from your image when 
editing without telling you.

2-10
Chapter 2: Basic color management
 
Color working spaces
It is a bit tedious to work with a large number of diﬀerent device 
dependent color spaces. This is why virtual, standardized color 
spaces were deﬁned. These do not describe a gamut of a real device 
but for an abstract (virtual) device. There are several diﬀerent such 
spaces for each of the color models (RGB, Lab, CMYK). They range 
from narrow to broad gamut. For example, for the RGB color model, 
there is (from narrow to wide) sRGB, Apple RGB, Adobe RGB (1998), 
ECI-RGB and Pro Photo RGB (and several others).
To eliminate a speciﬁc working space (including its ICC proﬁle) 
of your input device, you usually convert your image from the origi-
nal input color space to a standardized color space and continue to 
work on your image using this working space. With digital photos, 
you may accomplish this conversion using the RAW converter.
Why deﬁne several working spaces for a color model? These 
spaces diﬀer mainly in the color range (their gamut) they cover. In 
some workﬂows, it is advantageous to use a narrow color space, 
while in others, a wide space is better. If your input device has a 
wide gamut (such as digital cameras), you should use a work space 
with a wide gamut if you intend to produce output for several dif-
ferent output methods (e.g. inkjet printer, lightjet printer, monitor, 
etc.).  If you convert your image to a working space with a narrow 
gamut, you may lose some colors that could be reproduced by 
some of your output devices. If, however, you use a working space 
with a very wide gamut, the numbers (bits) representing color val-
ues may not be suﬃcient to diﬀerentiate the many diﬀerent colors 
your gamut allows (with 8-bit there are only 256 discrete values 
available). Many of these discrete values may be lost, because your 
image may never have colors that extend to the outer edge of the 
theoretical gamut of the space. This may get worse if you have to 
do a lot of correcting, rounding and transformations. For this 
reason, we recommend using 16-bit mode, when you intend to use 
a color space with a wide gamut.
The following list shows some of the most important color spaces 
for photographers:
r sRGB: This color space was designed to be used with monitors, 
and is probably a good one for photos to be presented on the 
Web. It deﬁnes a gamut that can be displayed by the average 

2-11
2.2: Understanding color management
monitor, which is a relatively small color space. Though many 
DSLRs  allow you to produce images using this color space, sRGB 
color space is much narrower than the color space than the 
cameras can see and record. 
r Adobe RGB (1998): A color space very popular among 
Photoshop users. It has a larger gamut than sRGB and covers 
most printable colors. This is the color space we use for digital 
photos.
r Pro Photo RGB: This color space was deﬁned and is supported 
by Kodak. It provides a very large gamut and should only be 
used when working with a color depth of 16-bit.
r Apple RGB: This color space was deﬁned by Apple Computer 
and is commonly used with Macintosh systems. Its gamut is 
wider than that of sRGB but smaller than that of Adobe RGB.
r ECI-RGB: This color space was deﬁned by ECI, the European 
Color Initiative – a group of companies attempting to deﬁne 
color production standards in Europe. The ECI-RGB color space 
was designed to include all colors that may be reproduced by 
printers. Its gamut is somewhat wider than that of Adobe RGB 
and includes some green colors that can be reproduced by many 
printers (inkjet and oﬀset, as well as gravure), but which are not 
part of either sRGB or Adobe RGB (1998). ECI-RGB is the standard 
RGB color space within the European prepress industry and 
serves as the European alternative to Adobe RGB for prepress 
work. 
 
Visualization of color spaces
Color spaces are actually three-dimensional (L-, A-, B-axis). The proﬁle 
shown in Figure 2-5 is that of sRGB, using the ColorSync utility of Mac 
OS X. The gray outer space shows the gamut of Adobe RGB (1998) and 
allows comparing these two color spaces. As can be seen, Adobe RGB 
is a superset of sRGB.

2-12
Chapter 2: Basic color management
 
 
Figure 2-5: 3D diagram of sRGB (color) and  Adobe RGB (1998) (gray shape)
The industry also uses some form of 2D charts to display color 
spaces. The color space plot shown in Figure 2-6 was generated with 
the GretagMacbeth Proﬁle Maker Pro 4.1 Proﬁle Editor.

2-13
2.2: Understanding color management
 
 
Figure 2-6: Gamut Display (using Proﬁle Maker Pro 4.1 Proﬁle Editor)
As seen in the diagram of ﬁgure 2-6, Pro Photo RGB is extremely wide, 
while Adobe RGB (1998) is much smaller and sRGB is very narrow.
We often use “Hahnemuehle German Etching watercolor paper” 
for printing with our inkjet printers. The gamut that may be repro-
duced using this paper using Epson’s UltraChrome inks exceeds 
sRGB but ﬁts into Adobe RGB. The color space of the “Epson Luster 
paper” has a much wider range than that of “Hahnemuehle water 
color paper” (no surprise here) and exceeds both sRGB and Adobe 
RGB (in some blues and greens). If you have ICC proﬁles describing 
diﬀerent printing sets (combinations of printer + ink + paper), a dis-
play like the ones shown above allow you to compare the gamut 
and thus the color richness you may achieve using diﬀerent papers.

2-14
Chapter 2: Basic color management
 
Color space mapping
When images need to be converted from one color space to another, 
for example, when displaying an image on a monitor, the image is 
transformed from its source color space (device color space or work-
ing color space) to that of the output device (your monitor, in this 
case). In most cases, the gamut of the source and the destination are 
diﬀerent, so some color mapping has to take place. This transforma-
tion is performed by the color management module (also called the 
color management engine). 
The main question is: What to do with those colors of the source 
space, that are not present at the destination space? Because there 
are several ways to handle this problem, ICC has deﬁned four diﬀer-
ent ways of mapping, called intents:
Perceptual (also called Photographic):  If the gamut of the source 
space is wider than that of the destination space, all colors are com-
pressed to ﬁt into the destination space. If the gamut of the source 
space is smaller than the destination space (all colors of the source 
are present at the destination space), a one to one mapping takes 
place (all colors keep their original appearance).
When mapping from a wider space to a smaller space, the 
Perceptual mapping usually shifts colors to a bit less saturated and 
somewhat lighter colors, but the overall impression of the image is 
preserved (diﬀerent colors keep their relative color distance). 
Perceptual mapping is one of the two intents we use when con-
verting photographs (the other being Relative colormetric).
Relative colormetric: When you map from a wider color space to a 
smaller color space and a color in the source space is not present at 
the destination space, it is mapped to the closest color at the desti-
nation space, which usually lies at the border of the destination 
space.
With this mapping, two colors diﬀerent in the source space and 
not present in the destination space may be mapped to the same 
color of the destination space (usually residing at the border of the 
that space). This may result in some color clipping or banding. The 
white point of the source space is mapped to the white point of the 
destination (if they diﬀer) and all colors are adapted relativ to the 
destination white point.

2-15
2.2: Understanding color management
The Relative colormetric intent is useful for photographs, and 
should be used when the source and the destination spaces have a 
similar gamut with lots of overlap or if most of the colors in your 
image (which may not use the full gamut of the source space) have 
an identical color in the destination space. In this case, most colors 
remain unmodiﬁed when transformed. This intent is used implicitly, 
when colors in your image are translated to colors on your monitor 
when an image is displayed in standard mode.
Absolute colormetric:  This intent is like a relative colormetric, 
where colors present in both color spaces are mapped 1:1, and colors 
that are out of the gamut (a color of the source space, that is not 
present in the destination space) are mapped to the border of the 
destination space. This mapping is particularly useful if you wish to 
use your output device (say your monitor) to simulate the behavior 
of another device. 
You should use this intent only for soft prooﬁng: When you 
want your monitor to display what your image will look like when 
printed on an inkjet or with oﬀset printing. In this case, the monitor 
simulates the white color of the paper. 
Saturation:  This intent tries to map an out-of-gamut color to a 
color of the destination space with the same saturation, even if the 
color has to be shifted signiﬁcantly. Use this intent when converting 
logos and colored diagrams from a larger color space to smaller one. 
For photographs, it is absolutely of no use! This intent tries to keep 
the visual diﬀerence of two colors but not their color impression.
 
Creating device proﬁles
The introduction above emphasizes the importance of using accu-
rate device proﬁles. As most of our digital work is done using the 
monitor, when setting up a color managed workﬂow we need to 
consider monitor proﬁles as our most important task. In this section, 
we turn our attention to how to build a device proﬁle.
When proﬁling a device, there are normally two steps:
r Calibration. The aim of calibration is to deﬁne a standardized 
state for the device, setting its controls so that it is in a state, as 
close to this deﬁned state as possible. For example, when cali-
brating a monitor, you manually set the controls of your monitor 

2-16
Chapter 2: Basic color management
to achieve a certain luminance (brightness of your monitor’s 
white) that has proven to be good for color work. Also, you set a 
white point conforming to an industry standard, such as D50 or 
D65 (color temperatures of 5,000 or 6,500 Kelvin respectively). 
The white point of your monitor is a mix of R, G and B that will 
represent white. 
r Characterization. When characterizing a device, a target is 
recorded by the input device, or sent to an output device. A tar-
get is a pattern of color patches with known color values. By 
comparing the color values recorded by the device (such as a 
scanner) to the known color values of the target, the proﬁling 
program can calculate a device’s color proﬁle, using essentially a 
translation table of device-dependant color values to device-
independent color values or vice versa. As an example, if the pro-
ﬁle is for an input device, it translates device-dependant colors 
seen by the device into the device-independent proﬁle connec-
tion space (PCS, which is CIE-LAB space). If, on the other hand, it is 
for a proﬁle of an output device, the table provides translation 
from the proﬁle connection space to the device-dependant col-
ors of the output device.
To perform both steps it is advisable to use a hardware device to 
measure color. When calibrating monitors, the device could be 
either a colorimeter or a spectrophotometer.
As the focus of this book is on the processing of RAW ﬁles, we pro-
vide a very brief overview of proﬁling, with only a bit deeper discus-
sion of proﬁling a monitor.
 
Camera proﬁles
There are two types of camera proﬁles: generic camera and custom 
camera proﬁles which proﬁle speciﬁc cameras. All RAW converters 
we discuss come with quite good generic proﬁles.  Some of them 
(e.g. Raw Shooter and Capture One) also support customer proﬁles.
Creating your own camera proﬁles can be very tricky, since  tar-
gets must be shot under highly controlled light conditions. 
Additionally, individual cameras of the same model can vary signiﬁ-
cantly  (certain cameras vary more than others within type and 
brand). For more details on camera proﬁling see chapter 11.

2-17
2.3 Profiling your monitor
 
Printer proﬁles
There is no single proﬁle for a printer. A printer proﬁle is always spe-
ciﬁc to that printer using a speciﬁc paper and ink set, and a speciﬁc 
driver and its settings (such as the same DPI). To make life interest-
ing, proﬁles for diﬀerent types of printing paper also vary signiﬁ-
cantly. 
Note: While some newer inkjet printers may vary little between 
individual printers of the same make and model, proﬁles should still 
be generated for each printer and its speciﬁc settings.
When proﬁling a printer, a target is printed, using precisely the 
printer settings, ink, and paper that the proﬁle is intended for. Once 
the print has dried (anywhere from 1 to 24 hours) the color values of 
the print are measured using either a spectrophotometer or a pro-
ﬁled scanner (less accurate). By comparing  known values of the 
color patches of the target to those of the measured patches of the 
print, the proﬁling software produces the printer proﬁle. 
Fortunately, you don’t need to invest in a costly 
spectrophotometer and proﬁling software; you can use several pro-
ﬁling services, which do this job for you. Look up “printer proﬁling 
service” at Yahoo or Google.
2.3 Proﬁling your monitor
As stated before, an accurate monitor proﬁle is the basis for serious 
color managed workﬂow. When calibrating your monitor, you have 
a choice of doing so by eye or with specialized hardware.
When proﬁling your monitor, begin by turning it on and leav-
ing it on for at least 30 minutes before beginning any calibration. To 
perform the calibration follow the instructions provided by your 
choice of tool, whether calibrating by eye or using hardware-based 
tools as discussed below.
Be aware that room lightning, the color of your walls and desk-
top and even your clothing can inﬂuence precise calibration.

2-18
Chapter 2: Basic color management
 
Calibration by eye
Photoshop for Windows comes with a utility called Adobe Gamma 
that lets you calibrate your monitor. With Mac OS X there is a similar 
little utility called ColorSync Calibrator. Both utilities use your eyes as 
their measuring instrument. 
 
Hardware based calibration
Although calibrating your monitor by eye is better than doing no 
calibration at all, if precision is important to you, you should use a 
hardware based color measuring device (a color spectrophotometer 
or colorimeter) to achieve much more precise results. While the soft-
ware and hardware for monitor proﬁling used to be quite expensive 
there are several packages currently available for between USD $100 
– $300 for a complete kit. Your choices include: GretagMacbeth Eye 
One Display 2 (see [15]), ColorVision Spyder and Spyder Pro products 
(see [16]), and MonacoOPTIX from Monaco Systems (see [17]).
We use and recommend GretagMacbeth Eye-One Display 2 
and the Sony Artisan monitor (which provides an integrated solu-
tion with a monitor and a special measuring device).
The entire calibration and proﬁling process will take you about 
10 minutes. Once a good calibration is achieved, the next calibra-
tion will be much faster. 
 
Calibration settings
As there are several options when calibrating and proﬁling a moni-
tor you have to decide which settings to use when starting your cali-
bration. Without going into too great detail, we recommend using 
the following values:
White point 
 
6500 K (D65) 
Gamma 
 
2.2 
Luminance 
 
130–150 cd/m2
We recommend these values even if you do prepress work (where a 
white point of 5 000 K is the standard) and even if you work on a 
Mac where a gamma of 1.8 is tradition.

2-19
2.3 Profiling your monitor
 
Calibrating and proﬁling using Eye-One Display 2
The Eye-One Display package from Gretag Macbeth ([15]) includes 
software (Eye-One Match) for calibrating and proﬁling monitors as 
well as a sensor (colorimeter). It supports Windows as well as Mac OS 
and allows the calibration of CRTs as well as LCDs and laptop dis-
plays. To use it to calibrate your monitor:
1. Launch Eye-One Match (EOM) and select the monitor from the 
list of devices you can proﬁle. We recommend using Advanced 
mode.
 
 
 
 
Figure 2-7: Startup screen of Eye-One Match: Select the monitor to proﬁle
2. Select the type of monitor you intend to calibrate (LCD, CRT, or 
Laptop), then Click 
 to continue.
3. The ﬁrst task is to calibrate the sensor (not your monitor). Follow 
the instructions given on the screen. (Help will provide you with 
additional information.)
4. Select your target calibration settings. We recommend these 
values:

2-20
Chapter 2: Basic color management
  
 
l Figure 2-8: 
Recommended settings 
for your monitor 
calibration
   
 will take you to the next step.
5. Attach the sensor to your monitor using either the suction-cup 
(if you are calibrating a CRT) or by attaching the lead weights to 
your sensor cable and letting them dangle on the backside of 
the monitor. If you’re calibrating an LCD you may have to tilt the 
monitor backward a bit, so that the sensor lies ﬂat on the screen.
    
 
l Figure 2-9:  
Eye-One Display 
colorimeter
6. Begin the calibration phase using the controls on your monitor, if 
your monitor has them. (Skip this step if you are calibrating a 
laptop or LCD without controls and continue with step 8). You 
will set the contrast control to maximum and then slowly reduce 
it until the green arrow resembles the black one. Don’t worry; 
Eye-One Match will guide you through this calibration.
     
 
 
l Figure 2-10: 
Use your monitor 
dial to bring the 
contrast marker 
near the zero 
value.

2-21
2.3 Profiling your monitor
7. Press Start to have EOM begin measuring the contrast values, 
then Stop and 
 to begin calibration of the RGB controls. This 
step will set the control dials so that the monitor’s white point is 
set close to the intended color temperature (6500 or 5000 
Kelvin). This may be achieved either by adjusting an OSD (Online 
Screen Display) setting on the monitor, or by setting the moni-
tor’s R-, G- and B-controls, if any. In this step, all three colored 
bars should be in the green area for optimal calibration. (The 
Eye-One Match screen will give you useful feedback.)
     
 
 
l Figure 2-11: 
If your monitor 
has RGB controls 
you should try to 
set your target 
white point.
  Next, set luminance using your monitor’s brightness controls.
    
  
 
l Figure2-12: 
Set the 
luminance using 
your brightness 
control of the 
monitor to a 
target value of 
120–150 cd/m2. 
8. This ﬁnishes the calibration phase, and Eye-One Match will start 
the actual characterization. It will display a number of color 
patches and measure their values (which should take about ﬁve 
minutes). You won’t need to do anything while this process runs.
9. Once the characterization is ﬁnished, Eye-One Match will display 
the values used and display a diagram of the resulting color 
space (see ﬁgure 2-13 at page 2-22).

2-22
Chapter 2: Basic color management
   
 
 
Figure 2-13: When ﬁnished, EOM shows the proﬁling values  
 
 
and the monitor color space. Enter a descriptive proﬁle name.
EOM will also prompt you for a proﬁle name. Choose a descriptive 
name that reﬂects the tool used, the make of the monitor, as well as 
the values used. For example, if your are using EOM to calibrate an 
NEC 2180 monitor with X values, a suggested name might be “EOM-
NEC2180-D65-G2.2”.
Eye-One Match will save the ICC proﬁle to the appropriate 
folder (depending on your operating system), and will immediately 
make it the active and default monitor proﬁle. Running Windows 
and having Adobe Gamma installed, you should move Adobe 
Gamma out of your start folder to prevent it interfering with the 
correct loading of the new monitor proﬁle when Windows starts up.
Once you have completed these proﬁling steps, do not change any 
monitor settings without re-calibrating. You should plan to re-cali-
brate your monitor about once a month.

2-23
2.4 Photoshop color and monitor profile settings
2.4 Photoshop color and monitor proﬁle settings
Before beginning to work with Photoshop, set up the program up 
with your personal color management preferences. The way color 
settings are made is similar with all Adobe applications since Adobe 
Creative Suite 1 (CS1). When using CS2, you may use centralized color 
settings. These settings will be used (by default) by all other CS2 
applications, as well. With CS2, the settings may be done in Bridge.  
Photoshop probably oﬀers the most advanced color manage-
ment support in any application. For that reason, its color settings 
show many diﬀerent options and parameters. 
To begin setting your color management preferences, select 
EditrColor Settings to open the color setting dialog.
Figure 2-10 shows how we set up the “Color Settings” in 
Photoshop (the most relevant settings are marked).
 
 
l Figure 2-14:
Photoshop color 
settings
Note: We ignore settings for CMYK and Gray here as we only cover 
RGB color setup in our workﬂow. If you live in Europe, your CMYK 

2-24
Chapter 2: Basic color management
Setting should either be Euroscale Coated or ISO Coated. If you are 
mainly preparing your images for prepress, use ECI-RGB as your 
default RGB color space, in which case your settings might look like 
this:
 
l Figure 2-15: 
Recommended working 
spaces for prepress work 
in Europe
Photoshop is not particularly intuitive when it comes to ﬁnding the 
monitor proﬁle in use. To determine which proﬁle is in use, select 
EditrColor Settings and use the RGB drop-down list to select work-
ing spaces and scroll (usually up) until you ﬁnd the entry Monitor 
RGB (Figure 2-x shows Sony_LCD_Std_D65). The entry you see indi-
cates the monitor proﬁle in use. 
Note: Close the Color Settings dialog box by clicking Cancel in 
order to avoid changing your working space settings. Your monitor 
proﬁle should never be your work space!
 
l Figure 2-16:  
Finding the Monitor 
Proﬁle in Photoshop

3-1
Basic RAW workflow
Chapter 3
 
Basic RAW workﬂow
Camera: Canon 350D (Rebel XT)
Here, we want to outline the basic workﬂow steps and tasks of a 
digital RAW negative workﬂow. The RAW converters featured in the 
next chapter will perform most of these tasks outlined here.
As an overview, here is a list of the main steps:
r Handling the camera in the ﬁeld using RAW ﬁle photographs
r Transferring images to the computer
r Setting up digital workﬂow tools 
r Browsing and evaluating RAW images

3-2
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
r Essential image corrections 
– White balance (WB) 
– Improving tonality 
– Getting better colors
r Advanced image corrections
r Advanced workﬂow helpers
In following chapters we will show how these steps can be handled 
by the various RAW converters we cover, starting with Adobe Camera 
Raw.
3.1 Setup the camera for RAW ﬁle photographs
 
Set your camera to RAW mode
This is a basic step as you merely follow your camera manual and set 
the camera to RAW. Some cameras allow use of both RAW and JPEG 
simultaneously. We don’t always recommend this as it uses more 
memory space on the card. Of course, there are instances when it 
may make good sense to do so, e.g., when you need to have the 
image available as JPEG quickly, without spending time with image 
optimization using the RAW converter. For dedicated images, you 
may then still go back to your RAW ﬁle, getting the most from it. 
 
Exposure, Exposure, Exposure
There are really not a lot of diﬀerences from traditional photogra-
phy. A better exposure is the ticket to a good ﬁnal result. Raw ﬁle 
processing may allow you to get good results from not-so-perfect 
exposure, but this should not be taken as an excuse for sloppy expo-
sures.
A good exposure sounds so easy, but it is not. What you want is:
r No blown highlights
r No underexposed images
r No noisy and dark shadows
The good news is that there is an instrument in digital cameras that 
allows you to evaluate exposure instantly after you take the photo: 
It is the histogram.

3-3
3.1 Handling the camera in the field for RAW file photographs
 
Optimize exposure using your camera’s histogram 
In the ﬁeld, the main diﬀerence between using a ﬁlm and a digital 
camera is the LCD on the back of the digital camera giving you the 
ability to evaluate an image right after exposure. You might think 
that viewing your pictures on that tiny LCD is a major beneﬁt in 
going digital. Yes, if you try hard, you can check sharpness by zoom-
ing in on the image. The main advantage of this LCD for me, how-
ever, is to check exposure in my last photo.
Correct exposure is the key to taking quality images. This did 
not change from ﬁlm to digital. In some ways, over-exposure 
becomes more problematic in digital as the sensors tends to clip 
data beyond a certain threshold. This equates to: Never over-
expose your photos. In this case, the highlights may be lost and 
recovery is not possible (though there are some techniques to esti-
mate lost highlight).
There is help which only the digital cameras can provide: The 
cameras provide a way to view the result of the last photograph 
taken and show a histogram of the grayscale values from 0 (black) 
to 255 (white). 
Here are four histograms examples (created in Photoshop) that 
show diﬀerent characteristics and show histogram basics. 
 
l Figure 3-1: 
Histogram 1 – indicating 
strong overexposure
Highlights (right side of the histogram) have been lost. This shot 
would be a candidate for deletion in all but a few rare cases. Some 
might recommend to “burn” the photo in Photoshop. Still that is fak-
ing details in the highlights that are not actually there. Histogram 2: 
Histogram indicating potential over-exposure
 l Figure 3-2: Histogram 2

3-4
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
There is only a small spike in the highlights and it very much 
depends on the photo whether this might be a problem or not. If the 
spike represents a real pure white or an unimportant specular high-
light then this photo may be OK. Otherwise, you are in trouble.
In such cases, if the camera has the ability to indicate overex-
posed areas, we recommend having a glance at the camera’s LCD 
preview with the highlight/overexposure indicator enabled. 
 
lFigure 3-3: Histogram 3 
– indicates good exposure
Here the highlights are OK. You lost a bit of the dynamic range in the 
highlight area but Photoshop can correct for this. You should 
endeavor to get histograms similar to this. In principle, it is best to 
get as close as possible to the right without actually touching it.
 
lFigure 3-4: Histogram 
4 –  indicates strong under 
exposure
Here the data in the shadows are lost. This is not the only problem 
since digital cameras show much more noise in the shadows. Once 
this image is corrected, extended noise would show up even in the 
midrange.
 
“Expose to the right” rule
From the above we learned that the ideal histogram should:
r Not indicate any over-exposure or missing highlights
r Not under-expose because you may lose shadow details, and 
more importantly, get more noise
In conclusion, the perfect digital exposure is as far to the right as 
possible without over-exposure. Unfortunately the reality is not that 
simple.

3-5
3.1 Handling the camera in the field for RAW file photographs
The overall shape of the histogram does not matter at all, as it 
merely reﬂects the tonal distribution of the scene you photo-
graphed.
Read the next section and you will understand why it is safer to 
slightly under-expose than risk highlight clipping. This is especially 
true as some histograms are hard to read outdoors in bright day-
light.
 
Color channel clipping
We mentioned that most histograms in cameras show the histo-
gram as grayscale levels. But as we are dealing with color images, 
we have, in reality, histograms of all three RGB channels.
Some clipping can 
happen just in one or 
two color channels, 
which might not display 
in the luminance histo-
gram.
Here is an example 
from the Canon 10D 
demonstrating typical 
problems with saturated 
colors. Blue, orange and 
yellow ﬂowers are good 
candidates, and it is safer 
not to use up the full 
exposure headroom to 
the right.
Figure 3.5: Image with clipping in the 
blue channel
The histogram in Camera Raw 2.2 clearly shows the challenge in the 
blue channel.
 
lFigure 3-6: Camera Raw 
2.0 histogram of image 3-5.

3-6
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
This overexposure in the blue channel was not shown by the cam-
era histogram as it averages all three channels (most often, they use 
a so-called luminance histogram, where green gets valued higher 
than red/blue).
In this diﬃcult situation, it would be very helpful if you also had 
histograms for the three-color channels. The only cameras we 
know providing this are the Fuji S2 and the new Canon 1D Mark II. 
The latter provides a histogram like this one:
 lFigure 3-7: The “after” histogram.
Most cameras allow you to inspect the histogram as part of the 
instant preview. Here is an example from the Nikon D70:
 
lFigure 3-8:  
Histogram from a 
Nikon D70.
Of course, the “after” histogram only helps if you can repeat the 
shot. Fortunately, when doing nature photography, this is frequently 
the case except for photographing birds and other wildlife. We 
check the histogram constantly. Once the exposure is right and the 
light does not change, it is necessary to only check the histogram 
occasionally.

3-7
3.1 Handling the camera in the field for RAW file photographs
 
The "before/live" histogram
The ideal would be to display a live histogram and use it instead of 
the camera meter. For digicams, this dream has come to be actual-
ity. The new 8MP Konica Minolta DiMAGE, Sony F828 and Olympus 
8080 all sport live histograms.
 
lFigure 3-9: 
Shot form 
the LCD of 
the A2.
Implementing live histograms in digital SLRs is problematic as the 
viewing mirror hides the sensor. One thing for sure: Reﬁned versions 
of live histograms are the way to go.
Do we really need the histogram?
What we actually need from the histogram is the information about 
under/over exposure. If this information can be presented by other 
means, then the histogram may become obsolete. But, for now, the 
histogram is your ticket to a better exposure.
 
Correct white balance (WB) for optimal color quality 
The key to correct color is getting the white balance correct, and 
that depends on the light source or sources illuminating the photo-
graphed scene.
When using ﬁlm, the choice of ﬁlm type or the ﬁlters used to 
compensate for diﬀerent lighting conditions (indoor, sun, cloudy, 
shade, ﬂash, etc.) all inﬂuence the white balance.
If you use only RAW ﬁle formats, WB can be corrected later. For 
ﬁne art photography, true color isn’t what really matters (would 

3-8
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
someone use Velvia™ for that?) Most people are more interested in 
the subjective ’correct’ (i.e. pleasing) WB. 
Digital SLRs allows you to measure the right WB (custom WB) at 
the time you photograph. This might be optimal, but is not always 
easy in the ﬁeld (nature). Therefore, set the WB to “auto” for all 
cameras and adjust the WB later in the RAW converter. A preferred 
practice is to photograph a gray card (or even better, a Macbeth 
ColorChecker) in the same light as the following photos and use 
this shot later for the correct WB correction.
Correcting WB (and color in general) can be very tricky, highly 
subjective and requires a lot of experience. With practice, you will 
improve. 
Additionally, an observation: Judging colors is very much a 
function of mood. Sometimes colder colors (more blue) are viewed, 
and, in that case, you may want more warmth (more yellow). Such 
experiments can amount to a lot of time optimizing images.
If occasionally you feel lost, don’t worry. You are not alone! 
 
Understand objective and subjective white balance
There is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between ’pleasing’ and ‘correct’ color. 
Only in a relatively few photographic disciplines are you concerned 
about the correct color. This may be the case when photographing 
fabrics or, perhaps, catalog shots. Otherwise, usually aim for pleas-
ing colors. The most heated discussions occur over what constitutes 
a good skin tone. Even here exist many cultural diﬀerences.
Begin with a white balance you prefer, optimize the contrast 
and change colors selectively only if there are major issues. Some 
shots might need skin tone correction, while in others, the shade of 
a boring blue sky.
 
Adjust your camera’s sensitivity: selecting the right ISO 
Today’s digital cameras allow changing the ISO value on the ﬂy by 
simply dialing in a new value. This is a huge plus for digital as you 
can change ISO speed on a picture-by-picture basis. 
A low ISO normally results in lower noise (better image quality) 
and a high ISO means higher noise (lower image quality). Noise can 
show up in many diﬀerent ways. If a camera shows noise-like grains 

3-9
3.2: Camera to computer: Enter the digital darkroom
of “salt and pepper” then this is very positive, as we all are accus-
tomed to this grain from our ﬁlm-based experience. 
Note: Stay at low ISO whenever possible and use a tripod!
If you need to use a higher ISO, try to improve such photos by using 
top-class noise removal tools (see Noise reduction at chapter 7).
3.2 Camera to computer: enter the digital darkroom 
 
Manage your image storage 
Once back from the ﬁeld with memory cards and/or digital wallets 
ﬁlled, it is time to transfer these ﬁles to your computer.
Be aware that this requires a lot of disk space. Converting images 
to 16-bit TIFFs makes even more demands on disk space.
You might be thinking in Gigabytes and soon in Terabytes. We 
currently have about 1,000 GB of storage in our network (to accom-
modate organization and duplicates). A reasonable starting point is 
80 GB at minimum then adding external Firewire drives as backup 
(perhaps start with 160 GB).
 
Computer transfer and organizing your photos
Most cameras today come with either a USB or Firewire interface. 
Many also use these interfaces to transfer ﬁles to a computer. We 
personally choose not use this feature, as it oﬀers little help if you 
have multiple memory cards and/or digital wallets. Nor do we 
believe cameras themselves are the most robust CF card readers.
We chose a USB 2.0 card reader installed on our main PC (same 
is available for Macs) then proceeded by copying our images from a 
day’s shoot to a new directory in our ”inbox“ folder.

3-10
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
 
Figure 3-10: Inbox folders
Since several diﬀerent cameras are frequently used, the goal is to 
give every image a diﬀerent name (even when using two cameras of 
the same type).
The following explains the ﬁle hierarchy:
r all_2005: all RAW ﬁles from all cameras for 2005 go here
r all_dvd_2005_001: this is the ﬁrst DVD set (or use CDs) for 2005. 
It is suggested you create a new folder when one’s content 
exceeds about 4 GB (data to ﬁt on one DVD or 600 MB for a single 
CD)
r 20050913_300d_LosGatos: a folder from a single photo session 
in Los Gatos (actually better to name it “Los_Gatos” as some 
archival tools ﬁlter out names. 
r The name also contains the date yyyymmdd for easier sorting
r 300d: for information on the camera used
r Subject: (sometime followed by “_01” or “_0x” if more than one 
card was used that day.
All image ﬁles are renamed to: 300d_nnnn_mmm where:
r 300d describes the camera type
r nnnn is a sequence number (starting at 0000) and incremented. 
Why do this? You may use two 300D cameras but still all images 
deserve a unique ﬁlename. Also, when 9999 is reached, the cam-
era restarts at 0001. Sequence numbers allow unique ﬁle names.

3-11
3.2: Camera to computer: Enter the digital darkroom
If we later work on a ﬁle in Photoshop, the result is saved as a master 
TIFF ﬁle. The ﬁle name will keep its original “300d_nnnn_mmm” ﬁle 
name, and can be appended with more descriptive text:
An example: r Original: 300d_0001_1256 
     
r Derived: 300d_0001_1256_Los_Gatos_Bear_Cafe
In doing this, every ﬁle is linked by its original ﬁle name to the RAW 
ﬁle in the archives.
 
Renaming
As described above, after copying ﬁles to a hard disk, ﬁles are 
renamed to ensure their names will be unique. A free PC utility 
called ”Rname-it“ is used (you can download it from our web site at 
[38]). Several others programs are available, e.g. Renamer4Mac ([39]) 
for Mac OS X.
The Photoshop CS File Browser and Capture One also allow 
renaming your ﬁles. We ﬁnd Rname-it suitable for our use. A ﬁle 
name can contain a preﬁx describing the digital cameras used with, 
for instance, a name like “1Ds_0000_”. We use software called 
Downloader Pro (PC only, see [41]).
 
Figure 3-11: Freeware PC renaming tool "Rname-it"

3-12
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
 
Securing your valuable photos: Backup
After transferring the images, it is strongly advised to backup these 
ﬁles to a physically diﬀerent hard disk or to CD/DVD. After that, it is 
safe to erase the images from your memory card or possibly refor-
mat the CF cards or Microdrives.
Tip: Backup, Backup, Backup
r Make backup CDs or DVDs 
r Use two diﬀerent CD/DVD brands if you make two copies. If a CD 
from manufacturer A fails there is a chance that additional cop-
ies may be faulty, as well. 
r Store each copy in a diﬀerent location 
r Once you have stored your ﬁles on a disk drive, you can conﬁ-
dently enter the digital darkroom and begin to work on your 
images.
Note: Infrequently, your Microdrive or Compact Flash card becomes 
corrupt. Do not panic! Get Photorescue (for more information con-
sult our web site [3]) There are several other programs to help 
recover images from corrupted ﬁle systems or memory cards.
3.3 Setting up your digital darkroom
This step is required only when a new RAW converter is installed or 
possibly if you change options.
r Setting up the cache folder: Most modern RAW converters use a 
cache to make unnecessary the need to create previews repeat-
edly while working on a set of images.
r Choosing the working space you will use (mainly ProPhoto RGB 
for 16-bit only, Adobe RGB or sRGB).
r Select either 8- or 16-bit TIFFs or 8-bit JPEGs (we do not recom-
mend the latter).
r Some RAW converters allow selecting the per-image-settings are 
storage area.
r Which application (if any) to launch after converting an image.

3-13
3.4 Browse and evaluate your RAW files
3.4 Browse and evaluate your RAW ﬁles
It is quite important for every photographer to inspect both new 
and older images. Particularly as you upload your work to a com-
puter, you want to analyze new images as quickly as possible, 
decide which to retain and which to delete, and begin working on 
the ‘keepers.’
A small thumbnail, as provided on older ﬁle browsers, is not 
usually good enough to determine whether the following image 
criteria are met. Advisable also is to preview RAW ﬁles on a digital 
light table which is best integrated with a complete RAW converter. 
The critical points to look for when inspecting your RAW ﬁles are:
r Is the composition satisfactory?
r Is critical sharpness achieved?
r Is the exposure OK? Here we need to see a histogram.
r Quality of colors. This step usually requires a correction of white 
balance.
r Flagging ﬁles and/or setting priorities.
r Basic rotation (in 90-degrees increments).
r The deletion workﬂow: ‘Delete’ sounds simple, right? In fact, it is 
one of the most dangerous operations. When you have deleted a 
valuable image you know you have a problem. If you keep all 
questionable images, you’ll need lots of disk space, having to 
view those images again and again. An eﬀective delete workﬂow 
is a two-step process: First, mark for deletion, revisit the marked 
images and then ﬁnally delete them. The RawShooter solution is 
simple, yet elegant. ACR 3.0 and Capture One may provide helpful 
solutions, as well.
r Ad hoc corrections, where the settings stick with the image: This 
implies that in previewing an image you can correct white balance 
and exposure on the ﬂy. These settings remain when you revisit 
RAW ﬁles later on. All RAW converters covered fulﬁll this criterion. 
r Ad hoc slide show: (in Bridge and RawShooter)
All the major RAW converters featured in this book are very capable 
browsers and inspectors.

3-14
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
3.5 Essential image corrections
 
White balance (WB)
A key part in getting the correct colors in your images is setting the 
WB correctly.
White balance (WB) – Essential
Good white balance support is crucial for any useful RAW converter. 
There are a couple of white balance correction techniques:
r Gray balance by clicking on a neutral spot in the photo
r White balance correction controls
– Color temperature and tint
 
l Figure 3-12: 
White balance in 
Adobe Camera Raw
 lFigure 3-13: 
White balance in Capture One
– Warmer/colder control

3-15
3.5 Essential image corrections
 
lFigure 3-14:  
White balance Colder/Warmer 
interface in RawShooter.
  – Presets (daylight, shade, tungsten, ..)
r White balance as shot in camera
r Auto white balance
Correct white balance support is also not a trivial task for any RAW 
converter. We expect that today’s capable RAW converter can pre-
view WB correction in real-time.
Note: Some RAW converters have a single color temperature slider 
(measured in Kelvin). These RAW converters oversimplify the situa-
tion of color cast. In many lighting conditions, especially outdoors, 
color cast cannot be corrected with a single slider.
White balance samples
This example shows how to use the white balance settings of your 
RAW converter.
Figure 3-15: Image with WB “as shot”

3-16
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
The camera records WB settings, and these are called “as shot.” Such 
settings can be achieved with the following camera settings:
r “auto”: means that the camera attempts to make a good guess. 
This can be a decent start, sometimes.
r Camera presets (like daylight, ﬂash, tungsten …): Use this option 
only if you know the light source for sure.
r Custom white balance: where the white balance is measured in 
the camera. Useful with mixed light or if the light stays constant 
for a period of time (e.g. sports photography).
These next samples demonstrate how small changes in color tem-
perature can have a strong impact on color balance.
Figure 3-16: Color temperature set to a lower value
Note: Some may be confused by the notion of “higher color temper-
ature” believing it tends to be bluer or “colder.” Colder in this sense 
makes an image look subjectively colder and more bluish. 
The above sample displays slightly “colder” because we assumed it 
was shot at a lower color temperature.

3-17
3.5 Essential image corrections
Figure 3-17: Color temperature set to a higher value
The above sample displays slightly “warmer” because we assumed it 
was shot at a higher color temperature.
 
Tonality
Exposure (white point), shadow point, contrast and 
brightness
A key factor in getting a correct image is creating a good tonality. 
Looking at B&W photos you realize that tonality is the only thing 
you care about:
r How smooth are the tonal transitions
r Contrast
r Highlights
r Shadows
r White point (brightest point)
r Black point (darkest point)
With color images it is more diﬃcult to judge optimal tonality. Yet, 
the same criteria hold for color photos. Image tonality is inﬂuenced 
by the following factors:

3-18
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
 
Exposure, Contrast & Brightness
 
l Figure 3-18:  
Tonality correction in Capture One
 
lFigure 3-19: Tonality 
controls in Adobe 
Camera Raw
Proper exposure compensation is essential. Tools should include a 
histogram or equivalent with under- and over-exposure indicators 
(Watch also for over-exposure in any single RGB channel). While 
under-exposed shots can often be corrected to one or two stops 
without too much loss of quality, over-exposure is very diﬃcult (or 
impossible) to correct. Once values are clipped in the highlights 
(this may occur per RGB channel) there is rarely any way to correct it. 
Control exposure to avoid over-exposure at all times. 

3-19
3.5 Essential image corrections
 
Adaptive tonality controls
In brightening up shadows, normal curve or levels controls are not 
really eﬀective. You need tools that work adaptively. This means that 
contrast is corrected locally in proportion to the area in which the 
pixels reside.
 
lFigure 3-20:   
RawShooter controls
As Photoshop does with its Shadow/Highlight function, RawShooter 
uses an adaptive way to improve shadows called “Fill Light”. 
Tonality sample #1
Let’s begin with a photo shot at very low contrast.
Figure 3-21: Rock colors photographed at low light

3-20
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
If you are able to recall the original scene when shooting took 
placer, the representation in ﬁgure 3-21 may be quite accurate and 
it’s color correct. But, some ﬂat images look too truthful or even dull. 
All this image needs is more contrast to bring it to life. 
The histogram shows what this image is lacking:
r There are almost no dark or black tones 
r Nor are there real bright tones either
Figure 3-22: Improved shadows with ACR curves
Although the curve control improves shadows some, the image is 
still unacceptable.

3-21
3.5 Essential image corrections
Figure 3-23: Using the ACR “auto” setting
Using ACR “auto” settings lets the image “pop” – but possibly too 
much so.
Figure 3-24: The ﬁnal version with some tweaking based on “auto”

3-22
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
It is unwise to correct tones only referring to the histogram. Best you 
judge it visually, as well.
Conclusion: Low contrast images may be a suitable starting point, 
since RAW converters do allow you to improve the overall contrast.
Tonality sample #2
Images covering a wide contrast range are much more diﬃcult to 
correct. Here the classic Levels and Curves tools show limitations.
Figure 3-25: Scene with strong shadows
Normally, these kinds of images are candidates for a Shadows/
Highlight tool treatment in Photoshop CS. The RawShooter con-
verter, however, permits adaptive correction as a part of tonality 
control at this early stage of RAW conversion.
Finally, manual ﬁne tuning brings out the best results, shown in 
ﬁgure 3-27.

3-23
3.5 Essential image corrections
Figure 3-26: RawShooter with “auto” exposure setting
Figure 3-27: Result after careful ﬁne tuning
We are convinced that more RAW converters will provide adaptive 
tonality control in the future.

3-24
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
 
Color corrections
The major step towards correct color is getting the white balance 
right. Then, after you have corrected tonality (with the focus on con-
trast), your image should be near what you want it to be. But the 
colors in RAW converters are also inﬂuenced by these other factors:
r Camera proﬁles
r Saturation settings
r Color controls in the RAW converter
All RAW converters we are discussing come with reasonably good 
camera proﬁles. Proﬁles are available on the market, and they may 
help improve your results.
It is essential to make a distinction between correct and pleas-
ing colors. As mentioned earlier, in only limited areas of photogra-
phy do you want true and correct colors (i.e., art reproductions, fab-
rics for catalogs). Most photographers, on the other hand, look for 
pleasing or even expressive colors. One of the problematic areas is 
skin tone. In this arena, pleasing colors are highly subjective.
3.6 Advanced image corrections
It is truly amazing how many defects you can ﬁnd in an image when 
you start carefully looking. While some RAW converters help correct 
certain lens deﬁciencies, in the end you may choose Photoshop to 
ﬁx those remaining defects. We dedicate a whole chapter on how to 
deal with all these diﬀerent defects (see chapter 7). 
Here is a list of main defects that must be covered at some 
point in a workﬂow:
r Noise (luminance and color noise)
r Sharpening 
r Removal of chromatic aberrations (CA)
r Vignetting
r Cropping
r Correcting tilt (so easy to have a shot uneven horizontally)
r Perspective corrections
r Dust removal
r Up-sampling

3-25
3.7 Extra workflow support: 
3.7 Extra workﬂow support
Here are more features oﬀered by some RAW converters, that may 
speed up work and make it easier:
r Batch conversion
r Background processing
r Applying settings from one ﬁle to other ﬁles
r Snapshots of diﬀerent conversion settings
r Save/restore settings
r Camera default settings
r Undo/redo
r Support for scroll wheels
r Keyboard shortcuts
r RGB value samplers
We go into these when describing how to work with the various 
RAW converters.

3-26
Chapter 3: Basic RAW workflow
Intentionally left blank

4-1
Basic RAW workflow
Chapter 4
Adobe Camera Raw
Camera: Canon 1DS Mk. II
Adobe Camera Raw (ACR for short) is Adobe’s RAW converter. 
Camera Raw version 1 was an optional plug-in to Adobe Photoshop 
7, but ACR version 2 is supplied free of charge with Photoshop CS (1) 
(also called Photoshop 8). There was a substantial jump in function-
ality with ACR2. Adobe Camera Raw version 3 (ACR 3) is now in its 
third generation and is probably the most used 3rd party RAW con-
verter. It comes for free with every version of Photoshop CS1/CS2. 
New with ACR3 are Auto-corrections and improved batch pro-
cessing. Additionally, cropping and straightening tools were intro-
duced with this version.

4-2
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
While the ﬁle browser was a module in Photoshop 7 then 
enhanced in Photoshop CS1, with CS2 it becomes a separate utility 
called Bridge, now the universal ﬁle browser in all Adobe applica-
tions of Creative Suite 2. It provides previews of all kinds of (Adobe) 
data ﬁles. Though Bridge oﬀers several enhancements over the pre-
vious ﬁle browser of Photoshop CS1, for many uses you may well 
use the PS CS1 ﬁle browser instead of Bridge. Bridge is highly 
customizable, and in our estimate, the most ﬂexible and most pow-
erful ﬁle browser of all those we will deal with in this book. If you 
do desktop publishing, its full strength will become obvious as you 
use its close integration with all the Adobe applications, such as 
Photoshop, Camera Raw, InDesign, Illustrator, Acrobat, GoLive and 
Version Cue. However, in this book, we focus only on those func-
tions, relevant to Camera Raw, Photoshop and our workﬂow.
As many readers still use Photoshop CS1 and ACR2.x, we will 
ﬂag those features (if appropriate) since ACR3  only became available 
with Photoshop CS2.
Figure 4-1: Basic ACR window

4-3
4.1 Quick ACR real life workflow
Camera Raw 2.x and 3.x can open nearly all RAW ﬁles created by 
today’s digital cameras. When a new camera is introduced to the 
market you may need to wait for the next update of ACR. However, 
Adobe has even shipped early beta versions to satisfy its customers.
Perhaps needless to mention, everything in Adobe Camera 
Raw (ACR) is fully color managed: Monitor proﬁles are the same as 
used by Photoshop, and for all supported cameras Camera Raw 
uses built in generic camera speciﬁc proﬁles.
4.1 Quick ACR real life workﬂow 
To use ACR you do not need to understand all its features. A good 
point to start is to describe how we use ACR for our own workﬂow 
before  discussing the gory details and numerous features of ACR. 
We use images from a real-life photo session in Monterey, Califonia 
(using the Canon 1Ds Mk. II camera) demonstrating how to 
approach working with ACR on this particular set of images.
Transfer your images to your computer
As described in a previous chapter, we renamed all images using 
Downloader Pro. Here is an example: “1ds2_5001_0039.CR2”:
r 1ds2 is our speciﬁc camera type code
r 5001 is a code we use to identify multiple cameras of the same 
type or for overrun of 9999 number limitation. 5001 is also used 
for a loaner camera
r 0039 is a camera internal number (camera was new at the time) 

4-4
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Browse the image folder of RAW ﬁles using  Adobe Bridge
Figure 4-2: Folder selected in Bridge
We use Bridge in the ﬁlmstrip-mode giving the layout shown above. 
At this point, we could open each picture individually to work on, but 
this is not terribly eﬃcient. Instead, we select all images (K/Á-(A)) 
and open ACR in ﬁlmstrip-mode (K/Á-(R)). 

4-5
4.1 Quick ACR real life workflow
Figure 4-3: ACR in ﬁlmstrip-mode
ACR in ﬁlmstrip-mode is an important workﬂow improvement over 
older versions of Camera Raw. We now have all RAW ﬁles from our 
photo session in direct access, and switching from one ﬁle to the next 
is close to real-time on current computers. 
Browse through your images
The ﬁlmstrip-mode (for other modes, see page 4-36) allows you to 
inspect all shots (almost) as fast as you like. 

4-6
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Make initial corrections to white balance 
Sample #1
Figure 4-4: White balance set to "Oﬀ"
When we view the crab photo we see that all images are oﬀ in white 
balance. This was expected as the photo was taken in the shade, 
and few cameras with automatic camera-white-balance will correct 
this properly. ACR shows the “As Shot” WB settings.
 
l Figure 4-5: "As Shot" 
white balance settings in 
ACR
Whenever possible, in such situations, we photograph a Mini-
ColorChecker to be used as a color reference for the white balance. 
In this instance, however, we need to use other means to correct the 
WB. This is really not a serious problem as white balance for these 
kinds of photos is highly subjective.

4-7
4.1 Quick ACR real life workflow
We have chosen to click on the ice with the WB tool (the eye-
dropper 
):
Figure 4-6: WB after correction (note the eye dropper cursor)
 
l Figure 4-27:  
Click WB settings
The result looks signiﬁcantly better, but perhaps a bit too yellow for 
our taste. To reduce yellow in the image we enter a color tempera-
ture of about 5,800. Again, this is highly subjective and fully up to 
your own personal style and taste.

4-8
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Sample #2
Figure 4-8: Cool white balance
 
lFigure 4-9:  
White balance 
settings for “As Shot”
Once more, we have no ColorChecker included in the shot thus no 
real deﬁned gray as a reference point in the image. This time, we 
begin with a WB preset of “Daylight”.

4-9
4.1 Quick ACR real life workflow
Figure 4-10: With white balance preset “Daylight”
 
lFigure 4-11:  
White balance at 
preset “Daylight”
Again, this result is a triﬂe too warm for our taste (highly subjective, 
too). Ultimately we settled with a WB temperature of 5,000, between 
both settings.

4-10
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Apply settings from one image to other images (especially WB)
Because the other photos of the crabs were shot 
using the identical light, we want to apply the 
same WB setting to the other crab photos. Keep 
the current (master picture, see blue border) 
selected and add all the other crab photos to 
the selection.
Click on Synchronize:
Figure 4-13: Synchronize White Balance only
Now all crab photos have the same WB settings while the other ori-
ginal image settings are untouched.
Figure 4-11: 
Image with blue 
border is the 
"master picture"
Tune tonality
Sample #1
Normally avoiding tools with an attribute “auto”, for tonality we 
select the ACR “Auto Adjustments” (not yet available with ACR 2.x) to  
provide a solid headstart. You can easily toggle Auto Adjustments 
on/oﬀ using K/Á-(U). Auto adjustments are signaled by the 
check marks in Exposure, Shadows, Brightness and Contrast.
Let’s start with Auto Adjustments ON.

4-11
4.1 Quick ACR real life workflow
Figure 4-14: Auto Adjustments on
We ﬁne-tune Exposure, Shadows, Brightness and Contrast manually. 
In this situation, we were actually pretty close to the Auto-Adjust-
ments. The goal is to always retain shadow details and also  keep the 
image slightly on the soft side for further ﬁne-tuning in Photoshop.
Figure 4-15: Tonality tuned.

4-12
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Tonality may also be adjusted using ACR Curves, see below (Usually 
leave this at a moderate setting  Medium Contrast).
Sample #2
Figure 4-16: Default tonality settings
This image requires further minor tweaks:
r Avoid small aggressive highlights
r Open up the shadows
Figure 4-17: Tweaked tonality settings

4-13
4.1 Quick ACR real life workflow
In addition to these changed 
parameters, the Tone Curve was 
set to “linear”:
 Figure 4-18: r 
Linear curve
Organize your images for processing – rank ‘keepers’
If you browse your images, you may want to 
rank them. ACR 3.x allows ranking from 0 to 
5 stars. Later, Bridge will allow displaying 
only the higher-ranked images so you may 
concentrate on the ‘keeper’ photos. 
Additionally, images may be ﬂagged with 
diﬀerent colors.
ACR 2.x/Photoshop CS1 oﬀers a simple 
method for ﬂagging ﬁles by your selecting 
the appropriate ﬁles in the ﬁle browser and 
clicking the ﬂag icon. The ﬁle browser then 
displays only ﬂagged images (or if you so 
choose, all those not ﬂagged).
 
Figure 4-19: You may 
rank images
Convert images in the background using “Save”
ACR 3.0 adds a new “Save” functionality allowing processing RAW 
ﬁles in the background (more details later).

4-14
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Mark bad pictures for deletion
It is disappointing viewing your poor 
images, and there are often quite a few, 
even with the best photographers. This is 
especially true when shooting sports or 
wildlife, often at high rates of frames per 
second.
Conﬁrm or abandon all changes 
You can end your browsing session with 
Done, Open or Cancel.
r Done: Conﬁrms all changes including 
the deletion of ﬁles marked for deletion 
(Images deleted are actually put into the 
system’s wastebasket where you have a 
second chance to recover them).
Figure 4-20: 
 Image marked  
for deletion
r Open: As with Done but opens all selected ﬁles in Photoshop
r Cancel: Not a single change will be performed. This tells you that 
all new setting changes are lost and no ﬁle will be deleted.
If you terminate your session with Open or Done ACR stores (saves) all 
settings. We choose to store settings in local XMP ﬁles (only if your 
ﬁles have non-default settings, see page ???). In this case, your folder 
will also display small XMP ﬁles stored with the RAW images.
Figure 4-21: XMP ﬁles store ACR settings

4-15
4.2 Browse and evaluate your RAW images with "Bridge"
Perfect your ‘winning’ images one at a time or batch 
process all of them
Which of these depends on your style of post processing and also 
on the number of changes made, as well as, how much work 
remains to be done per image later in Photoshop.
4.2 Browse and evaluate your RAW images with “Bridge”
Bridge is the new ﬁle browser by Adobe for the entire CS2 suite. With 
CS2, Bridge is no longer a module of Photoshop, but is a stand-alone 
application. In the context of Bridge, ACR plays a special role: ACR 
can be hosted by either Bridge or by Photoshop.
Figure 4-21: ”Bridge” File Browser using Camera Raw

4-16
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Bridge uses Adobe Camera Raw to create thumbnails and preview 
images for all supported RAW ﬁle formats. Preview images are of 
high quality and 1,024 pixels wide.
In the context of this book, we only cover Bridge as it is relevant 
to working with RAW ﬁles. There are basically two modes in which 
to work with RAW ﬁles in Bridge:
r Single ﬁles can be opened into ARC hosted by Bridge or 
Photoshop. K/Á+(O) opens ACR in Photoshop and  
K/Á+(R) in Bridge. Except for minor speed diﬀerences, it is 
unimportant where you open ACR.
r Working on a set of RAW ﬁles in ACR. 
Working on a set of RAW ﬁles by opening the ﬁles singly is not very 
eﬃcient. Capture One introduced a substantially more productive 
workﬂow. ACR has adopted a similar style of workﬂow. You can 
select a set of ﬁles in Bridge and open them all K/Á+(R) in ACR.
Figure 4-22: ACR in ﬁlmstrip-mode

4-17
4.2 Browse and evaluate your RAW images with "Bridge"
Once you open ACR in ﬁlmstrip-mode, previews are created on the 
ﬂy. For this task, ACR uses a cache. In ACR preferences you can select  
the location and set the size of this cache.
Figure 4-23: Cache settings
Best to choose a size permitting storing all previews of the largest 
folder you intend to process (a single preview ﬁle needs about 4.5 to 
6.5 MB of disk space). This cache has nothing to do with image infor-
mation (it is stored in a database or in XMP sidecar ﬁles).
Still in ﬁlmstrip-mode, you may navigate through the images in 
real time. Only for a brief period of time, a newly-displayed image 
will warn with this icon.
This indicator tells you that there may be some minor adjustments 
to the histogram and preview while ACR creates the full size image. 
At this time, you can navigate through the image set, make 
changes, rate or mark images for deletion. None of these changes 
are permanent until you conﬁrm them in the dialog pressing Done.
Note: If you work on a set of images, and you the press Cancel, all 
changes to all images in that set will be undone. Keep this clearly in 
mind so you won’t be wasting valuable time. In fact, the deleted 
images are put into the system’s wastebasket.

4-18
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
4.3 Adobe Camera Raw 3.x user interface overview
The user interface of Adobe Camera Raw is clean and easy to use. Its 
window can be resized up to full screen. The only downside of full 
screen is that some operations might slow to less than real-time 
which they display in a smaller window (This depends, of course, on 
the performance of the computer used). We use a window size that 
is quite large, and Camera Raw still performs well in virtually real-
time.
Figure 4-24: Basic Adobe Camera Raw Window
The preview image is large enough to judge color and other details. 
If you need to view ﬁner details, the preview can be zoomed to 
100 % pixels and beyond.

4-19
4.3 Camera Raw 3.x User Interface overview
The User Interface Elements 
The Histogram
 
l Figure 4-25:  
Use the 
histogram as 
an aid when 
making slider 
changes.
This illustration shows an RGB histogram plus histograms of the 
three individual color channels, R, G and B. The white areas are those 
where all three primary colors are present. Cyan combines green 
and blue pixels while yellow combines red and green channels. 
Magenta signiﬁes that there are red as well as blue pixel values. It 
would be helpful if you could disable the display of the combined 
channels, however, that is not currently possible.
Top left Toolbar:  
Zoom / Hand tool
ACR supports all the usual zooming and image moving controls that 
you are accustomed to in Photoshop. Normally, we set the preview 
to “Fit in View” as we do most detailed inspections later in 
Photoshop itself (This is, please note, our personal workﬂow style). 
Eyedropper ( 
 )  The eyedropper will be explained later when 
we cover WB (White Balance). The eyedropper 
 may also be used 
for some RGB readouts which are displayed on the right side below 
the preview window.

4-20
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Color Samplers
ACR 3 allows up to 9 color 
samplers to be placed on an 
image. 
These can be extremely 
useful when desiring to 
monitor certain areas in 
images and how they are 
altered while changing 
image parameters.
 
Figure 4-26: ACR color sampler
Crop ToolACR3
You can crop images in ACR too. The crop tool 
 also permits arbi-
trary rotation.
Straighten Tool ACR3
It is easy to tilt an image. The Straighten Tool is an easy way to cor-
rect for tilt. Follow a straight horizontal /vertical line with the 
straighten cursor. ACR will then correct the tilt automatically.
 
Figure 4-27: Straighten Tool
Rotating ACR3
There are two controls  
  to rotate the image either clock- or 
counter-clockwise.

4-21
4.3 Camera Raw 3.x User Interface overview
 
Workﬂow options
 
Figure 4-27: ACR Workﬂow Options
ICC Working Space
ACR oﬀers four diﬀerent working spaces. 
We use Adobe RGB (1998) or ProPhoto 
RGB (only for 16-bit).  Currently there is 
no way to add additional working spaces, 
such as ECI-RGB. 
 
Bit Depth
From RAW ﬁles, you may either produce 8-bit or 16-bit Tiﬀ ﬁles when 
converting (JPEG allows only for 8-bit ﬁles). Most of the time we use 
ACR in 16-bit mode. 
Output Size 
For most RAW ﬁle formats,  
ACR allows you to up/downsize 
an image. The algorithm used is 
much improved over the stan-
dard Photoshop  
“bicubic”.
 
 “(-)” indicates a down sampling from the native camera format 
and “(+)” an up sampling.
If you intend to do large format printing of your image but the 
native resolution of the image is not high enough for your intended 
size and printing method, we recommend doing your ﬁrst upsizing 
in ACR and, if required,  a second in Photoshop. 
Resolution
This deﬁnes the PPI that the opened ﬁle is tagged with. We work 
with the standards of 240 or 300 DPI.  

4-22
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
You likely will not change most of these options often once you 
use Camera Raw regularly.
 
Camera Raw’s main image correction controls
ACR oﬀers ﬁve tabs with controls:
Figure 4-29: Main correction tools (tabs) of ACR when  
"Extended Mode" is active
r Adjust
r Detail
r Lens
r Curve (new in ACR 3)
r Calibrate
We will discuss these tabs in more detail. In most cases, you only 
need to bother with three of them: Adjust, Detail and Curve.
Adjust tab
The Adjust tab contains the essential controls used for any RAW con-
version.

4-23
4.3 Camera Raw 3.x User Interface overview
 
lFigure 4-30: 
Adjust Tab of ACR
The main tasks done in any RAW converter are correcting White 
Balance (WB) and Exposure (EV).
White Balance (WB)   
Two sliders control white balance in ACR: Temperature and Tint.
This is how Thomas Knoll (the original creator of Photoshop 
and also of Camera Raw) explains their function:

4-24
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
”To get a color to appear white, you need to get three param-
eters correct. This is a basic feature of human vision, stemming 
from the three types of color sensors in the eye.
There are several common ways of factoring these three 
parameters. Probably the most familiar is red-green-blue 
values, where white is when they are all equal to some maxi-
mum value.
Another common factoring is luminance-temperature-
tint, which is what the Camera Raw plug-in is using.
Luminance is basically how bright the light is. This is what 
photographers ﬁddle with all the time by adjusting shutter 
speed and f-stop. The Camera Raw plug-in allows you to ﬁne-
tune this using the “Exposure” slider.
The remaining two parameters describe the “color” of the 
light.
If you take a black object and start heating it up, ﬁrst it 
starts to glow red, then orange, then yellow, then “white,” 
and then a blue-white. The exact color of this light is depen-
dent only on the temperature of the object, and is called 
“black body radiation”. It is usually measured in degrees 
Kelvin. Unfortunately, humans usually describe lower Kelvin 
numbers as being “warmer,” and higher numbers is being 
“colder,” which is opposite what science would suggest.
But real world light is rarely pure black body radiation. 
Tungsten light comes very close to being a pure black body, 
but other light sources usually have a color that is oﬀset from 
the black body curve. On one side of black body curve, the 
light is greener; on the other side, the light is more magenta. 
Fluorescent lights are often very green. The standardized 
average daylight values (D55, D65, D75) are all slightly greener 
than black body. Flashes are sometimes more magenta than 
black body.
The Camera Raw plug-in has two sliders to adjust for the 
color of the light. The ﬁrst is “Temperature,” which is a closest 
point on the black body curve to the light’s actual color. The 
second is “Tint,” which is the oﬀset distance perpendicular to 
the black body curve. Positive values means the light is 
greener than black body; negative means the light is more 
magenta than black body.”

4-25
4.3 Camera Raw 3.x User Interface overview
Having used nearly all other RAW converters out there in actual 
practice, we conclude that using only a single color temperature 
slider does not cut it. We consider the WB control in Camera Raw is 
one of the best we have seen, to date.
Of course, Camera Raw also allows a one-click WB. Click with 
the eyedropper on a gray or white (no overexposed white, please!) 
area and ACR sets the correct temperature and tint values. It is pre-
ferable to photograph a gray card or ColorChecker under the same 
light as other images during a photo session, correct from the gray 
card image and apply WB settings to all the other photos with the 
same lighting conditions (see saving and loading settings below).
Then there are also some standard WB presets:
 
lFigure 4-31: ACR oﬀers 
several predeﬁned WB settings
These presets can be used as a good starting point for manual WB 
correction (when you don’t ﬁnd a neutral/gray object in the image).
Please read the section on ”Subjective WB“ on page 3-8 to 
understand that frequently the ”right“ WB requires further subjec-
tive correction.

4-26
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Exposure, Shadows, Brightness & Contrast 
The slider Exposure allows you to control the proper settings for  
tonality (you can also use the Curves tool). ACR has a very powerful, 
unique feature to view possible blown highlights. While you drag 
the exposure slider, hold down the À key and display a threshold 
view (works like Photoshop Levels).
 
Figure 4-32: Threshold view shows clipped Highlights
If you check the Shadows and Highlights buttons at the top right 
top of ACR 3 window, 
 areas with blown out 
portions of an image are marked by ACRACR3 with a marking color (by 
default red = highlights and blue = shadows).
The Shadows slider lets you control the shadows, and, once more, 
the À key allows you to see a threshold view.
The preview and histogram are both updated in real-time.

4-27
4.3 Camera Raw 3.x User Interface overview
 
Figure 4-33: Threshold view shows clipped Shadows
Exposure
With the exposure slider you control the brightest point in your 
image. This means that the brightest area in your image should con-
tain the value you choose. The brightest area should not be a white 
without any detail unless you have some specular highlights. 
Shadows
With the Shadows slider you control the darkest point in your 
image. The darkest area in your image should have a value you 
choose. The darkest area in an image does not need to hold any 
detail and will be mapped to the deepest black your printer can pro-
duce.
Once you have controlled both Exposure and Shadows, then 
tune Brightness and Contrast.

4-28
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
We recommend using all four sliders to produce either the ﬁnal 
tonality or one that is slightly soft:
r No blown highlights
r No blocked up shadows
r No harsh contrast
Certain tonality corrections needing selection or adaptive controls 
(like PS Shadow/Highlight) cannot be performed in ACR. You must 
do this ﬁnal tuning in Photoshop.
Saturation   
The control for saturation works quite nicely. We prefer to tune color 
saturation later in Photoshop and do it only for selected regions 
and/or selected colors usually. 
Detail tab
The Detail tab includes controls that handle sharpness and noise.
 
l Figure 4-34: 
Detail tab of ACR
Sharpness
You can get quite good sharpening results with ACR’s sharpness 
tool. There are three possible strategies:
r Do all sharpening in ACR (recommended for batch conversion)
r Do approximately 10 % sharpening in ACR and later ﬁnal sharp-
ening in Photoshop
r Leave all sharpening to Photoshop.

4-29
4.3 Camera Raw 3.x User Interface overview
We currently tend to use method 3 as we have very good sharpen-
ing tools to use in Photoshop (e. g. CS Smart Sharpen or our own 
EasyS Sharpening Toolkit) and choose to leave sharpening as the 
ﬁnal step.
Here is a Canon 1Ds ﬁle as an example   
Figure 4-35: 1Ds image (4064 x 2704 pixels)
 
Figure 4-36: ACR sharpening 0 % on the left and 50 % on the right (shown at 100 % pixels)
You may also set the option Preview images only to prevent the con-
verted ﬁles from being sharpened at all by ACR but still simulate 
sharpening in the ACR preview. This makes it easier to judge the 

4-30
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
image now while using more sophisticated sharpening techniques 
later in Photoshop. 
Figure 4-37: Camera Raw Preferences
We actually have the sharpening setting at zero because sharpening 
is done later in Photoshop (or select sharpen for preview only). 
Smoothness
Smoothness controls the image noise removal. It can be controlled 
at two levels:
r Luminance Noise (detail noise)
r Color Noise (good values seem to be 20–30)
The smoothness control can be used to remove some noise (espe-
cially for higher ISO images). ACR tries to keep the sharpness on all 
edges but as with any noise ﬁlter, the images gets a bit degraded. 
Our strategy is to use as low as possible ISO with all our cameras to 
avoid later noise removal as much as possible.
Again, the general strategies are similar as with sharpening:
r Do all noise removal in ACR (only for really high ISO images)
r Do some 10  % smoothening in ACR and later more work in 
Photoshop using the ﬁlter Reduce Noise, Noise Ninja ([18]) or 
equally good tools.
r Leave all noise removal to Photoshop (again “Reduce Noise”, 
Noise Ninja ([18]) or equally good tools, also see [17]).
Again, we tend to use the third method  or, in general, do scarcely 
any noise removal at all.

4-31
4.3 Camera Raw 3.x User Interface overview
Lens tab
 
lFigure 4-38:  
ACR Lens tab. Midpoint 
is grayed out, until an 
Amount is set.
This tab provides two very unique tools:
r Chromatic Aberration Removal (CA)
r Vignetting compensation
Lower quality lenses – but also some prime lenses used with full 
frame sensors – show so-called chromatic aberration (CA), mainly in 
corners.
  
 
lFigure 4-39:  
Sample Chromatic 
Aberration and the ﬁxed 
result in Camera Raw 2
CA shows up on high contrast edges. One side will be green and the 
other purple. ACR helps remove (or at least minimize) the eﬀect with 
ease as the tool works in real time. The Panorama Tools (a free 
Photoshop plug-in for image stitching) also contain a CA ﬁlter but is 

4-32
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
pretty slow, and you have to manually try to ﬁnd the right values. 
Adobe Camera Raw chromatic aberration removal is simply ﬁrst 
class beginning with ACR2 and worth the price of the upgrade to CS 
alone if you are still using Photoshop 7 and see a lot of CA in your 
images.
We have not felt the need to use the Vignetting ﬁlter yet. If your 
lens, however, shows a strong vignetting, you should do a  correc-
tion in your RAW converter. As vignetting may occur a little bit oﬀ 
the lens center, you may use the slider Midpoint to position the 
center of the vignetting.
Curves tab
 
l Figure 4-40:  
Curve Tab  of ACR
In theory, you could control the entire tonality using this curves con-
trol, however, correcting using curves often is not terribly intuitive. 
We use it only for ﬁnal ﬁne-tuning. Some presets are provided that 
improve the contrast (some weak S-curves mostly). 

4-33
4.3 Camera Raw 3.x User Interface overview
 l Figure 4-41:  Curve presets
Oﬃcially, there is no support to create your own permanent presets. 
Fortunately, the developers allowed a workaround. You can save an 
ACR setting-subset to a ﬁle. If, at that time, you only select “Tone 
Curve,” the settings will be saved in a diﬀerent folder. These settings 
will then show up as Curves presets.
Calibrate tab
This is a tool that 
some will love while 
others may hate. 
Some RAW converters 
control colors for 
diﬀerent cameras by 
using standard ICC 
camera proﬁles and 
even allow the users 
to replace the proﬁles 
(example Capture One 
DSLR).
Figure 4-42: r 
ACR Calibrate tab 
This is a very powerful solution if you are able to get “good” (subjec-
tive) proﬁles. Creating your own proﬁles is not that easy, and, in our 

4-34
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
opinion, better left to experts. There are currently third-party pro-
ﬁles for tools like Capture One DSLR on the market. 
ACR has hard-coded Matrix proﬁles for all  cameras. The  
“Calibrate sliders allow you to tweak proﬁles deﬁned by ACR. This is 
very powerful, but you had better know what you are doing. We 
leave the settings mainly at the default (all = 0) but also expect that 
some photographers will come up with useful settings for diﬀerent 
cameras. For more details on camera proﬁling see chapter 11.
 
How to process the images ﬁnally
All ACR versions prior to ACR 3.0 had only had the options Open and 
Cancel. This does not envision working with multiple images simul-
taneously. ACR 3 adds two additional buttons: Save and Done.
 
lFigure 4-43:  
Processing options of ACR 3
It is important to understand these options and all their implica-
tions.
Save: Use Save, To convert an image and return to ACR:
Activate the Save dialog:
Figure 4-44: Save Dialog

4-35
4.3 Camera Raw 3.x User Interface overview
In the dialog you specify:
r Destination folder for the converted image. We always use a 
unique folder “x_acr_temp” used exclusively for ACR output ﬁles.
r Renaming options (optional)
r Output ﬁle type (either TIFF or JPEG)
Once you press Save, you will return to the main dialog of ACR. But 
in the background images will get converted. The ACR dialog indi-
cates this fact by showing a message:
 
lFigure 4-45: Status of background 
processing
What if you have many images in the queue and want to stop the 
rest? Just click on the message and you get this dialog:
 
Figure 4-46: Background Save status dialog
Pressing Stop will terminate all unﬁnished processing. 
Save may be executed without opening up the dialog by using the 
À-K-(S) (Mac: Á-Â-(S)) keyboard combination.
Open converts all selected ﬁles and opens them in Photoshop. The 
ACR dialog is closed and all settings are save (same as Done). This 
also denotes that image settings for images not opened will be 
saved.
Done  Saves all changed image settings and closes the ACR dialog. 
No images are opened or converted.

4-36
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Cancel  closes the ACR dialog without saving any changes. No ﬁles 
will be opened and image processing is done. 
Note: If you work on a set of images and you press Cancel, all (!) 
changes to all images in that set will be undone. Keep this in mind 
to avoid wasting time. Actually, the deleted images are put into the 
system’s wastebasket. This note is repeated here to help you avoid 
problems.
 
Saving and reusing settings
Often you want to use the same settings for an entire set of photos. 
There are two ways in Camera Raw to save the settings and apply 
them later to other images.
Save and Load settings (all 
settings or subsets are saved 
and can be restored).
Once saved into the folder 
”Presets/Camera Raw“ these 
settings are also shown in the 
settings drop-down list. Use 
descriptive names for your 
saved settings, so you know 
their function when recalling 
them later on.
Image Settings: Apply the last 
saved setting to this image.
Camera Raw Defaults: Apply 
camera type default (see next 
paragraph).
Previous: Recall values from 
the last conversion done by 
ACR for a picture with the 
same camera type.
Custom: User has changed 
values.
Other entries: List of user 
saved settings. 
Figure 4-47: Save or load settings
Figure 4-48: Drop-down list of settings

4-37
4.3 Camera Raw 3.x User Interface overview
 
Recording Adobe Camera Raw settings   
Looking at a converted image, you may wonder which settings were 
used for the RAW conversion. By using ACR for the conversion, this is 
no problem: ACR records all settings used in the meta information of 
the created ﬁle. You may recall (view) it in Photoshop by using 
Photoshop’s File Information function (FilerFile Info or via 
Q+À+K+(I)).
Figure 4-49: Recorded Settings
 
Batch conversion
There are actually three ways to do batch processing with Adobe 
Camera Raw:
r Provide your RAW ﬁles with the appropriate settings (e. g. call up 
ACR with the ﬁrst image, do all corrections and save that setting. 
Then, you may apply this setting to all other RAW images. Select 
all images you want to convert using either Photoshop ﬁle 
browser or Bridge). Shift-double-click on the last of the selected 
ﬁles. This will bypass the Camera Raw dialog box and start the 
conversion of all images selected.
r Create a Photoshop action (see page 8-5). The action may open a 
ﬁle, do a RAW conversion using ACR using the assigned setting of 

4-38
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
each individual ﬁle, open the converted image in Photoshop, do 
some Photoshop steps and save the image in a predeﬁned format. 
Then use Photoshop’s function FilerAutomaterBatch to apply 
the action to all ﬁles of a folder (and optionally all its subfolders).
r Use a script to do the job. A script can do operations a Photo-
shop action cannot do (e. g. use diﬀerent processing steps depen-
ding on some predeﬁned condition) and can use several applica-
tions like Bridge (e. g. to selection), ACR (e. g. selecting dedicated 
settings) and Photoshop. Adobe supports scripts either in Virtual 
Basic (with Windows), Apple Script (with Mac OS) or JavaScript, 
which may run on both platforms. 
Scripting is very powerful, but requires some learning. We rec-
ommend JavaScript, mainly for its independency of platform. 
There are a few (Java) scripts shipped with  Bridge. Looking at 
them can provide you a painless start into scripting.
We go further into batch processing in chapter 8, please refer to that 
chapter for more information.
 
Advanced image corrections
When white balance, exposure and other primary corrections are 
done, there may still be some advanced image corrections required. 
Here is a list of them and how we deal with them in Adobe Camera 
Raw:
Noise (luminance and color noise) r We rarely use Luminance 
noise removal as it degrades details too much. Additionally, we 
often leave the color noise slider at a low level (10–15). Be aware, 
however, that even color noise removal can result in colors bleeding 
into other areas.
Sharpening r For optimal sharpening we use other tools in 
Photoshop (Smart Sharpen or EasyS Sharpening Toolkit)
Removal of chromatic aberrations (CA) r This is a powerful option 
in ACR. Aside from this, you can also use the Lens Correction tool in 
Photoshop CS2. If you still use Photoshop CS1, we recommend you 
do removal of CA here.
Vignetting r As mentioned before, we have few vignetting issues 
(vignetting mainly occurs with extremely wide angle lenses).

4-39
4.4 Extra workflow support
CroppingACR3 r Though the cropping support in ACR is very useful, 
we often leave the ﬁnal crop to Photoshop. 
Correcting tilt ACR3 (So easy to shoot an image unlevel)r The 
straighten tool is very helpful in correcting tilt in images. If your 
image is only slightly oﬀ, we recommend  doing any straightening 
here, especially if you convert to 8-bit output.
Perspective corrections r ACR does not have a dedicated tool for 
perspective correction. You can use the Lens Correction tool in 
Photoshop CS2 though.
Dust removal r Dust removal is best performed with the 
Photoshop Healing Brush.
Upsampling r If you know you need your image up sampled,  ACR 
provides good options. Most often we perform any upsizing later 
with Photoshop CS tools (see also our Upsizing articles at [49]). 
4.4 Extra workﬂow support
Batch conversion
You can also perform batch conversions. This is done by creating 
Photoshop actions and using these actions in batch mode. Follow 
the instructions in the CS2 manual and see chapter 8 for more 
details. You may also create added  actions for diﬀerent purposes. 
One reason to use batch conversions would be to create some 
preview JPEG images from newly captured photos, or if a set of 
photos has the exact same exposure and white balance (e. g. studio 
shots).
Background processingrLike Capture One and RawShooter ACR 
(as from ACR 3 on) provides background processing with the new 
Save functionality.
Apply settings from one ﬁle to other ﬁles r  You can apply set-
tings from one image to other images in ACR or Bridge. 

4-40
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
In ACR:
r Select the original image whose setting you intend to use 
r Next, select all the other images that should be adjusted.
r Press the Synchronize button. 
r ACR pops up the following Synchronize dialog, where you may 
select (or deselect) all settings you want to transfer:
 
l Figure 4-50:  
Synchronize dialog
In Bridge:
r Select the original image. 
r Use EditrApply Camera Raw SettingsrCopy Camera Raw 
Settings.
r Then select all those images that should be adjusted. 
r Use EditrApply Camera Raw SettingsrPaste Camera Raw 
Settings. 
The same synchronize dialog pops up:
Snapshots for diﬀerent conversion settingsr ACR does not sup-
port snapshots directly. But you may save as many settings for any 
ﬁle as you wish.
Save/restore settings r You may save your settings to a ﬁle at any 
time to recall later on.

4-41
4.4 Extra workflow support
Camera default settings r A very important feature for any RAW 
converter is to have default settings applying to images created by a 
certain camera type. ACR allows setting defaults at any time or to set 
them back to factory generic settings.
Undo / redo r With ACR, Undo/Redo can be used for two purposes:
r Actually going back in history
r Toggle between the last and the current state during image cor-
rection (K-(Z)), Mac: Á-(Z)).
In some cases ACR also supports multiple undo/redo by using  
K-(Z) and Q-K-(Z).(Mac: Â-(Z) and Q-Â-(Z) respectively).
Keyboard shortcuts r For crucial and often-performed operations, 
keyboard shortcuts can save a lot of time. All the shortcuts we intro-
duce here are important. Check the manual for others.
Support for scroll wheel r There is no support for scroll wheels in 
ACR.
RGB value samplers r Up to nine color samplers can be set using 
the eyedropper icon 
. ACR will show their RGB values in the top 
area of the main window.
Figure 4-51: With ACR3, you may set up to 9 color samplers.

4-42
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
4.5 RAW ﬁles embedded in Photoshop "Smart Objects"
One of the very powerful new features in Photoshop CS2 are the 
Smart Objects. We will not cover Smart Objects in detail other than  
what is needed for our example. Best you read Ben Willmore’s book 
“CS2 Up to Speed” (see Ben’s book [3]). 
Overall, we ﬁnd Smart Objects more helpful for Designers than 
photographers. But there is one feature that is very powerful for 
photographers, indeed. You can embed a RAW ﬁle into a Smart 
Object layer.  The process is not complicated, but is not particularly 
obvious. The method we describe was introduced to us by Ben 
Willmore.
 
Creating a Smart Object layer that contains a RAW ﬁle
First, we may need to change a setting in Photoshop General 
Preferences:
 
l Figure 4-52: 
Preferences
Make sure that the “Resize Image During Paste/Place”  property is 
not checked.
Create a new 16-bit RGB document in Photoshop of about 300  x  300 
pixels:

4-43
4.5: RAW files embedded in Photoshop "Smart Objects"
 
Figure 4-53: 
New 16-bit 
document
Next select a RAW ﬁle in Bridge and place it into the new document 
by using the Place->Photoshop command in Bridge:
 
lFigure 4-54:  
Place Image from 
Bridge
This will open the Camera Raw dialog in Photoshop:
 
lFigure 4-54:  
ACR for Placing 
a RAW ﬁle

4-44
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
Change your RAW settings and conﬁrm with Open . Now you see 
the image of ﬁgure 4-55 in Photoshop CS2:
 lFigure 4-55: After Place
At this point the image is not yet really placed. To continue you need 
to conﬁrm the placement with the Return key.
 lFigure 4-56: After Return
Because the RAW ﬁle is larger than our newly-created document, we 
view only part of it. Fortunately there is the FilerReveal All tool in 
Photoshop available to get back to full size:

4-45
4.5: RAW files embedded in Photoshop "Smart Objects"
  lFigure 4-57: Reveal All command
At this point, we see the full-sized converted RAW image as if it would 
be normally as Background image. A closer inspection reveals that 
we have created a so called Smart Object layer containing the original 
RAW ﬁle. The ﬁrst indicator is the diﬀerent image title bar:
  
lFigure 4-58: 
Page Title bar
rThe ﬁle name is still “Untitled-1” while a normal opened RAW ﬁle 
would show the RAW ﬁle name.
rThe RAW ﬁle name shows up as a layer name which indicates that 
we have a layer and not simply a Background image
The Layers palette shows more:
 
lFigure 4-59: Smart Object Layer
The symbol 
 ﬂags Smart Objects.
Now that we ﬁnally have a RAW ﬁle as a Smart Object layer, you 
may ask: why is it worth the hassle? What is the big diﬀerence from 
using a converted RAW ﬁle as a normal Background image? 
In working with converted RAW ﬁles you have the following 
limitations:

4-46
Chapter 4: Adobe Camera Raw
rIf you want to change any parameters for the RAW conversion you 
have to begin all over again 
rAlso, you must  locate the matching RAW ﬁle ﬁrst
The RAW ﬁle in the Smart Object layer makes it much simpler. Double-
click on the image icon and Camera Raw 3.x will open up again and 
you can ﬁne tune your RAW conversions settings. There is no need 
to search for your RAW ﬁles as it is contained in the Smart Object 
layer. Finally all information needed for your work on a certain RAW 
ﬁle is part of your image.
 
Exporting RAW ﬁles from a Smart Object
Because the Smart Object layer contains the full original RAW ﬁle, 
we can even take the original ﬁle back. Select the Smart Object layer 
that contains your RAW ﬁle and use LayerrSmartObjectsrExport 
Contents:
 
lFigure 4-54:  
Export Contents
We think that Smart Objects allow a seamless integration of RAW 
ﬁles and the needed ﬁnal tuning in Photoshop.
Note: Dr. Brown‘s Services 1.0 make this whole process much easier 
to understand (Check out the movie at [48]).

5-1
Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Chapter 5
Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Camera: Canon 1DS Mk. II
Pixmantec RawShooter (RS for short) is a new RAW converter, 
created by the software designer Capture One. Capture One has 
proven to be very inﬂuential in the RAW converter evolution. 
RawShooter was designed to be very simple and quick to use. Yet its 
focus is excellent RAW conversion results.
As of mid-2005, there is no Mac version. That is a business deci-
sion on which we have no comment. We do hope for all Mac users 
that a Mac version of this technology is released in the future.

5-2
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
5.1 Quick RawShooter real life workﬂow 
To use RS it is not required to know all its features. It may be helpful 
to describe how we use RS in our own workﬂow before discussing in 
detail the many features of RS. Again, we work with images from a 
real-life photo session in Monterey, California (using the Canon 1Ds 
Mk. II camera) and explain how we approach working with 
RawShooter on this set of images.
 
Transfer your images to your computer
All images are renamed using Downloader Pro (see chapter 3).
 
Browse your RAW ﬁles using the RS RAW ﬁle browser
Figure 5-1: Folder selected in RS
RS has a RAW-only ﬁle browser which helps concentrate on only 
RAW ﬁles. The RS browser acts as a digital light box. We use the 
layout shown with a bottom ﬁlmstrip. When you enter a new folder, 

5-3
5.1 Quick RawShooter real life workflow
RS creates preview ﬁles. It is advisable to wait for all previews to be 
created, as work goes signiﬁcantly faster when previews are avail-
able.
Browse through your images
Filmstrip-mode allows you to inspect all shots as quickly as you like. 
Make initial corrections to WB 
Sample #1
Figure 5-2: WB Oﬀ  
The crab photos seen have incorrect white balance. This was 
expected because the photo was shot in the shade. Few automatic 
camera’s WB will correct for this situation. RS displays the “As Shot” 
WB settings:

5-4
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
 l Figure 5-3: 
“As Shot” WB settings in RS
As mentioned earlier, If possible a mini ColorChecker may be photo-
graphed. In this case, however, we will use other means to correct 
the WB. Because white balance for these kinds of photos is highly 
subjective, no serious problems are encountered .
We have chosen to click on the ice with the white balance tool:
 
Figure 5-4: White balance after correction (note the eye dropper cursor)
 lFigure 5-5: Click WB settings
This has improved white balance. After tonality is improved, the 
image may still need some tweaking.

5-5
5.1 Quick RawShooter real life workflow
Sample #2
Figure 5-6: Cool white balance
 
l Figure 5-7: WB settings for 
“As Shot”
Again, we have no ColorChecker, but also no real deﬁned gray occurs 
in the image. For that reason, we change the color temperature by 
adjusting the “Color Temperature” slider.

5-6
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Figure 5-8: With WB at Color Temperature 6000K
 l Figure 5-9: WB set to 6 000 K
The result is slightly too warm for our taste (this is highly subjective). 
Finally we settled on a WB temperature of 6,000 K. Again changes to 
the tonality may suggest revisiting the WB settings. 
Apply settings from one image to other images 
(especially WB)
Since all other photos of crabs were shot in the same light, we wish 
to apply the same WB setting to the other crab photos. Keep the 
current (master picture) selected and add the other crab photos to 
the selection.

5-7
5.1 Quick RawShooter real life workflow
Figure 5-10: Select master and target images
Click on the copy settings button 
 
l Figure 5-11:  
Copy “White Balance” only
Now, all crab photos have the same WB settings leaving the other 
original image settings untouched
 
Tune tonality
Sample #1
Normally we ignore tools that proclaim the attribute Auto. But for 
tonality correction, the RS “Auto Exposure” often provides us a head 
start (keyboard shortcut À-(E)).
 Let’s begin using Auto Exposure. It changes settings for 
Exposure, Fill Light, Shadow Contrast and Highlight Contrast.

5-8
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Figure 5-12:  Image using Auto Exposure of RawShooter
 l Figure 5-13: Auto Exposure
This adjustment brought much more life to the photo. It requires 
tweaking to make it a bit brighter. Overall brightness is achieved 
using the exposure slider, brightness in the shadows with Fill Light 
(No equivalent for this in other RAW converters).

5-9
5.1 Quick RawShooter real life workflow
Figure 5-14: Image of ﬁgure 5-12 after some tonality tuning
 
l Figure 5-15:  
Tonality tuned
Comparing the original image to the ﬁnal result is quite impressive; 
how a few slider changes can make such a huge diﬀerence.

5-10
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Sample #2
Again we start with Auto-Adjustments (À-(E))
Figure 5-15: Image in RS using Auto-Adjustments
 l Figure 5-16: Auto Exposure
There remain minor tweaks:
r Brighten the image overall
r Open the shadow up (more Fill Light)
r Keep some aggressive highlights in check

5-11
5.1 Quick RawShooter real life workflow
Figure 5-17: Image after tweaking Exposure, Fill Light, Shadow contrast and Highlight 
contrast
 
lFigure 5-18: Tweaked tonality 
settings for image of ﬁgure 5-15. The 
result is shown in ﬁgure 5-17.
It takes less than 30 seconds to achieve a ﬁrst usable result.
Rank/Prioritize keepers
Prioritize images

5-12
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Browsing your images, you may want to prioritize them. RS allows 
ﬂagging them, ranking from 1 to 3. By doing this, you can display 
only the ﬁrst-ranked pictures if you choose to do that:
 
 
Figure 5-20:  RS now only shows those images with priority 1 
  
(there are 3 of them).
Convert images in the background
At any time, convert single or sets of images in the background by 
clicking the Process button 
 or just hitting the Insert key.
Mark bad pictures for deletion
 
lFigure 5-21:  
Mark image for 
deletion
No matter how unpleasant it may be to view your poor shots, which 
happens to even the best photographers, you can mark those poor 
images for deletion. When an image is marked for deletion, it is not 
actually removed immediately. Rather, it is moved from the all 
images tab to the wastebasket tab. If you then view images at the 
wastebasket you may undelete them by clicking the delete button 

5-13
5.1 Quick RawShooter real life workflow
on the thumbnail view again. For ﬁnal deletion, next press the 
 
button. RS pops-up a warning dialog. If you conﬁrm it, your images 
will be removed completely (you will no longer ﬁnd them in the sys-
tem waste basket):
 
 
Figure 5-22: You receive a warning before images are deleted
All changes are always permanent
RS stores all settings permanently in some settings ﬁle:
 
 
Figure 5-23: Setting ﬁles used by RS
The setting ﬁles correlate to each folder stored in a subfolder 
“.RWSettings”.
Perfect your winning images one at a time, or batch 
process them all
Whether you convert images individually or use batch processing 
depends both on your style of post-processing and on the number 
and kind of changes required.

5-14
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
5.2 Getting started (setup RawShooter)
Note: Even though a lot of details are covered here, this book does 
not replace the manual. Further details and principles are covered in 
our e-book DOP2000 ([47]).
After installation, you must register and RS is ready to go. There is 
not much to setup, but we suggest the following: 
r Select the "Batch convert" tab.
 l Figure 5-24: Batch convert tab
RGB Working space: We use either 8-bit Adobe RGB or 16-bit 
ProPhoto RGB All as shown on the above screen shot.
This is the ﬁrst RAW converter used with its sharpening set to 
“on”. Later we may add minor sharpening with EasyS in Photoshop.
You can also open converted ﬁles directly into Photoshop. We 
don’t do this most of the time because we have a diﬀerent browser 
displaying the folder with converted ﬁles
You may also use custom camera proﬁles, but, in our estima-
tion, the internal proﬁles are quite good. We will not feature expla-
nations on how to use custom proﬁles, but RS fully supports these 
proﬁles and their creation process (see Preferences).

5-15
5.3 Inspect and browse your files with RawShooter
Open the "Naming and output location dialog”:
 
l Figure 5-25: 
Set up the 
naming and 
location for 
converted RAW 
ﬁles.
We created a special folder for all converted ﬁles  
(D:\_tmp_workﬁles\x_raw_shooter).
5.3 Inspect and browse your ﬁles with RawShooter
Note: As the name implies, this is a browser for RAW ﬁles only. 
The RAW ﬁle browser supports various features. First, you can select 
from 5 diﬀerent layouts to which you can switch ‘on the ﬂy.’ We use 
option #5 – ﬁlmstrip-mode:
 l Figure 5-26: Diﬀerent layout options
Our main layout looks like that of ﬁgure 5-27:

5-16
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Figure 5-27: Viewing option #5 with ﬁlmstrip-mode
At ﬁgure 5-28 you ﬁnd 
the folder browser and 
favorites list:
At any time you 
can add a folder to 
the list of favorites 
(either right context 
menu or via drag/
drop). Favorites are 
crucial to get quickly 
to your last projects.
Once you have 
selected a folder, RS 
will start to create 
previews and thumb-
nails. RS is notably  
very fast but using
 
Figure 5-28: Folder navigation of RS

5-17
5.3 Inspect and browse your files with RawShooter
folders with many large RAW ﬁles will 
take some time. Two indicators in RS 
preview that building is in progress:
Figure 9-29 r 
Progress wheels.
 
 
Figure 5-29: Window top border shows how many previews are still to be created
Once previews have been created, the workﬂow is quite fast. The 
ﬁlmstrip area allows organizing your images into diﬀerent priorities:
Figure 5-31: Filmstrip
There are eight tabs on top:
r All images in the folder
r All ﬂagged images in the folder 
r All images with no priority and not marked for deletion
r Images of priority 1, 2 or 3 (easily tag all ﬁles)
r Recently processed images
r Images marked for deletion (if you then ﬁnally delete them they 
are gone for good)

5-18
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
r The ﬁlmstrip toolbar allows 
control of appearance:
– Size of the thumbnails
– Sorting order (name or date)
– Finally, delete images marked  
for deletion.
For any single image, perform the following  
operations on thumbnails:
r Flag image
r Set priority to 1, 2 or 3
r Mark for deletion
r Rotate by 90 degrees, left or right
Once you have selected a folder and want 
to work on a single image, use the full 
image view (+ it toggles between both 
views):
Figure 5-32: Work view

5-19
5.3 Inspect and browse your files with RawShooter
You can scale the image up to 800%. 100–400% are 
pre-deﬁned settings:
RS allows conveniently toggling between “ﬁt View” 
and the last selected zoom level by using Q-+.
If you work with zoom levels, the 
navigator panel helps to ﬁnd the 
right locations.
Figure 5-33 r 
RSE navigator panel
Here are controls for the main view:
r Zoom level
r Fit to screen
r Zoom presets
r Hand tool (better to use the space bar)
r Show under/overexposure warning colors (can also be activated 
on-demand using the K key).
 
Preview size
RS provides full-sized previews for all cameras. Working with 100% 
views or larger is much more convenient than in Capture One (check 
out the slide show – see below).
 
Deletion workﬂow
Deleting ﬁles is an important and critical process. In RS you mark 
ﬁles for deletion on a folder-by-folder basis. Once you have marked 
all ﬁles that you want to delete in a certain folder, you can revisit all 
those ﬁles in the “marked for deletion” tab (e.g. presented in a slide 
show – see below). To undelete a ﬁle, just uncheck the deletion 
mark on the thumbnail pane. When you are sure you want to delete 
marked ﬁles, click on the wastebasket icon and remove the images 
completely (they will not show up in your system waste basket).

5-20
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
 
Some useful keyboard shortcuts
As with other tools, RS provides a number of keyboard shortcuts to 
speed up work and which you should keep in mind for eﬃcient work-
ing.
+: 
 
toggle browser to image view 
K: 
 
show over-exposure indicator colors 
K-+: 
toggle between zoom and ﬁt size view 
À-(E):  
Auto exposure (good starting point)
5.4 Image corrections
All correction tools are on one 
Correct tab: r
All essential image corrections 
fall into the following categories:
r White Balance (WB)
r Exposure and Tonality
r Color tuning
r Sharpness and detail
r Noise handling
The “Correct” toolbar:
From left to right:
r Apply settings to other 
selected images
r Activate WB gray balance tool 
(we use Q+Click instead)
r Set WB to ”as shot“ in camera"
r Auto WB and auto exposure. 
Auto exposure frequently 
provides a workable starting 
point (À-(E))
 
Figure 5-35:  RS Image correction tab

5-21
5.4 Image corrections
 
l Figure 5-36: With RS, you may use “Auto 
White balance” as a good starting point.
r Back to initial settings
r Forward to last active settings
Since we have reached undo/redo features, it is appropriate to show 
a very powerful RS tool: Snapshots.
You can create as many snap- 
shots as you like, and all those 
snapshot settings are stored for 
later use.
Note: RS stores all image settings 
in a subfolder with the name 
”.RWSettings“ and all settings ﬁles 
appended with the suﬃx “*.rws”.
 
 
Setting white balance (WB)
 
  
 
Figure 5-37: WB by Colder/Warmer 
 
 
WB by color temperature
White balance works as usual. The key correction methods are via 
color temperature or clicking on a light neutral gray object (do not 
use over-exposed white areas). The color temperature’s default set-
ting makes colors colder/warmer. You can change this in Preferences 
to sliders using absolute color temperature. We choose the default 
colder/warmer method because we believe that WB is, in most 
cases, a highly subjective decision.
We ﬁnd that ”as shot“ WB is often satisfactory. We do like to 
photograph a gray card or Color Checker and use the gray balanc-
ing eyedropper. We are just overlooking some predeﬁned and user 
WB presets. 

5-22
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Note: The navigator pane will show how the image would look if the 
WB eyedropper is clicked at the current position.
 
Exposure and tonality
Aside from WB, necessary for 
good colors exposure, tonality 
controls are essential in getting 
a pleasing photographic look to 
your images. RS has unique 
controls, and we had to learn 
how to use them. Most RAW 
converters support controls 
that, in principle, are a variant 
of levels and curves. RS works 
diﬀerently. It actually operates adaptively (pixels evaluated in their 
scene context, more like the Photoshop Shadow/Highlight tool). It 
may seem more complicated to describe than to actually experience 
yourself. To get the best from an image, you must ﬁnd the optimum 
setting for all four sliders:
Figure 5-38: Adaptive controls in RS
r Exposure compensation
r Fill Light
r Shadow contrast
r Highlight contrast
Keep in mind that it is best to make use of all four sliders and avoid 
extremes. Do a visual correction with RS displaying supporting his-
tograms (3 types, click to change the display type):
 
 
Figure 5-39: Watch your histogram while ﬁddling with the various sliders.
We like to use version #1. At the top you also ﬁnd three indicators for 
highlights and shadows. They signal whether a certain channel is 

5-23
5.4 Image corrections
being clipped. In the ﬁgure above, the blue channel is clipped in its 
highlights.
The best way to learn to use the controls is to play using your 
own images. We often see stunning improvements. The most accu-
rate word to describe the results is: ”more 3D like.”
Here are some primary guidelines:
Note: All values are entered numerically. If you click the cursor in 
one of the ﬁelds, use the mouse scroll wheel for ﬁne adjustments.
Exposure compensation (EV): If your image is too bright, tone 
down the EV. If too dark, ﬁrst try Fill Light to brighten the image
Fill Light: For most images it is advisable to stay below a value of 50. 
Consider perhaps lowering the EV and then turn Fill Light up. Fill 
light also helps opening up shadows.
Shadow contrast: Usually best to tune up giving more depth and 
contrast (punch).
Highlight contrast: Used to tone down aggressive highlights.
Again these four sliders work hand-in-hand. Work with all of them.

5-24
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Sample 1
 
 
Figure 5-40: Dull overcast shot (Canon 1D Mk. II)
The Fill Light feature is a key 
tool for working with your 
images. 
Figure 5-41:r 
RS settings for tonality 
Figure 5-42: Resulting image

5-25
5.4 Image corrections
Sample 2
 
 
Figure 5-43: Typical shot with deep shadows (Canon 1Ds Mk. II)
Before using RS, we spent 
much time achieving the 
correct tonality for this 
image (both in the RAW 
converter and later by 
masking in Photoshop). 
Using RS, it took us about 
30 seconds (actually!). 
 
Figure 5-44: Corrections 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5-45: Corrected

5-26
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Sample 3
 
 
Figure 46: Over-exposed Canon 1D Mk II shot
We hope our corrected 
photo explains why we 
wanted to take the picture 
in the ﬁrst place.
Figure 5-47: r 
Corrections  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5-48: Corrected

5-27
5.4 Image corrections
 
Saturation and Hue
Here you can do minor satura-
tion and hue tweaking. Usually 
we set both sliders to zero.
 
Figure 5-49: Saturation + Hue
Note: These tools, sharpening and noise removal, are best used at a 
magniﬁcation of 100% or greater. This is why the sliders are grayed 
out at lower values (though they are still fully eﬀective).
 
Sharpness and Detail
It is hard to know how RS 
reaches its level of very natural 
sharpness. Both top-of-the-class 
debayering (demosaicing) and 
normal sharpening are involved. 
 
Figure 5-50: Sharpness + Detail
Sharpening: slider normally left at 0. Zero does not mean that RS 
does not sharpen at all, but this level is considered to deliver a very 
natural sharpness with few sharpening artifacts. We set RS at level 0 
and do necessary ﬁnal minor sharpening in Photoshop using either 
USM (Unsharp masking) or EasyS.
Detail extraction: This allows the user to set the RS bias for ﬁne 
detail or noise. The ﬁner detail you select, the more ﬁne noise will be 
undetected and vice-versa.
Here is a sample comparison to our previous favorite of detail ren-
dering, Capture One:

5-28
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
 
Figure 5-51: Full 1Ds image 70–200 mm f/2.8 lens, tripod, mirror lockup
 
Figure 5-52: 100 % magniﬁcation with C1 + strong EasyS sharpening

5-29
5.4 Image corrections
 
   Figure 5-53: 100 % magniﬁcation with RS + very light EasyS sharpening
It is amazing how images appear coming directly from RS with shar-
pening level set to 0 (we again remind you that this does not mean 
there was no sharpening). Images do seem to have a more 3D and 
natural look. 
 
Noise reduction
Actually removing noise is easy. We hear you yelling :-). However, 
removing noise AND keeping detail is the real challenge. Even more 
diﬃcult, is doing noise removal in near real time.
Honestly, we have not played enough with RS for a ﬁnal judg-
ment. Also, we do not use many high ISO shots. Still, RS may be the 
ﬁrst RAW converter that is good enough for most of our photos 
without third party noise removal tools.
The developers of RS have invested a lot of work into noise 
removal since their tonality feature allows brightening shadows 
quite a lot. This operation is also pulling out noise, which is found 
primarily in the shadows. Opening up shadows usually needs eﬀec-
tive noise removal. The two sliders provided deal with the two 
most common types of noise:

5-30
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
r Luminance noise
r Shadow noise
We use the noise removal tool 
in our sample session below.
 
Figure 5-54: RS noise reduction
 
Batch processing
When all parameters are set, 
add the image to the batch 
queue. Processing is done in 
the background while you work 
on the next image.
At any time you can view the 
batch queue and add, stop or 
remove batch jobs.
Figure 5–55: r 
RS image batch queue 
 
 
Slide show
Another nice feature in RS is: A slide show. The slide show is useful 
for two purposes:
r To simply view your pictures
r To set priorities and for tagging ﬁles for deletion

5-31
5.4 Image corrections
Figure 5-56: Slide show
Figure 5-57: Controls
The slide show may be the best way for 
an initial preview of your images.
Note: It is preferable to wait until all pre-
views for a folder are created before gen-
erating the slide show as this process can 
be very slow if you try to do both simul-
taneously.
Figure 5-58: r 
Timing and transitions  

5-32
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
5.5 Advanced image corrections
Although RawShooter is still quite young, and until now focuses on 
basic conversion functionality, there already exist quite a variety of 
advanced image corrections. Expect to see even more in upcoming 
versions of RS.
Noise (luminance and color noise) r Noise suppression in RS 
works quite well. You may not need specialized noise removal tools.
Sharpening r For optimal sharpening, we use some sharpening in 
RS and still more later with other tools in Photoshop (Smart Sharpen 
or EasyS Sharpening Toolkit).
Removal of chromatic aberrations (CA) rNo correction of chro-
matic aberrations are oﬀered with RS 1.1.
VignettingrNo correction of vignetting is supported with RS 1.1. 
Cropping rRS (as of version 1.1) does not oﬀer cropping, so any 
cropping can be accomplished in Photoshop.
Correcting tiltrNo tilt correction is oﬀered with RS 1.1.
Perspective correctionsr No perspective correction is oﬀered with 
RS 1.1.
Dust removal rThere is no provision for dust removal in RS 1.1. Dust 
removal, thus, is best performed with the Photoshop Healing Brush.
UpsamplingrNo up or down sampling is supported with RS 1.1.
5.6 Extra workﬂow support
Batch conversion r you may convert any selection of images at any 
time in the background.
Background processingrRawShooter processes all conversions in 
the background. This is very convenient when working on a large 
number of images. It, however, slows down your foreground pro-
cessing a bit.
Apply settings from one ﬁle to other ﬁlesr This may be easily 
done (see our Batch Processing chapter 8 for more information).

5-33
5.6 Extra workflow Support
Snapshots for diﬀerent conversion settingsrA very powerful feature 
of RS is Snapshots. You can save the current settings by creating a 
new snapshot. Snapshots are permanently stored with your settings.
Save/restore settingsrYou may save your current settings, load 
them again and reset to RS defaults.
Camera default settings r  
RS allows deﬁning default cor-
rection settings on a per cam-
era model basis.
Undo / redorSnapshots 
allow you to go to and fro 
– from current settings to 
previous settings.
Keyboard shortcutsrFor 
crucial and often-performed 
operations, keyboard short-
cuts can save a lot of time. All 
shortcuts we introduce here 
are important. Check your 
manual for others.
Support for scroll wheel r 
Click in any numeric ﬁeld and 
use the scroll wheel on your 
mouse for ﬁne-tuning.
Figure 5-59: Processing Bias 
RGB value samplersrRS has one color sampler that can be set to 
show the RGB value of the pixel below the mouse cursor during the 
editing of a single image.

5-34
Chapter 5: Pixmantec RawShooter (RS)
Intentionally left blank

6-1
More RAW converts
Camera: Canon 1DS Mk. II
By previously digging deeper into the details of Adobe Camera Raw 
and RawShooter, we will shorten our description of those additional 
RAW converters. In so doing, we are not judging them less valuable. 
In his chapter, we describe the main features and some specialities 
of these converters.
Chapter 6
 
More RAW Converters

6-2
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
6.1 Phase One’s Capture One DSLR (Capture One)
Capture One Pro by Phase One ([20]) has been available for some 
time and has a generally good reputation. The company is well 
known for its P-series of digital camera backs for medium format 
cameras, such as the Mamiya RZ0 or Hasselblad 6 x 6.
We use Capture One DSLR Pro when working with our Canon 
1Ds, 10D and Nikon D1x, D100 and use Capture One Rebel with the 
Canon 300D. Capture One DSLR is available for Windows and Mac 
OS.
There are two main features making Capture One a state-of-
the-art RAW converter:
r Excellent image quality
r Great RAW converter workﬂow 
r broad range of supported digital cameras
Figure 6-1: Capture One DSLR

6-3
6.1 Phase One’s Capture One DSLR
There are various versions of Capture One (i.e. Capture One Pro and 
Capture One SE) each supporting unique function levels and diﬀer-
ent sets of cameras. Previously available LE version of Capture One 
has been discontinued.
Note: Some dialogs may diﬀer, but is of little concern as we cover 
only those features used in our workﬂow.
Capture One is fully color management aware, an essential quality 
in doing any serious color work. The best way to appreciate Capture 
One is by learning how it works.
Capture One DSLR is what is called a “Full Service RAW Converter.” 
This means you can accomplish nearly all operations on your ﬁnal 
image inside this tool (one exception is retouching, such as cloning 
and lens & perspective corrections).
Note: Capture One DSLR RAW conversion is not based on the Canon 
or Nikon SDK. It uses its own algorithms utilized on their high-end 
digital backs for many years.
In fact, Capture One DSLR implements a highly-productive workﬂow 
for RAW ﬁles it supports.   
We must remind you that this section is not intended to replace 
the manual, as we cover only the primary steps and settings. 
Capture One DSLR deserves a book of its own.
 
Capture One Setup
First, some help in setting up the preferences. We strongly recom-
mend you take care to follow these essential settings:
r DSLR noise Suppression: our preference is to set this at low or 
medium/low for lower ISO images.
r Disable sharpening on output. Doing so simulates sharpening of 
the preview but does not apply sharpening to the output. We 
inspired this feature as we do sharpening later in Photoshop, but 
still wanted a preview that appears sharp.
r We disable opening of the developed image in Photoshop. 
Rather, these ﬁles are visible in the Photoshop ﬁle browser.
r Activate the separate RGB channels for a histogram.

6-4
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
 
 
Figure 6-2: Setup of Preferences in Capture One  DSLR
 
lFigure 6-3: Capture One  
color management setup

6-5
6.1 Phase One’s Capture One DSLR
r Camera Proﬁle: Capture One oﬀers generic proﬁles for supported 
cameras
r Working Space: We use Adobe RGB (1998).
r Monitor: At this time, enter your correct monitor proﬁle (Capture 
One actually checks for a mismatch to the system monitor pro-
ﬁle)
 
Capture One RAW ﬁle browser
Figure 6-4: Image Browser in Landscape Mode
At ﬁrst glance, the browser view appears as a nice but normal image 
browser. There are some major diﬀerences, however:
r By pressing function key F8, the browser toggles from portrait to 
landscape mode (allowing maximum space for preview image).
r Browser and Capture One do not use original RAW ﬁles for pre-
views. Instead, Capture One creates its images in the back-
ground, and once these previews are created, you can switch 

6-6
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
from one ﬁle to another in nearly real-time. The downside of this 
approach is the large disk space needed for the preview cache (It 
can be cleaned via the preferences dialog).
r Capture One allows users to deﬁne permanent project folders. 
Doing so simpliﬁes accessing all current project folders quickly. 
The preview images in these permanent folders remain even 
after cleaning the cache.
 
Image Processing
Image processing in Capture One is a ﬁve-step workﬂow:
r Inspect
r Gray Balance your image
r Correct exposure and contrast 
r Sharpen (called focus)
r Develop
Inspect
The ﬁrst thing to do is to review 
photo and capture information, at:
r Histogram (best used with three- 
channel histograms)
r Data recorded by the camera, for 
example:
– ISO
– Exposure time and aperture
– Lens used
– Flash
 
Figure 6-5: Capture tab of CO

6-7
6.1 Phase One’s Capture One DSLR
 
Gray/White Balance (WB)
The main tool used for gray balancing is the eyedropper. Select a 
gray area within the image and click the eyedropper. Capture One 
helps by giving you hints as to whether this is the best spot for gray 
correction.
If no gray exists in the image, things can get a bit more compli-
cated. In such case, it is suggested you use the color temperature 
controls (Color Temperature and Tone Balance). 
Best to have taken the shot with a gray card or Color Checker 
(we have one with us at all times) using the same light. Makes gray 
balancing much easier. Capture One also allows additional cast cor-
rections.
 
lFigure 6-6:  
Capture One’s Gray Balance tool
Since you can save/restore WB settings, you can also save some 
sample settings for the same light conditions.
Capture One provides automatic correction. As in all automatic 
corrections, results may not be optimal. Try and decide for yourself.

6-8
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
 
Exposure
After white balance, expo-
sure is the next most impor-
tant correction tool. Here, 
you can correct ± 2.5 EV. The 
histogram and preview 
image (use this option in the 
toolbar) let you inspect all 
areas of over-/under-r 
exposure. Especially impor-
tant are the RGB channel his-
tograms as there are often 
over-exposures in only one 
of the channels.
Besides EV, you may 
correct contrast and tweak 
saturation (try to maintain 
moderation).
Figure 6-7:r 
Capture One Exposure
 
Tone Curves
In addition, Capture One 
includes a variety of tone 
curves:
 
 
l Figure 6-8: 
Capture One oﬀers some 
predeﬁned tone curves
For most situations, the standard tone curve Film Standard will do. 
When requiring greater shadow detail, try Film extra Shadow. The 
curve Linear Response is used mainly for proﬁling purposes.
More and more often we ﬁnd Curves in Capture One to be use-
ful, especially in recovering some shadow detail. Otherwise we 
leave shadow recovery to Photoshop.

6-9
6.1 Phase One’s Capture One DSLR
 
Focus and Sharpening
The Capture One sharpening tool 
is a classic Unsharp Mask (USM). 
Refrain from over- sharpening your 
images. 
As mentioned earlier, we 
leave our own sharpening until 
later in the workﬂow process.
Figure 6-9: r 
Capture One Focus tab
 
Develop tab
Clicking the Develop button 
 
(or the Insert key while you are 
viewing any tab) a real RAW con-
version is performed. Once again, 
Capture One demonstrates its 
focus on workﬂow. Here’s how? 
RAW processing is done in the 
background, and Capture One is 
free for the further interactive 
image corrections.
Note: Capture One LE can have 
only a limited number of ﬁles for 
development at any time. We work 
around this limitation by working 
on developed ﬁles in Photoshop. 
Then we add more to the queue. If 
this is a problem for you, you are a 
real pro. Buying the Pro version 
might save time and money.
Figure 6-10: r 
Capture One Develop tab
 

6-10
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
 
What’s More?
There much more to Capture One. In our personal workﬂow, we are 
quite pleased with the basic functionality as outlined. Studying the 
Capture One help ﬁle is well worth the time.
r You are able to create custom camera proﬁles and use them in 
Capture One.
r Export preview images
Note: There are available third party proﬁles for Capture One. They 
can make a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in your work.
Because we use so many diﬀerent cameras and RAW converters we 
try to keep to the basics, which are:
r Get the white balance right
r Optimize Exposure

6-11
6.2 Bibble version 4
6.2 Bibble version 4 (B4)
We have used Bibble for more than 4 years. Unfortunately the previ-
ous version, Bibble 3, had not been updated for some time. Eric 
Hyman, Bibble’s author (Bibble is his cat’s name) took his time and 
created a completely new version 4. We suggest it was worth the 
wait. Bibble 4 supports most digital SLRs available as well as some 
digicams, and runs on Windows and Mac OS. Bibble’s goal is to pro-
vide satisfactory image quality along with excellent workﬂow.
Figure 4-11: Main window of Bibble 4 (Windows version)
The Bibble user interface is highly customizable. We show here the 
interface we use (thumbnails in ﬁlmstrip-mode).

6-12
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
 
Bibble Setup
Preferences
Figure 6-12:  Setup of Preferences in Bibble 4.x
We recommend unchecking the Fit to screen option, speeding up  
workﬂow signiﬁcantly.
 l Figure 6-13:  Setup

6-13
6.2 Bibble version 4
There are a couple of things requiring setup. We recommend using a 
cache folder to store lots of data (at least 1 GB). For other setting, 
refer to the help.
 Color management
Bibble is fully color managed. You 
may add your own custom proﬁles 
and, moreover, change settings on an 
image-by-image basis.
Figure 6-14: r 
Bibble Color Management Setup 
 
 
Main features of Bibble 4.x
As with Adobe Bridge, Bibble is highly customizable. When browsing 
a folder we suggest use of the following view setup:
Figure 6-15: Bibble 4.x multi-image view

6-14
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
Bibble 4 supports all tools needed for an eﬃcient RAW conversion (it  
works on JPEGs, too).
r Picture Options (holds crucial parameters)
r White Balance (WB)
r Curves/Histogram
r Sharpen/Noise
r Color and color management
 White balance (WB)
Apart from  correct exposure, the second most important task in 
Bibble 4 is correcting white balance (WB). Two ways exist to accom-
plish this:
r by setting color temperature – using either the slider 
Temperature or by selecting one of the presets via the pull-down 
menu.
r by selecting a point that should be neutral gray using the  
.
   
 
 
Figure 6-16: WB: Setting Color Temperature 
 
Color Temperature Presets
Normally, we are more interested in a pleasing subjective color tem-
perature than absolutely accurate color values. Our photos seldom 
have well-deﬁned gray areas enabling use of the eyedropper for a 
reference point for a white balance (see description at page 6–15).

6-15
6.2 Bibble version 4
Setting the Gray Point
Correcting WB by clicking on a 
gray area in the photo (e. g. a 
gray card or ColorChecker) 
with the eyedropper 
  is the 
method of choice when you 
need the best objective WB 
correction and such gray area 
exists within your photo.
 
Picture Options
This is a crucial dialog – only 
the main controls are men-
tioned here:
r Exposure (EV)
r Tone Curves
r Auto levels
Make a habit, during EV cor-
rection, of very carefully 
watching the image and its 
histogram to avoid data clip-
ping in the highlights and (or) 
shadows.
Bibble 4 tone curves are useful to adjust contrast:
The diﬀerences are subtle, but they can make a 
huge diﬀerence in tonality.
Auto levels can be acceptable or too strong. We 
leave highlight clipping always at zero (you can 
deﬁne default settings for new images). Sometimes, 
Auto Levels delivers the snap that you desire.
Figure 6-18: White balance
Figure 6-19: EV compensation
Figure 6-20: 
Predeﬁned Tone curves

6-16
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
Tone curve adjustment 
(RGB tab)
Bibble 4 provides a powerful 
curves tool with a full RGB 
histogram.
Figure 6-19: r 
Curve adjustment 
Color adjustment 
(RGB tab)
Be cautious when using the 
hue slider. Using the satura-
tion slider may make more 
sense. Most often we lower 
saturation rather than mak-
ing it stronger. As explained 
in chapter 3, you should con-
sider a more selective satura-
tion enhancement and do it 
in Photoshop. 
Sharpening/Noise
As stated previously, we prefer to 
do sharpening in Photoshop us-
ing one of many sharpening tools 
available. Most frequently we use 
sharpening at level “low” or turn it 
oﬀ entirely. 
Fringe Reduction is designed to 
lower fringes (mostly green or ma-
genta) at high contrast edges. This 
helps keep artifacts down from 
chromatic aberration (CA). If your 
image displays fringes, you must 
Figure 6-21: Sharpening/Noise 
Figure 6-20: Color Rendering

6-17
6.2 Bibble version 4
use high magniﬁcation to recognize them – do your fringe reduc-
tion here.
Normally we keep noise reduction “oﬀ” or set to a very low level. If 
your image clearly requires further noise removal, use a dedicated 
tool, such as Noise Ninja in Photoshop. Photoshop CS2 ships with a 
new noise reduction ﬁlter (see chapter 7.3 at page 7-9).
 
Workﬂow with Bibble 4
Bibble provides for a good workﬂow. Here are some elements that 
help with that:
r Fast thumbnail conversion
r Fast image preview
r Easy real-time image corrections
r Apply settings to other selected ﬁles
r Render images in the background.
Bibble 4 does an better than average job in all these areas. 
Another handy feature of Bibble 4 is its so-called Batch Queue:
Figure 6-22 on page 6-18 shows our standard settings for run-
ning a conversion in the background and then launching the con-
verted ﬁles into Photoshop. You may attach a keyboard letter to 
this batch queue (we used “P”). When you press  ‘P’, the image gets 
converted in the background,  the result launched into Photoshop. 
We have another queue attached to ‘T’, doing the same, but does 
not open the ﬁle in Photoshop.
This is been intended as a full description of all Bibble 4 features. 
Some of its other interesting features are:
r Work Queues: You can group ﬁles from diﬀerent original folders 
into virtual groups then work with them as though they belong 
to the same folder. When working on a project, you can create 
diﬀerent work queues and collect ‘keeper’ images in these queues 
by subject. You might, for example, have a queue each for:
– Landscape
– Wildﬂowers
– Wildlife/Birds

6-18
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
Figure 6-22: Batch Queue Settings
r Print Queues: We have not even used this, as yet, since we often 
print from either Photoshop, Qimage or Image Print.

6-19
6.2 Bibble version 4
6.3 Canon Digital Photo Professional (DPP)
Canon Digital Photo Professional (DPP for short) is a free tool that 
ships with the Canon high-end DSLRs: 1Ds, 1D and 1D Mark II (it is 
also designed to support future Canon digital SLRs). DPP is Canon’s 
answer to third party tools that are much stronger in terms of work-
ﬂow than its past Canon tool.
Conversion quality is good, and also its workﬂow is adequate. It 
runs under Windows and Mac OS. DPP is not quite as elegant to use 
as ACR, Capture One or Bibble 4. 
Figure 6-23: Canon Digital Photo Professional
 
Setup
Preferences
With DPP,  we consider Operating Mode as one of the most impor-
tant settings. Standard is the best compromise of working speed to 
output quality (same quality on output as “Quality Priority”).

6-20
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
Figure 6-24: “General settings” tab in  DPP Preferences
Color management setup
DPP does not detect a system monitor proﬁle automatically, but 
allows selecting it manually. This is essential in achieving an accu-
rate color preview on your monitor.
As working space 
we use “Adobe 
RGB,” as with all 
tools.
Figure 6-25: r 
Color Management 
 

6-21
6.2 Bibble version 4
 
DPP – main features
There are four types of windows used when working with DPP:
r Main Window: for browsing thumbnails (see ﬁgure 6-26)
r Image Editing Window: Editing selected RAW ﬁles
r Single-image editing window (see ﬁgure 6-27)
r A panel with settings for the RAW conversion (see ﬁgure 6-29)
Figure 6-26: Edit Image Window

6-22
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
Figure 6-27: Singe Image Editing Window
The tools necessary to correct and optimize a RAW image are divid-
ed into two tool tabs:
r RAW image adjustment
r RGB image adjustment
 
 
lFigure 6-28: 
Bibble uses 
diﬀerent 
tabs for RAW 
conversion 
and RGB 
handling.
  

6-23
6.3 Canon Digital Photo Professional
RAW image adjustment Panel
This panel contains key con-
trols to adjust your RAW ﬁles: 
r White Balance (WB)
r Brightness (EV)
r Color Adjustment
r Dynamic range adjust-
ment (Tone curve)
 White Balance (WB)
Other than EV, the second 
basic task in DPP is getting 
white balance (WB) correct. 
There are two ways to correct 
WB.
A) Setting the color 
  temperature
u Figure 4-30: WB: Setting Color Temperature
When shooting 
nature photographs, 
we are often more 
interested in the 
subjective color tem-
perature than abso-
lute accurate color 
values. Our photos 
seldom have well-
deﬁned gray areas to 
use for method B 
(Figure 6-32).
 Figure 6-31: Color Temperature Presets
u Figure 6-29: RAW Adjustment Panel

6-24
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
B) Setting the Gray Point
 l Figure 6-32: 
Setting WB Gray Point
Correcting WB by clicking on a gray object within the photo (e. g. a 
gray card or ColorChecker) is the method of choice to obtain the 
best objective WB correction when you have such a gray area inside 
your photo.
 Setting Exposure
 lFigure 6-33: 
EV compensation
During EV correction, keep your eye on the image and histogram 
closely to avoid data clipping (both highlights and shadows). Sadly, 
the better-suited histogram is from the RGB adjustment tab as the 
histogram here appears to display linear data. Therefore, it is proba-
bly better to correct exposure by only viewing the image.
Color Rendering
 lFigure 6-34: 
Color Rendering
We leave this menu at “shot settings”.
Tone Curve Adjustment (RGB Tab)
This is an extremely powerful curves tool. We have used all its con-
trols to demonstrate its ﬂexibility:
r Brightness
r Contrast
r All normal curves functions

6-25
6.3 Canon Digital Photo Professional
 
lFigure 6-35: 
Tone curve 
adjustment
We always leave our image slightly ‘soft’, making ﬁnal adjustments in 
PS using our layer-based workﬂow. 
Color Adjustment (RGB Tab)
Be careful in using the hue slider. The saturation slider may make 
more sense. Often, we’d rather make saturation lower rather than 
stronger. As explained earlier in the workﬂow chapter, you should 
possibly consider a more selective saturation enhancement and 
then do it in Photoshop.
 
l Figure 6-35: 
Color Adjustment

6-26
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
 
Saving converted ﬁles
DPP oﬀers two ways to save converted ﬁles:
1. Single image save (don’t forget to select “Embed ICC proﬁle”).
 
Figure 6-37a: Save converted ﬁle
2.  Batch save
Figure 6-37b: Batch Save

6-27
6.3 Canon Digital Photo Professional
We choose the second option because you are able to:
r Convert multiple ﬁles at one time
r Select a standard target folder
r Continue working on another ﬁle while conversion of the pre-
vious ﬁle is performed in the background.
When the images are processed, this dialog displays:
 
l Figure 6-38: 
Processing dialog of 
DPP
Unfortunately, no option makes this window close by itself. 
Bug (feature) in our current version (6/2/2004):
When an image already exists in the target folder, that image will 
not be processed. EVU would, in this case, use a diﬀerent name (e. g. 
xxxx(2).tif)

6-28
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
6.4 Nikon Capture
Nikon Capture  (NC for short) is Nikon’s full-featured RAW conver-
sion utility – available for Windows and Mac OS. It is used not only 
for RAW conversion, but for scanning with Nikon scanners and edit-
ing JPEG ﬁles, as well. Though it oﬀers diverse image operations, it 
does not modify the original image, rather, stores all operations as a 
command sequence. Thus, you may undo or modify at any time 
these operations without a loss of quality (much the same as other 
RAW converters). Nikon Capture, however, does not substitute as an 
image editor, such as Photoshop.
Figure 6-39: Nikon Capture

6-29
6.3 Canon Digital Photo Professional
Although it must be purchased separately, if you are serious about 
conversion of Nikon RAW ﬁles, you need to buy this tool. If you use 
any of Nikon’s excellent ﬁlms scanners, you should seriously con-
sider purchasing Nikon Capture. The kit includes both a Windows 
and a Mac OS version.
Stated again, this discussion is not intended to replace the 
manual. We describe only features used in our workﬂow.
In our judgement, the quantity of windows and panels in a 
Nikon Capture screen can be a bit confusing.
When installing Nikon Capture after a Photoshop install, NC 
places an import ﬁlter into the Photoshop plug-in folder which pre-
vents the Photoshop ﬁle browser from recognizing RAW ﬁles during 
Nikon RAW ﬁle import and redirects data to Nikon Capture instead. 
If you prefer to open NEF-ﬁles (Nikon RAW ﬁles) using primarily 
Camera Raw, you may remove this plug-in (called “Nikon NEF 
Plugin”) from your Photoshop Plug-in folder (Import).
 
Setup
Preferences
You may launch converted ﬁles directly into Photoshop. That is why 
we suggest selecting the Photoshop application here. In fact, we do 
not use this feature in our own workﬂow.
 
lFigure 6-40:  
Selecting the Photoshop 
directory

6-30
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
Color management
This dialog box allows 
you to select your pre-
ferred working space 
and monitor proﬁle.
We use Adobe 
RGB (1998) as our 
working space and 
select the system 
monitor proﬁle 
(shown is the monitor 
proﬁle for our Sony 
NV170 notebook). 
You must restart 
Capture to make the 
monitor proﬁle active.
 
Figure 6-40: Color Management Settings
 
Main features
Let us assume you have opened a NEF photo in Capture 3 or 4.
 
Advanced RAW
Making correct settings in the 
“Advanced RAW” dialog box 
right is essential to your suc-
cess.
r We will cover EV compen-
sation later. 
r Sharpening can be set to 
“low” or “normal”. Normal 
sometimes introduces 
unwanted halos.
r Tone compensation is set 
to “normal” or, on a photo 
with stronger contrast, to 
“Less Contrast”.
 
Figure 6-41: Advanced RAW Dialog

6-31
6.3 Canon Digital Photo Professional
r For color mode, we use our working space “Mode II (Adobe RGB)”.
r We rarely ever use the “Hue Adjustment” or “Saturation Compen-
sation”. If we need to correct these, we use Photoshop later.
Curves
The Capture 3 Curves tool is 
quite powerful and we prefer 
its interface to that of Curves 
in Photoshop. Capture lets us 
view the histogram. On the 
other hand, we attempt to 
minimize our work in the 
Capture converter and leave 
the rest to Photoshop.
Return to the EV com-
pensation slider in the “Ad-
vanced RAW” dialog box. 
Starting with the histogram 
above, an EV of +1.0 would 
result in the histogram of ﬁg-
ure 6-43.
 
Figure 6-42: Capture Curves
As said before, you should limit 
modiﬁcations in Capture 4 and do the 
rest in Photoshop. In case of a light 
over-exposure, you must use a nega-
tive EV value for compensation. Play 
with the slider until you see no more 
spikes at the far right of the histogram. 
If necessary, set the Tone settings to 
“Less Contrast” to recover lost high-
lights.
 
Figure 6-43: EV +1.0s
Size and Resolution
Most users will not need this dialog box. If we choose to print the 
photo larger than 17 ” wide, we upsize photos at an early stage (we 
upsize to a 12 Megapixel equivalent). This helps minimize the eﬀects 
of degradation occurring later in the workﬂow when later upsizing 
of the photo is often done.

6-32
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
This setting permits 
printing up to 21 ” wide 
at 180 ppi without fur-
ther resizing or increas-
ing to 30 ” with no seri-
ous problems by 
utilizing Fred Miranda’s 
SI actions. We were 
inspired to use this 
method by Paul 
 
Figure 6-44: Upsizing In Capture
Tip: Experiment with this method as it may not be the right choice 
for you (and avoid it if you print smaller than 17 ” wide).
 
White Balance (WB)
Beyond EV, the other main task in Capture 4 is getting the white bal-
ance (WB) correct. There are two ways to correct WB.
Setting the color temperature
The settings in the image of ﬁgure 6-44 shows the way we use usu-
ally use this dialog box. Select the light source, such as “Daylight”, 
then “Sunny”, “Cloudy” or “Shade” and ﬁnally tune the color with the 
“Fine Adjustment” slider. 
 
lFigure 6-45:  
WB: Setting Color 
Temperature

6-33
6.3 Canon Digital Photo Professional
In most photographs, we are more interested in the subjective color 
temperature than absolutely accurate color values. Most of our pho-
tos contain few well-deﬁned gray areas to use with method 2.
Setting the Gray Point
 
lFigure 6-45: 
Setting WB Gray Point
Correcting the WB by clicking on a gray object in a photo (e. g. a gray 
card or ColorChecker) remains the method of choice if you need the 
best objective WB correction and you have a gray area inside your 
photo to use for a reference.
 
Save and load settings
Once you have established settings, save them. 
r To save them: From the main menu bar, click Setting then select 
Image Adjustments and click Save.
r To recall them later: From the main menu bar click “Setting” then 
select Image Adjustments and click Load.
Tip: Save the settings you use most often and recall them for each 
photo you process.

6-34
Chapter 6: More RAW converts
Intentionally left blank

7-1
Perfecting images
Camera: Sigma SD10
7.1 Do you really need to bother with this?
For many casual images you may never have the desire to look into 
all the minor shortcomings of digital images. But the camera and 
lenses (even the more expensive ones) are far from being perfect. 
There are several diﬀerent defects, you should watch for and then 
decide if you can life with it or that you should work on.
Chapter 7
 
Perfecting Images

7-2
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
Here are some of the more important defects that we will cover in 
this chapter:
r Image blur (lack of sharpness) which can have many sources
– Lens blur
– Blur introduced by the camera’s AA ﬁlter
– Motion blurs. There are tools that deal with this to some 
extent. But you better use fast shutter speeds or a tripod.
– Out of focus blur. This is hard to deal with. You better use a 
higher f-stop to gain more depth of ﬁeld.
r Noise. There are three types of noise:
– Color aliasing
– Luminance noise
– Moiré
r Chromatic aberrations
r Lens distortions
r Vignetting
r Rotation (more related to wrong camera setup)
r Perspective corrections
r Removing dust spots
You should not get that worried about all these problems and tackle 
them only if you feel they distract from your images.
Why did nobody bother that much about this with ﬁlm? First, in 
the high-end people did bother but had a very hard time to correct 
it. Second, with digital we have now many good methods to mini-
mize all these ﬂaws.
Actually Photoshop CS2 adds three new tools to help reducing 
all of the above defects:
r Smarter Sharpen
r Reduce Noise
r Lens Correction  
(corrects many diﬀerent types of defects created by lenses)

7-3
7.2 The art of sharpening
7.2 The art of sharpening
All digital photos require some sharpening. Especially since the AA 
ﬁlters (Anti-Aliasing-ﬁlters) in most digital SLRs blur the image a bit 
to decrease color aliasing (see description at page 1-9).
Sharpening is one of the most diﬃcult and subjective topics in 
digital photography but good tools are available and continue to 
improve.
The sharpening process has a built-in contradiction: While giv-
ing the impression of sharpness improvement, the viewer should 
be aware that some smaller details might get lost during this pro-
cess. That is why the targeted viewing distance is very important.
Sharpening may be done in (at least) three stages of your workﬂow:
r In the camera 
(not if you shoot RAW ﬁles, and we even do not recommend it, if 
you shoot JPEG or TIFF and do some optimizations in Photoshop 
later).
r In the RAW converter.  
We rarely use this and but most of the time just use a sharpening 
of the preview image without actually sharpen the image. 
However you might slightly sharpen the image in the RAW con-
verter and do some more sharpening in Photoshop afterwards. 
RawShooter seems to do a better job with sharpening than 
other RAW converters do. So with RawSHooter you may use a bit 
more of sharpening.
r In Photoshop. 
This is our preferred method as you have a very high level of 
control and may even restrict sharpening to certain areas of the 
image. There are quite a number of good sharpening tools as 
plug-ins for Photoshop. 
Even in Photoshop a three step sharpening may be the best way:
– A slight overall sharpening to improve the image
– A selective sharpening restricted to those areas of your 
image, that improve with further sharpening and that should 
be in the focus of the viewer. Bruce Fraser calls this a creative 
sharpening.

7-4
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
– A ﬁnal sharpening as one of the very last steps before output-
ting. This sharpening should be done when the picture is 
scaled for output and it should be adapted to the output 
method. Digital slide show need almost not sharpening, 
while printing using an inkjet printer or an oﬀset printer need 
much more sharpening, due to its printing process using 
dithering. Output on a lightjet printer or a dye sublimation 
printer requires less sharpening. Part of this ﬁnal sharpening 
may even be done by the RIP (Raster Image Processor) if you 
use one and the RIP is supporting this (e. g. Qimage , see [33]) 
supports it).
 
USM (Unsharp Mask)
The classic tool for sharpening in Photoshop is USM (Unsharp Mask). 
It is also important to be aware that it is diﬃcult to judge sharp-
ening on the screen. A photo that looks hopelessly over-sharpened 
on the screen might be exactly right for some inkjet printers.
Sharpening artefacts should be limited to a minimum:
r Halos (white or black borders at edges)
r Noise will get sharpened as well, making it more pronounced. 
There are a lot of sharpening tools out there and it is up to you to 
ﬁgure out your favorite methods.
 
How Photoshop “Unsharp Mask” works
The most used tool for sharpening is probably straight USM 
(Unsharp Mask) in Photoshop and nearly all techniques are a varia-
tion of it. To get an understanding of the sharpening issues you 
need to better understand how Photoshop USM works and its inher-
ent limits.

7-5
7.2 The art of sharpening
 
l Figure 7-1: 
Sample Picture  
(not sharpened)
We open the FilterrSharpenrUnsharp Mask Dialog:
 
l Figure 7-2: 
Unsharp Mask Dialog
In (almost) all cases you should check the Preview button. Three fac-
tors control USM:

7-6
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
r Amount 
r Radius
r Threshold
Amountr deﬁnes the strength of the new improved contrast at 
edges. The optimal amount depends very much on your image. 
Start with a value of 50–100 % and carefully watch the eﬀect with 
your image that should be set to an enlargement level of 100 % (or 
even a bit more).
Radiusrdetermines how many pixels are involved to build the new 
edges with higher contrast. Often 0,5–1,0 are good values, though 
the best value is very dependent on the resolution of your  
image. The higher the resolution, the higher Threshold may be. An 
inadequate high value will result in a high contrast and artefacts. 
Thresholdrdeﬁnes “how diﬀerent the sharpened pixels must be 
from the surrounding area before they are considered edge pixels 
and sharpened by the ﬁlter” (see Photoshop Help) and is needed to 
avoid sharpening noise too much.
Good values are very much dependent on the resolution of the 
image (ppi – Point per Inch). The higher the resolution, the higher 
values of Amount and Radius may be selected.
 
l  Figure 7-3: 
Sharpened 
Image
What is the dilemma? You can either sharpen too little or too strong 
so that the image gets severely damaged by showing light or dark 
halos

7-7
7.2 The art of sharpening
Figure 7-4: Image shows strong halos
We would caution you to stay on the side of low sharpening. If you 
images only impress by being sharp then try to work on the con-
tent.
Here is short story. We looked at some Cibachrome prints in 
one of Carmel’s top photo galleries. None of the prints in that 
show was critically sharp. But they all were beautiful. 
Remember sharpness is only a tool to improve the content.
Since the sharpening eﬀect is also a function of the resolution and 
the printing technology, ﬁnding optimal settings can be a lengthy 
process and needs a lot of experience. There is also a principle limi-
tation to USM: all settings are global for any given image. But you 
might want to sharpen the skin (smoother) diﬀerent from the hair 
(much more crisp) for a portrait. Also avoiding amplifying the noise 
using plain USM can be tricky.
That is why there are a huge number of diﬀerent sharpening 
techniques published (most often based on some edge masking) 
and many Photoshop plug-ins that try to make sharpening easier.
Note: There is no simple ”one size ﬁts all“ solution to sharpening.

7-8
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
 
The two step approach
The two-step approach is a simple way to get started in sharpening
r Low sharpening in the RAW converter  
r Final sharpening in Photoshop 
We don’t really do any sharpening in the RAW converter and use 
later only EasyS Sharpening Toolkit in Photoshop. That does not 
mean that the RAW converter sharpening is that bad but we ﬁnd 
that good sharpening tools in PS oﬀer more control.
Once you have a grip on sharpening, have a look into the many 
sharpening tools we show at Digital Outback Photo ([8]) and pick 
the technique that ﬁts your workﬂow and image best.
 
Photoshop CS2: Smarter Sharpen
In Photoshop CS2 we ﬁnally get an improved sharpening over plain 
USM.
Figure 7-5: Photoshop CS2 Smarter Sharpen

7-9
7.3 Noise reduction
In advanced mode you can also tune the sharpening for the shad-
ows and highlights. In general you don’t want to sharpen the 
extreme shadows (Noise) and the also not the bright highlights.
 
Other Sharpening Tools
In our daily work we use several advanced sharpening tools.
There are a lot of sharpening tools out there and it is up to you 
to ﬁgure out your favorite. Here are a few of our favorites.
r Our own EasyS Sharpening Toolkit (
, ; see [46])
r Focus Magic (
, see [31])
r Focus Fixer (
, ; see [32])
7.3 Noise reduction
Small sensors and larger sensors at higher ISO settings can show dif-
ferent kinds of noise. This is mainly visible in the shadow parts as 
here the signal to noise ratio gets very low. For more information on 
noise in digital images read our paper at [8]. The whole industry is 
working on sensors and software that allows lower and lower noise 
levels. 
Actually removing noise is easy. But removing noise and keeping 
ﬁnest details and without muting color is the real challenge.
There are several types of noise:
r Fine and coarse (hard to remove)
r Luminance noise (detail noise)
r Color noise (means false color pixels in homogeneous colors)

7-10
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
 
 
Figure 7-6: Shows Luminance and color noise
Fortunately we have now quite a few good programs (and all the 
good also work as Photoshop plug-ins) that can do a great job 
reducing noise.
But ﬁrst check whether your noise is really a problem in your 
prints. Only reduce the noise so far that you keep detail and avoid 
some sort of plastic look in your images.
After the use of some noise removal ﬁlter, we get the image of 
ﬁgure 7-7:

7-11
7.3 Noise reduction
 
 
 
Figure 7-7: After noise removal

7-12
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
 
Photoshop CS2: Reduce Noise
Finally Photoshop CS2 also got a very usable noise ﬁlter Reduce 
Noise:
 
Figure 7-8: PS CS2 Reduce Noise
As noise may be stronger in some channels – usually the blue chan-
nel shows more noise – it may be well worth to use the Per Channel 
tab and start noise removal with the blue channel. This may pre-
serve more details in your red and green channel.
 
Noise is in the shadows
Because noise is primarily present in the shadows it can be very use-
ful to perform the noise removal in a new layer and then use a Layer 
Mask so that the noise removal is only active in the shadows. We use 
the masks from our own Tonality Tuning Toolkit (see [7]).
 
Other Useful noise removal ﬁlters
We ﬁnd the following noise ﬁlters very useful:
r NoiseNinja (
, ; see [12])

7-13
7.4 Reduce chromatic abberation and purple fringing
r NeatImage (
, ; see [27]). There is a Standard and a Pro edition. 
This is an excellent tool.
r Noiseware (
, ; see [28]). There is a Standard and a Pro edition)
r Helicon Filter Pro (
; see [29]) This is superb freeware tool)
If you work with 16-bit images, which we recommend to do, you 
usually have to buy the Pro versions of the tools.
7.4 Reduce chromatic aberration (CA) and purple fringing 
Chromatic aberration  (CA for short) is actually a fault that nearly all 
lenses show. Whether it is  also shows in the ﬁnal image is up to the 
quality of the lenses used. Most of the time chromatic aberrations 
show as purple/green fringing and it gets stronger the more you get 
into the corners. The reason is that the lenses have a diﬀerent focal 
plane for the diﬀerent colors. Especially consumer class digital cam-
eras show more CA than high end digital cameras with top lenses. 
There is also purple fringing that may look the same but is the 
result of leaks in the imaging sensor (e. g. The Sony F828 shows 
both strong chromatic aberrations and purple fringing).
 
Heal chromatic aberration (CA)
Lower quality lenses but also some prime lenses used with full 
frame sensors show mostly in the corners so called chromatic aber-
ration (CA). It shows as magenta and green borders at opposite 
sides of high contrast edges.

7-14
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
 
 
 
l Figure 7-9: 
Sample Chromatic 
Aberration (left) 
and the ﬁxed result 
in Camera Raw 2/3 
(right)
If you don’t use Adobe Camera Raw and did not upgrade to Photo-
shop CS2 yet, then you may use the Photoshop plug-in Debarrelizer 
(see [30]) It corrects lens distortions and chromatic aberrations):
 l Figure 7-10: 
CA removal in 
Debarrelizer

7-15
7.4 Reduce chromatic abberation and purple fringing
 
Photoshop CS2: Lens Correction
New in Photoshop CS2 you can also ﬁx chromatic aberration outside 
of Camera Raw using the Lens Correction ﬁlter:
Figure 7-11: “Lens Correction” ﬁlter of Photoshop CS2
 
Heal purple fringing
Here is a real example we got from a Sony F828. We show how to 
make useful images from such ﬁles.
First get a free version of Panorama-Tools. You have to search 
the web where to ﬁnd it, as we have no right to distribute this free 
software. A good start will be [40]. There you ﬁnd a user friendly 
front end to Panorama-Tools as well.
The following is working on the original ﬁle (that was not 
sharpened)

7-16
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
 
l Fig. 7-12: 
Original with 
strong CA
1 Because we are using layers we create a new layer with the result 
of all current ﬂattened layers in it.
2 Using Panorama tools to remove some CA
Figure 7-13: Correct radial shift in Panorama Tools
These parameters may vary with the focal length.

7-17
7.4 Reduce chromatic abberation and purple fringing
 
l Fig. 7-14: 
After 
Panorama 
Tools
This step removes some purple and even more the green CA fring-
ing.
3 Reduce purple 
Use Photoshop Hue/Saturation tool to reduce the purple:
 
l Fig. 7-15: 
Selectively 
reduce a 
narrow color 
range of purple
It will leave desaturated areas in the picture but not as bad as purple 
(see ﬁgure 7-16).

7-18
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
 
l Fig. 7-16: 
Result after 
applying 
Hue/
Saturation
4 (Optional): You may additionally (or alternatively) reduce 
magenta using Selective Color Options: 
 
l Figure 7-17: 
Purple ﬁnging may 
also be reduced using 
the “Seletcive Color 
Options”

7-19
7.5 Distortion
7.5 Distortion
You will be surprised how much distortion even good lenses may 
show. But the good news is that you hardly will see it with images 
that have no straight horizontal or vertical lines. However once you 
photograph architecture it can be quite an annoyance.
There are two kinds of correction tools:
r Visual corrections based on barrel or pincushion distortions
r Proﬁle based correction based on measured proﬁles for  
camera/lens combinations
Whenever possible use a tool that is proﬁle based as the correction 
will be more correct and automatic. But also the other tools will help 
you getting a pleasing result.
 
Proﬁle based corrections
Clearly our favorite tool is the free PTLens plug-in (see [25]). 
Unfortunately it is only available for the PC right now. For Mac OS 
however you may buy LensFix ([26]) at a very reasonable price. It is 
based on the same technology.
Here is an example:
Figure 7-18: Strong barrel distortion

7-20
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
PTLens can correct this automatically knowing the right camera/ 
lens combination (even tries to get as much info from the image 
EXIF as possible).
 
Figure 7-19: PTLens User Interface
The resulting image looks much better now:
 
Figure 7-20: Corrected Image

7-21
7.5 Distortion
In some case PTLens can even be used for correcting distortions cre-
ated by ﬁsheye lenses:
 
 
Figure 7-21: Canon 15 mm ﬁsheye lens
 
 
Figure 7-22: Corrected distortion using PTLens

7-22
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
 
Photoshop CS2: Lens Correction
 
 
Figure 7-23: Corrected image using the Photoshop CS2 "Lens Correction" ﬁlter
The correction in the Photoshop CS2 Lens Correction ﬁlter may be 
not as perfect as in PTLens but in most cases it will perfectly do the 
job. Remember, in the old days you did not do any correction at all.

7-23
7.6 Vignetting
7.6 Vignetting
We encounter this problem rarely. But wide-angle lenses at open 
aperture or some ﬂash photos may suﬀer from Vignetting like the 
picture of page 7-23 (this is only a demo, the real image had only 
minor Vignetting that would not show that well in the book):
 
l Fig. 7-24: 
 Severe 
Vignetting
Vignetting can be ﬁxed in ACR or in the CS2 Lens Correction tool:
 
 
Figure 7-25: Quick ﬁx in Lens Correction

7-24
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
Midpoint does not deﬁne the midpoint of vignetting, but deﬁnes 
how far from the middle of your image vignetting-correction should 
start. In some cases this may not be enough, as some lenses show 
an unsymmetrical vignetting behavior.
As always we advise not to over correct the images. These are 
still photos and should show that they come from the real world.
Some enforced vignetting however may also be used as a creative 
touch to your image. Slightly darkening the outer border of your 
photo may lead your viewer to focus to the middle of the frame 
where you usually want the focus to be. For this, use a negative 
value for Amount. However as this eﬀect will create a circular dark-
ening, in most cases we would prefer to use a darker frame pro-
duced in Photoshop. 
7.7 Correcting tilt and perspective corrections
 
Rotation (correcting tilt)
Some RAW converters help to correct tilt directly (e. g. ACR 3.x and 
Capture One). For all the others you can easily use Photoshop and 
especially the CS2 Lens correction ﬁlter. If you choose to work with 
an 8-bit image in Photoshop, doing a correction in the RAW con-
verter has some advantages, due to the 16-bit mode used there. If 
you prefer to correct it in Photoshop, we would recommend staying 
in 16-bit mode until the tilt is correct and other corrections are done 
as well and only convert to 8-bit mode afterwards (ImagerModer8 
Bits/Channel).
If you have to do some image alignment, you should do the 
cropping after aligning the image.
 
Perspective corrections
Figure 7-26 shows a classic image that shows a perspective distor-
tion:

7-25
7.7 Correcting tilt and perspective corrections
 
l Figure 7-26: 
Perspective 
distortion
Besides a strong perspective distortion it also shows minor lens bar-
rel distortions. Both can be corrected in one step with the new PS 
CS2 Lens Correction ﬁlter (FilterrDistortrLens Correction).
 
Figure 7-27: Lens Correction ﬁlter
For this correction you need the grid enabled in the ﬁlter. Here 
(Figure 7-28) is the ﬁnal image after a crop:

7-26
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
 
Figure 7-28: Final corrected picture
7.8 Removing dust spots
Sometimes the CCD or CMOS sensors collect dust. These spots are 
easy to see in brighter parts of the image (e. g. sky). Here you can 
use the Photoshop clone tool 
 to copy over the spot with a simi-
lar area of the image.
Photoshop 7.0 introduced a very sophisticated clone tool: the 
“Healing Brush” 
. The healing brush melds the source and target 
areas together and often produces a more pleasing result than the 
clone tool. Here is a sample dust spot:
 
l Figure 7-29: 
Sensor Dust Spot

7-27
7.8 Removing dust spots
Select the Healing Brush tool 
 in the PS tools palette. Then press 
the À key and the source cursor shows up (can be hard to spot if 
the color of the cursor is close to the background color). You then 
click in an area where you want to sample patterns to replace the 
target (here the dust spot).
 
l  Figure 7-30: 
Selecting the source for the 
Healing Brush
Then you create a brush that is slightly bigger than the dust spot, 
position it over the spot, and click with the mouse button.
 
Figure 7-31: Apply Healing Brush 
 
 
 
 
The corrected image
This is actually not an easy example as the dust spot sits on top of a 
cloud pattern and could be improved to better reﬂect the original 
pattern. 
We rarely use the clone tool anymore to remove unwanted 
parts from a photo.
Comment by Phil Lindsay: “Yes, it’s true that the healing tool is great 
but there are still instances in which the rubber stamp may work 
better; especially if the two regions have grossly diﬀerent colors.”

7-28
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
 
Patch tool
The Patch Tool uses the same algorithms as the Healing brush, and 
can be used to remove, or move, areas in your picture.
We use it here to remove the same dust spot. This time we use 
the Patch Tool 
. The ﬁrst step in using the Patch Tool is to select 
the area you want to remove (works like a lasso):
 
l Figure 7-32: 
Patch Tool Selection
Then you drag the selected area to a place with a pattern that 
should replace the source:
 
lFigure 7-33: 
 Move selection to a 
replacement source
The result is close to our ﬁrst attempt:
 
l Figure 7-34: 
Result after Patch Tool use

7-29
7.8 Removing dust spots
Sometimes you need to use the Healing Brush for a ﬁnal touchup of 
the patched area.
 
Using Selection with the Healing Brush
Here is a spot on the CCD (actually residue from canned air, ouch):
 l Figure 7-35: 
Major spot
Here the use of the healing brush is tough. 
r Work at about 400 % magniﬁcation
r Select the area with a rectangular marquee that you want to pro-
tect from the healing brush and invert the selection
 
l  Figure 7-36: 
Protect 
window
r Now the healing brush is restricted to the selection and would 
not interfere with the areas that are not selected (in this example 
the window).

7-30
Chapter 7: Perfecting Images
After some more work we get a ﬁnal result that looks like ﬁgure :
 l Figure 7-37: 
”Healed” image
This is not really perfect work but would not be seen in smaller to 
midsize prints. This is a good example how the healing brush can 
save your day.

8-1
Batch Processing Techniques for RAW Files
Chapter 8
 
Batch Processing techniques 
for RAW ﬁles
Camera: Canon 1DS
When shooting digitally, the number of pictures taken and pro-
cessed will quite likely surpass numbers done with your analog 
camera by as much a factor as 2 to 5. For this reason alone, process-
ing photographs individually is ineﬃcient and usually not viable. In 
most cases, you will want to batch process most images.  
All RAW converters described in this book allow you to do just that 
– some in easier and more eﬃcient ways than with others.

8-2
Chapter 8: Batch Processing Techniques for RAW Files
8.1 Basic batch processing pattern
 The basic mode used for batch processing is quite similar with all 
converters described:
r Inspect and sort your ﬁles into those you wish to keep and those 
you want to delete. This usually reduces the number of ﬁles by a 
factor of 1.5 to 2.
r Sort your ﬁles, grouping together all ﬁles having similar lighting 
conditions or possibly those with contrast and color problems 
grouped together. To do this, tag them, using the browser of 
your choice. You may also choose to group them for diﬀerent 
conversion or output settings.
r Next, process the either the ﬁrst (or most typical) picture of a 
group with your RAW converter, taking all necessary care to 
achieve optimal results. 
If you do not have time or patience for that, you may use the 
RAW converter’s default settings. In most cases, the resulting 
photo will be better than in-camera processing. The reason for 
this is that your computer has much greater processing power 
than the processor in your camera. While the camera internal 
processing program (its ﬁrmware) is infrequently updated, your 
RAW converter may be updated far more often, gaining an 
advantage using new know-how and better algorithms. In addi-
tion, you may have corrected some default settings of your RAW 
converter thus compensating or correcting some imperfections 
of your speciﬁc camera in speciﬁc shooting conditions.
r Save the RAW conversion settings so you may apply them later 
to all other ﬁles with the same  or similar characteristics. Some 
converters, e. g.  ACR, Capture One and RawShoooter, allow 
applying subsets of these settings, as well.
r At this time, select all ﬁles in a group and apply the same set-
tings to them. You may now safely start batch processing your 
ﬁles. This is usually done in the background while you deal with 
editing for the next set. 
Concerning the settings for RAW conversion, you have several 
choices to choose from with most converters:
– Use the camera proﬁle default settings (these may or may not 
be modiﬁed from the original defaults)

8-3
8.1 Basic Batch Processing Pattern
– Use the original camera proﬁle settings (those, shipped with 
the converter)
– Use settings previously applied to the individual ﬁles
– Use the settings of the previous conversion
– Use the settings of a (temporary) reference image
– Use some other saved settings
r When doing batch processing, you usually have a choice of 
where to write output ﬁles – either to the same directory as the 
source ﬁles or to a diﬀerent destination directory. We prefer the 
latter, since it separates our working ﬁle set from the valuable 
originals (RAW ﬁles). 
Most RAW converters oﬀer an eﬀective method to naming (or 
renaming) output ﬁles although in practice, we rename our ﬁles 
before they are even seen by any RAW converter.
Some RAW converters discussed oﬀer additional options for batch 
processing. For example some may produce several output ﬁles 
from each source ﬁle, for instance, a high resolution 16-bit TIFF to be 
used for ﬁne-tuning and printing, as well as, a low-resolution JPEG 
ﬁle for use in a web presentation.
With most RAW converters you may choose if the batch pro-
cessing will be done in the background (while you continue editing 
ﬁles) or at a later time. As processing many large ﬁles takes a toll 
concerning CPU and memory resources, it may be advantageous 
add ﬁles to a batch queue with the intention of processing at a later 
time. Don’t be surprised if the performance of your computer slows 
noticeably while background processing is done (dual processor 
machines help considerably at this time).
It is recommended you convert RAW ﬁles into a new location 
(diﬀerent folder). In this way, these ﬁles won’t be inter-mixed with 
your current folder browser display. Also, there is no danger of acci-
dentally overwriting source ﬁles (most converters prevent this with 
RAW ﬁles). Later, you may move or copy them back to the source 
folder manually using a script or via the batch renaming of the con-
verter. Don’t overlook deﬁning a logical name scheme for the desti-
nation (converted) ﬁles. The RAW converter usually does that as 
part of the conversion process. Applying IPTC metadata to your 
RAW ﬁles (e. g. from ACR/Bridge) will save the labor of assigning this 
data to your converted ﬁles, as well.

8-4
Chapter 8: Batch Processing Techniques for RAW Files
Most RAW converters may be conﬁgured to open a converted 
image in Photoshop automatically, in batch processing this usually 
is not practical. We suggest you disable this option.
As mentioned earlier, batch processing is becoming more 
important. In Photoshop CS1 you had to write your own Photoshop 
action to open a ﬁle, make the various settings in Photoshop and 
save them, Photoshop CS2 comes preconﬁgured to do that. We see 
similar enhancements in batch processing in newer versions of 
other RAW converters, as well.
Apart from ﬁle conversion, simple ﬁle renaming is a frequently 
required batch operation. This can be done with one of the many 
renaming utilities (e. g.  “Rname-it” or “Downloader Pro”, both men-
tioned in chapter 3). Currently, however, renaming has become a 
basic function of most RAW converters. In Bridge, this function is 
found under ToolsrBatch Rename. The scheme for renaming is 
quite ﬂexible and allows for the inclusion of text, date, various 
sequence numbers and some EXIF metadata  in the ﬁle name (e. g. 
an Image-Unique ID). A ﬁle may also be copied or moved to a dif-
ferent folder.
 
Figure 8-1: Batch-renaming dialog of Photoshop CS2

8-5
8.2 Batch Processing with Adobe Camera Raw
8.2 Batch Processing with Adobe Camera Raw
To convert a number of RAW ﬁles eﬃciently with Photoshop CS1 you 
must create your own Photoshop action. This action should open a 
ﬁle in ACR, apply all  settings for the ACR workﬂow (selecting output 
Resolution, Depth, color Space, Size, …) start the conversion, make 
the setting for the target format, and ﬁnally save the ﬁle using the 
appropriate (preferred) image mode. Important in ﬁle saving is 
selecting an output ﬁle format and various settings for that speciﬁc 
ﬁle format. (The following is brief description how to create such an 
action. For more details, please refer to the Photoshop Help system).
How to create an action in Photoshop
Photoshop actions are very useful tools to do repetitive tasks. 
Creating a new action may be as easy as just recording the dif-
ferent Photoshop steps in your task. Thus, an action is a 
sequence of steps (such as opening a ﬁle or setting a new 
image mode) in Photoshop.
To create your new action, 
activate the action panel 
(WindowrActions).
Before starting, have a 
look at the basic recording 
tools in the action button 
bar: 
Their functions are (from the 
left to right):
 
Stop recording
 
Record button: shows “red” if Photoshop is recording an 
action and “green” when the recording is stopped.
 
Replay action
 
Create a new action set
 
Create a new action
 Delete action or action step

8-6
Chapter 8: Batch Pressing Techniques for RAW Files
To create an action for batch processing RAW ﬁles, ﬁrst create a 
new action SET by clicking 
. Enter a descriptive name for this 
action set:
Select the new action set in the action panel and click 
 to cre-
ate a new action. This starts recording the following Photoshop 
steps. But, ﬁrst a dialog appears, asking for a name for the new 
action. Lets us call it “16-bit RAW conversion”.
The next steps to be recorded, done in Photoshop, are:
r Open a RAW ﬁle (FilerOpen). It doesn’t matter which ﬁle you 
open because its name will later on be replaced by the 
source selection). 
r When Adobe Camera Raw appears, set all Work-ﬂow Options 
you want to use for your batch conversion. From the ACR 
Settings menu, select the appropriate conversion settings 
set you plan to use in your batch. 
r Click Open to start the conversion. The converted image will 
be opened in Photoshop.
r In Photoshop set the image mode you desire and add proto-
type adjustment layers (this, only useful, if you prepare your 
images for individual image corrections after the batch con-
version is complete).
r Call up “Save as” (FilerSave as), select the appropriate ﬁle 
format (e. g.  TIFF) and explicitly set all options and modes 
for your intended ﬁle format.  The ﬁle name you give here

8-7
8.2 Batch Processing with Adobe Camera Raw
 
will be overwritten when the actual batch processing is per-
formed.
r Close the Save dialog by clicking OK.
r Close the image window in Photoshop.
Click 
 to stop recording and thus ﬁnishing your action. Take a 
glimpse of the steps in your action by clicking at 
 of your par-
ticular action in the action panel. You will see all steps and val-
ues chosen. Photoshop allows adding more steps, deleting or 
replacing steps. All this is well documented when you call up 
Photoshop Help.
You should now save your action set (select action panel, 
right-click on 
 and select Save Actions).
To start batch processing with Photoshop, select FilerAutomater 
Batch. 
There are four sections 
in this dialog:
r Play for selecting 
the action-set and 
action.
r Source to select the 
source ﬁles.
r Destination to spec-
ify where the pro-
cessed (converted) 
ﬁles should go.
r Errors-Handling
Figure 8-2: r 
Batch dialog in Photoshop
Section “Play” r First, select the action set. An action set is a collec-
tion of diﬀerent actions grouped into a set. To be listed in this pull-
down menu, it should reside in the Photoshop default script folder.  

8-8
Chapter 8: Batch Pressing Techniques for RAW Files
You may, however, load additional scripts in Photoshop: Activate the 
action panel (WindowrAction). In that panel choose Load Actions 
from the 
 drop-down menu. From the Set menu of the Batch dia-
log select the speciﬁc action you plan to use to process your source 
ﬁles.
Section “Source” r In the source sec-
tion is speciﬁed which ﬁles to process 
and how the processing should be done. 
Various source selections are available:
For this RAW conversion, only Folder 
or Bridge (or File browser with CS1) is of interest. Selecting Bridge 
processes those ﬁles selected in Bridge (or the Photoshop browser). 
Or, if you select Folder, all ﬁles in that folder (and optionally all ﬁles 
in its subfolders) are processed. In this case, you must select the 
source ﬁle folder by clicking the Choose button. In either case, we 
strongly recommend the following settings: 
 
l Figure 8-3: Suppress 
Open and Warning dialogs
Override Action “Open” Commands will suppress the open dialog 
box as each source ﬁle is processed – it, nevertheless, will open each 
individual ﬁle. If you do not check this button, only that ﬁle will be 
opened which was in use when the batch script was recorded.
“Include All Subfolders” is optional and will do a recursive process-
ing of all source subfolders, as well. We rarely use this option.
Suppress File Open Options Dialog suppresses the ﬁle Open dia-
log when opening individual source ﬁles.
Suppress Color Proﬁle Warning suppresses a pop-up of the warn-
ing dialog if there is a mismatch of color proﬁle of the converted ﬁle 
and current working space of Photoshop.
Section “Destination” r Similarly to the source section, you specify 
your ﬁle destinations. They may either be written to the same folder 

8-9
8.2 Batch Processing with Adobe Camera Raw
as the source ﬁles or to a diﬀerent destination folder (which you are 
asked to select by clicking Choose).
Section “Errors” r If an error occurs while processing the ﬁles, the 
processing may either stop (useful when debugging your scripts) or 
the error may be logged to a dedicated log ﬁle while processing con-
tinues with the next source ﬁle. The second option is preferable in 
the ﬁnal, well-tested script.
Batch conversion using Bridge
Using CS2 and Bridge for a standard batch RAW conversion, it is 
unnecessary to build a Photoshop action. There is a simpler way:
r Select the ﬁles you want to convert within Bridge. 
r Call up ToolsrPhotoshoprImageporcessor. This brings up this 
dialog box:
 
Figure 8–4: Batch conversion via “Image Processor” in Photoshop CS2

8-10
Chapter 8: Batch Processing Techniques for RAW Files
You probably already know the scheme:
1  Open the ﬁrst (additional) image in ACR and do the conversion 
settings to be applied to all selected ﬁles (1). 
If you don’t use this option, current settings of the individual 
selected ﬁles are used instead.
2  Select the destination for converted RAW ﬁles.
3 Select a ﬁle format for converted ﬁles. You may generate JPEGs, 
as well as, PSDs or TIFFs – all simultaneously. 
You may even resize the (converted) images.
4 You may select an additional Photoshop action to be applied to 
the converted ﬁle. The default action oﬀers several diﬀerent 
workspaces. 
You should always include the ICC proﬁle of your destination 
color workspace.
You may Save the current settings of this dialog box or may Load 
settings previously saved. 
Clicking Run starts the conversion. If you selected the Open ﬁrst 
image to apply settings (see area 1 of ﬁgure 8-4), ACR pops-up the 
Open dialog where you may select a RAW ﬁle. This RAW ﬁle will be 
open in ACR, and you may set up various ACR settings for image 
optimization. Clicking Open in ACR starts the conversion using the 
selected ACR settings for the selected ﬁle of the Open dialog as 
well as the previous ﬁles selected in Bridge. 
The pictures will eventually display in Photoshop, yet no actions are 
required, and images are saved automatically.
Some Predeﬁned scripts with Photoshop CS2 and Bridge
Photoshop CS2 ships with an assortment of preconﬁgured scripts to 
do batch conversion. If the scripts are to your liking (test them!), all 
you need to do is select the ﬁles to be converted in Bridge and call 
up the chosen conversion-function. 
To select batch-conversion in Bridge, select ToolsrPhotoshop r 
Convert to. You may select one of the preconﬁgured destination 
ﬁle formats like JPEG, PDF, TIFF, …

8-11
8.2 Batch Processing with Adobe Camera Raw
 
l Figure 8-5:  
Batch-scripts with 
Bridge  (as part of 
CS 2 suite)
 A dialog will pop up, that allows you to do ﬁle format-speciﬁc set-
tings (e. g.  Quality for JPEG or embedding of an ICC proﬁle). You may 
select further conversion parameters (e. g. destination folder, rename 
options  by clicking the Output button) in the dialog.
 
l Figure 8-6:  
Option when converting to 
TIFF using the “convert to” 
script.
If the functions/scripts oﬀered do not meet your requirements, or if 
you need additional scripts, you may design your own Photoshop 
actions and include them into the Bridge (or Photoshop) default 
script folder. 

8-12
Chapter 8: Batch Pressing Techniques for RAW Files
These predeﬁned conversion scripts are available only in CS2 
suite. Using only Photoshop or an additional component of the 
suite, may modify your tool menu (ﬁgure 8-5).
Simple Photoshop CS2 Batch Conversion Using Bridge
When using Bridge, you may proceed very similarly:
1. Select the ﬁles you want to convert within Bridge. 
2. Shift-douple-click the previous ﬁle selected. This brings up ACR 
in the ﬁlm-strip-mode.
3. Select the ﬁle you want to use as the reference for your settings. 
Do all corrections you wish to apply to this and the other images. 
4. Now, select all ﬁles of the ﬁlm strip (using the shift key) or click 
the Select All button (upper left corner).
5. The ACR Save button will change to “Save n images”.
6. Clicking Synchronize will apply settings to all selected ﬁles.
7. Click Save n images. The dialog box of ﬁgure 8-7 pops up.
 l Figure 8-7
8. Clicking Save starts the actual batch conversion of selected ﬁles. 
ACR registers the status of the processing at the lower right cor-
ner of the ACR window, just above the Save button.

8-13
8.4 Batch Pressing with Capture One Pro
8.3 Smooth Batch Processing
There are several additional points you should learn to achieve pain-
less batch processing. These points are valid not only for ACR but for  
other RAW converters, as well:
r Be sure the source ﬁles you want to process are correctly 
selected before activating a batch – either that you selected 
them with the ﬁle browser or Bridge (if that is, indeed, the 
source) or you selected the correct source folder.
r Make certain there is enough disc space for your converted ﬁles.
r Select a ﬁle naming scheme for your destinations ﬁles that 
avoids overwriting ﬁles with identical names.
r Disable various Open and Save (or Save As) dialogs and the 
warnings, as shown in ﬁgure 8-3 at page 8-8.
r If you have created your own batch scripts (recording Photoshop 
steps), you must explicitly set all parameters and settings in 
those Photoshop steps which are relevant for the conversion 
even when they are correctly set as you process your sample 
image (e. g. resolution, depth, space and output size or scaling 
and your output ﬁle format). When you call up the script next 
time, diﬀerent settings may be in use, and result will be unpre-
dictable output.
r If you use a script for your batch, test it thoroughly. Test it under 
diﬀerent conditions, for instance, in cases where the output ﬁle 
already exists.
8.4 Batch Processing with Capture One Pro
Capture One Pro was one of the ﬁrst RAW converters providing 
advanced batch processing, thus improving workﬂow with RAW 
ﬁles. We prefer to use Capture One in ﬁlm-strip-mode while batch 
processing. 
Principal settings for batch processing with Capture One are 
made in File rPreferencesrProcess Settings (see ﬁgure 8-8 at page 
8-14).

8-14
Chapter 8: Batch Pressing Techniques for RAW Files
It allows including a 
copyright note into the 
output ﬁles without 
calling up of the ITPC 
metadata dialog.
The main section 
for actual processing 
are found under the 
tab Process within the 
Capture One main win-
dow. Here, it is the sec-
tion Batch Editor which 
controls batch process-
ing.
This section (ﬁgure 8-9) 
shows icons to control 
the batch queue, and 
shows the current ele-
ments and state of  the 
queue:
 
Adds the current 
image (or all 
images selected) 
to the batch 
queue. This does 
not start process-
ing them.
 
Adds the current 
image (or all 
images selected) 
to the batch 
queue, initiating 
the processing of 
the ﬁle.
 
Removes a 
selected item 
from the batch 
queue.
Figure 8-8: Batch-setup in Capture One Pro
Figure 8-9: Batch Editor in Capture One Pro

8-15
8.4 Batch Pressing with Capture One Pro
 
Starts processing of the queue. The progression bar at the bot-
tom of the sections will show the progress.
 
Stops processing of the batch queue. All items not yet pro-
cessed remain in the queue.
 Opens ﬁles recently processed via a drop-down list.
 
Allows selecting a diﬀerent destination folder.
 
Opens the current processing folder for inspection.
When an item (image) is added to the batch queue, the settings 
from the process tab (e. g.  Resolution, Depth, Size/Scaling, File for-
mat,) as well as all the conversion settings of the Capture, White 
Balance, Exposure and Focus tabs) are copied with the image-name 
as part of the conversion job ticket.
As in Photoshop, Capture One provides a rename function. To 
set it up, click 
. To start renaming, select ﬁles in the browser and 
click 
.
Though Capture One DSLR was one of the leading utilities con-
cerning batch processing, it has fallen somewhat behind new 
releases of other converters. However, it is still fast compared to 
some converters and delivers very satisfactory image quality.

8-16
Chapter 8: Batch Pressing Techniques for RAW Files
8.4 Batch Processing with RawShooter
Batch processing setup in RawShooter remains relatively simple. We 
prefer RawShooter in its ﬁlm-strip-mode. The settings for processing 
are grouped under the Batch convert tab.
After applying the proper conver-
sion settings (Correct tab), select 
the ﬁle or ﬁles you want to pro-
cess, check your workﬂow param-
eter using the tab Batch convert 
and click Add. 
This create job tickets for the 
batch conversion and adds them 
to the batch queue. The process-
ing will only start when you click 
Go!. Once you begin the batch 
queue, all items of the queue are 
processed as quickly as possible 
until you stop batch processing 
by clicking Stop (which has 
appeared during an active batch 
queue instead of Go!).
A status bar shows progress 
of the individual conversions. All 
items processed will be removed 
from the batch queue. As with all 
other RAW converters, original 
RAW ﬁles will not be modiﬁed or 
touched.  There is a button to 
call up the dialog for 
 
Figure 8-10: Batch-convert tab of RS
Naming and output location. Locate opens the destination folder 
containing converted ﬁles using the ﬁle browser of the operating 
system.

9-1
DNG – Digital Negative Format
Camera: Olympus E-20P
9.1 DNG – its potentials
As of  mid-2004, each manufacturer of digital SLRs had its own pro-
prietary RAW format – moreover, most had several (somewhat) 
unique RAW formats for diﬀerent camera models. For photogra-
phers using more than one camera, this was a real nuisance. 
Software companies, which intend to process RAW format ﬁles, must 
provide a broad, ever-increasing range of conversion routines as 
part of their software. Each time a new camera hits the market, they 
Chapter 9
 
DNG – Digital Negative Format

9-2
Chapter 9: DNG – Digital Negative Format
have to evaluate its speciﬁc RAW format and often must adapt and 
enhance their converters. To print-shops, studios and others hand-
ling digital data, the large variety of RAW formats remains a serious 
problem, and processing becomes costly.
Having implemented Adobe Camera Raw, one of the best RAW 
converters of the market, supporting a broad range of RAW formats 
(as of this writing, about 60 formats), Adobe has a rich experience 
with RAW conversion. To support the multitude of formats with 
Camera Raw, Adobe takes a two-step approach. The ﬁrst is to con-
vert the proprietary RAW data into a universal internal RAW format. 
The actual conversion from RAW to JPEG or TIFF is done from an 
intermediate format. The multitude of formats supported by Adobe 
camera RAW, provides Adobe with a very good insight of the gen-
eral requirements of a universal RAW format. Having this record of 
quite useful and universal format experience (PostScript, PDF, XMP, 
…), Adobe began to specify a generalized format for RAW photo 
data. The result was the introduction of Digital Negative Format 
(DNG) at the Photokina exhibition, 2004. Its purpose is to provide a 
universal container for RAW photo data and is partly derived from 
TIFF EP, a format used by other RAW formats, as well. DNG likely 
bears a resemblance to the internal intermediate format of ACR, but 
it is an external ﬁle format. Apart from the actual RAW data – the 
data read from the camera sensor – and the well known metadata, 
such as EXIF and ITPC (see chapter 10), it allows embedding proprie-
tary data of the camera maker (Adobe calls it private data), as well.
Though introduced and controlled by Adobe, DNG is an open for-
mat – well, as of now, half open. It is open in the sense that it is well 
speciﬁed, documented, and its speciﬁcation is published, something 
that is not true for most of the various proprietary RAW formats. 
DNG holds three promises:
r It may be used as an exchange format for RAW photo data, used 
whenever necessary to provide RAW ﬁles to a service or  person, 
who cannot (or does not wish to) process the proprietary format 
of your camera.
r It may be used as an archival format for RAW photo data. 
If the speciﬁc proprietary RAW format of the camera used in the 
shooting is no longer supported, or the conversion to a standard 
format is no longer optimized (while the general optimization of 

9-3
9.1 DNG – its potentials
the RAW data using the Bayern pattern continues), RAW ﬁles 
archived as DNG will probably still be accessible and their access 
should improve over time.
r DNG may replace some proprietary RAW formats or preclude  
introduction of additional new formats, thus reducing the 
jumble of diﬀerent formats you may handle. 
While not all of these predictions will come true immediately, DNG is 
a promising newcomer. Already, some advantages are obvious. 
DNG as an exchange format rTo use DNG as an exchange format 
today is quite simple. Adobe oﬀers a free Raw to DNG converter 
(DNGC for short) on its web home page ([45]). It is available for 
Windows and Mac OS and can handle the conversion of complete 
folders (see section 9.2). All cameras supported by Adobe Camera 
Raw are also supported by DNG converter. Rather than handing-oﬀ 
photos to others in a proprietary RAW ﬁle format, it is probably advis-
able to supply your data using DNG (unless JPEG or TIFF is the appro-
priate format). As the range of formats supported by Adobe Camera 
Raw is extended, support will also extend for DNGC. 
DNG as an exchange or archival format is not only supported 
by Adobe, but most other providers of RAW converters have picked 
up support for DNG, including Phase One (with Capture One) and 
Raw Shooter. Most software companies supporting RAW format for 
asset management systems, now support DNG or will do so soon. 
So, if your favorite tool does not yet support your speciﬁc RAW for-
mat, you may convert it to DNG using DNGC. Doing this, you will be 
able to include those images into your picture database or use them 
with a special ﬁlter or other tool designed for working on RAW ﬁles.
There is yet another advantage in using DNG. As there is (inter-
nally) a clear separation of photo data and metadata (see chapter 
10), if you change settings in the preview of a RAW converter (e.g. 
Adobe Camera Raw or RawShooter), these new settings need not 
be stored on a separate sidecar ﬁle, but may be included into the 
dng-RAW-ﬁle without actually modifying the original photographic 
information (sensor readouts).
DNG as an archival RAW format r As PDFs, are an answer to many 
archiving problems troubling companies storing their oﬃce docu-
ments, DNG may be the answer for archival of RAW photo data. As 
with PDF however, this may not solve all problems nor be the best 

9-4
Chapter 9: DNG – Digital Negative Format
solution in every case but deﬁnitely should be seriously considered 
as a long-term archival format for RAW photo data. Adobe will most 
likely not go out of business for some time. If that should happen 
(unlikely as that may be), numerous other RAW converters are sup-
porting the conversion from DNG to JPEG, TIFF or other standard for-
mats to come. 
The Digital Negative speciﬁcation provides for not only all pixel 
information stored in current RAW formats, but also for all addi-
tional, proprietary metadata that many manufacturers include. 
Note, however, that the current release of the Adobe DNG 
Converter may, in some cases, ignore a portion of proprietary 
metadata, and include only basic information required for creating 
a high-quality image ﬁle. For this reason, using this release of the 
Adobe DNG Converter for archival purposes, it is recommended 
you save your Digital Negative ﬁles in addition to the original RAW 
ﬁles created by the camera.
DNG as native camera RAW format r When DNG was introduced 
by Adobe in 2004, many photographers wondered whether camera 
manufacturers might pick up DNG as their native camera RAW for-
mat. It seems obvious that smaller companies and new market 
entries would be the likely early adopters, while the main stream 
industry, such as Canon, Nikon and Minolta have invested too many 
resources into their formats and tools to switch any time soon. As it 
turned out, it didn’t take long before some companies committed to 
DNG. Early 2005, Hasselblad and Leica announced their commitment 
and will support DNG as native camera RAW format.
DNG deﬁnitely will not be the only solution to the dilemma of a wide 
variety of RAW formats. In the future, a real RAW format standard will 
probably be deﬁned by a standards organization, such as ISO or 
ANSI. Then, Adobe will probably propose DNG as a standard. Today 
however, DNG is an important step toward reduction of the format 
variety in RAW photo data. As with PDF, DNG will undergo enhance-
ments over the years and will be extended to pick up new features of 
futures camera techniques.
It  is too soon to judge the success of DNG or its part in the for-
mat gamble. However, it exists, is easy to use and well supported. It 
may be a reasonable solution when you want to pass RAW data to 
outside parties. DNG may oﬀer a good solution, if you want to use 
some special software on RAW data not supporting your speciﬁc 

9-5
9.2 Usage of the Adobe DNG converter
RAW format, or when you wish to save an additional copy of your 
RAW data, using DNG, for archival purposes. 
As of today, however, we would not recommend conversion of 
all RAW data to DNG then delete original ﬁles (though DNG ﬁles 
may include your original RAW data), but would recommend its use 
for exchanging RAW ﬁles with other parties.
9.2 Usage of the Adobe DNG Converter
The Adobe DNG converter (DNGC for short) may be downloaded 
free of charge from Adobe’s Internet Home Page ([45]). It has multi-
ple functions, outlined above. 
 
l Figure 9-1: 
DNG dialog 
to convert a 
complete folder 
of RAW ﬁles
The interface is uncomplicated, and you will be wise to keep in 
mind, that its task is to convert an entire folder of RAW ﬁles, not just 
a single one.
In section 1 , you specify the folder in which RAW input ﬁles 
requiring conversion reside. Section 2 indicates where the gener-
ated dng ﬁles will go. Parameters of section 3 deﬁne the naming 
conventions of the newly-generated dng ﬁles. Parameters of sec-

9-6
Chapter 9: DNG – Digital Negative Format
tion 4 specify, how the conversion will be done. Clicking on 
Change Preferences brings up the following dialog box:
 
l Figure 9-2: 
DNG 
Preferences
Compressed r should always be used since it is a lossless compres-
sion, reducing about 10–65 % from ﬁles sizes.
Image Conversion method r There are two ways to do the conver-
sion: retaining the original RAW data – usually the data of the Bayern 
pattern sensor data – and a conversion to a linear picture. In most 
cases, the ﬁrst method is preferred. As improvements in the Bayer 
pattern interpretation (also called demosaicing) come along, you still 
retain original data and may apply any improved algorithm to that 
data. As signiﬁcant improvements were implemented in the past 
couple of years, more may be expected. Converting to a linear form 
actually performs an interpolation of the Bayer pattern (exception: 
RAW ﬁles from a camera with a Foveon-based sensor). In doing this 
method, some potential of your RAW negative is lost if you want to 
go return to the original RAW data. Additionally, ﬁle size increases by 
about 60 to 300 % (the linear version holds RGB data, while native 
RAW format stores but one pixel value per sensor element).

9-7
9.2 Usage of the Adobe DNG converter
Original Raw File r You may embed the complete and original RAW 
ﬁle into a  dng ﬁle, essentially making dng into a wrapper for your 
RAW data. You may extract the original ﬁle from the dng ﬁle (to 
extract such a ﬁle, activate he button Extract at the bottom of the 
conversion dialog box).
Clicking Convert initiates batch conversion. DNGC is quite fast, but 
converting many large ﬁles still takes time. Progress is indicated in a 
separate window. Stop the conversion by clicking Stop Conversion.
 
l Figure 9-3: 
DNG Conversion 
Status
As with original RAW ﬁles, DNG ﬁles may be used as input to RAW 
converters. If you attempt to open a dng ﬁle using Photoshop, it will 
launch Adobe Camera Raw to do the conversion from DNG to stan-
dard image format, as described in chapter 4. The dng ﬁle includes 
all metadata, such as EXIF and ITPC data, embedded in the original 
RAW ﬁle. It may not, however, contain some undocumented proprie-
tary parts whose meaning is known only to the manufacturer of the 
camera. To keep that data, as well, you must embed the original 
data in dng, hoping that its meaning will be known to Adobe (or 
possibly another provider of a RAW converter) to be released at a 
future date. 
If you use Photoshop CS2 (Photoshop 9) or later, there would nor-
mally be no need to use DNGC, because Adobe Camera Raw 3.x pro-
duces DNG ﬁles, as well. In this instance, it is simpler to call up ACR 
via Bridge and use ACR for the conversion.

9-8
Chapter 9: DNG – Digital Negative Format
9.3 Advantages and disadvantages of converting to DNG
Adobe’s DNG converter runs smoothly and fast. However if you 
already have dng ﬁles in your source folder, DNGC converts them as 
well, which usually makes little sense. When we tested the converter, 
dng ﬁles could be opened by Photoshop CS1 (aka PS 8) and Photo-
shop CS2 (aka PS9). As of this writing, C1 and Raw Shooter, Nikon 
Capture 4.1, Canon Digital Photo Professional and Bibble did not 
support DNG. Many Viewers and DAMS (Digital Asset Management 
Systems) supporting RAW ﬁles did support DNG (e.g. ThumbsPlus, 
Extensis PORTFOLIO, iView Media Pro), but an updated version of 
their RAW converter plug-ins may need to be downloaded.
Using lossless compression, dng ﬁles are usually smaller than 
original RAW ﬁles, depending upon the RAW format used. While 
with Nikon .NEF ﬁles tend to gain about 10%, with my Olympus 
.ORF ﬁles (from a Olympus E-20P DSLR) dng ﬁle size was about 1/3 
the original Olympus ﬁle size! This factor may be an additional 
advantage when storing ﬁles on a CD/DVD or when transferring 
RAW ﬁles via the Internet. If compression is not activated, however, 
the dng ﬁle is usually larger than the original ﬁle – up to 2 times. For 
that reason alone, we do not recommend using this option.
Adobe supports new cameras very soon after they are on the 
market. So, in some cases, converting those RAW ﬁles to dng may 
allow them to be correctly handled by other applications working 
with RAW ﬁles – such as, asset management systems (ThumbsPlus, 
Portfolio, iView MediaPro, …) or  special stand- alone ﬁlters such as 
DxO – which do not yet (or never will) support your speciﬁc RAW 
ﬁle format.
Exchanging RAW ﬁles as dng with outside parties, such as print 
shops, may be another usage, though, to date, most print shops 
and similar services prefer TIFFs or JPEGs.
Converting from a proprietary RAW format to DNG is clearly an addi-
tional step in your workﬂow. DNGC does not yet support hot folders 
(watched folders). So, each time new RAW ﬁles are imported, you 
must call up DNGC. This may become automated using a script, but 
you still have to deal with them. Until now, all RAW formats sup-
ported by DNGC are also supported by Adobe Camera Raw. So, there 
is currently no real advantage to using DNG locally. Exchange of RAW 
data, clearly demonstrates its advantages.

10-1
Metadata
Camera: Nikon 100D
10.1 Metadata for Photographs
Metadata provides descriptions with data. Using digital photogra-
phy, metadata describes an actual photo taken. Metadata may be 
embedded in the actual data ﬁle or may be stored separately – 
either in a discreet ﬁle or in a database. With RAW ﬁles, TIFFs and 
JPEGs, we actually ﬁnd several types of metadata:
r File attributes
r EXIF information
r ITPC information
Chapter 10
 
Metadata

10-2
Chapter 10: Metadata
r Further metadata such as 
– RAW conversion settings (e.g. embedded in XMP), 
– JPEG comments, 
– Preview icons and preview images,
– Keywords, 
– Classiﬁcation data etc. (partly stored in an image database).
File attributesr The ﬁle 
system stores metadata, 
such as ﬁlename and ﬁle 
type (given by its exten-
sion), (ﬁle) creation and 
modiﬁcation date, access 
rights, ﬁle length, etc. 
This metadata is deter-
mined by the camera, 
and, later on, by your 
operating system, the 
RAW converter or other 
applications. Aside from 
the ﬁle name and type, 
and to a lesser extent, the creation date, this data is of no great con-
cern or information value to the photographer. Some cameras 
include information as part of the ﬁle name, e.g. the creation date.
EXIF informationr The 
EXIF data (EXchange 
Image Format for Digital 
Still Cameras) is created 
by the camera and 
includes settings used 
when the picture was 
taken. You ﬁnd informa-
tion on the camera maker  
and model, aperture and 
shutter speed, ISO set-
tings, type of lens, focal 
length used and if a ﬂash 
was active. It includes the 
date and time  of the 
Figure 10-1: File Properties in Bridge
Figure 10-2: EXIF data in Bridge
shooting, as well as the metering mode used, white balance and 

10-3
10.1 Metadata for Photographs
color space settings, the camera program used and the resolution of 
the photograph. It may even contain the location of the shot via GPS 
data (e.g. for the Nikon D2X there is an optional GPS module available 
to record  current GPS coordinates. This is included into the EXIF data 
of the camera). There are many more data, EXIF can store. The EXIF 
speciﬁcation also allows for addition proprietary ﬁelds. All these val-
ues are recorded when the picture is taken and embedded into the 
data ﬁle, be it JPEG, TIFF or RAW. 
This EXIF data is not only valuable to the photographer, but is 
also used by the RAW converter, by optimizing applications, such as 
the lens correction software PTLens or DxO ([34]) or by the ﬁrm-
ware of inktjet printers when (automatically) optimizing pictures for 
output. (This optimization may be suppressed by explicitly sup-
pressing automatic optimization with your print job or by an EXIF 
ﬂag, indicating that the picture was optimized by some other appli-
cations previously, for instance Photoshop).
Normally there is little need for a user to change this informa-
tion. Consequently, neither ACR, C1 nor DPP provide this change 
function. If, however, the date and time for shooting is not set cor-
rectly, you may wish to eventually make such a correction. If you 
do, you may use a special application, such as Exifer ([35]) or 
ACDSee ([36]). 
IPTC (International Press Telecommunication Council)r This 
type of data has been in use for some time with photographers 
shooting press-related material. It was deﬁned by the International 
Press Telecommunication Council, and permits inclusion of copy-
right notices, author, title, a short subject description and keywords 
for  retrieval. This metadata is very DRM (Digital Rights Management) 
oriented; it however does not embed a watermark into the ﬁle.
Though these ITPC ﬁelds are present in pictures coming out of 
the camera or RAW converter, they are usually empty. They must be 
ﬁlled in by the user. Photoshop provides a  function to do that.
Additional metadatar While there is a well-accepted standard for 
EXIF and ITPC, you may ﬁnd a multitude of additional metadata.
Adobe deﬁned XMP (Extensible Metadata Platform) for the 
metadata exchange between applications. XMP is widely used in 
Adobe applications, such as Acrobat, Photoshop, Illustrator, 
InDesign and others. XMP is XML based and open (its speciﬁcations 
are published, and it is supported by the IETF). XMP data may be 

10-4
Chapter 10: Metadata
embedded into your data ﬁle or may be stored in a separate ﬁle. 
XMP is quite ﬂexible and may contain predeﬁned ﬁelds, as well as 
user-deﬁned ﬁelds. With Adobe Camera Raw, the settings for RAW 
conversion are embedded in an XMP ﬁle. Photoshop (and Version 
Cue) may even include a version history in the XMP ﬁle of a picture. 
Other makers of RAW converters store such information using a dif-
ferent format. RawShooter Essentials, stores these settings in ﬁles 
using the ﬁle extension .rws (inside a subfolder .RWSSettings in the 
folder containing the RAW ﬁles). These ﬁles are in a binary format. 
RawShooter supports having several setting ﬁles for one RAW ﬁle 
and you may choose which settings to use for the conversion.
Further metadata on your photos may be stored in a separate 
database, often the case when you manage pictures using a digital 
asset management system (DAMS) such as Extensis Portfolio, iView 
Media Pro, ThumbsPlus or one of the other numerous asset man-
agement utilities, professional document or content management 
systems. While using an asset management system, you may usu-
ally add keywords, categories and further classiﬁcations. These 
metadata are normally stored only in the database of the DAMS. If 
you use a DAMS to administrate your images, make certain your 
DAMS is importing those EXIF- and IPTC-ﬁelds, since you will likely 
use them for searching into their database. Searching a database is 
much faster than opening individual ﬁles to read data.
There are some overlapping ﬁelds within diﬀerent metadata sets. 
For example, ITPC, as well as EXIF, provide a ﬁeld for the title (or 
name) for your picture. You may also include it as a JPEG comment 
(not so on RAW ﬁles). For that reason, you should decide where you 
want to include this data. Redundancy often leads to conﬂicts and 
errors.
Another type of metadata not mentioned above, are ICC proﬁles. 
Proﬁles deﬁnes how the color (pixel) values of the image are to be 
interpreted (see chapter 11). At present, ICC proﬁles are not part of 
RAW ﬁles, but must be attached (embedded) to photographs when 
they emerge from the RAW converter and should stay with the ﬁle 
ever after. Files containing embedded ICC proﬁles are called ICC 
tagged ﬁles.
All of the RAW converters discussed handle EXIF and IPTC metadata 
and tag-converted ﬁles with the appropriate ICC proﬁle. Again, at 

10-5
10.2 Metadata Usage in Adobe Camera Raw and Bridge
present, XMP usage is mainly restricted to Adobe applications. All 
these metadata can be quite useful and important to you. Their use-
fulness increases over time as more and more applications come 
along, taking advantage of such metadata information. Bridge, for 
example, lets you search and sort ﬁles by much of the metadata 
mentioned (not only with photo ﬁles, but other Adobe application 
ﬁles, as well).
An example: If you browse your picture ﬁles using the 
Photoshop CS1 ﬁle browser or Bridge (part of Photoshop CS2) and 
change the white balance of a RAW data ﬁle (even without actually 
converting the RAW ﬁle), those changes are saved and stored as 
XMP data either embedded into the RAW ﬁle or as separate “sidecar 
ﬁles”. Since RAW ﬁles are considered sacrosanct (never to be modi-
ﬁed), any additions or modiﬁcations of metadata are stored in sepa-
rate ﬁles by ACR, Bridge or RawShooter. When using DNG (see chap-
ter 8), metadata, such as conversion settings, may be embedded, as 
DNG provides a clear, well-deﬁned structure for accomplishing this.
Concerning display, editing and usage of metadata, Bridge, ACR 
and Photoshop Elements are the most advanced of the set of appli-
cations we deal with in this book. Using a digital asset manage-
ment system, you will ﬁnd more advanced features for metadata 
handling.
10.2 Metadata usage in Adobe Camera Raw and Bridge
Adobe applications are making increasing use of metadata. Both 
Photoshop ﬁle browser or Bridge display some metadata as part of 
the image icon list and even more as part of the metadata preview 
window. The (almost) complete range of metadata is displayed, 
when you call up the File Info window.
Using Bridge or the ﬁle browser of Photoshop CS1, you may 
customize which metadata is displayed with the preview icons of 
the browser and what kind of metadata is visible at the metadata 
panel of the browser (see ﬁgure 10-1 at page 10.6). This conﬁgura-
tion (customizing) is done via EditrPreferences. (Mac: 
BridgerPreferences). To customize information display with the 
preview icon, select General.

10-6
Chapter 10: Metadata
u Figure 10.3: Customizing of metadata in icon view 
mode
To determine, which metadata is displayed in the Metadata Area of 
the ﬁle browser, go to EditrPreferencesrMetadata. Again, the 
metadata ﬁelds are grouped by ﬁle properties, IPTC Data and EXIF 
Data. Additionally, you may activate a display of edit history. Labels 
and ratings associated with a picture ﬁle are part of the ﬁle’s 
metadata, as well.
l Figure 10.4: Customizing of metadata 
in icon view mode s

10-7
10.2 Metadata Usage in Adobe Camera Raw and Bridge
As said previously, 
all ITPC data must 
be entered manu-
ally. You may do this 
at the metadata 
area of the ﬁle 
browser. Click on 
one of the ITPC 
ﬁelds marked by a 
 and enter the 
value for that ﬁeld. 
Pressing V will 
write the data into 
the ﬁle.
Alternatively, 
you may call up the 
metadata window 
by right-clicking the 
mouse button  and 
selecting File Info. 
Though keywords 
are part of the ITPC 
set, with Photoshop ﬁle browser or Bridge, you must use the Keywords 
panel to edit and enter them.
Figure 10-5: ITPC data may be edited
Keywords may be grouped in sets. If you apply a set to a ﬁle, 
all keywords of that set are included in the metadata. You 
may, however, select only one or more keywords of the set 
and apply them. If you delete a keyword or a set from the key-
word panel, or if you change the keyword name, it will not 
change the keyword data of all those ﬁles that have those 
keywords previously assigned.
To rename, delete or create a new keyword 
or set, go via the 
 menu of the keyword 
panel or call up the menu via the right mouse 
button while the mouse cursor is over a key-
word ﬁeld.
If you select several ﬁles (preview icons) and edit the ITPC or 
keyword metadata, new values are applied (added) to all selected 

10-8
Chapter 10: Metadata
ﬁles. The panel in this case will usually display (Multiple values), to indi-
cate, that the data values of the selected ﬁles diﬀer.
If you want to apply the same ITPC data to several ﬁles, e.g.  
name, copyright, URL and your address – this is an uphill task. 
Bridge, however, allows applying a metadata template to the ﬁles 
selected in the browser windows. To do this, ﬁrst apply the 
metadata to a single ﬁle and save this data to a separate metadata 
ﬁle (…/File InforAdvancedrSave). Next, select the ﬁles you want to 
provide with the same metadata inside the ﬁle browser and apply 
the saved metadata to the ﬁles via …/File 
InforAdvancedsrAppend, selecting the name of the metadata pre-
viously saved in the upcoming dialog box. Using Replace instead of 
Append will replace all of your ﬁle metadata with the ﬁelds set in 
the template.
XMP ﬁles are Unicode text ﬁles. So, you may view their content by 
simply opening the XMP ﬁle using an ordinary text (Unicode-
enabled) editor, where you may edit its content. This allows creating 
your own metadata templates, e. g. for an easy assignment of  copy-
right information to photographs or even creating your own cus-
tomized File Info panel (a description for this can be found at [43]). 
However, the basic structure of the ﬁle should not be altered. 
Conserve the correct XML/XMP syntax.
With Photoshop, Bridge and ACR, there are two ways to store  
metadata not embedded in an image ﬁle:
r at the ACR database or
r inside a separate XMP ﬁle, called a “sidecar ﬁle” by Adobe.
Both methods have their beneﬁts and their pitfalls. Storing  external 
metadata in the ACR database ﬁle will result in a very compact, cen-
tral solution. There are two disadvantages of this central database, 
however:
r If you move your directory with picture ﬁles or rename your pic-
ture ﬁle, the connection between the picture ﬁle and its external 
metadata is broken, and it is diﬃcult to recreate that connection. 
Any renaming using the Photoshop ﬁle browser or Bridge, the 
association is maintained. But, there is no function to move a ﬁle 
or complete directory of ﬁles within Bridge or Photoshop CS1 ﬁle 
browser (except drag and drop).

10-9
10.3 Retrieving files by searching for metadata
r Storing metadata in an XMP sidecar ﬁle adds an additional XMP 
ﬁle (name.xmp) for each picture ﬁle. It resides in the same direc-
tory as the RAW ﬁle, and contains metadata, as well as the RAW 
conversion settings of the image ﬁle. As long as you rename your 
image ﬁle or move it using the Photoshop ﬁle browser or Bridge, 
the sidecar ﬁle will be renamed, copied or moved consistently. If 
you do these operations using diﬀerent tools, you must make al-
lowances for the sidecar ﬁle.
We prefer the second method because it allows moving whole fold-
ers, including the metadata information, as well as archiving a folder 
while easily including metadata with the folder (e.g. on a CD or 
DVD).
The scheme is very similar with the other RAW converters and ﬁle 
browsers, though they use diﬀerent ﬁle and folder names.
10.3 Retrieving ﬁles by searching for metadata
An important beneﬁt of metadata is its use for sorting and retrieval. 
With PS ﬁle browser or Bridge, you call up the ﬁnd dialog box via 
EditrFind or via K+(F) (Mac: Â+(F)). Here, you may include sev-
eral metadata characteristics into your search criteria:
u Figure 10-6: Bridge Find dialog. It allows to specify several loopup 
criteria

10-10
Chapter 10: Metadata
The ﬁles ﬁtting the search criteria are grouped in a temporary set.
The search function for metadata is not available (as of now) with 
RawShooter, Capture One, Bibble, Nikon Capture or DPP. However 
you may ﬁnd these with asset management systems like ThumbsPlus, 
Extensis or iView – provided they included that speciﬁc metadata 
into their database when importing the image ﬁles. While Photo-
shop searches for data in its cache or by reading the metadata section 
of the ﬁles, asset management systems look it up in their database, 
usually much faster if a large number of ﬁles are handled. You should, 
however, be sure that the metadata you will likely use for searching 
is included in the DAMS database when importing your images into 
these systems. This may have to be conﬁgured when customizing your 
DAMS (digital asset management system).

11-1
Profiling and calibrating for cour RAW converter
Camera: Olympus E1
11.1 The problem with camera proﬁles
In chapter one and two, we emphasized the importance of ICC pro-
ﬁles. What was said is true for monitors, scanners and printers. But, 
proﬁling is useful for digital cameras as well. Cameras, however, 
present a problem:
When you proﬁle a device, the ﬁrst step is to deﬁne the relevant 
parameters, light being one of the most important. When you proﬁle 
Chapter 11
 
Proﬁling and calibrating for your 
RAW Converter

11-2
Chapter 11: Profiling and calibrating for Your RAW converter
a scanner, the light source remains the same (you only diﬀerentiate 
between reﬂective and transparencies). With printers, D50 (daylight 
at 5,000 Kelvin) is the standard light source for evaluating and judg-
ing prints. Cameras however, encounter varying light conditions, e.g. 
night shots, morning light, sunny or cloudy). For this reason, proﬁling 
your cameras is practical only if you shoot in only one or just a few 
diﬀerent lighting conditions, such as may be the case when shooting 
in a studio.
If all this holds true, the scheme for proﬁling can be quite simple 
and similar to other device proﬁling:
r Shoot a camera target using the same lighting conditions you 
propose to use with photographs. Use those camera settings 
(e. g. resolution, white balance, exposure, …) you will (most 
likely) use later for shooting. Your target must have uniform 
lighting. The hardest part is to get even lighting avoiding reﬂec-
tions with color targets with glossy patches. 
r Import the image of the camera target into your proﬁling soft-
ware. Doing this avoids any color correction and much of the pro-
cessing (you need to use a RAW converter if the target shot is a 
RAW ﬁle). In some cases, correcting white balance may be helpful.
r Your proﬁling software compares the colors appearing on the 
image of the target with known color values of the target and 
calculates the camera ICC proﬁle from that.  
Keep in mind however, that this ICC proﬁle is only valid for the 
camera you used for shooting and only for pictures taken with 
identical (or quite similar) lighting conditions used when shoot-
ing the target originally.
If you are shooting TIFFs or JPEGs, apply this proﬁle to your photo-
graph when opening the image in Photoshop. If you shoot RAW 
ﬁles, the RAW converter should accommodate camera proﬁles. Only 
RSE, C1 and Bibble do this.
All RAW converters we consider in the book provide their own, 
generic internal proﬁles for the cameras they support. Usually, sev-
eral shots are taken with a speciﬁc camera while using diﬀerent light-
ing conditions. From these photos, an averaged proﬁle is calculated 
(with additional tweaking). White balance control of your RAW con-
verter allows white balance of your image to shift along the axis 
between the proﬁles for low color and high color temperature.

11-3
11.2 Camera profiling using Eye-One Photo and  ProfileMaker 5
There are several packages to accommodate camera proﬁling – e. g. 
the module Camera by Gretag Macbeth ([15]), inCamera by 
PictoColor ([24]), or Proﬁle Prism by Digital Domain ([33]).
11.2 Camera proﬁling using Eye-One Photo and 
ProﬁleMaker
GretagMacbeth ([15]) oﬀers 
Camera, a package con-
sisting of a camera target 
and a software module 
called ProﬁleMaker 5. 
Camera is sold as a stand-
alone package or as part 
of diﬀerent Eye-One pack-
ages – e.g. Eye-One Photo. 
Gretag’s Camera – sup-
porting Windows as well 
as Mac OS – including a small (4 x 5 Inch) camera target MiniColor-
Checker.
Figur 11-1: GretagMacBeth 
MiniColorChecker
 
For serious camera proﬁling, however, you should consider 
ColorChecker SG, which may be ordered separately. It is larger, has 
many more patches and allows better proﬁles. It does come with a 
ﬁerce price tag (around 300 US Dollars or Euro plus tax). 
 
l Figure 11-2: 
Gretag MacBeth 
ColorChecker SG, an  
excellent camera 
target
Despite this, it is of excellent color quality, quite robust and the col-
ors should not fade for a long time, even when used in bright light. 

11-4
Chapter 11: Profiling and calibrating for Your RAW converter
The color patches show very little metamerism in varying lighting 
conditions. 
To proﬁle a camera using Eye-One Camera, follow these steps:
1. 
Take a picture of the target – we recommend ColorChecker SG 
– using the same lighting condition you use for a shooting ses-
sion. Continue with your shooting and do the proﬁling before 
you process your images of that shooting session.
2. Convert your target image using standard settings with your 
RAW converter, then convert to a TIFF ﬁle. If you usually work 
with 16-bit TIFFs, convert the target image as a 16-bit TIFF, as well.
3. Start ProﬁleMaker 5 and select Camera.
   
 
 
Figure 11-3 r: Starting dialog of ProﬁleMaker 5.0

11-5
11.2 Camera profiling using Eye-One Photo and  ProfileMaker 5
4. From the drop-down list labelled Reference Data select the type 
of target used.
5. With the drop-down list Photographed Testchart selected, press 
Open. Navigate to the image of the target shot. 
6. ProﬁleMaker will show the target image in a new window.
Figure 11-4: Target image that has to be cropped
 
Carefully crop it, using the mouse with a cross hair cursor and 
the 
. Better to crop a bit tight than to include white surround-
ing space. You may even crop into the target area, if the image 
shows a perspective view. 

11-6
Chapter 11: Profiling and calibrating for Your RAW converter
7. 
Compare your target image with the image of the reference 
target. If their orientation and pattern of patches are the same, 
proceed.
8. From the drop-down menu Photo Task select the type of picture 
you took, and then from the drop-down menu Light Source 
select the type of lighting condition used for shooting.
9.  The Options found in the dialog box with Photo Task Options let 
you tweak your proﬁle for special lighting and color conditions. 
 
 
 
Figure 11-5: Several options allow to adapt your camera proﬁle to speciﬁc needs
These should be used only if you have prior experience in proﬁling.

11-7
11.2 Camera profiling using Eye-One Photo and  ProfileMaker 5
10. Clicking Start initiates the generation of the proﬁle. You may see 
some messages, advising that the image is over- or underex-
posed. Ignore them.
11. Provide a descriptive name for the proﬁle, naming the camera 
and lighting conditions, (e.g. Nikon-D70_Studio_D50).
That’s it! This proﬁle may be used as a camera ICC proﬁle with C1 
or RSE or may be assigned to a converted image using 
Photoshop.
If your RAW converter does not support custom camera proﬁles, 
you should consider converting your RAW ﬁles without doing 
much color correction with the converter. Apply the generated 
proﬁle to your converted TIFF or JPEG ﬁle using Photoshop: 
1. 
Open the converted image with Photoshop, avoiding any proﬁle 
conversion while opening.
2. Select ImagerModerAssign Proﬁle from the menu (PS 9): 
EditrAssign Proﬁle). From the drop-down menu of pro-
ﬁles, select the camera custom proﬁle you generated using 
ProﬁleMaker for lighting conditions used for the shooting.
 
l Figure 11-6: 
Assign your camera 
proﬁle in Photoshop
  
If you checked Preview in your Assign Proﬁle dialog box, you will 
see the eﬀect of the selected camera proﬁle even before you 
click OK. Clicking OK will perform assignment of the camera pro-
ﬁle.

11-8
Chapter 11: Profiling and calibrating for Your RAW converter
11.3 Camera proﬁling using InCamera.
InCamera is a Photoshop plugin allowing users to create camera 
proﬁles. We recommend InCamera mainly for studio proﬁles in 
which you control the light consistently.
1. 
Convert your RAW ﬁle with a RAW converter (e. g. RSE) in the mode 
required for creation of camera proﬁles (see the documentation)
2. Open the converted ﬁle into Photoshop (do not color manage).
  
 
lFigure 11-7: 
Ignore Color 
Management for 
this image (at the 
time beeing).
3. Run the InCamera plug-in and adjust the grid to match the target.
 
 
 
Figure 11-8: Adjust the grid to match the target in InCamera.

11-9
11.3 Camera profiling using InCamera
4. Click on Check Capture. 
InCamera lets you check for even lighting of your target.
Figure 11-9: Check for even lighting
 
As mentioned before. Providing good even lighting is an art. A 
good proﬁle depends on shooting good target shots.
5. Now, you just click OK and InCamera will save a ready-to-use 
camera proﬁle.

11-10
Chapter 11: Profiling and calibrating for Your RAW converter
11.4 Shooting for a neutral gray
When shooting in abnormal lighting conditions, often the case 
when shooting outdoors or outside a controlled studio with well 
controlled lights, an ICC camera proﬁle is of little use. However, there 
are some ways to work around this problem. One reason for proﬁl-
ing is to achieve a correct white balance (not always what you want, 
e.g. when setting up soft or colored lights within a studio to achieve 
an intentional special mood). In this situation, there is an easy and 
universal solution, though possibly not achieving the same exact 
colors that may be accomplished using a camera proﬁle: 
Shoot a color checker or gray card with right along your subject. Use 
its neutral gray patches as the reference point for your white bal-
ance. If you shoot a series of pictures with the same lightning condi-
tions, include the color checker in only the ﬁrst shot. Then apply the 
white balance of this image to all the other images of your session – 
so long as lighting conditions do not change. 
 
l Figure 11-10: 
Shoot a color reference 
or a gray card with 
your ﬁrst image.
There are many gray cards and color checkers available, however 
not all provide a truly neutral gray patch. In our experience, Mini 
ColorChecker by GretagMacbeth is quite good – though not cheap 
(about 60–75 US dollars).
To utilize the patches of a gray card or ColorChecker for white bal-
ancing, follow these steps:
1. 
Open the image (see cropped view) with your RAW converter, 
e.g. ACR, and activate the tab for the white balance.
2. Pick up the eyedropper 
 and select the 
gray patch on your color checker (with MiniColorChecker by 

11-11
11.5 Calibrating Adobe Camera Raw
GretagMacbeth, it is the second patch from the left in the bot-
tom line – see ﬁgure 11-10).
This sets your white balance, which should be nearly neutral by 
now. If you save this setting and apply it to the other pictures taken 
with the same lighting conditions, you should get good white bal-
anced result for all of them.
11.5 Calibrating Adobe Camera Raw
While Adobe Camera Raw does not support custom camera proﬁles, 
it does provide controls and settings for special color corrections. 
This allows you to basically build special proﬁles (at least something 
resembling custom proﬁles) for your camera. If your camera tends to 
over-saturate red or cyan, for example – more than other cameras of 
the same make and model – you might correct this in one image, 
then make it the default color setting for the camera. 
We recommend against using these settings to correct individual 
shots, but to use only as a generic correction for a speciﬁc camera. 
You may, however, use diﬀerent settings for diﬀerent light condi-
tions. 
These setting are located within the ACR tab Calibrate.
Use these sliders with care and 
watch closely their visible 
eﬀect in the preview window. 
Use a correctly-exposed pic-
ture to do the calibration. It 
should show some neutral 
light gray areas where color-
cast are easily detected. Set 
several measure points with the 
 eyedropper in these areas 
and try to obtain equal RGB 
values there: 
Figure 11-11: Proﬁling with Calibrate

11-12
Chapter 11: Profiling and calibrating for Your RAW converter
You may use these calibration settings as new camera defaults. ACR 
will use them for only a speciﬁc camera make and model –  includ-
ing all cameras of this type. To use as camera defaults, save the set-
ting via Save New Camera Raw Defaults in the save setting menu:
 
l Figure 11-12: 
Save your current 
settings as new 
camera defaults.
Alternatively, you may save settings as a special ﬁle to be loaded 
again, in which case you should probably save the Calibrate settings 
as a subset (Save Settings SubsetrCalibration). Adobe stores the set-
tings as .xmp ﬁles. 
The default folder for that is 
C:\ Documents and Settings\
user\Application Data\ 
Adobe\Camera Raw\Settings 
(or Mac: user/Library/
Application Support/Adobe/ 
/Camera Raw/Settings). 
If you stay with that 
folder, these settings will be 
listed in the ACR Image 
Settings drop-down menu 
and may be recalled with-
minimum navigating.
Going a step further, 
instead of a good gray color 
balance, you may read out 
the color values on your 
target using a 
spectrophotometer (e. g. Eye-One Pro), set some color checkpoints 
with the ACR eyedropper 
 at the color patches.
Figure 11-13: ACR allows to selectively save 
your settings

11-13
11.4 Shooting for a neutral gray
If you have no spectrophotometer, use the patch-values mea-
sured with our Mini-ColorChecker (see ﬁgure 11-14).
Lab: 
39/13/14 
RGB:  
109/84/72
Lab: 
66/18/18  
RGB: 
185/147/129
Lab: 
50/-5/-22 
RGB: 
101/122/153
Lab: 
43/-13/23 
RGB: 
95/107/67
Lab: 
55/9/-23 
RGB: 
129/126/169
Lab: 
70/-33/0 
RGB: 
128/128/169
Lab: 
63/36/58 
RGB: 
202/124/55
Lab: 
38/9/-43 
RGB: 
73/88/156
Lab: 
51/48/17 
RGB: 
173/83/95
Lab: 
30/19/-20 
RGB: 
82/63/101
Lab: 
71/-22/56 
RGB: 
164/182/74
Labb: 
72/20/69 
RGB: 
214/160/53
Lab: 
29/16/-50
RGB: 
53/65/144
Lab: 
56/-37/32 
RGB: 
103/149/91
Lab: 
41/53/29 
RGB: 
152/50/56
Lab: 
81/5/80 
R GB: 
226/194/49
Lab: 
52/49/-14 
RGB: 
169/86/146
Lab: 
51/-29/-27 
RGB: 
63/135/164
Lab: 
96/0/0 
RGB: 
243/243/243
Lab: 
 81/0/0 
RGB: 
200/200/200
Lab: 
67/0/0 
RGB: 
162/162/162
Lab: 
50/0/0 
RGB: 
118/118/118
Lab: 
36/0/0 
RGB: 
85/85/85
Lab: 
21/0/0 
RGB: 
54/54/54
Figure 11-14: Gretag MiniColorChecker with the rounded Lab (L) and RGB (R) (Adobe RGB) 
patch color values
Try tuning the calibration settings, so that the readouts achieve tar-
get color values of the various patches. This must be done itera-
tively, since changing one color will change other colors, as well and 
things can get tedious. Don’t attempt matching all patches, rather 
focus on the three or four patch colors important to you, (e. g. skin 
colored patches or perhaps the blues). Remember that RGB values 
are color space dependent! Those RGB values given in the image 
shown are those or Adobe RGB (1989).
Results you achieve using this method are generally better than 
merely setting a neutral white/gray balance.

11-14
Chapter 11: Profiling and calibrating for Your RAW converter
Intentionally left blank

12-1
Creating B&W photos from color images
Camera: Canon 1DS
12.1 Turn color images into Black & White
When everybody is shooting in color, Black & White Photography 
may seem a dying art. We, however, are convinced, that for some 
scenes and some shooting, B & W is still sensible, sometimes even 
superior. With B & W, the photographer, as well as the viewer,  has to 
Chapter 12
 
Creating B&W photos from color 
images

12-2
Chapter 12: Creating B&W photos from color images
concentrate on shapes and contrast. B & W permits reducing the 
message to the most essential parts of the picture while drawing 
attention to those parts – you have to go for a strong abstraction 
with your photograph. Though some digital cameras allow shooting 
in B & W, we recommend shooting in color and do the reduction to 
B & W either in the RAW converter or in Photoshop (or similar image 
editor). Thus, converting color images to B & W has great potential. 
Still, merely converting an image from RGB mode to grayscale mode 
does not (in most cases) do the trick. This method usually results in a 
ﬂat picture without high impact. 
Shooting with B & W ﬁlm has a long and well-established tradi-
tion, so, let us have a glance at what a workﬂow with B & W ﬁlm 
looks like then compare to steps used with digital B & W processing.
B & W ﬁlm
B & W with Digital Camera and 
Photoshop
Real world in color
Real world in color
Camera Filter  
(red, orange, yellow, green, …)
Digital color image  
(TIFF or JPEG from your RAW 
converter)
B & W ﬁlm spectral sensitivity
Photo Filters in Photoshop
Developer
B & W Channel Mixer in PS
Negative
All techniques about contrast, 
brightness, 
 shadows and highlights
B & W print 
 (paper grades,  
dodge and burn)
Dodge and burn in Photoshop
Digital B & W print
Figure 12-1: Similarities and diﬀerences between B&W ﬁlm  
and B&W digital images
Setting up our digital B & W workﬂow, we want to come as close as 
possible to the simulation of these classic B & W techniques. 

12-3
12.2 B&W workflow with ACR, Capture One and RawShooter
12.2 B & W workﬂow with ACR, Capture One and 
RawShooter
When looking into B & W, we love the power of abstraction that 
B & W provides. But we might not be alone in the observation that 
working in color (have a look at our color work at [5]) and B & W 
requires very diﬀerent thinking and, more importantly, a diﬀerent 
feeling.
In fact, during the process of creating eﬀective B & W photos we 
can get distracted by any color we see (especially of the same 
photo). What we want to do is think in B & W only.
 
Color conversion techniques 
There are endless methods of conversion color to B & W, and most 
are based on Photoshop:
r Channel Mixer (full Photoshop only, not in Elements)
r Hue/Saturation desaturated
r Photoshop plug-ins
r Converting to grayscale in the RAW converter (Adobe Camera 
Raw, Capture One DSLR)
Probably nothing beats the power of all these techniques, but all 
require switching from color to B & W and, thus, detract from our 
pure B & W viewing process. 
We have developed a pure B & W workﬂow with ACR, Capture 
One and RawShooter. This includes even thumbnails and previews 
in B & W.

12-4
Chapter 12: Creating B&W photos from color images
 
B & W with ACR
Figure 12-2: Setting Saturation to zero will display your images in Black & White.
Creating B & W images with ACR is pretty easy. Just set saturation to 
zero. You than can manipulate tonality using:
r White balance (WB)
r Calibration data
Once you have a ﬁle converted and open in Photoshop CS, change 
its mode to “Grayscale” and open the Shadow/Highlight tool.

12-5
12.2 B&W workflow with ACR, Capture One and RawShooter
 
Figure 12-3: You may  optimize your image using Photoshop’s 
 Shadow/Highlight function.
Shadow/Highlight provides the ultimate control for tweaking your 
B & W tonality. For grayscale images the “Color Correction” slider 
turns into a “Brightness” slider. It is all there:
r Open up shadows
r Tone down highlights
r Enhance mid-tone contrast
r Optimize brightness
B & W thumbnails and previews
Then, apply saturation settings to all the pictures you want to con-
vert to B & W, and even thumbnails and preview images show up in 
B & W:

12-6
Chapter 12: Creating B&W photos from color images
Figure 12-4: Full B & W view
Note: Use the option “Sidecar xmp ﬁles.” Otherwise, any other color 
images with the same name might turn gray, too. 
 
lFigure 12-5: 
Set your 
preferences 
for your image 
settings.
For this setup of ACR, use (while Extended is activated) the triangle 
pull down menu Settings r Preferences. 
 
lFigure 12-6: 
You may save your 
ACR settings as new 
camera defaults.

12-7
12.2 B&W workflow with ACR, Capture One and RawShooter
 
B & W with Capture One DSLR
We recall that Capture One DSLR (Capture One) allows displaying 
images in grayscale, by activating the 
 button (top right). This is 
acceptable, but not real exciting. 
 
 
 
Figure 12-7: Capture One in grayscale display mode (click 
 for this)
Capture One can also convert to grayscale on output.
 
lFigure 12-8: 
Capture One provides a generic 
grayscale proﬁle.

12-8
Chapter 12: Creating B&W photos from color images
This creates a grayscale image with a gamma of 2.2. However, we  
like to view a B & W image in RGB mode instead. An RGB image 
allows further optimization within Photoshop.
The solution is to create a new proﬁle converting to B & W. This 
can be done with the proﬁle editor of Capture One DSLR Pro by 
desaturating colors. Unfortunately, Capture One only allows 
desaturating by 30 % in a single step. We needed to repeat this pro-
cess a couple of times to come up with a ﬁrst B & W proﬁle which 
we share with our readers (see [6]).
At this point, we are close to our goal of a 100 % B & W workﬂow:
1. 
Select the new B & W proﬁle as default for your camera
 
lFigure 12-9: 
You may select a B&W 
proﬁle as the default 
proﬁle for your camera 
in Capture One DSLR.
 
This has an amazing side eﬀect … thumbnails display in B & W.
2. The Exposure, Contrast, Levels and Curves tools in Capture One 
are very good in controlling B & W contrast and brightness.

12-9
12.2 B&W workflow with ACR, Capture One and RawShooter
 
lFigure 12-10: 
Use the Capture One tools 
Exposure, Contrast and Curve to 
adjust your B&W image to your 
aesthetic liking.
3. 
The techniques in Photoshop (Channel Mixer) allow you to ﬁlter 
the color image to get a better B & W rendering. Here we can 
(mis)use the WB control in Capture One.
 
lFigure 12-11: 
 You may use the B&W control of 
Capture One to control the look 
of the B&W image (which is still 
a color image.)

12-10
Chapter 12: Creating B&W photos from color images
All three controls (Temperature, Tone Balance and especially Color 
Cast) have an inﬂuence on the B & W conversion (settings may also 
be saved).
In addition, Color Saturation can be used to alter B & W render-
ing. You can even try messing with the single RGB channels in 
Levels (Unfortunately, Curves in Capture One doesn’t allow this yet).
Figure 12-12: 300D photo converted in Capture One
 
Working in color and Black&White
If you choose to work in B & W and color, use of Capture One allows 
you to have only one type of settings and previews in your cache.
We installed Capture One a second time in a diﬀerent folder to 
ensure that the cache is not shared (by default). You needn’t  go 
through a licensing hassle by copying the *.lic ﬁle from the old 
installation root to the new installation root.
Sample
We want the B & W photo to not be overly contrasty in Capture One. 
Later we will open the ﬁle in Photoshop and apply some initial mild 

12-11
12.2 B&W workflow with ACR, Capture One and RawShooter
sharpening (applied as a layer ([10]) – it allows us to improve the 
sharpening later on).
Next, in Photoshop 
tweak the black and  
(if necessary) the 
white point in an 
Adjustment Layer to 
get the ﬁnal B & W 
snap. By doing this, we 
can tweak the bright-
ness and contrast later. 
 
Figure 12-13: Use a Levels adjustment layer to 
tweak the white point of your image.
Figure 12-14: 300D converted with Capture One
Finally, the image gets saved as a PSD ﬁle. ImagePrint 5.6 (see [11]) 
will open PSD ﬁles and print using a custom ImagePrint gray proﬁle.

12-12
Chapter 12: Creating B&W photos from color images
 
B & W with Raw Shooter
B & W also works well using RawShooter. With it you can use both 
techniques from ACR (setting saturation to zero) or Capture One 
(using a B & W proﬁle). Most often, setting saturation to zero seems 
to be most convenient. You can even have diﬀerent color and B & W 
Snapshot settings in RawShooter.
Especially the Fill Light, Shadow contrast and Highlight 
contrast sliders aid in optimizing the tonality of your B & W pictures. 
Hard contrast, sometimes very disturbing in color photos, looks 
ﬁne in B & W. We frequently use stronger positive settings for 
Shadow and Highlight contrast.
Figure 12-15: B & W in RawShooter

A-1
Glossary/Abbreviations
AA ﬁlter • Anti-Aliasing Filter used in digital 
cameras to spread incoming light slightly 
so that small points of white light will be 
recorded by more than one sensor element.
aberration • With digital photographs, 
there are two types of aberrations: 
(1) chromatic aberrations. These are caused 
by the fact that a lens refracts light diﬀeren-
tially as a function of its wavelength (color). 
Good lenses compensate largely in that by 
combining several lens elements. Such a 
lens is called an ‘achromatic lens’. Chromatic 
aberrations (CA for short) usually show up 
as purple/green fringes that are more visi-
ble at the edges of an image. Good RAW 
converters oﬀer a tool to reduce chromatic 
aberrations. 
(2) spherical aberrations. Results in some 
blur in an image.
absolute colorimetric • See rendering intent.
ACR • see Adobe Camera Raw.
Adobe RGB (1998) • A color space deﬁned 
by Adobe. It is well-suited for digital photo-
graphs and has a reasonably wide gamut, 
larger than sRGB, and includes most print-
able colors.
Adobe Camera Raw (ACR) • This is the RAW 
converter provided as a plug-in by Adobe 
as part of Photoshop CS1 and CS2.  
Photoshop CS1 (aka Photoshop 8) ships 
with ACR 2.x while Photoshop CS2 (aka 
Photoshop 9) has ACR 3.x. Photoshop 
Elements 3 provides a slightly stripped ACR 
2.x interface.
artefacts (or artifacts) • An undesirable 
eﬀect visible when an image is printed or 
displayed, such as moiré patterns, banding 
or compression artefacts. Compression 
artefacts (JPEG artefacts) may result from 
too severe JPEG compression. Also over-
sharpening may produce artefacts.
banding • Noticeable tonal level jumps in 
an area, where a continuous tone level 
would normally be. Banding is one type of 
artefact. 
Bayer pattern •  
An array of color 
ﬁlters placed in 
front of camera 
sensors that 
allow the camera 
to capture color infor-
mation although those sensor elements 
can only record brightness. The Bayern pat-
tern, in most cases, consists of a matrix of 
tiny green, red and blue ﬁlter elements. The 
Bayer pattern algorithm (there are several 
others) interpolates from individual gray 
levels RGB colors for each pixel of an image.
blooming • An eﬀect occuring when a CCD 
cell of a camera sensor receives too much 
light. Its electronic charge transfers to the 
next cell thus producing an undesired 
‘blooming’ eﬀect. Blooming is most visible 
at the edges of high contrast and highly 
saturated colors.
black point • The density (or color) of the 
darkest black a device may reproduce. 
 
Glossary/Abbreviations

A-2
Glossary/Abbreviations
Black levels beyond that are clipped to the 
black point.
C1• Capture One DSLR by Phase One ([36]). 
As there is a trademark issue with C1, Phase 
One no longer uses this abbreviation, but 
instead uses “CO”. 
CA • Chromatic Aberration. See aberration.
calibration • Adjusting the behavior of a 
device to a pre-deﬁned state. Calibration, in 
many cases, is the ﬁrst step when proﬁling a 
device.
camera RAW format • See RAW.
candela • Unit of measurement for luminos-
ity. Luminosity is speciﬁed in candela per 
square meter (cd/m2).
CCD • Charged Coupled Device, an electronic 
element that accumulates an electronic 
charge depending upon the amount of 
light (photons) perceived by the element. 
The photographic sensors of most present-
day digital cameras consists of a matrix of 
CCDs. An alternative technique used as 
camera sensors are CMOS-based sensors.
cd • See candela.
CF • Compact Flash – a type of data storage 
used in memory cards for digital cameras.
CIE • Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage. 
This is the international scientiﬁc organiza-
tion which deﬁned the CIE Lab standard.
CIE LAB • See Lab.
characterization • See proﬁling.
CMM • Color Matching Module – the internal 
color engine of a color management sys-
tem. It does the color translation from dif-
ferent (source) color spaces to the PCS 
(Proﬁle Connection Space), and from the PCS 
to the output color space. Well known 
CMMs are Apple’s ColorSync for the Mac and 
Microsoft’s ICM as an integral part of 
Windows. Adobe provides its own CMM 
module with applications, such as 
Photoshop and InDesign. It’s called ACE 
(Adobe Color Engine).
CMS • Color Management System.
CMYK • A color model based on the four 
primary printing colors cyan, magenta, yel-
low and black (Black is also called the key 
color). Used in print production, they form a 
subtractive color model. Though many 
inkjet printers use CMYK inks (and often 
other additional colors), they, in fact, pres-
ent an RGB interface to the user.
CRT • Cathode Ray Tube – a component in 
monitors utilizing glass tubes for display. 
clipping • The loss of certain tonal values 
usually found in the color or tonal limits of 
a color space. Clipping occurs, for example, 
when converting images from 16-bit-mode 
to 8-bit or when converting from RGB to 
CMYK. In these cases, usually some satu-
rated colors are clipped to become less sat-
urated colors.
color gamut • See gamut. 
colorimeter • An instrument used to mea-
sure the color of emitted light. Often one is 
used in proﬁling monitors.
color model • The way colors are described 
by numbers. RGB, for example, uses a triple, 
denoting the amount of red, green and 
blue. CMYK uses a quadruple for the per-
centage of cyan, magenta, yellow and 
black. There exist other colors models, such 
as Lab, HSM, Grayscale (a gray value) or 
Bitmap (with pixel values of 0 or 1 – white 
or black respectively).

A-3
Glossary/Abbreviations
color space • A range of colors available for 
a particular proﬁle or color model. When an 
image resides in a particular color space, 
this limits the range of colors available to 
that image. It also deﬁnes how the color 
values of an image are to be interpreted. 
There are device-dependant color spaces 
(e. g. that of a scanner or printer) and 
device-independent color spaces (e. g. Lab, 
Adobe RGB (1998) or sRGB).
ColorSync • Apple’s implementation of ICC-
based color management (part of Mac OS 9 
as well as Mac OS X).
color wheel • A circular 
diagram displaying the 
available color spectrum 
(at a particular bright-
ness level).
   
color temperature • A measure on the  
spectrum of the wavelength of white 
(light). The unit used is Kelvin (K). Lower 
color temperatures correspond to a red or 
yellowish light, higher temperatures result 
in a bluish tint. The term ‘temperature’ 
stems from a ‘blackbody radiator’ emitting 
(white) light when heated to a speciﬁc color 
temperature Here are some examples:
candle light, ﬁre
1 000–1 800 K
tungsten
2 600–2 700 K
halogen lamp 
3 400 K
moonlight
4 100 K
D50 daylight illuminant
5 000 K
sunny and blue sky
5 800 K
D65 daylight illuminant
6 500 K
ﬂash
6 500 K
cloudy sky
7 000–8 000 K
neon light
8 000–9 000 K
sunny mountain snow 
up to 16 000 K
chroma • The technical term for saturation.
curves • A tool in Photoshop that allows 
control (change) of tonal values in an 
image. The curve diagram below represents 
the relationship between input and output. 
By modifying this curve, corresponding 
tonal values of the pixels in the image are 
changed.
CS1, CS2 • Adobe Creative Suite 1 & 2. The 
full suite includes Photoshop, InDesign, 
Illustrator, GoLive and Version Cue. The 
Premium suite includes Acrobat. CS2 also 
includes Bridge.
D50 • Daylight at 5 000 Kelvin. This is the 
standard light (illuminant) in the printing 
industry (prepress) for evaluating colored 
prints.
D65 • Daylight at 6 500 Kelvin. This is the 
standard (illuminant) that is closer to the 
light emitted by CRT or LCD monitors.
device proﬁle • See ICC proﬁle.
dithering • A technique used to simulate 
many diﬀerent colors and/or halftones yet 
utilizing only a few primary colors by plac-
ing dots in a certain pattern. Viewed from 
an appropriate distance, the image is per-
ceived as a continuous tone image.
dot gain • Halftone dots grow slightly in 
size when printed (e. g. due to ink spread-

A-4
Glossary/Abbreviations
ing). This is called dot gain. Coated paper 
has a dot gain of 8–20 %, while with 
uncoated paper it may grow up to 28 %. 
Photoshop may take dot gain into account 
when producing output for printers by 
reducing a dot size appropriately to com-
pensate for its future dot gain.
dpi, DPI • dots per inch. Used as a measure-
ment of print resolution in regard to ink or 
toner dots per inch on paper or printing 
plates. Most printing techniques (e. g. inkjet 
printers or oﬀset presses) simulate a half-
tone value or a non-primary color of a pixel 
using a pattern of tiny dots. With such 
printing techniques, the dpi value of a 
printing device must be considerably 
higher (by a factor of 4 to 8) than the ppi 
(pixel per inch) value of the image.
DSLR • Digital Single-Lens Reﬂex – a stan-
dard type of professional and semi-profes-
sional digital camera.
ECI • European Color Initiative. This organi-
zation focuses on deﬁning standardized 
means to exchange colors (color images) 
on the basis of ICC proﬁles. You may ﬁnd 
some speciﬁc color proﬁles at their Internet 
home page (see www.eci.org).
ECI-RGB • An RGB work space for those 
images destined for prepress work in 
Europe. Its gamut is somewhat wider 
(slightly more green tints) than that of 
Adobe RGB (1998) and also covers nearly all 
colors intended to be printed.
EPS • Encapsulated PostScript. A standard 
ﬁle format for graphics, usually those 
including vector graphics or a mix of vector  
graphics and bitmap images. Often, EPS 
ﬁles contain both the actual graphic infor-
mation and additionally a preview image of 
that graphic.
EV • Exposure Value.
Exif, EXIF • A standardized format for cam-
era metadata (e. g. camera model, exposure 
value, focal length, …). This data is usually 
embedded in the image ﬁle and may be 
used for searching, as well as, by applica-
tions to act in an intelligent way on the 
data. PTLens, one example, uses the focal 
length value from EXIF data to correct lens 
distortions.
Firewire • (IEEE 1394) a fast, serial interface 
for cardreaders, digital cameras, scanners 
and other peripheral devices. Firewire 
allows for transfer rates of up to 40 MByte/s 
(1394a) or 80 MByte/s (1394b).
gamma • (1) Relationship between tonal 
values (or input voltage with a monitor) 
and perceived brightness. There are two 
gamma values in broad use:  
(A) 1.8, the Apple standard for the Mac and  
preferred in prepress work. 
(B) 2.2, the Windows standard. For photo-
graphs, we recommend using 2.2, (even on 
Macintosh systems) when it comes to mon-
itor calibration and proﬁling. 
(2) The degree to which a color space or 
device is non-linear in tonal behavior. 
gamut • The total range of colors (and den-
sities) a device can reproduce (e. g. a moni-
tor or printer) or capture (e. g. a scanner or 
digital camera). Color gamut is the range of 
colors a device can reproduce (or capture) 
and dynamic range refers to the brightness 
levels a device can produce or capture.
gamut mapping • The way colors are 
remapped when an image is converted 
from one color space to another. If the des-
tination space is smaller than the source 
space, color compression or color clipping 
will be take place.

A-5
Glossary/Abbreviations
gray balanced • A color space is called gray 
balanced if equal values of the primary col-
ors result in a neutral gray value. This situa-
tion is preferable for work spaces.
highlights • Areas of an image with no 
color or gray level at all.
histogram • A visual representation of tonal 
levels in an image. With color images, it is 
advantageous not only to see luminance 
levels but also tonal levels of each individ-
ual color channel:
HSB, HSL • Adaptions of the RGB color 
model. Colors are described by a hue, satu-
ration of the hue and lightness (HSL) or 
brightness (HSB).
hue • Hue is normally referred to as color 
tint.
ICC • International Color Consortium. A con-
sortium of companies that develop indus-
try-wide standards for color management 
– e. g. ICC proﬁles. For more information see 
www.color.org.
ICC proﬁle • A standardized data format to 
describe the color behavior of a speciﬁc 
device. ICC proﬁles are the basis of color 
management systems. They allows CM sys-
tems to maintain consistent color impres-
sion across diﬀerent devices, diﬀerent plat-
forms and throughout a complete 
color-managed workﬂow. 
ICM • Image Color Management or 
Integrated Color Management – the 
Microsoft implementation of the color man-
agement module in Windows.
intent • See rendering intent.
IT-8 • A family of standard targets used by 
proﬁling devices such as scanners or digital 
cameras.
IPTC • International Press Telecommunication 
Council. In photography, IPTC is a metadata 
format describing the image. It provides 
ﬁelds, e. g. for copyright notices, rights 
usage terms, a title (caption) and keywords.
JPEG • Joint Photographic Experts Group. 
This ISO group deﬁnes a ﬁle format stan-
dard for color images. The JPEG format uses 
lossy compression, oﬀering various trade-
oﬀs between high quality (at lower com-
pression) and lower quality resulting in a 
higher compression but smaller ﬁles.
Lab, LAB, L*a*b*, CIE LAB • A perceptual- 
based color model deﬁned by the CIE. 
Colors in this model are deﬁned by L 
(Luminance) and two color components, a 
and b. ‘a’ (or ‘A’) is the axis ranging from red 
to green while ‘b’ (or ‘B’) ranges from blue to 
yellow.
LCD • Liquid Crystal Display. A display tech-
nique used with ﬂat panel monitors (TFT 
monitors). 
lpi, LPI • Lines per Inch. The measure used to 
deﬁne printing resolution (or screen fre-
quency) with typical halftone printing 
methods, such as, oﬀset printing.
luminance • Amount of light (energy) emit-
ted by a light source, e. g. by a monitor. The 
unit used with monitors is candela per 
square meter (cd/m2).

A-6
Glossary/Abbreviations
metadata • Data describing other data 
objects. EXIF and ITPC data are examples of 
metadata as part of digital photographs.
PCS • Proﬁle Connection Space. This is an 
intermediate color space used when con-
verting colors from a source space to a des-
tination space (say, from one proﬁle to 
another). According to the ICC speciﬁcation 
it can be either CIE-Lab or CIE XYZ.
perceptual intent • See intent.
PNG • Portable Network Graphics. A ﬂexible 
image ﬁle format, providing indexed color 
for up to 8-bits per channel and also allow-
ing transparency. This format, however, is 
not as ﬂexible as TIFF.
ppi, PPI • pixel per inch, used to specify the 
resolution of a digital image. See also dpi.
primary colors • Those colors of a color 
model used to construct the colors of the 
pixels. For RGB the primary colors are red, 
green and blue. CMYK primaries are cyan, 
magenta, yellow and black. 
proﬁle • See ICC proﬁle.
proﬁling • The act of creating a device pro-
ﬁle. Usually a two-step process, whereby 
the ﬁrst step is to linearize the device. The 
second step measures the color behavior of 
the device and describes it with an ICC pro-
ﬁle. The entire process is also called  charac-
terization.
PS • Photoshop.
RAW (camera RAW format) • See ICC proﬁle.
Relative colorimetric • See rendering intent.
rendering intent •  A strategy to achieve 
color space mapping when converting col-
ors from a source to a destination color 
space. ICC has deﬁned four diﬀerent stan-
dard intents: 
(1) Perceptual compresses colors of the 
source space to the gamut of the destina-
tion space (where the source space is 
smaller than the destination space). This is 
the intent recommended for photographs. 
(2) Relative colorimetric does a 1:1 mapping 
when the colors in the source space are all 
present in the destination space. Out-of-
gamut colors of the source are mapped 
(clipped) to the nearest neighbor of the 
destination space. This intent may be used 
for photographs if most of the colors in the 
source space are available in the destina-
tion space. In this case, most colors of the 
source are mapped 1:1 into the destination. 
The white point of the source space also is 
mapped to the white point of the destina-
tion space. 
(3) Absolute colorimetric does a 1:1 mapping 
when colors in the source space are present 
in the destination space. Out-of-gamut col-
ors of the source are mapped (clipped) to 
the nearest neighbor of the destination 
space. The white point of the source is main-
tained. This intent is used (only) for soft 
prooﬁng. 
(4) Saturation.  This intent aims to maintain 
saturation of a source color, even when the 
actual color has shifted during the mapping. 
This intent may be used when mapping 
logos and diagrams, but is not suitable for 
photographs.
resolution • This term deﬁnes the depth of 
detail that an image can reproduce. 
Resolution is measured in dots per inch 
(dpi) or pixels per inch (ppi).
RGB • Red, Green, Blue. These are the pri-
mary colors of the standard additive color 
model. Keep your photographs in RGB! 

A-7
Glossary/Abbreviations
mode as long as possible and use RGB for 
archiving your images.
RIP • Raster Image Processor. A module, 
either part of a printer or a software appli-
cation. The RIP converts page information 
into a raster image or dot pattern for print-
ing.
RS, RSE • RawShooter Essential – a free 
good RAW converter by Pixmatec ([35]).
saturation • (1) deﬁnes the purity of color. 
Saturation may vary from none (which is 
gray) via pastel colors (some saturation) to 
pure colors (full saturation) with no gray. 
(2) One of the four rendering intents. See 
rendering intents.
spectrophotometer • An instrument to 
measure the color of emitted and reﬂected 
light. It usually is used for proﬁling printers 
and measuring the color (light spectrum) of 
a print or other surface.
soft proof • Usage of the monitor as a proof-
ing device. For soft prooﬁng Photoshop 
simulates the colors a picture will have on a 
diﬀerent output method (e. g. a print) on 
the monitor.
sRGB • A standard color space for monitors. 
It is intended for images presented on 
monitors or in the Internet.
tagged images • Images with embedded 
color proﬁle. 
TIFF • Tagged Image File Format. A ﬁle for-
mat for images. TIFF acts as an envelope 
format for a lot of diﬀerent image formats 
and allows several diﬀerent compression 
modes – most of them lossless (e. g. LZW, 
ZIP, Runlength encoding, uncompressed). It 
allows to store diﬀerent color depths (from 
1 to 32 bit per channel), embed comments, 
proﬁles, and other metadata as well as lay-
ers and alpha channels. It is well suited as 
an archival format for images.
USB • Universal Serial Bus. A computer 
device interface for peripherals such as card 
readers, cameras, scanner or external disks. 
There are two version of the USB bus, where 
USB 2 (high speed) is much faster (up to 
60 MByte/s)than USB 1.x (up to 1.2 MByte/s). 
USM • Unsharp Masking. A method of 
sharpening an image by increasing the con-
trast of edge pixels. The term stems from a 
traditional ﬁlm-composing technique.
vignetting • Vignetting is an eﬀect where 
some areas of a photograph are less illumi-
nated that others. Most camera lenses 
exhibit “optical vignetting” to some degree 
– mostly at the outer edges but stronger 
when an aperture is wide open. 
“Mechanical vignetting” may occur, if a lens 
hood is too small or not properly attached.
 
  slight vignetting    very strong vignetting
wide gamut RGB • A large color space that 
covers almost all of RGB. There is no physi-
cal device that can reproduce all color of 
wide gamut. This color space is sometimes 
used for archival purposes, if output shall 
be produced for photographic printers or 
transparent recorders.
white balance • Adjusting the color tem-
perature and color tints in an image, so that 

A-8
Glossary/Abbreviations
there is no color cast and gray areas show 
no color tint.
white point • (1) The color of ‘pure white’ in 
an image. On a monitor, it is the brightest 
white the monitor can display. In photo 
prints, it usually is deﬁned as the color of 
the blank paper. 
(2) The color of a light source or lighting 
conditions in terms of color temperature. 
(3) The color “white” in a color space. For 
example Adobe RGB (1998) and sRGB have a 
white point of 6 500 K (D65) while ECI-RGB, 
Color Match RGB and Wide Gamut RGB have 
a white point of 5 000 K (D50). Most CMYK 
color spaces have a white point of D50.
white point adaption • When a color map-
ping has to take place and the source and 
the destination spaces have diﬀerent white 
points, with some intents (e. g. Relative colo-
rimetric) colors are adapted relative to the 
new white point.
working space • A device-independent 
color space (proﬁle). It deﬁnes the color 
gamut available to the image using this 
working space. For photographers Adobe 
RGB (1998) or ECI-RGB (in Europe) are the 
working spaces recommended. 

B-1
Resources
Remember that Internet addresses may 
change or vanish over time. We attempt, how-
ever, to keep up to date. In the e-book version 
you can click on the links (in blue) to get to a 
particular page directly with your browser.
B.1 Recommended Books
[1] 
Tim Grey: Color Conﬁdence.  
The digital photographer’s guide to  
color management. 
Sybex Inc, San Francisco, 2004.
[2] 
Bruce Fraser, Chris Murphy, Fred 
Buntig: Color Management. Industry-
strength production techniques. 
Peachpit Press, Berkeley, CA, 2003.
[3] 
Ben Willmore:  
uptospeed – Photoshop CS2. 
Peachpit Presss, Berkeley, 2005.
Camera: Nikon D100
 
Resources

B-2
Resources
B.2 Useful resources in the Internet
[4] 
Outback Photo: The home-page of 
Bettina & Uwe Steinmueller with lots 
of information on digital photography: 
www.outbackphoto.com
[5] 
Colors by Nature – some of the color 
works of Bettina & Uwe Steinmueller: 
www.colors-by-nature.com
[6] 
Uwe Steinmueller: A Proﬁle for B&W 
conversion: 
www.outbackphoto.com/artofraw/
raw_08/proﬁle_BW.zip
[7] 
Digital Outback Photo: Our Tonality 
Tuning Toolkit: 
www.outbackphoto.com/workﬂow/
wf_61/essay.html
[8] 
Digital Outback Photo: Paper on 
sharpening: 
http://www.outbackphoto.com/ 
dp_essentials/dp_essentials_05/ 
essay.html
[9] 
Digital Outback Photo: Paper on noise 
reduction: 
www.outbackphoto.com/ 
dp_essentials/dp_essentials_04/ 
essay.html
[10] Digital Outback Photo: An essay on 
Workﬂow techniques using actions and 
ﬁlters in layers: 
www.outbackphoto.com/workﬂow/
wf_19/essay.html 
[11] 
Digital Outback Photo: An essay on 
printing insights: 
www.outbackphoto.com/
printinginsights/pi.html
[12] Paper on Noise Ninja – a noise removal 
tool ( 
, ): 
www.outbackphoto.com/workﬂow/
wf_25/essay.html
[13] 
ICC – International Color Consortium: 
www.color.org
[14] ECI – European Color Initiative 
www.eci.org
[15] 
GretagMacbeth: ColorChecker and 
several proﬁle packages (e. g. Eye-One 
Match and Eye-One Photo): 
www.gretagmacbeth.com
[16] ColorVision: Color Management Tools 
(e.g. ColorPlus, Spyer2Pro, ProﬁlerPlus, 
PrintFIX, …): 
www.colorvision.com
[17] 
Monaco Systems (now part of X.rite): 
Color Management Tools (Proﬁling 
packages, e.g. Monaco OPTIX for mon-
itor proﬁling): 
www.xritephoto.com
[18] Digital Domain Inc.: Proﬁle Prism. 
ICC proﬁling tool for cameras and 
scanners: 
www.ddisoftware.com/prism/
[19] Pixmantec: RawShooter Essentials ( 
 ). 
A RAW converter for a broad range of 
DSLRs: 
www.pixmantec.com
[20] Phase One: Capture One DSLR (
, ).  
A RAW converter for a broad range of 
DSLRs. 
www.phaseone.com

B-3
Resources
[21] Bibble Labs:  Bibble. ( 
, ).  A RAW 
converter for a broad range of DSLRs. 
www.bibblelabs.com
[22] Canon: Canon Digital Photo 
Professional. ( 
, ).  
A RAW converter for various Canon 
DSLRs: 
www.canon-europe.com/Support/
Patches/dpp/
[23] Nikon: Nikon Capture. ( 
, )  
A RAW converter for most of Nikon’s 
DSLRs: 
http://nikonimaging.com/global/
products/software/capture4/
[24] PictoColor: inCamera. ICC proﬁle soft-
ware for digital cameras and scanners: 
www.picto.com
[25] PTLens – A correction program for 
lens ﬂaws (Photoshop Plug-in for 
Windows): 
http://epaperpress.com/ptlens
[26] LensFix & PanoTools – Lens distortion 
correction & image remapping plug-
ins for Mac OS: 
www.kekus.com
[27] NeatImage. Noise removal tool ( 
, ): 
www.neatimage.com
[28] Noiseware. Noise removal tool ( 
, ): 
www.imagenomic.com
[29] Helicon Filter Pro. A freeware set of  
ﬁlters to remove red eye, reduce 
noise, to do sharpening and  
color tuning ( 
 ): 
www.shareup.com/Helicon_Filter_
pro_download-21227.html
[30] Debarrelizer. For corrections of barrel 
distortions ( 
 , ): 
www.theimagingfactory.com/data/
pages/products/products1.htm
[31] Focus Magic. A sharpening tool (
): 
www.focusmagic.com 
[32] Focus Fixer. A sharpening tool ( 
, ): 
www.ﬁxerlabs.com
[33] Digital Domain Inc: Qimage RIP ( ) 
and Proﬁle Prism ( ) – a proﬁling 
software for printers, digital cameras 
and scanners: 
www.ddisoftware.com 
[34] DxO Optics Pro. Corrects distortions 
and lateral chromatic aberrations and 
vignetting ( 
,  ):  
www.dxo.com 
[35] Exifer for Windows. Management of 
EXIF/ITPC meatadata. ( 
 ): 
www.friedemann-schmidt.com/
software/exifer/
[36] ACD Systems:  ACDSee. 
Photo Management Software ( 
 ):  
www.acdsystems.com 
[37] Cerious Software: ThumbsPlus Pro. 
Simple to use digital asset manage-
ment system ( 
 ):  
www.cerious.com
[38] Rname-it ( 
 ). A free ﬂexible Windows 
renaming utility: 
www.outbackphoto.com/handbook/
cameratocomputer.html

B-4
Resources
[39] Renamer4Mac ( ): A free renaming 
utility for Mac OS X: 
http://mac.softpedia.com/get/
Utilities/Renamer4Mac.shtml
[40] Helmut Dersch: Panorama-Tools. ( 
 ) 
Tool for digital panoramas, used as 
the basis for PTLens. 
www.ptgui.com
[41] Donwloader Pro. ( 
 ). A windows utili-
ty to download and rename image 
ﬁles from a memory card or from a 
camera: 
www.outbackphoto.com/ 
computers_and_more/ 
veit_downloader_pro/essay.html
[42] Photorescue ( 
 ). 
A utility for Windows and Mac to ex-
tract image ﬁles from a corrupted 
memory card: 
http://www.outbackphoto.com/
handbook/usingdslr.
html#photorescue
[43] Adobe: Paper on XMP customizing: 
www.adobe.com/products/xmp/
custompanel.html
[44] New versions of Adobe Camera Raw 
www.adobe.com/support/
downloads/
[45] Free Adobe DNG converter 
www.adobe.com/products/dng/ 
[46] EasyS Sharpening Toolkit: 
www.outbackphoto.com/workﬂow/
wf_66/essay.html 
[47] Bettina&Uwe Steinmueller: 
Digital photography workﬂow hand-
book:  
www.outbackphoto.com/booklets/
dop2000/DOP2000.html
[48] Dr. Brown Russell: Tips & Techniques for 
Photoshop CS2. 
Dr. Brown‘s Services 1.0 make this 
whole process much more easy 
(check out the movie): 
www.russellbrown.com/ 
tips_tech.html
[49] Jack Flesher: Paper Upsizing in 
Photoshop: 
www.outbackphoto.com/workﬂow/
wf_60/essay.html

C-1
Index
 
Index
A
AA ﬁlter  1-9, A-1
aberration  A-1
chromatic aberration  7-13
absolute colorimetric  2-15, A-1, 
A-6
ACDSee  10-3, B-3
ACR (Adobe Camera Raw)  A-1
adjust tab  4-22
advanced image corrections  
4-38
apply settings  4-10
batch conversion  4-37, 4-39
brightness  4-26
calibrate tab  4-33
contrast  4-26
curves  4-12
curves tab  4-32
exposure  4-26
ﬁlmstrip-mode  4-16
histogram  4-19
ICC working space  4-21
image correction controls  
4-22
Lens tab  4-31
real life workﬂow  4-3
resolution  4-21
reuse settings  4-36
saturation  4-28
save settings  4-36
shadows  4-26
sharpness  4-28
toolbar  4-19
white balance  4-23
workﬂow support  4-39
action  8-6
additive color model  2-3
adjust tab
ACR  4-22
Adobe Bridge  4-4
Adobe Camera Raw  4-1, A-1
batch processing  8-5
calibrating  11-11
Adobe Creative Suite  A-3
Adobe Gamma  2-18
Adobe RGB (1998)  2-11, 2-13, A-1, 
A-8
advanced image corrections  
3-24, 4-38
Anti-Aliasing ﬁlter  1-9
Apple RGB  2-11
archival RAW format  9-3
artefacts  A-1
camera artefacts  1-11
Auto Adjustments  4-11
B
B&W
creating photos  12-1
ﬁlm  12-2
proﬁle  12-8
thumbnails and previews  12-5
with ACR  12-4
with Capture One DSLR  12-7
with RawShooter  12-3, 12-12
backup  3-12
banding  A-1
barrel distortions  7-19
batch  8-7
Adobe Camera Raw  8-5
basic pattern  8-2
conversion  4-39, 8-16
ACR  4-37, 4-39
using Bridge  8-12
predeﬁned scripts  8-10
RawShooter  8-16
renaming
Photoshop  8-4
RS  5-30
smooth processing  8-13
Bayer
pattern  1-6, A-1
demosaicing  1-7
sensor  1-8
Bibble  6-11, B-3
color management  6-13
Picture Options  6-15
setup  6-12
sharpening  6-16
WB  6-14
workﬂow  6-17
bitmap mode  2-2
bit depth  4-21
black point  3-17, A-1
blooming  A-1
blur  7-2
Bridge  4-15
batch conversion  8-12
brightness  3-17
ACR  4-26
browsing
RAW ﬁles  3-13, 4-4
C
C1 (Capture One)  A-2
cache settings  4-17
calibrate tab
ACR  4-33
calibrating Camera Raw  11-11
calibration  2-15, A-2
by eye  2-18
hardware based  2-18
settings  2-18
camera
artefacts  1-11
default settings  4-40
histogram  3-3

C-2
Index
proﬁle  2-16, 11-1
proﬁling  11-3
RAW format  A-2
set to  to RAW mode  3-2
target  11-2
to computer  3-9
candela  A-2
Canon Digital Photo Professional  
6-19
Capture One DSLR  6-2, B-2
B&W  12-7
batch processing  8-13
color management setup  6-4
develop  6-9
exposure  6-8
Preferences  6-4
RAW ﬁle browser  6-5
setup  6-3
sharpening  6-9
WB  6-7
CA (chromatic aberration)  7-13, 
A-1, A-2
CCD  A-2
CcMmYK  2-4
cd (candela)  A-2
CF (Campact Flash card)  A-2
Channel Mixer  12-3
characterization  2-16, A-2, A-6
Charged Coupled Device  A-2
chroma  A-3
chromatic aberration (CA)  7-13, 
A-1, A-2
CIE  A-2
LAB  2-3, 2-16, A-2, A-5
clipping  A-2
clone tool  7-26
CMM  2-8, A-2
CMS  2-8, A-2
CMYK  2-5, A-2, A-8
color model  2-4
color
adjustment
DPP  6-25
aliasing  1-11, 7-2
and B&W  12-10
channel clipping  3-5
clipping  3-5
color noise  7-9
conversion techniques  12-3
corrections  3-24
depth  2-2
ﬁlters  1-7
gamut  A-2
index mode  2-2
management  2-6
Bibble  6-13
DPP  6-20
module  2-8
NC  6-30
setup in Capture One  6-4
system  2-8
mode  A-3
bitmap mode  2-2
model  A-2
additive  2-3
CMYK  2-4
grayscale  2-5
LAB  2-3
RGB  2-3
subtractive  2-4
modes  2-2
sampler  4-20
settings  2-23
settings in Photoshop  2-23
space
CMYK  A-8
mapping  2-14
visualization  2-11
spaces  2-5
temperature  3-16, A-3
wheel  A-3
working space  2-10
ColorChecker  B-2
ColorChecker SG  11-3, 11-4
colorimeter  2-20, A-2
colorimetric  A-6
absolute colorimetric intent  
2-15
relative colorimetric intent  
2-14
ColorSync  A-3
ColorVision  B-2
command key  1-2
Commission Internationale de 
l’Eclairage  A-2
Compact Flash (CA)  A-2
computer conﬁguration  1-3
conﬁguration  1-3
for color work  1-3
contrast  3-17
ACR  4-26
enhancements  1-14
corrections
color corrections  3-24
Correct toolbar  5-20
cropping  1-14
crop tool  4-20
CRT  2-19, A-2
CS1  A-3
CS2  A-3
curves  A-3
ACR  4-12, 4-32
NC  6-31
D
D50  A-3
D65  2-18, A-3
Debarrelizer  7-14, B-3
deletion workﬂow  5-19
demosaicing  1-7
develop tab Capture One  6-9
device
gamut  2-5
proﬁle  A-3
creation  2-15
digital darkroom
setup  3-12
Digital Negative  1-1
Format  9-1
distortion  7-19
DNG  9-1
advantages  9-8
converter  9-3, 9-5
disadvantages  9-8
potentials  9-2
support  9-3
DNGC  9-3, 9-5
Donwloader Pro  B-4

C-3
Index
dot gain  A-3
Downloader Pro  3-11
dpi (DPI)  A-4
DPP  6-19
color adjustment  6-25
color management  6-20
exposure  6-24
main features  6-21
setup  6-19
WB  6-23
DSLR  A-4
dust spots  7-26
DxO Optics Pro  B-3
E
ECI  A-4, B-2
ECI-RGB  2-11, 2-24, A-4, A-8
EOM  2-19
EPS  A-4
Euroscale Coated  2-24
EV  A-4
exchange format  9-3
EXIF  10-1, 10-2, A-4
Exifer for Windows  10-3, B-3
expose
rule  3-4
Exposure  5-7
exposure  3-2, 3-17, 5-22
ACR  4-26
Capture One  6-8
DPP  6-24
Extensible Metadata Platform  
10-3
Eye-One
Display  2-19
Photo  11-3
F
ﬁle attributes  10-2
ﬁle hierarchy  3-10
Fill Light  5-7
ﬁlmstrip-mode
ACR  4-16
Bibble  6-11
RS  5-15
Firewire  A-4
Focus Fixer  B-3
Focus Magic  B-3
folder organization  3-10
format
RAW exchange format  9-3
Foveon sensor  1-9
fringing (purple fringing)  7-15
G
gamma  2-18, A-4
gamut  2-5, A-4
mapping  A-4
grayscale mode  2-5
gray balanced  A-5
GretagMacbeth  B-2
H
hardware based calibration  2-18
healing brush  7-29
Helicon Filter Pro  7-13, B-3
highlights  A-5
Highlight Contrast  5-7
histogram  A-5
ACR  4-19
camera histogram  3-3
indicating overexposure  3-3
live histogram  3-7
how to create an action  8-5
HSB  A-5
HSL  A-5
hue  A-5
in RS  5-27
RS  5-27
Hue/Saturation  12-3
I
ICC  11-1, A-5, B-2
proﬁle  2-7, A-5
ICM  A-5
IEEE 1394  A-4
image
advanced corrections
ACR  4-38
in RS  5-32
blur  7-2
correction  3-14
ACR  4-22
advanced  3-24
in RS  5-20
defects  7-1
naming  3-10
organize your images  4-13
storage  3-9
ImagePrint  12-11
Image Color Management  A-5
inCamera  11-3, 11-8, B-3
index mode  2-2
intent  2-14, A-5, A-6
absolute colormetric  2-15
perceptual  2-14
photographic  2-14
relative colormetric  2-14
saturation  2-15
International Press Telecommu-
nication Council  A-5
IPTC  10-3, A-5
ISO  3-8
ISO Coated  2-24
IT-8  A-5
ITPC  10-1
iView MediaPro  9-8
J
JPEG  1-4, A-5
artefacts  1-10, A-1
K
keyboard
option  1-2
shortcuts  1-2, 4-41
in RS  5-20
L
L*a*b*  A-5
LAB  A-5
color model  2-3
layer (Smart Object)  4-42
LCD  2-19, A-5
LensFix  7-19, B-3
lens correction  7-15, 7-22
Lens tab
ACR  4-31

C-4
Index
lossy compression  1-11
lpi (LPI)  A-5
luminance  2-18, A-5
noise  7-2
M
Macs  1-3
main features
NC  6-30
mapping
color
space  2-14
mark bad pictures  4-14
metadata  10-1
EXIF  10-1, 10-2
ﬁle attributes  10-1, 10-2
for seraching  10-9
further metadata  10-3
IPTC  10-3
ITPC  10-1
usage in ACR  10-5
XMP  10-2
MiniColorChecker  11-3
Lab values  11-13
moiré  1-11, 7-2
Monaco Systems  B-2
monitor proﬁle  2-17
N
NC (Nikon Capture)  6-28
color management  6-30
curves  6-31
main features  6-30
Preferences  6-29
setup  6-29
WB  6-32
NeatImage  7-13, B-3
neutral gray  11-10
Nikon Capture  B-3
Nikon Capture (NC)  6-28
noise  7-2, 7-9
color noise  7-9
luminance noise  7-9
noise removal ﬁlters  7-12
reduction  7-9
in RS  5-29
using PS ﬁlter „Reduce Noi-
se“  7-12
NoiseNinja  7-12
Noiseware  7-13, B-3
O
Online Screen Display  2-21
option key  1-2
organize your images  3-9, 4-13
OSD  2-21
Outback Photo  B-2
output size  4-21
P
Panorama-Tools  7-15, B-4
PanoTools  B-3
patch tool  7-28
PCS  2-16, A-6
PCs  1-3
perceptual  2-14
intent  A-6
Percetual  A-6
perspective corrections  7-2, 7-24
Photorescue  3-12, B-4
Photoshop (PS)
action  8-5
batch-renaming  8-4
color and monitor proﬁle 
settings  2-23
how to create an action  8-5
proﬁle settings  2-23
Picture Options
Bibble  6-15
pincushion distortions  7-19
Pixmantec  5-1, B-2
PNG  A-6
Portfolio  9-8
ppi (PPI)  A-6
Preferences
Capture One  6-4
NC  6-29
preview size  5-19
primary colors  A-6
printer proﬁle  2-17
proﬁle  A-6
B&W proﬁle  12-8
camera  11-1
camera proﬁle  2-16
monitor proﬁle  2-17
printer  2-17
proﬁling  A-6
camera  11-3
settings in Photoshop  2-23
ProﬁleMaker  11-3, 11-4
Proﬁle Connection Space  A-6
Proﬁle Prism  11-3, B-2
Pro Photo RGB  2-11, 2-13
PSD  12-11
PS (Photoshop)  A-6
PTLens  7-19, B-3
purple fringing  7-15
Q
Qimage RIP  B-3
R
Raster Image Processor  A-7
RAW  1-1, A-6
advantages  1-5
archival RAW format  9-3
camera settings  3-2
converter  1-14
converters  6-1
exchange format  9-3
ﬁles  1-1
browsing  3-13
ﬁle browser  3-13
Capture One  6-5
RawShooter  5-2
workﬂow  3-1
RawShooter  5-1
B&W  12-12
B&W workﬂow  12-3
batch convert  8-16
batch processing  8-16
real life workﬂow  5-2
setup  5-14
RawShooter Essentials  B-2
relative colorimetric  2-14, A-6
Renamer4Mac  3-11, B-4
renaming  3-11
rendering intent  A-6

C-5
Index
resolution  A-6
ACR  4-21
reuse settings
ACR  4-36
RGB  A-6
Adobe RGB (1998)  2-11, A-8
Apple RGB  2-11
color model  2-3
ECI-RGB  2-11, A-8
information  1-7
Pro Photo RGB  2-11
RIP  A-7
Rname-it  3-11, B-3
rotating  4-20
RS  5-1, A-7
advanced image corrections  
5-32
batch processing  5-30
hue  5-27
slide show  5-30
workﬂow support  5-32
RSE  A-7
S
saturation  1-14, A-6
ACR  4-28
intent  2-15
in RS  5-27
save settings
ACR
  4-36
scroll wheel support  4-41
sensor Foveon  1-9
settings
apply settings in ACR  4-10
cache settings  4-17
setup
Bibble  6-12
Capture One  6-3
DPP  6-19
NC  6-29
shadow
contrast  5-7
point  3-17
Shadow/Highlight  12-5
shadows
ACR  4-26
sharpening  1-14, 7-3
Bibble  6-16
Capture One  6-9
in RS  5-27
tools  7-9
sharpness
ACR  4-28
slide show  5-30
Smarter Sharpen  7-8
Smart Object  4-42
layer  4-42
smoothness  4-30
soft proof  2-15, A-7
source  8-7
spektrophotometer  A-7
spherical aberrations  A-1
sRGB  2-10, A-7
straighten tool  4-20
strategic reasoning  1-13
subtractive color model  2-4
Synchronize  4-10
T
tagged images  A-7
target  11-2
threshold  7-6
ThumbsPlus  9-8, B-3
TIFF  1-4, A-7
tilt  7-24
tonality  3-17, 5-22
adaptive  3-19
tool
clone tool  7-26
crop tool  4-20
healing brush  7-29
patch tool  7-28
straighten tool  4-20
toolbar
ACR  4-19
transfer your photos  3-9
U
undo, redo  4-41
unsharp mask  7-4
up-sampling  1-14
USB  1-3, A-7
USM  7-4, A-7
V
vignetting  7-2, 7-23, A-7
W
WB (White Balance)  1-10, 1-13, 
3-7, 3-14, 4-6, 4-23, A-7
ACR  4-23
Bibble  6-14
Capture One  6-7
DPP  6-23
NC  6-32
objective and subjective  3-8
seeting in RS  5-21
settings
in RawShooter  5-4
white point  2-18, 3-17, A-8
adaption  A-8
wide gamut  A-7
workﬂow
ACR  4-3
Bibble  6-17
deleting ﬁles in RS  5-19
options  4-21
support
ACR  4-39
in RS  5-32
support in RAW converters  
3-25
working space  A-8
X
X3 sensor  1-8
XMP  4-14, 10-2, 10-3

