
The Power of Protocols:
An Educator’s Guide to Better Practice
JOSEPH P. MCDONALD,
NANCY MOHR, ALAN DICHTER, AND
ELIZABETH C. MCDONALD
Beating the Odds:
High Schools as Communities of Commitment
JACQUELINE ANCESS
At the Heart of Teaching:
A Guide to Reflective Practice
GRACE HALL MCENTEE, JON APPLEBY,
JOANNE DOWD, JAN GRANT, SIMON HOLE,
AND PEGGY SILVA, WITH JOSEPH W. CHECK
Teaching Youth Media:  A Critical Guide to
Literacy, Video Production, & Social Change
STEVEN GOODMAN
Inside the National Writing Project: Connecting
Network Learning and Classrooms
ANN LIEBERMAN AND
DIANE WOOD
Standards Reform in High-Poverty Schools:
Managing Conflict and Building Capacity
CAROL A. BARNES
Standards of Mind and Heart: 
Creating the Good High School
PEGGY SILVA AND ROBERT A. MACKIN
Upstart Startup: Creating and 
Sustaining a Public Charter School
JAMES NEHRING
One Kid at a Time: 
Big Lessons from a Small School
ELIOT LEVINE
Guiding School Change: 
The Role and Work of Change Agents
FRANCES O’CONNELL RUST AND
HELEN FREIDUS, EDITORS
Teachers Caught in the Action: 
Professional Development That Matters
ANN LIEBERMAN AND
LYNNE MILLER, EDITORS
The Competent Classroom:
Aligning High School Curriculum, Standards, and
Assessment—A Creative Teaching Guide
ALLISON ZMUDA AND
MARY TOMAINO
Central Park East and Its Graduates:
“Learning by Heart”
DAVID BENSMAN
Taking Charge of Curriculum: Teacher Networks
and Curriculum Implementation
JACOB E. ADAMS, JR.
Teaching With Power:
Shared Decision-Making and Classroom Practice
CAROL REED
Good Schools/Real Schools:
Why School Reform Doesn’t Last
DEAN FINK
Beyond Formulas in Mathematics and Teaching:
Dynamics of the High School Algebra Classroom
DANIEL CHAZAN
School Reform Behind the Scenes
JOSEPH P. MCDONALD, THOMAS HATCH,
EDWARD KIRBY, NANCY AMES, NORRIS M.
HAYNES, AND EDWARD T. JOYNER
Looking Together at Student Work: 
A Companion Guide to Assessing Student Learning
TINA BLYTHE, DAVID ALLEN, AND
BARBARA SHIEFFELIN POWELL
Looking at Student Work: 
A Window into the Classroom (Video)
ANNENBERG INSTITUTE FOR SCHOOL
REFORM
Teachers—Transforming Their World and Their Work
ANN LIEBERMAN AND
LYNNE MILLER
Teaching in Common:  Challenges to Joint Work
in Classrooms and Schools
ANNE DIPARDO
Charter Schools: Another Flawed Educational Reform?
SEYMOUR B. SARASON
the series on school reform
Patricia A. Wasley
University of Washington
Ann Lieberman
NCREST
Joseph P. McDonald
New York University
SERIES EDITORS
(Continued)

Assessing Student Learning: 
From Grading to Understanding
DAVID ALLEN, EDITOR
Racing with the Clock: Making Time
for Teaching and Learning in School Reform
NANCY E. ADELMAN, 
KAREN PANTON WALKING EAGLE, AND
ANDY HARGREAVES, EDITORS
The Role of State Departments of
Education in Complex School Reform
SUSAN FOLLETT LUSI
Making Professional Development Schools Work:
Politics, Practice, and Policy
MARSHA LEVINE AND
ROBERTA TRACHTMAN, EDITORS
How It Works—Inside a School–College
Collaboration
SIDNEY TRUBOWITZ AND PAUL LONGO
Surviving School Reform:
A Year in the Life of One School
LARAINE K. HONG
Eyes on the Child: Three Portfolio Stories
KATHE JERVIS
Revisiting “The Culture of the School and the
Problem of Change”
SEYMOUR B. SARASON
Teacher Learning: New Policies, New Practices
MILBREY W. MCLAUGHLIN AND
IDA OBERMAN, EDITORS
What’s Happening in Math Class? 
Envisioning New Practices Through Teacher
Narratives (Volume 1)
DEBORAH SCHIFTER, EDITOR
What’s Happening in Math Class? 
Reconstructing Professional Identities 
(Volume 2)
DEBORAH SCHIFTER, EDITOR
The Subjects in Question: 
Departmental Organization and the High School
LESLIE SANTEE SISKIN AND
JUDITH WARREN LITTLE, EDITORS
Authentic Assessment in Action:
Studies of Schools and Students at Work
LINDA DARLING-HAMMOND, 
JACQUELINE ANCESS, AND
BEVERLY FALK
School Work: Gender and the Cultural
Construction of Teaching
SARI KNOPP BIKLEN
School Change: 
The Personal Development of a Point of View
SEYMOUR B. SARASON
The Work of Restructuring Schools: 
Building from the Ground Up
ANN LIEBERMAN, EDITOR
Stirring the Chalkdust: 
Tales of Teachers Changing Classroom Practice
PATRICIA A. WASLEY
the series on school reform, continued

The Power
of Protocols
An Educator’s Guide
to Better Practice
Joseph P. McDonald
Nancy Mohr
Alan Dichter
Elizabeth C. McDonald
Teachers College
Columbia University
New York and London

For Hannah and Bert
faithful witnesses 
to our writing weekends in Wareham
Published by Teachers College Press, 1234 Amsterdam Avenue, New York,
NY 10027.
Copyright © 2003 by Teachers College, Columbia University
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or trans-
mitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including pho-
tocopy, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission
from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The power of protocols : an educator’s guide to better practice / Joseph P.
McDonald…
[et al.].
p. cm. — (The series on school reform)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8077-4362-3 (cloth) — ISBN 0-8077-4361-5 (pbk.)
1. High schools—United States—Examinations. 2. Educational tests and 
measurements—United States. 3. Grading and marking (Students) —
United States. 4. Teachers—United States—Training of. I. McDonald, Joseph P.
II. Series.
LB3060.285.U6.P69 2003
373.1102—dc21 
2002072103
ISBN 0-8077-4361-5 (paper)
ISBN 0-8077-4362-3 (cloth)
Printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America
10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03   8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Contents
Foreword
vii
Preface
xiii
Acknowledgments
xix
Chapter 1: The Basic Ideas
1
Educating Ourselves
2
Exploring Student Work
3
Protocol-Based Learning
4
A New Workplace for Educators
7
Facilitative Leadership
11
Chapter 2: Facilitating
15
The Facilitator’s Core Tasks
16
The Facilitator’s Moves
18
Brief Protocols
21
Longer Openers
24
Fears and Hopes
24
Protocol for Setting Norms
26
Diversity Rounds
29
Marvin’s Model
32
Chapter 3: Tapping Outside Sources
34
Final Word
34
Learning from Speakers Protocol
38
Panel Protocol
40
Provocative Prompts
43
Mars/Venus Protocol
46
Rich Text Protocol
48
Chapter 4: Working on Problems of Practice
52
Descriptive Consultancy
53
v

Issaquah Coaching Protocol
56
Constructivist Learning Groups Protocol
58
Success Analysis Protocol
60
Tuning Protocol
63
Peeling the Onion 
66
Japanese Lesson Study 
68
Chapter 5: Exploring Student Work
73
What Comes Up
75
Collaborative Assessment Conference
76
New York Peer Review Protocol
80
Minnesota Slice 
84
Shadow Protocol 
91
ESP Protocol 
95
Equity Protocol 
97
Conclusion: Jumping In
100
Appendix A: Suggested Uses for Protocols
103
Appendix B: Additional Resources
105
References
107
Index 
111
About the Authors
117
vi
Contents

FOREWORD
Why Use Protocols?
Planning as a “Real”Team
To say that I was skeptical would be understating my initial
reaction to the notion of applying formulated protocols to the
tasks of collaborative planning. An earlier, unhappy experience
with School-based Management/Shared Decision-Making had
deteriorated into an ugly power struggle between the teachers’
union on one side and the school administration and parents’
organization on the other–despite the application of Robert’s
Rules of Order. Given the charge to make the State-mandated
School Leadership Team work successfully, however, I was per-
suaded by colleagues, successful principals, and professional
trainers of a much less traditional stripe than I, to give the pro-
tocols at least a chance. And what a revelation it proved to be!
After undertaking to learn and introduce them to our team, I
was astonished to see them at work. Such formats as a Go-
round and the Tuning Protocol gave even the most reticent of
our team members a voice, and limited the dominance of the
more assertive who had intimidated them. Disagreements
became challenges to be resolved rather than arguments, thanks
to the protocols of “warm” and “cool” (never “cruel”) respons-
es, enabling discussion while maintaining focus on shared
vision and goals. Moreover, the team actually began to function
as a “team,” with each member relaxing into the dual roles of
vii

viii
Foreword
active listener and contributor as they became more comfort-
able with the protocol models of group process.
Harris Sarney
Principal, Bayside High School, Queens, New York City
Bridging Cultures
In preparing for Principal-for-a-Day I was paired with Jane
Pauley of NBC and told to work on creating a partnership with
her organization—one which clearly had a completely different
culture from that of a high school in New York City. As my palms
sweated, I waited for Jane’s keen questioning tactics. But it was
through the use of a protocol that the bridging of our two cul-
tures could begin. We were led through a Descriptive
Consultancy Protocol, in which we each talked about our hopes
and our fears about working together. We did this at a “fishbowl”
where other Principal-for-a-Day folks watched. I remember Jane
saying that she particularly valued the “focused listening” that
was involved. The protocol directed our concentration, our
speaking and, most importantly, provided a focus for our listen-
ing across our organizations. 
Ada Rosario-Dolch
Principal, High School for Leadership and Public Service
New York City 
Confronting Issues of Diversity
I am an African American woman and educator with many
years experience teaching English in urban high schools, and also
working with other educators in urban areas. More often than
not I use articles by Gloria Ladson-Billings or Lisa Delpit and do
text-based discussions such as the Final Word. Some mainstream,
White educators are not used to seeing the words White and Black
referenced in an article and are angry that we are even having a
conversation about race, class, and gender. On the other hand, if
the group is a diverse group, then the article must be passionate,
relevant, and deep around the issues of equity. Together, educa-
tors must be willing to be transformed so that we can empower

Foreword
ix
students. Together, we must form alliances that will help us move
from awareness to understanding to taking action in our class-
rooms. Using provocative texts and a variety of protocols is one
way to hold ourselves accountable to each other and accountable
for the success of our students.
Camilla Greene
Professional Developer, New Jersey Coalition of Essential Schools
Looking at Student Work with Colleagues
A quick skim of their papers showed me how far from the
mark my students were in their thinking and understanding. I
dreaded trying to think of constructive feedback. I selected Nick’s
essay to share with my teacher Critical Friends Group, because it
reflected the shortcomings I had seen in all of the students’
papers. Using the Constructivist Tuning Protocol, I asked my crit-
ical friends to search Nick’s paper for understanding, because all I
could see were the gaps. I felt guilty, insisting that they find some-
thing redeeming in this vague and vapid essay. It turned out not
to be all that difficult for them. I took notes as they went through
several rounds of “warm” feedback, their fresh eyes finding
strengths in Nick’s paper that my own eyes, clouded with disap-
pointment, had missed. Their distance from the assignment also
allowed them to offer “cool” feedback on his work without the
harshness that I had been feeling. Hearing the group’s ideas
pushed me to think beyond the strengths and weaknesses of that
particular piece of work to how I could help move all of the stu-
dents’ learning forward. 
Jessie Towbin
Teacher, Illahee Junior High School, Federal Way, Washingon
Helping Students Examine Their Own Work
My positive experiences in using protocols with colleagues
raised the question: why not with students? Wouldn’t young
people who crave fair treatment respond positively to the fair-
ness inherent in protocols as least as well as adults? 
In the past year I have been experimenting with having mid-

x
Foreword
dle and high school students use structured protocols to examine
their work in my art and photography classes. What was prima-
rily an effective mode of adult professional development has now
become a new model for the classroom. In introducing a new
assignment, for instance, I have presented students with similar
work from previous classes. Using a simple protocol, students
speak in turn, first describing the work and then offering inter-
pretive observations. The benefits of using the protocol are imme-
diately evident. Students abide by the guidelines and listen to
each other, rare enough in itself. Each student seems to appreci-
ate the equal opportunity to speak, even if it is to simply say,
“Pass.” The initial rounds of description provide a way especially
for students to bypass the knee-jerk tendency to judge, which
effectively shuts down dialogue. As they step into the role of
thoughtful, respectful collaborators, the conversation seems to
become theirs, and I am able to comfortably assume the role of
learner among learners. 
Eric Baylin
Teacher, Packer Collegiate Institute, Brooklyn, New York
Refining Teaching and Learning
I work in an urban university teaching Current Issues in
Elementary Urban Education, the capstone course for the ele-
mentary master’s program. This puts me in the position to teach
all of the master’s candidates in a research and writing class as
they prepare for their comprehensive exams. I do not score the
comps, and therefore felt the need to bring together the profes-
sors whose questions the students answer and who score the
exams. My framing question was, “What is master’s level writ-
ing?” I chose the Tuning Protocol, and I presented one typical
paper. Five of my colleagues engaged in the protocol and a dis-
cussion that followed. What resulted was a reformatting of the
research paper to match the format professors were looking for in
the comps. In addition, I completely revamped my course syl-
labus and broke the paper down into manageable chunks for per-
sonalized assistance. I now have regular one-on-one conferences

with students wherein they bring me their work along the way.
Not only have the research papers improved, the comp professors
are also seeing an improvement in students’ organization of their
written responses on the exams.
I also use protocols with my secondary education methods
students, having them work with colleagues over a quarter to
“tune” their work before it is turned in to me. They get so much
out of critiquing each other’s work, as it gives them a different
audience and valuable feedback prior to handing work in for a
grade. In addition, I use protocols with my student teachers.
They meet two times during a quarter and bring two lesson
plans they have taught and the resulting student work. We use
Collaborative Assessment Conference and end by focusing on
the construction of the lesson, what happened, and how the
resulting work might be improved—all helpful—and students
feel very powerful.
Juli P. Quinn
Assistant Professor, California State University at Los Angeles
Foreword
xi


Preface
In 1991, a learning tool called the Tuning Protocol was intro-
duced in a hotel conference room in Boston. This was the first time
the word protocol was used in quite the way we use it throughout
this book. The meeting’s participants included educators from five
urban high schools that had been funded by the IBM Corporation
to devise systems for graduating students on the basis of student
exhibitions. The idea was to “plan backward” from a vision of what
they wanted all their graduates to know and be able to do, re-
thinking all their systems accordingly (McDonald, 1996;
McDonald, Barton, Smith, Turner, & Finney, 1993). The partici-
pants also included a couple of high school students, executives
from IBM, and staff from the Coalition of Essential Schools. The
latter had organized the meeting with three purposes in mind: to
introduce the educators to each other (the schools were in differ-
ent regions of the country), to offer IBM an early progress report
on the work it had funded, and to engage in what the organizers
called “tuning.” The metaphor sometimes gets a musical interpre-
tation—as in tuning up the instruments—and sometimes an elec-
tromagnetic one—as in tuning to a different frequency. Drawing on
both meanings, the organizers hoped that educators might gain
new sources of insight and energy for their work by sharing hon-
est accounts of it with each other, by giving and receiving honest
feedback, and by coming to appreciate a different perspective on
their joint concerns.
The organizers knew that educators are not used to “tuning,”
and that accomplishing it at this meeting would be particularly
challenging given the meeting’s other two purposes. If the partic-
ipants did not even know each other—never mind trust each
other—and if they were to be reporting progress to still other
strangers who had given them a lot of money to make progress—
wouldn’t they just put on a show? Moreover, might this rare
xiii

opportunity to hear about early work provoke the funders to be
more critical than they ought to be at such a point? The meeting
presented much possibility of social danger.
To save the tuning from the danger, the organizers designed a
protocol to guide the meeting. Why they chose this odd word to
identify their design is explained in Chapter 1. Here we say only
that the protocol structured the conversation that day so that
everybody got time to speak and everybody got time to listen;
that presenting, examining, questioning, and responding were
kept in balance; and that the meeting proved optimally honest
and respectful.
Still, the meeting got off to a rocky start—predictably so,
given the participants’ inexperience with tuning or with proto-
cols. Initially some of the school people resisted the facilitator’s
efforts to limit the presentations, and to structure the conversa-
tion. They had prepared for the meeting with a show in mind—
one aimed at building the funder’s confidence in their capacity to
deliver the student benefits they promised. Naturally, they want-
ed simply to do what they thought they had come to do.
However, the facilitator insisted on the protocol, though even
he buckled at one point under the pressure to put it aside. His slip
proved fortuitous. It occurred when he called on one of the stu-
dents to answer a question—in plain violation of the protocol’s
rules about when presenters may speak. His intentions were
good: one of the funders had asked a question about the student’s
own experience, and the facilitator thought that having the
chance to answer the question immediately might make the stu-
dent feel more comfortable. Before he could answer the question,
however, a teacher interrupted: “The students are expecting the
same format as the rest of us. They know that hard questions are
going to be coming at them, but they want the same time to think
about their answers that the rest of us get.” His statement helped
everyone present understand instantly the value of a protocol.
The result was that the resistance abated.
Since that day in Boston, use of the Tuning Protocol has
spread (Allen, 1998; Blythe, Allen, & Powell, 1999). Since then,
its use has also become linked with a number of other meeting
tools to which the word protocol is often attached (McDonald,
xiv
Preface

Preface
xv
2001b, 2002). We describe many of these in this book. Some
involve tuning—particularly the ones that help educators study
their students’ work together, or help them examine each other’s
practice. Others involve comparable levels of social danger
because they challenge long-standing norms among educators to
avoid exploring complex problems or discussing controversial
topics. But all of the protocols featured in the book have the
premise that was made explicit in Boston: whenever talk has
important consequences, we deserve a chance to think through
what we want to say, and an environment where what we choose
to say can be heard and respected.
Meanwhile, as the use of protocols has spread from confer-
ences and workshops to everyday settings where colleagues meet
to plan and work together, it becomes possible to imagine a new
kind of workplace for educators—quite different from the kind
most of us have grown accustomed to. The new kind of work-
place is one that we think capable of supporting what we call gen-
uine accountability—a spirit of collective effort to teach all our
students well, and to attend assiduously to the problem of leav-
ing none behind. Readers may use this book merely as a hand-
book of protocols—a collection of step-by-step accounts of how to
use them to study together, work on problems of practice, and
explore their students’ work. We hope, however, that they will
also use it to join with colleagues to imagine and then create this
new kind of workplace.
ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK
Chapter 1 explains the basic ideas underlying all the rest of
the book, beginning with an argument for why we educators
should educate ourselves. It also makes the case for exploring stu-
dent work as a crucial element in the effort to educate ourselves.
Then, at greater length, it explains what protocols are and why
we need them, and finally how the “facilitative leadership” they
foster can help build within our institutions the new workplace
we advocate.
Chapter 2 examines the work of the facilitative leader. We

apply this term, borrowed from Roger Schwarz (1994), to every
educator who has occasion to lead his or her colleagues in one
of the protocols we describe—whether in the context of a sim-
ple team meeting, a multiday retreat, or any format in between.
Moving the emphasis of the book from rationale to practical
guidance, this chapter offers advice and step-by-step activities
for facilitators of protocols. Here we also introduce the format
used to present all the book’s protocols—beginning with some
introductory material, proceeding to a note on purpose and
practical details, moving through a careful description of the
steps of the protocol, providing a few facilitation tips, and fin-
ishing with some variants to consider. 
Chapter 3 focuses on the crucial role of outside sources in
efforts to educate ourselves. It presents protocols that we educa-
tors can use to explore texts, and to draw advice from experts.
These enable bifocal attention on both the sources of new insight
and the issues of practice they concern.
Chapter 4 includes protocols commonly used for problem-
solving, planning, and other kinds of learning on the job. These
differ from the ones presented in Chapter 3 in that they sup-
port using the artifacts and experiences of our own practice as
the chief resources in educating ourselves.
Chapter 5 focuses on what is undoubtedly the most well
known use of protocols today, namely the exploration of student
work. It presents protocols for many different kinds and degrees
of exploration, including ones aimed at deeper understanding of
particular students, greater awareness of a curriculum’s impact,
and sharper awareness of the standards guiding teaching and
learning.
It is important to note that all the protocols we present in this
book, however, can be used for purposes other than the ones our
chapter groupings suggest. A shift of purpose takes only the right
circumstances, some modification, and a facilitator’s imagination
and skill. Protocols can also be used for purposes that go beyond
the education of educators. For example, many teachers adapt
protocols for use in their own classroom teaching—a particularly
beneficial off-shoot of educating ourselves.
We encourage lots of cross-use. In this regard, we follow the
xvi
Preface

Preface
xvii
lead of our favorite cookbooks—the kind that not only enable
“faithful replication” but also encourage improvisation, that tell
the novice how to make pesto with basil, pignoli, and parmi-
giano, but then suggest for future reference that it could just as
well be made with any green, nut, and cheese. To support such
cross-use—again in the manner of good cookbooks—we provide
a table of Suggested Uses in Appendix A. Moreover, abbreviated
versions of all the protocols presented in this book are available
on the Teachers College Press website (http://www.teacherscol-
legepress.com). This is for readers to download to their own com-
puters, to print out as needed for their own quick reference—the
equivalent for facilitators of the cook’s notes—and to customize
the “recipes” to meet their own needs. Finally, in Appendix B, we
provide information about contacting some of the organizations
whose work we have drawn upon in creating this book, and
whom we thank in the Acknowledgments.


xix
Acknowledgments
The use of protocols in the education of educators has roots in
the efforts of at least two generations of scholars and practition-
ers who have attempted to bring to education insights from the
fields of organizational development and human relations train-
ing. We think, for example, of the work of two scholar-teachers
who provided us important counsel in the last years of their lives,
Don Schön and Matt Miles. More recently, David Jacobson has
helped us connect our experience within the educational field to
larger organizational perspectives.
Most of what we describe and advocate in this book, howev-
er, originated in the theories and practices of education itself.
Among the seminal contributors, we count Patricia Carini, Peter
Elbow, James Gray, Vito Perrone, and Ted Sizer. We would also
like to acknowledge the work of some clever people we know
who have made prodigious contributions to the efforts we report
here by designing protocols, promoting their use, and reporting
on them also. We thank David Allen, Daniel Baron, Tina Blythe,
Simon Clements, Anthony Conelli, Kathleen Cushman, the late
Faith Dunne, Paula Evans, Helen Featherstone, Ruth Mitchell,
Barbara Powell, Steve Seidel, Gene Thompson-Grove, and Viv
White.
Still others’ important contributions, however, are sadly
beyond our capacity to trace. That is because some protocols have
attained the status of lore. Still, we have attempted to document
the sources of protocols (formal and informal, published or not)
wherever these sources can be traced. Scholarship and courtesy
demand as much, but there is learning to be gained from such doc-
umentation, too. Below the surface of attribution, the reader can
trace the influence of networks and institutions that encourage and
support educators educating themselves in the ways we advocate.

They include national organizations like the Coalition of Essential
Schools, the National School Reform Faculty, the National Writing
Project, the Annenberg Institute for School Reform at Brown
University, Project Zero at the Harvard School of Education, the
Education Trust, and the Institute for Learning at the University of
Pittsburgh. They also include many local organizations. As New
Yorkers, we especially want to acknowledge the work of the
Literacy Center at Lehman College, New Visions for Public Schools,
the Professional Development Lab, and the Horowitz Center for
Teacher Development at New York University. But many other
local organizations deserve mention. They stretch from coast to
coast (from the Bay Area Coalition of Equitable Schools to the
Southern Maine Partnership), with too many in between to list
here. Ultimately, the aim of this book is to advance the work of
such networks and institutions—nationally, regionally, and locally. 
Finally, with deep gratitude for the supportive contexts they
have offered us as developers, explorers, describers, and promot-
ers of protocols, we wish to acknowledge the Department of
Teaching and Learning at the Steinhardt School of Education,
New York University; the New York City Department of
Education; and the editors of Teachers College Press.
xx
Acknowledgments

1
CHAPTER 1
The Basic Ideas
In some educational organizations, protocols may at first
seem foolish—their artifice an unwarranted interference in
ordinary business. The more dysfunctional this business, the
stronger the negative reaction may be. For example, schools or
colleges mired in norms of private practice, and used to ignor-
ing the actual impact of the practice on students’ learning, may
not take easily to learning with protocols. Encouraged to try
them anyway, however, and pressed to see them all the way
through, even reluctant participants may find something
refreshing about protocols. Then, urged to reflect on the nature
of this refreshment, the participants may find that the protocols
help them imagine alternatives to ordinary habits of working
together, learning, and leading.
Thus emerges the possibility of what we call a new workplace
for educators—the kind that Peter Senge (1990) with great reso-
nance calls a learning organization. In this chapter, we describe
four basic ideas concerning the continuing professional education
of educators. These basic ideas underpin all the protocols pre-
sented in Chapters 2 through 5, and all our advice concerning
their use. Together, they also constitute the basis of our vision of
a new workplace for educators. As we suggested in the Preface,
readers can choose merely to use this book as a handbook of pro-
fessional development activities, but we hope they will use it also
as an invitation to help create such a workplace within their own
contexts.

EDUCATING OURSELVES
The first basic idea is that we professional educators should
take charge of our own learning. That is because only we can
direct it toward managing the real problems of our work, and
toward meeting our students’ real needs. Because these problems
and needs are vastly more complex than they typically appear to
others, inside perspectives are crucial to understanding them
(Lampert, 2001). To say that we ought to educate ourselves,
therefore, means that professional development activities for
educators that are designed and conducted without benefit of
inside perspectives are not worth the time and money they cost.
It does not mean, however, that we should cut ourselves off from
outside sources of learning. On the contrary, we desperately need
what outside expertise can offer. However, we cannot effectively
use outside expertise except in combination with our own inti-
mate knowledge of practice.
It is important to note the plural in the phrase educating ourselves.
The work it describes is necessarily collective. No educator works
alone, though we seem to. Yes, we make lots of private moves, and
our work demands an individual capacity for spontaneity, improvi-
sation, and good judgment. But all our efforts for better or worse are
mediated by the efforts of our colleagues. What they do matters as
much to the learning of our students and the running of our pro-
grams as what we do. Thus their values, standards, and methods are
our business—as ours are their business—and the problems of prac-
tice are inescapably mutual ones. For this reason, we must give up
our pervasive tendency to try to manage them alone.
Indeed, we may even fail to see what our actual problems
of practice are unless we dare to inquire about them together.
This is because so much of our knowledge of practice is tacit,
and becomes subject to critique only when we reflect on it in
the company of others (Schön, 1983). It is also because certain
aspects of practice—as we explain below—cause us to overlook
the problems that inhere in it; and it is our colleagues who are
best situated to help us understand this limit on our ordinary
perspective. Finally, it is because the identification and analysis
of problems require certain organizational components that are
often absent within educational institutions. These include
2
The Power of Protocols

norms for open and honest conversation; meeting habits that
support inquiry, dialogue, and reflection; opportunities for
those immersed in particular work to take direct action to
improve it; and facilitative leadership capable of encouraging
participation, ensuring equity, and building trust. The only way
to ensure the presence of these things within our educational
institutions is through collective work on the inside. No
amount of external pressure can by itself manage the task, nor
can any amount of solo effort.
EXPLORING STUDENT WORK
One good way for us to educate ourselves is to pause period-
ically in our practice to become deliberate students of our stu-
dents. This is the second basic idea underpinning this book. The
point is to reach a different understanding of our students than
the kind we’re used to, one deeper than what is required merely
to keep our teaching and their learning in sync. But this demands
a great shift of energy, both practical and organizational. Instead
of pressing for student work flow as we usually do, judging quick-
ly the value of the flow’s direction, we must on a regular basis
suspend flow, capture images of the work interrupted, study the
images calmly and deliberately, and explore together what they
may mean.
Along with a broad alliance of teachers, school leaders,
teacher educators, and reform-minded educators with many
other job titles, we often refer to this great shift of energy with
the simple phrase “looking at student work” (Allen, 1998). Here,
however, we acknowledge that the “looking” we advocate is sim-
ple in the deep and disciplined way that Thoreau’s looking was
simple at Walden Pond and Annie Dillard’s at Tinker Creek.
Simple but elemental. Simple but difficult.
Students’ work is the text we read in order to understand our
own work. It is where our moves as educators and their impact on
students are most traceable (McDonald, 2001b, 2002). It is where
what we know and also what we don’t know become most appar-
ent. For these reasons, our efforts to explore student work—togeth-
er—are crucial to our efforts to revise and improve the collective
The Basic Ideas
3

4
The Power of Protocols
work of our educational institutions. But for these reasons, too,
such efforts are threatening. This is why protocols are useful.
PROTOCOL-BASED LEARNING
The third basic idea underlying this book concerns our use
of the word protocol. It may seem at first an odd fit with our
purpose. In diplomacy, protocol governs who greets whom first
when the President and Prime Minister meet, and other such
matters. In technology, protocols enable machines to “talk”
with one another by precisely defining the language they use.
In science and medicine, protocols are regimens that ensure
faithful replication of an experiment or treatment; they tell the
scientist or doctor to do this first, then that, and so on. And in
social science, they are the scripted questions that an inter-
viewer covers, or the template for an observation. But in the
professional education of educators? One could argue that
elaborate etiquette, communicative precision, faithful replica-
tion, and scripts would prove counterproductive here. Don’t
we best learn from each other by just talking with each other?
No, we claim. Among educators especially, just talking may
not be enough. The kind of talking needed to educate ourselves
cannot rise spontaneously and unaided from just talking. It needs
to be carefully planned and scaffolded.
Making Our Work Transparent
Why should educators in particular need protocols? It is
because belief in the efficacy of our efforts is a principal tool of
our trade. Even when our students seem resistant, it is partly our
persistence in believing in the possibilities of their learning that
gives them in time the faith they need to perform well. But our
unconditional believing is an occupational hazard when it comes
to reflecting on our own practice. That is when, as Peter Elbow
(1986) argues, the educator must temper methodological belief
with methodological doubt. A good way to do this, he claims, is
to alternate the two. This idea was one of several important inspi-
rations for the design of the Tuning Protocol, whose debut we

The Basic Ideas
5
describe in the Preface. Another was the practice of the National
Writing Project (NWP) in juxtaposing in its summer workshops
for teachers three risky opportunities. The first involves sharing
drafts of their own writing with each other. The second involves
sharing examples of their teaching of writing with each other.
And the third involves learning about the teaching of writing
from experts and expert texts (Lieberman & Wood, 2003). In fac-
ing up to the first two risks—and thus gaining the benefits they
offer—NWP teachers become open to understanding the compa-
rable risk of the third and thus gaining its benefit, too. Of course,
teachers hear from experts all the time—for example, in profes-
sional development workshops; but they gain real benefit from
such encounters only when they dare to put their own expertise
at risk (McDonald, Buchanan, & Sterling, in press).
This is difficult for us educators because we must believe in
ourselves as much as in our students. We must project confi-
dence in the directions we offer, or our students lose faith in
these directions. But this has its downside. It encourages us to
hide the real complexities of our work from our students, and
inadvertently even from ourselves. We project such confidence
in the directions we set that we conceal the choices, hunches,
and inescapable uncertainty and arbitrariness that underlie
them. Over time, this habit can insulate us from the gaps and
faults of our own expertise, and seal us off from new expertise.
Dangerously for both ourselves and our students, it can also
mask the real dynamics of learning.
Protocols force transparency. By specifying, for example, who
speaks when and who listens when, protocols segment elements
of a conversation whose boundaries otherwise blur. They make
clear the crucial differences between talking and listening,
between describing and judging, or between proposing and giv-
ing feedback. In the process, they call attention to the role and
value of each of these in learning, and make the steps of our
learning visible and replicable.
Meanwhile, absent any effort on our part to make our work
more transparent, our students grow up thinking that everything
in education is clearer and more certain than it actually is—for
example, what to teach, how to teach it, whether the students
have learned it, what to do if they haven’t, how to organize the

6
The Power of Protocols
school or other institution, and how to make it effective. Then
some of the students grow up to be school board members,
trustees, mayors, members of Congress, even President—and in
these roles, they make policy decisions based on their faulty
understanding, and these policy decisions have consequences.
We work among the residual effects (in our organizational struc-
tures, institutional cultures, and work routines) of nearly a cen-
tury of efforts to make education as predictable (and controllable)
as it seems it should be. Educators have responded to these efforts
in turn by substituting harried privacy and spurious certainty for
the publicly accountable authoritativeness and creative uncer-
tainty that our work really requires (McDonald, 1992). One of
the benefits of working with protocols is that they disturb the pri-
vacy and certainty by interrupting the ordinary flow of conversa-
tion. Some of them force the raising of questions, the suspension
of judgment, and the withholding of response.
Enriching Learning
In our experience, teachers who participate in protocol-based
learning in their own education often adapt the protocols for
their teaching. This happens, we think, because teachers already
organize their practice in terms of routines—ones for which pro-
tocols may substitute, and also because teachers continually use
their own learning experiences as grist for their teaching plans.
Recently, Nancy Mohr worked with a group of teachers from the
Packer Collegiate Institute in Brooklyn, New York, who were
learning to use protocols to explore their students’ work. Over
the course of several months, the teachers also adapted many of
these protocols to use with the students themselves, and were
impressed with the quality of the work that resulted. One adapt-
ed a protocol to help her students identify whether they were
predominantly visual or auditory learners, and then to reflect on
what this means. The students came up with powerful lists. They
were first graders. Another teacher used a protocol to help his
students explore their own artwork in the same way that he and
his colleagues had done.
We hope that one benefit of this book will be that readers and
their colleagues will not only use the protocols we describe to

educate themselves, but to educate their students as well.
Thus protocols may encourage an environment for learning
(by educators and their students) based on the theory that knowl-
edge is socially constructed. That is, encounters with other peo-
ple’s understanding enable learners to gain and deepen their own
understanding. It is a theory well supported by research
(Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999). Moreover, along with
John Dewey, we believe such learning environments foster
democracy as well as cognition. They encourage learners—
whether they are first graders, graduate students, or colleagues in
professional education—to appreciate the value of diverse ideas
and deliberative communities (Glickman, 1998; Greene, 1988;
Oakes & Lipton, 1999).
Like their counterparts in diplomacy, technology, science,
medicine, and social science, the kind of protocols we describe
and promote in this book constrain behavior in order to enhance
experience. Some protocols enable enemies to sit at the same
table and make peace. Others enable scientific advancements and
medical cures. Still others ensure reliable data collection and valid
inference. The ones we write about help enrich educators’
descriptive powers, intensify their listening, enhance their quali-
ties of judgment, and facilitate their communication with each
other. They help us to become genuinely professional and gen-
uinely accountable.
A NEW WORKPLACE FOR EDUCATORS
The fourth basic idea informing this book concerns the conse-
quences of taking the other ideas seriously—of educating our-
selves, exploring student work together, and gaining experience
in the facilitation of protocols. These can lead, we believe, to the
development of what we call a new workplace for educators. This
is one where the power to assess outcomes and to take action to
improve them is distributed throughout the organization, and
where the people who do the work are able, willing, and even
eager—in consultation with their colleagues—to make changes as
needed in order to make the work more effective.
Management theorists call this a high-performance workplace
The Basic Ideas
7

(Applebaum, Bailey, Berg, & Kalleberg, 2000; Ichniowski, Levine,
Olson, & Strauss, 2000). Eileen Applebaum and her colleagues
outline its components within the manufacturing sector of the
economy against the backdrop of the traditional workplace:
In traditional manufacturing plans, conceptualizing and planning what
needs to be done is separated from carrying out work tasks and execut-
ing plans. . . . Most employees have little autonomy or control over
work tasks and methods. Managers coordinate the gathering and pro-
cessing of information . . . and then use knowledge concentrated with-
in management ranks to make decisions based on the information they
have gathered. There are few opportunities for ideas to flow upward
from front-line workers. Once decisions have been made, orders are
relayed back down the chain of command to the front-line workers,
who carry them out. Supervisors act as monitors. . . . Workers are paid
to follow orders, not to think. In this setting, time spent in training or
in problem-solving meetings represents lost productivity. (pp. 101–102)
With some modification, this description fits certain sectors of
traditional American education, too, especially urban schooling.
Indeed, the original design of urban schooling in the United
States, with its emphasis on mass production and “scientific man-
agement,” was imported from manufacturing (Callahan, 1962;
Tyack, 1974). Sadly, evidence of these roots may be stronger
today than in recent decades, given today’s heightened attention
to accountability. That is because pressures to achieve greater
accountability are often filtered through the century-old organi-
zational paradigm, resulting in ever more scripted curriculum,
ever closer monitoring, and ultimately spurious accountability.
The lesson from the 1990s turnaround in American manufac-
turing, however, is that higher performance requires a change of
organizational paradigm rather than greater dedication to the
existing one. The heart of the change in manufacturing, accord-
ing to Applebaum and her colleagues (2000), has been to reor-
ganize work “to permit front-line workers to participate in deci-
sions that alter organizational routines” (p. 7). Specifically, this
has involved more front-line authority exercised in production
teams; greater communication within and among the teams,
between teams and managers, and between teams and experts in
other parts of the organization; and participation by front-line
8
The Power of Protocols

The Basic Ideas
9
workers in off-line problem-solving. In the manufacturing enter-
prises that Applebaum and her colleagues studied, these changes
resulted in greater profitability and greater worker satisfaction.
The high-performance workplace shows up today also in the
service sector of the American economy—at least, the high end of
it. Charles Fishman (1996), for example, describes the high-per-
formance workplace of the profitable and upscale Whole Foods
Supermarket chain:
The Whole Foods culture is premised on decentralized teamwork. “The
team,” not the hierarchy, is the defining unit of activity. Each of the 43
stores is an autonomous profit center composed of an average of 10 self-
managed teams—produce, grocery, prepared foods, and so on—with des-
ignated leaders and clear performance targets. The team leaders in each
store are a team; store leaders in each region are a team; the company’s six
regional presidents are a team. Whole Foods supports teamwork with a
wide-open financial system. It collects and distributes information to an
extent that would be unimaginable almost anywhere else. Sensitive fig-
ures on store sales, team sales, profit margins, even salaries, are available
to every person in every location. In fact, the company shares so much
information so widely that the SEC has designated all 6,500 employees
“insiders” for stock-trading purposes. (p. 103)
Of course, measures of success in education are different than
in steel or apparel manufacturing, or in the retailing of natural
foods; and the kinds of information that people need to work
smartly in schools and colleges and other educational organiza-
tions are different, too. Still, it seems plausible that some work-
place innovations in manufacturing and high-end service may
also work well in our field. These may especially include the use
of teams—both “front-line” (to do the work), and “off-line” (to
study ways to improve the work); richer information systems and
far broader access to them; and the cultivation of a commitment
to the organization’s mission at all levels, purchased by the
decentralization of management authority and accountability.
Some recent studies of school reform bear this out. Here the
high-performance workplace has been associated with the
development of what are called professional communities of
practice. Reporting on a 4-year study of 16 high schools in two
states, for example, Milbrey McLaughlin and Joan Talbert

10
The Power of Protocols
(2001) depict a subsample of schools that consistently engaged
diverse students in challenging academic work, and kept them
engaged and successful over time. These schools were notable
for the presence of a “strong professional community commit-
ted to making innovations that support student and teacher
learning and success”(pp. 38–39). Similarly, Fred Newmann
and Gary Wehlage (1995), reporting on a national study of 24
restructured schools, conclude that “the most successful
schools were the ones that used restructuring tools to help
them function as professional communities of practice” (p. 3).
Where such communities had the right cultural and structural
conditions to exert continual leadership, the researchers say,
and where they focused on improving the intellectual quality
of their students’ work, the work did improve (Newmann &
Associates, 1996; Newmann & Wehlage, 1995).
In a recent national survey of American public school teachers,
69% reported a higher amount of collaboration in their work life
than 3 years before, with 36% reporting a “lot more” collaboration
(Belden Russonello & Stewart Research and Communications,
2000). Still, the presence of professional communities of practice in
American schooling seems far from the norm. Indeed, the same
survey suggests that the decline in front-line privacy reported by
teachers has been accompanied by increased rather than decreased
bureaucratic constraints on their work, especially in the form of
testing requirements.
Meanwhile, many calls for accountability in education and
plans for achieving it continue to take little account of the gap
between aspiration and organizational reality. For example, some
reformers argue that malfunctioning urban school systems can be
redirected toward student achievement by turning them over to
“accountable” mayors (Kirst, 2002). Cities now implementing
this “reform” include New York City, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland,
and Detroit (Gewertz, 2002). It is as if accountability were a kind
of fluid that could be squeezed through an educational organiza-
tion starting from the top, and as if the organization were a kind
of vacuum of accountability to begin with.
We think differently. For one thing, we know that the status
quo is not an accountability vacuum but a different (though inad-

The Basic Ideas
11
equate) kind of accountability system based on different assump-
tions about the goals of education (Abelmann & Elmore, 1999).
These are rooted in policy-making focused on controlling how
every job is done, rather than on building capacity for doing the
real job well (Darling-Hammond, 1998). Doing the real job well
involves unlearning the controls, and substituting an accounta-
bility based on faithfulness to learning. This is one that combines
front-line scrutiny of student work, collective responsiveness to
individual student needs, and strategic flexibility at all levels of
the organization. In this way the smallest units of the organiza-
tion become the source of its cohesion overall, as Margaret
Wheatley (2000) explains:
If the organization can stay in a continuous conversation about what it
is and what it is becoming, then leaders don’t have to undertake the
impossible task of trying to hold it all together. Organizations that are
clear at their core hold themselves together because of their deep con-
gruence. (p. 343)
The best way to be clear at the core, we think, is to build pro-
fessional communities of practice (McLaughlin & Talbert, 2001).
This is where educators can learn and unlearn whatever scrutiny,
responsiveness, and strategic flexibility require. This is where they
can educate themselves accordingly. Such education is usually
needed, since no education preset in its purposes—whether offered
in outside courses and workshops or “in-service” ones—can fully
meet the needs of professionals really attentive to their own stu-
dents and their own contexts. Professional communities of practice
inevitably need learning that only its own members can supply.
FACILITATIVE LEADERSHIP
Karen Seashore Louis and her colleagues (1996) argue that
the crucial components of professional communities of practice
are the following:
• Focus on student learning
• Deprivatization of practice

• Collaboration
• Shared norms and values
• Reflective dialogue
The first two of these require difficult shifts in organizational
values and structures. By and large, most educational organiza-
tions today are focused more on their own smooth running than
on student learning, and this smooth running depends in large
measure on keeping practice private and serious talk about prac-
tice minimal. Some reformers aim to improve matters quickly by
pressing directly for a focus on student learning and/or the depri-
vatization of practice, while paying insufficient attention to the
rest of the items on the researchers’ list. These reformers may
insist, for example, on accountability with respect to certain indi-
cators of student learning such as test scores, but neglect the
problem of how educators used to working alone and ignoring
such indicators might suddenly reverse emphasis. Or they may
insist on educators working in teams, but provide no models or
coaching. Or they may provide time for educators to meet
together for planning, but no norms for planning or frameworks
of values to guide it.
We argue that all the elements on the list are crucial, and that
efforts to achieve a new and more genuinely accountable workplace
for educators must work simultaneously to cultivate them all. We
argue further that a good way to do this is to invest systematically
in the development of distributed facilitative leadership. This means
working to ensure that there are people throughout the organiza-
tion who know how to do the following (Schwarz, 1994):
• Gather colleagues together with a purpose
• Establish effective ground rules for the gatherings
• Enforce the ground rules by identifying behaviors consistent
and inconsistent with them
• Enable the colleagues to share information freely with each
other
• Help them attend fully to each other’s perspectives
• Help them make a collective commitment to the choices the
group may make
12
The Power of Protocols

The Basic Ideas
13
When we use the word facilitator in this book, we mean some-
one empowered by role or opportunity to do these things. In an
educational organization, this someone may be a workshop or
task force leader; a member of a teaching team; the principal,
dean, or other administrator; the chair of a standing committee;
a parent or student leader; or any staff member suddenly called
upon on an ad hoc basis to organize others to learn together,
improve practice, solve problems, or develop action plans. Of
course, the facilitator may also be an outside consultant.
However, over time—and partly as a result of the thoughtful use
of outside consultants—enough insiders can become good facili-
tators that outsiders are needed only in special circumstances.
This is when the organizations may be said to have developed
facilitative leadership.
One of the values of using protocols as learning formats, in
our view, is that they can accelerate the development of facilita-
tive leadership, and thus assist in the creation of new workplaces
for educators. This is because in some important respects they
make the tasks of facilitation more transparent. Of course, facili-
tators of protocols still have to make many important on-the-job
calls: how to strike and keep a balance between comfort and
alertness, whether to speed up the pace or slow it down, how to
press for honesty but also soften its occasionally hard impact, and
so on. On the other hand, they do not have to make many other
calls—for example, who talks when and for how long, and even
what they talk about. That is because many protocols preset
these. Moreover—at least as we promote the role and the task—
facilitators of protocols do not decide the purposes of the learning
they facilitate, nor judge its ultimate effects. Our claim that we
professional educators need to educate ourselves means especial-
ly that these decisions need to be collectively made.
Thus freed from some kinds of decision-making, facilitators of
protocols have more energy for making the decisions they must,
and for reflecting on the results. Such experience over time can
make them good facilitators of other meeting formats besides pro-
tocol-based ones, and thus deepen their organization’s overall
capacity with respect to facilitative leadership.
In the next chapter, we examine more deeply the facilitator’s

14
The Power of Protocols
role, and offer practical advice to facilitators—including some pro-
tocols they may use to manage some parts of their role. Here we say
merely—and in conclusion—that this role may be more powerful
than it usually seems; that those good at managing the “process” of
educational reform may, in the end, control the fate of its “content”;
and that the more an educational organization cultivates people
who can play this role well, the healthier it may become.

CHAPTER 2
Facilitating
At its heart, facilitating is about promoting participation,
ensuring equity, and building trust. This is true whether the facil-
itating involves a protocol or another kind of meeting format. The
difference is that protocols are deliberately designed with these
tasks in mind, while most other meeting formats are rife with
opportunities for ignoring them. We all know the result: the fac-
ulty “meeting” that turns into a monologue by the principal or
the chairperson, the “discussion” that two or three people domi-
nate, or the task force that manages to suppress dissent.
Of course, protocols are no panacea for these or any other
kinds of collegial problems, but they are valuable in highlighting
the fact that the problems exist. In offering colleagues the image
of an alternative reality, they may also encourage efforts to
address the problems. Thus someone might say, “Let’s have more
of the kind of faculty meetings we had that one time, when
everyone got a chance to talk, and everybody’s ideas got heard
and responded to.”
To promote participation, ensure equity, and promote trust,
the facilitator needs, first of all, an “appointment.” It may be a
formal one—as in the announcement that “George will lead the
task force,” or it may be informal, as in a colleague’s asking, “Hey,
George, why don’t you facilitate the group this time?” In either
case, George also has to have a full understanding of what the
appointment entails. He has to understand that the three tasks—
involving participation, equity, and trust—are at the heart of the
work he is being asked to do. Furthermore, he must be willing
15

16
The Power of Protocols
and able to perform the tasks. One aim of this book is to help
spread such understanding, willingness, and ability throughout
educational organizations. This is crucial, we think, to the effort
to make them workplaces that are genuinely accountable.
THE FACILITATOR’S CORE TASKS
One reason why competent facilitators are in short supply
today, however, is that many organizational environments dis-
count the importance of the facilitator’s core tasks. The facilitator
deals merely with “process,” some like to say, but what really
matters is “content”: “getting the information across,” “accom-
plishing the task,” “making the decision.” We believe, however,
that “content” has a way of evaporating in the absence of partic-
ipation, equity, and trust.
For this reason, we begin our practical advice about facilitat-
ing by offering some arguments about why encouraging partici-
pation, ensuring equity, and building trust matter so much—and
how they relate to content. With such arguments to rely on, the
facilitator need not fear the old accusation that he or she is being
“touchy-feely.”
Promoting Participation
Learning is social. We inevitably learn through and with
others, even though what is finally understood is our own
mental construction (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999). In
insisting that educators learning together get to know each
other first, the facilitator is not just encouraging cordiality.
Openness to others’ experiences builds openness to others’ per-
spectives, and such openness provides learning opportunities
otherwise unavailable. 
When the facilitator encourages participants in a protocol to
“hear all voices,” it is really a call to highlight a sufficient number
of perspectives on the issue or problem at hand such that every-
one can gain the possibility of new insight. It is also a call to pool
knowledge and thus become smarter in the aggregate, to cultivate
and rely upon what Lauren Resnick (1987) calls shared cogni-
tion, which she properly distinguishes as the hallmark of most

complex work situations outside education. Finally, it is a call to
suspend what our friend Paul Naso calls the ordinary political
cross-currents of schools and colleges—the ones that may cause
the newer people to hold their tongues while the veterans speak,
that may give some people used to exerting influence more than
their due share of it, and that may perpetuate old culture within
new structures. 
Ensuring Equity
The presumption of a genuinely accountable educational
organization is that everyone can learn what he or she needs to
learn in order to do the work at hand. This everyone involves
adults as well as students. The difficulty in living up to such a pre-
sumption comes from the fact that people learn in different ways,
including ways that may seem aberrant: the child who persists in
walking around or talking out of turn; the adult who talks too
much or too little, or who seems always to disagree or to digress.
In striving for the inclusion of such people, the facilitator does
more than protect their opportunities for learning, or smooth out
social ripples. He or she also implicitly acknowledges the value of
difference in the group’s learning, and helps the group strive to
understand the contribution it may make. In doing so, the facili-
tator makes room for dissidence, and may even stretch col-
leagues’ capacity for learning from it. A norm that respects dissi-
dence is crucial to genuine accountabiliy. Until a professional
community really knows and understands the range of view-
points it contains—however variable and contradictory—it
remains incapable of taking collective and effective action on
behalf of all its students’ learning. That is because it ends up
screening out—for the sake of its own false consensus—exactly
the differences it needs to consider.
Building Trust
Educators educating themselves rely on each other’s honesty,
insight, and experience. Going public with their work, they let
each other in on what they are doing, thinking, learning, and
hoping. They invite one another’s perspectives in the expectation
that these will be valuable. They invite the collective experience
Facilitating
17

of the group to serve as the arbiter of their own growth. All of
these efforts require a trustful situation.
It is important to consider, however, what a trustful situation
really is and what it is for. It is situational. When a facilitator
promotes a group’s trust, it is not to help everyone trust every
other individual member as an individual, but rather to help each
trust the situation that has been collectively created. The purpose
is not trust in general, but trust sufficient to do the work at hand.
Nor is the goal to make everyone feel comfortable. Given trust, a
group of individuals can learn from each other and their work
together even when the work creates discomfort—as work
involving worthwhile learning often does.
THE FACILITATOR’S MOVES
Facilitating protocols involves long-term planning—as in what
protocol to use when, and how to open and close the meeting—and
also judgments made in the moment—as in how to intervene when
something goes wrong, and when to change one’s plan. In what fol-
lows, we offer some advice about some of the better moves to use
at these and other points, and how to use them.
Opening
Sometimes facilitators who use protocols think the people
they work with won’t need any warm-up. “Well,” they say, “I
think I’ll just start with looking at students’ work [or dealing with
controversial topics, or planning collaboratively] and skip all of
that ‘touchy-feely’ stuff.” In the process, as we suggest above,
they may undercut their purpose. Preparing educators to give and
get sensitive feedback is not a lightweight distraction or lure. It is
the developmentally crucial start of building a professional learn-
ing environment. No one can give and get feedback sensitively,
honestly, and effectively without first knowing a little bit about
everybody else involved, discussing the context in which they are
gathered—or what is often called the agenda—and setting or
reviewing some group norms.
Sometimes, facilitators who understand the value of opening
18
The Power of Protocols

Facilitating
19
moves are nonetheless tempted to skip them because they think
there is not enough time. Time is always an issue in the facilita-
tion of groups. In our experience, however, a little investment of
time up front saves a lot of time later.
What matters most in the selection of an opening move is that
the one selected seem relevant to the business at hand.
Disconnected openers provoke the “touchy-feely” accusation,
and seem as incongruous as an off-color joke at the start of a seri-
ous speech. It matters, too, that the scale of the opening move fit
the scale of the meeting: short moves for short time-frames;
longer ones for half-day sessions or day-long retreats. 
In whatever form they take, however, the opening moves
that should never be skipped are introductions, context review,
and norm-setting. This is true for any group meeting, including
ones governed by protocols.
Introductions have two general purposes. The first is to get
everybody present to say something right away—something that
connects each to the business of the group. People who speak
early at a meeting are more likely to avoid the prolonged silence
that might otherwise envelop them and become a source of ten-
sion for themselves as well as others. The second purpose is to
help everyone know something relevant about each of the peo-
ple now joining them in a learning activity, and thus represent-
ing in a symbolic way the presence of a distributed intelligence
and of its usefulness to the group’s learning purpose. 
Context review includes what we plan to work on and why,
how we came to be here, what we hope to achieve, and how long
and in what ways we plan to work together. A protocol usually
defines only the last of these; the others need to be explained, dis-
cussed, perhaps negotiated.
Norms are not the rules set down in the protocol, though
these are also crucial to explain. Norms are behavioral guidelines
whose purpose goes beyond the meeting itself. They signify ways
of being together and learning from each other that we hope will
become habitual. For example, they help participants come to
view discomfort not as an avoidable aberration but as a necessary
part of the learning process. They involve such other things as
how we treat each other’s ideas and how we push our own think-
ing. They also involve things such as whether we talk about what

20
The Power of Protocols
has transpired within the meeting outside the meeting, whether
we turn off cell phones during the meeting, and how we expect
our facilitator to work with us. 
Intervening and Closing
Even though protocols help prevent things from going wrong
(by providing an overarching structure that participants can
trust), unexpected things still happen that require intervention.
Once one of us was facilitating a protocol in a room where two or
three nonparticipants were at the periphery working at comput-
ers. Speaking within the parameters of the protocol, one partici-
pant began to speak about race, whereupon someone at the
periphery interrupted. The facilitator explained to the person that
the group was using a constrained form of conversation, and that
if he wanted to join the conversation, he would have to sit at the
table and follow the protocol, too. He declined to get involved.
Later, however, he interrupted again. At that point, the facilitator
ought to have asked him to leave the room—or, alternatively,
moved the protocol to a more private space. Instead, the facilita-
tor permitted the person to enter the conversation on his own
terms, and effectively gave up facilitating the protocol. Later, the
participant whose contribution had been interrupted told the
facilitator that she had felt deserted by the one person she had
expected to keep the difficult conversation safe. It was clearly a
bad move on the facilitator’s part.
Situations demanding facilitator interventions are usually
somewhat easier to handle than this. For example, a participant
new to the protocol format might momentarily lose the suspen-
sion of disbelief that new participants usually need, and might say
something like: “This is silly. Why don’t we just talk?” Generally,
a confident admonition to trust the process a little longer, com-
bined with a reminder that we will debrief the process in the end,
is enough to quell the uprising.
Some protocols—for example, the New York Peer Review
Protocol described in Chapter 5—encourage the facilitator to
help regulate the conversation by participating in it substan-
tively—for example, offering a supportive comment to the pre-
senter to offset a string of critical ones, or pressing for more

Facilitating
21
attention to the criteria for reviewing student work. Other pro-
tocols, however, discourage this kind of substantive involve-
ment by the facilitator. In such cases, problems that really need
intervention require either brief interruptions or longer time-
outs. During a time-out, it is better to engage in some silent
activity to help participants gather their thoughts about what-
ever has provoked the intervention before asking them to dis-
cuss it. Merely taking a 10-minute break can also be a useful
intervention.
Intervening moves try to preserve or revise the learning process,
while closing moves try to ensure the learning itself carries over into
the educators’ ordinary work life. The latter is best achieved
through meta-cognition. That is, participants must take the trouble
to specify what they have learned—substantively and procedural-
ly—and then to generalize from it. One way the facilitator can help
with this transfer is to press participants to answer three questions,
ones that are useful to nearly any kind of debriefing:
• What? What have I learned about the topic that brought this
group together? 
• So what? What difference does it seem to make—for example,
to my teaching or my team’s planning?
• Now what? What steps can I take to make the most of what I
have learned? 
These questions require some time for private consideration
and for public discussion—though not necessarily much time.
When it comes to closing especially, short moves often work best.
BRIEF PROTOCOLS
Sometimes it is best to open or close a protocol-based meeting
with the use of another, briefer protocol—or even to intervene
with a briefer protocol-within-a-protocol. This is especially true
when time is less of an issue—for example, at a full-morning
meeting. In what follows, we describe some brief protocols that
can be used as opening, closing, or intervening moves. Later, we
also describe three elaborate protocols that can serve as opening

moves for meetings where time is plentiful and a good start cru-
cial—for example, a day-long or multiday retreat.
POSTCARDS
The facilitator says, “Without looking at it first, deal yourself
one of the picture postcards from this deck going around. Then
imagine why it’s the perfect picture for you at this moment [or
how it represents your work, or describes your feelings about
starting or ending the workshop]. Be prepared to show and tell.”
We especially like to use black-and-white “art” cards, because
they lend themselves to interpretation. A variation is to have peo-
ple find the person with the same card (provided there are dupli-
cates available) and discuss their different reactions. Given a
smaller supply of postcards, the facilitator might ask two or three
people to share the same card. 
The activity ends with a Go-Round (see below), in which
everybody has a minute to share.
REFLECTION ON A WORD
This is an activity associated with Patricia Carini’s Prospect
Center and its work in Descriptive Review of the Child (Himley &
Carini, 2000). Before beginning a Review, participants are often
asked to focus on a word that the facilitator has chosen with the
child in mind. In describing this use, Elaine Avidon (2000) beau-
tifully suggests its power:
We spoke of enough as a word of measure having to do with both per-
sons and things, quantity and quality. We placed our depictions of
enough on a continuum with notions of adequate and appropriate at its
center, and too much and too little at the edges. On this continuum,
enough was a boundary line, a standard either achieved, not yet real-
ized, or exceeded. At issue was whose measure, whose standards,
whose evaluation. (p. 36, emphasis in original)
In our adaptation of the protocol, participants introduce
themselves briefly, then give their own takes on the word literacy
(or whatever word seems relevant to the work at hand). This
helps everyone see the multiple takes that a word can invoke,
22
The Power of Protocols

Facilitating
23
and establishes the norm that different takes are useful and help-
ful to the group’s learning overall. This activity can also be a good
intervention; taking a moment to clarify—or problematize—a
word or term can help clear the air, or generate new insight when
it may be especially needed.
PAIR-SHARE
Participants all share with a partner some past experience
related to the goals of the meeting. Experiences might include a
positive one they have had in a professional workshop, or best
and worst experiences taking a test, or an earliest memory of
being a student, or something about their first day as a principal.
All pairs address the same question, then discuss as a group what
their sharing had in common and what surprised them.
Obviously, Pair-Share can also provide a useful intervention at
times, and a good reflective close.
CLEARING
This protocol is also known as Connections. People come to
meetings or leave them with things on their minds, and they
need time to transition from there to here or here to there. It
helps enormously to take the time, from 5 to 10 minutes, for the
group members to say what things are on their minds. There are
simple rules: Nothing is too irrelevant; there can be no dialogue;
each person talks only once unless everyone else has spoken; and
silence is okay. When time is up, gently move on or adjourn. This
is an especially good starter for an after-school workshop when
people come in still connected to some earlier events, or for a
closing when a protocol session has been particularly intense.
ALL-PURPOSE GO-ROUND
This is perhaps the single most important protocol a facilitator
can know. The prompt can be as simple as “Introduce yourself and
tell us one thing you like about technology and one thing you dis-
like.” The facilitator can keep it simple by making sure that people
don’t jump in and that the time frame stays inviolate. One way to

24
The Power of Protocols
do this is to specify a time allotment—say, 30 seconds each—and to
signal by using body language when the time is up: intent listening
with smiling and nodding, then a nod of the head or shift of the eyes
to indicate that it is the next person’s turn. Turns can thus be sig-
naled with no facilitator talking at all.
We call this protocol “All-Purpose” because one can use it not
only as an opener but as a closing move, too, or as an interven-
ing one. Thus a facilitator can interrupt another activity to “do a
quick Go-Round” of people’s reactions to something that just
happened, or even of whether to continue the larger activity.
LONGER OPENERS
The following long opening moves are described in the same
format used to present the rest of the book’s protocols. It begins
by introducing the protocol, usually with a reference to its source.
Next it acknowledges the particular purpose for which the proto-
col seems designed. Then it notes important details such as time
frame and any materials or special settings required. Next it lays
out the steps of the protocol. Whenever we believe that including
a time frame for a step will help users understand the step better,
we include one. Often, however, we leave timing for steps to
facilitator discretion. Finally, the format includes some facilitation
tips and some possibilities for variation. 
FEARS AND HOPES
We have seen versions of this protocol used to open many
kinds of meetings in many different places. Its effectiveness
depends on the fact that people rarely undertake a new learning
experience without harboring some (usually unexpressed) fears
and hopes about what will happen. This protocol gets these into
the open.
Some facilitators hesitate to open with a “negative” question
such as “What are your fears about this meeting?” Their own fear is
that the negativity will get out of hand. However, our experience is
quite the opposite. When participants are encouraged to say aloud

Facilitating
25
that they fear the meeting will be boring, will not meet their real
needs, or will be run in a way that is insulting to their learning, then
they become, paradoxically, much more open and receptive to the
work of the actual meeting. Having accepted this first risk, they feel
less defensive about others that may come their way.
Purpose
One purpose is simply to help people learn some things
about each other. But the deeper purpose is to establish a norm
of ownership by the group of every individual’s expectations
and concerns—to get these into the open, and to begin address-
ing them together.
Details
Time for this protocol can vary from 5 to 25 minutes, depend-
ing on the size of the group and the range of their concerns. If the
group is particularly large, the facilitator asks table groups to
work together and then report out. The only supplies needed are
individual writing materials, newsprint, and markers.
Steps
1. Introduction. The facilitator asks participants to write down
briefly for themselves their greatest fear for this meeting/work-
shop/retreat/year: “If it’s the worst experience you’ve had, what
will have happened (or not happened)?” Then they write their
greatest hope: “If this is the best meeting you’ve ever attended,
what will be its outcome(s)?”
2. Pair-share. If time permits, the facilitator asks participants to
share their hopes and fears with a partner.
3. Listing. Participants call out fears and hopes as the facilita-
tor lists them on separate pieces of newsprint.
4. Debriefing. The facilitator prompts, “Did you notice any-
thing surprising or otherwise interesting while doing this activi-
ty? What was the impact on you or others of expressing negative
thoughts? Would you use this activity in your school? In your
classroom? Why? Why not?”

26
The Power of Protocols
Facilitation Tips
The facilitator should list all fears and hopes exactly as
expressed, without editing, comment, or judgment. One should not
be afraid of the worst fears. A meeting always goes better once these
are expressed. The facilitator can also participate by listing his or her
own fears and hopes. After the lists of fears and hopes are complete,
the group should be encouraged to ponder them. If some things
seem to need modification, the facilitator should say so in the inter-
est of transparency, and make the modifications. If some of the
hopes seem to require a common effort to realize, or if some of the
fears require a special effort to avoid, the facilitator should say what
he or she thinks these are, and solicit ideas for generating such
efforts. It is easy to move from here into norm-setting: “In order to
reach our hoped-for outcomes while making sure we deal with our
fears, what norms will we need?” 
Variation
One variation that cuts down on time is to use pictures or pic-
ture postcards that have fairly ambiguous meaning, and to ask
participants to introduce themselves and tell how the images they
have picked (randomly) express their hopes or fears for the meet-
ing. In this variation, the facilitator listens carefully and makes
notes while participants speak, so as to be able to capture
expressed hopes and fears for the group’s reflection. 
PROTOCOL FOR SETTING NORMS
Sometimes facilitators follow Fears and Hopes with this pro-
tocol, saying something like, “What norms do we need to
increase the likelihood that our hopes will be realized and our
fears allayed?” Nancy Mohr learned this protocol from Fran
Vandiver, a former Florida principal. They were together in a
school coaches’ training that wasn’t going well. Fran suggested
that the group set norms, and Nancy thought at first that this was
a terrible idea. “After all,” she said to herself, “everyone here is an

Facilitating
27
adult.” This is a common naïve assumption,  akin to “Why can’t
we start off with a long lecture? After all, everyone chose to learn
about this topic,” or “Why can’t we just have a conversation
about this controversy or conflict? I’m sure everyone will have
something constructive to say.” 
Purpose
We set norms first of all to curtail some unproductive
behaviors (for example, “Don’t monopolize the airtime”). We
also set them to give ourselves permission to be bolder than we
might otherwise be (for example, “Take some risks here”). And
we set them in order to remind ourselves that people learn in
different ways (for example, “Give everybody time to think”).
Norms are especially useful when newcomers are likely to
arrive after the work is already under way (and this happens
frequently in professional learning groups). When newcomers
arrive, the norms fill them in. They don’t have to learn them
through trial and error. Norms are also useful when “tricky”
conversations are likely (and tricky conversations are frequent
in real-life groups). 
Details
Norm-setting can take 10 minutes or much longer. Once a
group that Nancy Mohr was facilitating took an hour to decide
whether airtime should be restricted. The vociferous objections to
this proposed norm came from a group of men used to dominat-
ing meetings they attend. But the norm was set despite their
objection, and later one of them confessed publicly how much he
had learned from listening for a change.
Steps
1. Brainstorming. The facilitator encourages the group to brain-
storm all possible norms, and lists the offerings on chart paper.
But the process begins with a few moments of silence as people
consider what they want to offer. The facilitator also participates

28
The Power of Protocols
in the brainstorming, adding whatever seems lacking for the
emerging list—for example, “We want to create a place that is
safe enough in order for us to endure discomfort,” or “We want
to be allowed to take a risk.”
2. Discussion. The facilitator says, “So far this is just a brain-
stormed list—we have not yet agreed to it. Is there something
which needs discussion, which you want to question?”
3. Synthesis. In a transparent way—that is, voicing his or her
deliberations aloud—the facilitator synthesizes and fine-tunes: “I
think that what I’m hearing is that we want to be assured that
good judgment will prevail. There can be situations where a
phone must be left on, and we don’t want to prevent that when
needed. On the other hand, we don’t want a bunch of phones
ringing. So maybe the norm should be that we will only leave
phones on when our judgment tells us we must. This is good. I
was going to just say ‘No phones,’ but this is much better.”
4. Consensus. Noting that consensus means that all group
members can live with and support the norms, the facilitator
moves the group to affirm the list.
Facilitation Tips
The facilitator should point out to the group that we call these
things “norms” because they are not “rules.” Norms require flex-
ibility yet provide guidance. Moreover, norms can be changed at
any time. Indeed, norms that are intended to serve the group
over a period of time are useful only if they are revisited with
some regularity. Therefore, it is good to reflect on them from time
to time: “How are we doing with our norms?” Meanwhile, for
groups that meet over time, the chart paper with the norms can
be carried over from meeting to meeting. Reviewing how the
norms worked can be a good closing activity.
Variation
When time is really short the facilitator can provide a list of
norms for the group’s consideration. Two excellent facilitators we
know, Daniel Baron and Gene Thompson-Grove, both of the
National School Reform Faculty, sometimes say: “There is only
one norm: If you think it, say it. If you wonder it, ask it.”

Facilitating
29
DIVERSITY ROUNDS
Nancy Mohr and Judith Scott had been working with a group
of secondary school teachers in Indiana, exploring the principles
of the Coalition of Essential Schools. Having worked with this
same group for quite some time, they realized that it was time to
challenge the group a bit, especially around issues related to
diversity and equity. They developed this activity as a means of
stimulating a conversation.
In each round, members of the group subdivided according to
a particular “identifier” called out by Mohr or Scott: first the sub-
ject they taught, then where they grew up, and next their gender.
Following each round, members of the subgroups discussed the
impact on their professional lives of the particular identifier.
Nancy remembers that the men stood around perplexed and fair-
ly silent when it came time to discuss the impact of their gender
on their professional lives. Not so the women.
Then, in the final round, the group of 80 teachers regrouped
by “race.” There was something of a gasp as the 79 White teach-
ers went to one side of the room and the lone Black teacher to the
other. In the process of debriefing the activity, the White people
said how much fun the early rounds had been, and how uncom-
fortable the last. The Black teacher, however, expressed her
appreciation. The discomfort for her had surfaced long before the
final round, when she recognized that apart from one of the co-
facilitators, 
she 
was 
the 
only 
Black 
person 
present.
Acknowledging this fact actually helped.
Purpose
To help participants become more aware of the various connec-
tions they have to others, and to understand the impact of person-
al identity on professional experience. The activity is most useful for
groups that will be working together over an extended time. 
Details
Especially effective with large groups, Diversity Rounds can
be undertaken with almost any group of more than 20 members.

30
The Power of Protocols
The space must allow for people to move around. This activity is
best done standing the entire time. 
Steps
1. Introduction. The facilitator explains that the participants
will be asked to group and then regroup themselves three to five
times, according to certain identity criteria, and that they will be
moving about as they do this. The facilitator explains that the
identities are purposefully vague, and that participants will have
to define them in their own way. Once in a particular grouping,
participants will talk about how the group’s identity has shaped
them as professionals.
2. Grouping. The facilitator asks participants to find people
who are from the same group as they. For example, “Find people
who come from the same place as you do.” Typically people need
encouragement to get moving. After they have formed groups,
the facilitator reminds them to introduce themselves to each
other and talk about how “coming from that area” has had an
impact on them as professionals. (5–10 minutes, depending on
the size of the group)
3. Reporting. The facilitator gives a 1-minute warning, then asks
groups to report out a little of what they discussed. (5 minutes)
4. Regrouping. After each group reports, the facilitator asks
people to regroup by another category, and repeat the steps. For
example: “Now regroup by place in your family.” Other possible
groupings: kind of high school you attended, decade of your
birth, gender, race, family size, many others.
5. Debriefing. The facilitator should ask participants how they
felt during the activity, and also how their feelings may have
changed from one grouping to the next. He or she should also ask
them what they have learned about diversity, and about how
diversity affects professional experience.
Facilitation Tips
Getting participants to move for the first round is the most
difficult. The facilitator should push hard for this. Past that,

Facilitating
31
everyone begins to have fun. The laughter that develops as
groups form and re-form signifies identity. One way to help par-
ticipants appreciate the connection between identity and diversi-
ty—which Beverly Daniel Tatum (1992, 1999) explores well—is
to press them to notice this laughter and to theorize about its
causes.
It is important to do several rounds of relatively unthreat-
ening categories of difference before attempting an uncomfort-
able one—where there is plainly a history of discrimination
and possibly of personal hurt—for example, race, gender, eth-
nic identity, or age. It is important also to be sensitive in
debriefing a round that does take account of any of these dif-
ferences.
The prompts for regrouping need not be very clear-cut. For
example, the one we mention above—“place in your family”—
is likely to initially puzzle people. Is it about birth order? But
what about people who have no siblings, or were foster chil-
dren or stepchildren, or who were adopted? Sensing such puz-
zlement and finding a way through it can be a powerful out-
come of the activity. The facilitator should discourage “correct
answers” to the questions raised. “Birth order groupings work,”
he or she says, “but other kinds of groupings might, too. It
depends on the diversity of the group.”
Like all protocols, whether openers or not, this one needs a pur-
pose, and the purpose needs to be kept in mind. Is it just about help-
ing the group appreciate the fact that it is, like most other groups,
diverse in important ways? If so, three rounds are probably enough.
On the other hand, if there are particular issues related to diversity
that the group needs to explore, then more rounds may be needed.
The facilitator should work at the edge of his or her comfort zone
with regard to the basis of the groupings, but also be prepared to
change plans depending on how things go.
Variation
A version of Diversity Rounds can be used to explore orga-
nizational identity and diversity. For example, “Group your-
selves by department [or grade level, or research interests].

Now talk about how this identification affects your work. . . .
Okay, now group yourself by the course [or subject, or age]
you most often teach.”
MARVIN’S MODEL
We learned this years ago from a professor at a Midwestern
university who used it routinely in his classes. All we can remem-
ber now is his first name, which has stuck to the protocol in the
many contexts where it is now used. 
Purpose
To facilitate rapid communication about a topic at hand
among a large group of people, or to get many points of view
quickly in play without engaging in dialogue. This can be used to
open or close a meeting, or on occasion to intervene.
Steps
1. Introduction. The facilitator asks the large group to break
into subgroups of five to seven members, then instructs the sub-
groups as follows: “When I ask a question, I will give you 30 sec-
onds to think, and then each member of your group will answer
quickly, in turn. Each will get exactly 30 seconds to answer. As
each member speaks, the others listen silently. No one responds
to anyone else’s answer.”
2. Questions. The facilitator poses a series of questions, for
example, “What’s the first thing you think about when I say
mathematics [or writing, or science]?” “What do you think about
when it comes to the teaching of mathematics [writing, science]?”
“How about the assessment of learning in mathematics [writing,
science]?”
3. Debriefing. Following several questions, the facilitator
debriefs the group: “What has the group learned from this first
exploration of the topic at hand? What, if anything, do members
think we might have to unlearn?”
32
The Power of Protocols

Facilitation Tips
Some participants will be unable to form an answer to some
questions in the time provided. The facilitator should allow for
this, granting permission to take a pass. Later, the facilitator can
point out that both the answers and the passes may provide
insight for the debriefing. 
Variations
Besides being used as an opener, Marvin’s Model can be used
as a way of generating spontaneous responses to a speaker or a
reading, responses that can then be followed up in a discussion.
It can also be used in closing, as a way to share a lot of complex
reaction in a relatively short amount of time.
Facilitating
33

34
CHAPTER 3
Tapping Outside
Sources
Responsible direction of our own education as professional
educators necessarily involves consulting with many others. They
may not know as much as we about the intricacies and intimacies
of our educational practice—which is why we need to oversee
our own learning—but they know other things that are crucial
for us. These may involve the subjects we teach, the development
of learners (including us), theories of change and theories of
organization, and much more. 
We teach the world, but the world and theories about the
world continually change. We need to pay attention to the
changes. Moreover, attending to the views of outsiders also
enables us to stay politically astute, and this is very important,
since education is always at its heart political. 
The protocols we feature in this chapter focus on outside
sources of information and insight, and also on the problems
associated with accessing these sources, understanding them, and
adjusting our practices accordingly. 
FINAL WORD
This is a very versatile protocol developed by Daniel Baron
and Patricia Averette for the National School Reform Faculty. It is

Tapping Outside Sources
35
useful in exploring any kind of text, including controversial ones.
For example, in a graduate preservice teacher education course,
Beth McDonald uses it to explore some texts concerning racial
identity—a crucial topic in the course, but a risky one, too.
Neither the texts that Beth uses nor the topic itself lend them-
selves easily to open discussion. (Indeed, in our experience, few
good texts or topics do.) In most open discussions, some students
dominate, others retreat into silence, and important viewpoints
are invariably lost or undervalued. 
Students come to Beth’s class having read Peggy McIntosh’s
(1989) essay “White Privilege: Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack,”
and also Beverly Tatum’s (1992) powerful piece about racial iden-
tity. Beth then arranges the class into groups of three students each
and follows the steps outlined below, managing the time herself by
calling out the switches, rather than relying on the group’s own
timekeeping. She tells her students that the timing will be “rigid for
a purpose,” but that they will have more relaxed time later to talk
about whatever the timing may squeeze out. The version present-
ed here is one developed and favored by Beth.
Purpose
The purpose of the Final Word Protocol is to expand the inter-
pretation of one or more texts by encouraging the emergence of
a variety of interests, viewpoints, and voices. By forcing everyone
to offer an interpretation, and to listen closely to and reflect back
others’ interpretations, Final Word ensures the emergence of
diverse perspectives on texts. It also helps participants feel safer
in proposing what may be offbeat or dissident interpretations
because the protocol implicitly avoids consensus-building. It is
okay in this protocol to end a session with as much difference of
interpretation in the air as was there at the start. The point is to
get it in the air. 
Details
Final Word generally takes from 30 to 60 minutes (depending
on group size) and is best done in groups of three to six. It works

36
The Power of Protocols
especially well when the facilitator wants a large group to engage
with the same text and breaks it into smaller groups. Participants
must have copies of the text(s). Texts may have been read in
advance, or they may be read on the spot (though then they must
be short, and the facilitator must allow for varied reading times
and for a bit of mulling over). A watch with a countdown alarm
or some other timer can be a very helpful tool for this and other
protocols with tight time lines. 
Steps
1. Introduction and selection. The facilitator introduces the
whole protocol, providing copies of a short list of the steps
involved. Then he or she asks all participants to select from one
of the texts a short passage that has particular meaning for them,
a meaning they would like to call attention to. 
2. Arrangement. The whole group breaks into tight circles of
three to six participants each. The facilitator assigns an order of
presentation for participants in each circle—for example, “The
person in your group whose back is most turned to the door is
number one, and the person to his right is number two, etc.”
Each circle is asked to assign a strict timekeeper within each
group. Alternatively, the facilitator can serve as timekeeper for
the entire room, calling out the time switches.
3. Presentation. Presenter number one presents the passage he
or she has identified, reading aloud and having people follow
along on their copies. The presenter speaks for 2 or 3 uninter-
rupted minutes about it (with the timing clear in advance).
4. Reflecting back. Each listener in turn has 1 uninterrupted
minute to “reflect back” on what the presenter has said. The facil-
itator has explained that reflecting back means exploring the pre-
senter’s interpretation of the passage, not adding one’s own inter-
pretation. A listener might begin, “From what you said, I can see
that you are concerned about . . . .” 
5. Final word. The round ends with a 1-minute uninterrupted
time for the presenter to react to what has just been said.
6. Round repeats. Rounds two, three, etc. follow until all mem-
bers of each group have presented and had their final word.
7. Written reflection. Following the rounds, the facilitator

Tapping Outside Sources
37
asks everyone to write for 5 minutes about what they have
learned from the rounds about the text(s) as a whole. This
might be followed by a Go-Round asking each member to share
one observation or insight. In a group with some history and
trust, the facilitator might ask volunteers to share something
they heard from someone else that they found surprising, mov-
ing, or provocative.
Facilitation Tips
When the facilitator keeps the time, he or she risks feeling like
an intrusive announcer—“May I have your attention, please—
time to switch presenters!”—or the caller in a square dance—
“Readyyy? SWITCH presenters!” However, when the groups do
their own timing, there is the probability that they will finish at
different times. There is also the risk that they will succumb to the
temptation to dispense with artificiality. But without the artifice,
Final Word becomes a small-group discussion, which is a differ-
ent learning vehicle.
Groups may be bigger than three, and bigger groups raise
more viewpoints and more possibility of hearing diverse inter-
pretations. But, of course, the process takes longer, with more
rounds as well as more time per round.
Facilitators should take particular care with Step 4. This is
where presenters can experience really being heard—a crucial
(and often unusual) experience for many. It helps in describing
Step 4 to say, “It’s not what you think about the presenter’s pas-
sage. It’s what you think you heard the presenter say (and think
and feel) about the passage.” There are some variations of Final
Word, however, that change the emphasis of Step 4. (See the
next section, “Variations.”)
Some facilitators find it disconcerting that they cannot hear
what all the conversations touch upon. We suggest they get
over that.
Variations
Sometimes Final Word facilitators ask speakers in Step 4 to
provide their own reactions to the text passage, rather than

38
The Power of Protocols
reflect on the presenter’s. This has the advantage of getting
more interpretations into the open, but the disadvantage of not
attending fully to any one. However, there may be times when
this makes sense. A protocol called Save the Last Word for Me
takes this variation further, and offers still other benefits. In
Save the Last Word, each presenter only reads the passage or
passages selected, withholding any comment until the listeners
have first had their turns to comment. Then the presenter’s “last
word” incorporates not only his or her original interest in the
passage but also what he or she has learned about it from the
other members of the circle. This variation is useful in encour-
aging presenters to pick particularly complex or ambiguous pas-
sages—perhaps ones that they think are important, but do not
feel they fully understand. 
LEARNING FROM SPEAKERS PROTOCOL
One typical and very important source of outside perspec-
tive is the invited speaker. Yet we seldom take full advantage of
the source. The problem is often merely one of format. We
invite speakers to speak for, say, 45 minutes, but they speak for
an hour instead, shortening or eliminating the time we
planned for questions and answers. Or there are questions and
answers, but the questions seem like mini-speeches by the ones
who pose them, or the answers take up so much time that most
questions never get asked. And there are many other common
problems with this format.
But it doesn’t have to be this way.
Purpose
The purpose of the Learning from Speakers Protocol is to
structure the experience of the invited speaker format, so that
learning is maximized for the speaker as well as the learners. The
principles of the protocol are the same as for many others: to keep
a focus, to foster listening, and to provide an opportunity to con-
struct knowledge, both individually and collectively.

Details
The speaker must understand this new format well in
advance. The time frame and other details can be negotiated, but
it must be clear to the speaker that there is a different format to
be followed, one that must be respected. The number of partici-
pants can range from 15 up to 100. See “Variations” for how to
work with still larger numbers. 
Steps
1. Introduction. Just as the speaker must know the format and its
rules, so must the listeners. In this step, therefore, the facilitator
spells these out as part of introducing the speaker. (5 minutes)
2. Speech. The speaker delivers the speech as audience mem-
bers jot down questions or thoughts that occur for them along the
way. The facilitator may suggest that they imagine the possibility
for dialogue at each of these points, even though the dialogue
itself must be delayed. The speaker may pause on occasion for 30
seconds and invite the audience to jot down some notes and
questions. (30–50 minutes)
3. Five-minute warning. The speaker is given a warning by the
facilitator, sitting nearby, 5 minutes before the agreed-upon time
frame is due to end.
4. Huddling. When the speaker has finished, the facilitator
invites the audience to gather its questions and “huddle” in
groups of three to five. These groups should be formed based on
proximity, though with encouragement to include at least three
members per group. The facilitator instructs the groups to exam-
ine all their questions quickly in order to come up with its top
question, the one it really wants to make sure the speaker has a
chance to consider and answer. (5 minutes)
5. Top questions. The top questions can be called out by repre-
sentatives of each group. But all of the questions must be called out
before the speaker is allowed to answer any one. (5 minutes)
6. Answering. The speaker then answers questions, avoiding
repetition and aiming for connections among the questions and
the answers. (15–20 minutes)
Tapping Outside Sources
39

7. Sharing. If there is time, audience members are then invit-
ed to share with the speaker ways in which their thinking has
been pushed, and to ask other questions. If there is only a minute
or two, this thinking can be shared in pairs in the audience.
Facilitation Tips
It is not impolite to structure a speaker’s time and to ask that
he or she follow a slightly unconventional format. In our experi-
ence, many speakers appreciate the opportunity to have more
successful interactions with their audience. 
Variations
For larger groups, questions can be written on index cards
and handed up to the speaker and facilitator, who can quickly
sort through them.
This protocol can work for other kinds of learning from out-
side perspectives—for example, from a film or video where the
participants answer each other’s questions and provide important
guidance.
PANEL PROTOCOL
Alan Dichter once found himself planning a retreat for princi-
pals to which a panel of experts had already been invited. Alan’s
problem was what to do with the experts. The usual “everybody
talks for 10 minutes (which typically becomes 20), then we’ll have
the discussant discuss, and finally open the floor to questions
(when there’s little time left for any)” seemed a horrible way to
spend precious retreat time. So Alan designed an alternative.
He asked each expert to write a one-page case study based on
a problem that he or she thought a group of principals ought to
wrestle with. Small groups of principals worked on the case stud-
ies, trying to solve the problems, while the experts observed their
work. Following the activity, the experts were finally impan-
eled—but now their audience was primed to hear what they had
40
The Power of Protocols

Tapping Outside Sources
41
to say about the problems they had brought. 
Alan had thought he might need to work with each of the
experts on the framing of the cases, but there was no need. The
experts really got into it. 
Purposes
The main use for the Panel Protocol is to make sure that a
group of educators gets to interact meaningfully with some out-
siders whose expertise it needs, instead of being bored by “talking
heads.” At the same time, the protocol’s additional purpose is to
help the experts think about and frame their expertise so that it
best meets the needs of the people they are trying to help.
Details
The protocol takes at least two and a half hours. The overall
group size can vary substantially, though small work groups of 4
to 10 are desirable. The panel can similarly come in many sizes,
although three to four panelists seems ideal. If the room is very
large, a wireless microphone is helpful. 
The experts are asked to prepare for the panel by developing
a written case study focused on a problem of professional prac-
tice. They may substitute, if they choose, one developed by
someone else. The cases should be more or less complex depend-
ing on the time that will be available for wrestling with them. A
one-page case for a 2-hour protocol is appropriate. The cases
should be written in a way that highlights the ambiguities and
uncertainties of professional practice, and should end with ques-
tions to prompt readers to identify next steps. The following, for
example, are good closing questions: 
• In light of the information you have, what action would you
take?
• Was there any action that should have been taken earlier but
was not? 
• What additional information do you need to act? 
• How would you proceed to get that information? 

42
The Power of Protocols
Steps
1. Introduction. The facilitator explains the steps to follow,
and asks the experts to introduce themselves and give a brief
description of their area(s) of expertise. 
2. Case reading. Small groups each receive a prewritten case,
with each case going to at least two groups. The facilitator
allows ample reading time, and encourages note-taking. 
3. Case interpretation. For a 2- to 3-hour protocol, groups get
20 minutes to work on interpreting the case and trying to solve
the problem it highlights. During this time, they also prepare a 2-
or 3-minute presentation. This presentation should include an
answer to the question, “What is this a case of?”—an answer that
will help participants who did not read the case to understand the
rest of the presentation. The presentation should also include
either the group’s consensus (or confusion) concerning action
steps required, or a short list of alternative steps. 
4. Expert consultation. During work time, groups may call over
the experts to answer specific questions. But the facilitator has
coached the experts to avoid giving elaborate responses to these
questions, and to avoid providing overall “solutions” to the case
problems. When they are not engaged in answering “call-overs,”
the experts wander the room and listen in.
5. Presentations. Following the small-group work time, the
facilitator announces the first case, calling on all the groups who
worked on it to make their presentations in turn. Following all
the presentations on the case, the facilitator invites all partici-
pants to react or ask questions. Presentations continue in this
fashion until all the cases have been presented and discussed.
(5–15 minutes per case)
6. Expert reactions. After a break, the experts react to what
they have heard. The facilitator suggests that they focus especial-
ly on the strengths and weaknesses of the various action steps
proposed for the case they wrote, and that they take the oppor-
tunity as well to point out what they think the groups may have
overlooked. The facilitator has privately suggested to them that
this format offers them an opportunity to reinforce principles
they think should guide decision-making in practice. Each expert
gets a maximum of 10 to 15 minutes of reaction time. 

7. Questions and comments. Participants react to the experts’
perspectives.
Facilitation Tips
The facilitator must meet with the experts beforehand. It is
crucial that they understand their role and how it departs from
the ordinary. They may need assurance that they will have plen-
ty of time in Step 6 to share their expertise, and that the partici-
pants, having wrestled with the cases they wrote, will be far more
receptive to learning from this expertise than they would be if
they had walked cold into an ordinary panel presentation. The
experts should be encouraged to use Step 4 as an opportunity to
learn what the participants already seem to know and what they
seem to need to know. 
If the group is very large, it may not be possible for all the
teams to report out. Instead, the facilitator may ask one team to
report, and give a few minutes at the end for other teams work-
ing on the same case to offer another viewpoint or “crucial action
step” if one comes to mind.
In handling the question and answer portion of Step 5, the
facilitator may encourage the panel to take 5 to 10 questions
before answering any of them (see “Learning from Speakers”
Protocol). Not only does this allow the panelists to synthesize
their responses, often focusing on themes and reinforcing broad-
er issues, but it decreases the likelihood that the panel will get
stuck on one point. 
Variation 
This can work well with just a single case—one that all the
panelists agree to, or that they have jointly created. 
PROVOCATIVE PROMPTS
Nancy Mohr and Alan Dichter often use quotations from
expert outsiders to stimulate insider discussions. The power of
quotations in this regard comes not just from what they say about
Tapping Outside Sources
43

44
The Power of Protocols
a topic at hand, but also from the fact that they say different
things—a fact made obvious in what one selects and how one
arrays the selections. If even experts disagree, others feel safer in
owning up to and expressing their own disagreements.
Nancy and Alan have used short provocative quotations to
stimulate discussions of such topics as working for equity in edu-
cation, the purpose of teachers’ studying student work, the role
of standards in teaching and learning, and the things that begin-
ning teachers most need to learn.
Rather than present one way of using an array of contrasting
quotations below, we alter our typical format to describe several
simple protocols for doing so. Each one should be followed up by
an open discussion or a Go-Round.
Purpose
The purpose of the protocols is to infuse a conversation about
a particular topic with a quick and contrasting set of viewpoints
on it—viewpoints that participants in a learning group can use to
help elicit, shape, and reexamine their own perspectives and atti-
tudes. They are often used as a way into a complex issue that is
then treated in a more comprehensive way.
Details
The usefulness of these protocols depends on the provoca-
tion in the quotations themselves and in the contrast among
them. The facilitator selects the quotations ahead of time and
has them ready to distribute in the format desired. Time can
vary to suit circumstances, but a quick pace is usually advanta-
geous here.
Protocols
1. The facilitator distributes a page or two with all quotations
and their sources listed. Each member of the group chooses one
quotation, and shares in a Go-Round why he or she chose it. 
2. The facilitator distributes a page or two with all quotations

and their sources listed, then invites each member of the group to
choose one quotation that provokes him or her to think differ-
ently about the topic at hand, and to write briefly an account of
the difference. Then he asks them all to share what they have
written with a partner, with the partners reflecting back in their
own words what they think the difference means. This can be
done with several changes of partners.
3. The facilitator prepares the quotations on individual strips
of paper then hands out the strips randomly to everybody in the
group. Each person reads the quotation he or she gets and
responds to it on the spot. This requires having one quotation for
each person in the group. 
4. The facilitator writes or prints the quotations on large chart
paper and tapes the paper to the walls of a room or corridor.
Participants, using Post-its, place comments and questions, as
they choose, on each of the quotations. 
Facilitation Tips
Each of the simple protocols described above can run for vari-
able amounts of time, though the facilitator should be aware that
extremely engaging discussion often results from Provocative
Prompts, and sticking to the stated time frame can require one’s
full attention. 
Variations
At the end of an extended exploration of a topic by a learning
group—or along the way—participants can add to the quotation
sheet that got them started, and they can even engage in an addi-
tional round of Provocative Prompts as a way of bringing closure.
In this round, they might try to find one quote each to connect
(more or less exactly) to the expressions “I used to believe . . .”
and “Now I believe. . . .”
A group that uses the Final Word Protocol (see above) over
the course of an extended period of time can collect the text pas-
sages highlighted by participants for that protocol, and recycle
them for this one. 
Tapping Outside Sources
45

MARS/VENUS PROTOCOL
Inspiration for the name of this protocol comes from John
Gray’s (1992) book about gender differences in communication.
Beth McDonald created this protocol for a class session of a course
for which half the students had read Alfie Kohn’s The Schools Our
Children Deserve (2000), and the other half, E.D. Hirsch’s The
Schools We Need (1999). The goal of the session was to promote
analysis and deeper understanding of one’s own text, while gain-
ing some understanding of the other’s text.
Purpose
The protocol is useful in helping people learn from contrast-
ing points of view, particularly when one of the views is less
familiar. It works especially well when a group has agreed to split
into two reading groups in order to tackle two contrasting texts—
for example, the books by Hirsch and Kohn mentioned above, or
for another group and another set of issues, Allan Bloom’s The
Closing of the American Mind (1987) and Lawrence Levine’s The
Opening of the American Mind (1997).
Details
The protocol runs anywhere from 1 hour to 90 minutes, and
may involve any number of participants, divided into subgroups of
four participants (homogeneously composed with respect to the
text read). The facilitator should preselect and reproduce four or
five substantial quotations from each of the contrasting texts, pack-
aging these in two different sets with enough sets for all groups. 
Steps
1. Introduction. The facilitator explains that the purpose of the
exercise is to further explore and understand the text each par-
ticipant has read through exposure to a contrasting point of view.
To start, group members are given the set of quotations from the
“other” text, that is, the one they have not read. The facilitator
46
The Power of Protocols

Tapping Outside Sources
47
prompts the groups as follows: “Based on your reading of him,
how do you think E. D. Hirsch would respond to each of these
statements by Alfie Kohn? Would the two agree or disagree?
What underlying beliefs of your author does each quotation
either tap or challenge?” (5 minutes)
2. Reading. The participant allows sufficient time for each
group member to read the quotations individually and to think
about them privately in the light of their previous reading.
(10–15 minutes)
3. Facilitation and discussion. Group members take turns facili-
tating as they discuss each quotation, sharing their responses to
the prompt. (25–30 minutes)
4. Summarizing. Each subgroup prepares a brief summary to
share with the whole group regarding what it has discovered con-
cerning the authors’ differences and similarities of perspective.
(5–10 minutes)
5. Open conversation. The facilitator opens the floor to the
groups, asking each group to report the highlights of its summa-
ry, and invites others to share reactions or clarifying questions.
(15 minutes)
6. Reflection. The facilitator asks the large group to reflect on
the value and challenges of the activity. (5–10 minutes)
Facilitation Tips
To avoid the potential for a superficial and dismissive treat-
ment of the opposing text, it is important that the facilitator high-
light the need to look for the underlying bases for any disagree-
ments, along with potential areas of agreement. When this works
well, participants will have a more complex understanding of the
issues that are under consideration.
Variation
Groups can be asked to make a chart-paper summary for post-
ing during the summarizing step. Then, instead of oral reporting,
the whole group can engage in a “gallery walk” to read other
summaries before the open conversation step.

48
The Power of Protocols
RICH TEXT PROTOCOL
This is a demanding protocol that Joe and Beth McDonald
developed to help groups read and understand texts that need
close reading, and that yield greater understanding when
approached element by element and layer by layer. The text
that stimulated the development is an intriguing segment of a
longer videotape that Ilene Kantrov and her colleagues devel-
oped at the Education Development Center (undated), and that
she kindly allowed the McDonalds to use in their own teach-
ing. The particular segment features a group of five upper-ele-
mentary-school students working together on a complicated
math problem. Among the students is a boy with a red hat. We
make reference to this video and to this boy in the steps listed
below. 
At the heart of the protocol is a theory of reading derived
from the work of Robert Scholes (1985). It suggests the useful-
ness of bumps in the text—points of interest or puzzlement that
can cause a reader to interrupt a smooth reading process, and to
delve below the surface to explore his or her assumptions more
critically. So the protocol begins with noticing points of interest or
puzzlement, exploring these in an interpretive phase, then ending
with a critical phase in which participants share in writing a par-
ticular perspective they choose to apply to the text. 
In format, this protocol (like several others) owes much to the
Collaborative Assessment Conference described in Chapter 5.
Purpose
This protocol is useful for dealing with a text that is particular-
ly dense or ambiguous in meaning, complex in discourse, or com-
plicated in structure. It enables a group to “unpack” the text (writ-
ten, video, or still visual)—that is, to take it apart slowly, element
by element and layer by layer. One can, of course, do the same
thing in an ordinary text-based discussion without benefit of a pro-
tocol, but this protocol has the advantage of making the phases of
analysis more transparent. For this reason, it may appeal to partic-
ipants who might otherwise become impatient with the mincing
because they do not understand the method behind it.

Tapping Outside Sources
49
Details
The protocol is designed for use by groups of 5 to 15 partici-
pants. It can run in variable amounts of time, depending on the
length or format of the text, but generally takes about an hour.
The facilitator provides the text, and must be deeply familiar with
it, having read or watched it several times. It is best to use short,
demanding texts in any medium. We have used variations of the
protocol in exploring a poem about a child’s silence in class, a
photograph of students taking a standardized test, a brief but rich
account of three different students’ attempts to understand a
complex concept in economics, and the 7-minute portion of
video featuring a boy wearing a red hat. 
Chart paper or another medium for recording comments and
keeping track of the layers of discussion is essential.
Steps
1. Introduction. The facilitator briefly describes the content of
the text the group is about to “read,” and previews the steps
involved in the reading. 
2. Reading and noticing. The facilitator provides sufficient time
for participants to experience the text—for example, reading
their own copy of a print text, or viewing a video together.
Participants are asked to “notice” elements of the text that inter-
est, puzzle, or surprise them, jotting these down as they read or
watch or listen. 
3. Sharing. In a Go-Round, each participant shares one to three
elements they noticed—for example, “The boy with the red hat
never spoke” or “The poet starts off using some punctuation and
drops it completely by the third stanza.” Although it is often difficult
to separate noticing from interpreting, the facilitator tries to dis-
courage the latter. “A noticing,” he or she may say, “is something
that we can check the validity of just by checking the text. We don’t
need any outside information or expertise.” The facilitator does not
permit participants to comment on one another’s offerings at this
point. The facilitator records all the “noticings” on chart paper.
4. Checking. In this step, the facilitator asks the group if there
is anything on the list from Step 3 that needs “checking out”

before moving on. For example, a participant may say, “I didn’t
notice that the boy with the red hat never spoke. Can we check
that out?” When the text is a written one, it is easy to do the
checking as each request is made. However, for videotapes, it is
best to get the whole list of requests out first, and then check
them all out during a second viewing. The facilitator may again
have to caution the group to keep the focus on noticing rather
than on interpreting. Did the boy in the red hat speak or not? At
this point, commentary about why the boy did or did not speak is
not permitted. As noticings are checked, the facilitator circles
them on the chart paper or puts a check mark by them.
5. Interpreting. During this step, the facilitator guides the group
in the selection of two or three items from the chart paper that
would be fruitful or interesting to interpret further. This is a judg-
ment call based on the size of the group and the time available.
The facilitator leads a Go-Round for each point selected. For
example, during the round someone may say that the boy in the
red hat does not speak because he is intimidated by the rest of the
group. Someone else may suggest that he feels incompetent with
respect to the problem and cannot find an entry point. No direct
challenges to the interpretations are permitted, but the facilitator
encourages alternative interpretations of the same phenomenon.
The various interpretations of each element are duly noted on
chart paper. 
6. Identifying a perspective. In this step, the facilitator asks par-
ticipants to select one idea from the text under study and to write
about it, based on a particular perspective or theory that they
bring to it. The facilitator should define this theory or perspective
as “some overarching idea—for example, about teaching and
learning—that you might bring to any text you read about teach-
ing and learning, or that seems particularly relevant to this text.”
For example, one participant may write that the speechlessness of
the boy with the red hat provides vivid evidence of how the shy
or learning-disabled child may become lost in a classroom where
too much emphasis is put on small-group discussion. Another
may write that the boy with the red hat exhibits the characteris-
tics of an English language learner, and may well be learning
more than he appears to be. 
50
The Power of Protocols

Tapping Outside Sources
51
7. Pair-share. Participants pair off and share their writing with
each other, challenging each other as appropriate.
8. Final Go-Round. One at a time, participants say one thing
about the whole text, based on their experience with the protocol. 
9. Reflection. The facilitator invites volunteers to comment on
this reading experience.
Facilitation Tips
The facilitator should feel free to model each step by offering
an example of the kind of response called for. He or she should
also feel free to trim a noticing or an interpretation as needed. For
example, someone might say in Step 2: “One of the girls seems to
be just doing the scribing. She is the group’s secretary, but is not
doing any math learning. Typical pattern for many girls in math.”
And the facilitator might respond, “At the level of just noticing,
let’s say at this point that the shorter girl does much of the group’s
writing but little of its math talking. Somebody can ask us to
check that out in the next step if they want. And in still another
step, somebody can offer an interpretation of what’s going on
here and why.” 
Variation
After completing Step 1, a large group (for example, 12 to 15)
might break into work groups of three or four each to complete
subsequent steps, recording their results as they go. They might
also attempt to create a joint perspective in Step 6. Then small
groups could combine to share (and challenge) each other’s per-
spectives, or each small group could real aloud its final result to
the whole group, inviting questions and comments.

CHAPTER 4
Working on Problems
of Practice 
Professional educators solve problems of practice continually,
often hundreds in a single day. We sometimes solve them in ways
that seem definitive, as when we finally decide which text we’ll
adopt for a particular course, for example, or finally move Jason
out of Ms. Harwich’s class, or discover a new way to help Olivia
learn to write better. Still, we are not surprised when our “defin-
itive” solutions come undone, or when they generate one or
more other problems. In a famous essay in the Harvard
Educational Review, Magdalene Lampert (1985) proposes that most
of the problems we confront in practice are really dilemmas. They
present options that seem irreconcilable: whether to punish or
forgive, whether to press all the way or yield, whether to believe
or to doubt, whether to insist on the detail or overlook it, and so
on. In practice, though, the educator manages to reconcile the
irreconcilable, often by alternating emphases—pressing to a point
and then yielding, being tough in public and forgiving in private.
Even as she manages her problems in this way, however, the
teacher or principal or dean is chronically aware that one day’s
wise move may be another day’s foolish one, and that either day’s
move may come to seem either wise or foolish given a certain
shift of context. 
Thus all of us find ourselves solving problems provisionally,
and again and again. This inescapable condition of our work can
52

make us feel like Sisyphus rolling his rock, particularly when we
confront most of our problems in isolation. In such circum-
stances, we run low on creative approaches even while the prob-
lems never run low on novel ways of presenting themselves.
Meanwhile, the people on whose behalf we must address the
problems come and go endlessly, blithely ignorant of the troubles
they cause. Who is the teacher who has not on occasion thought
to herself, “Oh, no, another group of eighth graders!” Who is the
dean who has not thought, “When will this faculty ever get it?”
In this chapter, we describe some protocols that help educa-
tors sustain courage in the face of predictably chronic problems.
These protocols encourage the educator to frame some of the
myriad problems of practice for collegial review. The point of the
review is to gain the benefit of others’ perspectives and thereby
inform one’s own, to draw on others’ creative resources and
thereby replenish one’s own, and to experience in the process the
encouraging effects of sharing one’s burdens for an hour or so. 
DESCRIPTIVE CONSULTANCY
As the steps of this protocol make clear, the Descriptive
Consultancy is not just about getting and giving advice. The word
descriptive in its title is important. Before participants get advice on
problems they have brought to the group, they enjoy the oppor-
tunity of learning how others frame and understand these prob-
lems. The result is that they often gain insights they never other-
wise could.
Nancy Mohr, who designed this protocol, regularly uses it to
help groups of educators become facilitative leaders. Over a series
of meetings, the educators present a number of problems to each
other for descriptive consultation. In the process, they not only
get better perspectives on their own problems, they also become
better consultants to each other. 
Purpose
The purpose of Descriptive Consultancy is to help someone
think through a problem by framing it himself or herself, then
Working on Problems of Practice
53

hearing how others frame it. That is why participants are encour-
aged to be more descriptive than judgmental. An assumption
behind the use of the protocol is that framing and reframing a
complex problem is an especially valuable step in moving toward
creative, focused problem-solving. The protocol also includes an
advice-giving step.
Details
The protocol requires approximately an hour for the explo-
ration of each problem, though overall times vary depending
on the number of participants. The setting typically involves
either one group of 10 to 12 or smaller groups of 3 to 5 partic-
ipants each, meeting in a space where multiple conversations
can be carried on simultaneously. Groups may consult on more
than one problem, each participant presenting a problem in
turn.
Steps
1. Problem presentation. The presenting group member describes
the problem, laying out its different dimensions as he or she sees
them, and including previous attempts to address it. (10 minutes) 
2. Clarifying questions. Other members of the group (acting in
the role of “consultants”) ask questions of the presenting mem-
ber. These are meant to elicit information that the consultants
need in order to consult. (5 minutes)
3. Reflecting back. The presenter is silent while each of the con-
sultants describes what he or she heard in the presentation of the
problem, beginning with the question, “What did you hear?” The
purpose of this step is for the group to develop a shared under-
standing of the problem and of its complexity. Participants are
asked to pass if their reflection has already been offered by some-
one else. (10 minutes total for all consultants) 
4. Response. The presenter briefly responds to the consultants’
expressed understanding of the problem, and provides further
clarification of the problem as appropriate. (5 minutes) 
5. Brainstorming. The presenter is again silent while the con-
sultants brainstorm possible solutions or next steps: “What if . . . ?”
“Have you thought about . . . ?” (10–15 minutes) 
54
The Power of Protocols

6. Response. The presenter responds again, this time talking
about how he or she might be thinking now as a result of what
has been said. Here the presenter does not so much answer the
group’s questions as present his or her new insights gained
through listening. (5 minutes)
7. Debriefing. The facilitator asks participants about their roles:
“How did it feel to be the presenter? How did it feel to be the con-
sultant?” And “Sometimes people other than the presenter have
observed that they learned something from the consultation that
will be useful to them in their own context. Does anyone have
something to share along those lines?” (5 minutes)
Facilitation Tips
When Descriptive Consultancy is conducted in multiple small
groups, the facilitator oversees the process as a whole—having
first modeled the process by allowing participants to observe an
abbreviated or full version. During the process, the facilitator
should monitor the groups’ use of the steps, not hesitating to
intervene if they are not being followed. In explaining and mon-
itoring, the facilitator should especially emphasize the importance
of Step 3—reflecting back a description, rather than making a
judgment or proposing a solution. The watchphrase should be,
“No rush to advice before it’s time.” This is a delicate step for the
facilitator who must gently nudge the group to remain descriptive
and literal.
The facilitator should also emphasize Step 4, which involves
the presenter’s listening to the way the consultants frame the
problem. “The reason we reflect back,” the facilitator might tell
the group, “and listen carefully to the reflections, is to acknowl-
edge that people inevitably have different takes on a complex
problem. The power of Descriptive Consultancy is in learning
from these takes.”
Variation
Sometimes it is useful for a team to present a problem for con-
sultation. This has the benefit for the team—say, a leadership
group at a college—to become clearer about the problem as they
think through how to present it. 
Working on Problems of Practice
55

56
The Power of Protocols
ISSAQUAH COACHING PROTOCOL
This protocol was developed by Deb Bambino, Daniel
Baron, and Nancy Mohr, who first used it at a retreat for coach-
es of schools affiliated with the Small Schools Collaborative in
Washington State. The retreat took place in Issaquah State
Park, hence the name. The developers will always remember
that the retreat began on September 11, 2001, bringing a rather
unique set of challenges. 
This is a problem-solving protocol that mimics the succes-
sive moves of a coach or consultant:
• Elicit facts: “Tell us what happened. What’s the situation?”
• Listen actively and reflect back: “What I hear you say is . . .” 
• Interpret: “What I think this means is . . .”
• Check-in: “Am I getting it right? Is what I’m saying making
sense?”
• Probe: “Some additional questions I now have for you to think
about are . . .”
• Connect/extend: “Ideas this brings to mind for me are. . .”
• Elicit response: “What do you think you will do about this
situation?”
Purpose
Because this protocol models a developmentally appropri-
ate order for questioning in coaching and consulting situations,
it can be especially useful for educators whose roles involve
such situations. 
Details
The running time for this protocol is approximately 50 min-
utes. The ideal group size is 10 to 15. If the group is larger, the
facilitator should divide it into small groups of three to four par-
ticipants each. These groups then respond as groups to each of
the protocol’s prompts, after a brief caucus, and through spokes-
people.

Working on Problems of Practice
57
Steps
1. Presentation. A participant presents a problem that he or she
has been working on. It must be real rather than simulated, and
still be unresolved. (10 minutes)
2. Clarifying questions. These questions are for information
only, to help the “consultants” understand the problem more
fully. (5 minutes)
3. Active listening/reflecting back. In a Go-Round, each con-
sultant briefly restates the problem in consulting terms, pref-
aced by such remarks as: “I hear you say . . .” “What I’m hear-
ing is. . . .” Consultants refrain from interpretation or
speculation. The facilitator tells them that the purpose of this
step is not only to understand the presentation better, but to
help the presenter learn from others’ interpretations of what
he or she has said, and to correct misinterpretations. 
4. Check-in. The facilitator asks the presenter, “Quickly, are we
hearing you correctly? If not, what would you change/add?” 
5. Interpretive listening/reflecting back. Consultants respond in
a go-round to the following prompt: “What I think is going on
in this problem is. . .” 
6. Check-in again. The facilitator prompts the presenter, “How
does our thinking sound to you? Does it make sense?” (5 minutes)
7. Probing questions. These are questions intended to get the
presenter to think more deeply about the dilemma or problem
presented. The presenter is advised not to answer them, but to
use them instead to push his or her own thinking. The facilitator
cautions the consultants not to ask leading questions, ones tai-
lored to get the presenter to think as they do. (5 minutes)
8. Response. Here the presenter is asked simply whether any of
the probing questions made him or her think differently about
the dilemma or problem. The facilitator reminds everyone that
the point of this step is not to answer the questions, but just to
help the consultants gain more access to the presenter’s thoughts
on the problem. (1 minute)
9. Suggestions. Finally, and only if the presenter agrees that sug-
gestions are desired, consultants may offer some, again in a con-

58
The Power of Protocols
sulting framework: “What if you . . . ?” “Have you thought of . . . ?” 
10. Response. The presenter responds with thoughts about
“next steps”—concrete, long-, and short-term steps that now
seem possible. 
11. Debriefing. This starts with the presenter, then all partici-
pants can join in. The facilitator prompts: “What was it like to go
through these steps? Which kind of question was most
useful/least useful? Could the process follow a different order and
have it work? How does this relate to your work in the field?”
Facilitation Tips
The facilitator should make it clear that the purpose of this
consultation is to provide the kind of help that is wanted. Some
people prefer to have their thinking pushed but do not want
advice, while others really want ideas.
To achieve the main purpose of this protocol (beyond helping
someone work through a problem), the facilitator should periodi-
cally call attention to the fact that the protocol simulates a consult-
ing situation. For example, he or she might remind a “consultant”
to use his or her “consulting voice” (as practiced in Step 3).
CONSTRUCTIVIST LEARNING GROUPS PROTOCOL
This protocol comes from a 1994 article in Educational
Leadership by Robert Garmston and Bruce Wellman. It is espe-
cially effective for working with groups that are faced with dif-
ficult questions, ones that are unlikely to be satisfactorily
answered through ordinary conversation or discussion. The
protocol seems to defuse anxiety because it creates a sense that
everyone’s thinking has contributed to a greater understanding
of what is being explored.
Purpose
The purpose of this protocol is to help participants analyze
the different facets of a problem, issue, or question that they
have all been wrestling with, and in the process to move beyond

Working on Problems of Practice
59
familiar or predictable responses.
This activity is useful at various junctures in a group’s work.
It is especially useful if there is a sticky issue at hand, one that
needs some group consensus building. 
Details
The process takes from 45 to 60 minutes, depending on the
number of “subquestions” used. These are questions that seem to
be components of the larger question, problem, or issue at hand.
If, for example, a group of teachers is wrestling with the question
of whether to require all third graders to keep portfolios of their
work, then one subquestion might be “What is a portfolio any-
way?” The facilitator must be prepared with a list of tentative
subquestions, but should also be alert to the possibility that new
(and more relevant) subquestions are likely to emerge as the pro-
tocol moves forward.
The participants work in groups of five. Chart paper and
markers are needed for recording.
Steps
1. Introduction. In their small groups of five, participants assign
themselves a number from 1 to 5. The facilitator then explains
that the groups will be asked a series of questions that they must
answer. These are questions related to the larger question (or
problem, issue) at hand. They will be given 5 minutes to wrestle
with each question, then one person will be called on (by num-
ber) to report their group’s answer. Since they will never know
which number is to be called, everyone must be ready to answer
at any time.
2. First subquestion. The facilitator asks the first subquestion,
and gives them a time limit within which they must answer it, for
example, 5 minutes.
3. Responses. The facilitator gives a 1-minute warning before
time is up so that the participants have a chance to prepare their
answer. Then the facilitator calls on all the number 1s (or 3s, or
4s) in turn to report his or her group’s answer to the subquestion,
recording responses on chart paper. The facilitator asks the

60
The Power of Protocols
respondents not to repeat in their answer anything another
group has already reported. 
4. Second subquestion, etc. The facilitator repeats Step 3 through
all the subquestions, creating new subquestions on the spot as
seems appropriate.
5. Revisiting the larger question. The facilitator asks the group to
review what has been recorded and reflect on what has been
learned about the larger question (problem or issue) they started
with. All participants are invited to respond while the facilitator
records.
Facilitation Tips
One of the features that makes this protocol “constructivist” is
the facilitator’s willingness to construct new subquestions on the
spot. When all of the group’s responses to a particular subques-
tion are listed, everyone gains a better sense of where disagree-
ments lie. These then suggest new subquestions. 
Variations
This protocol can also be used to explore a complex issue or
question before different viewpoints on it have yet emerged. And
it can be used to tie up loose ends at the end of a meeting, con-
cerning unanswered questions and concerns. 
SUCCESS ANALYSIS PROTOCOL
Educators can gain much by collaboratively analyzing expe-
riences of failure—when the plan fell apart, when the students’
reactions were not at all what was expected, and so on. The
point of this protocol, however, designed by Daniel Baron, Co-
Director of the National School Reform Faculty, is to give equal
attention after the fact to experiences of success. Here the
“problem of practice” is to understand more fully in such cases
why things go right. This is especially important because most
cases of success in professional practice are examples of suc-
cessful problem-solving.

Working on Problems of Practice
61
Purpose
The purpose of the Success Analysis Protocol is to engage col-
leagues in collaborative analysis of cases from practice in order to
understand the circumstances and actions that make them success-
ful ones, and then to apply this understanding to future practice.
Details
Twelve to 30 participants work in small groups of 3 to 6. Chart
paper should be available. Participants need to be able to take
notes. The size of the small groups will determine the length of
the activity, with variations of 1 to 2 hours.
Steps
1. Preparing a case. Each participant is asked to reflect on and
write (in the form of notes for himself or herself) a short case
describing one area where he or she is finding success or making
progress in practice. The case should include specific details con-
cerning his or her own involvement in it—what he or she did that
may have contributed to its success. It should also account for
other factors that may underlie the success, including any favor-
able conditions present. (This step may be done in advance of the
meeting.) (10 minutes) 
2. Sharing. In small groups (3–6), the first person shares oral-
ly his or her case of successful practice, while others take notes.
(5 minutes)
3. Analysis and discussion. The group reflects on the success.
Participants offer their own insights into what made this case of
practice successful. They discuss specifically what they think the
presenter may have done to contribute to success, and they also
name what they take to be other factors involved. The presenter
is encouraged to participate and is prodded through questioning.
(5 minutes)
4. Repeating the pattern. Repeat Steps 2 and 3 for each member of
the group.
5. Compilation. The group then compiles on chart paper a list

62
The Power of Protocols
of specific successful behaviors and underlying principles that
seem characteristic of the cases presented. (5 minutes)
6. Reporting out. If there are multiple small groups, the
groups report out in some way, for example by means of post-
ing lists around the room and “gallery walking” to read all the
lists. (5 minutes)
7. Discussion. The facilitator prompts a general discussion with
the questions, “Do the lists have elements in common? Do any
contain behaviors or underlying principles that surprised
you?”(10 minutes)
8. Debriefing. Still in the large group, the facilitator asks, “How
might we apply what we have learned in this protocol to other
parts of our work? How might students use this protocol or a
variation of it to reflect on their work?”
Facilitation Tips
If participants are asked to prepare their cases of success in
advance, the facilitator should give them a few minutes to review
their notes. This will ensure that people are focused and provide
those who did not actually prepare a chance to develop their
thinking.
It sometimes helps people new to this protocol to have the
facilitator join in, presenting a case also—perhaps a case of suc-
cessful facilitation. This can be done in “fishbowl” fashion, with
one small group participating and the others observing.
When participants make generalized statements (e.g., “We
had a small group of teachers meeting to review our new
homework policy”), the facilitator should remind them to say
what they did themselves, since this is helpful in demystifying
success.
Variation
The facilitator may ask that everyone focus on the same
theme (e.g., a successful staff meeting, a successful peer observa-
tion, or a successful project design). Small groups compile a com-
posite list and report out. The facilitator then leads a general dis-
cussion about common successful practices.

Working on Problems of Practice
63
TUNING PROTOCOL
The Tuning Protocol and adaptations of it are often used
when professional educators study student work together
(Allen, 1998; Blythe, Allen, & Powell, 1999). In Chapter 5, for
example, we present an adaptation of the Tuning Protocol
called the New York Peer Review Protocol that serves this func-
tion for the New York State Academy of Teaching and Learning.
However, the roots of the Tuning Protocol are in the collabora-
tive exploration of educators’ problems. It was first used, as
you may recall from the Preface, as a way to gain feedback on
high school redesign efforts in progress. Then it gained promi-
nence when a major statewide school reform effort in
California adopted it as a method of sharing reform work in
progress (Kammer, 1998). Its versatility as a learning tool for
educators depends on two design features that particularly res-
onate with educators educating themselves. One is the separa-
tion of presentation and response. The other is the separation
of “warm” and “cool” response.
In a 1993 Phi Delta Kappan article, Joe McDonald described
the strange sensation of watching a video of student exhibi-
tions that he had witnessed in person several months before.
He used the word “warm” to describe his reaction to the exhi-
bitions in person, when he felt himself caught up in the antic-
ipation and pleasure of the parents, teachers, and students
themselves; and he used “cool” (borrowing from Marshall
McLuhan, 1964) to signify the difference that time and the
medium made. Shortly after making this distinction, Joe and
his colleagues faced the prospect of designing the Boston meet-
ing described in the Preface. Might it be possible, they won-
dered, to simulate the cool perspective without the time lag
and the videotape?
Ultimately the terms warm and cool signify Peter Elbow’s
(1986) older distinction between believing in ideas, people,
projects and doubting them. Good thinking depends, Elbow
says, on systematically alternating these mental moves.
Although David Allen was not present at the debut of the
Tuning Protocol, he played a crucial role in developing and popu-

larizing it through his teaching and writing. Having worked at the
Coalition of Essential Schools, the Annenberg Institute, and
Harvard Project Zero, David managed to find room for this proto-
col within a huge variety of school reform projects. 
Purpose
As a problem-solving tool, the Tuning Protocol aims to
ensure that educators receive direct and respectful feedback on
the problems they present, as well as the opportunity to reflect
on the feedback. It also aims to help all participants “tune up”
their values through contact with others’ diverse and candid
views. It forces presenters to frame a particular problem from
the hundreds they might select, and to collect and present evi-
dence that bears on the problem. It orients their colleagues to
examine both the problem and the evidence from both warm
and cool perspectives.
Details
The Tuning Protocol takes 45 minutes to an hour or more,
and usually involves 6 to 12 participants. It is sometimes used,
however, by groups as large as 30. Presenters might share rele-
vant supporting materials, which may include documents in
paper or video format.
Steps
1. Introduction. The facilitator briefly introduces the protocol
goals and norms and distributes a copy of the steps.
2. Presentation. The presenter shares the problem, or a draft of
a plan currently under development, and provides relevant infor-
mation about efforts to date. The presenter may also highlight
particular questions that he or she would like the respondents to
address, drawing on documents as appropriate to support the
presentation. During this step, respondents may not speak.
(10–15 minutes)
3. Response (warm and cool feedback). Respondents note their
warm and cool reactions to what the presenter has said. Warm
64
The Power of Protocols

Working on Problems of Practice
65
reactions emphasize the strength of the presenter’s views of the
problem and his or her particular approaches to solving it. Cool
reactions emphasize problematic aspects of these. Often cool
reactions come in the form of questions: “I’m wondering why
you chose to . . .” or “I’m curious about your interpretation of
the parental reaction. Could you say more?” During this step,
the presenter may not speak. He or she is encouraged instead
to take notes, and in the process to consider which responses to
comment on and which to let pass. In some versions of the
Tuning Protocol, participants are invited to offer warm reac-
tions first, then cool. In other versions, participants are encour-
aged to mix warm and cool (though never in the same
response). (10 minutes)
4. Reaction. The presenter reacts to any responses he or she
chooses to react to. The presenter is reminded that the response
is not meant to answer questions but to talk about her or his
thinking. During this step, respondents may not speak. (10
minutes)
5. Conversation. Presenter and respondents engage in open
conversation. (10–15 minutes)
6. Debriefing. Participants reflect on the process and explore
ways to use the protocol in other situations. The facilitator may
ask, “How did it feel hearing warm and cool feedback? How did
it feel not being able to respond to the feedback? How can you
apply this protocol in your ordinary work?” 
Facilitation Tips
Each step of the protocol requires a prespecified allotment of
time (though not necessarily those suggested above). The facilita-
tor must therefore watch the clock. In some versions of the pro-
tocol, facilitators simply facilitate. In other versions, they are per-
mitted to offer responses, typically to redress an imbalance
between warm and cool comments. In such cases, however, facil-
itators must make sure that they do not dominate. A good rule of
thumb in this regard is that the facilitator should never be the first
to offer either a warm or a cool comment. Another is that he or
she should refrain from offering more than one of each unless
absolutely necessary to redress an imbalance.

66
The Power of Protocols
The facilitator should advise the presenter to respond to the
warm as well as the cool reactions. Indeed, the facilitator should
take care throughout the protocol—in his or her introductory
remarks and responses—to suggest that warm reactions are not
simply a prologue to cool ones, that both warm and cool reactions
deserve thoughtful attention from presenter and respondents.
The facilitator should be prepared to interrupt tactfully when
a participant violates the protocol—for example, by speaking out
of turn, or by mixing warm and cool, or by jumping to cool when
the variation calls for warm to be handled first.
Variation
In some versions of the protocol there is an added step fol-
lowing the presentation. Here respondents ask “clarifying ques-
tions.” The facilitator must ensure that these do not cross the
boundary into warm or cool reactions. He or she may say, for
example, that a particular clarifying question might be better
saved for the next round. 
With small groups and abbreviated timing, each participant
can have his or her presentation—that is, problem statement and
concerns—“tuned” in less than an hour. In this fashion, the
Tuning Protocol can be used in classrooms as a device whereby
students offer each other feedback on their work. 
We have also sometimes used the Tuning Protocol as a feed-
back mechanism following lengthy professional retreats, where
the presentation is the retreat itself, and the problem is how to
improve the format for the next time. Hearing the reaction by
retreat organizers provides a wonderful opportunity for trans-
parency and serves to help participants increase their sophistica-
tion regarding retreat design.
PEELING THE ONION
In her work consulting with groups of educators, Nancy
Mohr discovered that the questions participants brought to
such activities as the Descriptive Consultancy were often “sur-

face” ones. By the end of the consultation, everyone would dis-
cover that the starting question was not the “real” one. So
years ago Nancy developed this protocol to deal explicitly with
this phenomenon.
Purpose
The purpose of Peeling the Onion is to provide a structured
way to develop an appreciation for the complexity of a problem.
This is done in order to avoid the inclination of many groups to
start out immediately “solving” the problem at hand (which may
not be the real problem at all). 
Details
This takes approximately 40 minutes and is best done in a
group of 10 to 12 members.
Steps
1. Sharing the problem. Someone agrees to share a problem that
they would like help with. (7 minutes)
2. Clarifying questions. Only clarifying questions may be
asked—ones that elicit brief additional explanation. (3 minutes)
3. Active listening. The facilitator leads a Go-Round in which
everyone completes the statement: “I understand the problem to
be. . . .” The presenter stays silent and takes notes. (6 minutes)
4. Peeling/probing. The facilitator leads another Go-Round in
which everyone gets to pose additional questions raised by hav-
ing heard the first round. (6 minutes)
5. Response. The facilitator invites a response from the presen-
ter as follows: “Having heard these questions, please share any
new thoughts about the problem you presented.” (5–10 minutes)
6. Open conversation. If time permits, the group might now be
invited to have an open conversation.
7. Debriefing. The facilitator prompts: “How was this like peel-
ing an onion? Why did we do this activity? What other ‘onions’
are there to peel in our work together?” 
Working on Problems of Practice
67

68
The Power of Protocols
Facilitation Tips 
The facilitator should start by saying: “Most of us are eager to
solve problems before we truly understand their depth. This pro-
tocol is designed to help us peel away the layers in order to see
that most problems are not simpleminded and require more than
our initial ‘take’ on what should be done.” 
The facilitator should keep to the times strictly and gently cor-
rect people whenever they offer solutions instead of continuing
to unpack the problem.
JAPANESE LESSON STUDY
Among the most important problems that professional educa-
tors must solve are those concerned with the design of teaching.
In contrast to what is often the norm in the United States, teach-
ers in Japan (at least at the elementary school level) collaborate
with colleagues in the design of lesson plans, developing and
refining them carefully over time. This process is called jugyu
kenkyuu, or lesson study. In their 1999 book based on an analysis
of video data from the Third International Mathematics and
Science Study (TIMMS), James Stigler and James Hiebert
describe the steps of Lesson Study. The protocol below is adapted
from their description.
We first heard about Japanese Lesson Study from Professor
Manabu Sato of Tokyo University, who visited the United
States frequently in the early 1990s just as the passion to devise
new curriculum and learning standards was beginning to wax.
In those days, new standards devised by states and subject-
based professional associations were often promoted as a
means of saving the American economy from the onslaught of
Japanese competition. In a series of papers and talks in English,
Professor Sato suggested, however, that standards by them-
selves would likely make little difference. The success of
Japanese elementary schools, he claimed, has much more to do
with habits of collaborative professional development among
Japanese teachers—often on a voluntary basis—than it does

Working on Problems of Practice
69
with the imposition and control of a national curriculum.
Indeed, he argued, collaborative professional development acts
in the Japanese context as a crucial counterweight to strong
bureaucratic controls (Sato, 1992). 
Stigler and Hiebert (1999) offer a highly accessible descrip-
tion of jugyu kenkyuu for the benefit of non-Japanese educators.
Another good source of information about Lesson Study is a
2002 article by Tad Watanabe in Educational Leadership. He is an
American mathematics educator who spent 7 months in Japan
studying the practice. Finally, there is the chapter by Nobuo K.
Shimahara in Gary DeCoker’s 2002 book comparing Japanese
and U.S. schooling and school reform. Shimahara suggests that
Lesson Study is intimately associated with two other features of
Japanese schooling: the role that teachers play in what he calls
the “cooperative management” of schools (p. 113), and also the
work of independent and voluntary national teacher networks,
which focus on the improvement of practice through sharing
and critiquing. 
American equivalents of Japanese Lesson Study are still
rare for a number of reasons, including the American tradition
of teaching “privacy”—planning alone and teaching alone. In
Japan, by contrast, teachers are more likely to spend their
planning time in common space that becomes what Steven
Gump (2002) calls the heart of the school. Another reason why
lesson study is still rare here is that teacher networks in the
United States have not tended to promote anything quite like
it. Exceptions have been the small-scale teacher study groups
described by Helen Featherstone (1998) and Eleanor
Duckworth (1997), and the large-scale National Writing Project
(Lieberman & Wood, 2003). Recently, however, other net-
works have followed the lead of these, and many of the proto-
cols we describe in this book are the result of their work. There
are signs, too, of an emerging recognition by policymakers and
policy researchers that the success of reform policy may ulti-
mately depend on the creation of opportunities for teacher
study (Cohen & Hill, 2001).
One result of such developments is that a number of
American educators and educational institutions have begun to

70
The Power of Protocols
adapt Japanese Lesson Study to their own contexts. We offer
the following “classic” version of Lesson Study (based on Stigler
and Hiebert’s account), but we also encourage lots of different
kinds of adaptation. 
Purpose
The obvious purpose of this protocol is to design better les-
sons and to improve existing ones. In the process, however, it
serves other purposes, too. It provides teachers at any level
with an opportunity to be continuing learners of their subjects,
and to add new skills to their teaching repertoire. In the
Japanese context, it also serves as a laboratory for the further
development and refinement of a whole school’s pedagogy
(Stigler & Hiebert, 1999).
Details
As described below, Japanese Lesson Study takes 2 or more
hours per session, with sessions held regularly over the course
of many months, and study group membership consistent.
Some of the steps listed below can take many sessions to com-
plete. Groups are led by classroom teachers, though adminis-
trators and others are sometimes members. An important
premise of the protocol is that the members share a common
curriculum framework, and also a sense of the teacher’s craft as
involving the creative interpretation of curriculum. The “les-
sons” involved are actually what American teachers would call
unit plans (Watanabe, 2002).
Steps
1. Problem selection. The Study Group sets the problem to be
worked on—one that has arisen in the practice of several teach-
ers, and seems important within a particular curricular context.
The problem might be one that a schoolwide committee has des-
ignated for special inquiry, or that a cadre of teachers at a grade
level finds perplexing.

Working on Problems of Practice
71
2. Lesson design. Drawing on published accounts of other teach-
ers’ practice and group members’ stories from practice, the group
designs a new lesson that seems likely to address the problem effec-
tively. The design process is not complete until every member has
invested in it and regards the result as promising. The goal of the
design process “is not only to produce an effective lesson but also
to understand why and how the lesson works to promote under-
standing among students” (Stigler & Hiebert, 1999, p. 113). 
3. Simulation. One member of the group teaches the lesson
while others role-play the part of students. Following the simula-
tion, the teaching design is adjusted as needed. 
4. Test run. Then another member of the group teaches the les-
son to his or her own students while the rest of the group
observes. The observations are not considered to be observations
of the teacher’s work, but of the Study Group’s work. The mem-
bers of the group typically walk around the classroom to view
student work at close hand. Note that in Japanese education,
teachers may leave their classes in the charge of appointed stu-
dent monitors while they observe a colleague as part of Lesson
Study. Adapting to the American context, one or two members of
the study group might observe the lesson and either take careful
notes or videotape it for the benefit of the others.
5. Critique. On the same day as the lesson is piloted, the
Study Group meets to critique the results. The protocol
requires that the teacher who piloted the lesson speak first and
in an uninterrupted fashion, describing how the lesson worked
from his or her unique perspective and what problems of
design surfaced. Then other members add any other design
problems that they noticed. The conversation is resolutely
focused on the design of the lesson rather than on the teacher’s
performance in teaching it.
6. Revision. Based on the critique, the Study Group revises the
lesson design. They may base the revisions on evidence of stu-
dents’ misunderstanding as gleaned from the students’ responses
in class or other work (Stigler & Hiebert, 1999). 
7. Second test run. The revised lesson is next taught by another
teacher to his or her own class. In the Japanese tradition, the
whole faculty is often invited to observe this second test run. As

72
The Power of Protocols
in the first test run, the results are critiqued on the same day, with
the teacher speaking first, and others invited to add design prob-
lems they may have noticed.
8. Final revision. The Study Group then invites other col-
leagues and sometimes outside experts to participate in the final
revision of the lesson plan. Following this revision, the group
publishes the lesson in an internal or external report. Sometimes
the lessons are also reported at “Lesson Fairs” (Stigler & Hiebert,
1999). For an American version of a lesson fair, see the New York
Peer Review Protocol described in Chapter 5.
Facilitation Tips
As noted above, some of the steps are really phases of a design
process and cannot be completed in a single session. For this reason,
the facilitator of any particular session must be one of the members
of the group, though more than one member may rotate into the
role. He or she must have a sense of the group’s history, not just as
Study Group but as Study Group studying the particular problem at
hand. He or she must also have a well-developed sense that it is
indeed problem-solving that defines the group’s mission, not just
design. The point of the design is to solve a problem. Such an ori-
entation is crucial to ensure that the designs are evaluated in terms
of their effectiveness rather than their elegance.
Meanwhile, the facilitator is important in developing and pro-
tecting a group culture that prizes the slow and careful working
out of a problem through lesson design—a culture that is contra-
puntal (within the American context, at least) to the one of quick
problem-solving characteristic of the rest of school life. It is this
counterpoint that makes the protocol more than a problem-solv-
ing tool, but a professional development tool as well. 

CHAPTER 5
Exploring Student
Work
A group of Connecticut teachers from the largely rural and
poor southeast quadrant of the state formed a study group in the
early 1990s. It was focused on sharing and exploring student
work by the light of the new Connecticut standards. The teachers
planned to educate themselves about what these standards (and
assessments to follow) might mean for their teaching. At one
point, the new teacher study group adopted a logo and motto,
and ordered some sweatshirts with both emblazoned. The logo
featured two triangles. The first, with its base on the bottom and
two long sides pointing up, represented teaching practice. “Like a
mountain,” the teachers said, “impossible to move and hard to
scale.” The other triangle, base on top and sides pointing down,
represented the state’s standards. “Like a dagger,” they added,
“apparently aimed straight at the teacher’s heart.” In the logo,
these triangles overlapped at their apexes, forming a third and
shaded geometric figure, a diamond-shaped one. The group’s
motto was “Work the Diamond” (McDonald, 2001a).
If chapters had mottoes, this is the one we would choose for
this chapter. These teachers knew intuitively that Connecticut’s
ambitions for educating all its children well—particularly the poor
rural students they taught—could not be realized through policy
prescriptions alone. On some neutral ground, such a policy ambi-
tion had to meet practice, and take serious account of teachers’
73

74
The Power of Protocols
deepest thinking about teaching, and bring students into the pic-
ture—real ones, not just ones imagined in the state capitol or,
indeed, in the teachers’ lunchroom. The Connecticut group’s story
is a rare case of exactly this kind of meeting. The Connecticut State
Department of Education provided the funds for meeting, but the
teachers took charge of the meetings themselves. And with the
help of some hired consultants, they learned to work the diamond,
teaching themselves many of the protocols outlined in this chapter,
struggling to make better sense than many educators often make of
the intersection of policy and practice.
As applied to this chapter, however, the motto “Work the
Diamond” refers to more than policy and practice. When educa-
tors explore student work together, they often deal with other
intersections, too. Some of the protocols in this book, for exam-
ple, involve exploring what we might call the intersection of the
one and the many. These protocols engage us intimately in the
work of just one or two students in order to sharpen our aware-
ness of the fact that the groups we teach are comprised of unique
people who do unique work. They provoke us to consider the
ways in which our group-based teaching might take better
account of the distinct and different individuals it aims to benefit.
Such protocols slow us down and bring us close to others’ learn-
ing in ways that prove deeply refreshing.
Most of the protocols in this chapter also help us to explore
the intersection of our practice, our values, and their impact on
our students. Do we look first for errors in usage or for the stu-
dent’s voice? Why? How are we swayed by a compelling point of
view? Does spelling “count”? In general, do we tend to think that
substance outweighs presentation, or vice versa? Why? How does
our calculation in this regard affect what our students produce? 
The level of what educators learn from exploring student
work tends to deepen as they gain experience, though it may be
hard to persuade those starting out that this will be true. The use
of protocols we feature in this chapter is for many educators less
intuitively appealing than the uses featured in the other chapters.
Once tried and then practiced several times, however, this use
becomes the one they think of first, and the one they may regard
as the most beneficial.

WHAT COMES UP
Simon Clements, a former member of Her Majesty’s Inspectors
of Schools (HMI) in England, invented this protocol for the benefit
of the Connecticut teachers’ study group described above.
He adapted What Comes Up from the traditions of the HMI,
where the examination of student work is considered a crucial
source of evidence for judgments (Wilson, 1996). In its encour-
agement of perception and its press for deeper and deeper levels
of it, this protocol shows the influence, too, of the Collaborative
Assessment Conference, which is the next protocol we describe.
Purpose
The Connecticut teachers asked Simon for a protocol they
could use in short after-school faculty meetings, the kind that are
often dominated by announcements and that seldom focus on
teaching and learning. Thus the purpose of What Comes Up is
subversive if also practical.
Details
This is a protocol for a 30- to 45-minute meeting of 6 to 20 peo-
ple who already know each other well because they work in the
same department or program. It works best when seats are arranged
in a circle. It depends on the facilitator’s having obtained two or
three pieces of student work, preferably freshly collected from one
or more of the participants’ classrooms, with each focused on a dif-
ferent subject and composed in a different medium. It is best to
choose pieces that seem intriguing for some reason—because they
raise questions, seem ambiguous, or appear unconventional.
Steps
1. Presentation. The facilitator presents the first piece of student
work. Depending on the kind of work it is, the facilitator may
choose to read it aloud (a story or poem), to post it on the wall (a
drawing), or to pass out copies (notes on a science problem).
Exploring Student Work
75

76
The Power of Protocols
Participants attend quietly to the work—listening, looking, read-
ing. (5 minutes)
2. Question. The facilitator then asks the participants to consider
the question, “What comes up for you when you examine this piece
of work?” Participants take a few moments to consider the question.
3. Round of response. Beginning with whoever seems most ready
to start, the facilitator calls on people in turn, going around the cir-
cle. Each responds to the question. No one may speak out of turn.
No one may repeat an observation. Depending on how much inter-
est has been stimulated and how many people there are in the
group, the facilitator may choose to go one more round.
4. Conversation. The facilitator invites open conversation based
on what the group has learned from the round(s).
5. Repeat. Time permitting, the facilitator introduces a new
piece of work, and the process repeats.
Facilitation Tips
The facilitator seeks to create an unhurried, reflective space
carved out of ordinary work life. The protocol presses for depth
through the gamelike prohibition on repeating an observation as
turns go around the circle. The facilitator should insist on the
rules of the game, but lightheartedly, giving each turn-taker time
to think up a new comment if one is needed. 
Variation
One can cross this protocol with the Tuning Protocol, and
have a warm round followed by a cool round in response to the
question, “What comes up for you in considering this piece of
student work?” Warm comments are empathetic, appreciative.
Cool comments are detached, comparative.
COLLABORATIVE ASSESSMENT CONFERENCE
Roughly once a month on a Saturday, Steve Seidel, Director
of Project Zero, convenes a group of as many as 30 educators in

Exploring Student Work
77
a large conference room on the campus of Harvard University.
Called “Rounds,” the meetings attract some longtime devotees.
After a quick breakfast of coffee and bagels, the educators take
their seats in a large circle surrounded by portraits of past
deans of the Harvard Graduate School of Education. Then one
of them presents some student work that he or she has
brought. Thus commences a Collaborative Assessment
Conference—the home office version of ones that happen now
in many other places, thanks to Project Zero’s wide influence,
and to the availability of two rich descriptions of the protocol,
one by Seidel (1988) himself, and another by Tina Blythe,
David Allen, and Barbara Powell (1999).
Purpose
This protocol has several purposes, according to Steve Seidel.
The first is to enhance teachers’ perceptions of all their students’
work by honing the teachers’ perceptual skills. A second is to
encourage depth of perception by demonstrating all that can be
seen in a single student’s work. A third is to encourage a balance
in perception—the habit of looking for strength as well as need.
The assumption behind this purpose is that a teacher can address
need only by building on strength. A fourth purpose is to encour-
age conversation among teachers about what the work shows
and of how they can act individually and collectively on what it
shows in order to benefit their students.
Unlike many protocols for looking at student work, the
Collaborative Assessment Conference typically focuses attention
on one student’s work. This is because of its interest in honing
perception, and its assumption that care in looking at one can
generalize to care in looking at many. 
Also unlike many other protocols, this one does not pay
overt attention to a set of learning standards. Still, it involves
standards—implicitly, but purposefully. That is because the hon-
ing of perception is ultimately and effectively the honing of
standards, too, and conversation about students’ work
inevitably involves “tuning” standards, even when the word
standards never comes up (McDonald, 2001b).

Details
Time varies from 45 to 90 minutes. A group setting is required
in which participants (5–30) have access to the work under study
and where eye contact can be maintained as much as possible.
Although the protocol can work well with a single piece of work,
as long as it is rich in detail, presenters are ordinarily asked to
provide several pieces of work by the same student—as, for
example, in a portfolio. Typically, participants all have copies of
the work presented when it involves, for example, writing or
drawing. Other media can be posted or displayed so that every-
one can view it at once. 
Steps
1. Presenting. The facilitator begins by asking the presenting
teacher what he or she has brought to the group. The teacher
then presents a single student’s work, offering only minimal con-
text. He or she might say, for example, only that this is the work
of a third-grade boy. Participants read silently or otherwise exam-
ine the work, marking on their copies any sections that hold par-
ticular significance for them.
2. Describing. The facilitator asks the group, “What do you
see?” Group members respond by describing components or
aspects of the work without making judgments of quality.
3. Raising questions. The facilitator asks, “What questions does
this work raise for you?” Participants respond with questions
they have about the student, the work, the assignment, the class-
room circumstance, and so forth. During this time, the presenting
teacher listens and makes notes, but does not respond.
4. Speculating. The facilitator asks, “What do you think this
student is working on?” Responders say what they think the stu-
dent was attempting to learn, accomplish, practice, or improve.
The facilitator presses for evidence to support these speculations:
“Why do you think this student is working on . . . ?”
5. Responding. The facilitator invites the presenting teacher
to speak: “After hearing all this, what are your thoughts?” This
is the presenter’s chance to respond to questions raised, to offer
additional context, to share his/her own thoughts about the
78
The Power of Protocols

student work, and to respond to any other questions partici-
pants may have regarding the student, the context, the assign-
ment, and so forth. At this time the presenter might also share
any surprises or unexpected feedback heard during the earlier
steps.
6. Reflecting and discussing. The facilitator invites open discus-
sion, asking participants to reflect on the experience of the pro-
tocol by the light of their own larger experiences in teaching and
learning. He or she may also ask participants to share what they
found particularly helpful or difficult while participating in the
activity, and also how they might use the protocol in their own
work with colleagues and/or students.
Facilitation Tips
More so than in most other protocols, the facilitator here
plays the interlocutor, initiating each of the steps with a partic-
ular question. Moreover, he or she may use questions to ensure
protocol discipline. For example, if a participant responds to
the question “What do you see in this work?” with an evalua-
tive comment, the facilitator might ask, “What elements do you
see that made you think so?” He or she might also simply ask
the participant to withhold evaluative comments. 
Like all protocols, this has a number of features that strike
participants as unnatural the first time through. Here it seems
unnatural to know so little context to start. The facilitator may
have to prevent the presenter from providing too much, and
thus distorting the seeing and responding. Similarly, the facili-
tator may have to encourage the participants to raise questions
about the work rather than just about the context.
A major objective of the facilitator here—especially when
working with an inexperienced group—is to press participants to
go deeply into the work, to raise more questions and make more
speculations collectively than any one member imagined possi-
ble. Another objective is to generate questions and speculations
that cause participants to think more deeply about learning and
teaching. In this regard, the facilitator may on occasion have to
guard against superficiality. For example, sometimes an inexperi-
enced group will respond to the question, “What do you think
Exploring Student Work
79

80
The Power of Protocols
the student is working on?” by answering simply, “a math prob-
lem” or “an art assignment,” and the facilitator must point out
that the purpose of the question is not to guess the assignment,
but to speculate about how the student frames the learning
involved. The thrill of Collaborative Assessment Conference
derives from how much can be learned from a single student’s
creative work.
Unlike some protocols described in this chapter—for example,
the New York Peer Review Protocol—the Collaborative
Assessment Conference has no preset time limits assigned for
each step. This means that the facilitator must gauge the overall
time well, since overall time is always limited, and must also
attend closely at each step to signs that the group may be ready
to move on to the next step. This is tricky, because this protocol
may also demand more than an ordinary amount of “wait
time”—for example, to encourage as many questions and specu-
lations as possible. The facilitator should listen for comments that
may be more appropriate to a later step. Hearing one, the facili-
tator should ask the person to restate the comment at the appro-
priate time. Hearing several, however, may be a signal that peo-
ple are ready to move on. 
Variations
If the group includes some experienced facilitators, they can
facilitate smaller groups, thus enabling several simultaneous con-
ferences to occur. For a large group, a useful variation is to “fish-
bowl” the conference: a group of 6 to 10 volunteers, with an
experienced facilitator and a predesignated presenter, participates
in the review while others observe. Step 6 should then be open
to the observers as well as the participants.
NEW YORK PEER REVIEW PROTOCOL
In Chapter 4, we described the Tuning Protocol as especially
useful in examining problems from practice. However, as the
Tuning Protocol spread to many reform networks and policy con-
texts in the 1990s, it came to be viewed also as a protocol for

studying student work. In this respect, it illustrates well some-
thing we said in the Preface, namely that nearly all the protocols
featured in this book can be adapted to nearly all the purposes
described in the book.
The story of how New York State adapted the Tuning Protocol
begins in the early days of that state’s efforts to introduce stan-
dards-based teaching and learning. Commissioner of Education
Richard Mills had the idea of introducing what were then the
state’s new Learning Standards by illustrating them with exem-
plary lesson plans by New York teachers. He also proposed hon-
oring the teachers whose work was chosen for this purpose by
inducting them into a new entity called the New York State
Academy for Teaching and Learning. Officials from his office con-
tacted the Annenberg Institute for help with this project, and two
of us—Joe McDonald and Nancy Mohr—agreed to help.
As we and our New York State Department of Education col-
leagues began to plan the Academy, we realized that membership
could be more than an honor. The insight developed as we talked
about a peer review process to judge submitted lesson plans. Our
first image of this process was that of a contest judged by peers
who would review the work blindly and send their reviews to
Albany. Then somebody said, “What if the teacher were there?”
What if the teacher did not send a lesson to Albany to be judged,
but brought it to Albany in person, and what if the judges were
others who had brought their own lesson plans to Albany? What
if the contest became a conversation at a lesson fair?
Today, more than 1,300 New York teachers have participat-
ed in Statewide Peer Reviews, and thousands more in regional-
and district-level versions. Although the state still uses reviewed
lesson plans to illustrate its Learning Standards on a website
devoted to the purpose (www.nysatl.nysed.gov), it has long
since realized that Peer Review has a larger purpose than sup-
plying illustrations. 
Purpose
The Peer Review Protocol is designed to foster standards-
based teaching by means of a structured conversation focused on
some actual teaching plans, the standards they address, and the
Exploring Student Work
81

82
The Power of Protocols
student work that resulted. It aims to model such conversations
as a principal tool of school reform in New York State (University
of the State of New York, 2001).
Details
Teachers prepare for Peer Review by compiling what is called
a Learning Experience. This is a detailed description of a unit of
instruction at any level—from preschool to adult—and in any
subject area. It must include not only a narrative of teaching
plans and a list of materials required, but also the specific state
Learning Standard and performance indicators that the teaching
addresses, a plan for assessing student work based on these stan-
dards and indicators, and samples of actual assessed student
work. As conducted at the Academy’s annual Statewide Peer
Review, the protocol features a facilitator trained in the protocol,
a teacher-presenter, and up to eight reviewers, one of whom acts
as recorder. The process, including a follow-up debriefing among
the facilitator, the teacher-presenter, and the recorder, takes
about an hour and a half.
Steps (Adapted from McDonald, 2001b)
1. Introduction. The facilitator gives an overview of the
process, sets the tone for the review, and describes the ground
rules. (5 minutes) 
2. Presentation. The teacher-presenter sets the school and
curricular context for the Learning Experience, and its focus
and purpose, including targeted Learning Standards and per-
formance indicators as listed in the New York State Learning
Standards guides. He or she shares copies of or visuals con-
cerning any tools associated with the Learning Experience—for
example, assignment sheets, materials kits, and so on; and also
samples of student work that have been assessed using an
assessment plan. Reviewers stay silent throughout the presen-
tation. (15 minutes)
3. Reading time. Reading through the written materials the
presenter has provided, including the student work samples, the
reviewers use Post-it notes to flag evidence related to criteria (list-

ed in the next step). They pay special attention to the relationship
of the teaching plans and student work to the Learning
Standards. (15 minutes)
4. Review. As the presenter stays silent, the reviewers respond
to the Learning Experience in “warm” and “cool” terms, with
special reference to a set of criteria, as follows:
• Relation to the targeted Learning Standards
• Degree of intellectual challenge
• Quality of assessment plan 
• Power of engagement
• Adaptability to other teaching contexts
• Effective technology integration (where technology is
involved)
Warm comments are empathetic, appreciative. Cool com-
ments are comparative, critical. Reviewers may not combine
warm and cool in the same comment. They and the facilitator
(who may participate in the review) must maintain an overall
balance of warm and cool. (10 minutes)
5. Response. Following the reviewers’ comments, the presenter
responds to any he or she chooses to respond to, while the
reviewers remain silent. (10 minutes)
6. Full-group conversation. Finally, everyone joins in general
conversation. The facilitator tries to ensure that any criteria not
previously discussed are discussed here. (10 minutes)
7. Reflection period. Reviewers have some time to think about all
that has been said and to fill out and sign a reporting form that has
places to record warm and cool reactions for each criteria. (5 min-
utes)
8. Summary. The recorder offers a summary of the review by
criteria. This affords the reviewers an opportunity to revise the
recorder’s impressions, and provides the whole group an oppor-
tunity to test consensus. Is the Learning Experience ready for the
Academy, or does it need revision, and if so, what revision, and
how extensive? (5 minutes)
9. Consultation. Following the departure of the reviewers from
the table, the facilitator, presenter, and recorder meet to debrief. The
aim of this part of the process is to ensure that the presenter is well
Exploring Student Work
83

oriented for the work of revising his or her learning experience, if
necessary. It is only after revisions are complete that he or she is
inducted into the Academy. (15–30 minutes)
Facilitation Tips
Facilitating a full Peer Review takes skill and experience.
Among the most demanding tasks are helping reviewers manage
the multiple tasks involved—for example, exploring the links
among Learning Standards, teaching plans, assessment plans, and
assessed student work. Another is maintaining the right balance
between warm and cool—not too much of either, but with each
given its due. A third is figuring out whether and how to inter-
vene as a substantive contributor in a way that is most helpful
and non-dominating. And a fourth is managing the overall tone
of the session, and of the follow-up consultation to ensure that
presenters feel that their work is appreciated even as it is also cri-
tiqued. The goal is that they emerge from the experience feeling
stronger professionally and pedagogically. 
Variations
Although the Academy adheres to a strict interpretation of
the Peer Review Protocol for purposes of admission to the
Academy, it encourages groups of teachers in New York and else-
where to adapt the protocol to the practical needs of their own
contexts, and to change the components as necessary—for exam-
ple, the number of reviewers, the time frame, and the review cri-
teria. Many such adaptations exist. Some of the New York City
Teacher Centers, for example, have developed a Mini-Peer
Review that takes under an hour. In most local adaptations, the
point is to help teachers improve a Learning Experience, rather
than judge it by the Academy’s demanding standards. 
MINNESOTA SLICE
The Slice Protocol for studying student work was first used by
the Bush Educational Leaders Program at the University of
84
The Power of Protocols

Exploring Student Work
85
Minnesota in the early 1990s. Joe McDonald devised the proto-
col with help from Jean King and John Mauriel. Since then, it has
migrated to many other contexts. In Minnesota, it was always
part of a larger inquiry focused on a question raised by a school
or district. For example, one year, a particular Minnesota school
district wanted to know what teachers, students, parents, and
other community members thought should be the purpose of
education in their small town. So the Bush Fellows organized
focus groups, conducted a telephone survey, shadowed some stu-
dents through an entire day of school, held a town meeting, and
collected a slice.
The word slice reflects the fact that the student work to be
studied is a broad but still limited swath of work. In this same
Minnesota district, for example, it consisted of all the work done
by students between 12:00 noon one day and 3:00 p.m. the next
day (including homework) in two kindergarten, second-grade,
fourth-grade, and sixth-grade classes in each of two elementary
schools, plus all of the work done within the same time span by
25 students per school (chosen randomly from each of three stra-
ta reflecting achievement levels) at both the town’s middle school
and its high school. The elementary work was collected by the
teachers. The middle school and high school work was collected
by the students. Both teachers and students were encouraged to
take photos of work that could not be collected (for example,
silent reading, group work, artwork, physical exercise). All the
collected work was xeroxed once names and other identifying
characteristics were masked, and particular class sets (at the ele-
mentary level) and student sets (at the secondary level) were
then assigned numbers. Photos were arranged separately. 
Frequently, a slice (here we use lower-case to refer to the cor-
pus of work collected rather than to the overall protocol) is less
elaborate than it was in this Minnesota example. For example, it
may not be part of a more elaborate inquiry involving other
methods, and it may involve only one school rather than a whole
district. For example, at University Neighborhood High School
(UNHS), a small school on the Lower East Side of New York City,
a recent slice consisted of the work done by 15 students over the
course of a day and a half. The students were volunteers who
received community service credit for their collection efforts.

They represented a range of skill levels, but included a slightly
higher proportion of special education students than are found in
the school’s population overall. One of the things the school was
interested in learning from the slice was whether such students
were being appropriately challenged.
Regardless of how elaborate it is, however, a slice once pre-
pared becomes a “text” for discussion by a group of protocol par-
ticipants. The participants may be limited to the school’s faculty,
as at UNHS, or may include outsiders, too, as in Minnesota.
Before proceeding with a reading and discussion of this “text,”
the participants are advised to remember that any slice provides
just a small window on the teaching and learning life of a com-
munity. Like all windows, it excludes from view far more than it
includes.
Purpose
The purpose of the Slice Protocol is to help answer a question
raised by a school, school district, college, or other educational
program. It is important that the question be one that a broad but
limited (in time) student work sample can help answer. The Slice
cannot definitively answer the kinds of questions it typically
addresses. It merely provides a text that can provoke useful con-
versation regarding the questions, one that may lead in turn to
new insights.
Details
The Minnesota Slice takes anywhere from a morning to a whole
day, depending on the amount of student work collected. In our
Minnesota example, participants began just after school, paused fol-
lowing the reading to have dinner together, then convened for the
seminar after dinner. At University Neighborhood High School, by
contrast, the whole process ran from 9 a.m. to noon. 
In any case, the Slice Protocol requires a significant amount of
preparation. The first task is to settle on a guiding question. The
next task is to take steps to ensure the ordinariness and repre-
sentativeness of the work sample, the slice itself. The power of
the protocol ultimately depends on participants’ trust that the
86
The Power of Protocols

Exploring Student Work
87
text they are reading is both ordinary and representative. To
ensure these qualities, we encourage the following elements:
• A tight time frame for collection—24 to 36 hours. Teachers
and students participating in the selection need to know how
to proceed, but they do not need a lot of advance word on the
scheduling of the sample. This avoids the temptation to “load
up” the sample with unusual work. 
• Randomization in the selection of classes and/or students,
though sometimes a stratified random selection makes the
most sense. If, for example, a school’s guiding question is
whether White students and Black students have equal access
to a high-quality curriculum, the school will want to ensure
equal representation of both groups in the randomized sam-
ple. Or if a college’s question is whether students are gaining a
lot of writing practice regardless of their major, it will want to
represent all majors.
• Standardization of the collection procedures. Everyone will or
will not collect students’ notes. They will or will not include
homework. They will or will not take photos. Sometimes a
slice-collecting strategy involves a roving photographer who
takes photos throughout the school or district, within the
same time frame as the collection.
In designing the collection procedures, however, it is impor-
tant to bear in mind the differences between the Minnesota Slice
protocol and a research project that uses student work as a data
source. The purpose of the Minnesota Slice is to provoke a con-
versation based on an informative text. The purpose of a research
project that uses student work as a data source may be to draw
valid generalizations. The Minnesota Slice strives only for a rea-
sonable degree of reliability (across collectors) and validity
(defined as ordinariness in the collection). The facilitator of the
Slice Protocol should always begin by stressing that the readers
cannot make valid generalizations from this sample about all of
the school’s or district’s student work; it can only use the sample
to raise issues for reflection and conversation. 
Teachers are often the chief slice collectors. However, in slices
involving older students, we think the students themselves make

88
The Power of Protocols
the better collectors—mostly because they typically have so many
teachers who must otherwise be involved. The trick is to get the stu-
dent collectors to care about the reliability of the process—either by
providing some incentive (University Neighborhood High School
offered community service credit), or by offering to debrief them on
the process, individually or collectively. Depending on institutional
policies, the school or college may have to seek students’ and/or
parents’ permission to include their work in a slice. 
Another major preparation effort crucial to the success of the
protocol is the preparation of the text once the collection is over.
This involves removing identifying characteristics—especially
students’ and teachers’ names—and coding (to ensure that third-
grade work stays with third-grade work, and doesn’t get mixed in
with fifth-grade work). It also involves lots of xeroxing, photo
finishing, and compiling.
Finally, there are details to manage on protocol day: laying
out all the photos on a large table or tackboard, or along a corri-
dor wall; arranging the xeroxed work at tables that are them-
selves arranged in some way—for example, all the English majors
here, all the Math majors there, and so on.
The details, in short, are prodigious. In our experience, how-
ever, so is the payoff.
Steps
1. Preparations. See “Details” above.
2. Introductions. The facilitator begins with any introductions
that may be appropriate, then identifies the guiding question:
What is the purpose of an education in our town? Or how does
everyday work at University Neighborhood High School reflect
the New York State Learning Standards? At this point, the facili-
tator also asks the person in charge of preparations to character-
ize the slice. How representative is it? What were the parameters
for the collection—for example, does it include photos and xerox-
ed copies of notes and jottings? The assumption is that a slice will
always be to some extent compromised in its representativeness
(and sometimes in its ordinariness, too), and that this is okay so
long as the readers are forewarned. 

Exploring Student Work
89
3. Norm-setting. The facilitator suggests some norms for the
reading hour (or even 2 hours for large slices), and tries to gain
assent. These usually include a ban on discussing particular
work samples with each other, and a ban on talking while oth-
ers are still reading. They may also have to do with such mat-
ters as the order in which work is read, and the pace and char-
acter of the reading (not close but nonetheless thorough), as
well as the kind of notes to take (ones related to the guiding
question, to patterns of strength and weakness, and so on). 
4. Reading. Participants silently read through the entire slice,
literally reading the paper-based work and also studying the
photos, moving at will among the tables and display areas.
5. Seminar. Participants discuss the slice in a seminar that fol-
lows these norms: 
• The aim of the conversation is to help answer the guiding
question, and the facilitator will periodically remind partici-
pants that this is the aim. However, it is in the nature of a
seminar to follow its own unique conversational paths, and
the facilitator will allow this.
• Useful conversational paths develop best if participants try to
build on previous comments, and avoid “stepping on” some-
one else’s talk (that is, starting to speak before the previous
speaker has finished).
• Observations and speculations based on evidence in the slice
are welcome, but generalizations are not (“It’s obvious that
there is no teaching of writing going on in the sixth grade”).
The facilitator will therefore discourage generalizations, and
will also probe for evidence with respect to observations and
speculations (“Can you offer an example of that?”).
• Since it is a given that one cannot make generalizations about
the school, program, or college based on the slice alone, there
is no need for defensiveness in the face of evidence-based
speculation. For this reason, the facilitator will discourage any
participant from providing additional contextual information
or explanation (“If we’d only collected the slice the day
before, you would have seen a major piece of writing that
sixth graders did that day”). 

90
The Power of Protocols
6. Reflection on the question. After 45 to 60 minutes of seminar,
the facilitator asks all participants to reflect briefly in writing on
what they have learned from the slice concerning the guiding
question. After 5 minutes of writing, the facilitator asks volun-
teers to share some of what they have written, and invites others
to comment.
7. Reflection on the process. To conclude, the facilitator asks par-
ticipants to reflect on the protocol itself and what modifications
they might suggest, if any.
Facilitation Tips
The Minnesota Slice puts considerable demands on the facil-
itator because of its dependence on seminar-based conversation.
It helps if the facilitator is practiced in leading text-based dis-
cussions. Seminars typically begin when the facilitator asks the
first question. It should be an interpretive question, one that is
clearly related to the overall purpose of the seminar (in this
case, the guiding question of the protocol), and that implicitly
calls upon references to the text. For example, one seminar in
Minnesota began when the facilitator asked, “Will someone get
us started by noting some value that you think you see recur-
ring in the work?” A seminar facilitator must prepare for the
seminar by constructing a half-dozen such questions as these,
and by anticipating an equal number of possible conversation
paths (based on his or her own reading of the text). However,
most of the questions a good seminar leader asks are not pre-
constructed, and most of the preconstructed ones are never
asked. Among the spontaneous questions are those that probe
for evidence (“Can you recall an instance of that in the slice?”);
call for elaboration (“Will you say more about that?”); and
encourage connections (“Can you relate this idea to what
Suzanne said she noticed?”). 
One crucial role that the facilitator plays is to help the
group remember the guiding question: “Let’s return for a
moment to our guiding question. Remember that we’re trying
to understand the purpose of education in this town. What
purposes did you see below the surface of this work sample?”
Another crucial role the facilitator plays is to help the group

mind the norms. So, for example, the facilitator interrupts a
teacher who is about to explain how a particular piece of work
in the slice relates to a larger assignment. “No need to give us
more details,” the facilitator says. “We all know that the slice
provides a very limited window.” 
Variations
If outsiders are present—as they were in Minnesota—the sem-
inar may have the outsiders discuss the slice first—say, for 30 min-
utes—with the insiders observing. Then the process inverts, giving
the insiders the chance to continue the conversation with the out-
siders listening, again for 30 minutes. The seminar then finishes
with an open conversation to which both groups may contribute.
At University Neighborhood High School, where only insiders
were present, and where the guiding question concerned the rela-
tionship of the slice to the New York State Learning Standards, the
facilitator preceded the reading of the slice with an exercise focused
solely on the standards. After reading a two-page summary of the
Learning Standards, participants were asked to brainstorm what
kinds of work they would expect to see in a high school striving to
meet these standards. Later, the facilitator began the seminar by
asking what the participants had seen of the standards in the slice.
After a number of responses and ensuing conversation, he asked
what they had missed of the standards in the slice. Following this
first alternation of “warm” and “cool” responses, the conversation
fell naturally into an alternating rhythm—with occasional nudges
one way or the other by the facilitator.
SHADOW PROTOCOL
Janet Mannheimer Zydney, a doctoral student in education at
New York University, needed to observe a high school student for
a course she was taking, while University Neighborhood High
School (UNHS), fresh from its experience with the Minnesota
Slice, wanted to see if slicing could be used to get to know one
student more deeply. This is how the Shadow Protocol came to be
developed. It aims to see a student’s work from the student’s own
Exploring Student Work
91

92
The Power of Protocols
point of view, and involves “shadowing” or accompanying the
student through one day at school.
In the version tried at UNHS, the shadower chronicles the
intellectual tasks that the student faces during the day, both with-
in the formal curriculum and also outside it (for example, in dis-
cussions with friends or in extracurricular activities). Assisted by
the student, the shadower also collects artifacts concerning the
student’s response to them. These may include work samples,
photos of work in progress, notes of conversation overheard, or
quotations from the student’s own account of her encounter with
a task. The shadower aims for “thin” description—that is, descrip-
tion that is close to the details, with minimal inference and no
interpretation mixed in.
In addition to its relationship to the Minnesota Slice, the
Shadow Protocol has conceptual roots in the work of “descriptive
review” by Pat Carini and the Prospect Center (Featherstone, 1998;
Himley & Carini, 2000).
Purpose
The purpose of the Shadow Protocol is to situate a student’s
work within the context of his or her own complex work life,
and thus to understand the student better and teach him or her
more effectively.
Details
The Shadow Protocol has four requirements. The first is that
the persons who will receive the shadower’s report have invited
it. They may be the student’s teaching team, whose members
hope that the report will give them insight into the student’s
learning. Or they may be a study group that includes only one of
the student’s teachers, but one who is struggling to understand
this particular student, and who hopes that her colleagues can
use the report to help. Or they may be the student’s
Individualized Educational Planning Team, who hope to use the
report to understand the student’s special needs and to make a
plan for addressing them.

Exploring Student Work
93
The second requirement is that the student (and generally the
student’s parent) consents to the shadowing, understands its pur-
pose, and actively cooperates with the shadower.
The third requirement is that the shadower—whether an insid-
er (somebody whom the student already knows well, for example,
one of her teachers), or an outsider (for example, a graduate student
like Janet)—is both a skillful observer and recorder, and also capa-
ble of withholding his or her own interpretations of the findings.
This protocol depends for its power on the fact that those who
commission the data become the principal interpreters of it.
Finally, the fourth requirement is that the shadower and the
facilitator stay in close communication. Each plays a crucial role
in the protocol itself. 
Steps
1. Shadowing. The shadower spends an entire school day with
the student, noting the most salient intellectual tasks that the stu-
dent faces (within and outside the formal curriculum). For each
task, the shadower describes the student’s response, striving for
thin description. 
2. Preparation for presentation. The shadower makes a selec-
tion of four to six tasks that seem to him or her to represent a
variety of responses on the part of the student. The variety may
involve levels of interest and engagement, of confidence, of
enjoyment, of struggle, or of evident skill and insight. The
shadower prepares a brief description of each of the selected
tasks and chooses an artifact relating to the student’s perform-
ances in response to the tasks. The artifact might be an assign-
ment completed, quotations from the student’s account to the
shadower of a hallway conversation with a friend, a photo-
graph of the student’s involvement in reading or dancing, or
any number of other possible things. 
3. Introduction. At a conference of the student’s teachers or
other appropriate participants (for example, the student’s advi-
sor, counselor, parent), the facilitator explains the rationale for
the protocol and its steps. He or she emphasizes its purpose: to
understand one student better in the context of his or her life

in school (college, and so forth). Then the facilitator introduces
the shadower. (5 minutes)
4. Presentation. The shadower presents his or her selected and
thin account of the student’s day, as represented in four to six
tasks that the student confronted and the performances that
resulted. (20 minutes)
5. Questions. The participants ask any questions they may have,
and the shadower responds, avoiding in the process anything but
minimal inference and interpretation. (10 minutes)
6. Private speculation. Based on his or her reaction to the pres-
entation, each participant (including the shadower) takes 5 min-
utes to write down several speculations concerning the student’s
intellectual strengths.
7. Sharing. Participants (including the shadower) read in turn
what they have written, without commentary or questions from
others. (10–15 minutes)
8. Open conversation. Participants discuss the entire set of specu-
lations they have just heard. Prompted by the facilitator, they seek
to highlight common threads as well as “out of the box” insights.
9. Planning. Participants brainstorm teaching strategies that
build on their new perceptions of the student’s strengths. 
Facilitation Tips
It is crucial that the facilitator explain clearly the purpose of this
protocol, and remind conference participants about this purpose as
they offer their speculations. He or she should emphasize that the
purpose is to recognize the intellectual strengths of the student so
that these can inform teaching. It is not to evaluate the student’s
curriculum or teachers. Nor is it to evaluate the student’s work or
work habits. It may be necessary for the facilitator to “ban blame.”
Variations
A variation of this protocol might focus on some other observ-
able pattern besides the most salient intellectual tasks and the
student’s responses to them. For example, the group that com-
missioned the shadow might like to focus only on the student’s
opportunities for learning based on social interaction. 
94
The Power of Protocols

Exploring Student Work
95
ESP PROTOCOL
In this case, ESP stands for Empire State Partnerships. Begun
in 1996, the Empire State Partnerships is a joint initiative of the
New York State Council on the Arts and the New York State
Department of Education. It aims to increase student achieve-
ment in the arts as well as in other areas, through arts integra-
tion. Its strategy is the creation of model arts education partner-
ships between schools and arts or cultural organizations. It is one
of a number of successful national and regional networks of
teachers that focus on professional development activities in par-
ticular content areas (McDonald & Klein, 2002).
To support the 60-odd partnerships ESP has founded through-
out New York State, the organization maintains a support net-
work and also holds an annual statewide 5-day summer retreat.
The ESP Protocol outlined here is an adaptation of one originally
developed for use during the summer 2000 retreat. Readers may
notice the influence of the Collaborative Assessment Conference,
and also of a version of the Tuning Protocol called the California
Protocol (Kammer, 1998). 
Purpose
The ESP Protocol aims to stimulate teachers’ perceptions of
qualities of thinking and feeling in their students’ work, to con-
nect these perceived qualities with standards (in ESP’s case, the
New York State Learning Standards), and thus to help the teach-
ers help their students achieve the standards. Another of the
Protocol’s aims is to help teams of educators (including classroom
teachers and teaching artists) learn how to work more effective-
ly together by inquiring together about the qualities of their stu-
dents’ learning, and by receiving feedback from one or two other
teams of educators working on different projects.
Details
The process begins with the efforts of each participating team
to select a sample of student work that somehow raises an issue
or set of questions of deep concern to the team’s work. ESP

96
The Power of Protocols
encourages teams to prepare exhibits that are respectful of the
student artists and the media in which they work. Thus artwork
must be hung properly and against an appropriately neutral
background; music must be recorded well and played back on
acoustically good equipment; video must be shot well and with
good sound qualities; and so on. In general, these are good admo-
nitions for all those who study student work, but are crucial
when the work involves the arts, where substance and presenta-
tion are so entwined.
Steps
1. Introduction. The facilitator makes sure that all the members
of the group know each other, and that everyone is familiar with
each team’s project.
2. Presentation. One team invites the other(s) to observe its
exhibit of student work. The presenting team provides no con-
text—no explanation of the assignment or assignments, no char-
acterization of the students or the work setting. The exhibit may
involve video, music, visual artifacts, and so forth. The facilitator
asks the observers to infer what students are addressing and
accomplishing in the work exhibited. (10 minutes)
3. Observers’ discussion. The observers discuss among them-
selves—with presenters present but silent—their perceptions of
the student work, responding to the facilitator’s prompts to begin
with descriptive, nonjudgmental assessments of what the work
seems to “address,” and then to build toward interpretations of
what the work “accomplishes.” (15 minutes)
4. Presenters’ discussion. The presenters discuss among them-
selves—with observers present but silent—the issues or ques-
tions that provoked them to exhibit this particular collection of
student work. In the process, they acknowledge the ways in
which the observers’ discussion has affected them. (10 minutes)
5. Context and standards. The presenters silently hand out
copies of a short written account of any contextual details they
wish to share, plus a list of the standards and performance indi-
cators that guided the teaching related to the exhibit.
6. Observers’ response. After reading the handout, the observers
offer a response. Prompted by the facilitator, they especially

address questions of fit and misfit between the standards and the
student work. Presenters are silent. (5–10 minutes)
7. Open conversation. Presenters and observers are free to raise
or answer any questions they like.
8. Reflection. Presenters, speaking in turn, convey what they
learned from the process of presenting their students’ work in
this way and explain how, if at all, it may benefit their team.
Variation
Instead of beginning with Step 1, a group might decide to let
the presenting team offer some minimal context. ESP suggests,
however, that beginning with context tends to tip the conversa-
tion toward more exploration of lesson design rather than of stu-
dent work.
EQUITY PROTOCOL
This protocol originated in the Winter Meeting of the
National School Reform Faculty in Houston in December 2001.
The focus of the meeting was on equity, and participants grap-
pled with the question of what equity really is—a topic? A
lens? A principle? 
In this protocol, as in most of the others described in this chap-
ter, we look at student work in order to understand our own work.
Details
The teacher-presenter brings an assignment and correspon-
ding student work on which he or she would like feedback using
an equity lens. The facilitator and the teacher meet beforehand
and agree to a set of equity-focused questions that seem appro-
priate. Optimal group size is 9 to 12.
Steps
1. Presentation. The teacher presents the assignment to the
group, offering relevant context and his or her expectations con-
cerning the student work it may generate.
Exploring Student Work
97

98
The Power of Protocols
2. Go-Rounds. The facilitator leads the group in several Go-
Rounds, each focused on a question. Possible questions include
the following:
• What do you see that might be engaging to many different
students?
• What do you see that might meet more than one learning
modality?
• What do you see that might support/hinder students with spe-
cial needs?
• What do you see that might support/hinder English Language
Learners?
• What do you see that might be considered bias in the lan-
guage used in the assignment?
• What do you wonder about with respect to equity?
3. Student work. The presenter silently distributes some stu-
dent work samples that resulted from this assignment. The
samples should vary in terms of quality, and should also reflect
the diversity of the students who completed the assignment.
Participants are given sufficient time to review the work.
(10–15 minutes)
4. Final Go-Round. The facilitator asks each participant to
reflect on the relationship between the questions raised earlier
and the student work reviewed. The facilitator cautions that the
purpose of this round is not to make judgments, but to raise fur-
ther questions. (5–10 minutes)
5. Reflection. The presenter reflects on all that he or she has
heard, and comments on any new insights or opportunities that
have arisen. (5 minutes)
6. Open conversation. If time permits, the facilitator engages all
participants in an open conversation, prompting: “What do we
think we have learned from this experience about equity and
efforts to achieve it?”
Facilitation Tip
One crucial challenge here, as in any protocol where teach-
ers dare to share their own and their students’ work, is to

ensure that the teachers do not emerge from the experience
feeling in some sense “blamed”—for an imperfect assignment,
an inequitable arrangement, and so forth. Another challenge is
to ensure that the teachers feel free to discuss their work and
their students frankly, without feeling that they have to make
excuses. The facilitator may occasionally need to remind par-
ticipants to “avoid the blame game—and the excuses game.”
Exploring Student Work
99

100
CONCLUSION
Jumping In
In Chapter 1, we introduced a persistent theme of this book
with the expression “educating ourselves.” We put this expres-
sion in the form of the first-person plural to signify that we
authors are educators, too, and like all our fellow educators, in
need of continual education. We meant the phrase also as a call
to join with us and many other educators who struggle to edu-
cate ourselves within sometimes indifferent institutions
because we think our students’ learning depends ultimately on
our own. 
Throughout the book also, we have used third-person pro-
nouns, especially in describing the work of the facilitator. We
have wanted our readers to gain a comprehensive view of the
role—from the one who conducts a simple Go-Round with some
colleagues on a small task force, to the one who leads an institu-
tion’s comprehensive effort to study itself and its impact on stu-
dents, drawing partly on a slice. Knowing that we are likely to
have a range of readers with a range of purposes in their reading,
we know also that most are unlikely to find themselves facilitat-
ing all the protocols described in the book.
In closing, however, we want to invite all readers to facili-
tate at least some of them. So we come full circle with our pro-
nouns. We encourage you to jump in. Remember our claim: that
we can have the kinds of genuinely accountable institutions of
learning that our students need only if many of us who work in
educational institutions are willing to learn how to take the lead

in educating ourselves. And if you have taken the trouble to
read this book, then certainly you are likely to be or to become
a facilitative leader. 
How to become such a leader, if you are not already one? The
only way to learn this work is by doing it. Being transparent and
open about what you are trying allows for jumping in, with
opportunities to talk about the results afterward. And the courage
you show enables participants to become engaged, and helps
build community.
WAYS TO GET STARTED
• Try these protocols in any environment. Why not a committee
meeting, a leadership team, or a task force? Volunteer to facil-
itate.
• Get a partner to work with. Partnering is good for morale and
for honing each other’s skills.
• Seek opportunities to work on facilitation skills through work-
shops and classes.
• Form a group to support one another, what we call a critical
friends group. Meet regularly, and don’t just make promises,
keep them.
• Try these activities with students.
• Solicit someone to act as a coach—someone who will sit in
while you work and give you feedback.
• Observe other facilitators.
THINGS THAT MAKE IT EASIER
• Not skipping norms. Norms can make it clear that you are try-
ing something new and that it’s okay if it isn’t totally success-
ful the first time around. Make sure one of the norms pro-
motes risk-taking.
• Not skipping reflecting/debriefing afterward. If you don’t do it,
how will people appreciate or even be aware of what they’ve
learned?
Jumping In
101

102
Conclusion
• Not being afraid of silence. Learn to listen. Worry less about
what to say. Let the participants do the “saying.”
• Being honest about the fact that you have some concerns
yourself, but acknowledging that your hopes in the possibili-
ties overcome them.
• Remembering that this is like any sport, art form, or game:
you learn by doing. If you try to understand all of the rules
first, you’ll never get started.
• Really believing that most of the wisdom to be gained will
come from the participants.
• Not involving people simply for “buy-in,” but because their
voices are crucial to everybody’s learning. 
• Remembering that there are very few mistakes you can make
that would be (as our computers sometimes warn) “fatal
errors.” Maybe mild embarrassment. Think of this as an
opportunity to model vulnerability. 
• Having the courage, above all, to do business differently, to be
a learner, to be a leader, to educate yourself.

103
APPENDIX A
Suggested Uses for
Protocols
Starting a Group 
Opening a Meeting 
Closing a Meeting 
Working on a 
Problem
Exploring Issues of 
Equity
Interventions for 
Conflict
Understanding
Students
Teaching, Learning, 
and Curriculum 
Large Groups 
Using Text 
Classroom 
Application
Postcards 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
Reflection on a 
Word
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
Pair Share 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
Clearing 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
All Purpose Go-
Round
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
X 
Fears and Hopes 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
Norm Setting 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
Diversity Rounds 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
Marvin’s Model 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Final Word 
X 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
X 

104
Appendix A
Starting a Group 
Opening a Meeting 
Closing a Meeting 
Working on a 
Problem
Exploring Issues of 
Equity
Interventions for 
Conflict
Understanding
Students
Teaching, Learning, 
and Curriculum 
Large Groups 
Using Text 
Classroom 
Application
Learning from 
Speakers 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
Panel Protocol 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
Provocative
Prompts 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Mars/Venus  
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
Rich Text  
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
Descriptive
Consultancy
X 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
Issaquah Coaching  
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
Constructivist
Learning Groups 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
Success Analysis  
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
X 
Tuning  
X 
 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
X 
Peeling the Onion 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
Japanese Lesson 
Study
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
What Comes Up 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
Collaborative
Assessment
Conference
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
New York Peer 
Review
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
Minnesota Slice 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
Shadow  
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
ESP  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
Equity  
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 

APPENDIX B
Additional Resources
“Examining Student Work,” by Ruth Mitchell, Journal of Staff
Development, Summer 1999. Presents plan used by the Education
Trust for examining student work. Available at 
http://www.nsdc.org/library/studentwork.html 
“The Heart of Teaching Protocol Kit,” a publication of the
Australian National School Network. Includes print material and
a 28-minute video showing teachers engaged in looking at stu-
dent work. Available at 
http://www.nsn.net.au/downloads/protocols.pdf
Looking at Student Work: A Window into the Classroom by
Annenberg Institute for School Reform. 1997. 28-minute video.
Features students, teachers, and administrators at Norview High
School in Norfolk, Virginia, as they discuss their experiences in
looking at student work. Available from Teachers College Press: 
http://www.teacherscollegepress.com
Looking at Student Work Resources. A collection of tools and pro-
tocols compiled by the Coalition of Essential Schools. Available at:
http://ces.edgateway.net/cs/resources/query/q/879?x-r=run-
new
Looking at Student Work website, maintained by the
Annenberg Institute for School Reform. Offers extensive resources
105

for studying student work. Available at:
http://www.lasw.org
“Looking Collaboratively at Student Work: An Essential
Toolkit,” by Kathleen Cushman, Horace 13 (2), November 1996.
Horace is a publication of the Coalition of Essential Schools.
Describes several strategies for examining student work.
Available at: 
http://www.essentialschools.org/cs/resources/view/ces_res/57
National School Reform Faculty. A collection of material sup-
porting the development of Critical Friends Groups. Available at:
http://www.harmonyschool.org/nsrf/resources.html
106
Appendix B

References
Abelmann, C., & Elmore, R., with Even, J., Kenyon, S., & Marshall, J. (1999).
When accountability knocks, will anyone answer? CPRE Research Report Series,
RR-042. Philadelphia: Consortium for Policy Research in Education,
University of Pennsylvania.
Allen, D. (Ed.). (1998). Assessing student learning: From grading to understanding.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Applebaum, E., Bailey, T., Berg, P., & Kalleberg, A. L. (2000). Manufacturing advan-
tage: Why high-performance work systems pay off. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.
Avidon, E. (2000). Context. In M. Himley & P. Carini, From another angle:
Children’s strengths and school standards (pp. 24–26). New York: Teachers
College Press.
Belden Russonello & Stewart Research and Communications (November 2000).
Making the grade: Teachers’ attitudes toward academic standards and state testing:
Findings of a national survey of public school teachers for Education Week.
Washington, DC: Education Week.
Bloom, A. (1987). The closing of the American mind. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Blythe, T., Allen, D., & Powell, B.S. (1999). Looking together at students’ work: A
companion guide to assessing student learning. New York: Teachers College
Press.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (1999). How people learn: Brain,
mind, experience, and school. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Callahan, R. E. (1962). Education and the cult of efficiency. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Cohen, D. K., & Hill, H. (2001). Learning policy. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Darling-Hammond, L. (1998). Policy and change: Getting beyond the bureau-
cracy. In A. Hargreaves et al. (Eds.), International handbook of educational
change (pp. 642–667). Boston: Kluwer.
Duckworth, E. (Ed.). (1997). Teacher to teacher: Learning from each other. New
York: Teachers College Press.
Education Development Center. (undated). Faces of equity, tape one. Newton, MA:
Author.
Elbow, P. (1986). Embracing contraries: Explorations in learning and teaching. New
York: Oxford University Press.
107

Featherstone, H. (1998). Studying children: The Philadelphia teachers’ learning
cooperative. In D. Allen (Ed.), Assessing student learning: From grading to
understanding (pp. 66–86). New York: Teachers College Press.
Fishman, C. (April, 1996). Whole foods is all teams. Fast Company, 2, 103.
Garmston, R., & Wellman, B. (1994). Insights from constructivist learning the-
ory. Educational Leadership, April, pp. 84–85.
Gewertz, C. (2002). New York City mayor gains control over schools. Education
Week, June 19.
Glickman, C. D. (1998). Renewing America’s schools: A guide to school-based action.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Gray, J. (1992). Men are from Mars, women are from Venus: A practical guide for
improving your communication and getting what you want in your relationships.
New York: HarperCollins.
Greene, M. (1988). The dialectic of freedom. New York: Teachers College Press.
Gump, S. (2002). Getting to the heart of public junior high schools in Japan. Phi
Delta Kappan, January, 788–791.
Himley, M., with Carini, P. F. (2000). From another angle: Children’s strengths and
school standards. New York: Teachers College Press.
Hirsch, E. D. (1999). The schools we need: Why we can’t have them. New York:
Random House.
Ichniowski, C., Levine, D. I., Olson, C., & Strauss, G. (Eds.). (2000). The American
workplace: Skills, compensation, and employee involvement. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Kammer, J. (1998). Three takes on accountability: The California protocol. In D.
Allen (Ed.), Assessing student learning: From grading to understanding (pp.
105–122). New York: Teachers College Press.
Kirst, M. (2002). Mayoral influence, new regimes, and public school governance. CPRE
Research Report Series, RR-049. Philadelphia: Consortium for Policy
Research in Education, University of Pennsylvania.
Kohn, A. (2000). The schools our children deserve: Moving beyond traditional class-
rooms and tougher standards. Boston: Mariner Books/Houghton Mifflin.
Lampert, M. (1985). How do teachers manage to teach? Perspectives on prob-
lems of practice. Harvard Educational Review, 55, 178–194.
Lampert, M. (2001). Teaching problems and the problems of teaching. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Levine, L. W. (1997). The opening of the American mind: Canons, culture, and history.
Boston: Beacon Press.
Lieberman, A., & Wood, D. (2003). Inside the National Writing Project: Connecting
network learning and classroom teaching. New York: Teachers College Press.
Louis, K. S., Kruse, S. D., & Marks, H. M. (1996). Schoolwide professional
community. In F. M. Newmann & Associates, Authentic achievement:
Restructuring schools for intellectual quality (pp. 179–203). San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
McDonald, J. P. (1992). Teaching: Making sense of an uncertain craft. New York:
Teachers College Press.
108
References

McDonald, J. P. (1993). Three pictures of an exhibition: Warm, cool, and hard.
Phi Delta Kappan, 74(6), 480–485.
McDonald, J. P. (1996). Redesigning school: Lessons for the 21st century. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
McDonald, J. P. (2001a). Foreword. University of the State of New York, New
York State Academy for Teaching and Learning: Statewide peer review. Albany, NY:
The State Education Department.
McDonald, J. P. (2001b). Students’ work and teachers’ learning. In A.
Lieberman & L. Miller (Eds.), Caught in the action: Professional development for
teachers (pp. 209–235). New York: Teachers College Press.
McDonald, J. P. (2002). Teachers studying student work: Why and how? Phi
Delta Kappan, 84, 120–127.
McDonald, J. P., Barton, E., Smith, S., Turner, D., & Finney, M. (1993).
Graduation by exhibition. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision &
Curriculum Development.
McDonald, J. P., Buchanan, J., & Sterling, R. (in press). Scaling up by scaling
down: The case of the National Writing Project. In S. Bodilly (Ed.), Taking
education programs to scale: Lessons from the field. Santa Monica, CA: Rand.
McDonald, J. P., & Klein, E. (2002). Capacity for school reform: The role of teacher
networking. Paper prepared for the Woodrow Wilson Foundation,
Princeton, NJ.
McIntosh, P. (1989, July/August). White privilege: Unpacking the invisible
knapsack. Peace and Freedom, 10–12.
McLaughlin, M. W., & Talbert, J. E. (2001). Professional communities and the work
of high school teaching. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media: The extensions of man. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Newmann, F. M., & Associates. (1996). Authentic achievement: Restructuring schools
for intellectual quality. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Newmann, F. M., & Wehlage, G. G. (1995). Successful school restructuring.
Madison, WI: Center on Organization and Restructuring of Schools,
University of Wisconsin.
Oakes, J., & Lipton, M. (1999). Teaching to change the world. New York: McGraw-
Hill.
Resnick, L. B. (1987, December). Learning in school and out. Educational
Researcher, 16(9), 13–20.
Sato, M. (1992). Japan. In H. Leavitt (Ed.), Issues and problems in teacher edu-
cation: An international handbook
(pp. 155–168). Westwood, CT:
Greenwood Press.
Scholes, R. (1985). Textual power: Literary theory and the teaching of English. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Schön, D. A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action.
New York: Basic Books.
Schwarz, R. M. (1994). The skilled facilitator. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Seidel, S. (1998). Wondering to be done: The Collaborative Assessment
References
109

Conference. In D. Allen (Ed.), Assessing student learning: From grading to
understanding (pp. 21–39). New York: Teachers College Press.
Senge, P. M. (1990). The fifth discipline: The art and practice of the learning organiza-
tion. New York: Doubleday.
Shimahara, N. K. (2002). Teacher professional development in Japan. In G.
DeCoker (Ed.), National standards and school reform in Japan and the United
States (pp. 107–110). New York: Teachers College Press.
Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (1999). The teaching gap: Best ideas from the world’s
teachers for improving education in the classroom. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Tatum, B. D. (1992). Talking about race, learning about racism: The application
of racial identity development theory in the classroom. Harvard Educational
Review, 62, 1–24.
Tatum, B. D. (1999). Why are all the black kids sitting together in the cafeteria? And
other conversations about race (Rev. ed.). New York: Basic.
Tyack, D. B. (1974). The one best system: A history of American urban education.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Watanabe, T. (2002, March). Learning from Japanese lesson study. Educational
Leadership, 36–39.
Wheatley, M. (2000). Good-bye command and control. In Jossey-Bass Reader on
Educational Leadership. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Wilson, T. A. (1996). Reaching for a better standard: English school inspection and the
dilemma of accountability for American public schools. New York: Teachers
College Press.
110
References

111
Abelmann, C., 11
Accountability in education, 10–11,
12–13, 17
Allen, David, xiv, 3, 62–66, 77
All-Purpose Go-Round Protocol, 23–24,
103
Annenberg Institute, 63
Answering, in Learning from Speakers
Protocol, 39
Applebaum, Eileen, 8–9
Arrangement, in Final Word Protocol, 36
Averette, Patricia, 34–38
Avidon, Elaine, 22
Bailey, T., 8
Bambino, Deb, 56–58
Baron, Daniel, 28, 34–38, 56–58, 60–62
Barton, E., xiii
Baylin, Eric, ix–x
Berg, P., 8
Bloom, Allan, 46
Blythe, Tina, xiv, 62–66, 77
Brainstorming
in Descriptive Consultancy Protocol, 54
in Protocol for Setting Norms, 27–28
Bransford, J. D., 7, 16
Brown, A. L., 7, 16
Buchanan, J., 5
Bush Educational Leaders Program,
University of Minnesota, 84–91
Callahan, R. E., 8
Carini, Patricia F., 22, 92
Case interpretation, in Panel Protocol, 42
Case preparation, in Success Analysis
Protocol, 61
Case reading, in Panel Protocol, 42
Check-in, in Issaquah Coaching Protocol,
57
Checking, in Rich Text Protocol, 49–50
Clearing Protocol, 23, 103
Clements, Simon, 75–76
Closing moves, 20–21
Closing of the American Mind, The (Bloom),
46
Coalition of Essential Schools, xiii, 29, 63
Cocking, R. R., 7, 16
Cohen, D. K., 69
Collaborative Assessment Conference, 48,
76–80, 95, 104
Compilation, in Success Analysis Protocol,
61
Connecticut State Department of
Education, 73–74
Connections Protocol, 23
Consensus, in Protocol for Setting Norms,
28
Constructive Learning Groups Protocol,
58–60, 104
Consultation, in New York Peer Review
Protocol, 83–84
Context, in ESP Protocol, 96
Context review, 19
Continuing professional education. See
Professional development
Conversation
in New York Peer Review Protocol, 83
in Tuning Protocol, 65
in What Comes Up Protocol, 76
Cooperative management, 69
Critical Friends Group, ix
Critique, in Japanese Lesson Study
Protocol, 71
Darling-Hammond, L., 11
Debriefing
in Descriptive Consultancy Protocol, 55
in Diversity Rounds Protocol, 30
in Fears and Hopes Protocol, 25
in Issaquah Coaching Protocol, 58
Index

112
Index
in Marvin’s Model Protocol, 32
in Peeling the Onion Protocol, 67
in Success Analysis Protocol, 62
in Tuning Protocol, 65
Decision-making, in facilitative leadership,
13–14
DeCoker, Gary, 69
Delpit, Lisa, viii
Describing, in Collaborative Assessment
Conference, 78
Descriptive Consultancy Protocol, viii,
53–56, 66, 104
Descriptive Review of the Child (Himley &
Carini), 22–23
Dewey, John, 7
Dichter, Alan, 40–45
Dillard, Annie, 3
Discussion
in Collaborative Assessment
Conference, 79
in ESP Protocol, 96
in Mars/Venus Protocol, 47
in  Protocol for Setting Norms, 28
in Success Analysis Protocol, 61–62
Diversity Rounds Protocol, 29–32, 103
Duckworth, Eleanor, 69
Education Development Center, 48
Elbow, Peter, 4, 63
Elmore, R., 11
Empire State Partnerships, 95
Enriching learning, 6–7
Equity, 17
Equity Protocol, 97–99, 104
ESP Protocol, 95–97, 104
Even, J., 11
Expert consultation, in Panel Protocol, 42
Expert reactions, in Panel Protocol, 42–43
Facilitation tips
for Collaborative Assessment
Conference, 79–80
for Constructivist Learning Groups
Protocol, 60
for Descriptive Consultancy Protocol, 55
for Diversity Rounds Protocol, 30–31
for Equity Protocol, 98–99
for Fears and Hopes Protocol, 26
for Final Word Protocol, 37
for Issaquah Coaching Protocol, 58
for Japanese Lesson Study Protocol, 72
for Learning from Speakers Protocol, 40
for Mars/Venus Protocol, 47
for Marvin’s Model Protocol, 33
for Minnesota Slice Protocol, 90–91
for New York Peer Review Protocol, 84
for Panel Protocol, 43
for Peeling the Onion Protocol, 67–68
for Protocol for Setting Norms, 28
for Provocative Prompts Protocol, 45
for Rich Text Protocol, 51
for Shadow Protocol, 94
for Success Analysis Protocol, 62
for Tuning Protocol, 65–66
for What Comes Up Protocol, 76
Facilitative leadership, xv–xvi, 15–21
brief protocols for, 21–24
closing moves in, 20–21
core tasks of, 16–18
decision-making in, 13–14
facilitator moves in, 18–21
intervention in, 20–21
longer openers for, 24–33
nature of, 11–14
opening moves in, 18–33
protocols in, 13. See also names of spe-
cific protocols; Protocols
Fears and Hopes Protocol, 24–26, 103
Featherstone, Helen, 69, 92
Final Go-Round, in Rich Text Protocol, 51
Final Word Protocol, viii, 34–38, 45, 103
Finney, M., xiii
Fishman, Charles, 9
Five-minute warning, in Learning from
Speakers Protocol, 39
Garmston, Robert, 58–60
Gender differences. See Mars/Venus
Protocol
Gewertz, C., 10
Glickman, C. D., 7
Go-Rounds
All-Purpose, 23–24
in Equity Protocol, 98
in Final Word Protocol, 37
in Rich Text Protocol, 49, 50, 51
Gray, John, 46
Greene, Camilla, viii
Greene, M., 7
Grouping, in Diversity Rounds Protocol,
30
Gump, Steven, 69

Index
113
Harvard Project Zero, 63, 76–77
Hiebert, James, 68–72
High-performance workplace, 8–10
Hill, H., 69
Himley, M., 22, 92
Hirsch, E. D., 46, 47
Huddling, in Learning from Speakers
Protocol, 39
IBM Corporation, xiii
Ichniowski, C., 8
Identifying perspective, in Rich Text
Protocol, 50
Interpreting, in Rich Text Protocol, 50
Intervention, 20–21
Introductions, 18–20. See also Opening
protocols
in Constructivist Learning Groups
Protocol, 59
in Diversity Rounds Protocol, 30
in ESP Protocol, 96
in Fears and Hopes Protocol, 25
in Final Word Protocol, 36
in Learning from Speakers Protocol, 39
in Mars/Venus Protocol, 46–47
in Marvin’s Model Protocol, 32
in Minnesota Slice Protocol, 88
in New York Peer Review Protocol, 82
in Panel Protocol, 42
in Rich Text Protocol, 49
in Shadow Protocol, 93–94
in Tuning Protocol, 64
Issaquah Coaching Protocol, 56–58, 104
Japanese Lesson Study Protocol, 68–72,
104
Jugyu kenkyuu, 68–72
Kalleberg, A. L., 8
Kammer, J., 63, 95
Kantrov, Ilene, 48
Kenyon, S., 11
King, Jean, 84–91
Kirst, M., 10
Klein, E., 95–97
Kohn, Alfie, 46, 47
Ladson-Billings, Gloria, viii
Lampert, Magdalene, 2, 52
Learning Experience, in New York Peer
Review Protocol, 82, 83
Learning from Speakers Protocol,
38–40, 104
Learning organization concept, 1
Lesson design, in Japanese Lesson Study
Protocol, 70–71
Levine, D. I., 8
Levine, Lawrence W., 46
Lieberman, A., 5, 69
Lipton, M., 7
Listening
in Issaquah Coaching Protocol, 57
in Peeling the Onion Protocol, 67
Listing, in Fears and Hopes Protocol, 25
Louis, Karen Seashore, 11–12
Marshall, J., 11
Mars/Venus Protocol, 46–47, 104
Marvin’s Model Protocol, 32–33, 103
Mauriel, John, 84–91
McDonald, Beth, 35, 46, 48–51
McDonald, Joe P., xiii, xiv–xv, 3, 5, 6,
48–51, 63, 73, 77, 81, 82–91, 95–97
McIntosh, Peggy, 35
McLaughlin, Milbrey  W., 9–10, 11
McLuhan, Marshall, 63
Meta-cognition, 21
Mills, Richard, 81
Minnesota Slice Protocol, 84–91, 104
Mohr, Nancy, 6, 26–28, 29–32, 43–45,
53–58, 66–68, 81
Naso, Paul, 16–17
National School Reform Faculty, 34,
97–99
National Writing Project (NWP), 5, 69
Newmann, Fred M., 10
New York Peer Review Protocol, 20–21,
63, 80–84, 104
New York State Academy of Teaching and
Learning, 63, 81–82
New York State Learning Standards, 95
New York University, 91–92
Norms, 19–20
Norm-setting, in Minnesota Slice Protocol,
89
Oakes, J., 7
Olson, C., 8
Open conversation
in ESP Protocol, 97
in Mars/Venus Protocol, 47

114
Index
in Peeling the Onion Protocol, 67
in Shadow Protocol, 94
Open conversations, in Equity Protocol,
98
Opening of the American Mind, The (Levine),
46
Opening protocols, 18–33. See also
Introductions
All-Purpose Go-Round, 23–24
Clearing, 23
Diversity Rounds, 29–32
Fears and Hopes, 24–26
Marvin’s Model, 32–33
Pair-Share, 23
Postcards, 22
Protocol for Setting Norms, 26–28
Reflection on a Word, 22–23
Outside sources, 7–11, 34–51
Final Word Protocol, 34–38
Learning from Speakers Protocol, 38–40
Mars/Venus Protocol, 46–47
Panel Protocol, 40–43
Provocative Prompts Protocol, 43–45
Rich Text Protocol, 48–51
Pair-Share Protocol, 23, 103
in Fears and Hopes Protocol, 25
in Rich Text Protocol, 51
Panel Protocol, 40–43, 104
Participation, promoting, 16–17
Pauley, Jane, viii
Peeling/probing, in Peeling the Onion
Protocol, 67
Peeling the Onion Protocol, 66–68, 104
Peer Review Protocol, New York, 20–21,
63, 80–84
Planning, in Shadow Protocol, 94
Postcards Protocol, 22, 103
Powell, Barbara S., xiv, 62–66, 77
Presentations
in Collaborative Assessment
Conference, 78
in Equity Protocol, 97
in ESP Protocol, 96
in Final Word Protocol, 36
in Issaquah Coaching Protocol, 57
in New York Peer Review Protocol, 82
in Panel Protocol, 42
in Shadow Protocol, 93, 94
in Tuning Protocol, 64
in What Comes Up Protocol, 75–76
Private speculation, in Shadow Protocol,
94
Problem presentation, in Descriptive
Consultancy Protocol, 54
Problem selection, in Japanese Lesson
Study Protocol, 70
Professional communities of practice, 11
Professional development, 1–14
exploring student work in, 3–4, 73–99,
105–106
facilitative leadership in, 11–14
outside sources and, 7–11, 34–51
protocol-based learning in, 4–7, 52–72
self-education in, 2–3
Project Zero, 63, 76–77
Protocol-based learning, 4–7, 52–72
Constructive Learning Groups Protocol,
58–60
Descriptive Consultancy Protocol, 53–56
Issaquah Coaching Protocol, 56–58
Japanese Lesson Study Protocol, 68–72
Peeling the Onion Protocol, 66–68
Success Analysis Protocol, 60–62
Tuning Protocol, 62–66
Protocol for Setting Norms, 26–28, 103
Protocols
brief, 21–24
nature of, 4, 7
opening, 18–33
outside sources and, 7–11, 34–51
reasons for using, vii–xi, 4–7, 13
starting to use, 101
suggested uses for specific, 103–104
tips for using, 101–102
website versions of, xvii
Provocative Prompts Protocol, 43–45, 104
Questions
in Collaborative Assessment
Conference, 78
in Constructivist Learning Groups
Protocol, 59–60
in Descriptive Consultancy Protocol, 54
in Issaquah Coaching Protocol, 57
in Learning from Speakers Protocol, 39
in Marvin’s Model Protocol, 32
in Peeling the Onion Protocol, 67
in Shadow Protocol, 94
in What Comes Up Protocol, 76

Index
115
Quinn, Juli P., x–xi
Randomization, 87
Reaction, in Tuning Protocol, 65
Reading
in Mars/Venus Protocol, 47
in Minnesota Slice Protocol, 89
in New York Peer Review Protocol,
82–83
in Rich Text Protocol, 49
Reflection
in Collaborative Assessment
Conference, 79
in Descriptive Consultancy Protocol, 54
in Equity Protocol, 98
in ESP Protocol, 97
in Final Word Protocol, 36–37
in Issaquah Coaching Protocol, 57
in Mars/Venus Protocol, 47
in Minnesota Slice Protocol, 90
in New York Peer Review Protocol, 83
in Rich Text Protocol, 51
Reflection on a Word Protocol, 22–23,
103
Regrouping, in Diversity Rounds Protocol,
30
Reporting
in Diversity Rounds Protocol, 30
in Success Analysis Protocol, 61
Resnick, Lauren B., 16–17
Response
in Collaborative Assessment
Conference, 78–79
in Constructivist Learning Groups
Protocol, 59
in Descriptive Consultancy Protocol, 54,
55
in ESP Protocol, 96–97
in Issaquah Coaching Protocol, 57–58
in New York Peer Review Protocol, 83
in Peeling the Onion Protocol, 67
in Tuning Protocol, 64–65
in What Comes Up Protocol, 76
Review, in New York Peer Review
Protocol, 83
Revision, in Japanese Lesson Study
Protocol, 71–72
Rich Text Protocol, 48–51, 104
Rosario-Dolch, Ada, viii
Russonello, Belden, 10
Sarney, Harris, vii
Sato, Manabu, 68
Save the Last Word for Me Protocol, 38
Scholes, Robert, 48
Schön, D. A., 2
Schools Our Children Deserve, The (Kohn), 46
Schools We Need, The (Hirsch), 46
Schwartz, Roger M., xv–xvi, 12–13
Scientific management, 8
Scott, Judith, 29–32
Seidel, Steve, 76–80
Self-education, 2–3
Seminars, in Minnesota Slice Protocol, 89
Senge, Peter M., 1
Shadow Protocol, 91–94, 104
Sharing
in Learning from Speakers Protocol, 40
in Peeling the Onion Protocol, 67
in Rich Text Protocol, 49
in Shadow Protocol, 94
in Success Analysis Protocol, 61
Shimahara, Nobuo K., 69
Simulation, in Japanese Lesson Study
Protocol, 71
Slice Protocol, Minnesota, 84–91
Small Schools Collaborative, 56
Smith, S., xiii
Speculation, in Collaborative Assessment
Conference, 78
Speech, in Learning from Speakers
Protocol, 39
Standardization, 87
Standards, in ESP Protocol, 96
Sterling, R., 5
Stigler, James W., 68–72
Strauss, G., 8
Student work, exploring, 3–4, 73–99
additional resources for, 105–106
Collaborative Assessment Conference,
76–80
Equity Protocol, 97–99
ESP Protocol, 95–97
Minnesota Slice Protocol, 84–91
New York Peer Review Protocol, 80–84
Shadow Protocol, 91–94
What Comes Up Protocol, 75–76
Success Analysis Protocol, 60–62, 104
Suggestions, in Issaquah Coaching
Protocol, 57
Summarizing

116
Index
in Mars/Venus Protocol, 47
in New York Peer Review Protocol, 83
Synthesis, in Protocol for Setting Norms,
28
Talbert, Joan E., 9–10, 11
Tatum, Beverly Daniel, 31, 35
Test runs, in Japanese Lesson Study
Protocol, 71
Third International Mathematics and
Science Study (TIMMS), 68
Thompson-Grove, Gene, 28
Towbin, Jessie, ix
Transparency of work, 4–6
Trust, building, 17–18
Tuning Protocol, vii, x–xi, xiii–xv, 4–5,
62–66, 80, 104
Turner, D., iii
Tyack, D. B., 8
University Neighborhood High School
(New York City)
Minnesota Slice Protocol and, 85–91
Shadow Protocol and, 91–94
University of Minnesota, Bush
Educational Leaders Program, 84–91
University of the State of New York,
81–82
Vandiver, Fran, 26–28
Watanabe, Tad, 69, 70
Wehlage, Gary G., 10
Wellman, Bruce, 58–60
What Comes Up Protocol, 75–76, 104
Wheatley, Margaret, 11
Whole Foods Supermarket, 9
Wilson, T. A., 75
Wood, D., 5, 69
Zydney, Janet Mannheimer, 91–94

About the Authors
Joseph P. McDonald is Professor of Teaching and Learning at
New York University’s Steinhardt School of Education, where he
oversees doctoral study in the Department of Teaching and
Learning. He also teaches undergraduates interested in teaching. His
research interests include the policies and practices of school reform,
the deep dynamics of teaching, and the creation of new designs for
accountability in schooling, including designs based on the study of
student work. He was the first Director of Research at the
Annenberg Institute for School Reform at Brown University, where
he also taught for many years, and was Senior Researcher at the
Coalition of Essential Schools. He is the author or co-author of sev-
eral books, including Teaching: Making Sense of an Uncertain Craft,
Redesigning School, and School Reform Behind the Scenes.
McDonald was a high school teacher for 17 years, and principal
of a small public high school in Watertown, Massachusetts. For the
last 20 years, he has worked as an “outsider on the inside” of high
schools in Providence, Rhode Island, and New York City. Currently
he assists in the development of University Neighborhood High
School, a new high school founded in 1999 as a partnership of the
Manhattan High School District and New York University. He lives
in New York City with Beth McDonald. 
Nancy Mohr is an educational consultant who directs the
New York Center of the National School Reform Faculty, affiliat-
ed with the Horowitz Teacher Development Center at New York
University. She also works with the Center for Reinventing
Education at the University of Washington, and with other proj-
ects and groups of educators throughout the United States, and
has consulted with groups in Australia. Her professional interests
include the development of school coaches, the development of
professional learning communities, and the exploration of stu-
117

dent work. Her doctoral work was in the area of shared decision-
making, and she continues to be interested in issues of leadership
governance, especially their relationship to equity. 
Mohr was the founding principal of University Heights High
School in the Bronx, where she served for 10 years. The school
was the first new school to open as a member of the Coalition of
Essential Schools. She is the author of “Small Schools Are Not
Miniature Large Schools” in William Ayers’s book A Simple Justice.
She lives in New York City with Alan Dichter.
Alan Dichter is the Deputy Superintendent for School
Reform and Leadership Development in the Queens High School
District of New York City. He is formerly Assistant Superintendent
of Executive Leadership at the New York City Board of Education,
where he conducted programs for aspiring principals and for
future superintendents and deputy superintendents. He also
helped to create and oversaw the Executive Facilitators Academy,
a program designed to help leaders develop and practice facilita-
tion skills, and he was Assistant Superintendent for Charter and
New School Development in New York City. He is a National
Facilitator with the National School Reform Faculty (NSRF) and
works closely with NSRF New York. 
Dichter is a former high school English teacher. In 1982, he
became the Director of the Lower Manhattan Outreach Center, a
program for overage students who have been out of school. For
10 years he was also the Principal of Satellite Academy High
School, an alternative high school in New York City. He is the
author of a number of articles on leadership and professional
development, and has consulted widely on issues related to urban
school reform. He lives in New York City with Nancy Mohr.
Elizabeth C. McDonald is Project Director at the Center for
Research on Teaching and Learning, Steinhardt School of
Education at New York University, where she also teaches gradu-
ate students in the preservice teacher education program. Her
consulting and professional development work in New York City
and elsewhere have focused on a wide variety of purposes,
including the improvement of teaching and curriculum, the sup-
118
The Power of Protocols

port of new teachers, the collaborative exploration of student
work, the integration of children with special needs into main-
stream classrooms, and the preparation of principals and other
administrators for the challenges of school reform.
McDonald has been an elementary and middle school teacher
of students with special needs, a professional development spe-
cialist for the Rhode Island State Department of Education, and
for 9 years an elementary school principal. She is also the author
of articles about teaching and learning, and an Endorsed
Facilitator of the National School Reform Faculty. She lives in
New York City with Joe McDonald. 
About the Authors
119


