Scanned by Highroller.
Proofed & re-formatted by nukie.
Made prettier by use of EBook Design Group Stylesheet.
Color: -1- -2- -3- -4- -5- -6- -7- -8- -9- 
Text Size: 10-- 11-- 12-- 13-- 14-- 15-- 16-- 17-- 18-- 19-- 20-- 21-- 22-- 23-- 24 
The Horde
by Joseph Green
Table of Contents
CHAPTER ONE
CHAPTER TWO
CHAPTER THREE
CHAPTER FOUR
CHAPTER FIVE
CHAPTER SIX
CHAPTER SEVEN
CHAPTER EIGHT
CHAPTER NINE
CHAPTER TEN
CHAPTER ELEVEN

CHAPTER TWELVE
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
 
CHAPTER ONE
^ » 
Leo  Volz  crouched  behind  the  frail  shelter  of  a  low  bush  and  tried  with
desperate earnestness to make the right decision. His life depended on it.
The  local hoofed carnivore,  resembling  a water buffalo with saber-tooth
fangs, shook the  ground as it  thundered  toward  Leo's  hiding  place.  Saliva
dripped from its wide black nostrils, and fear and fury distended the bulging
yellow eyes. In its mouth was the pink thigh of a screaming member of the
Horde,  the  humanoid  body  tossed  like  a  live  toy  back  over  the  beast's
shoulder.  Some  distance  behind  the  fleeing  animal  Leo  could  hear  the
shouts and cries of  the  captive's  pursuing  comrades,  muffled  by  the  thick
and smoky mist. They would be  here  within two minutes.  Their  scoutship
might  be  overhead  even  sooner,  though  it  was  unlikely  they  had
instruments capable of penetrating this soupy air.
Leo's  steady  right hand  held  his  two-charge  laser  pistol  focused  on  the
carnivore's  chest.  The  noisy  explosive  projectile  gun  was  in  his  left.  The
laser would stop the  killer beast,  and  do  so  silently.  But  that  would  leave
him only one charge in his most powerful weapon, and this seething inferno
was filled with similar hunters—many, like this one, apparently going mad.
A  little  to  Leo's  left  was  a  gurgling,  belching  mudhole,  its  popping
bubbles  filling the  air  with  the  nauseous  smell  of  sulfur.  Behind  him,  the
mists thickened until they provided excellent cover. But that area was full of
similar mudholes, some of them neither noisy nor smelly. One slip, a single
fall, could  mean  death.  Unpredictable  rockslides  from  mountains  colliding
just beyond the mists were another continual danger. The only safe ground
was  the  wood  on  whose  edge  he  hid,  and  it  was  jammed  to  overflowing
with wild animals.  They  had been  forced  here  by  the  massively  slow  but

inexorable  grinding  of  deeply  hidden  tectonic  plates,  the  force  separating
this heavily forested peninsula from the mainland.
The thought flitted through Leo's mind that he should fire, just to save an
intelligent humanoid from the  jaws  of a wild beast.  That  one  he  dismissed
immediately.  The  screaming  captive  was  a  member  of  the  Horde,  human
only  by  definition  and  appearance.  He  was  as  dissimilar  to  Leo  as  the
horned carnivore that wanted to make a meal of the alien's pink flesh.
If Leo  tried to slip to one  side and away,  the  pursuing Horde  members
were  likely  to  see  him—and  even  one  glimpse  could  be  fatal.  They  had
sonic  rifles  that  produced  a  spreading  cone  of  sound  still  fatal  at  sixty
meters—where  the  diameter  was a good three  meters  wide. There  was  no
hiding from such a weapon. And Leo, above all, had to remain alive. Misty
was already in their hands.  Somehow,  someway,  he  had  to  live,  to  rescue
his partner and get back to their own small scout and out of this star system.
A  flash  of  inspiration  hit  Leo,  a  vague  glimpse  of  an  answer—and  he
pressed the firing stud.
The  blue  beam  crackled  through  the  air,  slicing  into  the  animal's  hairy
chest  and  burning  deep  inside  its  massive  body.  The  carnivore  collapsed
between one step and the next, dying on its feet. The huge mouth opened in
an  agonized  reflex,  and  the  pink  captive  went  hurtling  over  the  curling
horns and slammed into the ground. The shrill screaming ceased abruptly.
Leo left his shelter  at a run,  holstering  both  guns and drawing his bush
knife. He slid to his knees by the sexless humanoid, which had landed on its
back.  Leo  raised  his  knife  for  the  quick  hard  slash  across  the  throat  that
would  ensure  silence—and  two  large  green  eyes  opened  and  blurrily
focused on his face.
Leo froze, knife held high. His heart was racing, the poised hand shaking
with nervous tension. He could hear the other members of the Horde party
spreading out and calling to each other  as they  came  this  way.  He  had  to
silence this  one,  prevent  the  others  from  learning  his  location.  For  Misty's
sake even more than his own, he must stay free.
But he could not swing the knife at that exposed and helpless pink throat.

It was an action of which Leo was simply incapable.
The green eyes stared steadily into Leo's for five  seconds,  then  abruptly
closed.  The  head  tilted  to  one  side.  The  muscular  pink  body  shivered
convulsively, and went limp.
Leo quickly held a hand against the alien's mouth and nostrils. He felt air
moving  in and out.  This  one  could  still  revive  and  tell  its  brethren  it  had
seen the Earthman.
A variant of the  fragile plan he  had conceived  came  to  Leo.  It  was  still
possible… a poor chance, but his only one. He rose and stepped back to the
dead carnivore.  Stooping,  he  seized  its forelegs just  above  the  hooves  and
straightened.  The  flaccid body  of  a  creature  that  must  have  weighed  over
400 kilograms hung from his hands.
Leo was a big man, standing 190  centimeters  and weighing eighty-eight
kilos.  He  was  heavily  muscled,  barely  thirty  Earth-years  old,  and  in
excellent  condition.  Exerting  all his strength,  he  stepped  backwards,  tilting
to the  rear and digging in his heels.  The  hairy  body  slid  forward  over  the
grass-like ground covering.
Step  by  straining  step,  Leo  dragged  the  dead  meat-eater  toward  the
mudhole, trying not to lose momentum. But he had to stop a meter from its
edge  and  shift  his  grip;  the  ground  was  becoming  soft.  When  he  moved
back and grasped the wide trunk under both shoulder joints, he thought he
had  lost  the  gamble  then  and  there.  The  body  did  not  move  when  he
heaved.
Feeling  his back  muscles  cracking  with  the  effort,  Leo  tried  again.  And
very  slowly the  trunk slid forward, bit  by  agonizing  bit.  He  moved  a step
closer to the edge, until the  ground was rising around his sinking feet,  and
strained once more. The horned head entered the bubbling mud, sank—and
Leo stopped the slide with the animal's hindquarters still on firm ground.
His  estimated  time  was  almost  up,  as  the  shouts  of  the  approaching
Horde proved; they were drawing close. A wind could tear the smoky  mist
away at any second, exposing him.

Leo  took a long step  back  to firm,  vegetation-covered  ground.  Turning,
he supported himself  with one  hand on the  dead beast's  flank, and leaned
forward to smooth and flatten the  muddy  area where he  had walked. And
then he moved quickly to the still unconscious humanoid, slung it over one
shoulder, and trotted rapidly to the  south,  where  the  forest  was  thick  and
close.
It  seemed  to  Leo  that  it  had  been  a  half-hour  since  he  crouched  and
aimed  at  the  charging  carnivore.  Actually  he  was  well  away  from  the
mudhole before  the  first pursuers reached it. And  his two-minute  estimate
had been close.
Leo  was careful to keep on the  thick  sward,  where  footprints  would  be
hard to see. When he was a hundred meters from  the  mudhole  the  ground
suddenly heaved and trembled under his feet,  a small surface indication of
the  terrible  pressures  at  work  hundreds  of  kilometers  below.  A  crack
suddenly gaped to his right, the ground parting like some chained demon of
the  interior  opening  a  hungry  mouth.  And  seconds  later  he  heard  fresh
rumbles in the distance, as new rock slides started in the  mountains  lost in
mists to the east.
An  accumulation  of  frightened  animals,  driven  this  way  by  an  even
worse cataclysm to the west, were moving uneasily through the woods. Leo
saw two more of the hoofed carnivores, but neither made any move toward
them.  Most  of these  creatures seemed  to have  stopped  and  were  standing
uneasily  about,  as  though  afraid  to  go  forward.  And  there  was  no  going
back. Their world was vanishing into the sea behind them.
When  he  was  a  safe  distance  from  the  mudhole,  Leo  slowed  his  pace,
breathing hard. His burden weighed about fifty kilograms and was perhaps
150  centimeters  tall,  roughly  the  size  of  Misty.  He  had  once  carried  his
partner  four  kilometers  when  she  sprained  an  ankle,  slung  over  his
shoulders like a shapely sack, muttering foul words into his ear every step of
the way. But he had been in no hurry then.
Leo  stopped about  300  meters  from  the  mudhole,  easing  his  burden  to
the ground. To his surprise the large green eyes were open  again, studying
him. The creature had made no sound.

Behind them Leo heard the humming whine of the Horde scout, hidden
from sight by the mists. It was hovering over the mudhole. He would know
in  a  moment  if  they  assumed  their  comrade  had  been  swallowed  by  the
smelly death-trap.
Leo  glanced  at  the  humanoid's  mangled  pink  leg.  The  four  puncture
wounds were bleeding  heavily,  but  the  flow was steady;  no major  arteries
had been cut. Only the fangs had penetrated very deeply.
"I speak Shemsi," Leo said in that tongue. "Do you speak StandEnglish?"
"Shemsi is the name of my people, not our language," said the humanoid.
He  had  a  surprisingly  deep  voice,  one  Leo  could  not  help  thinking  of  as
"male."
"And StandEnglish I speak, yes, not good," he added in Leo's tongue.
The  human  and the  Shemsi  stared at each other.  Leo  saw a  completely
hairless  pink-skinned  humanoid  who  wore  nothing  but  a  harness  of  soft
straps around shoulders  and hips,  with a carrying case on  each  side.  With
clothes on he  could have  passed  for  a  baldheaded  little  man,  one  with  an
unusually  ruddy  complexion  and  large,  protruding  green  eyes.  Without
them,  his color was too obviously  an overall characteristic—and where the
open harness should have revealed genitalia, there  was nothing.  His  crotch
was as smoothly vacant of organs as the belly above it.
"A medical kit in your  bag  you  have?"  the  Shemsi  asked,  his  voice  low
and calm. "If my wounds not treated, to death shall I bleed, I think."
The  thought  of  treating  the  alien's  injuries  hadn't  occurred  to  Leo.  He
hastily opened his own side pack and extracted the small but heavy med-kit.
Leo  reached for a powerful  clotting  agent,  then  hesitated.  He  had  rescued
this imitation of a human from the carnivore to save his own life, and carried
him away only  because  he  had been  unable  to cut the  pink throat.  But  he
felt  no  compelling  desire  to  try  to  save  this  creature  from  those  nasty
wounds.
"If  a—a  congealing  agent  for  blood  that  is,  use  it  not.  Our  body
chemistries—similar, but same not. Compression of cloths, yes."

This  little  fellow—and  Leo  realized  he  had  no  frame  of  reference  for
neuters,  and  would  have  to  think  of  him  as  a  male—was  taking  a  lot  for
granted.
"Why should I treat your wounds?" Leo asked, letting a low growl creep
into his voice. "And speak Shemsi; your English is terrible."
The  Shemsi  shrugged,  a  very  human  gesture.  "As  you  wish.  Will  you
leave me your kit, then?"
Leo hesitated, trying to think. "No, I may need it myself," he finally said
aloud. He was listening to the distant whine of the Horde scoutship, waiting
for  it  to  either  rise  and  head  for  their  basecamp,  or  start  circling  again  in
search of him.
There was no reason not to treat those bleeding wounds while he waited.
Leo opened the kit and set to work.
He had no choice but to pour a strong disinfectant into the punctures and
spread  it  over  the  other  cuts.  Any  carnivore's  mouth  was  a  haven  for
dangerous germs.  The  Shemsi  would have  to take his chances  on  harmful
reactions.
As he carefully cleansed each puncture and packed it with sterile plysorb,
Leo suffered a peculiar reaction himself.  The  pink skin was as smooth  and
softly pleasing to the  touch as Misty's,  but  with an odd  underlying  feel  of
hard  muscle  close  beneath.  It  seemed  a  strange  combination  of  male  and
female characteristics, one he found different and disturbing.
As  Leo  was  packing  the  fourth  deep  hole  the  constant  whine  of  the
distant  Shemsi  scout  suddenly  changed.  He  paused,  listening.  A  moment
later the high thin sound intensified, then began to move rapidly away.
The  wounded  Shemsi  was  also  listening  intently.  After  a  moment  he
said, "My brothers have given up the search and are returning to camp."
That was a lucky break for Leo. A  steady  breeze  from  the  ocean side of
the  peninsula  was  rapidly  thinning  the  smog.  "Good;  I'll  be  right  behind
them," he said, his voice filled with controlled anger.

"In  your  small scout which  we  failed  to  find?  That  would  not  be  wise.
Our synchronous platforms would detect you immediately."
Leo opened his mouth and closed it again without speaking. So that was
how they  had spotted  the  human  scout!  Evidently  the  Shemsi  had  placed
three  satellites  in  equidistant  geosynchronous  orbits  as  soon  as  they
established  their  small  basecamp,  which  indicated  they  planned  to
stay—perhaps  permanently.  If  so,  this  was  another  highly  suitable  planet
that had been lost to Earth, this one well away from known Shemsi areas of
colonization.  The  government  on Earth  would want to  know.  And  if  they
chose to dispute the claim and send out colonists to this world or another in
this  star  system,  then  the  odd,  strained  relationship  of  official  peace  but
constant border fighting would go on, as it had now for forty Earth-years.
"Why did you warn me  about  the  sky-spies?"  Leo  suddenly  demanded.
"Incidentally, what is your name? Or does your species use individual titles
of address?"
The Shemsi smiled. "We have names, and mine is Erith  One Eight  Zero
One Two Six Four Three One Nine. We use as many digits as necessary  to
separate individuals when several Erithains are serving together. Since I am
the only Erithain Shemsi in this two-part grouping, my name is Erith. As for
why I warned you of detection should you lift off in your scout, that should
be obvious. You would certainly leave me here to die if you could fly to our
basecamp. Since you must walk, I hope to persuade you to take me along."
"That," said Leo dryly, "would take some strong persuading!"
"I  do  not  think  so,  for  the  major  characteristic  our  two  species  most
obviously share is rationality. You must make your way on foot for almost a
thousand  of  your  kilometers.  I  have  been  on  this  planet  for  over  one
revolution, and know the animal and plant life far better than you. I am also
more  familiar  with  the  geography.  You  had  barely  started  your  survey
when we asked you to land and account for your  presence  on our planet.  I
doubt  you  know  where  our  basecamp  is  located,  or  even  the  major
landmarks around it. Without  my  aid  you  will  not  succeed  in  reaching  it.
Without yours, I will surely die. Though our Long Walks are of the east and
the west, for the moment they run together."

At the reminder of how this  encounter  had started,  Leo  felt fresh  anger.
Misty had been at the controls as they approached this apparently habitable
planet in  the  Beta  Crucis  system  that  the  Space  Service  had  sent  them  to
investigate.  They  had started the  preliminary  survey  by  cruising  over  this
continent from east to west, above the equator. On the west coast they  had
observed  a  region  of  very  high  volcanic  activity,  where  a  large  peninsula
was slowly separating from  the  mainland.  The  western  edge seemed  to be
breaking apart, tremendous lava flows boiling up from high-level magma to
flow  hissing  and  steaming  into  the  sea.  On  the  east  side,  two  mountain
chains  were  literally  grinding  into  each  other  as  the  floating  plates
supporting  them  slid  past  one  another  at  an  angle.  The  heavily  forested
center of the  peninsula  was stable  at present;  but  obviously  it  would  soon
break up or slide beneath the water. And near the eastern edge of the wood,
the scout's highest resolution automated scanning camera had spotted signs
of intelligent life and buzzed a warning to the pilot.
The sight that triggered the alert was a group of small thatched huts, not
far south of the broad land bridge connecting the sinking peninsula with the
mainland. From the air they appeared deserted. When an hour's continuous
observation indicated no sign of life, Leo had taken the single grav-sled and
gone down for a closer look.
Leo had barely landed and walked away when  he  heard a strange  voice
over the scout's radio link, speaking StandEnglish.  It  ordered Misty  to land
immediately, in the center of the abandoned village.
While the humans had been hovering, studying the small circle of huts, a
Shemsi  scout  ship  had  silently  approached  from  the  east.  Its  much  larger
armament  made  resistance  useless.  Leo  dashed  back  toward  his  sled,
intending to hide it among  the  trees.  A  pink beam  flashed down from  the
sky and the  little craft began  vibrating,  then  seemed  to shake  apart  before
his eyes.
Misty had no choice but to obey. She started down, intending to land by
the  remnants  of  the  sled.  When  she  was  less  than  a  hundred  kilometers
from the  ground, the  large mountain  to  the  east,  which  had  been  steadily
showering the area with ashes, suddenly exploded.

The volcano did not produce lava but more ashes, a tremendous mass of
soot that blackened  the  sky  and  turned  day  into  night.  The  Shemsi  scout
was  hovering  at  about  two  kilometers,  almost  directly  above  the  volcanic
cone.  The  turbulence  shook the  craft  violently  about—and  the  thick  cloud
temporarily hid the human ship from view.
Misty, not normally an action-oriented person, had for once made a good
crisis  decision.  Instead  of  trying  to  land  and  pick  up  her  partner,  she
accelerated  and  shot  away  to  the  north.  The  air  at  ground  level  was  still
relatively clear. Leo saw her disappear around the  side of a presently  quiet
mountain. He took off in that direction at a run, and had barely disappeared
into  the  forest  when  the  Shemsi  scout  broke  through  the  overcast  and
hovered above the circle of huts.
And somewhere  in the  tangle of gullies and canyons  at  the  base  of  the
mountain, Misty found a good hiding place for the little scoutship.  She  had
left  it  and  headed  back  on  foot,  seeking  her  partner.  But  the  Shemsi,
following  the  pattern  of  dominant  logic  for  which  they  were  noted,  had
landed most of their crew between the two humans and started searching in
both  directions.  They  had spotted  Misty;  Leo,  fortunately,  had  seen  them
first.
For  almost  two  days  after  the  capture  of  his  partner,  Leo  managed  to
evade the searching Horde. They had flown above  the  thick jungle  growth
in a relentless  search  pattern,  broadcasting  an  appeal  by  Misty  for  him  to
surrender. Since  the  humans'  standing orders suggested  they  say  anything
the Horde wished if captured, Leo had ignored his partner's voice. The land
party was far more dangerous. On several occasions they had come close to
spotting him. On that final sweep, where they had forced him into the active
volcanic  area,  he  had  been  almost  ready  to  give  up.  But  then  one  of  the
panicky  and  hungry  carnivores  had  attacked  a  Shemsi,  resulting  in  the
dramatic rescue attempt Leo had become involved in.
Erith's reference to "Long Walks of the East and the West" was obviously
a colloquialism, but the rest made eminently good sense. He could expect a
betrayal once they actually neared the basecamp, but that would be weeks if
not months away.

Erith was right; his logic was irrefutable.
"Very  well,  I  agree,"  Leo  finally  replied.  "We  will  help  each  other
throughout the walk. At the end we'll try to work out some  agreement  that
will allow me to rescue Misty and start back and you to rejoin your people."
"Done,  then!"  and  Erith  extended  his  hand  in  a  familiar  gesture  of
friendship.
As they  shook hands,  Leo  realized he  should  not  have  been  surprised.
Obviously  the  weapon-holding extension  had  to  be  neutralized  to  express
agreement, in any species.
Leo returned to bandaging Erith's wounds. Most of the lesser gashes had
finally  stopped  bleeding,  and  the  four  punctures  were  oozing  only  minor
trickles.  He  cleaned  the  general  area,  sprinkled  it  with  disinfectant,  and
wrapped it firmly with plyskin. Then he left his new and temporary partner
to look for some food. While running from the Horde for two days,  he  had
found few chances to eat.
When  Leo  returned  to  Erith  with  an  armload  of  fruits  and  nuts,  he
discovered  that  despite  differences  in  internal  chemistry,  they  could  eat
almost  identical  plant  foods.  The  Shemsi  physiology  was  apparently
incapable of digesting meat.  Nor  did Erith  eat the  nuts,  choosing  only  the
very juicy and ripe fruits.
They  finished  the  rough  but  filling  meal.  "And  now  I  must  ingest  my
primary food, while taking my rest  period," said Erith.  "Will you  call out if
danger approaches?"
Leo  could  only  stare  in  bewilderment.  Erith  turned  on  his  side  and
somewhat  awkwardly dragged himself  into the  nearest  open  area,  keeping
the wounded leg extended  behind  him.  He  sprawled on the  grass face up,
and  spread  his  arms  and  legs  wide  apart.  Although  filtered  through  an
upper  smoky  haze,  weak  sunlight  now  reached  the  ground.  The  steady
breeze from the west had cleared the air at the lower levels.
"So it's  true,"  Leo  said  slowly.  "I  didn't  believe  it.  You  feed  on  air  and
water!"

"We  absorb  carbon  dioxide,  not 'air'.  Our primary  method  of producing
glucose is far more  efficient  than  your  single  source  of  energy  generation.
We use that clumsy two-step process as a secondary system; but to depend
on plant cells to synthesize organic compounds, and then disassemble them
in the digestive tract is wasteful. The main function of our digestive system
is  to  provide  the  bulk  needed  for  growth,  though  it  can  also  supply
immediate energy. Now if you will excuse me…" and Erith appeared to fall
into a deep sleep almost at once.
The sun was just past the zenith. Leo was tired himself, from two days of
constant  running  and  little  sleep.  But  one  of  them  had  to  be  alert.  He
compromised  by  walking to a  nearby  large  rock  and  sitting  with  his  back
against  a  slight  overhang.  He  was  only  a  few  meters  from  the  sleeping
Shemsi and could see any creature approaching from the thicker forest.
Leo  drew  his  projectile  pistol—it  was  now  safe  to  use  the  noisy  but
effective  fifty-shot  weapon—and  laid it near his right hand.  For  the  rest  of
the afternoon he intermittently dozed and awoke, never actually asleep but
getting  some  valuable  rest.  For  once  the  mountains  were  quiet  for  a  few
hours, and  the  weak  sunlight  in  which  Erith  lay  persisted  throughout  the
day.
By the late afternoon Leo was completely alert. Staring at his still sleeping
companion,  he  could not help but  wonder at the  strange  twist  of  fate  that
had made him the guardian of a member of the Horde—or Shemsi, in their
tongue.  So  far  he  had  seen  several  rumors  confirmed.  The  Shemsi  were
totally sexless, had a chemical in their skin cells similar to but more efficient
than  chlorophyll,  and  ingested  mostly  fruits  and  water.  Confirmation  of
these  theories  made  him  wonder if any  of the  wilder  stories  could  also  be
true.  Some  contended  that  there  were  three  race  mothers  from  which  all
Shemsi  were  born;  others  theorized  that  although  these  people  were
extremely  logical, they  were not highly  intelligent;  and still  others  claimed
that the Shemsi had life spans ten times that of a human.
It was disheartening that the one intelligent species Man had encountered
so far resembled  a colony  of emotionless,  humanoid  ants.  But  it was a big
galaxy, and they  had barely  penetrated  200  light-years  from  Earth.  Sooner
or later they would find a more compatible species.

In  the  meantime,  Man  had  constructed  colonies  in  forty  other  star
systems. Only toward Alpha Crucis had a problem arisen, this  conflict with
another  ambitious  species.  The  Horde,  too,  was  expanding  into  space.
Highly habitable worlds like this one were sought after by both peoples.
In human affairs it was an old pattern, and possibly older than humanity
itself in the rest of the galaxy. But in this particular undeclared war Man was
for  the  first  time  a  united  species,  and  the  opposition  a  creature  only
superficially like himself.
CHAPTER TWO
« ^ » 
Erith  awoke,  stretched,  rolled  over,  and  sat  up.  He  yawned,  and  rubbed
sleep  out  of  the  large  green  eyes.  "Shall  we  be  on  our  way?"  he  asked
pleasantly.
Leo could only stare at him. Erith smiled. "Well, I will need a crutch. But
it's usually better  to exercise  a wound like mine  than  rest  in bed.  If  I  may
use that knife?"
Leo  drew  the  heavy  bush  knife,  grasped  the  blade,  and  extended  the
handle. He  was  watchful  for  treachery,  ready  to  jump  back  and  draw  his
pistol at the slightest hostile motion. But there was no need. Erith got to his
feet and hopped one-legged to the nearest suitable tree. He leaned against its
bole while he cut off a low limb, one with a fork two meters from the trunk.
A  few  minutes  of  pruning  and  shaping  created  a  rough  but  serviceable
crutch.
"You propose to travel  through these  woods at night?"  Leo  asked as his
knife was returned.
"Of course. We Shemsi are nocturnally active, so we have excellent night
vision."
Erith gingerly tested his injured leg, making quick little hops and keeping

most  of his weight on the  crutch.  "Painful,  but  I  can  manage,"  he  assured
Leo.  "I  suggest  we  go  as  far  north  as  possible  before  turning  toward  the
mainland. The passes are lower and the land is less geologically active at the
moment."
There  seemed  little  to  do  but  yield  to  his  companion's  superior
knowledge. "Lead the way," said Leo.
They  moved  off  through  the  forest,  trying  to  stay  on  open  ground  as
much as possible. The sun was setting, long shadows creeping over the land
from the west. Erith's progress was painfully slow, but he struggled steadily
on. By full dark they had gone a kilometer.
And soon afterward they had their first near brush with death.
There  was a shrill, savage  scream  to their left,  followed by  a  frightened
bellow.  Seconds  later  an  animal  taller  than  Leo  went  galloping  past,  only
meters  away.  The  first of this  planet's  two moons  was up, and  by  its  dim
light  Leo  saw  a  swift  and  shadowy  form  running  silently  after  the  much
larger animal.  The  creature turned when  it smelled  slower  prey,  screamed
again to paralyze the new victims with fear, and came gliding toward them.
Leo had already drawn his pistol. He fired, missed in the dim light, fired
again—and then  it was springing toward his  throat.  He  finally  placed  two
bullets through the hungry killer's furry chest. It curled into a ball in midair,
knocking him over with the weight of its hurtling body.
Leo  scrambled  to his  feet,  drawing  the  laser.  He  had  lost  the  projectile
gun.  He  aimed  at  the  thrashing,  squalling  killer,  then  realized  he  was
witnessing its death throes and held his fire. The hunter kicked once or twice
more before dying. Leo reholstered his laser and looked around for the more
valuable pistol.
Erith silently handed it to him.
Leo  took the  gun without comment,  but  in  his  mind  at  least  one  point
had been settled. This partnership was not a temporary  thing proposed by
the Shemsi to put Leo off his guard.
They  resumed  walking.  But  within  another  hundred  meters  Erith's

crutch hit an unexpected soft spot, and he fell heavily. A quick examination
by touch indicated the wounds were bleeding again, and probably had been
for some time.  Leo  decided to stop for the  night,  and suggested  this  to his
companion.
"Perhaps  that  would  be  best,"  Erith  agreed.  "I  am  not  as  strong  as  I
thought, and these night-hunting carnivores are dangerous."
A short search located a small cul-de-sac among  the  rocks bordering  the
jungle.  Leo  crawled  inside,  alert  for  a  prior  occupant,  but  found  nothing.
Gratefully, he curled up on the sandy floor, wriggled out a depression for his
hip,  and  composed  himself  for  sleep.  In  this  warm  climate  he  needed  no
bedding. Erith was taking the first watch.
He  also  took  the  second  one.  Leo  awoke  to  discover  it  was  dawn,  a
smoky grayness only slightly less dark than the night. A fresh layer of ashes
had been thrown into the sky while he slept, and there would be no sunlight
until it gradually fell to the ground.
"I  think  I  do  not  need  as  much  sleep  as  you,"  Erith  said  when  Leo
protested not being called. "Normally a Shemsi sleeps from sometime before
midday until well into the  afternoon,  while the  sunlight  is  at  its  strongest.
Such  sleep  and  feeding  occupies  only  a  quarter  of  our  daily  cycle.  You
humans seem to need more."
"And  we  also  need  to  eat  more,"  said  Leo.  His  stomach  was  growling
with hunger.
But first Leo redressed Erith's wounds, throwing away the  blood-soaked
outer  bandages.  The  packing  he  left  in  the  punctures.  And  again  he
experienced that peculiar revulsion caused by tactile recognition, his fingers
conveying  the  message  that  he  was  handling  smoothly  desirable  female
flesh.
Leo  ate as  they  walked,  plucking  fruit  and  nuts  from  whatever  bushes
they passed. Erith also ate heavily of the fruits. They drank at the first clear
stream  they  crossed.  The  forest  was  still  crowded  with  animals,  but  Leo
noticed many tracks leading north  and east.  The  bolder  ones  were moving
into the mountains in an effort to reach the main continent. Those creatures

familiar with the  territory  were choosing  a  northerly  route,  along  with  the
two sapients. Those who could not or would not travel  would die with the
peninsula.
It took them three more days to reach a point where they decided it was
safe to head  for  the  mainland.  Erith  was  walking  steadily  on  the  bad  leg,
only  occasionally  using  his  crutch.  When  they  stopped  that  night,  Leo
removed  the  packing  from  the  punctures  and  checked  for  infection.  The
wounds  seemed  clean,  and  the  removal  caused  only  a  little  bleeding.  He
doused  them  with  antiseptic  again  and  used  the  last  of  his  bandaging
material for a final external dressing.
The  land had grown  more  stable  as  they  moved  north.  The  prevailing
wind  here  was  from  the  northwest,  keeping  most  of  the  smoke  and  ash
south and east of them. The mountain range on the sinking peninsula began
here as a series of tree-covered foothills. The mountains east of them, on the
tectonic plate  where  the  mainland  began,  were  not  in  motion.  This  entire
area was probably  slipping beneath  the  sea,  but  it  might  be  several  years
before the slow process  was completed.  One day  the  ocean would wash to
the base of those towering peaks a few kilometers to the east.
There  had  been  no  sign  of  a  search  party  from  the  Shemsi  basecamp.
They had apparently given Erith up for dead and were content to locate Leo
by waiting for him to find the hidden scoutship and fly into the view of their
spy satellites.
The companions had fallen into a fixed travelling routine.  They  stopped
walking a few hours after dark, and Erith  watched while Leo  slept through
the rest of the night. They set  off again in the  gray dawn and walked until
noon.  Then  Leo  watched while Erith  lay  in  the  sunlight,  apparently  more
unconscious  than  asleep.  He  seemed  alive  only  when  an  apparently
involuntary order came to turn over and expose his other side to the sun.
Leo  noticed that  despite  his  claims  of  superiority  in  energy  generation,
Erith ate a large quantity  of fruit each day.  Evidently  he  needed  more  fuel
than  his  skin  could  supply.  Considering  their  heavy  exertion  and  the
relatively small amount of skin area a Shemsi  possessed,  this  need  seemed
natural.

Even  so,  Leo  could not help but  envy  his  companion.  Although  he  ate
almost constantly to keep down hunger, still he  was losing weight.  Natural
foods did not contain the calories packed into a like quantity of concentrates.
On the fourth day they turned inland. Crossing the green foothills in the
morning, they stopped for Erith's rest period only a few kilometers from the
base of the first mountain.
Leo spent most of the afternoon staring at the high stone peaks, trying to
pick  the  best  pass.  There  was  no  reliable  way  of  determining  what  lay
beyond  the  next  high  ridge.  Erith  had  assured  him  this  general  area  was
slightly lower than that farther to the south.
When the sun began to sink toward the ocean, Erith awoke. He stretched
and limbered  up with some  mild exercises.  When  they  started  walking  he
said,  "I  must  warn  you,  Leo.  These  mountains  are  the  home  of  several
predators, including flocks of small but  very  savage  meat-eating  birds.  We
lost one brother to them. Your noisy gun will be  of little use,  and we have
only one  charge left in  the  laser.  I  suggest  we  prepare  weapons  when  we
stop for your rest tonight. In fact, travelling only by night would be safest."
They  had  not  been  attacked  by  predators  since  leaving  the  crowded
peninsula forest, and Leo did not want to try mountain climbing after dark.
He firmly declined the suggestion.
Erith  accepted  the  decision  without  argument.  Leo  had  learned  his
Shemsi  companion  seldom  argued.  Presumably  there  was  a  point  where
Erith would not obey  him,  but  they  had yet  to reach it. In  their four days
together  Leo  had  gradually  assumed  the  leadership,  and  Erith  seemed
content to let him.
When  they  stopped  for  the  night,  Erith  borrowed  the  bushknife  again
and  made  a  trip  into  the  forest.  He  returned  with  an  armload  of  springy
boughs.  Removing  his  harness,  he  carefully  cut  narrow  strips  from  every
piece. Then  he  trimmed  the  boughs  and bound  them  into  two  flat  shapes
resembling very stout tennis rackets.
Once he  saw the  intended  shape,  Leo  helped him  cut the  limbs  and  tie
them off.

Erith  swung  his  racket  one-handed,  then  used  both  hands.  "A  little
heavy,  but  at  least  sturdy.  Now  we  have  a  fighting  chance  against  the
birds."
"You  seem  to dread running into them,"  said Leo.  He  could  handle  his
weapon with one hand.
"I saw the brother die when  the  birds  attacked us.  It  was not a quick or
easy death. Our hand weapons were practically useless.  Later  we designed
portable sonic sweeps that are much more effective."
Leo  wondered  what  the  Shemsi  idea  of  "effective"  was:  probably  a
wide-spreading beam that could make birds fall from the sky  like feathered
ram.
In  four  days  Leo  felt  he  had  come  to  know  his  companion  reasonably
well.  Erith  was  almost  phlegmatically  calm,  ordered,  and  logical.  He  had
emotions, but they were muted and understated, with few highs or lows. He
seemed to share Homo sapiens' innate curiosity, and was even more afraid of
loneliness.  The  Shemsi's  lack  of  sexual  attitudes  caused  a  curious
ambivalence  in  Leo's  reactions,  a  constant  tendency  to  think  of  some  of
Erith's  characteristics as "female"  and  others  as  "male."  In  truth  they  were
neither;  Leo's  reactions  were  based  on  his  own  cultural  conditioning.  He
realized this, tried to allow for it, but learned that was all but impossible.
Leo chose what seemed  the  best  pass,  and dawn found them  toiling up
the  steep  slope.  By  noon  Leo  was  both  hungry  and  thirsty.  When  they
stopped  for  Erith's  rest  period  Leo  again  found  himself  envying  his
companion's ability to live off sunlight, water, and air. At least two of those
commodities were usually present.
Leo fell asleep that night with nothing in his stomach but water from his
canteen. After his belly stopped growling he was too tired to care.
Next morning they set off with no breakfast, but soon found more water.
Its coldness made Leo's stomach ache. They had climbed past the last of the
heavy timber, but the ground was still covered with scrub brush and many
smaller trees. The air was crisp and cold, but there was little wind. After two
hard hours of steady climbing they reached the summit of the  pass.  Ahead

lay  a  snow-capped  peak  that  Erith  assured  Leo  stood  roughly  midway
across the range.
The ground at the foot of the high peak was rough and broken,  but  low
enough to allow small trees to take root. Ahead in the distance Leo could see
what appeared to be another pass, to the left of the last tall mountain.
"We can sleep in those woods tonight if we hurry," said Leo, considerably
cheered by  the  thought  of possible  berries  to be  found there.  His  stomach
had grown numb,  but  he  was starting to feel the  effect  of  heavy  exertions
without food.
"I think that valley is a little high for most edible plants," replied Erith, his
voice doubtful.
By noon they were over halfway down the slope, moving along a natural
path,  that  seemed  the  remnant  of  an  ancient  lava  flow.  Two  more  hours
would bring them to the edge of the trees.  "Let  us continue  walking," Erith
suggested when Leo asked if he needed to stop. "Perhaps you can find food
while I sleep/feed."
"Why can't your marvelous skin absorb sunlight and air while you walk?"
"The  skin  cells  need  continuous  and  steady  sunlight  to  perform  the
complex  operations  of  photosynthesis.  Consequently  a  Shemsi  falls  into  a
low-energy-expenditure state approximating your sleep when  feeding.  This
is a physiological function not under conscious control: we must rest to feed.
We can control the start and ending of the feeding period, though."
"So a Shemsi  lying  in the  sunlight by  a pool of water  could  live  almost
indefinitely?"
"Only for a few years. Our metabolisms are far more complex than those
of  plants.  We  must  have  certain  compounds  our  skins  cannot  synthesize
from air and water."
Leo  had  been  wondering  what  evolutionary  necessity  had  driven  the
Shemsi upward to intelligence. It  was a tenet  of Earth-based  biology  that a
species which did not need to change to survive remained the  same.  In  the
case  of  the  Shemsi,  the  ability  to  synthesize  food  compounds  seemed  to

have acted as a free aid, without removing the spur to evolve. Compared to
the grim struggle of Homo  sapiens  to live and grow, the  Shemsi  had had it
easy.
Leo  looked  sideways  at  his  sturdy  companion,  noted  the  smooth  and
featureless expanse of skin below the belly, and decided to stop envying the
Shemsi. There were advantages to being  a two-sexed  species  that a worker
ant could not possible appreciate.
Leo's  thoughts  veered  into a new channel.  Perhaps  it  was  true  that  the
Shemsi  lifespan  was  ten  times  as  long  as  the  human's.  If  so,  that  could
compensate  for  losing  the  pleasures  of  sexual  exchange,  and  the  joy  of
seeing one's self perpetuated in the form of children.  Maybe  humans  spent
too much of their total time and energy propagating themselves.
That  made  him  think  of  Misty,  and  Leo  felt  an  ache  in  his  loins  and  a
heaviness  in  his  heart.  Resolutely,  he  put  the  thought  of  the  woman  he  loved
more than  life  itself  out  of his  mind.  Later,  before falling  asleep  that  night,  he
would permit himself to think of her. Later.…
The travellers reached the grove, and to their pleasure discovered a small
stream  flowing  through  a  gully  on  the  opposite  side,  just  past  the  trees.
They drank deeply, and Erith promptly sprawled by the water to sleep. Leo
set out on a systematic survey. He soon confirmed the pessimism of Erith's
initial observation.  These  were high-altitude plants with needles  instead  of
leaves,  without edible  seeds.  No  berries  grew  on  the  brush  and  brambles
scattered somewhat thinly over the area; nor did the plants have tubers.
Leo shrugged, and returned to the stream by Erith. The  thought  of food
had  stirred  his  digestive  juices  and  made  him  intensely  hungry,  but  the
hunger faded when he drank more water. He sat down by his companion to
maintain guard. The coolness had kept him from sleeping well the previous
night, and the lack of food made him feel weak. Leo found himself nodding
off in the warm sunlight.
There had been no animal life at all in the glade; none was to be seen on
the rocky slopes  around them.  Leo  took a final careful check before  letting
himself doze off.

Jarred awake by a shout of fear, Leo opened his eyes to chaos.
The sun was low in the west. A swarm of silver birds flew in an endless
circle  overhead,  the  whirring  of  their  wings  a  gentle  susurrus  that  might
have lulled the unwary in their slumber.  But  a steady  stream  of the  lovely
birds flashed downward, nipping at Erith  with quick tilts of  cutting  beaks,
then winging away with undiminished speed. They were striking first at his
eyes. Two bloody spots on his cheeks showed near misses.
As Leo  sat up, two feathered  arrows  dived  silently  at  his  face.  He  saw
small hooked tearing beaks  coming  at  him,  raised  an  arm—and  felt  sharp
jolts of pain as he lost two patches of skin and flesh from his forearm.
Something dug viciously into the back of his neck. Leo slapped at it, but
he  was  far  too  late.  The  hand  came  away  covered  with  blood—his.  And
then he had both arms flailing at the air, twisting and dodging to keep them
away, feeling a continual assault on his body  as a dozen  more  tried  to  rip
through his clothes. Most of them were succeeding.
"Back to back with me!" a voice panted, and Leo's over-sized tennis racket
was thrust into his hand. Erith had fought his way to the weapons lying by
the stream, and then to Leo. Grasping the  thick handle,  Leo  swung around
until he felt Erith jar  against his back.  And  then  he  held the  racket in both
hands, beating the air above his head and on both sides, as a steady stream
of the feathered killers descended to slay by countless small nips of flesh.
Leo  stopped swinging wildly, and brought  down the  next  several  birds
that dived at him. They were instantly replaced; one dove under the  racket
to his left ankle.  From  both  sides they  came,  two steady  streams  of  flying
tormenters, slashing those small hooked beaks  at his arms,  face,  and body.
The lattice-work of the rackets brought down many, but the supply of birds
was endless.
"Let's  work  our  way  into  the  trees!"  Leo  shouted.  "Break  up  that
formation overhead!"
"Agreed!"  gasped Erith,  and  took  the  first  step  that  way.  Leo  followed,
trying  to  maintain  the  back-to-back  contact  without  looking.  The  steady
attack from above continued, except that now the birds knew enough not to

approach the humanoids from directly in front. They came straight down, or
whipped to the side and came in low. Leo kept his heavy racket in desperate
motion,  from  above  his  head  to  guarding  his  ankles.  A  thin  covering  of
feathered forms littered the rocky ground around the battling sapients.
Erith  took  another  step,  then  another.  He  was  facing  the  trees,  which
were only a few meters away. Gradually the Shemsi turned, so that he  and
Leo  were  shuffling  along  sideways.  That  made  it  easier  to  keep  together.
The attack from  above  continued.  The  birds  were taking heavy  losses,  but
Leo was bleeding from at least twenty wounds, and Erith had a more tender
skin with virtually no clothes to protect it. Leo now understood how Erith's
comrade had been slowly killed.
Leo's  arms  were  growing  tired,  his  breath  coming  in  ragged  pants.  He
could hear Erith breathing deeply behind him. But the trees were close now;
already the flying circle above was being prevented from overhead attack.
They  suffered a few  more  nips  and  killed  a  few  more  birds  before  the
protecting shadows of the trees closed around them. For a moment the  two
attacking streams  continued  to flow down and back  into the  circling  mass.
Then  a quick burst  of speed  brought  the  bleeding  pair  near  the  base  of  a
thickly  foliaged  tree,  and  the  birds  were  restricted  to  an  almost  head-on
approach.  The  birds'  casualties  increased  immediately,  their  effectiveness
gone.
The attack slowed as the two streams of birds grew thin. Then it stopped.
For a moment  the  huge  flock  continued  to  circle  just  outside  the  trees,  as
though wondering where to look for another dinner. And then the formation
broke, one part flying  away in a straight line and the  rest  falling into place
behind.  As  silently  as  they  had  come—Leo  had  not  heard  a  single  noise
except  the  soft  sound  of  their  wings—the  birds  flew  off  into  the  swiftly
falling darkness.
"And that, my travelling companion, was what I warned you about," said
Erith, his breath still ragged.
Leo  held up his racket. Several  strands  were  broken,  but  it  was  largely
intact. "These  saved  us,  Erith.  Preparing  them  was very  good planning on
your part."

"The  thought  occurred  to  me  after  we  lost  our  brother  to  them,"  Erith
replied. "But another brother devised the sonic beam, and my idea was not
needed."
"Not  for the  Shemsi,  perhaps.  But  let's  have  a look  at  you.  I  think  you
lost a little more skin than I did."
Though  all were shallow  flesh  wounds,  Erith  was  bleeding  from  many
lacerations. Leo's  medical  kit  was  out  of  bandaging  material.  He  used  the
antiseptic liberally, and most of the cuts soon stopped bleeding of their own
accord.  Those  that  persisted,  he  bandaged  with  strips  of  cloth  from  the
bottom of his regulation shirt.
There  was  no  way  to  lock  the  pads  in  place,  so  Erith  had  to  hold  the
worst ones with his hands.
When Erith was no longer bleeding, Leo stripped off his clothes  and the
Shemsi examined him. Human skin was not as soft as that of a Shemsi and
had proven harder for the small beaks to tear. Erith doused the many small
wounds with antiseptic, and Leo redressed.
"I  presume  your  search  for food was unsuccessful?"  Erith  asked as they
set about gathering wood for a fire.
"Didn't find one edible bite," Leo confirmed—and had a sudden and very
happy thought.
"That you would eat, anyway," Leo added, and hurried back to the scene
of the fight.
A grisly sight awaited him.  Three  of  the  silver  birds  who  had  suffered
broken  wings were  calmly  eating  some  of  their  brethren.  When  they  saw
Leo  approaching they  attempted  to flee,  hopping awkwardly on both  legs,
like tiny kangaroos.
Leo  ran down the  fleeing cannibals,  batting  them  to  death  with  a  stick.
He hefted the tiny bodies in his hands. They would average over a hundred
grams  in  weight—not  much  edible  flesh  per  body,  but  with  the  number
they had killed…

Leo returned with dead birds  instead of firewood, and Erith  gave  him  a
curious look. When Leo  beheaded  them  and began  to pluck the  thousands
of feathers off the tiny forms, the look grew disgusted. And when Leo gave
up  on  the  hopeless  task  of  cleaning  the  small  bodies  and  instead  gutted
them, split each through the breast, broke them open, and strung them on a
green stick for roasting whole, the Shemsi reached his limit.
"Are  you  seriously  contemplating  eating  those  horrible  creatures?"  Erith
demanded,  showing  as  much  emotion  as  he  had  exhibited  in  times  of
deadly peril.
"The  contemplation  is only  the  first mild joy.  Just  wait until  you  watch
me  crunching  these  little  fellows  and  spitting  bones,  if  you  want  to  see  a
happy man."
"Then I must leave you to your animal feast.  My  system  is incapable  of
tolerating such barbarism."
"Maybe—but you can knock them out of the sky by the thousands. You
would eliminate them as a species and make no use of the bodies at all."
"That is an entirely different matter.  I  am  thinking of the  sensitivities  of
intelligent beings,  not the  place in nature of carnivorous birds.  I  fail to  see
how  you  can  lower  yourself  to  eat  flesh  at  all,  much  less  that  from
predators."
Leo  grinned.  "You  have  your  marvelous  skin,  Erith—and  I  greatly
admire it. But  let  this  omnivore  eat  whatever  he  can  find  in  these  barren
mountains.  Otherwise  you  may  end  up  having  to  get  out  of  them  by
yourself."
The first set of little bodies was ready. The smell of burning feathers was
strong  in  the  air,  Leo  removed  the  stick  and  slid  a  second  one  he  had
prepared as they talked over the fire. He pulled the first small carcass off the
hot  wood,  cursing  when  he  burned  his  fingers.  Holding  the  tiny  form
gingerly by  the  blackened  wings, Leo  brought  the  cooked breast  up to  his
face. The smell of meat made him almost delirious with hunger. He tore into
the tiny  body,  chewed,  spat  out  bones…  and  Erith  walked  away  into  the
darkness.

The silver birds had an unpleasantly feral taste, but Leo hardly cared. He
leisurely cooked and ate every one he could find, including going back in the
darkness to gather up more  along  the  stream  bank.  Twice  he  had  to  stop
and  hunt  additional  firewood.  By  midnight  his  stomach  was  full,  his  face
covered with grease, and his hands were filthy.
Leo  cleaned  up  the  mess  he  had  made  eating,  then  went  back  to  the
stream to wash his face and hands in the icy water. He built up the fire again
and  curled  up  by  it.  Erith  silently  appeared  out  of  the  darkness  and  sat
down on the opposite side.
Leo  fell asleep with his stomach  blissfully  content  for the  first time  in a
week. There were some advantages in having an omnivore's diet after all. In
a land barren of edible vegetable matter, food could descend from the sky.
Leo  awoke in a cold dawn, to find Erith  had  kept  up  the  fire  while  his
companion slept the sleep of the gorged. There was little need for a guard at
this place,  and  although  the  Shemsi  was  sitting  up,  he  was  sound  asleep.
Leo had previously seen him sleeping only while lying in the sunlight.
They made good time that morning; by noon the tall peak with the little
grove  of  trees  at  its  base  was  far  to  the  rear.  The  pass  Leo  had  noticed
earlier, to the  left of  the  last  high  mountain  in  their  path,  was  only  a  few
kilometers ahead. Below was the final dip they must cross before starting up
what Leo hoped would be the last of the slopes in their path.
CHAPTER THREE
« ^ » 
Two hours after noon  the  travellers  reached the  base  of the  valley  that lay
between  the  two  mountains  fronting  on  the  pass.  They  stopped  there  for
Erith's  sleep/feeding.  It  was  relatively  warm  and  comfortable,  and  though
the vegetation here did not include trees, it was still high enough to prevent
another attack by the birds. Leo stretched out by the Shemsi and took a nap
himself.

When  they  awoke it was almost  dark. Leo  suggested  they  change  their
travel pattern by waiting until morning to resume walking. By leaving now
they would end up spending the last of the night at a much higher altitude,
probably with no wood available.
Erith agreed, and they gathered material for the  night's  fire. Most  of the
brush  here  was thin  and light, quickly  turning  to  ash  in  the  flames.  They
had to cut and pile up a large amount  of it, almost  denuding the  area. Leo
did not worry about  their depredations:  the  brush  would have  a  thousand
years in which to grow back.
They  slept  one  at  a  time,  not  from  fear  of  attack  but  because  the  fire
required almost  constant  attention.  And  without  it  they  would  have  been
very  uncomfortable.  This  closed valley  acted as a sink  for  cold  and  heavy
upper air descending from the high slopes of the mountains. Direct sunlight
warmed the valley during the day, though.
Leo's  bird-flesh  dinner  had  long  ago  been  digested  into  a  memory.  As
they  toiled up the  first slope next  morning,  climbing  what  appeared  to  be
another  old  lava  flow,  he  found  himself  almost  wishing  the  birds  would
attack again.
The ascent  was steep  but  short.  They  reached the  top just  before  noon,
and stood looking at  the  edge  of  the  other  forest,  some  twelve  kilometers
distant. There  awaited food,  water,  and  relative  safety.  Leo  glanced  at  his
companion and saw a smile of relief on the pink face.  He  was grinning like
an idiot himself.
They stopped for Erith's  rest  as usual, but  by  agreement  cut it down to
two  hours.  With  the  sun  still  high,  though  angling  toward  the  west,  they
resumed walking. There was a final long hard slope to climb,  then  a gently
sloping incline to the  woods. Before  dark they  entered  the  warm  shade  of
the giant trees.
Though his legs were trembling with weakness, Leo  had no intention  of
sleeping  on  an  empty  stomach.  While  Erith  gathered  up  what  fruits  and
tubers he  could find, Leo  walked quietly  into the  woods, seated  himself  at
the base of a giant tree, and waited. He sat almost motionless for a half-hour,
while  shadows  deepened  and  the  small  creatures  of  the  forest  gradually

grew accustomed to his unmoving presence.
Two small arboreal animals, faintly resembling squirrels, finally lost their
fear and emerged from a hole in the tree just ahead of Leo.  He  took careful
aim and shot one. He missed the second when it scurried away in fright.
The  customary  sounds  of  the  forest  had  gradually  returned  while  Leo
waited silently  for his prey.  Now a  renewed  silence  fell,  deeper  and  more
fearful  than  before.  Leo  walked  to  the  fallen  climber,  made  certain  it  was
dead, and lifted it by the rear legs. It weighed almost a kilogram. He carried
it back to the camp, skinned, cooked, and ate it. Erith again left until he was
through with his meal.
Fresh meat had never been a part of Leo's diet. He decided he could learn
to like it.
Next  morning  they  resumed  the  old  travel  routine.  Leo  sometimes
caught naps while Erith slept and fed in the afternoon, but still collapsed like
the exhausted man he was from midnight to dawn. He also started hunting
during the  morning  hike.  When  successful  he  built  a small fire while Erith
slept,  and  cooked  and  ate  his  meal.  After  a  few  weeks  he  had  become  a
proficient  hunter  and  sometimes  managed  to  kill  fairly  large  herbivores.
When  this  happened  he  cooked the  meat,  stuffed  himself,  and  carried  the
rest in the animal's hide.  Between  the  meat  and the  fruits, nuts  and tubers
he still ate in quantity,  Leo  had an almost  adequate  diet.  Erith,  he  noticed,
ate  almost  constantly,  but  was  still  growing  thinner.  He  needed  to  spend
more  hours  lying  in  the  sun  each  day,  but  their  travel  schedule  did  not
permit it.
Erith no longer left the camp when Leo ate meat in his presence, though.
The  days  stretched  into weeks,  and the  weeks lengthened  slowly into a
second month. Leo grew as hard and tough as the trees through which they
travelled:  Erith  gained  the  Shemsi  bodily  equivalent  in  endurance.  The
forest was never the  same  two days  in a row, and yet  after a time  became
monotonously  familiar.  They  averaged  about  twenty  kilometers  a  day,
which Leo felt was adequate, considering the thickness of the vegetation, the
time devoted to gathering food, and the slowness of travel after dark.

There were no paths through this  virgin wilderness.  Erith  kept them  on
an almost due east course, explaining that the Shemsi camp was at the base
of the mountain range where this vast woodland ended. When they reached
a point where he could climb a tree and see the mountains, Erith could take
a more definite aim.
When  they  had been  walking for some  fifty  days,  Leo  started  climbing
the nearest  tall tree before  they  settled  down for Erith's  afternoon  nap.  He
did this five days in a row—and on the fifth, Leo saw a dim haze ahead that
could well be the range they were seeking.
Three  days  later the  weather was clear and  sunny  over  the  entire  area.
When  Erith  climbed  that  afternoon,  he  saw  the  mountains  clearly.  He
announced they were a little north of the Shemsi basecamp and should start
gradually slanting toward the southeast.
The great forest became  noticeably  thinner  over  the  next  five  days,  and
the air somewhat cooler at night.  The  land had started rising. According to
Erith's description, they  should be  within two or three  day's  travel  of their
destination. Leo decided it was time to broach the subject of separation and
putting their mutual safety agreement into effect.
Leo  made  an  unusually  good  kill  that  morning,  just  before  noon,  and
suggested they stop a little early. Erith gave him a curious look, but agreed.
While his Shemsi companion exposed that remarkable pink skin to the sun,
Leo cooked all of the meat he could carry. When Erith awoke, stretching and
yawning, Leo was ready.
"Erith, isn't it about two more days march to the basecamp?"
The Shemsi looked at Leo, stretched again, and reached for some fruit he
had been  eating  before  lying  down.  "That  is  correct,  my  friend.  And  you
think the time has come to part, perhaps?"
"No 'perhaps'  to it. Have  you  given  any  thought  to how we  can  assure
your neutrality until I've gotten Misty out?"
"Yes,  I  have.  The  simplest  and easiest  way is for  me  to  wait  here  until
you return. Once past this point you should be safe.  I  will then  proceed on

to camp and tell them I accompanied you this far."
"Your people won't accuse you of being a traitor?"
"There  may  be  some…  hesitation,  a  few  doubts.  But  I  am  convinced  I
took the sensible, logical course of action dictated by the circumstances. Any
Erithain would approve. The Domidains might possibly dispute our point of
view, of course. The Ferilains will be happy to accept any reasonable excuse
that could lead to forgiveness."
The Shemsi and human had talked surprisingly little about their peoples,
considering  they  had  been  living  in  forced  intimacy  for  two  months.  Leo
had learned enough to know that the legend of the  three  race Mothers  was
correct.  Therefore  at  least  three  females  existed  in  this  largely  sexless
species. Each individual Shemsi inherited the characteristics of his particular
Mother.  The  Erithain  stood  for  science,  rationality,  logic,  and  self-control.
The  Domidain  were the  adventurous  ones,  enjoying  exploration,  war,  and
individual feats of heroism. The Ferilain believed  in racial harmony,  peace,
social consciousness,  and  love.  Any  large  group  of  Shemsi  had  an  almost
automatic social balancing mechanism at work.
"I'll leave in the morning," said Leo. "At the end of five days and nights I
will  be  back  with  Misty,  or  you  are  free  to  go  on  to  the  base.  Is  that
agreeable?"
"Eminently so," said Erith, rising. He extended his hand, and the human
and Shemsi shook in solemn agreement.
There  was  a  small  hill  in  the  near  distance.  The  travellers  reached  its
eastern base before sunset, and Leo helped Erith build a comfortable camp.
They constructed a lean-to and gathered grass and soft ferns for a bed.  Leo
had grown so accustomed to travelling after dark that he did not feel sleepy
until near midnight. When he finally crawled under the thick roof and dozed
off, Erith  was  sitting  quietly  before  the  fire.  When  he  awoke  at  dawn  the
Shemsi was sleeping soundly beside him.
Leo lay still a moment in the growing light, staring at his companion. He
still  had  mixed  feelings  toward  this  strange  creature  whose  company  had
been forced upon him for two months. Erith  had proven  himself  a faithful,

efficient,  somewhat  bland  person,  with  little  of  the  temperament  and
changeability  Leo  thought  of  as  "human."  The  Shemsi  was  logical  and
orderly  in  thought  and  action,  and  somewhat  slow  at  both.  Leo  had  his
doubts that a person like Erith,  left alone in a wilderness,  could survive.  A
group of them, cooperating as fully as they seemed to, would be much more
efficient. Social order and group action had to  be  the  dominating  forces  in
Shemsi society.
Overall Erith made a satisfactory, if somewhat dull, travelling companion.
But  he  could  hardly  compare  to  the  fire  and  sparkle  of  a  woman  like
Misty—even leaving out the physical joys of having a mate.
Leo crawled out of the lean-to, awakening Erith. He gathered up his few
possessions,  including the  large  hide  bag  of  cooked  meat,  ate  a  few  bites,
and  extended  a  hand  without  speaking.  Erith  silently  shook  it,  and  Leo
turned and left.
He travelled  that  day  until  dark  fell,  eating  as  he  walked.  Leo  covered
almost forty kilometers, double a normal day's travel. He did not make a fire
that night and dined on more meat. Well before noon on the second day, he
was approaching the Shemsi basecamp.
Leo  was  reasonably  certain  Erith  intended  to  wait  at  their  temporary
camp,  as  agreed.  But  he  intended  to  free  Misty  and  be  gone  before  the
Shemsi could possibly arrive, regardless.
The  ground had been  rising and the  trees  thinning  for  the  past  several
kilometers.  The  Shemsi  had  chosen  this  site  with  their  usual  logic  and
attention  to  detail.  It  was  fronted  by  the  great  reaches  of  the  subtropical
forest, with its abundant supply of immediately edible food. To the rear lay
clear patches of grassland, where experimental gardens could be started with
a minimum  of  ground-clearing.  Beyond  the  gardens  the  highlands  began,
leading to the chain of mountains that marked the eastern end of the forest.
When he judged he was approaching the guarded area, Leo climbed a tall
tree. He  was even  closer than  he  had realized.  Their  single  large  building,
constructed from  lumber  cut while clearing land for cultivation,  was  half  a
kilometer  away.  Its  overall  structure  was  dome-shaped,  but  since  it  was
fashioned  from  straight  materials,  the  outer  surface  had  a  faceted

appearance.
Leo  judged the  top about  equal  to the  height  of  their  scout,  which  was
not visible.
From his position about thirty meters up, Leo could see past the Shemsi's
giant  beehive  to  the  garden  patches.  Some  twenty  Shemsi  were
industriously  working  the  ground,  a  few  cultivating  and  the  rest  clearing
away trees and brush. Some of the crops he could see on older areas seemed
nearly mature.
Leo  carefully  scanned  the  area  around  the  camp,  looking  for  two
scoutships. Though  he  and Erith  had not often  indulged in small talk, Leo
had  slowly  accumulated  some  information  on  the  Shemsi.  They  always
travelled to new planets in two scouts, each having the capacity to carry the
entire  force.  Only  one  ship  at  a  time  was  risked  in  planetary  exploration.
Since only physical objects could exceed the speed of light, and it was some
twenty  light-years  back  to  the  home  planet,  any  significant  exchange  of
information had  to  be  by  messenger.  Therefore  one  ship  was  often  gone,
either back  to  Creche  World—their  word  for  the  home  planet—or  in  local
exploration.
Leo  carefully  scanned  the  area  around  the  main  building.  There  was  a
much smaller  structure several  hundred meters  to the  side,  with two  thick
cables  running  through  the  trees  to  the  beehive:  obviously  the  power
supply.  But  the  scout was not visible,  nor was  there  any  area  of  brush  or
trees thick enough to conceal it.
One scout had to be gone. The other was either concealed well away from
the camp, or it formed the central support of their single building!
Leo  shook his head,  baffled.  It  made  little sense  to  construct  a  building
that would have to be destroyed when the ship left. And  then  Leo  realized
he was projecting his own logic patterns onto the Shemsi—an unproductive
and potentially risky way of thinking.
So accept the fact that they had  built their home around the scoutship, in
effect making it a part of this new environment. And go on from there.

The problem was how to get inside and look for Misty. Leo settled down
to an intensive study of the camp. There had to be a guard system of some
kind… the  wires from  the  power source to the  living  quarters  gave  him  a
clue. He found four others, very thin and tiny at this distance, leading away
from the small shed in two pairs, going in opposite directions. They formed
a huge circle. By dint of much concentration, he finally located them in front
of him, only a few meters ahead. He had stopped just in time.
One wire was on the ground, concealed but not buried. The other was in
the trees  above  it, placed as high as possible.  Apparently  any  warm  body
passing between  them  triggered a signal, probably  with size,  location,  and
direction of travel indicated on a monitor inside.
Leo glanced back at the camp, just in time to see  the  Shemsi  working in
the gardens gather in an open spot and sprawl on the grass. They were well
outside the guarded area, and one remained alert against possible predators.
Seven others emerged from  the  main  building and joined  their brethren  in
peaceful  sleep/feeding.  No  one  in  the  inner  group  remained  awake.
Probably an alert guard was sitting inside at the monitor's console.
There was no sign of Misty. Since this was their main period of rest, they
probably had her confined.
Leo  descended  to the  ground, his  mind  busy  with  plans.  He  had  been
automatically thinking of waiting until dark, to conceal his movements.  But
that  was  stupid  under  these  circumstances.  The  Shemsi  would  be  awake
then and could see better than he.  Strange  though  it seemed,  the  best  time
to attempt entry was in the bright light of early afternoon.
Leo backed a few more meters away from the wires, then walked parallel
to  them  around  the  camp.  There  was  one  crossing  point  where  frequent
travel should have  accustomed  the  monitors  to expect  signals—the  path to
the  gardens.  And  unless  the  system  was  extremely  sensitive,  Leo's  size
should fall within the range normally expected of a passing Shemsi.
When he judged himself within fifty meters of the resting gardeners, Leo
took off his worn but still serviceable boots and tied them  around his neck.
Barefooted, he crept through the brush without a sound, slowly working his
way between the alert guard and the trail back to camp.  Finally  he  reached

the main path. Cautiously he eased forward to the edge of the vegetation.
The  wires  were  a  few  meters  down  the  path  to  his  left.  Some  thirty
meters  to  the  right,  the  guard  paced  slowly  back  and  forth.  A  weapon  of
some sort hung from his body harness at the hip.
Leo  waited and watched. The  guard glanced often  among  the  trees  and
brush around his sleeping companions; only seldom  at the  more  open  area
toward the  camp.  Unless  there  was  a  radio  hidden  in  one  of  his  two  side
cases, he was not equipped with one, which meant the plan Leo was slowly
formulating just might work.
Leo looked to his left. The path to the camp did not lead straight toward
the building. After entering  the  guarded area, it curved gently  to the  right.
From where he crouched he could see  the  top of the  tall wooden structure,
but not its base.
Wriggling backward, Leo stood up and walked toward the path at a clear
spot. Before stepping out into the open he looked toward the clearing to his
right,  locating  the  guard.  At  the  moment  that  worthy  happened  to  be
walking his way.
The guard turned and went back. Leo quickly  stepped  out into the  path
and hurried in the  opposite direction. He  was over  the  wire before  he  had
time to wonder if he had guessed correctly. A few more fast steps took him
around the gentle bend and out of sight of the alert sentry.
Leo  stopped long enough  to slip on his boots.  If  he  was  wrong—if  this
was such  a departure from  the  norm  that  the  monitor  inside  sounded  the
alarm, or had some unseen means of contacting the sentry—then he had lost
the battle before it began.
Leo walked on into the large clearing, heading directly for a door into the
building. He  had  to  pass  within  a  few  meters  of  several  sleeping  Shemsi.
Leo stepped softly, keeping on the grass. At the door he drew his laser;  the
noisy projectile gun would bring  the  camp  down on his head.  He  had one
charge with which to disarm or kill the monitor inside.
How  noisy  should  he  be  in  opening  the  door?  A  feeding  Shemsi  was

virtually  comatose,  disturbed  only  by  very  loud  sounds.  He  opened  the
door in a normal  manner,  pulling it closed behind  him  firmly  but  without
slamming.
Directly  ahead  was  the  rounded  base  of  the  silvery  scout  ship.  The
wooden building enclosed an area some twenty meters wide on all sides of
it. Glowing tubes on the walls and high on the curved ceiling provided light.
A miscellany  of scientific equipment,  living quarters,  and tools  littered  the
enclosed  space.  Other  than  the  lack  of  partitions  and  resulting  loss  of
privacy,  it  looked  very  much  like  the  all-purpose  utility  building  human
settlers erected first on a new planet.
Leo examined the living quarters as he walked toward an open hatch into
the ship. The chain of logic, luck, and good guesswork that had gotten  him
this far was about  to run out.  The  alerted monitor  should be  sitting before
his console, waiting to learn what had alarmed the  outer guard and caused
him to awaken someone and send him in to report. The monitor had heard
the  wooden  door  open  and  close.  Next  he  expected  to  hear  shoes  on  the
metal rungs Leo could see just inside the open hatch.
Leo obliged him.  The  steel  rungs were anchored to the  inside wall. Leo
holstered  the  laser  and  climbed  them  at  a  normal  pace,  making  what  he
hoped  was  a  standard  amount  of  noise.  If  the  guard  decided  to  leave  his
post and look inside the shaft, Leo was dead.
Nothing happened. Leo reached a platform three-quarters of the way up
the vertical ship,  and the  shaft  ended.  Drawing the  laser again, he  stepped
through  an  open  hatch  into  a  small  airlock,  stooping  to  pass  inside.  He
walked on through the inner hatch and straightened up in the control room.
A  Shemsi  was  seated  at  a  small  console  to  Leo's  left,  his  chair  swung
around to face the airlock. There was no one else in the room.  The  monitor
gave a startled gasp, gaped unbelievingly—and  then  whirled around in his
chair, finger stabbing toward a button.
There  was  no  time  to  think,  to  weigh  the  odds.  Leo  swung  the  laser,
pulling  the  trigger  without  consciously  aiming—and  a  bolt  of  blue  heat
smashed  into the  console  ahead of  the  reaching  finger.  Glass  crackled  and
shattered,  plastic melted  and flowed like water. Leo  sprang forward  as  the

singed pink hand recoiled in pain, shifting his grip on the laser to the barrel.
Leo brought the handle of the heavy pistol down on the round skull. The
monitor had started out of the chair, mouth open to yell. He collapsed back
into his seat, shoulders slumping and head sagging. Leo  caught him  just  in
time to keep his face out of the mess on the console.
Easing the slack body to the  deck, Leo  looked around for rope.  None  of
any  kind  was  visible.  He  drew  his  bushknife,  cut  off  the  monitor's  body
harness,  and  quickly  sliced  parts  of  it  into  wide  straps.  Before  tying  the
guard Leo had another thought, and closed and latched the hatch.
When the monitor stirred and groaned, Leo helped him sit erect. With his
hands tied behind him and his ankles strapped firmly  together,  the  Shemsi
had trouble  keeping his balance.  And  his head  obviously  hurt.  Blood  was
dribbling slowly from a scalp wound.
The  fact  that  Shemsi  blood  appeared  identical  to  human  had  always
seemed an oddity to Leo, as was the fact the  sexless  aliens had five  fingers
and toes. Considering their very different internal chemistry, he would have
expected  more  external  differences.  But  the  red  blood  was  probably  only
superficially  like  that  in  his  own  veins,  and  there  was  one  major
physiological difference that  was  quite  obvious.  A  Shemsi's  teeth  were  all
grinding  molars.  There  had  been  no  need  for  incisors  or  fangs  in  their
ancestry.
Leo had carried the heavy laser pistol a thousand  kilometers  for the  one
instant it might  be  needed.  He  tossed  the  now  useless  weapon  aside,  and
drew the projectile gun. Holding it to the Shemsi's nose, he said softly in the
other's  tongue,  "Now  you  will tell  me  where  to  find  the  human  you  hold
captive—or you will die, and I'll find her myself. Speak if you wish to live."
The  monitor  visibly  quailed in fear.  This  one  seemed  to lack the  stoical
courage of Erith. "Do not harm me! The sexed creature is not here!  Ferilain
called—yes!  One of the  Mothers  honored  our  little  band;  she  called!—and
ordered  her  sent  to  Creche  World.  The  other  scoutship  and  an  operative
crew departed not long after her capture! We thought you dead."
The  conviction  that  this  frightened  creature  was  telling  the  truth  was

overwhelming.  Leo  fought back  a black  despair,  felt  the  hand  holding  the
gun shaking,  relaxed his finger before  he  inadvertently  killed—and  turned
away until he could control himself.
The Shemsi was watching in evident terror when Leo swung back to face
him.  For  the  first time  Leo  noticed  this  one  was  somewhat  different  from
Erith.
The  body  build  was  taller  and  thinner,  and  his  eyes  were  brown.  The
features of the pink face were not quite as rounded.  He  also had noticeable
scars on the right leg and left shoulder.
"Your Mother is Ferilain?" Leo asked.
The monitor nodded, the fear fading slightly. "That is true, as any Shemsi
would know. But how did you?"
"I'm  beginning  to know you,"  Leo  told him,  looking around  the  control
room. A search of the few cabinets he saw still failed to disclose a rope.  He
cut  more  harness  and  tied  the  Shemsi  thoroughly  to  a  stanchion,  until
certain he could not possibly escape and reach an alarm.
Leo set out to explore the scoutship. He could not take a chance  that the
Shemsi might be lying. Masterful deception could be a part of their culture,
for  all  he  knew.  But  every  hatch  in  the  ship  opened  except  one  that
obviously led to the engine room. And Misty was not to be found.
Leo  returned  to  the  control  room.  The  trussed  guard  could  have
screamed while Leo  went in or out the  door, but  he  must  have  realized  it
was unlikely any comrades had awakened and entered the ship. He was also
fearful for his life. Individuality was not a part of their culture, but the desire
of each Shemsi to remain alive was obviously very strong.
"Was it not as I told you?" asked the monitor.
Leo  nodded  without  answering,  inspecting  the  control  room.  It  was  so
alien and different there was no conceivable way he could operate this ship.
Besides, the console would require considerable repair work before it would
be  operable.  Either  he  had to have  a pilot—and no one  here  was  going  to
take  him  to  their  secret  Creche  World—or  Leo  had  to  recover  the  hidden

human ship.
He thought of the two-month journey back  through the  forest,  this  time
alone. Knowing Misty had hidden it well, Leo wondered how long it would
take him  to find the  scoutship.  The  depression  hanging  in  the  back  of  his
mind grew deeper and darker. Even if he found the  charts he  needed  here,
located Creche World, recovered the scout, and set out—there were still the
planetary defenses  to  overcome,  the  whole  world  of  the  Shemsi  opposing
him. There was no way…
Leo  asked himself  a simple  and  fundamental  question,  one  he  had  not
faced before because there had been no need. Was life worth living without
Misty?
The answer was "No." And therefore he had nothing to lose in trying  to
get her back. Logic, good sense, his own desire to live—none of these really
mattered in comparison. And so there was no real choice involved at all.
CHAPTER FOUR
« ^ » 
Leo rechecked the bonds on the Shemsi, who was getting over his fright. A
short  search  located  the  scout's  star  charts.  As  had  long  been  suspected,
Creche World circled an unnamed old star in the  direction of Alpha  Crucis.
Leo  quickly  memorized  the  star's  exact  location. Then  he  stepped  into  the
access well and closed the outer airlock hatch firmly, but without locking it.
The  monitor's  replacement  would  release  him  at  the  shift  change.  In  the
meantime, no one would hear him if he started yelling.
The  Shemsi  sprawled  in  the  open  were  still  lost  in  sleep/feeding.  Leo
walked quickly but quietly past them, heading, by the most direct route, for
the camp where he had left Erith. This time he passed between the guarding
wires without seeing them. Nor did he bother to conceal his passage.
Leo  walked swiftly,  working off tension.  By  dark  he  was  calm  in  spirit
and several  kilometers  from  the  Shemsi.  He  ate  some  of  his  cooked  meat

and went to sleep early. Up before dawn, he  resumed  walking. The  timing
was such that he was going to arrive at Erith's camp well after dark, or sleep
only a few kilometers away. Leo began trotting whenever the woodland was
open enough. He was now in top physical condition and could run for long
periods without becoming winded.
At lunch Leo  took a short  rest  and ate the  last of his  meat.  There  were
edible fruits available, but he  did not take time  to pick them.  The  sun  was
sinking  behind  the  small  hill  west  of  the  camp  when  Leo  strode  into  the
open.
"Leo!"  Erith  sprang  to  his  feet  from  a  seat  before  the  fire;  he  had  not
heard the Earthman coming. "So you are alive and well! But  where is your
softly-muscled mate?"
Leo threw himself prone on the grass and did nothing but breathe deeply
for several minutes. The muscles in both legs were in semi-spasm, twitching
and jerking as though still trying to propel him onward.
Gradually  the  nervous  spasms  eased.  Leo  finally  sat  up,  to  see  Erith
holding  out  some  fruit.  His  stomach  had  grown  numb  as  he  ran,  but
suddenly  he  was  ravenously  hungry.  He  stuffed  the  food  into  his  mouth
and swallowed after barely  chewing.  The  soft pulp felt like leaden weights
going down.
It was well after dark by  the  time  Leo  felt recovered  enough  to talk. He
told Erith  what had happened,  being  careful to include the  fact  no  Shemsi
had  died.  The  small  hairless  humanoid  listened  intently,  nodding
occasionally.  He  seemed  to  think  the  frightened  behavior  of  the  Ferilain
Shemsi perfectly normal.
"This is most  unusual,  Leo.  To  have  a Mother  contact such  a small and
unimportant band… seldom does this happen. Evidently they wish to study
your female partner."
"Then  you  think  she  will  be  safe  on  Creche  World?  You  may  as  well
know, Erith. I'm going after her."
The Shemsi nodded. "I would have assumed as much.  The  home  world

is well-guarded, Leo.  Nothing  that  flies  can  approach  Birth  Mountain,  not
even one of our own ships. You will not succeed."
Leo shrugged. "We'll see. Now I need some sleep."
And  Leo  did  sleep,  while  Erith  mounted  guard.  When  the  sun  awoke
him next morning, Leo felt as though he hadn't even turned over in the little
lean-to.
Leo staggered to the fire, yawning and rubbing his eyes. Erith rose to his
feet;  he  had  been  dozing  sitting  up.  They  smiled  at  each  other  in  the
early-morning  light—and  Erith  stiffened,  eyes  closing,  face  frozen  in
surprise. Body  rigid as though  in shock,  he  turned blindly  toward the  fire,
took a halting step, paused… and fell to his knees.
"Mother!" Erith  cried in a strangled  voice,  his  face  lifted  to  the  greenish
sky. "Mother,  I hear!" His  hands  rose,  covering  his eyes.  He  seemed  in the
grip of some religious ecstasy, body trembling and jerking, teeth chattering,
the eyes now streaming tears.
After a moment  Erith  quieted,  but  remained  on  his  knees.  He  lowered
his hands and faced the disk of the  sun,  just  rising beyond  the  edge of the
forest.  He  rocked back  on  his  haunches  and  remained  that  way,  eyes  still
closed, while Leo watched and waited.
The  visitation  or  possession,  whatever  it  was  in  human  terms,  did  not
last long. When it was over, Erith rose to his feet, a mingled look of anguish
and pride on his smooth-skinned face. He wiped away the tears and cleared
his throat. When he spoke, his voice was filled with wonder. "Friend  Leo,  I
was amazed that our little group was called by a Mother—but for the second
active  Mother  to  also  call  the  same  little  band,  and  within  a  few
months—such  a  thing  has  never  happened  before!  And  for  me  to  be  so
honored—you cannot  know what this  means  to us,  Leo.  There  are at least
four  billion  Erithain  scattered  over  twenty-four  worlds,  and  most  live  out
our 1,200 years never dreaming of having the Mother call. No greater glory
can happen to a single Shemsi."
"But what did she say?" demanded Leo. This unexpected contact seemed
to  have  driven  Erith  into  a  highly  emotional  state,  very  unusual  for  the

normally placid Shemsi.
Erith's mouth twisted into a shape that would have been a wry grin on a
human face. "The Mother gave most surprising directions, Leo. It seems our
partnership  is  not  to  end,  at  least  for  the  indefinite  future.  I  am  to
accompany you in the search for your scoutship, and go on to Creche World
with you if we find it. I am to aid and assist you in every possible way, short
of  killing  a  brother.  I  am  to  work  against  my  own  people,  and  do  so
conscientiously and with all the abilities I possess."
Amazed, Leo could hardly believe his ears. "Why?" he demanded.
"That  was  revealed  to  me—possibly  because  the  Mother  realized  you
would  wish  to  know.  The  active  Mothers,  Erithain  and  Ferilain,  have
decided to let you attempt the rescue of your mate. They do not believe you
will  succeed,  even  with  my  willing  help—but  they  desire  to  study  your
behavior patterns and examine your ability to act independently, which we
much admire. Therefore I am to accompany you and observe your actions."
"And  have  one  of  your  rulers  constantly  spying  on  me  through  your
eyes? Sorry."
"No.  Leo,  continuous  observation  would  be  impossible.  A  Mother  can
communicate  only  with  one  individual  at  a  time,  and  you  are  not  that
important. I doubt that I will be called again until you are captured or dead.
Should we actually succeed in reaching  Birth  Mountain,  my  orders  would
probably  change  from  'accompany'  to  'capture.'  But  we  can  solve  that
problem by separating, as we did here.  And  even  if you  are captured, you
would probably be reunited with your soft mate."
"In captivity, you mean?"
Erith  shrugged.  "I  do  not  know  the  minds  of  the  Mothers,  Leo.  Most
probably in captivity, yes. Possibly they would free both of you if the data I
accumulate  is  of  great  value  to  them.  We  Shemsi  have  little  interest  in
individuals."
Leo  started pacing around the  fire, trying  to think.  This  was  a  situation
for  which  he  had  no  guiding  precedents  and  insufficient  knowledge  on

which to make  a  sensible  decision.  He  obviously  needed  Erith's  aid.  And
apparently it was perfectly safe to trust the  little Shemsi,  at least until they
neared the home of the  Mothers.  But  unless  he  could break  away near the
end, reach Misty alone… he had to weigh the advantages offered by Erith's
aid  against  the  knowledge  that  the  Mothers  could  follow  their  progress  if
they wished. And the Mothers might lay traps for him, or attempt  in some
other way to test his unknown abilities as an individual.
Leo  mentioned  the  latter possibility  to  Erith.  The  Shemsi  smiled.  "I  do
not think so,  my  friend.  The  Mothers  seem  more  interested  in  testing  the
regular Creche World and Birth Mountain defenses. To change them would
invalidate  the  test.  Besides,  the  most  logical  and  likely  outcome  of  our
attempt to penetrate them will be the death of both of us."
Letting Erith stay with him was a decision Leo was not prepared to make
at  the  moment.  Instead  he  asked,  "Can  you  tell  me  how  your  Mother
communicates with you?"
"I  cannot.  They  have  powers  far  beyond  anything  we  accomplish  with
machinery,  including that of speaking  with  a  child  anywhere  at  any  time.
Most of their messages  are  to  members  of  management  Trios,  workers  in
important  research  groups,  and  others  in  critical  areas.  However,  each
Mother  can  communicate  only  with  her  own  children.  When  a  Mother  is
inactive, as Domidain is at present, a message to one  of her brood  must  be
relayed through the child of an active Mother."
"Why is Domidain inactive?" asked Leo.
"Each Mother enters the birth chamber every third year, where she lies in
a semi-comatose state and steadily  lays  eggs.  At  the  end of the  year  she  is
awakened by the attendants and returns to active life, while the next Mother
enters  the  chamber.  We  have  had  a  peaceful  and  pleasant  time  while
Domidain sleeps, but that will end when she awakens."
"You  have  a  leadership  system  of  Shemsi  'Trios'—each  composed  of  a
Domidain,  a  Ferilain,  and  an  Erithain—but  actually  the  Mothers  rule  the
whole roost. Are they the only true individuals among you?"
"That  would  depend  on  how  you  define  the  word  'individual.'  Since

every child of a Mother born in the same year is identical in the egg, and the
influence of the  male  parent  produces  only  minor  variations  from  year  to
year, we tend to be very much like our Mother. Domidain provides children
who  are  war-like,  adventurous,  bold,  and  courageous.  Erithain's  children
have  a  predisposition  toward  science,  rationality,  and  logical  thought.
Ferilain supplies  social  consciousness,  harmony,  love  and  peace.  Only  the
shaping  influences  of  maturation—such  factors  as  whether  one  takes  the
Long Walk to the  East  or the  West,  or the  number  of years  one  lingers  in
each  stage—make  one  Erithain  very  different  from  another.  Still,  those
differences can sometimes be quite significant."
"That's  fascinating,  and  I'll  want  to  hear  more  later,"  Leo  replied,
wondering  particularly  about  the  "male  parent."  Erith  always  tended  to
furnish endless detail once started on a subject, but often failed to provide a
clear and complete picture. "But right now I have to make a very important
decision. Do I stand a better chance of getting Misty out of there  with your
help, or without it? It's a tough question."
"I do not believe  so,"  Erith  said, his voice  low and thoughtful.  "Without
my  aid  you  will  have  no  slightest  chance  of  success,  which  is  why  I  was
instructed to join you. With it we will still fail—but at a point much closer to
your goal."
"I  don't  know  why  I  should  believe  you,  but  I  do.  Very  well,  then.
Partners it is, until I'm close enough to Misty to do without you. And I only
hope you don't get orders to turn on me before then."
Erith put out a hand, a broad smile on his pink face. "I am over 700 years
old by your reckoning, Leo Volz. But this will continue the new experiences
I have  gained from  cooperating with you,  ones  never  before  available  to a
Shemsi. I will add much to the knowledge of the Mothers and my people."
"Then let's go," said Leo, and he started breaking camp.
By the time the sun reached the first quarter they were well on their way
back  to  the  slowly  sinking  peninsula,  back  to  the  smoke  and  ashes  and
volcanic  fury  that  were  transforming  the  edge  of  a  continent.  Leo  felt  as
though they were going home.

When  the  companions  emerged  from  the  last of the  forest  and  saw  the
tall  peaks  fronting  on  the  ocean  dead  ahead,  Leo's  wrister  indicated  they
were six days ahead of the time made on the inland journey. Both were now
hardened  and  experienced  travellers.  Leo  could  find  his  way  through  the
dark with few falls.  The  Shemsi  had  developed  faster  reactions  and  could
march all day on three hours sun-feeding and a little fruit.
"Since your medical kit is almost exhausted, I suggest we cross the slopes
where the birds hunt after dark," said Erith.
"A  good  idea,"  Leo  agreed.  He  was  staring  at  the  pass  through  which
they had come, wondering if there was a shorter way. In his mind he could
still see the  small human  scoutship,  and the  peak on the  peninsula  around
which  it  had  vanished.  Misty  had  very  likely  hunted  a  place  to  land
immediately, knowing she was out of sight of the Shemsi vessel. She would
want the trip back on foot to be as short as possible. But unless she found a
large cave or closed canyon in short order she would have gone on…
The most logical course was to retrace her route exactly, see what she had
seen.  But  the  view  was  different  on  the  ground,  and  the  extra  distance
would take too much time. It would be faster to cross the  mountains  lower
on  the  land  bridge,  near  the  active  zone,  and  enter  the  area  she  had
vanished into from this side.
Leo  tested  his  logic  on  Erith  and  found  him  in  full  agreement.  From
where  they  stood  a  second  pass  was  visible,  one  that  apparently  almost
skirted the water. It was higher and would be more dangerous, but had the
advantage of being directly in front of the area they wished to reach.
It was almost dark; the travellers ate and resumed walking.
Two days later they stood atop a high escarpment and looked out at the
mountain pass where the scout-ship had vanished. It was a region of rugged
and  craggy  but  generally  low  peaks.  They  had  crossed  from  mainland  to
peninsula the day before, and the rising tension in the ground had become a
tangible  quality.  Leo  felt  in  his  bones  that  a  major  cataclysm  was  on  the
way, and if they did not find the scoutship soon, it might be lost to the sea.
Almost  at  once  Leo  spotted  a  dark  hole  in  the  face  of  the  mountain

opposite them, one Misty would have seen immediately… and so would her
pursuers. He looked again, trying to find something less obvious that would
still make a good hiding place. A moment later he saw it.
"There,"  said  Leo,  pointing.  A  narrow  canyon  led  up  into  the  hollow
between the first peak and the one to its north. The fissure seemed open and
easy  to  reach,  but  the  walls  gradually  came  together  overhead.  The
shadowed  passage  twisted  out  of  sight  around  the  curvature  of  the
mountain.
Erith stared, shrugged, and started down the slope. Over his shoulder he
called back, "If you are wrong, friend Leo, at least it is the  closest  hole.  We
can check that large cave next."
But Leo had guessed correctly. They found the scoutship at the very end
of  the  canyon,  far  past  the  point  where  the  Shemsi  vessel  could  have
penetrated.  And  Misty  had  even  turned  it  around,  ready  for  a  fast  exit  if
needed.
The sight of the little ship brought an acute, unexpected  reaction to Leo.
He thought of the months he and Misty had spent in its cramped quarters,
the thrills and high excitement they had known on several raw new planets,
the depth of intimacy and love made possible by a closely  shared life. And
Misty  suddenly  appeared  before  his  eyes,  so  real  and  close  it  seemed
possible to reach and touch her.
A short,  slender  woman  but  with  legs  and  arms  softly  curved  by  firm
muscles… hips very wide for her slim frame, below a waist so tiny he could
encircle it with his hands…  breasts  small but  beautiful,  riding high  on  her
smoothly muscled chest… a darkly olive complexion, with black, somewhat
curly hair framing a face of delicate beauty… a bint of fire and steel  always
present, hidden in the depths of large, dark-brown eyes.
By conventional standards Misty was not a beautiful woman. Her  figure
was not symmetrical, she was well below average height, and her chin was
too  small.  But  Leo  remembered  the  joys  and  laughter,  the  coziness,  sex,
above all the companionship of someone deeply loved and respected. There
was  an  inner  strength  to  Misty,  a  toughness  that  enabled  her  to  endure
when others  faltered. She  was wine  and  moonlight,  sun-heat  and  passion,

happy  laughter  and  sometimes  banked,  slumbering  fires…  she  was  the
woman he loved.
Leo  remembered,  and suddenly  his knees  became  weak with  need  and
longing. He could have stood there in the shadows of the canyon  and cried
like a hurt child.
"There is in your face the news that a Mother has died," said Erith softly.
Leo blinked, and brought himself back to the present. The  most  difficult
job  he  had ever  undertaken  lay ahead;  this  was not the  time  to indulge  in
reminiscence.  Taking  a  deep  breath,  he  glanced  at  his  companion.
"Something  like  that,"  Leo  agreed,  not  elaborating.  But  he  felt  sorry  for
Erith,  who did not  understand  and  could  never  experience  the  wonder  of
heterosexual love.
The round hatch into the airlock fronting the pilot's compartment opened
smoothly  to  Leo's  handprint.  The  ship  roused  from  the  "quiet"  operating
mode as they  entered.  Fans  whispered to  life  to  move  the  musty  air,  and
lights came on throughout the living areas. This small ship did not have one
of the larger computers, which were almost human in intelligence, but it was
programmed to perform most needed functions automatically.
"I  suggest  a  direct  ascent  and  a  trajectory  toward  Earth  from  this  star
system,"  Erith  said  as  he  seated  himself  in  the  second  pilot's  chair.  "My
colleagues have  no way of knowing I  am  alive  and  with  you.  There  is  an
excellent  chance  they  will  assume  you  are  returning  home  without
attempting to find your mate."
"A  careful  leading  Trio  would  report  our  departure  to  Creche  World
anyway," Leo pointed out.
"True; and since  the  Trio  here,  as elsewhere,  contains  an Erithain  and a
Ferilain, the  cautious way will prevail.  But  this  colony  has  no  safe  way  of
reporting until the  second  ship returns.  Of course  both  leaders  with  active
Mothers will attempt to reach them by… your closest equivalent is a prayer
to a god. The result is usually the  same—the  one  who is supposed  to hear
seldom  responds.  But  with  us,  unless  there  is  an  immediate  answer,  we
know the message has not been received."

"It  would be  very  interesting  to know  how  the  Mothers  communicate,"
Leo said absently. On his main console, he was viewing section after section
of  engineering  data,  checking  conditions  and  redundancy  reserves.  "Our
physics  don't  provide  for  any  electromagnetic  waveform  that  exceeds  the
speed of light."
"Nor  do  ours,"  Erith  replied,  with  the  infrequent  grin  that  made  him
seem far more human. "It may be that the Mothers, who are not physicists
in the usual sense, do not understand this ability themselves. It may also be
that  they  do  not  wish  it  duplicated  by  us.  Such  a  device  would  greatly
weaken their control."
Leo  completed  his  inspection  and  prepared  to  lift  off.  He  gave  verbal
directions for an initial course back to Earth, to be reviewed when out of the
solar  system.  The  ship  was  actually  operated  by  the  computer,  but  he
monitored the displays and checked its functions.
With a quiet whirring of the anti-grav generator, the little scout rose and
headed  down  the  canyon.  As  soon  as  the  roof  overhead  split,  the  ship
slanted  upward,  emerging  into  the  bright  blue  light  of  Beta  Crucis.  It
accelerated as rapidly as air friction permitted, the separate gravity  field the
computer maintained  inside the  ship compensating  for the  G-pressures.  In
minutes they  were out of the  atmosphere  and heading around the  star,  on
the  most  direct  safe  pathway  to  Earth.  There  had  been  no  sign  of
acknowledgement by the Shemsi.
Erith  had  fallen  silent.  His  pink  face  seemed  unusually  sober  and
thoughtful.  Although  he  was  following  orders  received  from  the  highest
possible  authority,  it was obvious  Erith  did  not  relish  this  assignment.  To
him, there  was something  fundamentally  wrong in assisting  someone  who
opposed the will of the Mothers. To someone accustomed to total and blind
obedience, the internal conflict was traumatic.
"Cheer up," said Leo cheerfully.  "Perhaps  we'll be  killed when  we try  to
slip  past  the  Creche  World  defenses,  and  your  honor  won't  be
compromised."
Erith gave him a puzzled look, but only shrugged. Humor was as alien to
him  as  sex.  When  he  did  not  understand  a  human  attitude  he  usually

ignored it.
"Okay, let's get down to business. Tell me how the defense system works
and how we can get around it. No, first let's talk about Creche World itself."
Leo unobtrusively pressed a "record" button on his console. Later he would
review the  information  until it was  thoroughly  absorbed.  "You've  said  we
have to land in the Stage 5 area where the spaceport is, even if we don't use
the port itself. Why is that true?"
"Because no flying craft of any sort is permitted over any area other than
Stage 5. Ground travel is also very restricted. Riders and their mounts  may
freely cross the  clear zone  between  Stages  5  and  4,  but  nothing  may  pass
between Stages 1 and 2, 2 and 3, and 3 and 4 except creatures moving in the
outward direction."
"Go back to the beginning and start with a general description," said Leo,
feeling very lost.
"Very  well.  That  is  probably  best.  Creche  World  has  one  very  large
continent  that  completely  encircles  the  planet  like  a  wide  belt.  There  are
islands in both the north and south seas and icecaps at the poles. Neither the
islands nor the icecaps are inhabited. The planet is very old. Most geological
features have been worn down, but one great mountain remains. This is the
home of the  Mothers  and the  cradle of our species.  The  mountain  and the
land around it for perhaps a hundred of your  kilometers  is Stage 1.  A  clear
zone  about  two  hundred  meters  wide  circles  the  entire  stage.  State  2
surrounds the Stage 1 clear zone,  and reaches  from  the  northern  sea to the
southern  sea.  It  is separated from  Stage  3  by  straight  clear  zones  on  both
sides, extending  the  full width of the  continent.  Stage 3  is broken  into two
parts, as is Stage 4. Stage 5 is the largest in physical area, taking in perhaps
half the  planet's  land mass.  There  is only  one  spaceport,  and it sits almost
exactly opposite Birth Mountain, on the other side of the world."
"Then this phrase you use, 'the Long Walk of the East or the West'—that
means a baby from Birth Mountain can go in either direction and still finally
reach Stage 5?"
"If he survives, yes. A baby is hatched every two seconds. About half do
not live through Stage 1,  into which they  are expelled  as soon  as they  can

crawl. Those  who live and grow  cross  into  the  larger  Stage  2,  where  they
remain  until  young  adulthood.  Although  many  die  in  the  fights  between
juvenile  gangs,  many  eventually  become  adults and cross on into  Stage  3,
where they join one of the many bands there. When life grows dull the adult
continues on into Stage 4, where some  live out the  rest  of their days.  Most
become  bored  after a few years  and  make  the  final  crossing,  into  Stage  5.
And eventually, the one out of four who is still alive and fully educated goes
on into space to spread the Shemsi brotherhood among other worlds."
"So Stages 1, 2, and 5 are each complete on one area of land, but 3 and 4
divide  into  two  parts  each.  There  are  differences,  then,  between  the  two
halves of these stages?"
"In  a  sense.  Both  halves  of  Stage  3  are  occupied  by  several  thousand
bands  of  young  adults.  They  have  little  contact  with  each  other,  and
conditions vary greatly. When  the  growth urge compels  a Shemsi  to move
on  and  he  enters  Stage  4,  he  learns  that  the  two  halves  are  somewhat
similar, even though no steady contact exists between them. This is because
both connect to Stage 5,  and news  and information  travels  freely  back  and
forth. This  seems  to exert  a  strong  shaping  effect,  keeping  the  two  halves
quite similar."
For  an  intelligent  creature  dedicated  to  logic,  Erith  was  releasing
information in a very disjointed fashion. Perhaps the subject was so familiar
to him he had difficulty conveying all the ramifications to an alien.
"We'll get into more detail later. Right now you're saying we have to land
somewhere  in Stage 5,  either  walk or ride an animal of some  sort  through
Stage 4, then sneak across the border into Stage 3, and do the same at Stages
2 and 1. If Stage 5 takes in half the planet, then our obvious course is to land
near the border."
"Obvious,  perhaps,  but  not  the  best  way.  I  have  been  thinking  of  this
matter for some  time,  Leo.  I  believe  it  safest  to  attempt  a  subterfuge,  one
with enough validity to make it credible. We  can land at the  spaceport and
pretend  I  have  captured  you  and  your  ship.  I  will  state  that  Erithain  has
communicated with me—which  is the  truth—and  commanded  that I  bring
you to her—which is partially true.  The  fact that your  softly-muscled  mate

was  taken  to  Birth  Mountain  will  lend  the  story  extra  credence.  I  will
demand the use of an aircraft and a flight to the border. The west side seems
best,  since  that is the  Long  Way  I  took and I  know it better.  We  will then
borrow  riding  mounts  for  the  journey  across  Stage  4  and,  hopefully,  on
through Stage 3."
"I  don't  understand  why  the  Mothers  would permit  this.  In  fact  I  don't
understand the Mothers, period.
"Where do they get their information? How do they rule over you?"
"Those  are difficult questions,  but  I  will try  to  answer  them.  A  Mother
virtually reads the mind of a son when she calls him, obtaining all his recent
strong  memories.  Since  the  two  active  Mothers  contact  many  of  their
children  every  day,  from  every  settled  planet  and  many  new  ones,  they
receive  a  tremendous  amount  of  input.  But  perhaps  you  are  under  the
impression  the  Mothers  'govern'  as your  human  rulers do. That  is  not  the
case.
Shemsi  Trios  make  most  day-to-day  decisions.  Our  final  authority  is  a
council of 100 Trios, all from the seventh, or highest level in 100 major areas
of  activity.  The  Mothers  determine  policy,  but  seldom  interfere  with  the
administration of our laws. Nevertheless  they  are the  shaping and guiding
force behind  our civilization,  and every  fifth stage Shemsi  is aware of this.
The Mothers do not contact anyone in the first four stages."
That seemed to Leo a very vague and uncertain way in which to oversee
a species of twelve billion beings, settled on seven  worlds in their own star
system  and  rapidly  expanding  to  others.  But  he  tried  to  remember  these
people were not human,  in  any  sense  of  the  term  except  sentience.  Their
system  worked.  And  he  would  undoubtedly  learn  more  about  it  in  the
months ahead.
CHAPTER FIVE
« ^ » 

Leo  gave  the  coordinates  he  had  memorized  for  Creche  World  to  the
computer, and asked for travel time. It was less than four days away at top
speed. The Shemsi were expanding outward from their home system in the
same  cautious fashion  in which they  seemed  to conduct all  their  activities.
Earthmen  had  probably  explored  most  of  the  star  systems  in  this  entire
section  of  the  Orion  arm;  now  there  was  talk  of  sending  an  expedition
toward the center of the galaxy, across the great gulf to the innermost arm of
Sagittarius.  After  that  would  come  the  center  itself.  And  all,  Leo  hoped,
within his life time.
Leo  settled  down  to  an  intensive  study  of  Shemsi  life,  culture,  and
language.  The  next  four  days  were  some  of  the  most  fascinating  in  his
experience.
The  Earth  scout  was  not  well  equipped  with  spare  parts,  but  Erith
managed to build the essential item needed to confirm  their story.  Leo  had
to wear a metallic collar around his throat,  the  standard captivity  device  of
the Shemsi. It was supposedly controlled by a small transmitter, also faked,
strapped to Erith's  harness.  A  captive  was  free  to  walk,  talk,  and  eat,  but
subject  to  immediate  strangulation  if  he  misbehaved.  As  usual  with  the
Shemsi, the true article was very efficient.
Creche  World  was  surrounded  by  a  series  of  twenty-four  automated
satellites, eighteen of them circling in synchronous orbit around the equator.
All  were  equipped  with  discreet  magnetic  field  generators.  Together  they
could  lay  a  pattern  around  the  planet  that  would  completely  disrupt  the
movement  of  electrons  through  any  conductor  in  the  field.  The  practical
effect on a spaceship  was the  immediate  explosion  of its power plant.  The
eighteen  synchronous  satellites  were  also  equipped  with  telescopes  and
lasers capable of pinpoint accuracy. They did double duty enforcing the ban
on  travel  backwards  between  stages.  The  Mothers  had  ordered  their
construction several thousand years back, when  the  Shemsi  first developed
the  technology.  They  had  seemed  to  know,  long  before  the  first  Shemsi
spacefarers confirmed it, that hostile species existed throughout the galaxy.
"Do  you  think  the  Mothers  let  the  scout  carrying  Misty  land  at  Birth
Mountain?" Leo asked Erith.

The  Shemsi  looked doubtful.  "I  do not think  so,  friend  Leo.  If  so,  they
would  have  already  returned.  It  is  far  more  likely  they  landed  at  the
spaceport and took transport similar to what we must use."
"That  seems  very  inefficient;  it  gives  me  the  impression  the  Mothers
must not be in any great hurry to get Misty. But tell me—why will this trip
we must undertake be so difficult?"
"The  physical  dangers  faced  by  two  people  will  be  formidable,  Leo.
Hungry  predators  abound,  and  the  environment  provides  many  natural
hazards.  The  running  bands  of  young  adults  in  Stage  3  are  vicious  and
hostile. Some will kill strangers  on sight.  The  gangs of juveniles  in Stage 2
will also kill, without provocation and without mercy. Stage 4 is usually safe.
The people there are students and teachers, having learned better means  of
overcoming  obstacles  than  unthinking  violence.  Stage  1  has  only  tiny
children, but our legends say it is heavily patrolled by guards."
To  Leo,  Creche World seemed  a weird and wonderful place, with some
ways  so  strange  as  to  defy  logical  analysis.  He  had  to  keep  reminding
himself these people were sexless humanoids who lived for 1,200 years, and
that what seemed to him  a development  so slow as to be  almost  ludicrous
was to them a normal pattern. But the fact their society functioned well was
obvious. They were Mankind's only known competitor in the starlanes.
With Leo  in the  pilot's seat,  but  supposedly  compelled  by  the  collar  to
obey Erith, they plotted a flight path that would bring  them  within hailing
distance of Creche World.
The Earth ship emerged from faster-than-light  drive and stopped within
minutes. It had barely ceased moving when it was challenged. Erith had the
communications set already turned to the Shemsi audiovisual band, waiting.
The bland pink face of a Ferilain appeared on the pilot's small screen. He
was looking slightly  to  the  side,  apparently  at  a  sensor.  Leo  saw  his  eyes
widen, and one hand moved out of sight. Evidently he had expected to see a
regular Shemsi  scout,  and  some  of  the  ground-based  instrumentation  had
identified it as "alien."
"Stranger, identify yourself!"

"This is Erith One Eight Zero One Two Six Four Three One Nine,"  Erith
answered smoothly.  "At  the  direction  of  the  Trio,  Beta  Crucis  Exploration
and Colonization Expedition,  I  have  returned with one  captured Earthman
and  one  Earth  scoutship,  Class  II.  Request  permission  to  land  and  an
immediate appointment with the Trio, Colonial Service Management."
The Shemsi on the ground was immediately and obviously  jarred into a
state of deep confusion. This was a totally unprecedented situation for him,
one outside both his training and his limited ability to improvise. To add to
his near-panic, Erith calmly added, "I walk to the voice of the Mothers."
The  latter was  the  formula  phrase  for  a  Shemsi  acting  on  direct  orders
from  his  Mother.  It  carried  tremendous  weight  at  all  levels  of  Shemsi
management.
The  Ferilain  started  to  say  something,  hesitated,  and  then  hit  his  "off"
switch. The  image on the  scoutship  screen  faded. Erith  turned  to  Leo  and
grinned. Erith had assured Leo he had changed a great deal, in just the  few
months  they  had been  together.  Now  the  Earthman  could  believe  it.  The
individual/social balance  that  leaned  so  heavily  toward  the  group  in  most
Shemsi had shifted perceptibly in Erith.
It  was only  a minute  before  the  screen  brightened  again.  This  time  the
hairless face was  that  of  a  Domidain.  "This  is  Domid  Nine  Two  Four  Six
Five Two Eight Seven Three One," the newcomer said authoritatively. "You
state  you  are  from  Beta  Crucis  and  have  a  captive  Earthman.  Is  he  the
companion  of  the  Earthling  captured  there  and  sent  to  Birth  Mountain
earlier?"
Evidently  the  arrival  of  Misty  had  created  quite  a  stir,  if  this  minor
spaceport official knew that much about  the  two humans.  "That  is correct,"
Erith replied. "The Mothers wish him to rejoin his mate."
The  official  was  looking  closely  at  the  collar  around  Leo's  neck.  "Very
well;  permission  to  land  is  granted.  I  will  attempt  to  reach  the  Colonial
Service Trio with your request."
The original Ferilain came back on and began giving landing directions, a
routine task with which he plainly felt more at ease. Leo made a mental note

in the file he  was keeping on the  Shemsi;  two could play at the  evaluation
game.  This  was another  confirmation  of what  he  had  decided  about  these
people:  they  functioned  very  poorly  when  confronted  with  an  original
problem. Only the Domidain seemed capable of making fast decisions.  Leo
made a second mental note: to observe the Shemsi decision-making process
where possible. Were the Domidains the real force behind the species, or did
the logic and rationality of the Erithains, and the social-consciousness of the
Ferilain, play equally important parts?
The computer took them down. Leo carefully monitored the instructions
and responses,  afraid the  language change  might  upset  the  little  ship.  But
the  Shemsi  tongue  was  in  the  computer's  memory  banks,  and  it  had  no
difficulty translating.
Creche World was a beautiful sight through the small forward viewpanel.
Most of the landmass below was covered with clouds but Leo could see vast
reaches of deep green ocean on both sides, stretching away to white-capped
poles of floating ice. A mountain range, worn down with age, dominated the
center strip of the long continent. The climate was temperate throughout the
lower lands that descended to the sea on both sides. Much of the surface Leo
could see was covered with forests;  probably,  knowing the  Shemsi,  of fruit
trees.  But  there  were  giant  cities  sprawled  like  concrete  hives  over  entire
mountains and a thin but noticeable haze in the air above them. This part of
the planet was both crowded and highly industrialized.
They  settled  slowly  toward  one  city  that  filled  an  immense  low-level
plateau in the center  of the  continent.  The  scene  grew increasingly  familiar
to Leo, and yet oddly different. The features he recognized were those seen
in  any  Earth  city;  huge  buildings,  manufacturing  plants,  excavations  in
nearby  mountains,  roads and bridges,  power plants and dams,  and  all  the
other artifacts of an advanced civilization.
But  there  were  also  noticeable  differences.  The  first  oddity  Leo
recognized was the lack of houses; the city was gigantic, a mammoth warren
of  low  blocky  buildings  with  flat  roofs,  but  there  were  no  dwellings  for
individuals surrounding them. Erith had informed Leo all Shemsi  had their
living quarters in the same buildings as their work stations.

The  second  unsettling  factor was more  subtle.  The  amount  of traffic  on
the roads and in the air was a tenth that of an Earth city of similar size.
That,  too,  was  undoubtedly  a  difference  between  human  and  Shemsi
civilizations;  one  caused  by  the  hive-oriented  lives  of  these  humanoids.
These people would travel less than humans, both at work and at play.
The  little  scout  cut  off  its  rockets  and  switched  on  its  anti-grav  field,
turning in  the  thickening  atmosphere  and  descending  on  its  belly.  Losing
direct sight of the city, Leo switched to his viewscreen.  After  a moment  he
saw the  flat concrete  field of the  spaceport,  a  huge  area  near  the  southern
edge of the city. A giant freighter was drifting slowly upward, while another
touched  down  as  he  watched.  Several  smaller  craft  were  in  motion,
including two of the unusually large scouts he had seen on Beta Crucis Two.
One  section  of  the  great  field,  apparently  older,  was  reserved  for  winged
flying craft.
"And  again  I  behold  Earingell,  the  Dwelling  Place,"  Erith  said  softly.
"Never did I think to see it again. Here I spent most of my adult life. Here I
thought myself content to live out my days. But the restlessness came again,
the old stirrings I had thought dead, and I had to move still farther along my
chosen track. So it is with most of us. Though some linger for centuries, like
myself, and others but a few years, most eventually move on. There are few
of us in space who do not think of Earingell as home."
"And  the  main  function  of  this  whole  huge  city  is  to  support  the
spaceport?"
"That  is  correct,  friend  Leo,  though  it  is  also  the  primary  source  of
finished metals  for all of Stage 5.  For  many  Shemsi  lifetimes  Earingell  has
built  and  supplied  the  ships  that  fly  the  blackness  between  the  stars,
carrying my  brethren  to other  worlds. One spaceport,  one  city,  is  enough.
Most  Shemsi  do  not  return.  Only  those  who  serve  aboard  the  carriers
bringing minerals from other worlds land here time and again."
"Did you  really want to leave?"  Leo  asked,  as  the  ground  drew  rapidly
closer. He was still adding an occasional command  for clarification, but  the
scout seemed to be having little trouble with Shemsi directions.

Erith hesitated before finally saying, "Both yes and no, Leo. I had grown
bored  with  my  assigned  tasks  as  a  chemist,  tired  of  what  had  become  a
monotony  to me.  And  yet  I  was  useful,  and  served  my  brethren  and  the
Mothers. If, as in the old days, Earingell was the end of the  journey,  then  I
might have resisted  the  vague  longing, lived out my  years  in service  here.
The colonization program offered an interesting alternative."
There  was  a  gentle  thump  as  the  flat  bottom  of  the  scout  touched
concrete, and the anti-grav generator whined down into silence.  The  pilot's
console was a solid bank of green lights. The atmospheric analysis indicated
almost  one  per  cent  argon,  an  unusually  heavy  concentration,  but  the
mixture  was  not  harmful  to  humans.  The  gravity  was  97  per  cent  Earth
normal, and Leo already knew the planet had a twenty-three-hour  rotation.
Except for the very different arrangement of the  landmasses,  Creche World
was remarkably similar to Earth.
"Place  your  systems  in  the  'quiet'  mode  as  soon  as  we  exit,"  Leo  said
aloud  to  the  ship.  "Do  not  respond  to  any  future  commands  except  from
Misty or myself."
The "acknowledged" light blinked green on the pilot's console. "It will not
matter,"  said  Erith.  "The  technicians  will  take  your  little  ship  apart  to  see
what they can learn, regardless of its unwillingness to respond."
"I  had  planned  to  steal  one  of  yours  to  leave  in  anyway,"  Leo  replied
cheerfully.
Erith nodded in comprehension.  That  was  obviously  the  most  sensible
plan. The fact that Leo  was chuckling aloud was an oddity he  passed  over
without attempting to understand.
There was no escort waiting when they disembarked, but a small ground
car came rapidly toward them from the blocky control center. When it came
to a stop, an Erithain emerged, hurrying toward them. Leo kept a pace back
of Erith, trying to look docile.
The  newcomer  was  almost  identical  to  Erith,  except  for  an  apparent
difference  in  age.  He  was  a  few  hundred  years  Erith's  junior.  The  two
Shemsi  clasped  hands,  four  at  once,  and  then  briefly  embraced.  "I,  Erith

Four  Two,  greet  a  brother  who  has  returned,"  the  younger  man  said,  his
tone very formal. "May the restlessness not again drive you from Earingell."
He was looking at Leo as he spoke, making no effort to conceal his curiosity.
Leo saw Erith suppress a grin. "I thank my brother," he  said, with equal
formality and a noticeable lack of conviction.  "Our Mother  called me,  else  I
should not have lived to see Earingell again. Is this the first Earth-man  you
have seen? A large and ugly brute, is he not?"
I'll put a fly in your fruit for that! Leo silently promised, lowering his head
as the second Erithain openly inspected him.
"No  larger  than  some  of  the  other  short-lived  reproductives,"  the
newcomer said, his tone judicious. "It is his resemblance to ourselves that is
startling."
As they  entered  the  small car,  Leo  was  forced  to  crouch  on  hands  and
knees in a rear compartment. Erith Four Two went on, "Your request for an
audience  with  the  Colonization  Trio  is  being  processed  now.  We  should
have an answer shortly." He slipped an audio communicator into his ear as
he  activated  the  drive,  and  headed  the  little  car  back  toward  the  control
center.  "Yes,  it has  just  come  through.  I  am  to conduct you  directly to  the
Trio, rather than to detention for the Earthman."
As  the  driver  abruptly  turned  and  headed  back  across  the  field,  Leo
made  himself  as  comfortable  as  possible  and  tried  to  observe  the  strange
architecture. There was no fence or other barrier at the  end of the  concrete,
and Erith Four Two simply looked for a convenient road and entered it.
The  streets  were  broad,  smooth,  and  in  perfect  repair.  The  blocky
buildings were clean and shining in the  morning  sunlight,  though  to Leo  it
was immediately obvious they were all alike. Traffic consisted of only three
types of vehicles, small personal cars identical to the one they were in, larger
buses carrying scores of Shemsi,  and huge bulk carriers. The  latter seemed
to be  of two types,  open  and covered.  The  traffic soon  became  as  visually
dull as the antiseptic and monotonous buildings.
It  was  two  hours  after  sunrise,  and  this  was  the  free  period  after  the
night's work for most Shemsi. After two more hours they would be seeking

the  open  rooftops,  or  the  identical  parks  located  at  regular  intervals
throughout  the  city,  for  their  sleep/feeding.  In  the  meantime  they  were
pursuing their leisure-time  activities.  As  Erith  had  described  them  to  Leo,
these  leisure activities  seemed  little different  from  their  work.  The  Shemsi
were not a fun-loving people.
The Colonial Service building was only a few blocks  from  the  spaceport.
They  parked  on  the  ground  floor,  which  was  reserved  for  vehicles.  A
Ferilain came hurrying toward them, glancing curiously at Leo.
"Is this car on reserve, brother?" the Ferilain asked of Erith Four Two.
Assured it was not, the  Shemsi  entered  it and drove  away.  The  concept
of private property had little importance here, Leo had learned. It would be
necessary to find another vehicle when they left, or take public transport.
A  steeply  sloping  ramp  with  a  rough-finish  surface  led  to  the  upper
floors; there  were no elevators.  The  Colonial Service  Trio  had  its  office  on
the sixth floor, and Leo was breathing hard by the  time  they  reached it. So
were the two Shemsi, but they seemed to accept this as normal.
The  governing  Trio  for  the  Shemsi  Colonization  Service  were  all
old—individuals  who  had  resisted  the  inner  urge  to  move  on.  The  vast
office complex  they  supervised  was deserted  at the  moment.  The  Trio  sat
behind a table at the  end of the  open  room  that covered  the  entire  floor of
the building. All three looked somewhat irritated at having been called from
their recreational pursuits.
The  Erithain  who  had  escorted  the  travellers  turned  and  departed
immediately.  The  old  Domidain  behind  the  table  scowled  at  Erith,  but  it
was  the  Erithain  who  spoke.  "Please  state  the  reason  for  this  emergency
meeting, Erith One Eight. What has our Mother asked of you?"
"That I conduct this captive to Birth  Mountain,"  Erith  answered at once.
"I request the use of air transport and a pilot to reach the  western  border.  I
am not qualified to fly light aircraft."
"That is twice within half a year the Mothers have called for trips to Birth
Mountain," the old Domidain said, with the most indignation Leo  had seen

a Shemsi  display.  "If  this  is  to  continue,  we  should  ask  that  the  guardian
satellites be modified so aircraft can be  used.  Why  must  the  Long  Walk in
reverse be undertaken every time?"
"Ask  the  Mothers,"  the  Ferilain  suggested,  with  what  to  Leo  seemed  a
trace of sarcastic humor.
"We  have  no choice but  to honor  the  request  of one  who  walks  for  the
Mothers,"  the  Erithain  said, glancing  at  his  colleagues.  "But  you  will  need
five well-armed brethren  to ensure  a safe journey.  And  there  is  no  reason
why you must leave at once. We would like to question this Earthman for a
day or so. There are many mysteries… Also, the biolabs would like samples
of his body tissues, particularly the spermatocyte and sperm cells."
Leo  saw  a  surprised  look  cross  Erith's  face.  But  he  only  said,  "As  the
management  Trio  wishes.  May  I  ask  if  you  also  obtained  haploid  and
diploid reproductive cells from the female Earthling?"
"We  did," the  Erithain  answered calmly.  "Some  of  the  past  prohibitions
on biological research are no longer valid. The Mothers have not directed us
to stop this line of inquiry, as in the old days."
"Possibly  because  we seem  to be  the  only  animals  on this  or  any  other
known  planet  without  reproductive  organs,"  the  Ferilain  added,  and  this
time there was no mistaking the sarcasm in his voice.
The  Domidain  looked uncomfortable.  "I  suggest  that  you  are  tired  and
should  rest,"  he  said  to  Erith.  "I  will  summon  a  guardian  to  escort  your
captive to the labs."
"No, my metabolism has become adjusted to Beta Crucis Two and this is
my work period," Erith said quickly. Leo knew this was not true;  Erith  had
learned to lie. "I will serve as your guard in the labs, and absorb by sunlamp
when my captive sleeps."
The Trio exchanged glances. The Domidain  shrugged,  then  turned back
to Erith. "As you wish. I will take you there myself."
Erith looked startled. He had obviously not expected this, but could think
of no graceful way to refuse.

The Trio rose to their feet,  and Leo  saw all were stooped and bent  with
age. As the other two disappeared, the Domidain came around the table and
led Leo and Erith back to the ramp.  It  was only  two blocks  to the  building
housing the experimental biology laboratory, and he chose to walk. Leo and
Erith followed him  through the  light crowd in the  streets,  where Leo  drew
many curious stares. Everyone seemed to realize  he  was an Earthman,  but
few  had  seen  one  in  person.  A  steady  buzz  of  comment  followed  them,
which the Domidain executive ignored.
The  laboratory  was not organized  in the  usual  Trio  fashion.  The  single
manager  was  an  Erithain,  and  so  were  at  least  half  the  workers.  Leo  had
been wondering at what point the Shemsi ideal of brotherly equality would
yield to the necessity of utilizing unequal competence.
The Erithain manager was easily distinguishable from all others Leo had
seen:  he  had  a  prominent  scar  on  his  left  cheek.  They  found  him  in  the
equivalent of a study  hall, poring over  reports of some  work performed  in
another  laboratory.  He  was  also  capable  of  more  expression  than  most
Shemsi. When he saw Leo, a look of joy animated his round face.
The elderly Domidain smiled slightly. "Yes, Erith Six Two Seven,  this  is
the  male  of  the  human  species.  Your  prayers  to  your  Mother  have  been
answered."
"But  this  captive  must  not be  harmed,  and we can linger here  no  more
than  two  days,"  Erith  said,  quickly  adding,  "I  walk  to  the  voice  of  the
Mothers!"
"So one would expect," the scientist said, his gaze shifting to his younger
brother. "We can finish in two days. Suitably safe quarters  are available  for
the  human,  and  the  food  some  of  our  other  specimens  eat  will  serve  his
needs. If you will turn your restraint transmitter over to me—"
Even a cursory examination would reveal the supposed transmitter to be
a fake.  But  Erith  was  equal  to  the  situation.  "I  cannot  in  good  conscience
release control of one to whose care our Mother has committed me," he said
after a short hesitation. "Therefore I have volunteered to serve as your guard
for this specimen."

The older Erithain looked surprised, but nodded. "Very well. Then follow
me, and we will confine him until the next work shift."
"Your  light aircraft  and  a  pilot  will  be  available  when  needed,"  the  old
Domidain assured Erith as they rose to leave.  They  separated on the  ramp
outside, Erith Six Two escorting Erith and Leo up the ramp to the next floor.
The  huge room  they  entered  was  rilled  with  animals,  most  of  them  lying
quietly in small cages. A few larger ones had more roomy quarters. Leo was
placed in a big cage equipped with a waste disposal and a type of bed.
Two  Shemsi,  a  Ferilain  and  an  Erithain,  were  working  desultorily  at  a
table in the center, where they could see every specimen in the open-fronted
cages.  Someone  was  always  on  duty  among  the  captive  animals.  Leo
watched Erith Six Two lead his companion over to the table and explain his
special guardianship. The two Shemsi,  apparently  underachievers  who had
been relegated to this menial chore, nodded and exchanged brief greetings.
Erith  left  briefly,  but  was  back  within  minutes.  He  made  himself
comfortable  on  a  portable  mattress  the  two  keepers  had  given  him.  Leo
noted with interest that its top was of simulated grass.
Erith  turned  on  two  wall-mounted  sunlamps  and  promptly  fell  asleep.
Leo was already on the  bed,  which was both  too hard for comfort  and too
short.  But  he  was  very  tired,  and  despite  the  bizarre  surroundings  and
occasional animal noises, he easily fell asleep. His last thought as he  drifted
off was a worried one. What did these  scientists  intend  to do to him  in the
course of their experiments?
CHAPTER SIX
« ^ » 
Leo  awoke when  the  cage  door  opened,  to  see  Erith  standing  to  one  side
with a finger poised prominently on the restraint collar transmitter. Perhaps
in deference to his size,  two animal keepers  entered  and escorted Leo  over
to  the  first  work  area.  Erith  Six  Two,  easily  distinguishable  from  a  large

crowd  of  look-alikes  by  his  facial  scar  and  air  of  authority—as  well  as  a
noticeable animation most Shemsi lacked—took personal charge of the tests.
And they were many and complex.
The  Shemsi  weighed Leo,  then  measured  his height,  length  of arm and
leg,  and  the  size  of  biceps,  triceps,  femoris,  and  hamstring  muscles.  Leo
cooperated freely by tensing and relaxing as directed. They  even  measured
the  length  of  his  hair,  though  they  obviously  knew  from  studying  other
hair-covered animals that this was in a continual state of growth.
Erith  Six  Two  was  only  beginning.  A  medical  technician  inserted  a
peculiar  needle  in  a  vein  in  Leo's  arm,  one  with  a  flow  control.  He  took
sample after sample of blood, into what seemed twenty different containers
with  separate  reagents.  Some  of  these  were  boiling,  fuming,  or  hissing  as
they  were carried away.  Another  Shemsi  took skin  samples,  some  of  only
the epidermis  but  several  of  the  dermis  as  well.  The  latter  bled  profusely
and had to be treated with thick pressure bandages. Leo could only hope the
antiseptic they used was not poisonous  to him—then  remembered  how he
had cleaned Erith's  wounds without knowing how the  Shemsi  metabolism
would react. But that had been under field conditions.  Here  they  were in a
modern and extremely well equipped laboratory.
It was also a noisy place during the work period. The  Shemsi  seemed  to
talk constantly, continually exchanging opinions with their fellows. Leo tried
to ignore what they were doing to his body in favor of observing his captors
in action. A few definite impressions began to filter through, several obvious
differences between these people and his own.
The  Shemsi  cooperated  better  than  humans.  Anything  of  interest,  any
discovery  or  conclusion  generated  by  the  on-going  examination,  was
immediately  shared with someone.  They  were intensely  fact-oriented,  and
each new bit of data was promptly  passed  along, until everyone  concerned
knew of it.
Occasionally,  an  accumulation  of  data  would  lead  one  of  the  milling
throng  to  a  conclusion,  which  he  immediately  tested  on  the  group.  Such
statements  increased  the  already  high  noise  level—obviously  conclusions
were the  desired objective  of the  continual chatter.  Most  such  propositions

stood  up  under  examination,  but  now  and  then  one  failed  the  test  of
thorough discussion. Leo saw one Erithain, whose original contribution was
rejected, fall silent and devote himself to obtaining more basic data. He was
in some form of disgrace—which surely meant he would be more certain of
himself before propounding something new again.
Over a period of several  hours a conclusion of his own formed  in  Leo's
mind. It was that none of the individuals in the large group working on him,
with  the  possible  exception  of  Erith  Six  Two,  was  very  intelligent.  They
spent  a  great  deal  of  time  chewing  over  the  obvious.  Conclusions  were
arrived  at  by  a  gradual  consensus  of  coalescing  opinion—a  slow  process,
which  a  competent  human  scientist  might  have  skipped  entirely.  A  good
earth  biologist  could  have  taken  three  of  the  bits  of  data  the  Shemsi
procured in such  quantity,  intuited  a  fourth—then  confirmed  or  refuted  it
with a quick check. These  people took the  three  items  and examined  them
endlessly,  until  the  fourth  bit  was  discovered  independently,  or  gradually
emerged from the interminable discussion.
There  were  at  least  forty  people  in  the  group  devoted  to  Leo,  and  he
would  have  sworn  one  good  Earth  scientist  and  two  lab  assistants  could
have  done  the  job  more  efficiently.  And  yet  their  system  worked.  At  the
end of the shift, when the sun rose outside and the Shemsi ended their long
night  of  labor—better  than  half  of  each  twenty-three-hour  Creche  World
day—they  had  completed  a  great  deal  of  work.  Leo  felt  certain  they  had
obtained  more  hard  data  than  creative  conclusions—but  similar  results
would gradually emerge when still more data was added later.
Leo had received a snack of fruit and nuts in the middle of the night, but
was  famished  by  daybreak.  He  demanded  meat  for  breakfast—and  after
another of the  windy conferences  between  Erith  Six  Two  and  his  helpers,
they produced some muscle tissue from a local herbivore they raised as food
for captive carnivores. All their tests indicated it was safe for Leo to eat.
To  his disgust,  Erith  was assigned the  task of cooking the  meat.  But  he
roasted it over  a  laboratory  burner,  as  he  had  seen  Leo  do  game  animals
over an open  fire, and served  up  something  that  tasted  like  the  wild  goat
Leo had eaten once in Asia. He disposed of it with relish. Several months of
eating anything he could shoot on Beta  Crucis Two  had inured him  to bad

tastes.
That  night  the  tests  and  sampling  resumed,  with  the  same  busy
inefficiency as before. Toward morning the scar-faced chief scientist spoke to
Erith,  and Leo  learned they  wanted  to  anesthetize  him  and  remove  some
spermatocyte  and sperm  cells.  The  Shemsi  did not possess  a suitable  local
anesthetic.  They  would have  to  put  Leo  completely  under  to  perform  the
minor surgery.
A  few  of  the  research  team  moved  into  a  smaller,  enclosed  operating
room.  With  misgivings,  Leo  allowed  the  medical  technicians  to  tape  his
mouth  closed  and  insert  two  tubes  into  his  nostrils,  the  Shemsi  way  of
administering anesthetic gas. Erith was standing by the table, watching him.
His expression was peaceful and unworried.
Leo relaxed. Over a period of several months together, he had learned to
trust Erith. His friend would see to it these talkative scientists did no more to
his unconscious body than had been agreed upon.
Which made it very disconcerting to awaken and find himself in a dimly
lighted rock-walled room, Erith breathing quietly beside him.
Leo  lay  still  for  a  moment,  only  his  eyes  moving  to  take  in  the
surroundings; then  he  sat erect.  He  and Erith  were resting side-by-side  on
two of the imitation-grass mattresses the Shemsi used everywhere. The only
light in the  small cell came  in  under  the  door,  which  he  could  see  was  of
heavy wood. They were apparently deep underground.
When  Leo  reached to shake  Erith  awake, he  saw  that  the  fake  restraint
control was gone from  the  Shemsi's  belt.  He  touched his own neck;  it was
bare.
Something was very wrong here. Leo grasped Erith by the shoulders and
shook him  vigorously.  It  took several  minutes  before  the  Shemsi  regained
full consciousness. And when he did, Erith was of little help.
The small humanoid sat on the edge of his mattress, a hand on his aching
bald  head.  "Friend  Leo,  I  do  not  know  what  happened,  or  how  we  came
here.  I  was  watching  Erith  Six  Two  close  up  the  small  incision  in  your

right—is not the word 'gonad'?—when I suddenly felt disoriented. Erith Six
Two believed that I had inadvertently breathed some of the  anesthetic  you
were  receiving,  and  suggested  I  lie  down  until  the  dizziness  passed.  I
remember  walking  back  to  my  mattress  in.  the  specimen  room—and
nothing more."
"Can you explain… this?" asked Leo, gesturing at the walls.
"We  are  almost  certainly  in  one  of  the  ancient  iron  ore  mines  that  lie
under  Earingell.  Some  have  been  unused  now  for  many  centuries.  The
important questions are how we came here, and why?"
As they sat and talked, Erith gradually recovered from whatever drug he
had received.  After  a time  his  head  stopped  hurting.  But  it  was  over  two
hours  later  before  they  heard  noises  outside  the  door,  and  it  abruptly
opened.
Erith Six Two stood there, smiling at them. A Domidain with a pistol Leo
recognized as a sonic stunner stood just behind him.
"Greetings,  mismatched  friends.  The  Council  of  the  Underground  has
gathered and  wishes  to  question  our  tall  captive  from  Earth.  Please  come
along, Erith One Eight. I believe they will also be interested in knowing why
you  escorted  this  human  here  with  an  unworkable  collar  and  a  useless
transmitter."
Erith opened his mouth to ask the flood of questions typical of a puzzled
Shemsi—and closed it without speaking.  Leo  observed  his friend's  reaction
with grim amusement. Erith was rapidly diverging from the Shemsi norm of
behavior.
The corridor they entered was obviously an abandoned mine shaft, with
heavy doors sealing off side tunnels and perhaps other cells. They followed
the scientist at a rapid pace,  the  guard with the  pistol bringing  up the  rear.
Erith  Six  Two  led  them  to  a  ramp,  for  what  seemed  several  floors.  They
emerged into another tunnel, which ended after a short distance at the door
of a fairly large, well-lighted room. Inside, a group of about  twenty  Shemsi
sat around a circular table, engaged in the usual chatter. They stopped when
Leo and Erith entered.

The faces were all strange to Leo. But he heard Erith take a sudden deep
breath, as though startled.
This group of Shemsi  ranged in age from  mature  to very  old. All had a
certain  air  of  dignity,  of  expectance  of  obedience,  that  subtly  spelled
"leadership." Leo had a feeling they would not need to constantly  exchange
information in order to reach a decision.
"I  see  you  recognize  some  members  of  the  Council  of  100  Trios,  Erith
One  Eight  Zero,"  Erith  Six  Two  Seven  said  aloud.  "Almost  a  third  of  the
council of 100  are also members  of the  Council of  the  Underground.  Now
please answer the questions put to you,  as completely  as possible.  And  do
not deviate from the facts. There is a drug in your blood, which will react to
a  deliberate  untruth  by  speeding  up  your  heartbeat.  A  monitor,  now
focused on you,  will register such  an increase.  I  will know the  instant  you
lie."
One  of  the  youngest  Shemsi  at  the  table,  a  Domidain,  immediately
demanded, "Start by telling us why your  restraint device  was a simulation,
Erith One Eight Zero. What is your real relationship to this human?"
"In  the  name  of  Erithain,  whom  I  serve,  I  will  tell  you  nothing,"  Erith
replied, his voice  steady.  "Instead  I  demand  to  know  how  this  'Council  of
the Underground' came to exist, and what is its purpose. Do you  dare defy
the Mothers?"
"You will speak, my brother, or you will die," their escort said, his voice
grave  and  quietly  certain.  "But  your  questions  are  fair  ones,  and  I  will
answer them. Yes, we dare defy the Mothers. That is the purpose for which
the council was organized. We intend to free ourselves of the domination of
those three females. We plan to construct a truly ordered and logical society,
one not subject to the constant changes that occur when a Mother sleeps and
loses influence.  Their  time  is over.  Birth  Mountain  is  an  anachronism,  the
deaths of the  young  around it a savage  and useless  custom  that  serves  no
purpose today. We intend to eliminate both."
"And from where are new Shemsi to come?" demanded Erith.
The  older  scientist  smiled.  "From  here,  brother,  here.  Above  us  is  a

nursery,  filled  with  growing  babies  who  are  being  carefully  and  lovingly
tended by  members  of our group. They  were hatched  from  artificial  eggs,
fertilized by  cells from  my  body  and those  of  the  other  council  members.
And brother, unlike at Birth Mountain where one in a million is sexed—half
these children have sexual organs. They are females!"
For once  Leo  saw Erith  almost  overwhelmed  with  surprise.  His  mouth
fell open, and for a few seconds he could only gasp for air.
The  older  Shemsi  waited,  smiling  slightly.  He  went  on,  "It  is  not  that
difficult, as we have discovered in my gene manipulation work. It is merely
necessary  to remove  the  unmatched  chromosome  from  a separate cell  and
pair  it  with  the  unmatched  one  in  the  cell  you  wish  to  germinate.  Such
chromosome pairs inevitably produce females.  And  it is our belief  that the
females  we  are  raising  will  produce  both  male  and  female  eggs,  without
further manipulation on our part. Those children should be Shemsi  such  as
you  and  I  have  never  seen,  brother—born  with  sexual  organs  and  germ
cells."
Leo was not a biologist, but  he  remembered  the  simpler  facts of human
reproduction  and  sexual  differentiation.  The  sperm  cells  from  a  man
contained either an X chromosome or a Y, and the Y was in reality a partial
fake; it carried a minimum of genetic information.  If  a sperm  containing an
X  chromosome,  fertilized  the  female's  eggs,  which  always  carried  the  X
chromosome, the  matching  pair produced a female  child. An  egg fertilized
by a sperm with a Y chromosome produced a male,  because  the  Y  exerted
no real sexual genetic effect, and the X chromosome from the female, acting
almost alone, produced a male.
The  "unmatched"  chromosome  to  which  Erith  Six  Two  Seven  referred
must be the equivalent of the sex-determining one in a human male, except
that instead of having a fake Y there was nothing at all present. Some insects
on  Earth  used  that  system.  These  people  had  apparently  succeeded  in
removing  one  chromosome  from  a  diploid  somatic  cell  and  had  forced  a
similar cell to accept it. How they turned what had been a somatic cell into a
germ  cell  was  not  explained,  but  that  should  be  a  simpler  task  then  the
original bonding of chromosomes.

Erith had finally recovered his composure. "Do the Mothers know of this
work? If not, how have you kept it from them?"
"I  will answer that one,  and then  you  will speak,"  the  young  Domidain
interrupted. "This entire area is sealed off from the Mothers by a device my
physics'  team  perfected.  It  creates  a  contained  field  into  which  their
telepathic minds cannot penetrate. Those  of us who must  leave  to perform
our duties in Earingell wear a small one on our persons. To the Mothers we
have ceased to exist."
"Are you certain of that?" demanded Erith.
The  Domidain  shrugged.  "Who  knows  the  full  powers  of  the  Mothers?
We have  been  organizing and  working  now  for  almost  twenty  years,  and
there has  been  no reaction  from  Birth  Mountain.  Only  if  someone  fails  to
wear  his  protector  and  a  Mother  happens  to  call  him,  or  someone
deliberately betrays us, will we be exposed. So far that has not happened."
"So you  say!"  Erith  spoke in a loud voice.  "You  cannot  be  sure they  do
not follow your every move!"
"The  Mothers  have  never  been  known  for  their  toleration  of
disobedience,"  a  rather  stout  Ferilain  joined  in.  "We  believe  they  would
strike at once should they discover us."
"We  will furnish  you  more  information  later, since  you  must  either  join
us of your own free will—or die,"  the  Domidain  said, cold and remorseless
certainty  in his  voice.  "Now  we  ask  again—what  is  your  true  relationship
with this human?"
Erith  looked  at  the  ceiling  as  though  for  guidance—and  found  it.  He
lowered his gaze  and said, "I  think  the  truth  will  not  be  a  betrayal  of  the
Mothers, since I act on Erithain's direct orders." And he briefly  outlined his
instructions to accompany  Leo  and aid him  in the  attempted  rescue  of  his
bonded mate.
The Underground Council listened, absorbed. At  the  end Leo  saw them
exchanging  worried glances.  A  middle-aged Erithain  with a misshapen  left
ear said aloud, "I  had not dreamed  the  Mothers  were this  interested  in the

Earth people. What can be their purpose?"
"Perhaps  they  intend  to  establish  better  relations,  as  do  we,"  another
Domidain suggested.
"While  your  Mother  sleeps,  perhaps,"  Erithain  Six  Two  Seven  said.
"When  she  awakes and  Ferilain  takes  to  the  birthing  bed,  all  may  change
again."
The  Domidain  looked  annoyed.  This  group,  Leo  realized,  showed  far
more  individualism  than  the  Shemsi  he  had  seen  so  far.  Perhaps  true
individuals tended to rise to positions of command in Shemsi society.
"I am not responsible for the actions of Domidain!"  the  young  Councilor
declared angrily.
"None  of  us  are  responsible  for  our  Mothers,"  the  fat  Ferilain  quickly
interjected. "But we will all be held to account if they learn of us before  we
are strong enough  to attack Birth  Mountain.  Let  us not bruise  each others'
feelings,  my  brothers.  We  walk  a  dangerous  path,  one  neither  of  the  East
nor the  West.  To  step  off  it  is  to  die.  Let  us  reaffirm  our  support  for  one
another. I call for the circle!"
All the Shemsi seated at the table quickly clasped hands to form a circle.
Both Erith Six Two Seven and the Domidain guard who had escorted them
hurried to join it. The  Ferilain led them  in a short  chant,  which apparently
reaffirmed  their  commitment  to  the  cause  and  the  brotherhood  they  had
formed—without reference to the Mothers, obviously.
Leo  waited; this  did not seem  a good time  to attempt  an  escape.  When
the  "togetherness"  ceremony  was  over,  the  Domidain  guard  escorted  him
and Erith back to their cell.
Leo placed his mouth against Erith's pink ear and whispered, "Is this cell
likely to be monitored by hidden—ah, audio or visual devices?"
Erith looked casually around the  cell, and spoke in a normal  tone.  "No,
friend  Leo;  if  here  they  would  be  in  the  open.  Why  should  they  be
concealed?"

Leo  did not attempt  to  explain  the  psychological  differences  between  a
species  whose  members  shared  almost  every  waking  thought,  and  one
where  individuals  were  accustomed  to  privacy  and  secrecy.  There  were
many  advantages  in  knowing  what  an  opponent  thought,  even  if  he  was
your  captive.  Instead  he  said,  "Then  speak  low,  and  let's  have  a  fast
conference. Do you intend to join these people?"
Erith  shook  his  head.  "I  have  been  loyal  to  the  Mothers  too  long  to
change now,  Leo.  Even  if I  were so inclined,  I  do not  believe  these  rebels
can  succeed.  The  Mothers  must  know  what  the  Underground  Council  is
doing and are letting it continue  for reasons  only  they  know. Remember,  I
would  not  have  known  why  they  wished  me  to  aid  you,  had  they  not
explained to convince you of their sincerity."
"That thought occurred to me also," admitted Leo.  "And  I  heard that bit
about some of your biologists now being  engaged in heredity  research  that
was formerly forbidden. The work being performed here in secret seems an
extension of that done openly. I would suspect a connection."
Erith  frowned,  then  smiled.  "Friend  Leo,  your  ability  to  reach  a
conclusion even when half the needed data is missing  continually  surprises
me.  Of  course  there  is  a  connection!  For  reasons  not  known  to  us,  the
Mothers  have  chosen  to  let  this  underground  work  continue,  but  do  not
want it generally distributed. Therefore they permit these people to work in
secrecy."
"Which  answers  a  question  with  a  question.  Why  should  the  new
discoveries being made here be suppressed?"
"I do not know, but more data will doubtless supply  that answer.  In  the
meantime, our course is clear. We must escape and resume our journey."
"Agreed," said Leo, who had never had any other intention. He had been
playing a part in the lab cage, but this confinement was real, and he disliked
it  intensely.  Besides,  if  the  Shemsi  chose  to  fight  among  themselves,  that
was  strictly  their  business.  His  mission  was  to  reach  Birth  Mountain  and
free Misty. After that he would worry about stealing a scoutship and getting
home.

Leo  had  already  examined  the  interior  of  the  cell.  The  bare  rock  walls
offered no hope at all, and the  door was extremely  sturdy.  Physical  escape
seemed  impossible.  Therefore  they  had to trick or  deceive  their  captors  in
some way.
There  was  a  noise  in  the  hallway,  and  the  door  abruptly  opened..  A
Ferilain  entered,  carrying  a  large  bowl  of  fruit  and  nuts  in  one  hand;  the
other hand held a battery-powered sunlamp. Behind him an Erithain guard
stood halfway across the corridor, sonic stun gun ready.
Anyone attempting to reach the  guard would not get two steps  into the
corridor. The one who entered was unarmed. He placed the lamp and food
on a little table  at the  end of  the  two  mattresses  and  turned  to  go.  It  was
perfectly clear that grabbing the inside man, or attempting to rush the guard
outside, would be totally useless.
That  meant  no  Shemsi  would  do  either.  Logic  was  the  dominant
characteristic  in  their  behavior  patterns;  attempting  the  useless  was  not
logical.
And that gave Leo an idea.
It  was too late to execute  it now.  The  Ferilain  left  and  closed  the  door.
Leo listened and heard other  doors opening  and closing in the  corridor. So
they were not the only prisoners. But he could be certain all the others were
Shemsi, and behaved like it.
Perhaps the  best  countermeasure  against logic and rationality was to be
illogical and irrational.
When  Leo  told Erith  what he  intended  to try  at the  next  meal  time,  he
saw his companion's eyes widen.
"But that will not work, Leo. What you are suggesting is exactly what the
guard is designed to prevent."
"Correct. And it's so obvious it can't be done that no Shemsi would even
try. So I will."
Erith  shook  his  round  head  in  disbelief.  "Very  well,  but  you  will  only

cause us to be stunned. And your head will ache for the next two days."
"Perhaps. Well see."
They ate and slept for a time, ate the  remainder  of the  food, and waited
for  the  next  meal.  There  was  little  to  do  but  talk,  and  from  the  human
viewpoint, Erith was not a good conversationalist. Leo tried to remain on the
alert,  but  he  was  almost  caught  napping  when  the  sound  of  someone
releasing the outside bolts finally came again. According to his wrister it was
just after daybreak; this would be the last meal of the day.
Springing to his feet, Leo managed to be standing close to the door when
it opened. A different Ferilain entered with their food—and to Leo's delight,
another Ferilain stood behind him in the corridor, holding the stun gun.
As soon as the bearer passed him, Leo took a step almost into his tracks,
turned to face the  open  door, bellowed "Hü!  Yaa!" at the  top  of  his  lungs,
and charged.
Leo  saw  the  almost  physical  shock  on  the  guard's  face,  just  before  he
caught the  barrel of the  gun and twisted it aside.  The  Shemsi  was  literally
frozen in his tracks with surprise.  For  a precious two seconds  he  had been
unable  to  believe  an  intelligent  being  would  scream  like  an  animal  and
actually charge a ready weapon. That was time enough for Leo.
The  stun  gun  fired  harmlessly  into  the  ceiling.  Leo  smashed  into  the
Ferilain with his left shoulder.  He  lifted  and  hurled  the  smaller  humanoid
hard  against  the  opposite  wall;  the  pistol  came  free  in  his  hand.  As  the
Shemsi  bounced  off,  Leo  stepped  back  and caught him  with a  hard  left  to
the  head.  The  pink  form  went  down,  conscious  but  groggy.  Leo  turned
quickly and managed to stop the  Ferilain in the  cell door with another  left.
His  larger  size  and  weight  made  him  a  formidable  opponent  for  a  single
Shemsi.
Leo  shifted  his grip on the  pistol  from  barrel  to  butt.  He  turned  again,
and shot the Ferilain who was rising from the corridor floor, blood dripping
from a split  cheek.  He  swung  back  to  the  one  he  had  knocked  inside  the
open cell door and shot him also, though he appeared to be unconscious. He
wanted to be certain the two Shemsi would remain out for a time. Erith, still

standing inside the cell, stared at Leo wide-eyed. "I would not have believed
it could be done," he said, shaking his head in wonder.
"I'll  bet  a  lot  of  the  animals  in  your  zoos  get  away,"  Leo  answered,
between deep breaths.  His  heart was racing, a heady  feeling of excitement
making him  feel fully alive again after the  dullness of captivity.  Down  the
corridor, they  heard  the  muffled  sounds  of  people  speaking  to  each  other
behind thick cell doors.
"More often escaping animals are killed," said Erith. "But  you  are correct
in  assuming  most  attempt  to  return  to  the  wild.  Few  seem  able  to
understand they are far more safe and comfortable under our care."
Leo  was  debating  the  idea  of  freeing  the  other  captives  as  a  diversion
while they sought the exit. A quick examination of the nearest door revealed
that it locked with a key,  too stout  to be  easily  battered  open.  The  guards'
key fit only their own cell door.
Since they  were  deep  underground,  and  the  Shemsi  did  not  believe  in
elevators, there was probably a ramp at both ends of the long corridor. Leo
mentally tossed a coin and turned left. The lights in the roof were far apart,
but he could see what appeared to be a rock wall a hundred meters away.
As they approached an intersecting tunnel on the right, Leo motioned for
Erith to precede him. The Shemsi gave him a blank look.
"Walk across normally," Leo said in a low voice. "Look down the corridor
for a ramp. See if there are any guards visible."
Erith finally realized that one glimpse of Leo  would cause instant  alarm,
and nodded. He walked casually across the open space, looked to the  right,
and kept going. On the  opposite side he  whirled around and motioned  for
Leo to wait.
After  two  minutes  Erith  walked  back  to  Leo,  again  glancing  down  the
corridor. This time he stopped in the  intersection.  "Two  people were at the
other end, but they are gone," he said aloud. "I think there  is a ramp there.
But it would likely go by several inner rooms above us. If there is one at the
end of the longer tunnel it would receive less traffic."

Leo nodded, and they hurried on down the corridor. The ramp was at the
end, where Shemsi  logic required it, and they  walked  quickly  up  the  long
slant. Before turning each corner, Erith stepped around it and made  certain
the  way  was  clear.  Once  they  had  to  hide  in  a  former  tool  room  while  a
small  descending  party  passed  them,  but  Erith  had  spotted  the  group  in
plenty of time.
They  emerged  onto  the  ground  floor  of  what  had  once  been  a  huge
smelter.  A  great  deal  of  rusty  machinery  filled  the  abandoned  building,
most of it obviously of great age.
"As  I  expected,"  said Erith.  "We  are in the  oldest part of Earingell.  This
mine  was  abandoned  after  the  last  ore  was  extracted,  over  four  thousand
years ago."
Leo was not surprised to see  the  smelter  located directly over  the  mine;
that seemed a natural choice for the Shemsi. But he asked, "Why was all the
old machinery left here? In fact, why leave a useless old building standing in
the heart of your city?"
"The equipment was completely outdated, Leo. And why use energy and
resources to tear down a building?"
Leo realized he had been thinking in human terms again, where property
rights  and  commercial  considerations  would  have  been  important.  That
whole  pattern  of  thought  was  alien  to  the  Shemsi.  And  though  they  did
possess  a  sense  of  aesthetics,  what  would  have  offended  humans  meant
little  to  them.  When  there  was  no  logical  reason  to  remove  it,  an  ugly
eyesore of a building in the heart of a vast city was perfectly acceptable.
"I believe it will be safe for you to wait here while I seek a restraint collar
and  a  transmitter,  Leo,"  said  Erith.  "If  the  Underground  Council  sends
guards after us you have plenty of places to hide."
"I'll manage," Leo replied. They had discussed their best course of action
while waiting in the  cell. "But  come  back  in that door—" he  pointed to the
nearest one, "—and pat yourself on top of the head three times as you walk
in."

Erith looked baffled, but nodded. Leo did not explain that he intended to
shoot, very quickly, any Shemsi who walked in unidentified.
CHAPTER SEVEN
« ^ » 
Nothing at all happened during the two hours Erith was gone. Leo  found a
good  hiding  place  where  he  could  watch  the  door  and  waited  patiently.
When Erith finally returned he was carrying a small bag. Looking as stupid
as  he  probably  felt,  the  Shemsi  lowered  it  to  the  floor  immediately  and
patted himself three times on his bald pink head.
The bag contained a collar—this time  the  real article—and a transmitter.
It  also  held  several  pounds  of  some  delicious  nuts.  And  to  Leo's
amazement,  his  faithful  projectile  gun,  still  fully  loaded,  was  inside.  Erith
had been  carrying it in one  of his body  harness  cases  when  he  passed  out
while  watching  Erith  Six  Two  operate  on  Leo.  It  had  been  taken  to  the
nearest central storage area, which was where Erith had gone in search  of a
collar and transmitter. Leo happily reclaimed it.
While  Leo  hungrily  ate,  Erith  opened  the  transmitter  and  carefully
rendered it inoperative.
Leo  and  Erith  had  decided  that  at  least  two  of  the  Colonial  Service
Management  Trio  were  probably  members  of  the  Underground  Council.
Asking the  old Domidain  for the  light  aircraft  he  had  promised  them  was
out  of  the  question.  But  Erith  felt  certain  the  Trio  would  have  followed
through on the authorization, since it had been  made  in front of witnesses.
Therefore a plane was probably ready for them, if they could reach it.
"Don't you  need  some  authorizing  paperwork to show the  pilot?" asked
Leo, curious.
"We  do  not  often  use  such  paperwork,  Leo.  What  real  purpose  does  it
serve?"

"For you, not much," Leo had to admit. In  a society  without greed,  little
private  ambition,  and  no  accumulation  of  personal  wealth,  many  of  the
common  safeguards  originated  by  human  society  were  not  needed.  This
meant  any  Shemsi  who  learned  to  lie  convincingly  had  a  tremendous
advantage over his fellows, but  the  incidence of such  lying  was apparently
very low.
"I will claim a personal car from the nearest building and return here  for
you," Erith suggested. "You will be much too conspicuous walking."
Leo  agreed, and Erith  again left.  The  short  personal free  time  a  Shemsi
enjoyed  between  the  end  of  the  night's  work  and  the  start  of  his
sleep/feeding period was nearing its end. Erith had no trouble locating a car
and was back  within a half hour.  He  parked  as  near  the  door  as  he  could
approach, and Leo walked quickly to it and lay down on the narrow seat in
the rear.
As the traffic around them rapidly thinned down to almost nothing, Erith
drove  at  a  measured  pace  between  the  monotonous  rows  of  too-similar
buildings.  By  the  time  they  reached  the  turn  to  the  spaceport  control
building, they were alone.
Only a few Shemsi throughout all of Earingell were awake, most of these
operating the powerplants, water systems, and other necessary services. The
spaceport  was  an  exception.  Traffic  there  was  continuous,  due  to  the
different sleep cycles of the billions of Shemsi on other worlds.
Leo tried to look properly subdued and walked quietly just behind Erith.
By  asking  directions,  Erith  found  his  way  through  a  maze  of  featureless
corridors  to  the  right  office,  that  of  Personal  Emergency  transport.  The
young Ferilain in charge, a Shemsi of unusually strong personality,  listened
with grave attention as Erith asked for the authorized plane and pilot.
"Why  must  you  go now?" The  Ferilain protested.  "The  Colonial  Service
Trio did not say you would be flying during the local feeding period."
Erith explained  that he  and  his  captive  were  on  a  different  sleep  cycle.
When the official did not look impressed, he finally said. "I walk to the voice
of the Mothers!"

"Yes, so I have heard,"  the  Ferilain replied, showing a noticeable  lack of
respect for the tradition. "But I do not understand how you can attempt such
a hazardous journey alone. Very well, I will attempt to locate a pilot. And I
am  thinking  of  reporting  this  lack  of  consideration  on  your  part  to  the
Management Trio."
Such reports of antisocial conduct were a major  technique  by  which the
Shemsi  society  conditioned  every  individual  to  his  role.  If  enough  such
reports  were  received  within  a  given  period  of  time,  the  individual  was
called before his work group and given a public reprimand. This was a form
of extreme disgrace, a censure  so severe  the  individual would remember  it
for a hundred years.
"I  have  already  been  delayed  two  days  by  unplanned  tests  of  the
human," Erith replied, somewhat testily. "Report me if you wish. I recognize
no higher authority than the Mothers."
The Ferilain gave Erith a disgusted look and left to hunt a pilot.
He was back within minutes. Leo had been afraid this thoughtful Ferilain
might check with the  old Domidain  who  had  made  the  authorization,  but
Erith assured him that would be most unusual.
"I have arranged a place for you on a shipment of cargo to Arthingo," the
Ferilain  said  without  preamble.  "I  see  no  reason  why  you  must  have  a
private plane."
"That is perfectly acceptable," Erith replied quickly.
During  a  moment  of  privacy  as  they  were  being  shown  to  the  plane,
Erith explained  to Leo  that Arthingo  was almost  on the  western  border  of
Stage 5. From there they could take ground transportation to the clear zone.
The winged cargo plane was a bulky, boxlike craft powered by two huge
ramjet engines mounted outside the central body. They operated by heating
incoming air in a small reactor and expelling it to the  rear. The  system  was
pollution-free, and the craft could fly for months on a single reactor charge.
Leo  felt  his  respect  for  the  Shemsi  rise.  Earth  could  have  built  such
airplanes,  but  they  would  not  have  been  commercially  competitive  with

hydrogen-fueled craft.
The plane had a crew of three, two Domidains and a Ferilain. There was
no separate pilot's compartment, the entire inside being one large open area.
Erith managed to find seats for himself and Leo away from  the  crew. They
were  at  a  window  near  the  rear,  where  they  could  see  the  countryside
below.
The cargo was a series of boxes containing a rare and very heavy mineral
from  one  of  this  system's  other  worlds.  Normally  it  would  have  been
delivered by the Shemsi trucks, but some factory in Arthingo needed it in a
hurry.
The heavily loaded craft's takeoff was slow, but they cleared the runway
easily enough. Leo looked out the window as they flew almost directly west,
gradually  gaining  altitude.  The  monotonous  buildings  of  Earingell  soon
faded behind them, to be  replaced by  other  cities,  equalljraull.  The  Shemsi
lived  in  communities  of  varying  sizes,  but  most  were  large.  The  land
between  them  was  usually  occupied  by  carefully  tended  fruit  trees.  The
only other major agricultural industry was raising fiber crops, for which the
Shemsi had a wide variety of uses.
Erith  explained  that  the  lower  lands  sloping  down  to  the  seas  were
intensely cultivated, the soil there being very rich. The cities in the lowlands
were  generally  small.  The  main  commerce  was  fiber  and  fruit  from  the
lowlands  to  the  great  cities  along  the  continental  backbone,  and
manufactured  goods  flowing  out  in  all  directions.  Each  major  city  had  a
manufacturing specialty, and supplied its products to all other cities in Stage
5.  Due  to  its  location  over  immense  iron  ore  deposits,  Earingell  produced
virtually all steel for the entire planet. In latter years it had also become  the
center of spaceflight activities.
"Friend  Leo,  I  am  very  tired  and  need  to  feed,"  Erith  went  on.  "I  am
going to turn this transmitter over to one of the crew. Do not take any action
that could cause him to use it."
"I promise," Leo said, his voice dry.
Erith walked to the front, talked briefly with the Ferilain, and turned the

control transmitter over to him. Then he strapped himself into a bunk  built
against one wall and turned on the overhead sun lamps. In seconds he  was
fast asleep.
The  Ferilain glanced at Leo  at frequent  intervals,  but  said  nothing.  Leo
went  back  to  watching  the  countryside.  After  a  few  minutes  he  became
sleepy himself and leaned back in the chair.
Leo  awoke stiff  and  aching,  but  refreshed.  He  was  hungry,  but  waited
until Erith awoke and returned to sit by him before asking for food. All that
was available was some fresh fruit, and the remainder of the nuts Erith had
brought to him earlier. Leo ate it all, and still felt hungry.
The  long  trip  finally  neared  its  end.  They  had  covered  close  to  10,000
kilometers in under ten hours.  Toward  the  last they  were moving  south  to
the edge of the great plain leading down to the sea. Arthingo was located in
the  foothills.  For  the  trip  through  Stages  4  and  3  they  would  use  riding
animals—and they could make much better  time  on flat land than  through
the mountains.
Erith had been silent for some time. Leo saw his troubled look and asked
what was bothering him.
"Friend  Leo,  the  Underground  Council  must  know  we  have  escaped
them,  and  where  we  are.  We  are  an  unacceptable  danger  to  them.  I  find
myself  wondering  when  they  will  attempt  to  eliminate  us.  If  I  have
interpreted the information we received correctly, most if not all members of
the  conspiracy  live  in  Earingell.  Anywhere  out  of  that  city  they  must  act
very  carefully,  or expose  themselves.  It  seems  logical  to  assume  they  will
make no effort to intercept  us  in  Stage  5—but  thereafter  we  can  be  easily
disposed of. I believe we will be in great danger from the moment we enter
Stage 4."
"Then perhaps we should travel at night," suggested Leo.
"That is my thought also. Let us find mounts  as quickly  as possible  and
be on our way.  I  would like to cross the  clear zone  into Stage 4  before  the
sun rises again."

The sun was setting as they landed. Arthingo was a relatively small city;
its specialty  was the  supplying  of fertilizer for the  endless  hectares  of fiber
plants  that  covered  the  vast  plain  it  overlooked.  Leo  had  noticed  the
immense  green  carpet  below  as  they  approached  the  airport.  The  most
striking oddity to him  was the  lack of separation into fields; there  were no
fences  or  other  barriers  to  be  seen.  At  this  time  of  year  the  plants  were
almost fully grown, and their rounded green  shapes  spread across the  land
like a living sea. In a sense, the  order and control were beautiful.  No  scars,
dead  spots,  or  bare  hilltops  marred  the  landscape.  But  such  all-out
productivity could also become visually monotonous in a short time.
As  the  efficient  but  ugly  aircraft  stopped  rolling,  Leo  reflected  that  the
fiber  plants  symbolized  his  impression  of  the  Shemsi.  They  were
homogenous,  productive,  dull  and  uninspiring.  No  individual  shoot
received much attention, but the crop as a whole was well-cared-for. While
not  efficient  as  individuals,  the  Shemsi  functioned  very  effectively  as  a
society.  But  he  would  not  want  to  be  a  member  of  this  faceless,  sexless,
monotonous horde even for the twelve-hundred-year lifetime they enjoyed!
Leo felt a secret tug of sympathy for the Underground Council. Somehow
they had sensed their lives were incomplete, would always remain less than
genuinely  fulfilled.  But  Leo  also  wondered,  if  their  biological  experiments
succeeded  and  they  actually  produced  a  two-sexed  species,  if  this  would
affect their longevity. Was there a tie-in between their lack of sexual  organs
and  the  extended  life  span?  If  not,  if  the  new  sexual  beings  they  were
creating lived as long as the sexless workers, could humans learn something
about life prolongation by studying the Shemsi? It was an interesting line of
thought.
But for the moment the underground was after Leo and Erith, with their
deaths or a return to captivity in mind. Until  they  reached Birth  Mountain,
their best chance of success lay in allegiance to the Mothers. After that—
Without a word to Erith, the flight crew headed for temporary quarters in
.the small airport control building. They would be sleep/feeding while most
of  the  town  began  the  night's  work.  Erith  was  on  his  own;  they  had  no
further interest in him or his captive.

Erith  found  an  unoccupied  personal  car  sitting  in  front  of  the  control
building and promptly  claimed it. From  the  flight crew he  had learned the
location of an experimental  breeding  farm  only  a  few  kilometers  from  the
clear zone. It was at the end of the only road leading west out of Arthingo.
He intended to claim two riding mounts in the name of the Mothers and get
as far into Stage 4 as possible before dawn.
If  Erith's  analysis  of  the  underground  group's  course  of  action  was
correct, they  had nothing  to fear until they  crossed into the  clear zone.  To
Leo, it seemed obvious that the 200-meter wide-open space was an excellent
place for an ambush.
At the farm Erith encountered his first real argument, a claim by the Trio
in  charge  that  they  needed  all  their  riding  animals.  Erith  finally  had  to
invoke the sacred name of the Mothers. These people had not heard of the
capture  of  either  the  female  Earthling  or  her  bonded  mate.  Evidently  the
party bringing Misty to the Mothers had taken another route.
Leo stood quietly behind Erith while the argument went on, and studied
the mounts they were trying to claim. They  looked surprisingly like horses
from Earth,  except  for being  wider in body  and thicker in leg. These  were
the  primary  transport  of  Shemsi  who  worked  the  fields;  there  were  no
provisions for wheeled vehicles except those that tilled the land or gathered
in the crops.
When  Erith  finally  got  his  way,  the  local  Trio  grudgingly  ordered  two
mounts to be prepared for them. Leo  had never  ridden on a live animal in
his life. He stared with something like horror as two Ferilains attached a flat
seat by  straps that went around the  beast's  neck  and  both  front  legs.  The
rider sat directly above the massive  front shoulders,  his lower legs encased
in  two  long  holsters  that  reached  to  the  knees.  The  seating  looked
secure—but  if the  animal fell,  it  would  take  precious  seconds  to  pull  both
legs free and jump.
Almost an hour after arriving at the farm, Leo and Erith rode off into the
night. In addition to the mounts, Erith had talked the  station  managers  out
of  two  canteens.  Two  of  Creche  World's  four  moons  brightened  the  sky
above them,  enough  so even  Leo  could see  fairly well. It  was less  than  an

hour's ride to the clear zone.
The  moment  they  were  out  of  sight  of  the  farm,  Leo  turned  sharply
north.
"Where  are  you  going?"  called  Erith,  turning  and  hurrying  after  Leo.
"This route will take longer and the ground is rougher!"
Leo  nodded.  "Exactly  what I  had  in  mind.  The  hills  will  give  us  cover
from aircraft surveillance. And the last place I want to cross the clear zone is
directly ahead of that farm. Don't you realize the underground probably has
a crew armed with sonic rifles waiting right across the border?"
Erith  looked  puzzled.  "How  could  a  crew  have  gotten  here  faster  than
ourselves, Leo?"
"By  the  Shemsi  scoutship  that's  probably  hovering  just  out  of  the
atmosphere  above  our heads  right now.  Don't  you  have  small  landers  for
two or three people?"
Erith nodded, gripping the reins of his mount loosely with one hand and
guiding it with slight pulls to the side.
Instead  of a bit  in  the  mouth  the  head  harness  controlled  the  beast  by
administering slight shocks from  batteries  and contact points  near the  ears.
A hard pull on both  reins  would send  it  to  its  knees,  almost  unconscious.
The animal had no chance at all to resist—the  usual Shemsi  efficiency,  and
disregard for other life.
"The first moon will be down shortly," said Leo, pointing. "The light level
will then fall enough that I doubt we can be  seen  from  space.  According to
what you've told me they had to drop down on this  side of the  clear zone,
and the  scouts  can't  go any  farther than  the  edge.  Even  if they  have  us  in
sight now, we should be able to lose them shortly. Our best hope is that the
ship won't dare use its radio to notify the lander that we've shifted north."
Erith ruefully shook his head. "Now that you have outlined the situation,
Leo, I can see the logic of it. A twisted and unhealthy chain of reasoning, but
believable.  If  the  scout can see  us now,  you  should not  have  changed  our
course until the moon vanishes. Since they will not dare use their radio, their

best course of action would be for the scout to descend on the anti-gravs and
attempt to eliminate us with its own weapons as we cross the zone."
That  thought  hadn't  occurred  to  Leo.  He  promptly  turned  his  mount's
head  back  in  a  straight  line  toward  the  clear  zone  and  slowed  their  pace.
Hopefully,  their  unseen  watchers—if  they  existed—would  think  they  had
detoured around some barrier.
It  was  almost  an  hour  before  the  first  moon  finally  faded  below  the
horizon. The riders were only a few hundred meters from their destination.
Leo turned due north the moment the light decreased. They rode parallel
with the bare soil of the clear zone for several kilometers, picking their way
through rounded old hills, often planted with fruit trees but frequently bare
or  covered  by  grass.  The  land  had  become  noticeably  more  barren  and
rocky; the elevation increased at a steady rate. This close to the end of Stage
5, on poor and unproductive land, the Shemsi desire to make every hectare
produce seemed to have lost its force.
They  rode  into  the  shadow  of  the  first  hill  that  verged  on  being  a
mountain, into a darkness so deep Leo  had to surrender the  lead to Erith's
better  night vision.  There  they  turned  west,  heading  directly  for  the  clear
zone.
The  horses—and  the  term  was  close  enough  that  Leo  decided  to  use
it—did not have Erith's night vision. Slowly and carefully they  picked their
way. Erith did not attempt to force the  pace.  After  a few minutes  the  third
moon edged over the top of a rise to their right, and again they  had a dim
light. The mounts moved a trifle faster.
They reached the clear zone  with a surprising abruptness.  One moment
they were clattering down a steep  slope toward level  ground, and the  next
they had entered a deadness, completely unrelieved  by  greenery  or shades
of color. No life, not even a single blade of grass, was permitted here.
There  seemed  little point in crossing slowly;  they  were  fully  exposed  if
anyone  waited  on  the  opposite  side.  Leo  pulled  slightly  on  the  reins  and
forced his mount into a trot. Erith followed.

They  crossed  the  200  kilometers  without  incident  and  rode  into  the
shadows of some low trees on the opposite side.
Leo  did not speak until they  were a hundred meters  inside Stage 4.  He
reined up to look back at Erith, who also stopped.  The  Shemsi  was smiling
in relief. The  tension  had been  high  as  they  crossed  the  open  space,  easy
targets in the fair light.
A faint whining sound caught Leo's ear. He held up a warning hand for
silence,  then  led  Erith  behind  a  rock  outcropping.  They  dismounted  and
crept to its top, only their heads visible above the edge.
The whining grew louder, and Leo recognized the sound of an anti-grav
generator. He looked to the  south.  A  dark shape  more  solid than  the  night
obscured  the  stars,  drifting  along  just  inside  Stage  5  at  a  hundred  meters
altitude. There were no lights visible.
Leo  and Erith  waited, scarcely  breathing,  until the  Shemsi  scout moved
out  of  sight  to  the  north.  Then  they  hastily  mounted  and  rode  rapidly
westward.
At what he felt to be a safe distance, Leo reined up. Erith pulled in beside
him. In the dim light Leo saw a broad smile on his companion's face.
"Their  heat  sensors  cannot  reach this  far, Leo,  and it is  doubtful  such  a
small ship would have good audio pickup equipment. I believe  we are safe
now.  But  we  would  surely  have  been  detected  had  we  not  hidden  the
mounts  and ourselves  behind  that rock. I  must  congratulate  you  on  again
reaching a correct conclusion on insufficient data."
"It was easy," said Leo, without noticeable modesty.  "But  this  is just  the
start.  We  will  have  to  hide  during  the  daylight  hours  for  several  days.  A
good  telescope  on  a  scout  hovering  just  200  kilometers  up  inside  Stage  5
could see us for a long distance."
"Then  we had  best  be  on  our  way,"  replied  Erith,  turning  and  starting
southwest.
They  reached  fairly  open  ground  shortly,  and  made  good  time  for  the
rest of the  night.  When  the  sky  paled in the  east,  they  hunted  shelter  and

found it in front of a steep,  westward-facing cliff. Erith  promptly  located  a
niche  exposed  to  the  rising  sun,  while  Leo  hunted  food.  There  was  an
abundance  of wild fruit  and  nut  trees,  probably  from  seeds  carried  across
the clear zone by animals. The horses dined fairly well on the lush grass.
Shortly after dark the  companions  resumed  their journey.  Leo  had slept
most of the day; he felt truly rested for the first time since landing on Creche
World.  Within  an  hour  they  approached  a  small  village  and  detoured
around it. Although  this  should have  been  a  period  of  maximum  activity,
Leo saw little life around the dozen or more wooden frame houses.
"Tell me a little more about the activities in Stage 4," said Leo.
Erith  smiled.  "It  is  a  quiet,  pleasant  life,  Leo.  Only  the  unnameable
longing that drives one on… One progresses  into Stage 4  after learning the
advantages  of  cooperation  and  mutual  trust.  On  this  western  side,  all
territory  is  held  in  common  by  all  the  people.  They  do  not  cultivate  and
hence  must  live  in  small  groups  widely  scattered  over  the  countryside,
primarily in the lower lands. People in Stage 4 do not, in fact, work at all, in
the  standard  sense.  It  is  here  that  most  Shemsi  adults  receive  their
non-technical education; teaching and learning are the primary  occupations.
The stage is so attractive that many Shemsi never move on to Stage 5."
"That's interesting. What does drive a Shemsi on?"
Erith sighed. "A built-in compulsion, Leo. I believe it can be  argued that
the  active,  striving  life  is  inherently  more  interesting  than  the  quiet,
contemplative  one—at  least  for  most  intelligent  beings.  But  there  is  good
communication between Stages 4 and 5, each knowing the life of the  other.
Some overcome the  compulsion  and remain,  convinced  they  would not be
as happy in Stage 5  as they  are here.  It  will perhaps  surprise you  to know
the percentage that remains is about equal between Erithain, Domidain, and
Ferilain. One would think few Domidain  would remain,  but  this  is not the
case."
"How many  years  does  the  average  Shemsi  live  in  Stage  4?  How  long
were you here?"
"I  remained  in Stage 4  for over  a century  and  almost  could  have  made

my life here. I had become a teacher, and instructing the steady flow of fresh
young minds that passed through was always interesting. But after a time I
began to chafe at my lack of knowledge of the huge machines  we glimpsed
across the  clear zone,  to envy  those  who rode the  great steel  ships  to  new
adventures  among  the  stars.  My  thirst  for  new  experiences  grew  stronger
than the  desire  for  a  life  of  quiet  contemplation,  and  eventually  I  crossed
over. Once done, there is no going back.
"And as time has passed, Leo, I have become convinced the active life is
inherently  superior  to  one  of  thought.  Stage  4  has  good  printshops,  and
books  are  plentiful.  But  teaching  is  the  only  occupation,  and  learning  the
primary  means  of  justifying  one's  existence.  Once  one's  education  has
progressed as far as is practicable in a non-technical society, the only  choice
is  to  teach  or  walk  on.  Most  choose  to  walk,  of  course.  Even  those  who
remain  seldom  do  so  for  life.  Like  myself,  most  eventually  follow  their
students across the clear zone."
The  very  long  lives  of  the  Shemsi  gave  them  an  entirely  different
perspective from that of a human. Leo shook his head in rueful wonder. A
human  was  barely  grown  and  functioning  effectively  before  the  decay  of
ageing set  in.  The  idea of pausing for a century  to  learn  and  teach,  before
deciding one  desired a more  active  life…  A  strange,  fascinating  people,  in
some ways. In others, as Leo had learned, they could be deadly dull.
CHAPTER EIGHT
« ^ » 
The  country  through  which  Leo  and  Erith  rode  was  monotonous  in  its
sameness.  Toward  morning  they  ran  into  a  long  high  ridge  jutting
southward  from  the  central  mountains,  necessitating  a  detour  to  the
southwest.  Near  dawn they  easily  found  a  place  to  hide  among  the  rocks
and spent a second quiet day asleep. Leo ate all he could find, but food was
scarce here, and he had to settle his stomach by filling it with water.
The horses were beginning to show signs of strain. Their present diet did

not  provide  the  energy  they  needed  for  long  hours  of  riding.  That  night
Erith suggested trading horses at the next village they encountered, and Leo
agreed.
Luckily, the travellers  saw the  lights of a small community  shortly  after
dark. Erith led them boldly into the central opening the dozen small houses
faced,  and  asked  the  nearest  Shemsi  if  he  had  two  horses  for  which  they
could trade.
The Shemsi was an Erithain, wrinkled with age, obviously a teacher who
had  chosen  to  remain  in  Stage  4  for  life.  The  spare  muscles  on  his  arms
stood out  like  ropes,  and  there  was  a  visible  tremble  in  his  chin.  He  was
staring  at  Leo  with  wide-eyed  curiosity.  Leo  estimated  he  must  be  more
than twelve-hundred-years-old.
"I no longer ride, but… but there are horses… available," the old Shemsi
said, haltingly.  "I  would ask of you…  what  is  this  strange  creature  with…
with whom you ride? It is almost humanoid, but… hairy as the beasts of the
wood!"
"This  is a Man,  one  of  an  intelligent  species  which  we  in  Stage  5  have
encountered  on  distant  worlds.  I  walk  to  the  voice  of  the  Mothers!  I  was
honored  to  hear  the  voice  of  Erithain,  and  she  ordered  me  to  bring  this
creature to Birth Mountain. Now who may I speak with who has horses?"
A  small  crowd  had  swiftly  gathered  around  the  travellers.  All  Shemsi
present  were  adults,  but  varied  in  age  from  the  ancient  before  them  to
others who seemed barely grown. Leo looked around curiously at the  circle
of  small,  simply  built  houses,  obviously  designed  for  little  except  shelter
from the elements.
"Most  of  us  have  one  horse  each,"  one  of  the  younger  Ferilains  in  the
group volunteered.  "Since  you  walk to the  voice  of the  Mothers,  you  may
take mine."
"And mine!" several voices chorused.
"Thank you. We will need a large one for my captive. And we will leave
you our mounts to replace them," said Erith.

"But  can you  not stay  for… a time?"  asked the  ancient  one.  "We  would
study your captive at… at length,  and speak with you  of him.  Does  he  eat
meat as do some…  other  animals?  Does  his head  require  extra  protection,
and thus need this… unsightly mass of hair?"
"I regret that we cannot linger and permit you  time  to study  the  strange
ways of Man," said Erith, and only Leo caught the amusement in his voice.
"But we must be on our way. Now who has the largest horse?"
The trades were accomplished in short  order, and Erith  led the  way out
of the village with a minimum of ceremony. Leo almost regretted the speed
with which Erith  had worked. He  would have  liked to  study  these  people
while they examined him.
Leo's  reddish-brown  hair  had  grown  somewhat  long  as  they  travelled,
and he  kept it pulled back  in  a  neat  ponytail.  His  facial  follicles  had  been
deactivated  as  an  adolescent.  He  did  not  feel  his  hair  was  ugly,  but  he
endured the unintended insult in silence.
They stopped at dawn as usual. Leo had been calculating in his head for
the past hour and voiced his fears. "Erith, I think our pursuit has had about
enough time to catch us."
Erith nodded.  "If  the  scoutship  personnel  concluded at daylight that we
had  somehow  eluded  them  and  landed  a  party  that  also  procured  horses
from  the  breeding  station,  they  could  reach  this  far  sometime  today  by
taking  minimum  rest  periods.  That  would  probably  ruin  the  horses,  but
their sole objective is to catch us, whereas we must plan to ride our mounts
for many days."
"You're  getting there,"  said Leo  with a grin. "But  carry it a step  further.
The most people they could put on the ground is about twelve.  Since  there
are two of us, and I'm a pretty fearful alien menace, they would want at least
four people to a party when they break up into groups. Only the group that
takes the  northernmost  route will find  the  village  where  we  traded  horses
and be hot on our trail. So,  sometime  today  four Shemsi  armed with those
sonic guns should be riding by here."
"We have followed the only easily traversable route, which was perhaps a

mistake,"  Erith  agreed. "Let  us maintain  a guard then  and hope  to see  our
pursuers before they see us."
"If  we tie the  horses  behind  that outcropping,"  said  Leo,  pointing,  "you
and I can climb to the top to sleep."
The rock toward which he pointed was over  thirty  meters  high,  and the
rising sun  threw  a  deep  shadow  behind  it.  They  rode  into  the  shade  and
found a meadow filled with thick grass.  It  was the  work of a minute  to tie
the horses out of sight. Leo hastily searched for food, but  found only  some
half-ripe  berries.  He  ate  them  anyway.  There  had  been  no  time  or
opportunity to hunt for meat, and his diet was as inadequate  as that of the
horses.
They climbed the back face of the crumbling little ridge and found a tiny
alcove covered by clinging brush near the top. With a sigh of thankfulness,
Leo  hastily  cut a dozen  bushes  for a bed.  Erith  was taking the  first watch,
since he could feed better in the strong sunlight of midday. Leo lay down to
sleep.
He seemed to have barely closed his eyes before Erith was shaking him.
The  sun  was past the  zenith,  and  he  had  been  sleeping  with  it  full  in  his
face. Leo struggled to his feet and walked around the little flat area, swinging
his arms and wishing he had something to eat. Erith promptly took over the
empty pile of brush and stretched out to the sun.
The  slow  afternoon  passed.  Leo  had  to  walk  around  to  fight  off
drowsiness. The sun was near the horizon in the west, and Erith had just sat
up, when Leo saw a rider coming hard from the east.
At  first  Leo  did  not  realize  he  had  spotted  the  enemy.  He  had  been
expecting to see three or four Shemsi in a group. But the purposeful way the
rider  was  driving  a  mount  whose  head  was  hanging  low  in  exhaustion
indicated it had to be one of their pursuers.
The  rider  was  still  some  distance  off.  Leo  looked  on  both  sides  of
him—and finally saw a second  rider, almost  a kilometer  to the  south.  That
meant  there  was  one  or  two  more,  riding  farther  north  or  south,  each
keeping  the  closest  comrade  in  view.  This  was  a  more  efficient  way  of

hunting  a  running  quarry,  but  a  dangerous  one.  Any  one  rider  could  be
easily picked off from ambush.
But  that  would  indicate  the  prey  had  been  found,  and  the  remaining
three  could  close  in  for  the  kill:  the  typical  Shemsi  way  of  operating.  An
individual  life  hardly  mattered—except  to  the  individual  involved.  Leo
realized he had been thinking like a human again.
Gesturing for Erith to approach the  edge,  he  pointed out the  two riders.
The Shemsi instantly grasped the situation. But he surprised Leo by saying
cheerfully, "Once we have escaped this danger, my friend, we should have a
clear  path  to  Birth  Mountain.  Our  enemies  will  have  no  other  means  of
reaching us."
"Unless they know some way to disable the monitors, which they may."
"I  doubt  this,  Leo.  The  Mothers  frequently  call on  the  guardians  of  the
satellites,  as is well known.  Taking  them  into the  plot  would  be  too  risky.
Now how do you propose to eliminate these two without undue risk?"
Leo had been wondering himself. This rider was probably  going to pass
close enough to be picked off by the sonic pistol, but that would leave three
coming after them in the dark. Leo's faithful projectile gun, fully loaded and
not fired since Beta Crucis Two, was in one of Erith's harness cases.
"You  take  my  projectile  gun,"  Leo  decided.  "You  see  best  in  the  dark.
Remember that it will kill or disable as far as you can shoot accurately. We'll
take this fellow first, then you ride to the south and try to get the second one
before you come within range of his sonic rifle. I'll mount also, but wait and
try to intercept  the  one  we haven't  spotted  yet  to  the  north—if  he's  there.
You  return to the  rock, and wait to see  if  the  fight  draws  in  another  rider
from the south side."
There was probably a fourth rider still farther north or south, but if so, he
could not arrive before the decisive battle would be over. Leo kept the sonic
pistol, similar to the rifles he had seen used earlier except  that at minimum
force it became a stun  gun,  and at maximum  power it had a range of only
forty meters.

The first rider was rapidly approaching their rock, though from the looks
of his horse he would not be riding much farther. Leo had a sudden attack of
squeamishness, and handed the sonic gun to Erith. Common  sense  and his
overriding  need  to  rescue  Misty  dictated  they  take  no  chances,  that  this
unsuspecting Shemsi  must  be  shot  from  ambush—but  the  thought  turned
Leo's stomach.
Erith looked surprised, but obediently took the weapon. For him, Shemsi
who had rebelled against the Mothers were outside the pale, and fair game.
They climbed quickly down to level ground, and Erith waited at the edge
of  rock  around  which  the  rider  must  come.  And  two  minutes  later  they
heard the tired thudding of heavy  hooves,  and the  horse  lumbered  around
the outcropping.
Erith dropped the  rider and horse  together,  their  insides  turned  to  jelly
by the deadly sonic beam. Leo doubted the Shemsi knew what had hit him.
But the rider to the south knew. Erith hastily  handed Leo  the  pistol and
mounted.  He  rode  out  from  behind  the  sheltering  rock  and  toward  the
second pursuer, who had turned and headed directly for them.
Leo also mounted, but  clung closely  to the  western  face of the  rock and
rode  north,  trying  to  keep  from  being  seen.  He  stopped  behind  the  last
shelter and carefully looked ahead, but saw nothing. It was possible the one
Erith had killed was the northernmost rider.
Leo decided to wait where he was.
From the rear and out of sight, Leo heard the sharp crack of his pistol. He
hoped Erith had thought to dismount and steady his arm before shooting.
A moment later the gun fired again, and only seconds later, a third time.
A thrill of fear ran through Leo. If Erith had failed, and the  second  rider
came on in search of him… the enemy almost certainly had the longer range
rifles,  and  someone  armed  only  with  a  sonic  pistol  would  be  completely
helpless, once seen.
Leo  considered returning to  the  south  edge  and  trying  to  see  who  had

won.  If  Erith  had  lost,  an  enemy  with  superior  arms  was  even  now
approaching Leo from the rear.
Leo  stayed  where  he  was.  Returning  would  let  the  rider  to  the  north
arrive unseen, if such a rider existed. Leo had to assume he did. If Erith had
lost, they were probably  doomed  anyway.  If  not,  this  way both  still had a
chance.
A moment later a rider appeared out of a shallow gully a hundred meters
away,  pounding  hard  toward  Leo.  The  Shemsi  had  obviously  heard  the
sound of the pistol, which carried far in the stillness of the rural evening.
Leo saw that the straining horse had foam at its mouth.  The  animal was
exhausted,  only  the  pain  of  the  electrodes  at  its  temples  driving  it  into  a
loping  run.  The  rider  was  holding  the  reins  with  one  hand,  a  sonic  rifle
ready in the other.
Leo quieted his mount with soothing words and waited.
Leo had planned to shoot the Shemsi from ambush, but that human and
illogical reluctance that no Shemsi would ever understand held his hand. He
waited  until  the  onrushing  rider  was  well  within  range  of  his  pistol,  then
pulled firmly on the reins and shocked his mount into a hard lope.
They  emerged  from  behind  the  rock  after  a  few  steps,  and  the  Shemsi
saw  them.  Leo  almost  regretted  his  chivalrous  act  when  he  saw  the  rifle
swinging toward him; its owner was a Domidain.
But Leo was poised and ready,  and the  threat  of the  moving  rifle barrel
was enough incentive to kill. He pulled the trigger.
Between one step and the next both mount and rider collapsed, the  rifle
flying  toward  Leo  and  thudding  into  the  ground,  the  horse  falling  limply
and  rolling  over  his  captured  rider.  Leo  distinctly  heard  the  sound  of
breaking bones.
Leo  pulled  his  horse  to  a  halt,  dismounted,  and  retrieved  the  rifle.
Jamming the pistol into his belt, he turned and rode hard along the rear face
of the outcropping, rifle at the ready.

Leo's  sense  of timing  told him  that even  if  Erith  had  failed,  the  enemy
would not yet have had time to reach the edge of the rock. It  might  still be
possible to confront him from a shielded position.
In  fact,  the  approaching  rider  was  still  a  hundred  meters  away.  Leo
stopped and stared, trying hard to see his features in the gathering dimness.
The  Shemsi  came  on  fast,  rifle  in  hand.  Leo  dismounted  by  the  vertical
rockface and stood behind it, raising his captured weapon.
"Do not fire, Leo!" came a strong yell. "It is Erith!"
Sighing with relief, Leo lowered his rifle.
A moment  later  Erith  drew  to  a  stop  beside  him.  The  Shemsi  reached
into his left harness case and pulled out Leo's pistol. "This puny toy  almost
caused  my  death,  but  I  dismounted  after  the  first  miss  and  wounded  his
mount  with my  second  shot.  The  animal stopped,  and I  took  very  careful
aim and managed  to hit the  Domidain  in the  chest.  He  failed to realize  he
should  hide  behind  the  horse,  not  being  familiar  with  how  this  weapon
functions. I gave both him and the horse a painless death with the captured
rifle."
Leo  nodded,  without commenting.  Anything  he  could have  said  would
have been superfluous.
There was no sign of a fourth Shemsi in the hunting party. After waiting
for an hour they  finally decided  Leo  had  been  wrong,  and  the  group  had
broken  up  into  four  bands  of  three  people  each.  Leo  felt  it  was  safe  to
resume their journey, and Erith agreed.
"Now  may  I  suggest  we  ride  through  the  night  as  usual,  but  stop
tomorrow  to  hunt  food  for  you?"  the  Shemsi  asked.  "And  since  it  is  now
doubtful  a  scout  could  see  us  from  behind  the  clear  zone,  I  believe  we
should start travelling in the mornings and afternoons."
"Agreed,"  said  Leo,  though  his  emotional  mood  had  not  shifted  that
quickly from thankfulness to future planning. He still felt tense  and driven.
Somehow  a  Shemsi  never  seemed  to  become  too  personally  involved  in
anything, even in saving his own life.

The  rest  of the  night was uneventful,  and they  rode on in  the  morning
until the sun was well up. Leo went hunting while Erith slept, and soon shot
a fair-sized herbivore. He butchered it, and then spent most of the morning
cooking the meat. It dressed out at over ten kilograms, which was enough to
last him for several days.
Leo  also  found  some  thin-shelled  wild  seeds  which  Erith  assured  him
made  good  feed  for  the  horses.  They  moved  under  those  particular  trees
and let the animals eat heartily.  When  they  set  out again next  morning,  all
four travellers were rested and refreshed.
They  saw several  more  of  the  thousands  of  small  settlements  scattered
throughout  Stage  4,  but  avoided  them.  The  countryside  remained  very
much the same. The temperature on this circular continent was determined
more  by  where  you  were  in  relation  to  the  mountains  than  the  gentle
change  in  seasons.  They  were  on  the  edge  of  the  great  plain,  where  the
weather was warm, slightly humid, and broken only by occasional showers.
Five days later they traded horses,  with no more  trouble  than  before.  A
week and several hundred kilometers after that they exchanged them again,
and repeated this procedure twice more before they finally reached the clear
zone marking the end of Stage 4.
Erith stopped well short  of the  blackened  ground.  He  stared  across  the
zone with a somber expression  on his face.  "Never  did I  think to return to
the scene of my young adulthood, Leo. There are memories here  that were
best forgotten."
"When  you  were  still  very  much  an  individual,  before  the  strong
conditioning  forces  in  Stage  4  began  to  shape  your  final  psychological
growth?"
Erith  hesitated.  Finally  he  said,  "This  is  the  last  stage  before  true
adulthood,  Leo.  I  have  learned  from  our  talks  that  with  you  Earthlings,
becoming an adult is a matter of physical growth and the passage of a stated
number  of  years.  This  seems  to  me  a  foolish  way  to  determine  such  an
important  matter.  In  Stage  3  we  know  when  we  have  matured.  The  life
there  no  longer  seems  enough.  Some  prefer  the  peace  of  Stage  4  to  the
constant  striving  in  Stage  5,  but  no  one  wants  to  return  to  the  wild  and

savage life of Stage 3."
"Just how savage is it?" asked Leo, curious.
"To begin with, there are many wild and dangerous animals  there,  none
of which are allowed to cross this clear zone. They are confined to Stages  3
and 2. A laser beam flashes down from the orbiting satellites, and burns any
animal that starts across. But the Shemsi who live there are far more deadly
than the animals. They are young adults, usually less than a hundred of our
years in age. We are fully mature physically at about forty, but that is a step
of no major importance to us."
Erith was getting sidetracked again. Leo gently asked him  to stick to the
main point.
"I  am  sorry,  Leo.  Very  well.  The  young  adults  who  first  reach  Stage  3
have had to survive in an even more dangerous world, that of Stage 2. Here
they must learn the  value  of restraint,  acquire the  beginnings  of trust.  The
people live in large bands, each of which roams around in a given territory.
The  bands  often  fight,  using  clubs  for  weapons,  and  individuals  are
sometimes  killed. A  band  will also trap and fight the  larger  animals,  often
just for fun. They have little respect for life, since that virtue must be taught.
Any stranger a band encounters in its wanderings must fight or be killed. To
be a coward, here, is to die."
"And the Ferilain and Erithain do as well as the Domidain?"
"Those  that reach this  far, yes.  The  Domidains  are  the  most  numerous
brotherhood, but that is because slightly more of them survive the rigors of
Stages 1  and 2.  Any  Shemsi  who has  reached  Stage  3  has  proven  himself
strong and reasonably brave, or clever enough to survive regardless."
Leo remembered the warmth, comfort, and love  lavished  on babies  and
young children on Earth, and developed a new respect  for his own people.
They  might  be  more  irrational  and  less  cooperative  than  the  Shemsi,  but
they had customs he considered much more likable.
"If  a  beam  flashes  down  from  space  and  kills  any  animal  that  starts
across,  how  are  we  supposed  to  manage  it?"  Leo  asked,  returning  to  the

business  at  hand.  "You  said  we  could  probably  ride  our  horses  through
Stage 3."
"And  I  think we can,  though  there  will be  no fresh  mounts  for us from
now  on.  As  for  getting  across,  Leo,  I  have  no  certainty  that  we  will.  But
there are old tales… I believe  that the  satellites  overhead  operate by  visual
means and have a low level of discrimination. If they  cannot  see an animal,
and a familiar surface does not move  fast enough  to register as 'alive'…  let
us gather much firewood, Leo, and set about burning grass. We must create
a roof of burned grass under which we can hide."
Leo  got  the  idea  immediately;  he  helped  Erith  gather  wood  to  start
burning a nearby patch of grass. When the work was well along, he left it to
Erith and started cutting greener branches to construct the framework.
It  took almost  a  full  day.  They  finally  decided  to  sleep  the  rest  of  that
night and start across the next morning.
The frame of small branches, large enough to shelter both horses with the
riders walking on the  ground between  them,  was  surprisingly  heavy.  The
blackened grass they had spread across the  top strongly  resembled  that on
the burned ground, enough so Erith felt sure it would fool the spy satellites.
The real problem was how to hold the  horses  to a very  slow walk. In  fact,
Erith felt the  only  safe  way  was  to  take  two  or  three  easy  steps  and  stop
completely for a moment.
The travellers ran into an immediate  problem  when  they  tried to attach
the framework to the horses. The animals snorted and plunged, reared and
bucked to prevent  the  branches  from  touching  their  heads.  There  was  no
help for it. Leo and Erith finally had to mount the beasts,  position them  on
either side of  the  framework,  then  grasp  it  and  lift  until  it  rested  on  their
own heads. Though the horses snorted and pranced nervously around, they
eventually quieted.
Keeping  the  heavy  load  balanced  was  a  precarious  business.  Leo  and
Erith finally got the two horses so close together the riders' legs were almost
touching, each person with one arm extended overhead to grasp the bottom
of the framework, the other on the  reins.  Finally  they  were ready.  Keeping
carefully  together,  they  rode  with  extreme  slowness  onto  the  forbidden

ground.
After three  steps  Erith  said, "Stop!"  Leo  pulled gently  on  the  reins,  and
the animal obediently halted. It was only seconds  before  Erith  called, "Go,"
and they moved forward again.
Leo's arm was tiring rapidly. They  had barely  left the  edge,  but  he  was
already wondering if he  could hold  out  to  cross  this  two  hundred  meters.
But to hurry, or drop the camouflage, was to die.
At least the horses were behaving. They seemed to have accepted having
a canopy overhead as reasonably normal. They took three more slow steps,
halted, three more—and Erith asked, "Shall we try four steps next time?"
"No!" said Leo quickly. "We can get across in an hour this way. Let's not
press our luck."
"Very well. But I must soon shift my arm. It is growing numb."
"I'll hold the platform, and you change arms. Then you can do the  same
for me."
The change in arms was soon accomplished. They rode on, three steps at
a time, deeper into the zone of death.
Leo began to realize how fragile and foolish this plan was. If a horse tired
of  this  game  and  bolted,  or  even  snorted  and  reared…  If  they  grew
impatient and moved  fast  enough  to  register  as  "alive"…  The  possibilities
for disaster were endless.
Not the least of their problems was the necessity of frequent arm rests. A
horse happened  to shift  nervously  the  next  time  Leo  dropped  the  reins  to
make the exchange. The grass-covered roof dipped and almost pulled out of
Leo's grasp, before he managed to grip his mount with his knees and bring
it to a halt.
Slowly,  with  pain,  fear,  and  much  mental  anguish  on  Leo's  part,  they
rode across the clear zone.

CHAPTER NINE
« ^ » 
When  the  horses  took  the  three  steps  that  brought  them  within  one
walk-pause cycle of the opposite side, Leo could hardly restrain himself. His
upraised arm was trembling with fatigue, but he dared not try another shift;
the one holding the reins was little better. Instead he endured the silent wait,
and when Erith said "Go!" a last time, he held his breath  as they  crossed to
green grass again. The moment they were safe, Leo dropped his side of their
roof to the ground. It pulled out of Erith's hand, hit the grass, and collapsed
into a formless pile of brush.
"That  was  a  rather  frightening  experience,"  said  Erith  quietly.  Leo  was
simply breathing deeply in relief. "I wonder how much consecutive forward
movement it would have taken to trigger the beam?"
"Let's not even think about it," said Leo, dismounting. He lay down and
spread his arms  and legs to the  morning  sun,  as Erith  did every  day.  The
Shemsi  watched  him  in  puzzlement.  And  after  a  few  minutes,  when  not
only his arms but his nerves were back to normal,  Leo  mounted  again and
they rode on into Stage 3.
"Leo, I would not ask of you that we endure any danger likely to cost us
our lives,"  Erith  said a moment  later. "But  I  do request  that we try  first to
run  away,  second  to  stun,  and  only  as  a  last  resort  take  the  lives  of  any
Shemsi here. They  are savages  and would probably  be  totally merciless  to
you, but they are our young. I ask that you treat them as such."
"Of course, if I can," Leo agreed. "Let's just hope we don't get backed into
any rough corners."
Leo  had been  gradually heading south  as they  crossed Stage  4,  seeking
the  easier  riding  of  the  flat  plain.  After  the  fight  with  the  three  pursuers
there had been no further need for rocks to hide behind during the day. The
land around them  now was mostly  gently  rolling hills,  often  covered  with
clumps  of  trees  but  no  true  forests.  Those  began  on  the  slopes  of  the
mountains at a slightly higher elevation. Erith cautioned him that each large
gang  of  young  adults  usually  claimed  a  grove  as  its  own,  and  fought  to

defend it. The  safest  course was to ride well clear of all trees,  and  hope  to
outrun any group that tried to stop them.
Leo  agreed, though  it was obvious  that the  need  for  food  was  going  to
drive them  into the  trees  sooner  or later. But  they  were lucky on that first
day; he shot another of the herbivores  that were plentiful here.  When  they
halted  to  skin  and  cook  it,  Erith  protested  that  the  fire  would  alert  every
gang  in  the  vicinity  of  their  presence.  Leo  calmly  reminded  him  of  their
run-away strategy, and persisted.
He  did,  in  fact,  get  the  meat  cooked  before  the  first  group  of  curious
young adults came to investigate. They had evidently been watching from a
distant  clump  of  trees.  It  was  nearly  dark,  and  Leo  and  Erith  calmly
mounted  and  rode  away  as  the  Shemsi  approached.  When  they  began
running to overtake  them,  the  riders reined the  slow horses  into their best
pace, a good canter, and gradually outran them.
The  rolling hills made  observation  for any  distance impossible,  and  the
trees were often numerous and close together. The companions rode for less
than an hour before Leo suggested they halt and find a hiding place. He was
not afraid of being ambushed and killed. But he was worried that a sudden
attack would compel them to use the sonic rifles within their killing range.
Erith agreed, and approached the next very small group of trees with rifle
at the ready. It proved to be deserted. They spent the remainder of the night
there, taking turns at guard duty.
By  the  light  of  dawn  Leo  searched  the  trees  for  edible  fruits  or  nuts.
Finding none, they resumed their journey. He ate some meat from the pack
he had made of the animal's hide as they rode.
The  next  several  days  passed  uneventfully,  and  they  made  good
progress. They were a week into Stage 3 before the travellers had their first
encounter with one of the deadly beasts that roamed freely here.
Leo rounded a gently  sloping shoulder of dirt early  in the  morning  and
heard  curious  sounds  just  ahead.  He  shifted  the  rifle  to  his  hand  as  a
precaution, and slowed his mount's pace. They walked quietly  on the  thick
grass, almost directly into the  jaws  of a large, lean creature that seemed  all

teeth  and  long  bones.  It  was  noisily  feeding  on  the  remains  of  a  large
herbivore it had killed in the night.
Erith  gave  a  cry  of  warning  behind  Leo,  but  he  needed  no  more
indication of danger. They were already too close to the animal's food not to
be considered enemies trying to take it away.
Leo brought the rifle to his shoulder, trying to aim. And the skinny killer
that  resembled  an  oversized  starving  cheetah  came  bounding  at  him,  a
fighting snarl disrupting the morning quiet.
The creature was taller than Leo's horse and had teeth as long as human
fingers, all of them showing. As Leo squeezed the trigger his mount reared,
screaming in fear. Leo's  sonic  beam  vibrated  the  grass  to  his  right,  killing
hundreds of insects.
Leo fought to control the horse, to regain his balance  and swing the  rifle
around  for  another  shot—all  in  vain.  The  thin  hunter,  moving  like  the
running cat he resembled, hurled himself forward in a dive that would sink
those teeth into the horse's neck—and Erith's beam caught him in mid-leap.
There was no breath for a scream, but the carnivore gave a long,  hissing
sigh, and Leo distinctly heard the teeth snap closed. It hit the horse,  almost
bowling it over, but the mount kept its footing and whirled away. Leo let it
run, to shed the fear of death through action. And a moment later he gently
applied the reins, and gradually brought the trembling beast to a halt.
Erith was  kneeling  by  the  carnivore.  Leo  rode  back.  When  the  Shemsi
finished his inspection he remounted. "It has been many years since I saw a
Bones-That-Eats,  Leo.  This  is  one  no  Shemsi  faces  alone.  A  truly  hungry
Bones will even attack a band and sometimes escape with a member."
Leo  shuddered  at  the  thought.  This  thin  killer  was  certainly  more
repulsive than the sleek, deadly cats and savage dogs of his own world.
They  rode  for  several  more  days  without  incident.  Their  next  close
escape came when Erith  approached a clump of trees  to sleep  in one  night
and discovered too late they were occupied by a very small gang of nine or
ten Shemsi.

Leo  was only  a little distance behind  Erith.  When  the  band  burst  from
cover,  he  reined  his  mount  around  and  shocked  it  into  a  hard  lope.  He
risked a glance over his shoulder and saw that Erith  had not escaped.  Two
pink forms were clinging to his saddle, another pulling at the reins.
Erith's  horse  stopped,  falling  to  its  knees.  The  Shemsi  yanking  on  the
reins had unknowingly  shocked it into immobility.  Erith  was  going  down,
slipping inevitably out of the saddle. Leo  let his mount  run as he  freed his
rifle. Seconds later he guided it in a hard turn and raised the weapon.
As best  Leo  could estimate,  he  was well past the  point where the  sonic
beam  could kill. As  a precaution  he  tried  to  aim  just  to  one  side  of  Erith,
where the strongest force would hit only the young  Shemsi.  He  hesitated  a
long moment, then pulled the trigger.
Two Shemsi in the direct path screamed, stiffened, and collapsed. Those
savagely attacking both the horse and Erith yelped with pain and jumped to
their feet, starting an odd, impromptu  dance,  as though  trying  to shake  off
stinging insects.
Leo turned his horse a little more toward the  group and fired again, this
time  to  the  other  side  of  Erith  and  at  open  ground.  And  then  he  rode
directly for the motionless horse, rifle at the ready.
Though completely ignorant of modern weapons at this stage, the young
Shemsi had no difficulty locating the source of the terrible pain they had just
felt. The band  started to back  away.  Two  hesitated,  grabbed  the  shoulders
of one of the two unconscious Shemsi, and tried to pull him  along. He  was
too heavy, and Leo was coming fast. They abandoned the effort and fled.
The  adults  would  have  made  a  much  stronger  effort  to  save  their
brethren,  Leo  was thinking as he  stopped his horse.  But  even  they  would
have  given  an  individual  only  his  exact  due.  And  when  that  was  not
enough… The Shemsi had some subtle way of placing a value on the life of
a  brother,  one  beyond  Leo's  comprehension.  Every  single  Shemsi  was
worth a certain amount  of effort and trouble,  and no more.  The  idea of an
individual having  infinite value,  such  as  Misty's  worth  in  Leo's  eyes,  was
alien to their thought patterns.

The  Shemsi  had  their  values,  and  Leo  had  his.  He  dismounted  and
hastily checked the  two Shemsi.  Both  were  already  stirring,  twitching  and
jerking  in  remembered  pain.  They  were  too  weak  to  be  dangerous.  Leo
checked  the  bridle  of  Erith's  horse,  to  be  certain  it  had  not  locked  in  the
"shock"  position.  The  animal  was  breathing  stertorously,  its  squat  body
trembling as though with a severe chill. Leo checked Erith last. The Shemsi
had caught only the outer fringes of the  beams,  but  Erith  was no longer in
the full strength of youth, and he had been hit twice.
Erith was unconscious  but  breathing  normally,  as if asleep.  Leo  heaved
him  erect  and  slung  him  face  down  across  the  saddle  of  the  one  good
mount.  The  sun  had  slipped  out  of  sight  during  the  brief  encounter,  and
darkness  was  rolling  swiftly  across  the  grassland.  The  band  could  attack
again, their better night vision almost ensuring success.
But  those  ignorant young  men  had no way of knowing their eyes  were
now  better  than  his.  And  though  they  might  be  brave  enough  when
confronting known enemies like the large animals, Leo doubted they would
again attack someone  who  could  inflict  pain  as  he  had.  He  waited  by  the
head of Erith's horse until the animal stirred, shook its head, and finally got
to its feet.
Leo petted and reassured the still-dazed horse until it seemed recovered,
then swung up behind the slack body of Erith and urged his mount forward,
pulling the second one along by the reins. They rode slowly away.
Half an hour later Erith stirred, tried to sit up, and slipped off the  saddle
before Leo could catch him. It was only a short drop to the ground, and the
fall revived Erith. He sat up, holding his head and groaning. The first of the
two  larger  moons  had  risen,  giving  enough  light  for  Leo  to  see  his
companion.
Leo dismounted, unharnessed  the  animals,  and let them  graze  while he
tended to Erith. He had been clubbed on the head, shoulders, and back, was
scratched  and  badly  bruised,  but  had  no  broken  bones.  He  was  still  in  a
dazed condition, recovering much more slowly than had the horse.
Leo sat with Erith for several hours, while the Shemsi gradually returned
to his normal senses. They rode on not long before dawn, and shortly  after

sunrise  found  shelter  in  one  of  the  infrequent  rock  outcroppings.  Leo
surveyed the area from the top of the low mound, spotted a small grove  of
trees nearby, and rode to it with rifle at the  ready.  It  was deserted,  and he
gathered all the edible fruits and nuts he could find.
Erith  awoke  late  in  the  day,  almost  his  old  self  again.  But  he  had
evidently suffered a mild concussion.  Erith  ate some  of the  fruit and asked
Leo  what  had  happened.  The  Shemsi  nodded  in  approval  when  Leo
explained that the  two unconscious  young  adults would  probably  recover,
based on Erith's reaction. They were younger, and had only been hit once.
"That  is  good,  Leo.  I  was  not  alert  enough;  I  should  have  seen  them
hiding in the trees. I am glad no one paid with his life for my lack of care."
"You  Shemsi  have  an  odd  sense  of  altruism,"  Leo  said,  his  voice  cool.
Young or not, the attacking Shemsi had been adults. And  it was within his
capacity to kill such savages, if necessary to save his own or Erith's life.
Erith glanced at him, evidently decided this was one of those areas where
human and Shemsi  understanding  could not meet,  and did not pursue the
point.
Erith's horse was fully recovered. At dusk the companions resumed their
long journey.
The rest of the weary days and weeks across Stage 3  were only  a repeat
of  what  had  gone  before.  They  were  attacked  by  savage  carnivores
unaccustomed  to weapons,  and killed several.  They  had  many  encounters
with the  bands  of young  Shemsi  and often  had to  fight  them  off  with  the
sonic rifles. By maintaining a vigilant guard, they avoided more  ambushes.
The horses grew thin and stringy on the inadequate  diet of grass and what
fruit the  sentient  beings  could spare;  they  were obviously  weakening.  The
day came  when  one  could not go on,  and they  abandoned  them  both  and
walked. The  animals  were unlikely  to survive.  There  were too many  large
carnivores preying on the abundant herbivores roaming the grasslands.
According to Erith's reckoning, they should be approaching the next clear
zone. No really large animals were permitted on the opposite side, and they
would have had to abandon them there in any case.

On the  scale the  guardian satellites  used  to  distinguish  between  "small"
and  "large,"  Leo  had  been  happy  to  learn,  he  would  be  classified  as  the
former.  Once  inside  Stage  2,  he  was  not  enough  larger  than  a  Shemsi  to
register as a "large animal."
Erith's estimate had been close. Two days later they stood on the edge of
the third clear zone,  staring  at  the  burnt  grass.  Erith  had  already  said  the
same technique as before should work for the crossing, except that this time
the  roof  could  be  a  small  one.  Of  course,  no  protection  would  have  been
needed if they had been going in the opposite direction.
"Do  you  suppose  the  party  with Misty  had to go through all this?"  Leo
asked  as  they  cut  brush  and  burned  grass.  "Why  wouldn't  one  of  the
Mothers  simply  tell  the  monitors  of  the  guardian  satellites  to  deactivate
them for a few minutes?"
"The  Mothers  would never  take such  a personal interest  in  the  work  of
any small group, Leo. Once a Shemsi has received the Word, it is up to him
and his associates to fulfill it. The Mothers have little interest in 'how.' "
"Then  your  rulers  are  even  more  human  than  the  rest  of  you,"  Leo
muttered sarcastically,  scattering burning  brands  about  the  unusually  thick
green  grass,  which  was  difficult  to  burn.  Erith  did  not  understand  the
remark, and as usual with such, ignored it.
The  crossing  this  time  was  much  easier,  and  they  made  it  without
incident. Of course,  Leo  realized,  as they  stepped  onto  safe live growth on
the opposite side, this was an all-or-none operation. They would never have
known failure if it happened; just oblivion.
"Let me caution you that carnivores still exist here, Leo," Erith said when
the tension  eased.  "Only  the  large  species  have  been  eliminated.  Many  of
those our size or less are still deadly hunters."
"And  what happens  if they  catch  one  of  your  brethren  while  he  is  still
small?" asked Leo.
"He dies, of course. That happens often enough.  Babies  can do no more
than crawl when  they  are expelled  from  Birth  Mountain  at the  age of two,

but no natural enemies  are allowed in Stage 1.  If  a baby  can find water, it
has a chance to survive. Many, of course, do not."
"You can put on body tissue without eating fruit?"
"Yes,  though  it is  a  slow  process.  Most  babies  mature  for  two  or  three
years  in Stage 1  before  learning to crawl or walk well enough  to  reach  the
fruit trees, which are abundant there. Shemsi stomachs will not accept solid
food for the first four years of life."
"And what happens to the bodies of the babies who don't make it?"
" 'Make it?' Ah, I perceive you refer to 'survive.' Nothing happens except
the  natural  process  of  putrefaction,  Leo.  That  is  why  the  area  of  Stage  1
outside Birth Mountain is sometimes called 'The Land of Baby Bones.' Even
very young bones survive longer than tissue, and—"
"I don't want to hear any more!" Leo interrupted, very firmly. But despite
his  revulsion,  the  image  of  millions  upon  millions  of  tiny  baby  bones
accumulating around Birth Mountain rose before his mind's eye. He saw the
great volcanic cone rearing out of a vast mound of thousands  of millions of
delicate breastbones,  round skulls, slim  tibias,  the  separated baby  sticks  of
ulna and radius. It was a horrifying vision—and fortunately  not a true one.
Even bones returned to the environment in time.
Erith gave Leo a puzzled look, but changed the subject.
Stage 2 was not as wide as Stages 3 and 4, but neither could the travellers
walk as fast as the horses. Despite their apparent bulk and awkwardness, the
mounts had carried their riders at a surprisingly good pace.  Now they  had
only their feet.
Leo  looked  down  at  himself,  and  for  the  first  time  realized  his  clothes
were literally in rags. He had been wearing the same  uniform  since  leaving
the Earth scout-ship, supposedly as Erith's prisoner, and there had been  no
provision for fresh  clothes.  Space  Service  uniforms  were  of  extraordinarily
strong material,  but  his had taken more  than  could  be  expected.  Only  the
tough boots still held together well.
At the moment Leo was not carrying any equipment except the captured

sonic gun and borrowed canteen. With freshly aware vision he saw that his
legs had become hardened sticks, prominent bones moved by lean ropes of
hard  muscle.  In  amazement  he  glanced  at  his  arms,  and  saw  tough  but
shrunken muscles, large bony wrists, outstanding blue veins. He patted the
sunken area where his stomach had once been flat with muscle. Leo realized
he was slowly starving.
Leo glanced at Erith. He too had lost weight,  though  not as much.  That
miraculous skin of his fed him  steadily,  day  by  day,  while Leo  sometimes
had to exist just on water and a little fruit. Despite the admitted inability  of
the photosynthesizing cells to provide all needed energy,  in situations  such
as this long trek a Shemsi had a decided advantage over a human.
Leo made a decision. It was time to slow their pace a little. He had to be
in good shape for the final assault on Birth Mountain.
Leo  lowered  their  walking  time  to  ten  hours  a  day  and  devoted  more
effort to  hunting  and  food-gathering.  Since  Birth  Mountain,  like  Earingell,
sat squarely in the middle of the  central mountain  chain,  they  were slowly
working their way north again.
The  going soon  became  harder, the  rolling  hills  and  undulating  upland
plains  giving  way  to  rocky  foothills  and  frequent  forests.  Leo  and  Erith
debated  the  merits  of  returning  to  the  plains  and  proceeding  until  almost
opposite  Birth  Mountain,  but  decided  against  it.  This  way  was  much
shorter,  and  the  hunting  was  better.  Leo  was  making  a  kill  almost  every
day.  And  despite his aversion  to  the  idea  of  eating  meat,  Erith  realized  it
had more food value than fruits and nuts.
The  first band  of young  Shemsi  they  saw  seemed  no  different  to  Leo's
eyes than the ones in Stage 3. All appeared young but fully grown. For once
they  had seen  the  band  approaching  and  hidden  atop  a  small  rise,  giving
Leo  an  unusually  good  look  as  the  group  passed  below.  After  the  young
adults  were  out  of  hearing,  he  questioned  Erith  about  the  apparent
similarities.
"There is little real difference this  close to the  zone,  Leo,  except  that the
bands on the other side are better organized.  You  must  remember  that the
growth  toward  community  and  solidarity  is  continuous,  not  sharply

delineated  at  the  clear  zones.  A  Shemsi  enters  Stage  2  as  a  small  child,
barely  able  to  walk  and  find  food.  He  moves  forward  very  slowly  as  he
grows older, and only  after several  years  does he  encounter  his first band,
see there are others like himself, and learn they find pleasure and protection
in  each  other's  company.  The  bands  in  Stage  2  are  continuous  entities,
constantly  receiving  new recruits from  the  west side,  and  losing  the  larger
adolescents to bands  farther east.  Those  this  close  to  the  eastern  zone  are
always physically adults."
"And no band of larger kids ever moves a few kilometers to the west and
beats up on the smaller kids? Just for fun, maybe?"
Erith hesitated. "Such a thing could happen. I do not believe it would be a
frequent occurrence, though. The urge to move on is quite strong at this age.
Few would fight it by going in the opposite direction."
The question of how a species developed such an instinctual compulsion
remained unanswered,  but  Leo  dropped the  subject;  no  one  could  explain
all the built-in human urges, either.
The  weather  slowly  grew  colder  as  they  worked  their  way  west  and
north.  The  night air was  now  crisp,  even  chilly  whenever  the  wind  blew.
Leo was so inured to rain he usually ignored it, taking shelter only if a place
of refuge happened to be near at hand. They did most  of their travelling at
night, Erith leading the  way.  The  sun  usually provided enough  warmth  to
enable Leo to sleep well during the day.
Twice they encountered roving bands of young adults, too close to miss
being seen. Both times the stun rifles scared them  away.  These  youngsters
might  not  have  learned  civilized  ways  of  behavior,  but  they  easily
understood pain.
They had been almost a month into Stage 2, and Leo had regained a little
of his muscle tissue, before they encountered the first gang of less-than-adult
physical stature. Leo saw them first. He topped a low hill and found he was
on  the  edge  of  a  sharp  drop;  almost  simultaneously,  he  heard  a  vicious
snarling ahead, mingled with shrill cries of anger.
Leo  dropped  to  his  stomach  and  wriggled  cautiously  to  the  precipice.

Slowly extending his head, he looked downward into a narrow gully.  Some
sixty meters up the  draw, Leo  saw a gang of Shemsi  adolescents,  gathered
around  a  pit  in  the  center.  He  could  not  see  into  the  opening,  but  the
snarling sounds were coming from there.
"A gang has  trapped one  of the  local carnivores,"  said Erith  beside  him.
"It sounds like a sendarko, the largest in this stage. When they grow old, or if
other game becomes scarce, they hunt Shemsi."
Several  of the  young  people  around  the  pit  had  been  gathering  stones.
They passed them out to the others. Leo did not see the first one fly, but the
angry snarling suddenly  changed to  a  loud  roar  of  rage  and  pain.  Then  a
dozen arms were hurling both large and small stones, and the roar became a
moan of outrage and hurt. That swiftly faded into silence.
"I  well remember  trapping my  first  sendarko,"  Erith  said,  wistfulness  in
his voice. "I had belonged to two other  gangs closer to Stage 1,  but  we did
nothing but hunt fruit and water together. If a killer came, we ran or climbed
trees.  Most  of us got away;  occasionally  someone  did  not.  Learning  that  I
could  fight  back,  that  a  group  could  accomplish  what  a  single  individual
could  not,  was  a  great  revelation  to  me.  We  knew  that  one  certain  beast,
very  large and very  old, had started eating Shemsi  regularly.  We  watched
him, found his den, observed his comings and goings. Then  one  day  while
he  was  away  hunting  we  dug  a  trap,  very  quickly,  using  our  hands  and
large sticks. We built a grass roof for it, supporting this by thin limbs resting
on the bottom. One of us volunteered to tempt the beast. It was a Domidain,
of course. No Erithain would risk his life unnecessarily, and a Ferilain could
not be depended on to stand firm.
"The  flesh-eater  returned  on  schedule,  the  Domidain  showed  himself,
and the  killer charged. He  was bounding  so high I  thought  he  would  leap
completely  over  the  pit,  and  that  would  surely  be  the  death  of  the  brave
tempter. But he did not, and the false cover gave way and tumbled him in.
He was so large we were afraid he might leap completely out of the pit. We
gathered very quickly, bringing stones as large as we could lift. It was such a
pleasure to see the killer die."
"I'll  bet,"  muttered  Leo,  to  whom  the  killing  sounded  mean  and

vengeful—but  then,  he  had  never  seen  a  wild  beast  eat  a  fellow  human,
either.
Their way lay directly through the narrow valley ahead, and Leo decided
to wait for the young  Shemsi  to move  on.  They  finally did, but  not before
hurling so many stones they must have literally buried the carnivore in the
pit.
A detour to  the  left  located  a  less  precipitous  way  down,  and  Leo  and
Erith took it. Leo could not resist pausing at the pit and peering in. He saw a
thick, saffron coat on a cat-like animal slightly larger than himself, the first of
this kind  he  had  seen.  The  head  and  upper  shoulders  were  buried  under
rocks.
Erith suddenly  spat into the  pit, one  of the  few signs  of strong emotion
Leo  had seen  in him.  Evidently  the  self-controlled  Shemsi  retained  strong
memories of sendarkos, and they were highly unpleasant ones.
"Why would the Mothers let such a large and dangerous beast  run loose
in Stage 2?" Leo asked, curious.
Erith  shrugged.  "Mysterious  are  the  ways  of  the  Mothers,  Leo.
Presumably  they  constitute  a form  of fitness  test.  The  weak, the  lame,  the
stupid, those who try to live alone,  fall prey  to them.  Only the  strong,  and
those who have learned the value of cooperation, survive to cross into Stage
3."
From  then  on  Leo  carried  his  rifle  ready  in  his  hand.  These  cliffs  and
tumbled  boulders  offered  good  hunting  to  cat-like  creatures  that  sprang
from ambush.
CHAPTER TEN
« ^ » 
The  nights  grew  steadily  colder  as  the  travellers  climbed,  and  during  the
day  Leo  had  to  seek  shelter  from  the  wind  in  order  to  sleep.  The

temperature  did  not  seem  to  affect  Erith.  His  skin  absorbed  well  at  any
altitude.
Late one afternoon Leo killed a large herbivore, a creature with a woolly
coat suitable  to this  cool climate.  He  took the  rest  of the  night  to  cook  the
meat  and  clean  the  flesh  off  the  hide.  Leo  knew  only  the  rudiments  of
preparing clothes from animal skins, and what he achieved was rough, stiff,
and smelly—but it made a warm outer garment over his torn clothes.
The  travellers  reverted  to  their  old  system,  whereby  they  both  slept
during the afternoon and one at a time in the darkest part of the night. Leo's
heavy new garment kept him reasonably warm while asleep.
The  fourth day  he  wore his new coat, Leo  was  leading  the  way  over  a
wooded slope when he spotted movement ahead.  He  slowed his steps  and
motioned for  Erith  to  be  quiet.  They  moved  cautiously  forward,  gripping
their weapons. At the point where Leo had seen a flash of pink he stopped,
looking around—and suddenly a young child broke from cover almost at his
feet,  screaming  in fear. The  youngster  fled down the  slope ahead of them,
looking  fearfully  back  over  its  shoulder.  It  soon  disappeared  in  the  thick
growth.
Leo  turned  with  a  grin  to  Erith,  but  saw  his  companion  had  a  sober
expression. "We have gone past the  point where the  first bands  form,  Leo.
You  have  just  seen  a  frightened  and  savage  little  child,  the  elemental
primitive—a  Shemsi  alone.  This  is  the  low  point  of  Shemsi  existence,  the
nadir  from  which  one  can  only  rise,  or  die.  His  brain  is  not  yet  fully
developed,  and  he  acts  primarily  on  instinct—which  I  understand  you
humans  claim  to  have  outgrown.  That  child  is  already  lonely,  without
knowing  what  loneliness  is.  He  seeks  the  warmth  of  shared  experience,
though  he  does  not  know  it  exists,  nor  how  it  would  feel.  He  has  no
knowledge of the Mothers, of the Shemsi Brotherhood, of his own place in it
as  an  Erithain.  The  capacity  for  rational  cognition  is  there.  The  desire  to
know that distinguishes an Erithain from the others is present, but dormant.
If he lives, his future holds the promise of joy in sharing, of pride in self, and
the  benefits  of  brotherhood.  He  is  large  enough  to  soon  find  and  be
admitted to his first gang, after which he  will seldom  be  alone  again.  You
have just seen the stock from which all adult Shemsi grow."

Leo  listened,  smiling  at Erith's  unusual loquaciousness,  but  keeping  his
thoughts to himself. That child might grow up to know a feeling of warmth,
but  he  would  never  experience  real  love.  At  the  moment  he  was  an
individual,  acting  entirely  on  his  own.  With  his  admission  into  that  first
band, a subtle and prolonged shaping process would begin. The child would
have  no more  chance  of  escaping  it  than  a  tiger  of  learning  to  eat  lettuce.
Somewhere  along  the  way,  he  would  lose  the  sense  of  individuality  he
unknowingly possessed at the moment, lose it by submerging himself into a
group  identity  where  every  person  had  a  set  worth—and  no  more.  The
warmth  of  companionship  would  be  gentle  and  always  present,  but  he
would  never  know  the  stronger  fires  of  love,  or  a  burning  hate.  Within
certain broad channels, his actions for the rest of his life were ordained and
predetermined.
Leo did not want to live that way.
But it was difficult to discuss any  human  point of view with Erith,  who
simply ignored what he did not understand.  "Let's  go,"  Leo  said instead of
trying, and led the way.
Three nights later Erith walked around a clutter of terminal  morain  rock
and almost stepped onto the last clear zone.
Erith  stopped  so  abruptly  Leo  bumped  into  him.  The  moonlight  was
bright enough to recognize what they had found. Erith, looking across to the
opposite side, said softly, "The Land of Baby Bones."
"Yes, but if no large carnivores are allowed inside, and the Shemsi young
are too small and isolated to attack us, then we, at least, should be perfectly
safe," Leo pointed out.
"Not  quite  true,  my  friend.  The  entire  circle  around  Birth  Mountain  is
patrolled by Shemsi  guards, to keep the  land free of the  smaller  predators.
You and I will be shot on sight. Adults are strictly forbidden in Stage 1."
"Then we will have to travel solely at night for these last few kilometers,
and go cautiously. Let's get across first, and then you can tell me  what you
know of Birth Mountain itself."

The travellers retreated to a spot behind  the  mountain  they  were facing
to build a fire for the  usual camouflage.  They  were back  before  dawn  and
crossed  safely.  Once  on  the  other  side  they  destroyed  the  little  roof  to
prevent a guard finding and recognizing it, and hid for the day in a little cleft
on the hillside.
The sun was still behind the mountains to the east. "Tell me all you know
about Birth Mountain," Leo demanded before they slept. "Try to distinguish
between fact and old wives'—that is, fanciful tales."
"That I cannot do, Leo, for we adults have no facts. All must be  'fanciful
tales.' I do not even know how they originate."
Leo sighed. He disliked going into action on a background of flimsy data.
But they had no choice.
Another  problem  was  his  peculiar  relationship  with  Erith.  To  date  his
Shemsi  companion  had  not  received  a  second  communication  from  his
Mother,  which  was  according  to  Erith's  expectations.  Leo's  fears  of  being
spied on had been totally groundless. But at some point Erith would receive
new  orders  and  change  from  ally  to  enemy.  The  problem  was  that  Leo
needed Erith's  help as long as it was available.  And  from  the  careless  and
inconsistent  way  the  Mothers  acted,  it  was  possible  they  had  completely
forgotten  about  them  and  would  not  visit  Erith  again  until  he  stood
physically before them—if that was allowed.
Leo  had already made  his decision.  He  was going to let Erith  stay  with
him,  fulfilling  his  obligation  to  the  Mothers,  until  Erithain  possessed  him
again.  After  that,  Leo  would  consider  him  untrustworthy  and  insist  they
separate.
"Then tell me the accepted tall tales," Leo said aloud.
Erith  ignored  the  reference  he  did  not  understand.  "I  will  do  my  best,
Leo. Birth Mountain is the highest point on the  planet,  an old volcano  that
has  been  inactive  since  recorded  history  began.  Nevertheless  the  magma
must be close beneath, for it is supposed to be warm inside the hollow walls.
The caldera is about four kilometers wide, very  round in shape,  with inner
walls rising perhaps one kilometer above  the  inside floor. The  volcano  was

apparently a very heavy emitter of gasses when active, for the vast walls of
Birth Mountain are filled with natural vents. These have been expanded and
supplemented  over  the  millennia,  until  now  it  is  said  the  entire  great
mountain is one huge network of tunnels, and may someday collapse of its
own weight."
The  image that came  to Leo's  mind  was of an oversized  anthill,  but  he
said nothing. The similarity was not that exact.
"There are many entrances into the runnels, most closed and unguarded,"
Erith  went  on.  "I  know  nothing  specific  about  the  layout  of  the  interior.
There is supposed to be a large area where the  Mothers  and their retainers
live, a huge warm nursery  adjacent  to  it  where  the  eggs  are  hatched,  and
many outside nurseries in the caldera, where the babies are tended for their
first two years. They receive water and sunlight, which is all they require. I
do not know the  details of how the  babies  are moved,  or  who  takes  them
out and turns  them  loose to crawl among  the  trees.  Since  a  Shemsi  egg  is
produced every two seconds,  you  can understand  that hatching  and caring
for  the  tens  of  thousands  produced  every  day  must  be  a  gigantic
undertaking. We have always assumed the Mothers keep a chosen group of
several thousand adults on hand to serve the babies."
"Do you know what a Shemsi father looks like?" Leo suddenly asked.
"Now you are departing from the main subject, Leo, as you often accuse
me of doing. No,  we do not know. Adult biologists  have  always  assumed
that Shemsi  males  are somewhat  like those  of other  animals,  with external
genitalia. Oh, I do not like to think of such  things!  But  if I  must…  We  also
assume  the  Mothers  themselves  are  females  on  the  order  of  birds,  with  a
single  genital-excretory  tract.  Apparently  only  a  single  impregnation  by  a
male is necessary, and the eggs are then fertilized automatically for the  rest
of the  year,  a system  for which there  is ample  precedent  among  the  lower
animals. Our tales also state the Mothers are far larger than adult Shemsi  of
the three types we know, larger even  than  yourself,  and are very  fat when
entering the dormant cycle. Of course this would explain  how they  survive
for a year without food or water, while producing eggs."
Erith fell silent. "How much do you know of how the Mothers administer

their responsibilities?" prompted Leo.
"Very little. We know they use no intermediaries or sub-rulers, or at least
we  never  receive  orders  from  any  claiming  to  be  such.  We  people  at  the
lower levels seldom know if a decision has been made by the Mothers or the
high-level  Trios.  Some  disputes  work  their  way  up  to  the  Council  of  100
Trios, where the decision is final."
"All your activities are divided between  100  areas,  and you  have  higher
and higher levels of Trio management until—"
"There  are  seven  layers  of  management  in  each  of  the  100  Areas  of
Activity, and the top level is automatically  part of the  council. The  ethic of
cooperation  is  so  strong  in  Stage  5  that  we  seldom  have  unmanageable
disagreements  between  individuals.  Sometimes,  though,  the  goals  of  one
activity  will  require  resources  wanted  by  another,  or  a  future  conflict  in
needs  can  be  predicted.  If  such  questions  cannot  be  settled  at  the  lower
levels, the two Seventh level Trios in the affected activities present  the  case
to the council, which then decides the issue."
"That's  a  reasonably  understandable  system,"  said  Leo,  glad  to  find
something about these strange people he could easily comprehend.
"It is eminently logical," said Erith, pride in his voice.
Leo  resisted  the  urge  to  tell  Erith  it  was  the  Shemsi  idea  of  how  an
individual should live—almost totally submerged in the group, with no true
life of his own—that he found repulsive.
"Back to the  business  at hand.  What  do you  know of automatic guards,
spy beams, alarm systems, and so forth, protecting the tunnels?"
"I  know nothing  at all as fact, but  I  strongly  doubt  there  are  such,  Leo.
The Mothers have never needed them; therefore why should they exist?"
"Because  if  they're  so  good  at  predicting  the  future,  they  should  have
known I'd be here trying to get in," said Leo, with a straight face.
"No, they set us on this quest to see  if you  could manage  to reach Birth
Mountain,"  responded  Erith,  with  his  usual  failure  to  understand  irony.

"Unless they plan to reunite you with your soft mate and breed you two, it
may  be  that they  will have  learned all they  wish to know when  next  they
absorb my memories and will then eliminate you."
Leo gave him a savage scowl. Erith did not understand that, either.
Further questioning brought little helpful information. Leo had no choice
but to depend on luck and intuition, once inside.
They slept the entire day and resumed walking. Next morning just as the
sun  rose,  Leo  climbed  a  tall  tree  and  looked  to  the  west.  Clearly  visible
above  the  tops of closer and more  sharply  pointed peaks,  he  saw  the  vast
slopes  and  rearing  shoulders  of  the  largest  mountain  he  had  seen  on  the
planet.
Leo hastily climbed down. "I saw Birth Mountain," he said to answer the
question on Erith's face. "It's quite a sight. Climb up and see."
Erith looked doubtfully at the tree and said firmly, "I'll wait. It should be
in sight from the ground tomorrow."
It was; and two days later they slept almost in its gigantic shadow.
The  companions  had not sighted a  single  patrol  since  entering  Stage  1.
Because of travelling only at night, they had been averaging better than ten
hours sleep  a day,  and Leo  found it  easy  to  absorb  this  much  rest.  There
was a deep and abiding fatigue in his body,  a tiredness  that reached to the
bones. Between Beta Crucis Two and Creche World, he had been walking or
riding now for over  an Earth  year.  He  was  lean,  hard,  and  strong;  but  he
could have used a long rest.
To his pleased surprise,  Leo  had found that the  cone  of Birth  Mountain
was  only  a  few  thousand  meters  higher  than  the  surrounding  slopes  on
which they stood. Erith had said it was the  highest  peak on Creche World,
which was undoubtedly true—but all the mountains on this old planet were
well worn by time and the elements.
As they passed on the plain below, he had seen only a handful that were
high enough  to sustain  permanent  snow.  Birth  Mountain  had  the  most,  a
coating that stretched from the top down for perhaps 800 meters. Measured

from  sea  level,  as  humans  calculated  elevation,  Birth  Mountain  was  less
than  5,000  meters  high.  And  they  stood  less  than  2,000  vertical  meters
below its highest point.
Birth Mountain was impressive because of its gigantic size, not its height.
The great slopes leading up to the cone made it ten times wider than it was
high.
Leo  carefully  examined  the  slope  just  ahead.  It  rose  at  a  fairly  gentle
angle  almost  to  the  snow  line,  and  even  from  there  on  did  not  seem
especially steep. Most of the lower but  more  sharply  pointed peaks around
them would be far harder to climb.
The thought Leo had been playing with surfaced, and he said, "Erith, let's
try to get into Birth Mountain through the back door."
Erith gave him a puzzled look. "I do not understand, Leo."
"Simple.  We're  going  to  climb  the  outside  to  the  cone  and  find  a  way
down to the valley floor."
"That will take much longer than locating an abandoned  tunnel  entrance
and forcing our way in," Erith pointed out.
"Yes, but it will leave us in the open where we'll be harder to pin down."
Leo  did  not  explain  that  he  hated  the  idea  of  being  enclosed  by  the  rock
walls of a maze  of tunnels.  Being  confined in Earingell had been  a  hateful
experience. And if the tunnels here were as extensive as Erith thought, they
might  wander  around  for  days  before  finding  Misty's  prison.  That  would
give  them  food  and  water  problems,  and  increase  the  chances  of  being
detected.
"I defer to your judgment, Leo, as always," Erith said quietly.
"I think we can make that final climb from the snowline in a single night.
Will it be too cold for you without clothes?"
"I do not believe so. Only prolonged cold without protection can drain a
Shemsi of warmth."

The sun had been setting when they awoke, and darkness  spread across
the rugged high country  as they  talked. Leo  ate some  of  the  roasted  meat
left  from  his  last  kill,  and  they  resumed  walking.  Within  two  hours  they
reached the gentle incline that was the first true slope of the mountain itself.
Two more hours of easy climbing brought them to a small prominence, and
they  detoured  around  it  to  the  left.  When  they  were  almost  to  the  point
where they  could start upward again, Erith  suddenly  stopped and reached
back to grasp Leo's  arm.  And  a few seconds  later they  heard the  voices  of
the returning party Erith had spotted.
The guards were approaching from the opposite side. Leo looked quickly
around for shelter;  there  was little nearby.  Erith  dropped flat  and  huddled
against the base of the cliff, which was in deep shadow. Leo imitated him. A
minute  later a group  of  Shemsi  adults,  wearing  normal  body  harness  and
armed with both  handguns  and  sonic  rifles,  appeared  out  of  the  darkness
ahead.  They  were  talking  quietly  among  themselves,  and  even  from  this
distance Leo caught the tone of weariness.
The party  of about  eight turned west just  before  reaching the  rock face,
and  started  climbing.  As  soon  as  they  were  out  of  sight,  Erith  wriggled
forward to the end of the rock and cautiously looked around it. Leo followed
him.  One  moon  in  the  east  threw  the  slope  immediately  ahead  into  clear
relief, and they  watched the  party  toil up it for about  seventy  meters.  The
leader entered  the  dark shadow of a small vertical face,  and Leo  heard the
creaking  sounds  of  a  heavy  door  opening.  The  others  followed,  and  a
moment later the door creaked again as it was closed.
"So we have found a tunnel," Erith said aloud. "But it is probably  one  of
the heavily-used main entrances."
"Yes; let's stick to the original plan."
They resumed climbing, following the guards. The door, dimly visible in
the vertical rock face, was of wood, and massively constructed. They passed
it  by  and  detoured  around  the  small  cliff  in  which  it  was  set.  The  slope
ahead  was  growing  more  steep,  and  the  chill  in  the  air  had  become
noticeable.
The  climb  was  difficult  but  uneventful.  When  dawn  broke,  they  were

past  the  first  scattered  traces  of  snow.  For  once  luck  was  with  them,  and
they found a sheltered little depression, free of snow, in which to sleep.
That evening Leo ate the last of his food and water. While waiting for the
first moon  to rise,  he  filled the  canteen  with snow and held it between  his
inner  and  outer  garments.  By  repeating  this  three  times,  he  obtained
adequate drinking water. An hour after dark they set out for what he hoped
would be the last hard leg of their climb.
For six hours they toiled upward, making slow but steady progress.  The
going was much harder than it had been, but they managed without the use
of  mountain-climbing  equipment.  And  when  Leo's  legs  were  an  aching
torment  and  his  lungs  seemed  continually  starved  for  air,  they  finally
reached  the  rearing  side  of  the  central  cone  itself.  It  rose  before  them,  as
straight and smooth  as  the  wall  of  a  building;  and,  without  ropes,  pitons,
and grapples, as unclimbable.
Leo looked up, estimating  they  were within less  than  a hundred meters
of the top. To be stopped now…
"Let's work our way around and look for a cleft or chimney,"  suggested
Leo. "We could split up and go both ways, or—no, let's stay together, in case
one of us falls."
The  slope  they  stood  atop  was  steep  enough  to  make  falling  a  distinct
possibility. Leo mentally flipped a coin and went to his right, moving slowly
and  carefully.  He  soon  discovered  it  was  easier  to  climb  than  to  scrabble
sideways. The second moon went down and the light became very dim, but
practice  had  considerably  improved  Leo's  night  vision.  They  pressed  on,
and just as a soft gray dawn lightened the  peaks to the  east,  Erith  found a
chimney.
The  narrow  fissure  in  the  vertical  wall  crooked  and  turned  until  it
vanished upward. Leo braced himself  at the  bottom  and threw small rocks
up between  the  curving walls, as hard as he  could hurl them.  By  listening
intently to the ricochets, he satisfied himself that none had hit a solid ceiling.
But there was no way to be certain the way was open except to climb.
Leo  placed his back  against one  wall and his feet  against the  other,  and

started upward.
The  fissure was a comfortable  150  centimeters  wide at  first,  but  swiftly
narrowed  to  slightly  less  than  a  meter.  By  using  his  knees  for  support
instead  of  his  feet,  Leo  managed  to  squeeze  past  the  close  part.  Then  it
widened  until  the  center  was  almost  two  meters  across,  further  than  he
could bridge with his body.  Leo  worked his way  in  until  he  was  near  the
inner wall, and found enough purchase there to keep going.
Twice  he  had  to  stop  and  rest.  Each  time  Leo  thought  he  could  never
force his tired muscles to move again, that he  must  inevitably  lose his grip
and fall, to end as a bloody jelly on the rock below. Each time he thought of
Misty, of the certain knowledge she would be waiting for him, depending on
him. She was his partner, his lover, and his mate. Without her there was no
point  in  living—and  Leo  loved  life,  and  every  joy  and  sorrow  it  brought
him. Both times he somehow found the strength to start again, to place his
palms against the, rock and slip his back upward, to move first one  foot up
and then the other, to repeat. With exhausting slowness, with bruised hands
and raw back, he climbed.
Leo  was  dizzy,  his  eyes  swimming  and  his  vision  impaired,  when  his
upper back suddenly felt empty space.
He froze, then tentatively moved one hand upward. He  was flat against
an edge of rock, with air on all sides. He blinked his eyes until he could see
clearly again. He was at the top.
Leo  struggled  up  a  few  more  centimeters,  leaned  back,  and  pushed
himself violently away with his feet. He slid a little, until his buttocks  were
resting on a firm surface,  and stopped.  He  had  only  to  wriggle  backward,
and he was safe.
Leo lay as though dead for a moment,  not even  breathing  deeply.  Then
gradually he stirred, sat up, and looked around. The  top of Birth  Mountain
was rugged and uneven, covered with a light coating of snow. The sun was
now well up, bringing a welcome  warmth  to his face.  He  could see  inward
for over a hundred meters, to what seemed the inside edge.
As his brain began to recover, Leo thought of Erith. He did not know the

limits of the Shemsi's strength, but doubted it was as great as his own. And
Erith's delicate skin could never survive that ascent up the rough face of the
rock.
Leo lay on his belly and leaned over the edge of the chimney. "Erith!" he
called softly. "Can you hear me?"
"Yes, Leo," a muted voice came back. "Are you well?"
"Yes. I'm at the top. Are you ready to try it?"
There was a moment of silence. Then Erith said, "As ready as I shall ever
be, Leo."
Leo stood up and removed his outer garment. There were no protruding
edges sharp enough  to snag it on the  way down. "Erith,  I'm  dropping  my
smelly coat to you. Put it on to protect your back. Ready? Here it comes!"
Before Erith could protest  that Leo  would freeze  without it, he  dropped
the furry animal hide. Seconds later Erith acknowledged that he had it. Leo
looked  around  for  a  shelter  from  the  light  wind  blowing  across  the  peak
from the west, and found one at the base of a low ridge. It was free of snow.
He curled up into a ball for warmth, and waited to see if Erith would survive
the climb. If the Shemsi  died in the  effort,  exposure  would probably  finish
off Leo in short order. But he had no choice in the matter. Erith had to have
the coat.
Despite the cold, Leo fell into a light doze. He was awakened by  a voice
saying, "Best resume wearing your stinking garment, Leo, before you freeze
to your death. I am glad to be rid of it."
Leo  struggled  back  to  wakefulness,  to  see  a  pale,  tired,  but  perfectly
healthy Erith crouching by him. And Erith was right. Leo's body was numb
and chilled. A few more hours and he would never have awakened.
Leo  struggled  into  the  stiff  hide.  Erith,  seemingly  oblivious  to  the  cool
breeze still blowing across the top of the mountain, stood waiting while Leo
stamped  around  on  the  uneven  rock,  trying  to  restore  full  circulation  to
numbed feet. Leo wondered if he was going to suffer frostbite, then realized
it was too soon to know.

It  would  be  best  to  reach  a  lower  level  before  dark,  if  possible.  Every
meter down meant a little less chill. When he felt almost normal  again, Leo
walked to the inner edge. It was even more straight and forbidding than the
outer side.
Leo looked out over the interior of the caldera. About  a kilometer  below
he saw strips of rich green grass, alternating with many long narrow bodies
of water.  They  stretched  across  the  valley  floor  to  the  opposite  rock  wall,
four kilometers  away.  There  was a light haze  in the  air, and  visibility  was
poor. Probably  an upper air phenomenon  caused by  the  meeting  of warm
and  cool  air  currents.  Leo  could  make  out  what  seemed  to  be  a  few
structures on the ground whose  purpose he  could not identify.  There  were
many  adult  Shemsi  moving  around,  performing  tasks  whose  purpose  he
could not discern.
Erith  had  silently  followed  Leo,  and  stood  gazing  down  at  the  interior
with a troubled expression. Leo could almost hear his thoughts. His life had
begun  in  some  nearby  birthing  chamber,  as  a  tiny  egg  expelled  from  the
huge mass of Erithain. After  an unknown period of time  in the  nursery  he
had been  taken into this  valley  for his first taste  of  sunlight.  He  had  been
two years  old when  some  unknown  keeper  plucked  him  from  among  the
younger  babies  and carried him  outside,  releasing him  among  the  trees  at
the foot of the  mountain.  Somehow  he  had  crawled  until  he  found  water,
had sought the sunlight during the day, had eventually grown until he  was
both  old  enough  to  find  fruits  and  able  to  eat  them.  And  when  the  first
touch of the inborn restlessness came, he had set out on foot—walking now,
and that too learned on his own—toward the rising sun. He had passed over
a  blackened  strip  of  land  without  knowing  what  it  was,  survived  the
carnivores waiting on the other side, moved on until he found his first gang,
joined…  and  eventually  colonized  Beta  Crucis  Two  and  ended  up  in  the
jaws of a horned carnivore, where he should have died.
Keeping just back from the edge, Leo set off to the south, seeking  a way
down. He  soon  found a chimney  similar to the  one  they  had climbed,  but
ignored it. Neither  he  nor Erith  could survive  a descent  that rugged. After
walking  for  more  than  a  kilometer  Leo  finally  saw  a  possibility,  a  gaping
crack in the rock face that extended over halfway to the outside. It was about

twenty  meters  wide  at  the  inner  edge,  and  so  rough  and  broken  that
climbing down should be relatively easy.
The crack reached a third of the way to the ground. Even if there was no
way  down  from  there,  it  should  be  warm  enough  for  them  to  rest  in
comfort. Leo crawled over the edge.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
« ^ » 
Leo  and  Erith  found  the  going  hard,  but  less  so  than  the  climb  up  the
chimney.  For  one  blessed  difference,  they  could  stop  and  rest  whenever
they chose. It took most of the morning to cover the 300 meters.
Although he was almost staggering with weariness, Leo worked his way
slowly  to  the  edge  and  looked  down.  There  was  a  steeply  slanting  ledge
running out of sight to his left. From here they could walk down for at least
another hundred meters.
Leo returned to Erith, found a reasonably flat spot on the solid rock, and
relaxed in the sunlight. Almost instantly he was sound asleep.
Leo awoke after dark, hungry, thirsty, and still tired. He drank the last of
his water and followed Erith out onto  the  ledge. He  did not know what he
would  do  if  they  followed  it  to  the  end,  and  found  no  way  down  to  the
valley floor from there.
The  ledge did end less  than  halfway  to  the  ground,  but  another  began
just below it, and ran downward back the way they had come. Erith almost
fell climbing down to it, but caught a grip with one flailing hand just in time
to save himself. Leo followed more  cautiously and had no problems.  They
walked  down  the  new  ledge  until  it  ended,  at  an  extrusion  of  rock  that
reached up from the caldera floor, still 200 meters below.
Wearily,  knowing it was now or never,  Leo  started  down.  The  sides  of
this imperfection  in the  inner  cone  were  rough,  affording  many  hand  and

toe holds. By now he was an experienced  climber,  and if there  was a way,
he would find it.
Before the sun rose the tired travellers stood on the soft green grass of the
valley floor.
And again the  sky  was gray in the  east,  though  the  wall  at  their  backs
was still in deepest  shadow.  So  exhausted  that  he  could  hardly  walk,  Leo
searched  for  some  place  to  sleep  through  the  day.  There  was  a  narrow
crevice at the rear of the extrusion, where it had worn away from  the  main
cone.  Leo  walked inside,  Erith  right behind  him,  and collapsed on the  soft
and  welcoming  grass.  He  was  covered  with  sweat,  his  exertions  in  the
rapidly  increasing  warmth  having  taken  him  from  cold  to  hot  as  he
descended.  He  felt  sick,  as  though  he  had  finally  reached  the  end  of  his
strength. Leo had just time to tell himself  he  would feel better  after a good
day's sleep before consciousness faded.
Leo  awoke  to  the  sound  of  voices,  and  a  hand  roughly  shaking  his
shoulder.  He  struck  out  blindly,  eyes  still  clouded  with  sleep,  and  heard
someone grunt with pain. And then something hard smashed into his head
and  consciousness  receded,  hanging  faint  and  dim  just  before  his  blurred
eyes. He felt someone pulling on his feet, dragging him out of the crevice. A
moment  later  strong  hands  helped  him  erect.  He  stood  blinking  in  the
sunlight of mid-afternoon, until his vision cleared. Erith was standing a few
meters  away,  gripped on both  sides  by  two  Domids.  His  own  arms  were
held, and standing in front of him was an Erithain, a sonic pistol in his hand.
The Erithain  turned away,  to confront  Erith.  "Identify  yourself,  brother,
and  explain  how  you  and  this  weird  creature  came  to  be  inside  Birth
Mountain.  You  are not of the  Guardians. From  the  looks  of  you,  it  seems
obvious  you  crossed  Stage  1  and  climbed  down  to  here.  The  penalty  for
unauthorized entry is death. What have you to say before it is executed?"
Despite  his obvious  fatigue, Erith  drew  himself  stiffly  erect.  "Brother,  I
walk  to  the  voice  of  the  Mothers!  Erithain  commanded  me  to  aid  this
Earthman  in reaching Birth  Mountain,  and  I  have  done  so.  You  had  best
consult with her before taking my life, or that of my companion."
"So you say," his accuser replied, his voice sour with suspicion. He turned

again to Leo.  "So  this  is  an  Earthman!  I  have  seen  his  soft  mate,  and  she
looks nothing  like this  one.  Indeed,  this  is a  monstrous  and  ugly  creature.
What is he called?"
"Leo," Leo said evenly in Shemsi. "I think you  will find Erithain  wanted
us brought before her, if we lived to reach this place. I suggest that you take
us there promptly."
The Erithain looked slightly confused. He had not expected Leo to speak
his tongue. Like many Shemsi in the lower skill levels, he did not seem very
intelligent. This situation was unprecedented, and beyond his grasp.
"Search them for weapons, then take them to Mother Erithain," suggested
one of the Domids holding Erith. "She will know the truth."
The Erithain nodded and swiftly hunted through Leo's clothes for hidden
weapons. He found a sonic pistol and Leo's bushknife. They already had the
sonic rifles and Erith's pistol. The projectile gun had been  abandoned  some
weeks before, after its last round was fired.
With Leo  and Erith  in  the  center,  the  band  of  guards  started  marching
across  the  caldera  floor.  Leo  noticed  that  two  Shemsi  kept  pistols  in  their
hands  at  all  times;  they  obviously  feared  his  size  and  strangeness.  They
could not know he was so tired and weak it was all he  could do to stagger
along without falling on his face.
The  guards  jabbered  back  and  forth  as  much  as  any  Shemsi  group.
Inadvertently, they answered at least one question for Leo. No one had seen
them  descend.  By  the  worst  possible  bad  luck,  a  passing  attendant  had
heard a strange noise in the cleft and investigated,  fearing an animal might
have somehow crept in. Finding  the  sleeping  intruders,  he  had summoned
the guards.
The noise, Leo felt certain, must have been his own stertorous breathing.
Erith slept as quietly as a baby.
For the  first time  since  he  had set  out to find Misty,  Leo  faltered  in  his
resolve.  It  was  so  incredibly  unfair  to  have  come  this  far,  endured  this
much,  only  to have  his efforts brought  to nothing  by  a freak of  chance.  A

watchful and malignant fate seemed to hover over him and Misty. He could
not endure living as a captive  here,  even  if he  had that option.  And  Misty
would wither away once her last hope was gone.
As  walking  gradually  restored  his  numbed  senses,  Leo  looked  around.
They  were passing by  one  of the  long and narrow bodies  of water he  had
seen from above. He saw that it was only  a few centimeters  deep,  with an
artificial  bottom.  The  sun  was  sinking  toward  the  west,  but  the  shallow
canals  ran  from  north  to  south,  and  the  central  part  was  still  receiving
warmth. The air itself was warm and humid, far more so than sunlight alone
could produce at this altitude.
A movement in the water caught Leo's eye. He looked more closely, and
saw several tiny  forms  floating on the  surface.  A  moment  later one  turned
over,  giving Leo  a clear look. It  was a  miniature  Shemsi,  perfectly  formed
but less than ten centimeters long.
"So that is how we spend the two years between hatching and expulsion,"
said  Erith  softly,  speaking  only  to  Leo.  "Our  bodies  at  that  age  must  be
naturally  buoyant.  Obviously  the  digestive  and  excretory  organs  are  still
dormant, and a baby lives and grows on carbon dioxide and water, with the
reactions powered by photosynthesis."
It  looked  somewhat  like  growing  fish  in  a  pond  to  Leo.  In  order  for  a
Mother to produce an egg every two seconds, they had to be very  small.  It
seemed obvious that the warmth of the nursery was only to hatch the eggs,
and the  creatures that  emerged  were  as  tiny  and  helpless  as  insect  grubs.
The energy generated by that remarkable skin enabled  them  to grow, once
in sunlight and water, but  there  was so little of it at first that progress was
slow. But with every added centimeter of length the amount of skin surface
increased dramatically. Most of their size gain probably occurred in the  last
few months before expulsion outside the mountain.
The  strangeness  of the  Shemsi  was borne  home  to  Leo  once  again.  An
adult was a reasonably close analog to a human,  but  he  reached that status
through a process both weird and terrible, from Leo's  viewpoint.  A  Shemsi
baby  never  knew  the  tender  care  of  a  mother,  the  warming  touch  of  her
hands;  he  never  experienced  the  feeling of  being  protected  and  loved.  No

wonder  they  grew  up  to  become  cool  and  unemotional  creatures,  lacking
compassion  and  understanding.  As  adults,  their  conscious  recognition  of
brotherhood,  and  strong  sharing  of  group  ambitions,  were  deliberate
attempts to generate the sense of belonging they had missed as children.
The biology of the young Shemsi was so different from the human as to
defy comparison. A baby on Earth was born with all ten-billion brain cells in
place, though  many  were  not  fully  developed.  A  Shemsi  had  to  grow  his
from a tiny nucleus.  Probably  that explained  why  it took forty  Earth-years
for a Shemsi to reach physical maturity.
On  the  other  hand,  perhaps  the  slower  development  was  also  a  major
factor in the greatly increased life span. Forty years was not too high a price
to pay  if you  could then  expect  to live thirty  times  that length.  Even  with
the most advanced age-retarding techniques, an Earthman lived only  six  or
seven times his development period.
The guards led them across a low, railless bridge that spanned  the  canal
they had been following. Leo observed that all Shemsi babies visible  in the
water seemed roughly the same  size.  There  were a series  of bridges  across
the canals, all the way to the opposite side of the crater. As they passed over
several hundred different streams,  Leo  saw they  were connected  by  many
little  cross  waterways,  each  with  a  gate  in  the  center.  A  number  of
attendants  were  working  along  the  banks  of  every  separate  canal,  using
long-handled nets. The largest babies  were caught and transferred past the
locks, where they swam feebly toward the wider canals. Evidently  this  was
a continuing process.
On Earth  such  separation by  size  kept the  big  fish from  eating the  little
ones. Here it was probably to keep the  larger and more  active  babies  from
accidentally damaging the smaller ones.
The last two canals nearest  the  crater wall were shorter  than  the  others,
and  Leo  saw  why  as  they  approached  them.  Here  thousands  upon
thousands of Shemsi  about  half a meter  long were lying  on the  grass,  and
getting into or out of the water. These little ones were as tall as most human
babies, though much smaller because they lacked fat; their proportions were
the same  as those  of Shemsi  adults. They  could not yet  walk, but  crawled

with  vigor  and  strength.  And  their  eyes  were  open.  Leo  realized  that  all
those he had seen in the water kept their eyes closed.
Several hundred attendants around the last canal were picking babies up
from  the  grass,  comparing  them  in  length  to  a  short  staff,  then  either
replacing  them  or  tucking  the  squirming  bodies  into  four  mesh  baskets
suspended from  the  body  harness.  This  phase  of  the  work  was  evidently
ending for the day; the last babies were gathered up as Leo watched.
Those attendants carrying babies converged on a single open doorway in
the rock-face and disappeared, walking in a purposeful manner. Some of the
others  milled  about,  discussing  what  to  do  next  in  their  usual  chattering
style.  Their  mental  level  was obviously  not very  high;  nor  did  the  guards
seem  overly  bright.  Possibly  being  picked  to  stay  here  spared  them  the
turmoil  and  strife  of  trying  to  survive  in  the  woods,  but  also  prevented
development to their highest potential.
The  mild exercise  of walking had cleared Leo's  head,  and  he  felt  much
better.  His  attitude had  also  improved.  He  was  still  alive  and  on  his  feet.
Misty was here somewhere. All hope was not yet lost.
The guards led them through an enormous archway, cut like the smaller
doors out of the vertical rock. The inside had a vaulted ceiling, some twenty
meters  overhead.  It  reminded  Leo  very  much  of the  naves  of some  of  the
beautiful  old  churches  in  United  Europe  on  Earth.  The  resemblance  was
heightened by the use of immense woven tapestries to hide the vertical rock
walls.  Leo  realized  this  was  the  first  time  on  Creche  World  he  had  seen
decoration used as an art form, without some obvious practical reason for its
existence.
Many  smaller  arched  doorways  led  away  from  the  main  room.  Their
guards took them across the open space at an angle and entered one near the
rear on the opposite side. A short walk brought them to an antechamber; at
the opposite end was a wooden door. A  guard tapped on  it,  and  the  door
opened. Leo  heard a muffled exchange  with someone  inside,  and the  door
closed. It  was several  minutes  before  it opened  again. Leo,  Erith,  and  four
guards  were  ushered  inside.  The  guards  left  their  weapons  with  the  ones
who were not admitted.

Leo saw that the two attendants escorting them had long knives hanging
from their body harnesses. So long-distance weapons were not allowed near
a Mother.
They passed through a short  corridor to another  door, which opened  as
they  approached.  The  two  attendants  led  the  way  inside,  Leo  and  Erith
following. The guards brought up the rear.
"MOTHER!" Erith cried loudly, and went to his knees.
Three  enormous—females?—stood  together  in  the  center  of  the  richly
furnished  apartment.  Around  them,  so  real  and  palpable  it  was  almost
visible, hovered an aura of raw power, a sense of vast and majestic presence
—as  though  the  natural  powers  of  quaking  mountains,  flaring  suns,
collapsing stars, were all held under control in their bodies. They were as tall
as Leo, bald and hairless like all Shemsi, and equally pink—but there was a
softness  in  the  body  tissues,  a  lack  of  hard  muscles  in  the  arms,  a  gentle
roundness to the hips. And they wore clothes. Long, loose white robes, very
similar to the ancient Roman togas, hung from their shoulders  to their feet.
They were full-bodied, but not as fat as the Shemsi folklore had caused Leo
to  expect.  Their  features  were  more  full  and  rounded  than  those  of  their
children, but otherwise very similar. The one facing them was unmistakably
Erithain, and the other two Domidain and Ferilain.
The  one  major  missing  characteristic that indicated "female"  to Leo  was
breasts.  Women  that tall and stout  would normally  have  massive  bosoms.
These queens of the Shemsi had none.
Erithain  took  a  step  toward  them.  Her  voice  was  deep  and  strong,
vibrant,  and  subtly  feminine.  "Rise,  my  son.  You  have  done  well.  Stand
before me."
Erith  rose  to  his  feet.  Leo  saw  a  look  of  mingled  ecstasy  and
apprehension  on  his  face  as  Erithain  approached  him.  The  tall  Mother
reached with both  hands  and clasped  Erith's  head.  Leo  saw  his  face  grow
pale, and the eyes close. He sagged in her odd embrace, almost falling. The
big hands and arms supported him. For  several  seconds  the  frozen  tableau
held, while the other  two Mothers  quietly  watched. Then  Erithain  released
her child, and Erith crumpled slowly to the floor.

Leo  saw that Erith  was unconscious,  not dead. Erithain  gestured to two
waiting attendants,  who seized  Erith  by  the  arms  and dragged  him  out  of
the room. He was breathing heavily, as though in shock. Evidently Erithain
had invaded and drained his mind  again; probably  just  of events  that had
occurred since the first time.
"They  were  held  captive  by  the  Underground  Council,"  said  Erithain,
turning  back  to  her  sisters.  "We  should  have  expected  this.  That  group
grows ever more bold."
"It would perhaps  have  been  prudent to keep in closer touch with your
child, sister,"  said Ferilain.  Her  voice  was the  most  mellow  of  any  Shemsi
Leo had heard, rich in tone and timbre.
"Have  you  let  your  children  run  wild  while  I  slept,  sister?"  asked
Domidain, and Leo learned that all three sounded much alike. "This burning
curiosity that drives  you  will  be  the  death  of  the  Shemsi!  Why  must  you
dabble with changes to the old ways?"
Ferilain turned to the guards. "You  may  go. Our attendants  will restrain
the Earthman should he become violent."
The  four  guards  turned  and  hurried  out,  without  ceremony.  The  two
inner attendants watched Leo alertly, hands  on their knives.  He  decided to
behave himself.
"We have gone through all that before,  Sister,  and agreed that our ways
must change,"  said Ferilain.  "Our seed  cannot  compete  with these  humans.
And who knows what other  vicious  and  destructive  life  forms  inhabit  the
enormous  reaches  of this  galaxy  into which our children are expanding?  If
they  can  indeed  do  with  their  science  what  we  cannot  with  our
bodies—grow  equal  numbers  of  males  and  females—then  we  must  stop
producing workers, and let a new kind of Shemsi inherit the world."
"The question, sisters, is whether the females now growing in the hidden
nurseries will be Mothers like ourselves, producing only one male or female
for each million sexless worker eggs, or equal numbers of both sexes, and no
sexless workers." Erithain's voice was low but intense. "We have decided to
let the  experiments  continue,  until  that  vital  question  has  been  answered.

Let us remain on the agreed course."
"I want to try something," said Domidain, walking toward Leo. She faced
him from a meter away, as tall as himself  and certainly  heavier.  There  was
great  majesty  in  her  presence,  a  habit  of  command  and  expected  prompt
obedience  that was as natural to her  as  breathing.  She  reached  out  slowly
and clasped Leo's head in her hands, as Erithain had done with her child.
And instantly Leo felt a vast and indescribable river of mental power rip
away the moorings of his mind, tear him loose, carry him away. He floated
on the surface of a stream of consciousness so strong and dense he could not
sink  within  it,  could  not  absorb,  could  not  breathe—and  knew  that  in
seconds, he could not live.
Domidain  released  him,  and  Leo  swayed  on  suddenly  weak  knees,
fought to stay erect, succeeded—and stood. Domidain turned away. "It is as
it was with the  little Mother.  His  mind  is too alien.  Not  even  the  physical
contact is enough. We can only communicate with him by speech and check
his answers for truth."
Leo breathed deeply, still dizzy, trying  to recover  his strength  and wits.
No wonder these females were virtual gods to their children! The  power  he
had felt…
But Leo had one subject on his mind, and one  only.  He  dredged up the
strength to ask, "Where are you keeping my bonded mate? Let me talk with
her and then I will answer your questions, if I can do so without harm to my
fellow human beings."
Ferilain  gave  him  a  sympathetic  look.  "Yes,  we  know  of  the  strong
emotional attachment bonded  Earth-people  tend  to develop  for each other.
Very well, you may join her now and we will question you again later."
The  other  two  sisters  nodded,  and  two  attendants  grasped  Leo  by  the
arms and led him away. It was all he could do to walk.
The two Shemsi took Leo  out a different door, through a series  of short
corridors, and into a long one that seemed to reach for kilometers  back  into
the mountain.  They  walked down this  one  for 200  meters,  took a left turn

into a cul-de-sac, and opened a locked door.
Leo was too weak to attempt an escape. He stepped inside as a dim form
sat up on a narrow bed in the corner, and the door closed behind him.
"Leo!"
Misty  had recognized  him  in  the  better  light  from  the  hall.  She  almost
bounded from the bed and flew toward him, with a muffled cry  of delight.
He  braced  himself,  and  she  leaped  off  the  ground  and  encircled  his  hips
with her legs,  in their  old  abandoned  embrace.  Her  arms  flew  around  his
neck, the small chin came down on his shoulder, and the long black hair was
pressed  against  his  left  ear.  He  almost  went  down  under  the  assault,  but
managed to step back and regain his footing. And then her head shifted, her
lips  met  his,  and  the  pain  and  struggle  and  torment  Leo  had  endured
vanished, had never been, and there was only Misty in his arms, warm and
real and human.
For the moment not another word was spoken aloud. It was enough that
they  were  together,  holding  each  other.  Leo  walked  across  the  small  cell,
turned, and sat on the bed, without shifting Misty from her position astride
him. Tenderly and quietly he held her, lips still together. It seemed an hour
before Misty finally pulled back, the most wonderful hour of Leo's life—and
then  the  soft,  bruised  lips  were  against  his  ear,  her  head  again  on  his
shoulder. They snuggled into each other as though seeking to merge.
For the first time in longer than he could remember, Leo actually relaxed.
His muscles softened, the fatigue that had been eating at his last reserves of
strength  asserted  itself,  and he  became  afraid he  would pass out where  he
sat. Gently he moved Misty to one side,  took off the  sturdy  boots  that had
served  him  so  well,  shed  the  dirty  skin  that  had  saved  him  from  a  cold
death on Birth Mountain, and crawled beneath the covers.
Misty instantly understood his need for rest. She slid beneath the  covers
with him, tucked his head onto her shoulder, and clasped his body tightly to
hers. The warmth and feel and delicious smell of her was the last thing Leo
knew before his senses faded.
Leo  and  Misty  were  sitting  side  by  side  on  the  narrow  bed,  quietly

talking, when  they  heard  noises  in  the  hall.  According  to  his  wrister,  Leo
had slept for over twelve hours before being awakened by guards delivering
food.  Now  that  he  was  rested  and  his  stomach  full  for  the  first  time  in
weeks—and most of all because he and Misty were together again, Leo was
almost content.
The  door opened  and Erith  entered.  Leo  had  grown  accustomed  to  the
many  differences  between  Erithains  caused  by  aging  and  varied
environments;  now he  could easily  identify  his fellow traveller.  There  was
also something subtly different about Erith that had developed over the last
six  months,  an  animation  and  awareness  possessed  by  few  Shemsi.  The
variety of unique experiences he had undergone with Leo had changed him
for good.
"Greetings, my friend. And the courtesies of first contact to you,  bonded
female." (Erith could not know how close his inappropriate greeting to Misty
came to being an insult.) "Leo, Mother Erithain wishes to speak with both of
you, with myself in attendance."
There were four of the inner attendants with their long knives outside in
the corridor. Leo shrugged and turned to Misty. She  linked one  arm in his,
gave  him  a  quick  smile,  and  they  followed  the  leading  guard  through
another maze of tunnels. Misty  pointed out corridors and doors that led to
different areas of this  immense  baby  nursery,  explaining  that  the  Mothers
had  allowed  her  to  roam  freely  so  long  as  she  was  escorted  by  armed
attendants. She was only locked in for her sleep periods.
"I've also talked to Ferilain and Erithain a few times," Misty added. "They
have an absolutely voracious curiosity about Earth and the human species."
(Leo  could  have  listened  all  day  to  Misty's  soft,  slightly  husky  voice.)
"Domidain  seems  to have  less  interest,  but  she  only  awakened  out  of  the
year's birthing a few months  ago. One of the  others  was supposed  to have
taken  her  place  then,  but  the  ordinary  routine  has  been  broken  for  some
reason."
"That change is the talk of the Shemsi here," said Erith.
"But all three stay very busy," Misty went on.  "Being  gods and mothers
to  twelve  billion  children  keeps  them  well  occupied.  Erithain  wanted  to

spend more time talking to me, since she can't read my mind and absorb  it
all in one gulp, but each time  we try  she  gets  interrupted.  I've  managed  to
give her a lot of general background, though."
That  was  Misty's  subtle  way  of  informing  Leo  she  had  talked  in
generalities without releasing much hardcore data. He would have to do the
same.
At least Misty had been well-treated here. Lingering in the back of Leo's
mind  throughout  the  long  journey  had  been  the  fear  the  Mothers  might
subject  her  to  destructive  biological  tests.  That  would  have  fitted  in  with
what he  had seen  of Shemsi  indifference to the  welfare of others.  It  hadn't
happened—but  it  still  could,  if  he  didn't  get  her  out  of  this  fortress
promptly, and safely home.
CHAPTER TWELVE
« ^ » 
A  few  minutes  of  walking  brought  Leo,  Misty,  and  Erith  back  to  the
chamber where the travellers had first met the Mothers. Now only  Erithain
and a few attendants were there. She was seated in a large comfortable chair,
pushed back almost to the tapestry hanging from one curving wall.
Erithain gestured for her guests to sit on a padded bench in front of her.
Leo noticed that two of the attendants quietly moved in behind the  visitors
as they seated themselves.
"Are  you  well,  little  Mother?"  asked  Erithain  of  Misty.  "Have  all  your
wants been provided as I directed?" To  Leo's  surprise,  there  was a marked
respect in her voice. Evidently Misty had made a strong impression  during
her stay here.
Which  should  not  really  have  been  a  surprise  to  Leo.  He  knew  of  the
quiet inner  strength  his partner possessed,  and  how  resolute  she  could  be
under stress.  But  perhaps  part of the  respect  accorded  her  was  due  to  her
biology.  Misty  was  not  actually  a  mother,  but  she  had  the  capability  to

become one. She and Leo  had planned to have  a child when  they  finished
their tour of duty in the Space Service.
"All but  one,  Mother  Erithain,"  Misty  replied,  and  Leo  was  surprised  a
second time. There was warmth, even affection, in her soft voice. "But if you
could not release  me,  at  least  you  have  had  what  I  wanted  most  brought
here instead. With that I am content for now."
"He  brought  himself,  as you  said he  would  given  the  slightest  chance,"
replied  Erithain  with  a  broad  smile.  It  was  apparent  she  had  a  far  more
lively and expressive personality than her offspring. "Truly, I did not accept
as  believable  your  assertion  that  your  bonded  mate  would  find  his  way
here.  The  logical course  of  action  was  for  him  to  return  home  and  seek  a
new mate. Therefore I decided to study his efforts, and assigned one child to
aid  him  and  record  their  progress.  It  has  been  a  most  productive
experiment. I  have  learned that Leo  always led the  way,  drawing on Erith
only for knowledge. He has performed an amazing feat, one I do not believe
any Shemsi would have  lived to complete.  If  this  ability  is inspired by  the
quality  you  call love,  as  you  have  stated,  then  this  'love'  is  a  very  strong
motivating agent. I would like to study it in more detail."
"Mother  Erithain,  love  is  a  human  quality  that  does  not  yield  much
information under a microscope or scalpel," Misty said, looking at Leo with a
slightly mischievous grin. This was the first time Leo  had heard that Misty
knew he was on his way to her, and that her strong words to her captors had
made his mission possible. "Love is more nearly in Ferilain's  province  than
yours, and even she has no way to relate to heterosexual love."
"Perhaps  so.  Among  us,  males  are  little  more  than  seed-carriers.  The
same  genetic  anomaly  that  occasionally  produces  a  male  with  sex  organs
also destroys his mind. Only new Mothers are hatched with both minds and
reproductive organs."  Erithain  had turned  until  she  was  facing  Leo;  Misty
must have heard this before. "Mating with one is a hateful act. We endure it
because  we  must,  and  it  is  only  necessary  once  every  three  years.  The
male's life is terminated afterwards, to be certain we never  mate  twice with
the  same  individual.  We  keep  hoping  for  some  genetic  diversity,  a  few
desirable changes in the pattern. None ever appear. And the Shemsi species
has  grown  so  large  and  spread  so  far  that  we  are  losing  control  of  our

children."
"Is rigid and complete direction so necessary?" asked Leo.
"Our control is never  unbending.  The  pattern  of our civilization  has  not
developed in such a fashion that this is possible. But our rule is strong, and
this must  continue.  Our children,  whether  Erithain,  Ferilain,  or  Domidain,
lack  a  certain  ability  to  ...  effectively  synthesize,  to  extrapolate  from  the
known  to  the  unknown  in  a  manner  that  yields  new  data.  I  believe  the
human term is 'creativity.' Only we Mothers are truly creative, and our time
is  necessarily  taken  up  with  guidance  and  administration.  We  have  done
well  as  a  people  until  now,  but  new  stresses  caused  by  our  expansion  to
other worlds, and the great number of workers living at once, are tearing our
society  apart. For  one  of the  few times  in our recorded history,  no Mother
lies  sleeping  in  the  Birthing  Chamber.  We  have  agreed  that  birthing  will
cease  until  some  of  our  problems  are  resolved,  and  the  experiments  the
Underground Council have undertaken have yielded their results.
"I am aware that you wish to return to your  own people,"  Erithain  went
on.  "That  may  not  be  possible  for  many  years.  Erith  Six  Two  Seven  will
want you humans to bear  children,  so that he  and his associates  can study
the child developing  in the  womb.  He  will need  fresh  sperm  and egg cells
when  those  he  took  from  you  two  become  weak  with  age.  Until  you  are
needed in  Earingell,  we  will  provide  more  spacious  quarters  for  you  here
and see to your physical comfort. Since you, Leo,  have  learned to trust my
son here, I am directing him to remain with you. And when time permits, I
would like to speak with you again. The transfer of information  by  voice  is
tediously slow, but you are a very interesting people,  and I  would learn all
about you that I can. Now what is your first desire?"
"To  have  a  guided  tour,"  Leo  said  promptly.  "Your  people  are  as
fascinating as mine, Mother Erithain,  even  though  less  varied.  I  would like
to see what is for us a most unusual and interesting place."
"Very  well.  These  two,"  she  gestured  at  the  nearest  attendants,  "will
accompany  you.  You  may  go anywhere  except  the  Birthing  Chamber  and
the quarters of the males. Since I cannot read your mind, Leo, I do not know
your intentions. Be aware that any attempt to escape will be punished." She

rose, staring into Leo's face as the humans got to their feet. "And yet I think
that will not deter you; the same strength which brought you here, will urge
you on your way again. Know this, Leo. Though both of you are valuable to
us,  you  are  not  indispensable.  And  though  I  have  developed  a  feeling  of
sisterhood for this  small Mother  you  call your  bonded  mate,  I  will  punish
her as well if either of you violate my rules. Now you may go."
Leo  nodded,  and  almost  bowed.  There  was  an  imperial,  truly  regal
quality  about  a Mother,  almost  a grandeur…  but  he  would  defy  her  if  he
must. No one was going to keep Misty and himself imprisoned here for the
rest of their lives.
"Let's take Leo to see the nursery," Misty suggested to Erith as they  left.
Since the Shemsi had not seen it himself, he cheerfully agreed. Misty  asked
the two attendants to conduct them there.
Their way led through a maze  of corridors and back  to the  huge central
chamber,  then  across it to another  of its many  entrances.  They  walked  for
several minutes  down a steeply  descending,  almost  featureless  tunnel,  one
without  connecting  passages.  It  finally  ended  at  a  massive  wooden  door.
Leo  noticed that the  air had  grown  steadily  warmer,  as  though  they  were
approaching an underground hot spring or some other source of geothermal
heat.
The guards, who did not seem to fear Leo or be particularly alert, opened
the door and led them inside. They were in an immense room carved out of
the rock, with a ceiling less  than  three  meters  high that  was  supported  by
frequent rock columns. Unlike the tunnels and chambers he had seen so far,
this one appeared entirely artificial. Leo  thought  of the  labor that had been
required to slowly carve away this rock with hand tools—he had yet to see a
power  tool  inside  Birth  Mountain—and  shuddered.  But
 then  he
remembered these people had lived here for untold thousands of years.
The  dominant  feature of the  nursery  was a  series  of  long  tables.  These
twisted and turned around the rock columns until the eye grew dizzy trying
to  follow  them.  The  tables  reached  to  Misty's  waist,  were  about  a  meter
wide, and had sideboards ten centimeters high. They were filled to the level
of  the  sides  with  grass,  ranging  from  the  bright  green  of  freshly  plucked

stems to the dark brown of dried-out hay.
As  usual  with  the  Shemsi,  the  area  was  crowded  with  workers.  Some
were removing old dry grass and replacing it with fresh.  Others walked up
and  down  amid  the  tables,  carrying  large  buckets  of  water  slung  around
their necks. They were heavily sprinkling the  grass,  using gourd-like ladles
with  small  holes  punched  in  one  side.  Others  were  methodically  looking
through the browner sections for eggs that had hatched.
Leo noticed that a sheen of perspiration had appeared on his face, though
he was doing nothing  more  vigorous than  walking. It  was both  noticeably
warm and very humid in the nursery.
Leo and Misty received many curious stares, but no one spoke as Leo led
the way to the nearest table where the grass had turned brown. He stopped
and  stood  watching  a  Ferilain,  who  was  searching  with  great  delicacy
through the decaying layer. Evidently the heat of decomposition, combined
with the natural warmth of the room and the artificially high humidity, were
all that was required to hatch Shemsi eggs.
The  Ferilain gently  lifted a small object  from  the  grass.  Leo  saw  a  tiny
Shemsi,  less  than  two  centimeters  long.  Its  arms  were  crossed  over  the
diminutive  chest  and the  head was bent  forward. The  nurse  placed  it  in  a
basket hanging from his shoulder. Leo saw that it too was filled with brown
grass.
The  searching  fingers  found  another  hatchling.  This  one  had  its  head
down and the  arms  bent,  partially curled  into  a  crouch.  The  Ferilain  let  it
rest in his palm for a moment and measured it with a device he pulled from
his harness. Then he replaced the tiny figure in the grass.
"That one hasn't uncurled enough yet," Misty explained. "They are ready
for the  water when  they  unbend  to a certain length.  The  egg is  just  a  soft
covering, not a hard shell, and it dissolves in a warm and moist atmosphere.
The  Shemsi  baby  is curled up  inside  in  a  fetal  position,  very  much  like  a
human baby in the womb—though that's about the only resemblance."
"They start breathing spontaneously?" asked Leo.

"I don't think 'breathing' is quite the right term. As best I can tell from  a
superficial  examination,  a  Shemsi  hatchling  absorbs  carbon  dioxide,  and
later water, through that unique  skin.  The  lungs  develop  while  it  floats  in
the  water,  and  the  cells  in  the  skin  gradually  change  from  being  passive
acceptors  to  actively  producing  energy  from  sunlight  and  air.  I  couldn't
hazard  even  a  good  guess  on  the  changes  that  occur  at  the  cellular  and
molecular levels.  After  the  transformation  is complete,  and the  lungs  have
filled out and taken up the work of respiration, the energy from the skin cells
goes  into  growth  activities.  I'd  almost  bet  there's  a  special  energy
transportation system between the outer cells and the internal ones, using a
carrier that would be the equivalent of adenosine triphosphate in ourselves.
However  it works, the  nutrients  seem  to be  simply  water and air, and  the
process is very slow at first."
"How long are the eggs in here?" asked Leo.
"About eight weeks. Something like one out of eighty won't uncurl and is
'terminated.' That's such a dreadful word, isn't  it? But  of course they  aren't
sentimental about eggs, or even hatchlings."
As  they  walked  through  the  seemingly  endless  room,  following  the
winding  rows  of  tables,  he  saw  more  of  the  primitive  quality  that  had
already struck him about Birth Mountain. All labor was done by hand, with
only crude tools.  This  entire  operation  could  easily  have  been  automated,
except possibly for the judgement required in removing hatchlings from the
grass.  The  work  being  done  in  this  room  by  thousands  could  have  been
accomplished by fifty people using machinery.
The  only  modern  devices  Leo  had seen  here  were  the  weapons  carried
by  the  guards.  And  even  they  were  for  outside  use,  obviously  imported
from  Stage  5.  Access  to  this  mountain  was  guarded  by  sophisticated
spy-eyes  and  killing  weapons  of  immense  power—but  little  of  that
technology  had been  allowed to penetrate  Birth  Mountain  itself.  They  had
probably functioned this same way since the first Mother stopped laying her
eggs in the  warm and wet  marsh  grass,  and  came  inside  the  mountain  to
attend them by hand.
Leo  wondered how many  billions  of  Shemsi  must  have  been  eaten  by

predators in primitive  days,  during that long two years  when  they  floated,
hidden  by  grass  but  helpless,  in  the  warm  shallow  marshes.  No  wonder
they had such a high reproductive rate! It had probably been necessary then
for the  species  to survive.  Now that  same  fecundity  was  making  them  an
expansionist  people,  seeking  needed  room  on other  habitable  worlds.  And
the Mothers were losing control of their incredibly numerous progeny.
Erith  had  been  unusually  silent  as  they  walked.  He  was  obviously  as
intrigued and awed as the two humans.  Not  many  Shemsi  had this  chance
to  see  their  origins.  And  of  course  the  guards  and  attendants  here  were
equally  ignorant  of  starships,  heavy  mining  machinery,  and  all  the  other
wonders of the technological world outside.
The  rest  of  the  tour  was  less  interesting.  They  saw  living  quarters
equipped with sunlamps powered by portable long-life batteries, another of
the  rare  items  imported  from  Stage  5.  Leo  would  have  bet  the  Birthing
Chamber was similarly equipped. Amusement and recreational pursuits for
the guards and attendants were limited. Primarily, they worked. There  was
no  library,  no  means  of  utilizing  taped  material.  A  small  number  of
attendants made body harnesses and wove baskets. A  select  group worked
on  new  tapestries,  always  ones  designed  by  one  of  the  Mothers.  Others
brought in fruit from the numerous  trees  in Stage 1  outside.  More  cleaned,
waited on the Mothers, and maintained a constant guard.
Leo  thought  these  people  had  the  most  monotonous  jobs  of  any
supposedly intelligent group he  had ever  known.  The  dullness of it would
have numbed his mind within months.
They returned to the cathedral-like entrance chamber and took a different
route to their new quarters. A bed large enough for both of them  had been
designed  and  built.  It  was  equipped  with  two  thick  mattresses.  Leo  bent
down and sniffed,  to identify  a familiar odor. They  had  been  stuffed  with
grass.
The room had two chairs and a table loaded with baskets of fruit, a water
jug, and a small platter covered with roasted fish. The heads and skins were
still on,  but  at least their unknown chef  had removed  the  intestines  before
cooking them.

Erith was able  to talk the  guards into supplying  some  wooden  utensils,
but no metal knives. Leo tried to eat everything  available,  but  his stomach
was still  badly  shrunken  and  would  not  hold  much.  Erith  joined  them  in
partaking of fruit and water, then said goodbye and left. The long walk had
tired him. Like Leo, he was still badly worn from the long trek and the final
mountain climbing.
"I'm going to ask Ferilain if we can have some tapestries for these walls,"
said Misty, looking with distaste at the bare rock.
"Don't  make  it too homey,"  cautioned Leo.  "We  aren't  going  to  be  here
that long."
Misty looked troubled. "Oh, I suppose I know that, Leo. But the thought
of  trying  to  escape  bothers  me.  The  Mothers  are  not  only  incredibly
powerful, they are… oh, totally Shemsi-oriented, unthinking of others. And
accustomed to absolute obedience. Do you know that a Mother can destroy
a child of hers,  anywhere  in  the  galaxy?  She  can  reach  into  his  mind  and
twist… and he  becomes  a vegetable.  What  chance  would  we  have  against
them?"
Leo told her about the device the Council of the Underground  had built,
to  shield  their  minds  from  the  Mothers.  Apparently  it  was  effective.  The
growth of science and technology had been very slow in Shemsi hands, but
they  had  at  last  reached  a  point  where  their  powers  were  in  some  ways
superior to a Mother's. And they held all the  weapons of mass  destruction.
If  the  biological  experiments  worked  out  so  they  could  perpetuate
themselves,  Leo  had  no  doubt  they  would  eventually  attack  Birth
Mountain, as they had said.
"You  mean  they  will try,  Leo.  Even  assuming  they  seize  control  of  the
satellites and turn off  the  lasers,  the  council  ships  will  have  to  fight  those
loyal  to  the  Mothers.  And  don't  be  too  sure  that  telepathic  shield  is
completely  effective.  The  Mothers  may  want  the  council  members  to  feel
safe and secure, even though they  can strike through the  shield.  Otherwise
they  might  be  afraid  to  continue  their  forbidden  biological  work.  I  don't
think the Mothers are really super-intelligent as compared to ourselves, Leo,
but  all  three  have  tremendous  stores  of  knowledge.  And  though  they

usually  have  no  need  for  subtlety,  I  have  a  feeling  they  can  be  devious
enough when subterfuge serves their needs."
"We have no real friends on either side," Leo pointed out. He  told Misty
of his original plan to return across Creche  World  to  Earingell,  and  steal  a
scoutship.  "That  still  seems  our  best  bet.  It  might  be  years  before  the
Mothers decide to turn us over  to the  experimenters  in the  council, if they
ever do."
"I don't want to spend the rest of my life on Creche World either," Misty
said  quietly.  "But  let's  wait  a  few  days  and  see  what  happens  before  we
make any  firm plans.  I  want you  to get your  strength  back,  and put some
meat on those big bones. Besides, it will take several days of bathing to get
you really clean again."
Leo grinned, and took her in his arms for a long kiss,  despite the  fact he
suddenly  realized  he  was  probably  exuding  a  very  ripe  aroma.  It  would
have accumulated gradually over the weeks and months, and the occasional
soapless baths  he  had  managed  would  not  have  kept  it  down.  But  to  his
own nose he smelled "normal."
"In  fact we can get started  now,"  Misty  said,  and  led  him  outside.  The
attendants escorted them to still another new chamber, this one containing a
large natural basin filled with steaming, smoky water. This  was the  Shemsi
communal  bath,  fed and drained by  underground  springs.  Under  the  dull
but  watchful  eyes  of  the  guards,  the  two  humans  stripped  and  joyfully
entered the water. It was not as hot as it appeared. There  was no soap,  but
Misty  took  handfuls  of  fine  sand  from  the  bottom  and  methodically
scrubbed Leo from head to toe,  sparing only  his eyes  and hair. He  relaxed
and enjoyed it.
The days fell into a pleasant routine of eating, sleeping, making love, and
talking  with  Erith  or  one  of  the  Mothers.  Misty  had  not  told  her  captors
about  the  intrauterine  device  in  her  womb  that  kept  her  from  becoming
pregnant,  and  Leo  cautioned  her  not  to  mention  it.  That  was  a  possible
ticket for a trip to Earingell,  when  they  were ready.  Extracting  it was a job
for  a  medical  specialist.  There  were  only  crude  tools  and  unskilled
technicians at Birth Mountain.

The  humans  were  always  called  by  one  Mother  at  a  time.  Erith  was
usually  present.  The  other  Mothers  were  apparently  busy  running  the
interstellar empire they commanded.
Domidain, who seemed the least willing of the three Queens to accept the
Underground Council, questioned Leo  and Erith  about  their experiences  in
Earingell. She  wanted fine and complete  detail, including every  minute  bit
Leo  could  recall.  Like  their  children,  the  Mothers  seemed  to  need  to  sift
through vast  amounts  of data to reach a conclusion—but  the  Mothers  had
almost inconceivable amounts of information stored in their brains  through
which to sift!
Domidain  was  very  interested  when  Erith  told  her  of  the  lie  detection
technique  the  biologists  in  the  underground  had  worked  out.  A  Mother
could  detect  a  falsehood  only  in  her  own  children;  the  drug  and  detector
worked on everyone.
The  humans  had much  free  time  on  their  hands.  Leo  spent  some  of  it
roaming Birth Mountain, until he was thoroughly familiar with every tunnel
and door. He was slowly formulating a plan of escape,  in case that became
necessary.  The  Mothers,  faced  with  the  need  for  change,  might  intend  to
relax their restrictions and let airplanes start flying over the forbidden stages.
If not, he and Misty could always walk back.
The captivity was boring, but pleasant and uneventful; a month went by.
Leo  regained  his  full  strength  and  much  of  the  weight  he  had  lost.  He
started a regular exercise program again, just as they  did during long space
voyages, and insisted Misty join him. Misty, who disliked exercise, willingly
equalled his efforts.
The  long lives  of the  Shemsi  gave  them  a different perspective  on  time
from  that  of  a  human.  At  the  end  of  five  weeks,  Leo  was  growing
ill-tempered  and  impatient.  Occasionally  he  and  Misty  had  little  spats,
though these were quickly settled. The Mothers were in no hurry  to decide
their fate, but Leo did not have their patience. During the next session with
Erithain he told her of the intrauterine device.
Erithain's  reaction  was  to  look  grave  and  slightly  troubled.  Leo  soon
learned that was only  because  it was strongly  against Shemsi  principles  to

prevent the start of life. It made them somewhat evil in her eyes. "Though I
must accept that your  ways  are not ours,  and obviously  a starship is not a
good birthing chamber," Erithain added.
"If you want Misty to bear a child, it will be necessary for us to return to
Earingell and let the technicians there remove the IUD," Leo pointed out.
"As of now, my children have no need to study Misty developing a baby.
The work is not that far along, though it is going well. Many embryos have
been  conceived  in  suitable  containers,  from  sperm  and  eggs  furnished  by
you  two.  Several  are  still  alive.  It  will  be  years  before  they  are  ready  to
study the intrauterine growth cycle.  The  extrauterine  experiments  must  be
completed first, and the data analyzed."
"In  that case we won't worry about  it,"  said Leo  cheerfully…  and  knew
even as he spoke that the decision to leave had just been made for him.
The  preparations  for  escape  were  relatively  simple.  They  would  exit
through one  of the  long tunnels,  avoiding the  difficult climb  up and down
Birth Mountain. Their prime needs would be warm clothes,  some  food, his
old canteen, and weapons. The heavy tapestries Misty had had installed on
their  walls  would  make  fair  blankets.  They  had  been  furnished  robes,
similar to the ones  worn by  the  Mothers,  and rough but  stout  shoes.  Food
and water were easily obtained. The weapons presented more of a problem.
Leo did some careful thinking and planning; eventually he managed to steal
two sonic rifles in such a fashion their owners would think them lost. It was
not difficult to obtain two of the long knives. A week from the  time  he  had
decided to flee, they were ready.
The  best  time  to  flee  was  mid-morning,  when  the  last  outside  patrols
were back  inside,  and  the  early  evening  ones  had  not  yet  gone  out.  That
would give them several hours start. Leo intended to cover as much ground
in the first day as he and Erith had normally travelled in two, and cross the
Stage 1 clear zone the third night. After that, by staying in the foothills and
travelling after dark, he felt they would be safe from recapture.
To accommodate their hours to the  Mothers  and most  of the  attendants
and guards, Leo and Misty had gotten into the habit of sleeping  during the
middle  of  the  day.  On  the  first  morning  after  their  preparations  were

complete, Leo and Misty left Erith and returned to their room.  Once inside
and with the  door closed,  they  swiftly packed their  stored  dried  meat  and
nuts,  filled the  canteen,  pulled the  tapestries  from  one  wall,  and  cut  them
into double-thickness full-length cloaks. In minutes they were ready to go.
The sonic rifles were noiseless in operation. Remembering that Erith had
admonished him about taking the life of a Shemsi—that seemed an age ago,
not a year—Leo opened the door very quickly, and aimed between the two
guards when they turned toward him.  The  sonic wave was so narrow that
close to the barrel it did not hit them directly,  but  there  was a bounce-back
effect  from  the  wall.  It  knocked  them  down—and  to  Leo's  surprise,  the
shock also drove him to his knees.
The  Earthman  recovered  first and hastily  regained  his  feet.  The  guards
were  jerking  and  twitching.  Leo  dragged  both  inside  at  once,  and  Misty
closed  the  door.  They  quickly  bound  and  gagged  the  Shemsi,  who  were
beginning to struggle. The relief guards would find them that afternoon.
Leo and Misty wrapped their food, water, and weapons in the two cloaks.
They  hoped  to  be  ignored  if  someone  saw  them  at  a  distance.  The  only
strangeness would be the lack of guards following them,  and most  of these
attendants were not bright enough to take alarm from that.
The  first short  corridor was clear.  In  the  intersecting  one  they  saw  two
Shemsi at a distance, but were ignored. Leo  led the  way to one  of the  long
tunnels  that ran all the  way outside,  meeting  with it  as  far  from  the  inner
walls  as  they  could  manage.  The  final  corridor  curved  and  crooked,
following the ancient vent from which it had been enlarged. In the area they
could see, not a Shemsi was in sight.
Leo  walked as fast as Misty  could  move  without  tiring.  There  were  no
more side tunnels or chambers, and it would be obvious to anyone they met
that the humans were leaving Birth Mountain. Leo took his sonic rifle from
concealment  and  carried  it  ready  to  fire.  This  time  they  might  have  no
choice but to kill.
Fortunately,  Leo's  planning  worked  well.  They  met  no  one  during  the
two  hours  walk.  And  they  finally  had  a  bit  of  luck.  The  tunnel  curved
enough to  keep  them  out  of  sight  of  the  guardians  at  the  door  until  they

were within about  eighty  meters.  Leo  had  established  that  the  sonic  rifles
could  stun  at  that  distance,  but  not  kill.  He  aimed  and  shot  at  the  two
Shemsi as soon as he saw them. They fell without a sound.
Misty  checked  the  guards  as  Leo  heaved  the  door  open.  They  were
deeply unconscious, but seemed certain to live. Leo closed the  door behind
Misty, and they walked free into bright sunlight.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
« ^ » 
Leo had decided to return the same way they had come, for the reason Erith
had  chosen  the  Western  Walk—familiarity.  The  Shemsi  would  probably
guess  they  had  gone  this  way,  but  that  hardly  mattered.  The  methodical
Mothers would send search parties in both directions, regardless.
They  started  down  the  first  steep  slope,  Misty  holding  Leo's  hand  for
balance.  Leo  was moving  swiftly,  to  get  out  of  sight  from  the  door.  They
scrambled and slid over the steeply descending surface. By the time the sun
slipped past the  edge of the  great cone  and shadow enveloped  them,  they
were walking on the less inclined lower slopes.
Just  before  dark  Leo  and  Misty  paused  long  enough  to  eat  and  drink,
then immediately set out again. Leo rigged a hand-held line back  to Misty,
whose eyes  were not accustomed  to night-walking. They  made  good time,
though he  knew  a  hard-marching  band  of  the  Shemsi  guards  could  equal
their pace.
Leo  had  chosen  a  way  that  paralleled  the  course  he  and  Erith  had
followed coming  in,  but  was several  kilometers  to  the  south.  It  was  a  less
direct route, but one that brought them more quickly to the foothills. When
the sun  came  up next  morning  and they  hunted  for a  place  to  sleep,  they
were less than two night's travel from the clear zone.
There had been no sign of pursuit. Nevertheless, Leo insisted they sleep
one  at  the  time.  They  could  afford  longer  rest  periods  once  the  larger

dimensions of Stage 2 had swallowed them.  If  Shemsi  guards passed  them
during the day, he wanted to know of it.
That  night  they  marched  while  the  sky  was  still  a  reddish  gold  in  the
west. Misty had not complained about the hard pace, but she already looked
worn  and  tired.  The  months  of  confinement  at  Birth  Mountain  had
weakened her,  and the  exercises  they  had undertaken  were not  enough  to
restore her full strength.
By  the  end  of  the  second  night  Misty's  feet  were  dragging,  and  she
occasionally  stumbled  and  jerked  on  the  line  Leo  held.  She  slept  heavily
through  the  entire  day,  but  seemed  to  have  recovered  some  strength  by
nightfall.  Leo  held  to  the  fast  pace  throughout  the  third  night,  and  just
before  dawn  they  reached  the  clear  zone.  This  time  Leo  saw  it  well  in
advance, crossing a small valley they were following.
It had been a long night, and though she had not complained, Misty was
obviously  exhausted  again.  Leo  had  wanted  to  cross  before  stopping,  but
smoke from the fire they would have to build would be visible  for miles  in
the clear morning light. He decided to wait until dark, and hunted a place to
sleep.
Leo  took the  first watch. He  had not called Misty  on  the  previous  day,
but was now too tried to do without sleep  again. He  awoke Misty  at noon,
and she  staggered  to  her  feet.  Leo  almost  instantly  fell  asleep,  but  awoke
two  hours  later.  He  saw  that  Misty  was  huddled  in  her  tapestry  cloak
against  the  rock,  sitting  up  but  dozing.  He  went  back  to  sleep  without
speaking. She might not spot a distant party passing them, but the sound of
anyone approaching would certainly awaken her.
In  the  early  evening  shadows  Leo  found  a  secluded  little  former  river
bed,  now  heavily  covered  with  grass.  By  retreating  up  it  a  few  hundred
meters  they  were  able  to  build  a  fire  that  could  not  be  seen  except  by
someone  passing  very  close  by.  While  Misty  burned  off  the  grass,  Leo
returned  to  the  valley  it  debouched  into  and  gathered  branches.  In  three
hours they had the small platform ready.
Since they were travelling in the correct direction, they  would be  able  to
walk freely across the other clear zones. Only on this one were the guardian

computers set to kill moving forms as large as Leo and Misty.
The first and largest moon  was up, giving a fair light. The  crossing was
uneventful, and Leo  heaved  a sigh of relief when  they  at last stood on the
other side.  He  broke  up the  little platform and  hid  the  fragments  in  some
thick  brush.  Misty  was  somewhat  shaken  by  the  extreme  tension.  They
walked for only a few minutes, continuing down the  pleasant  green  valley,
before they reached a stream and paused to eat and drink.
"Somehow  that…  computer-guarded  dead  strip  seems  to  typify  the
Shemsi for me, Leo," Misty remarked as they ate. "The computer obviously
can't  discriminate  between  large  but  harmless  herbivores  and  the  killer
carnivores  they  want  kept  out."  They  had  noticed  a  dead  and  rotting
herbivore  a short  distance down the  strip  as  they  crossed.  "The  system  is
very  efficient,  and it doesn't  matter  to the  Shemsi  if a  few  innocent  beasts
get killed along with the dangerous ones."
"I  suppose  that  lack  of  feeling  for  others  is  a  natural  outgrowth  of  the
extreme solidarity they achieve with each other," Leo answered. "Their only
source of warmth and emotional support is the group, whereas we start with
the  smaller  but  stronger  pair-bond.  I  think  the  basic  difference  lies  in  the
Shemsi  lack  of  sexuality.  Somehow  the  Mothers  built  up  an  elaborate
system  that substitutes  brotherhood  for family  ties.  The  attachment  to  the
group is very  strong by  the  time  a Shemsi  reaches  Stage 5.  It's  a  one-way
relationship,  in  that  the  group  never  places  too  high  a  value  on  any
individual. I  wonder if this  complex  system  would have  been  necessary  if
they  had  evolved  as  normal  males  and  females  instead  of  queens  and
sexless workers?"
"Or  if  they  would  have  gotten  as  far  as  they  have  without  those
marvelous skins," Misty said thoughtfully. "It's tempting to think of them as
hive creatures like bees or ants, but you can't carry the  analogy  too far. No
insect ever had genuine intelligence and individual self-determination.
"They  have  a workable social system—but  I  prefer ours,"  Misty  added,
suddenly  moving  into  Leo's  arms  for  a  quick  kiss.  He  held  her  tightly,
thinking of the year he had spent in Erith's company and of the  differences
between  Shemsi  and human  personal relations.  Erith  was  a  quiet,  selfless,

pleasant travelling companion,  but  he  lacked  the  fire  and  fury,  the  higher
capacity  for  both  receiving  and  giving  that  was  normal  for  humans.  On
Earth,  biologists  had  long  ago  established  that  the  Homo  sapiens  was  the
most sexually active animal known. That strong sexuality was an important
component of the human sense of individualism. Leo  was convinced  in his
own mind that sexuality, with all its attendant  problems,  developed  beings
of greater competence and range than creatures like the Shemsi.
Though Leo  would cheerfully  admit he  envied  all twelve  billion sexless
Shemsi workers their photosynthesizing skins and long lives!
Feeling somewhat refreshed by the pause and a lessening of tension, the
travellers  resumed  walking.  The  long  narrow  valley  they  were  following
ended  in  a  twisting,  turning  defile  that  separated  two  rocky  foothills.  Leo
kept  his  rifle  ready,  but  entered  it  without  hesitation.  He  and  Erith  had
travelled through many similar passages throughout these hills.
Leo cautioned Misty to stay close behind him. The only real danger was
some hungry  night-hunter  leaping down on them  from  a den in the  rocky
walls. And the sonic blast of the rifle could kill in midair if Leo  had even  a
second of warning.
Nevertheless,  Leo  breathed  more  easily  when  they  at last emerged  into
the open, at the beginning of a new and broader valley. But Leo was barely
free of the  rock  walls  when  a  loud  voice  called,  "Drop  your  weapons  and
stand!"
The shock, for a brief second, almost paralyzed Leo.
He  had  finally  let  down  his  guard,  admitted  to  a  feeling  of  safety  and
freedom.  But  directly  ahead,  clearly  visible  in  the  moonlight,  were  three
Shemsi, hurrying toward them. A fourth had paused, and had his sonic rifle
carefully aimed at the humans.
One of the three running Shemsi suddenly staggered, stopped,  and sank
to his knees, head back and arms extended. The posture was a familiar one.
He had been possessed by one of the Mothers.
So at least one of the Shemsi queens was personally supervising the hunt

for them.  Suddenly  Leo  realized what must  have  happened  and  saw  how
they  had  been  caught.  The  Mothers  had  taken  control  of  the  satellites
guarding  the  clear  zone,  ordering  the  Shemsi  controllers  to  perform  the
scans instead of the  computer.  At  the  same  time,  teams  of  hard-marching
guards  had  been  sent  to  cross  into  Stage  2  and  wait.  The  controllers  had
spotted the movement of the burned-grass  roof across the  dead area. They
knew  precisely  what  to  look  for,  because  Erithain  had  learned  of  the
platforms  when  she  drained  Erith's  mind.  And  then  the  closest  party  of
guards had been directed to intercept the humans, and had caught them.
Or had they? The two guards running toward them  were about  seventy
meters  away.  The  one  who  was  poised  to  shoot  was  at  least  forty  meters
behind  them.  At  that  range  Leo  did  not  believe  the  sonic  wave  could
seriously harm him. It was still possible to save Misty.
Leo  whirled,  placing  his  body  between  Misty  and  the  ready  rifleman.
"Run!" he shouted in English, just as her startled eyes  saw the  approaching
Shemsi.  "Go  back  through  and  cut  hard  right,  I  saw  another  way—"  and
then  a giant hand  seemed  to  seize  and  shake  Leo,  turning  his  muscles  to
jelly  and  his  blood  to  water.  He  sank  to  his  knees,  too  weak  to  stand,  as
Misty obediently whirled and sprinted out of sight.
A second  jarring wave passed  over  Leo,  this  time  seeking  Misty.  But  it
was too late.  Leo  was  briefly  shaken  unconscious,  but  his  eyes  opened  in
seconds—just in time to see his partner emerge from  the  narrow defile and
run to his side.
"They'll… punish…  you!"  Leo  managed  to gasp as Misty  knelt by  him.
"Erithain… said so!"
"Then  we'll  endure  it  together!"  Misty  said  angrily,  pulling  Leo's  head
into her lap. "Why did you try to send me off by myself, you big idiot!" She
held him, wiping at the blood that started pouring from his nostrils, until the
first two guards reached them.
The  Shemsi,  both  Domidains,  seized  Misty  and  bound  her  hands
together. Leo was obviously  helpless.  The  other  two joined  them,  and Leo
saw the one who had been possessed was an Erithain, and the last a Ferilain.

Leo rolled over to let his still bleeding nose pour onto the grass. The flow
was  slowing  as  the  burst  blood  vessels  gradually  clotted  closed.  He  had
been  lucky.  Some  of  the  smaller  veins  in  the  eye  could  have  ruptured,
bringing blindness.
The  Erithain  knelt by  Leo  and studied his  running  nose.  "We  will  wait
here until the bleeding stops," he announced to his companions. "This large
one  will  be  weak  for  a  time.  But  he  does  not  seem  to  have  suffered
permanent harm."
Leo felt as though he might never have the strength to walk again; he felt
sure the damage was permanent. But after a time he managed to struggle to
his feet, though the movement caused the bleeding to increase.  The  guards
watched him warily, obviously fearful of his size and strength. But  they  let
him keep his hands  free until the  nose  finally stopped trickling blood,  and
Leo could breathe almost normally again.
The guards tied Leo and Misty together  with a rope around their necks,
the  two  free  ends  held  by  a  guard  leading  the  way  and  one  following
behind.  The  other  two  walked  on  each  side.  Escape  was  virtually
impossible;  Leo  resigned  himself  to  the  thought  of  returning  to  Birth
Mountain. They would have to wait for another opportunity, and next time
plan better.
When the small group reached the clear zone they started across without
hesitation, confirming Leo's guess.
It took four days to reach Birth  Mountain  again. They  entered  the  same
tunnel through  which  the  humans  had  fled,  and  two  hours  later  Leo  and
Misty stood before the assembled sister Queens.
Domidain  was angry,  and clearly showed  it.  There  was  compassion  on
Ferilain's  face,  but  no  mercy.  And  Erithain  was  the  cold  and  remorseless
creature of logic and discipline that seemed to personify the Shemsi.
"You  were  informed  that  an  attempt  to  escape  would  result  in
punishment,  Leo,"  Erithain  began  without  preamble,  the  deep  voice  firm
and  emotionless.  "You  have  taken  up  most  of  my  waking  time  for  three
days,  time  which  could  have  been  better  spent  aiding  and  guiding  our

children."
"It  is  not  in  our  nature  to  willingly  remain  captives,  Mother  Erithain,"
Misty spoke before Leo could reply. "Even knowing we will be  caught and
punished, we will try again."
"You have already required more time and attention than you are worth!"
Domidain  said  angrily.  She  turned  to  Erithain.  "Have  you  considered
extracting more sperm and eggs and then terminating these two?"
"Yes. That would only partially satisfy our needs," Erithain said calmly.
"Then  let  us  fly  in  one  of  our  surgeons  and  let  him  dull  their  brains,"
suggested Domidain. "Your requirement is for their bodies."
"Not  so!"  Ferilain  quickly  interjected.  "I  wish  to  study  their  behavior
patterns, particularly the strong pair-bonding exhibited by  these  two. Their
brains must be functioning normally. And  as for your  punishment,  Sisters,
it must not be so severe  as to disrupt their usual behavior.  This  is the  first
chance I have had to study an intelligent male with sexual organs."
Domidain gave her sister Queen a dark look. To Leo, Ferilain and all her
children seemed the weak link in Shemsi society, the frail ones, hardly fit to
compete  with  fighting  spirit  or  rational  mind.  But  somehow  the  Ferilain
constantly  proved  their  worth.  Perhaps  compassion  and  understanding  of
others were as necessary  in a functioning society  as intellect  or  force.  And
besides,  Leo  had  to  keep  reminding  himself,  a  Ferilain  could  fight,  or  a
Domidain be a scientist. The characteristics they  inherited were strong,  but
there  was  plenty  of  room  for  individual  growth  and  initiative.  Not  every
Shemsi was a precise copy of his Mother.
"Ferilain  is  correct,"  Erithain  said  after  the  briefest  pause.  "Very  well,  I
will change  the  planned punishment  and  administer  it  at  a  later  date.  For
now," she addressed the guards, "return them to their room and place extra
attendants  in  the  corridor  on  both  sides.  They  are  not  to  leave  their
quarters."
The  guards obediently  hurried Leo  and Misty  to their old room.  It  had
not been  touched.  Worn  and tired from  seven  days  of  hard  walking,  they

collapsed into the comfortable bed.
Two  days  passed,  while  Leo  and  Misty  rested  and  recovered.  No  one
came to deliver the expected punishment. On the third day there was a tap
at their door. Knowing who it had to be, Leo called for Erith to enter.
Leo  was  right.  Erith  walked  in,  his  grave  expression  belied  by  a  small
smile tugging at the corners of his mouth. "Greetings,  travelling companion
and bonded mate. Leo, Mother Erithain has directed me to punish you both,
in such a fashion that you will suffer no permanent damage. I do not wish to
do  this,  but  a  child  may  not  disobey  his  Mother—as  the  Underground
Council will someday learn. Therefore you are to receive twenty lashes each
by my hand."
Erith was carrying a wide leather strap. It looked, in fact, too wide to be
very effective. "Where did you get that?" demanded Leo.
"Mother  Erithain  saw it in my  mind,  from  a  description  you  once  gave
me. My understanding is that it exactly  suits the  need,  producing pain but
no lasting harm. Will you be first, Leo?"
The strap did not look as though it could hurt unless wielded with a very
heavy hand. Leo shrugged and turned his back to Erith. For some reason he
could not explain, he  felt certain his companion  of a year  would not swing
hard.
Seconds later the  strap smacked  against  Leo's  buttocks.  It  made  a  loud
sound,  but  produced  only  a  little  pain.  Leo  endured  it  for  nineteen  more
strokes without difficulty. Misty watched, wide-eyed, until she saw Leo was
not even making a face. Erith had not bothered  to have  them  remove  their
robes.
Despite  his  supposed  impartiality  and  fairness,  Erith  was  noticeably
lighter on  Misty.  Or  perhaps  his  arm  was  growing  tired.  In  any  case,  the
blows were barely hard enough to redden her soft skin.  But  he  did deliver
the full twenty, as instructed.
Erith tossed  the  strap aside.  "Now  that is done,  and perhaps  we can  be
friends again. I think Mother Erithain was worried that you  and I  grew too

close  on  our  long  journey,  Leo.  Therefore  she  assigned  me  this  unusual
chore."
"Which you performed exactly as ordered," Leo said with a straight face.
"Now join us in eating some of these delicious fruits."
"Gladly," said Erith happily, and did so. But he ate only a little, while the
two humans disposed of a full meal of nuts and fruits. Erith had much to tell
them.
"I  have  seen  that  which  I  never  thought  to  see,  Leo,"  Erith  began.  "A
water leak developed in the quarters of the  males,  and I  was asked to lend
my knowledge in repairing it. I saw the thirty-two males who are alive at the
moment. They range in age from hatchlings to full adults and are the ugliest
sight  I  have  ever  beheld—even  more  so  than  you,  Leo."  (There  was  no
irony in his voice, and suddenly Leo realized he should have known earlier
that when remarks were made by Erith and other Shemsi about his ugliness,
they were simply stating a fact—as they saw it. To  them  he  was repulsive.
Erith  had  given  no  sign  of  letting  this  bother  him,  in  all  their  months
together.) "As we expected, the genital and excretory  organs are combined,
as with most  egg-laying creatures.  And  the  males  are even  larger than  the
Mothers! A mindless, mewling,  helpless  lot of ill-smelling flesh,  less  by  far
than the  beasts  of the  field. It  is saddening to know one  like that fertilized
my Mother's eggs."
"We humans have a philosophy that says it is what you  are that counts,
not your ancestry, Erith," Misty told him.
"With us that philosophy could never prevail," replied Erith.
Misty  had  to  smile.  For  a  Shemsi,  whose  life  to  a  large  extent  was
determined by which Mother he sprang from, this was obviously true.
"Birth Mountain is rilled with loose talk," Erith went on. "So much so the
Mothers  have  directed  the  attendants  to  stop  repeating  unproven
assumptions.  That  is one  order not even  the  Mothers  can enforce,  for  it  is
part of the nature of a Shemsi to share knowledge and speculation."
"Give us some examples," suggested Leo, curious.

"For one, the Mothers appear to have lost control of the monitor network
that guards the clear zones. They took active charge while searching for you,
and disrupted the  normal  routine.  When  they  released the  system  back  to
the  Management  Trio  for  Space  Sciences,  all  controllers  were  replaced  by
newly trained people. And some of the  personal attendants  to the  Mothers
say  Domidain  attempted  to  reach  the  controllers  one  day,  and  could  not.
They are all equipped with the protective device that hides the mind from a
Mother."
Taking  over  the  synchronous  satellites  was  the  obvious  first  step  if  an
attack was to be launched on Birth Mountain. "What else?" asked Leo.
"A  Ferilain  who  had  been  working  in  the  protected  underground  area
repented of his treachery,  and fled  to  Earingell.  He  prayed  to  his  Mother,
and she  heard.  Now they  know the  Underground  Council has  been  busily
building  bombs  in  the  old  mines.  We  have  never  used  explosives  as
weapons,  there  being  no  need,  but  the  concept  was  learned  from  you
humans. And of course explosives would be far more effective against Birth
Mountain than magnetic or laser beams."
A clear pattern  was  forming.  The  Underground  Council,  knowing  they
had  been  discovered  (and  unaware  the  Mothers  had  known  of  them  all
along and tolerated their existence), was preparing to fight. An attack on the
Mothers,  once  considered something  to worry about  in the  far  future,  was
an imminent reality.
Birth Mountain was not as hollow with tunnels as Shemsi legends had it,
but  a  few  cobalt  or  fusion  bombs  might  still  shake  it  into  a  vast  pile  of
rubble. And a direct hit in the caldera might easily arouse the volcanic furies
that had so long lain dormant. The protective covering of rock mantle had to
be thin here, for so much heat to escape upward.
The  defense  of  their  odd  and  ancient  home  was  the  Mothers'  worry.
Leo's  was how to get himself  and  Misty  back  to  Earth.  If  an  attack  came,
escape to the  outside again might  be  easy  in the  confusion.  And  this  time
the  Mothers  would  be  too  busy  to  worry  about  the  fate  of  two  puny
humans.
The  Mothers  were  evidently  very  preoccupied.  Over  a  week  went  by,

and Leo and Misty grew increasingly  bored  with having  to remain  in their
room. Leo attempted to see Erithain, but the guards would not forward his
request. Erith tried, but was unable to gain his Mother's presence.
Finally Erith appeared at their door, only a short time after ending a visit,
to  announce  they  were  to  come  to  the  conference  chamber.  All  three
Mothers wished to see them.
Misty  had  learned  soon  after  arriving  that  each  Mother  had  separate
quarters and a retinue  of  attendants.  They  met  in  the  conference  room  to
exchange  information  and  make  mutual  decisions.  One  of  the  many
weaknesses of Shemsi biology was that the Mothers could not communicate
with each other except verbally. That strange defiance of the laws of physics
that allowed a Mother  instant  communication  with  her  child,  anywhere  in
the galaxy, was a unique ability.
And Leo felt the human species was lucky this  was true.  If  the  Mothers
had the ability to combine their vast but separate fields of knowledge, they
would be even more mentally powerful than they already were.
The Mothers were standing as usual, conversing  with each other.  There
was  a  smouldering  anger  on  the  face  of  Domidain,  and  even  Ferilain
appeared darkly sullen. Only Erithain seemed calm as always.
"Leo  and  Misty,  we  have  decided  to  return  you  to  your  people,"
Domidain  began,  in the  abrupt  Shemsi  manner.  "We  have  pulled  back  all
armored spaceships from Beta Crucis and most of our other star systems. In
their absence your fellow humans have become unduly aggressive. We wish
you  to  convey  to  them  that  in  the  future  we  will  be  agreeable  to  settling
disputed  claims  to  territory  without  violence,  by  whatever  means  we  can
mutually devise."
"And for now we ask that no further harm come to our children scattered
on those  worlds," Ferilain joined  in.  "On  several  planets  where  skirmishes
recently  occurred,  our  children  were  killed  after  the  protecting  ships
withdrew.  There  is  no  need  for  this.  We  ask  that  the  slaughter  stop,  and
promise by the Word of the Mothers that we will not renew hostilities when
we have surmounted our problems here."

Leo could see no harm whatever in acting as messengers for the Mothers.
He felt that he and Misty, between them, knew these people fairly well now.
Though they were different from humans in many ways, the similarities the
two species shared were far more important. "We accept," he said promptly.
"Excellent," said Erithain.  "The  attendants  will take you  out through the
main tunnel to the south, where you will find a plateau suitable  for a scout
landing. Erith is to accompany you and be our ambassador to Earth. He has
received his instructions.  Now go. Our defenders  approach, and we expect
to be under attack shortly."
Leo saw that Domidain and Ferilain had started slowly pacing the  floor,
their  eyes  closed,  both  wearing  looks  of  intent  concentration.  He  did  not
need to be told their minds were roaming among the stars, guiding the fleet
of  fighting  ships  they  had  ordered  in  from  all  outlying  areas.  As  soon  as
Erithain  stopped  speaking  she  joined  them,  eyes  closed,  feet  taking  small
steps around the circular chamber.
Occasionally,  two  Mothers  bumped  into  each  other.  The  blind  circling
resumed without interruption, and the eyes did not open.
Leo  kept looking over  his shoulder as the  guards  hustled  them  out.  To
the  visible  eye  there  was  only  the  sight  of  three  tall  robed  figures,  their
subtly feminine forms almost visibly surrounded by an aura of power. Not
a single  machine  was  in  the  room,  no  weapons,  nothing  of  the  complex
technology Man had built to augment his body's feeble resources. But these
three  sister  Queens  were  powerful  beyond  all  human  experience,
commanding  vast  resources  of  science  and  technology,  and  numbers  of
warriors,  scientists,  and  behaviorists  so  large  the  figures  became
meaningless. They came as close to personifying gods as any  creatures Leo
and Misty were ever likely to see.
Three  tall  figures  draped  in  white,  blindly  walking  circles  in  a  small
rock-walled chamber, deep in the heart of an ancient volcano… turning and
twining,  bumping  into  each  other,  resuming  their  stately  tread…  an  odd
display of power, in human terms.
But terribly real.

The attendants hustled Erith and the  humans  through the  corridors and
out the vaulted main entrance room into the open caldera. There they were
turned over to three  guards, who led them  across the  growth canals to the
opposite side.  They  entered  a tunnel  that twisted and turned as usual, but
led directly outside. Two hours later they emerged in an area Leo and Erith
had not seen, a high plateau abutting the sharply rising cone of the volcano.
The guards started to return inside. "Wait!" called Erith.  "Leave  us some
weapons!"
"You  should have  no need  of weapons,"  replied a Domidain,  surprised.
"The Mothers did not tell us to leave them."
"Nor did they say you should not," Erith  replied, his voice  cool. "We  do
not  wish  to  be  left  here  without  some  means  to  defend  ourselves.  The
Mothers would want you to leave us one  rifle and one  pistol. If  you  doubt
me, call Domidain."
The  guard,  looking  confused,  tried  to  comply.  As  Erith  had  probably
anticipated,  Domidain  was  much  too  occupied  with  weightier  matters  to
answer him. After a moment he gave up. And after a little more  argument,
and forceful demands  on Erith's  part, they  received  the  weapons he  asked
for.
The  guards  disappeared  into  the  tunnel,  and  the  two  on  duty  inside
closed  the  massive  wooden  door.  The  humans  and  Erith  were  alone  and
free.
And almost immediately the fighting started overhead.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
« ^ 
It  was late afternoon.  The  two humans  and Erith  stood in sunlight,  but  to
the east,  half the  world was already in shadow. And  out of that  shadow  a
Shemsi  scoutship  suddenly  flashed  into  view,  hurtling  toward  Birth

Mountain.
The  ship was several  kilometers  away and low to the  ground. To  Leo's
trained eye  it seemed  to  be  moving  as  fast  as  atmospheric  friction  on  the
metal  skin  would  allow.  And  attached  to  the  sleek  silvery  hull  was  a
detachable pod.
That could only be a bomb of some sort. Leo would have bet it was one
powerful enough to wipe the caldera clean of life if it exploded inside.  With
the cold efficiency  that characterized  the  Shemsi,  the  attackers  intended  to
begin and end this combat with a single blow, if that was possible.
It  was  not.  A  yellow  beam  flashed  down  from  the  sky.  It  caught  the
attacking  scout  just  as  it  started  to  rise  for  the  pass  over  the  cone.  The
bomber's  momentum  was  so  great  it  continued  over  the  mountain,
vanishing  in a few seconds.  But  the  detachable  pod  went  with  it,  and  the
Shemsi rebels inside were dead.
Leo  shielded  his  eyes  from  the  sun  and  peered  upward.  Four  of  the
standardized  scouts  were  rapidly  descending,  already  assuming  a  circular
pattern. A fifth was moving farther south and down, heading toward them.
Before  the  defending  ships  could  reach  their  stations  a  second  rebel
bomber tried another low-level run, this time from the south. It fought back
by flashing a beam upward at the closest ship, and caught the fifth one that
was almost overhead.
Three yellow beams knifed through the air, and two of them reached the
second bomber. It suddenly veered off course and vanished to the east.
The hit defending scout abruptly went into a nosedive, smashing into the
ground only  a few kilometers  away.  Leo  felt his heart sink.  That  ship  had
almost certainly  been  the  one  the  Mothers  had  assigned  to  pick  them  up.
And  now  there  was  no  escape.  They  were  helpless,  stranded  beside  a
mountain that might be blown apart at any second.
To  linger  there  was  an  invitation  to  death.  "Let's  go!"  Leo  said  aloud,
before leading Misty and Erith away at a trot. It was unlikely they could get
far enough to be safe if the mountain blew, but he preferred the  attempt  to
passively waiting for death.

Several more defending scoutships had appeared in the sky. This caused
whoever  was  commanding  the  rebels  to  decide  on  a  change  in  tactics.
Yellow  beams  began  flashing  back  and  forth  in  the  stratosphere.  The
attackers were zeroing in on the circling defenders.
All Shemsi scoutships were virtually identical, and equally armed except
for those  recently  equipped  with  bombs.  The  rebels  were  moving  past  as
fast  as  atmospheric  heat  permitted,  while  the  defenders  were  locked  into
slower  circling  patterns.  Leo  glanced  upward  occasionally  as  they  hurried
across  the  plateau.  The  somewhat  outnumbered  attackers  were  having
better success in the sky. Those killing beams had a limited range, and their
greater fly-by speed made them harder to hit.
The  Shemsi  rebels  launched  another  bomb  attack,  this  time  from  the
north. With their usual lack of imagination, they  had apparently  decided to
attack from  all  four  quarters  and  were  sticking  to  the  plan.  Their  obvious
hope  was  that  the  scout  could  slip  through  while  the  defenders  overhead
were preoccupied.
That  hope  was  not  realized.  The  first  priority  of  the  Mothers  was  to
protect Birth Mountain—and themselves. A hovering scout came screaming
down  on  an  intercept  course,  moving  so  fast  Leo  knew  the  hull  must
disintegrate. It began crumpling as he watched. But just before the craft flew
apart,  a  yellow  beam  flashed  down  and  barely  caught  the  approaching
bomber, at what seemed its extreme limit of range.
The defending pilot, true to the Mothers, guided his smoking  ship away
from Birth Mountain. It smashed into the next peak to the east. The bomber
survived the effect of the beam and passed over the cone. Leo saw the silver
shape of the bomb plummet downward in the sunlight.
Leo  stopped.  They  were  still  in  the  open,  and  there  was  little  point  in
running a few steps more.
It seemed strange to have come so far, survived this long, only  to die as
helpless pawns, sacrificed in a game  not of their choosing.  Leo  drew Misty
closer  with  his  right  arm,  and  felt  the  presence  of  Erith  to  his  left.
Impulsively, he clasped the  Shemsi  around the  shoulders.  His  instinct  was
to comfort,  to  offer  what  solace  he  could  in  this  hour  of  their  death.  And

Erith, with his unswerving loyalty to the  Mothers,  must  be  in sore need  of
comfort. His logical, orderly world was coming apart before his eyes.
They waited, and listened, and watched… but nothing happened. Several
seconds after the bomb must have hit, there was still no reaction. It dawned
on Leo that it must have been a dud.
That,  too,  was like the  Shemsi.  Stirred out of  their  accustomed  pace  by
the necessity for speed, the rebels had somehow failed in the design of their
bomb. Which meant they were all probably duds, and Birth  Mountain  was
safe from total destruction, at least for now.
There  was  a  whistling  sigh,  a  slowly  dying  scream  of  heated  air  from
overhead—and  the  third bomber,  now with only  the  pod  carrier  attached,
settled slowly toward them on its anti-grav generators.
Leo looked desperately for a place to hide. The land for a kilometer on all
sides  was  virtually  flat,  a  grassy  table.  There  were  many  rocks  scattered
around, but none large enough to conceal them.
The  ship  came  down  less  than  a  thousand  meters  away.  It  appeared
intact,  although  the  shiny  skin  had  been  darkened  by  friction.  Leo  felt  a
sudden wild hope.
"Erith!  Is  it  possible  for  your  yellow  beams  to  kill  the  people  inside  a
scout without ruining its drive system?"
Erith looked startled.  He  had  to  think  for  a  minute,  and  in  the  Shemsi
manner, did his cogitation verbally. "The yellow personnel death beam  is a
variant  of  the  pink  vibrator,  Leo.  Both  create  distortions  in  magnetic
potentials  at  the  molecular  level.  The  yellow  beam  has  a  longer  effective
range  because  it  is  designed  specifically  for  cellular  tissue,  which  is  more
easily  damaged  than  most  non-organic  matter.  A  hit  upsets  the  chemical
balance in the  liquid medium  surrounding  the  body  cells,  causing  a  rapid
transfer  of  sodium  ions  across  the  membranes.  This  results  in  extreme
shock, followed by  death.  It  is possible  that the  crew is dead or dying  and
the ship still operable, yes."
"Let's test that theory," said Leo, starting for the silent scout at a run.

There was no sign of life from the downed craft. The upper hatch that led
directly  into  the  small  airlock  fronting  the  pilot's  compartment  was
accessible from the ground. For once Leo blessed the sameness that imbued
the lives of the Shemsi. There was no outer locking mechanism—there  had
never  been  a need  for one  in  Shemsi  experience—and  Erith  knew  how  to
open the circular hatch.
A careless and malignant  fate  had  destroyed  the  ship  the  Mothers  had
reserved for them. Now good luck had cancelled the  bad,  and they  at least
had a fighting chance  again. If  the  scout was  still  operable…  if  they  could
seize it and flee without being noticed by the combatants…
Leo was carrying the sonic rifle; Erith had kept the pistol. Leo traded with
the Shemsi. He trusted his own faster reactions,  and the  pistol was a more
maneuverable weapon at close quarters.
"Wait here  while we check out the  interior,"  Leo  said  to  Misty.  He  saw
the protest start to form on her face and quickly added, "You're  not armed;
we are. Now please wait."
Misty  closed  her  mouth  without  speaking.  The  hatch  opened  under
Erith's fingers, and he pulled hard as he stepped out of the  way.  The  small
airlock inside was empty.
Leo,  crouching low, led  the  way  in,  Erith  right  behind  him.  It  was  the
work of a minute  for the  Shemsi  to operate the  inner  controls,  and  release
the door latches.
Erith  moved  to  the  side.  As  Leo  bent  his  head  and  pushed  the  hatch
open, pistol at the ready, he  caught a glimpse  of Misty  entering  the  airlock
behind him, quietly smiling.
And then Leo realized his desire to protect Misty had been foolish. If  he
and  Erith  died  here,  Misty  would  not  want  to  live.  Even  if  she  did,  the
cataclysm occurring behind them made the possibility unlikely. They would
win free, or perish, together.
Two dazed-looking Shemsi sat at the central control console. They turned
to face Leo as he sprang inside. The two pilots had not heard them enter the

outer airlock. One fumbled at his seat harness, trying to work himself loose.
The second was more alert. His hand dove for the pistol at his side.
It was impossible to reach the Shemsi before he could fire. Leo regretfully
squeezed the trigger. The two Shemsi were obviously very sick, perhaps too
far gone to live—but Leo would have spared them if he could.
The beam caught both pilots. They jerked erect, as though every muscle
had gone into spasm,  and as swiftly collapsed.  The  two  were  dead  before
their bodies slumped down into the seat harnesses.
"I'll  check  the  rear  section,  you  take  the  front,"  Leo  said  to  Erith,
low-voiced. So far no one  alive was aware the  ship  was  under  attack.  The
gunnery  officer,  seated  before  his  console  at  the  front  of  the  control
compartment, was obviously dead. A fourth crewman lying on the floor was
dead or nearly  so.  There  should be  about  eight more  people aboard,  if the
ship was fully manned.
Erith nodded, and led the way through the main entrance at the rear. He
pointed to a hatch at the end of the narrow corridor, and Leo hurried to it as
Erith stepped into the nearest open compartment. The Shemsi fired his rifle
almost  immediately,  then  shot  again.  There  was  a  muffled  groan  from
inside.
Leo reached the  hatch  and quickly  opened  the  airtight door. He  walked
through  a  series  of  narrow  personnel  access  corridors  surrounding  the
engine,  and  found  three  Shemsi  sprawled  at  various  places.  Quick  checks
revealed that all were dead. He  hurried back  to the  corridor and the  living
quarters,
 where
 Erith
 was
 methodically
 checking
 the
 remaining
compartments.
There was a look of calm,  somewhat  grim determination  on Erith's  face
when  Leo  joined  him.  They  entered  the  last  room  together,  and  it  was
empty.  "Only  one  brother  was  still  truly  alive,"  Erith  said  as  they  hurried
back to the  control compartment.  "The  others  were  dead  or  dying;  I  gave
those still living a merciful end."
That, too, was like the Shemsi, at least when dealing with their own kind.
But inflicting the "merciful end"  had obviously  taken a toll on Erith's  inner

strength.
Leo considered hurling the bodies out the airlock, but decided to wait. He
wanted  to  get  out  of  the  battle  zone  as  quickly  as  possible.  Instead  he
dumped the gunnery officer on the  floor and took his seat.  Erith  gave  him
hasty  instructions  on how to fire the  weapons,  and he  and  Misty  took  the
two pilot seats. Leo rose long enough to close the two airlock hatches before
they lifted off.
Erith boosted the speed as rapidly as was safe and headed south, directly
away  from  Birth  Mountain.  He  was  keeping  close  to  the  ground  and
weaving among the peaks. Hopefully,  the  defending scouts  of the  Mothers
would be  too busy  to fire at a ship  obviously  fleeing  the  scene.  If  not,  he
could at least try to make them miss.
They had gone less than fifteen kilometers when a long high ridge forced
Erith upward. Leo had been playing with his gunner's screen, and managed
to get Birth Mountain in focus as they  rose.  He  was just  in time  to see  the
attack by the last bomber.
The sky was a flashing confusion of fast-moving ships and darting yellow
and pink beams.  It  was impossible  for Leo  to be  certain,  but  it  seemed  to
him there  were now far more  defenders  than  attackers.  If  so,  the  rebellion
was almost over.
The final bomber came in from the west, low to the ground and rising for
the run over  the  cone,  as usual.  Two  yellow  beams  came  seeking  the  last
daring  attacker,  and  both  were  successful—but  too  late.  Leo  saw  sunlight
glitter on an object  hurtling downward into the  cone  as  the  Shemsi  in  the
ship died.
Three  bombs  had  already  smashed  into  the  ground,  and  none  had
exploded. Leo did not expect this one to go off.  Nevertheless  he  called out,
"Last bomb into the caldera! Brace yourselves!"
And the world turned to flame behind them.
The  delivery  problem  with the  first three  bombs,  whatever  it  was,  had
been  corrected. The  power and fury  of the  blast,  confined as it  was  in  the

giant cup of the caldera, was contained and vented upward. A  vast  column
of flame  rose into the  sky,  its  top  seething  and  roiling,  the  sides  clean-cut
and distinct.  Like  a giant  burning  rod  thrusting  toward  space,  the  column
fed itself at the base, rearing higher and higher. And finally, just as the scout
dipped  down  again  and  a  peak  cut  off  Leo's  view,  the  darker  top  of  the
column began spreading outward into a familiar mushroom shape.
"Take us up a little!" Leo called urgently. "No one is going to be shooting
at us."
Erith had had his screen  focused ahead and been  intently  concentrating
on guiding the  scout.  He  had time  to lift them  just  a  few  hundred  meters
before  the  shock wave hit.  The  scoutship  shivered  and vibrated  under  the
impact, but easily rode it through. Most of the fury  of that titanic blast  had
been directed upward.
Nothing inside the cone could have survived that terrible explosion. The
Mothers, their attendants, the millions of Shemsi babies  in the  nursery  and
the growth canals—all were dead. In one bold and radical stroke, the  rebels
had altered their biology, and their lives. They had paved the way for a new
order among the Shemsi.
"Let's  head  directly  for  space!"  Leo  called  to  Erith.  The  scout  tilted
upward immediately in response. Now was the time to go, before the rebels
got their battle group reorganized and reactivated the guardian satellites. For
the moment,  with so much  activity  occurring  in  the  sky  of  Creche  World,
Leo did not expect to be noticed.
They were now some distance away, but Birth Mountain was still visible
in  the  telescope  when  they  reached  the  thin  upper  air.  The  initial  bright
column was fading, dying away into smoke and blackness. But at its base a
new glow had appeared, a shimmering lake of fire that filled what remained
of the battered walls of the cone. The ancient volcano was erupting.
The  vast  accumulation  of  knowledge  possessed  by  the  three  Queen
Mothers—and the hundreds of Shemsi  females  who had preceded them  in
that ancient society—must have made them aware Birth Mountain  was not
totally dormant.  But  they  had been  unwilling to move,  clinging to  the  old
ways and the first home, even  though  their advanced  children could easily

have provided a better  baby  factory.  And  now the  stable  but  thin  layer  of
protecting rock had been breached, and the hot blood of the planet itself was
oozing to the surface.
Erith had finally found time to switch one of his two screens  to the  rear.
Leo  saw  the  shock  on  his  companion's  face  when  it  focused  on  his
birthplace.
As they watched, the welling flood of molten rock overflowed two places
where  the  high  walls  had  shattered.  Great  streams  of  lava  began  rolling
down  the  old  slopes.  Huge  boulders  were  flying  into  the  air,  and  water,
transformed  into  instant  steam,  was  hissing  skyward.  The  eruption  had
become a full-fledged volcanic explosion.
Erith turned back  to  his  front  screen.  Determinedly  he  picked  a  course
away from the planet. As the last traces of atmosphere vanished he switched
on the  main  drive,  which automatically  converted  the  anti-grav  generators
into  statis  generators,  freeing  the  ship  and  all  inside  from  the  effects  of
acceleration.  And  within  a  few  short  minutes  they  reached  the  speed  of
light, passed over, and were safe from any possible interception.
 
"Are you going to land with us,  or return and try  for acceptance by  the
rebels?" Leo asked. He was at the controls, which he had learned to operate
over the past few weeks. Erith was in the  second  seat,  while Misty  slept in
the  crew  quarters.  Earth  was  a  bright  white-and-blue  globe  a  million
kilometers ahead, incredibly beautiful, at least to human sight.
"I  must  return,  Leo;  I  no  longer  have  a  mission  here.  But  rather  than
trying for acceptance by the rebels, I have decided to seek one of the colony
planets and attempt  to blend  in there.  With  luck, I  can live out the  rest  of
my life in peace."
Leo  was silent.  Erith  had  changed  and  grown  over  their  time  together,
but being forced to dissemble for the rest of his long life would grate on his
sensibilities. And yet he would certainly never fit in on Earth. His best hope
was  that  the  rebels  had  declared  a  general  amnesty,  and  he  would  be
forgiven for helping the captive humans escape.

"I  had  never  thought  to  see  this  day—"  Erith  began,  and  broke  off  in
mid-sentence.  His  body  stiffened,  his  head  jerked  forward,  and  his  eyes
closed. Leo stared at him in alarm. And then Erith leaned back, as far as his
seat  harness  permitted,  and  raised  his  face  to  the  ceiling.  "MOTHER!
Mother, I hear!"
And finally Leo understood. He waited and watched in silence.
Erith's  body  jerked  and twitched  convulsively,  the  teeth  chattering,  the
eyes  streaming  tears.  The  possession  went  on  for  what  seemed  several
minutes, though it must have been less. And finally the fury of the emotion
passed,  and  the  trembling  eased.  Erith  wiped  his  flooding  eyes  with  one
pink hand, opened them, and blinked away the remaining tears.
Leo  did not speak.  Erith  slowly  regained  his  self-possession.  At  last  he
looked  over  at  Leo.  Misty  had  appeared  in  the  door  from  the  corridor,
drawn by the Shemsi's loud cry. She watched in wondering silence.
Erith's  voice  was calm.  "I  shall be  landing with you  after  all,  Leo.  I  am
still  the  Shemsi  ambassador  to  Earth.  Erithain  has  just  reconfirmed  her
original order and issued new instructions."
"So they had some secret method of getting away!" Misty walked toward
them. "I'm not surprised. I'll bet there was a hidden ship somewhere in the
mountain, and a fast way out of there.  Those  old women  were too wise to
play games with the rebels, letting them run free and have their hidden labs,
without taking a few precautions. Who won the final battle, Erith?"
"There was no more  fighting after the  attacking ships  were destroyed  at
Birth  Mountain,"  Erith  answered,  his  voice  somewhat  slow  and  dreamy.
"Erithain knew you would want to know and communicated all to me.  The
Mothers  have  moved  to  Earingell  and  are  living  in  the  underground
quarters  formerly  occupied  by  the  rebels.  All  who  survived  have  been
forgiven and accepted again into the  grace of the  Mothers.  And  they  have
announced  there  will  be  no  more  births,  unless  the  children  now  being
raised to maturity do not fulfill their genetic potential to produce two sexes.
These Mothers expect to be the last of their kind. As  we will be  the  last of
ours."

There was a lingering silence in the  small scoutship  control room.  Misty
broke it by walking across to Erith and putting her arms around him. "From
the selfish viewpoint, Erith, that is awfully good news.  We  wanted to keep
you with us, and now we can."
"And with peace in effect between  our species,  maybe  our scientists  can
learn what it is about  you  that  grants  such  a  long  life,"  Leo  joined  in.  "In
which case, our friendship will endure much longer than might otherwise be
the case. And everyone on Earth will be very grateful to the Shemsi."
The broad smile on Erith's face told Leo he had been wrong in thinking a
Shemsi could never know strong emotions. They, too, could learn and grow
from experience, regardless of biology.  And  while it was still true he  could
never  feel  for  Erith  the  love  he  felt  for  Misty,  he  had  come  to  value  the
Shemsi as a true and tested friend.
Perhaps, when Erith grew tired of being an ambassador and their time in
the Space Service had been completed, the three  of them  could be  together
again. There was a vast and mostly unexplored galaxy out there, and if their
lives could be  extended  to match  Erith's…  They  would be  one  of  the  few
combinations  of  three  people  where  there  could  be  no  jealousy  and  no
personality conflicts.
That  was another  dream,  perhaps  possible,  perhaps  not.  Dreaming  was
one of the characteristics of the human species, but the Shemsi were rapidly
learning. They had a new biology and a new order, to testify to the power of
the dream held by a few Shemsi scientists.
But  for now there  was still a job  to  do.  "Let's  go  home,"  said  Leo,  and
reached  for  the  exterior  radio  switch.  "Earth  Space  Central,  this  is  Space
Service  Exploratory  Crew  69,  accompanying  Ambassador  Erith  of  the
Shemsi.  Request  permission  to  land  a  Shemsi  scoutship  at  Geneva
Spaceport. Please acknowledge."
Leo headed toward Earth without waiting for the return call.

