

Copyright 1951 by The Free Press, a Corporatioa 
MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AME!\lCA 
Fonnat by Sidney Solomon 
SF.COND PIIINTlNG I'OVEI\IBEll 1959 
LITHOCRAPHF.I> FOR THE 
PliULISliJo~KS BY 
NOllt.f: OFFSF:'f PRINTt:RS, 
INC.~ Nio;w \'OUK 

CONTENTS 
Prefatory Note 
PART ONE-SOCIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS 
PAGE 
ix 
I. City, Prince ancl God 
3 
1. On Chinese r.'lonev 
3 
2. City and Guild 
' 
13 
3. l'rincely Administration and tl1e Conception of Deity: 
A Comparison with the Middle East 
20 
4. The Charismatic and Ponlificall'osilion of the Central 
Monarch 
.'30 
II. The F euclal and Prebendal State 
33 
1. The Hereditary Ch;uismatic Nature of Feudalism 
33 
2. The Restoration of the Unified Bmcaueratic State 
42 
3. Central Govemment and Local Officialdom 
47 
4. Public Charges: the Corvcc-State and the Tax-State 
50 
5. Officialdom and Tax Collection by Quota Levies 
55 
III. 
Administration and Rural Structure 
63 
1. Feudal and Fiscal Organization 
64 
2. Army Organization and Wang An-shil1's Attempt at 
Reform 
75 
3. The Fiscal Protection of Peasants and Its Results for 
Rural Society 
79 
IV. 
Self-Government, Law, and Capitalism 
84 
1. Absence of Capitalist Relationships 
84 
2. The Sib Association 
86 
• v • 

» vi « 
CONTENTS 
3. Organization of the Sib 
4. Self-Government of the Chinese Village 
5. Sib Fetters of the Economy 
6. The Patrimonial Structure 'of Law 
PART TWO-OHTIIODOXY 
PAGE 
88 
91 
95 
100 
V. 
The Literati 
107 
l. Confucius 
113 
2. The Development of the Examination System 
115 
3. The Typological Position of Confucian Education 
119 
4. The Status-Honor of the Literati 
129 
5. The Gentleman Ideal 
131 
6. The Prestige of Officialdom 
133 
7. Views on Economic Policy 
136 
8. Sultanism and the Eunuchs as Political Opponents of 
the Literati 
138 
VI. The Confucian Life Orientation 
142 
l. Bureaucracy and Hicrocracy 
142 
2. Absence of Natural Law and Formal Logic of Legal 
Thought 
147 
3. Absence of Natural Sciences 
150 
4. The Nature of Confucianism 
152 
5. Freedom from Metaphysics and Inncrworldly Nature 
of Confucianism 
155 
6. The Central Concept of Propriety 
156 
7. Piety 
157 
8. The Confucian Attitude Toward the Economy and 
Confucianism's Rejection of the Professional Expert 
159 
9. The Gentleman Ideal 
161 
10. The Significance of the Classics 
163 
11. Historical Development of Orthodoxy 
165 
12. The "Pathos" of Early Confucianism 
167 
13. The Pacifist Character of Confucianism 
16Q 
PART THREE-TAOISM 
VII. Orthodoxy and Heterodoxy 
l. Doctrine and Ritual in China 
2. Anchoretism and Lao-tzu 
3. Tao and Mysticism 
4. The Practical Consequences of Mysticism 
173 
173 
178 
179 
180 

CONTENTS 
PAGE 
5. The Contrast Between the Orthodox and Heterodox 
Schools 
181 
6. Taoist lvlacrobiotics 
191 
7. The Taoist Hicrocracy 
192 
8. The General Position nf Buddhism in China 
195 
9. The Systematic Rationalization of Magic 
196 
10. The Ethic of Taoism 
204 
11. The Traditionalist Character of Chinese Orthodox and 
Heterodox Ethics 
205 
12. Sects and the Persecution of Heresies in China 
213 
1.'3. The T'ai P'ing Rebellion 
219 
14. The Result of the Development 
224 
VIII. Conclusions: Confucianism and Puritanism 
226 
Notes 
250 
Glossary and Index 
29S 


PREFATORY NOTE 
T PUllLICATIOK of ~lax Wcbcc'< Confucim>;sm and Tao;sm 
now makes available to the English reader the entire first volume 
of Weber's Collected Essays in the Sociology of llcligion, a work 
which Professor A. D. Nock has evaluated as "not merely work 
of great ability, but of genius." 1 
Talcott Parsons has published The Protestant Ethic and the 
S1Jirit of Capitalism (London, 1930), the essay ·which sr:ts forth 
Weber's basic thesis. It has given rise to an entire litcrature. 2 The 
essay volume Fr01n Max \Vebcr, edited by I-I. H. Gerth and 
C. Wright \Jills, Oxford Press (New York, 1946) includes the 
companion piece, "The Protestant Sects and the Spirit of Capi-
talism" and the introductory essay to the preseut volume. For 
contextual reasons we took the liberty of substituting the title 
"The Social Psychology of the \Vorld Heligions" for the original 
heading "The Economic Ethic of the \Vorld Religions, Compara-
tive Essays in the Sociology of Religion, Introduction." We have 
named this volume The Religion of China in order to avoid the 
isms. The last essay, "Zwischenbetrachtung," of the German vol-
ume, leading over to the sh.1cly of Hinduism and Buddhism, has 
been published in the aforementioned essays Fmm AJax \Veber. 
1. Talcott Parsons, The Structure of Social Action (New York and London, 
1937), pp. 500 f., footnote 1. 
2. Cf. Hans Gerth and Hedv.rig Ide Gerth, "Bibliography on :rvfax Weber," 
Social Research, vol. 16, no. 1 (:\larch 1949) pp. 70-89. 
~ ix c 

» X « 
PREFATORY NOTE 
For our principles of translating \Veber we refer thl' reader to 
the Preface of the essays. \Ve fed encouraged by Professor Baum-
garten who evaluates the English editions to be "in part more 
reauable" than the original text.=: \Vc hope that the present volume 
will not fall short of this mark. Possibly we have felt freer than 
before to drop what in literal translation would SC(·m to be super-
fluous and redundant words nwkiug for overwritten prose in 
English. 
Despite our aim to transpose \Vcber's thought from one lan-
guage into another the frequent use of the term sib instead of 
clan might give the text the flavor of a "translation." By now 
Baden Powell's usage of the term dan for Far Eastem kinship 
groups seems to be common usage. A. !\1. Henderson and Talcott 
Parsons have honored it in their translation of \Veber's Theory of 
Soci.al and Economic Organization (New York, 1947). In spite 
of the precedent and with great hesitancy we have feit obliged 
to use the term sib rather than clan for Sippe fl.S 'Neber rejected 
the "Irish term clan as ambiguous" and used the tenn sib in a 
technical sense for "gentile charismatically outstanding agnatic 
descendants of charismatic chieftains."4 As the term sib has not 
become obsolete as yet in sociological literature and Joseph K. 
Folsom has used it in his The Family and Democratic Society 
(New York, 1943) we prefer it to clan at the risk of deviating 
from common usage. 
Weber was no sinologist and published his study of China 
without the benefit of a s-inologist's revision of his text. As he was 
no pedant he freely used tra~sliterations from the Chinese as 
found in English, French, German and Russian romanizations. 
Naturally this presented some difficulties to us. I am grateful to 
my sinologieally trained collea&>Ue, Professor M. L. Barnett, for 
going over the galley proofs and checking the romanizations of 
3. Eduard Baumgarten, "Versuch iibcr clie menschlichen Gesellschaften 
und das Gewissen," Studium Gencralc, vol. 3, no. 10 (September 1950), 
p. 547. 
4. Max Weber, The Ilindu Social System, tr. by Hans Gerth and Don 
1\-iartindale, University of i'v[innesota Sociology Club Bulletin, no. 1 ( 1950) 
p. 86. (German text: p. 56, footnote 1.) 

PREFATORY NOTE 
» xi « 
Chinese names and phrases. Some fine points were kindly settled 
by Professor Y. T. Wang. 
First draft translations of several chapters have been revised 
some years ago by lvfessrs. Joseph Bensman and Bernard Green-
blatt. I am grateful for their valuable assistance. Special thanks 
are due to Dr. Patricke Johns Heine for her careful reading of the 
manuscript and numerous stylistic improvements. Dr. Hedwig 
Ide Gerth has rendered valuable assistance throughout. 
I am grateful to Professor C. Wright Mills and the publishers, 
Oxford University Press, New York, for their kind permission to 
reprint the chapter "The Chinese Literati" of the essay volume 
From Max Weber. 
Madison, Wisconsin 
Spring 1951 
HANS GERTH 


PART 
I 
SOCIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS 


CHAPTER I 
CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 1 
lf 
1. On Chinese Money 
JLN SHARP contrast with Japan, China was already a country of 
large walled cities in times prehistoric by our conception. Only 
cities had a canonized local patron with a cult and the prince was 
primarily lord of a city. Even in the official documents of large 
constitutive states the term for "state" remained "your capital" or 
"my humble city." And even in the last third of the 19th century 
the definite subjection of the Miao ( 1872) was accomplished by 
a compulsory synoecism, a collective settling in cities, just as in 
ancient Rome until the 3rd century. In effect the taxation policy 
of the Chinese administration strongly favored the urban residents 
at the expense of the open country.2 From early times China was 
the scene of an inland trade indispensable for providing the needs 
of large areas. Nevertheless, because of the preponderance of 
agrarian production, money economy was, until modern times, 
scarcely as well developed as it was in Ptolemaic Egypt. Sufficient 
indication of this is to be found in the monetary system-in any 
case partially to be understood as a product of disintegration-
with the exchange rate between copper currency and silver bul-
lion (the coinage of which was in the hands of the guilds) con-
tinually fluctuating from time to time and from place to place.8 
Chinese currency4 combines extremely archaic features with 
apparently modern elements. The sign for "wealth" still retains 
the old meaning of "mussel" ( pei). It appears that as late as 1578 
• s • 

THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
tributes in shell money still issued from Yunnan (a mining prov-
ince!). There is still a character for "coins" which means "tor-
toise shell."5 Pu pe (silk money) is said to l1ave existed under the 
Chous, and payment of taxes in silk is found in many varying 
periods. Pearls, precious stones, and tin are cited alongside these 
as old bearers of monetary function, and even the usurper \Vang 
Mang (after 7 A.D.) tried in vain to set up a monetaty scale in 
which tortoise shells and sea shells functioned alongside gold, 
silver and copper as means of payment. Conversely, but from an 
admittedly unreliable account, the rationalistic unifier of the 
Empire, Shih Huang Ti, had only "round" coins cast from copper 
and gold ( i and ch'ien), forbidding all other media of exchange 
or payment-again without success. Silver seems to have become 
important as a currency metal only in late times (under \Vu Ti, 
end of 2nd century B.c.) and as a tax on the Southern provinces, 
only in 1035 A.D. This was doubtless attributable to technical 
factors: the gold was of the panning type and copper was origi-
nally obtained by a relatively easy technical process. But silver 
could be obtained only by full-scale mining and the mining as 
well as the coining techniques of the Chinese remained on a 
completely primitive level. The coins, allegedly made as early as 
the 12th century n.c. (but probably actually only in the 9th) and 
first inscribed about 200 n.c., were cast rather than stamped. 
Hence they could be very easily imitated. Also their intrinsic 
content varied greatly, much more so than European coins up to 
the 17th century (e.g., English crowns varied up to 10%). Eighteen 
pieces of the same issue in the lith centmy ranged in weight, 
according to Hint's finding, from 2.7 grams to 4.08 grams; 6 pieces 
of 620 A.D. issue ranged from 2.5 to 4.39 grams copper. For this 
reason alone they were neither unambiguous nor utilizable stand-
ards for trade. From time to time the gold reserves were suddenly 
augmented by Tatar booty gold, only rapidly to decline again. 
Therefore, gold and silver early became very scarce, silver in 
spite of the fact that it would have been worthwhile to operate 
the mines by existing techniques.6 Copper remained the currency 
of everyday trade. The far greater expansion of precious metals 

CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 
in the Occident was well known to the annalists, especially of the 
Han period. In fact the many large annual silk caravans which 
were supplied by tributes in kind brought occidental gold into the 
country, as evidenced by Roman coins that have been found. This 
of course ceased with the end of the Roman Empire, and only in 
the period of the Mongol Empire was the currency situation 
improved. 
Trade with the \Vest reached a turning point in the period 
after the opening of the Mexican-Peruvian silver mines, for their 
yield flowed in considerable portion to China in exchange for 
silk, porcelain, and tea. The depreciation of silver in relation to 
gold is evidenced in the following ratios: 
1368 ........... 4:1 
1840 ........... 18:1 
1574 ........... 8:1 
1850 ........... 14:1 
1635 ........... 10:1 
1882 ........... 18:1 
1737 ........... 20:1 
But the rising valuation of silver which came in the wake of in-
creasing needs for silver money nonetheless caused the price of 
copper to decline relative to silver. Mining and minting were 
regalia of political authority; even the nine semi-legendary de-
partments mentioned in the Chou Li include the master of the 
mint. The mines were operated pa1tly under public management 
with corv6e7 and partly by private operators, but the government 
monopolized the purchase of the yield. The discrepancy between 
price and costs is sufficient explanation for the very low output. 
The high costs of transporting the copper to the mint in Peking 
-which sold everything in excess of state coinage needs-consid-
erably increased the cost of minting. These costs were tremendous 
in themselves. In the 8th century (752 according to Ma Tuan-lin) 
each of the 99 existing minting plants reportedly produced about 
3,330 min ( 1000 pieces each) in copper coins annually. Each re-
quired 30 laborers for this, and utilized 21,200 chin ( 550 grams 
each) of copper, 3700 chin of lead, and 500 of tin. The cost of 
manufacturing 1000 pieces amounted to 750 pieces, i.e., 75 per-
cent. To this must be added an exorbitant minting profit claimed 
by the monopolized mint, 8 nominally 25 percent. The constant 

» 6 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
battle which was waged through all the centuries against the 
fabulously profitable counterfeiting was made hopeless by this 
alone. The mining districts were threatened by enemy invasion. 
It was not uncommon for the government to buy copper for coin-
age from foreign countries (e.g., Japan) or to confiscate private 
copper holdings in order to assure fulfillment of the large coinage 
requirements. From time to time regalia and public operation 
were extended to practically all metal mines. The silver mines 
paid a very considerable royalty to the K wangtung mandarins 
involved. (In Kwangtung in mid-19th century, these royalties 
amounted from 20 to 33~ percent; or in combination with lead, 
55 percent.) Such revenue was the chief source of income for 
these mandarins in return for a lump payment made to the gov-
ernment. The gold mines, located mainly in Yunnan Province, 
like all others were allotted in small fields to mining master crafts-
men for small-scale operation, and each paid up to 40 percent 
royalties according to output. As late as the 17th century the 
mines were reported as poorly exploited from a technical stand-
point. The reason, apart from the difficulties created by the 
geomancers9 (see Chapter VII, 9), was the general traditionalism 
inherent in the political, economic and ideological structure of 
China. This traditionalism repeatedly caused the miscarriage of 
all serious monetary reform. Regarding the debasement of coin-
age, it is further mentioned at a very early date in the Annals 
(Chuang Wang and Ch'u) that the imposition of debased coinage 
failed. We are told of the great disturbance of trade when, under 
Emperor Ching Ti, gold coinage was debased for the first time-
but by no means the last. 
Obviously, the basic evil was the fluctuation of monetary 
metal.H' The North, the defense area against the barbarians of 
the steppes, suffered much more from this than the South, which 
as the seat of trade was always better provided with means of 
circulation. The financing of every war forced monetary reforms, 
and copper coins were converted to the manufacture of arms 
(comparable to the use of nickel coins in Germany during World 
War I). With the restoration of peace the country was :flooded 

CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 
» 7 « 
with copper since the "demobilized" soldiers freely used army 
property. Any political unrest could close the mines. The shortage 
or surplus of coinage is reported to have resulted in price fluctu-
ations which are amazing even when we allow for probable 
exaggeration. Again and again numerous private counterfeiting 
mints emerged, undoubtedly tolerated by the officials. The various 
satrapies also regularly defied the state monopoly. Desperate 
because it failed in each and every attempt to enforce the 
monopoly, the government repeatedly allowed the private citizen 
to mint money according to set standards. It was done first under 
Wen Ti ( 175 B.c.) and naturally resulted in complete monetary 
muddle. To be sure after this first experiment Wu Ti promptly 
succeeded in restoring the mining monopoly. He abolished th6 
private mints and by improving the minting technique (hard-
rimmed coins) the prestige of state coins was raised. But the 
necessity of financing warfare against the Hsiung Nu (the Huns) 
-at all times contributive to monetary muddle-resulted in issuing 
credit currency of white deer skin. Moreover, the ease with which 
his silver coins could be imitated eventually condemned this 
attempt to failure. 
Probably as a result of political unrest, the shortage of minting 
metal under Yuan Ti (about 40 B.c.) was as great as everY Fol-
lowing this the usurper Wang Mang vainly experimented with 
coinage scales of 28 dHferent types of coins. Since then no gov-
ernmental restoration of gold and silver coinage seems to have 
been recorded, but in any case it had occurred only occasionally. 
Following the banks' example,12 the government first issued 
means of exchange irt 807,13 a practice which flourished espe-
cially under the Mongols. At first, in the manner of the banks, the 
issue was bas(;d on metal, but later this was less and less so. The 
memory of the debasement of coinage and the depreciation of 
the assignats has since firmly established bank currency. Bank 
currency used silver bar deposits as the base for means of ex-
change in wholesale trade, calculating in tael units. Despite the 
very low prices of copper currency, the latter meant a tremendous 
increase in minting costs and besides was a cumbersome form of 

THE flELIGION OF CHINA 
money for trade. Thus it was a hindrance to the development of 
the money economy since the charges for money transport were 
high. 
Originally a string filed with 1000 copper coins ( ch'ien) was 
equivalent to 1. and later to ~2 an ounce of silver. The fluctuations 
of available amounts of copper also remained vmy important in 
peace time because of the industrial and artistic uses of copper 
(Buddha statues) which tangibly affected prices and taxes. The 
wide variations of the mint price and its influence on the price 
level have thus regularly doomed to failure the attempts at estab-
lishing a unified budget on the basis of pure or approximately 
pure money taxes. Repeatedly it was necessary to fall back (at 
least in part) on taxation in kind with its natural stereotyping 
ramifications for the economy.14 
Besides direct defense requirements and other budgetary con-
siderations, the central authorities were primarily concerned with 
price policy in money matters. Inflationary tendencies, such as 
decontrol of coinage for the sake of stimulating the production of 
copper money, alternated with counter-infiationary measures, 
such as closure of part of the mintsP Above all, currency con-
siderations played a role in the prohibition and control of foreign 
trade. This was because loss of money was feared if imports were 
free and a deluge of foreign money feared if exports were free.16 
To be sure, the persecution of the Buddhists and Taoists was 
essentially determined by religious policy, but monetary reasons 
of state were often co-detennining factors. Stimulated by monas-
tic art, the Buddha statues, vases and paraments and the con-
version of coinage to artistic uses repeatedly endangered the cur-
rency. The melting of coinage en masse led to a great shortage 
of money and the hoarding of copper, as well as to price declines 
which ended in a barter economy.H The state systematically 
looted the monasteries, imposed tariffs on copper goods,IB and 
finally10 attempted to monopolize the manufacturing of bronze 
and copper goods. Later this state monopoly was extended to all 
metal goods in order to bring private dilution of coinage under 
control. Both measures failed in the long run. The accumulation 

CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 
» 9 « 
of land was prohibited (to be discussed below), a prohibition 
which was enforced with varying efficiency by officials who re-
peatedly accumulated considerable sums of copper in their own 
hands. During periods of money shortage high taxes were levied 
on monied wealth. Maximal money holdings were defined20 with 
increasing frequency for reasons of price policy and budgetary 
considerations. The situation was not improved by recurrent at-
tempts to change to iron money which was used for a time along 
with copper. The officigJ petition mentioned in the time of Schi-
tong (tenth century) demanded that profits from coinage be re-
nounced and the utilization of metal decontrolled in order to avoid 
monopoly prices on metal goods and the concomitant stimulus 
given to its industrial utilization. This was not carried out. 
Paper money was dealt with similarly. The bank issues at first 
were obviously of the quality of those certi£cates by means of 
which wholesale trade usually guards itself against currency 
muddle. Later they became essentially a means of exchange for 
facilitating interlocal remittances. These bank issues provoked 
imitation. The technical prerequisite was the emergence of the 
paper industry, imported since the 2nd century A.D., and a suitable 
process of printing wood cuts,21 especially relief cuts rather than 
the earlier intaglio precess. Early in the ninth century the state 
began to remove the profitable exchange opportunities from the 
traders' bands. At first the principle of an exchange fund of J:i to ~ 
was taken over. Note issues based on a fiscal monopoly of bank 
deposits are also to be found later. Naturally this was not all. The 
notes, which were first reproduced from wood cuts and then from 
copper engravings, were quickly worn because of the poor 
quality of paper. Because of the shortage of coinage metal in war 
the notes became illegible with ip.creased use. This led to the re-
duction of coins to the smallest denominations, the repudiation of 
the illegible paper slips, and the levying of a charge for printing 
new money for old.22 
Above aU, it led to the elimination of the metal reserve,23 or 
at least it made it more difficult to exchange paper money as the 
place of exchange shifted to the inter:ior.24 At first withdrawal of 

» 10 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
currency from circulation was spaced over a short period but this 
was later extended from 22 to 25 yearsY• 1\fostly new notes, often 
of lower denomination,26 were issued for old ones, which were 
turned in. Repeatedly authorities refused to accept the old notes 
for all tax payments. These measures discredited paper money 
again and again. Naturally the frequent orders to effect every 
large payment in defined quotas of paper money,27 or the occa-
sional prohibition of payment in metal did not check this. 
The repeated withdrawal of all paper money from circulation 
led to deflation and lower prices. Recurrent attempts to increase 
the means of circulation in a planned manner failed because the 
temptation of all-out inflation, for budgeta1y reasons, always 
promptly arose. Under nonnal conditions the ratio of note circu-
lation to coinage roughly remained that of 18th century England 
( 1 to 10 or even less). Inflation was brought about by war and 
by loss of mining districts to the barbarians. Though less relevant, 
the use of metal for industrial, or rather, artistic purposes was also 
conducive to inflation at times when great wealth was accumu-
lated and the monastic foundations of Buddhism were built. The 
aftermath of war always led to bankruptcy of the currency, remi-
niscent of the assignats of the French revolution. The Mongol 
rulers ( Kublai Khan) had tried to issue graded metal ceJtificates 
(?),a measure which Marco Polo, as is known, greatly admired,28 
but this led to a tremendous inflation. As early as 1288 the cur-
rency was devalued by 80 percent; then the great influx of silver 
brought it back into circulation. Thereupon an attempt was made 
to establish exchange rates between gold, silver and copper (gold 
to silver 10, actually 10, 25:1. An ounce of silver equalled 2005 
ch'ien, hence copper was devalued by .50 percent). Private posses-
sion of gold and silver bars was forbidden and precious metal 
was only to be coverage for the ceJtificates. The precious metal 
and copper industries were taken over by tl1e state and no coins 
were minted. Actually this led to a pure paper currency. With 
the fall of tl1e dynasty it was abolished. 
The Ming resumed orderly minting. That gold and silver were 

CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 
»11« 
allegedly valued in the ratio of 4 to 1 is a characteristic example 
of the instability of the price ratios of precious metals. Soon the 
.Ming prohibited gold and silver (in 1375), and then copper 
money (in 1450), because the paper money which was circulated 
at the same time was devalued. Therewith, paper currency 
seemed to be definitely established. Yet 1489 is the last year for 
which the annalists mention paper money. The 16th century wit-
nessed great efforts to coin copper but these efiotts also failed. 
In the 16th century conditions became tolerable with the influx 
of European silver through direct trade. By the end of the 16th 
century the silver standard (bullion-actually bank) was adopted 
in wholesale trade. Copper coinage was resumed and the copper-
silver ratio changed considerably at the expense of copper.29 
Paper money of all sorts remained completely suppressed after 
it was prohibited by the Mings in 1620, a prohibition honored by 
the Manchus. The slow but considerable increase of the metal 
reserve is expressed in the increasing pecuniary structure of state 
budgetary accounts. The issue of paper money by the state during 
the second T'ai P'ing rebellion ended in a devaluation and repudi-
ation similar to that of the assignats. 
Yet the circulation of silver bullion caused great difficulties. 
It had to be weighed each time, and it was considered legitimate 
for provincial bankers to recover their higher costs by using scales 
other than those used in the port cities. The !,'1'ain of silver had 
to be tested by silversmiths. Because of the great proportionate 
increase in silver payments the central government demanded a 
certificate stating the place of origin and the examining board of 
each silver bar. The silver was molded in the form of a shoe and 
differed in grain by regions. 
Obviously these conditions necessarily led to bank currency. 
In wholesale places the bankers' guilds, whose bills of exchange 
were honored everywhere, sponsored guild organization and en-
forced payment of all commercial debts in bank money. To be 
sure, during the 19th century there were recommendations that 
the state introduce paper culTency (memorial of 1831).30 The 

)) 12 (( 
THE HELIGION OF CHINA 
arguments remained exactly those of the beginning of the 17th 
centllly and the ~fiddle Ages: namely, the industrial use of copper 
was said to endanger monetary circulation and therewith piice 
policies. Although bank money \Vas said to surrender cnncncy 
control to the traders, paper currency was not introduced then. 
The salaries of the officials-the most powerful interest group-
were suLstantiaily paid in silver. Because their iacomc oppor-
tunities depended on trade, broad strata of officials shared the 
interest of the traders in opposing the intmference of the .Peking 
government in currency matters. In any case, all provincial offi-
cials were unanimously against any strengthening of central 
finance, above all, against financial control by the central govern-
ment. 
The mass of the petty bourgeois and small holders was little 
or not at all interested in changing existing conditions. This was 
so despite, and partly because of, the great decline in the pur-
chasing power of copper, a decline which had been gradual 
through the centuries. Here the technicalities of Chinese bank 
credit and exchange may be left aside. We vmuld only like to 
mention that the tael, the standard unit of account, circulated in 
three main but also some minor forms. 1\'Ioreover, the grain of the 
bars carrying a banker's stamp and moulded in the form of a shoe 
was quite unreliable. For quite some time the state had no longer 
enforced a tariff on copper coins. In the interior the copper stand-
ard was the only effective one, but the silver hoard, and especially 
the rate of its gro\:vth since 1516, was quite significant. 
We now face two peculiar facts. 1. The strong increase of 
wealth in precious metals had unmistakably led to a stronger 
development of the money economy, especially in state finance. 
This, however, did not accompany a shattering of traditionalism, 
but rather its distinct increase. Capitalist phenomena, as far as 
can be seen, were not effected to any tangible extent. 2. The 
enormous growth of population, to be discussed below, was 
neither stimulated by, nor did it stimulate, capitalist develop-
ment. Rather it was, to say the ]east, associated with a stationary 
form of economy. 

CITY, PHIXCE AND GOD 
» 13 « 
2. City and Guild 
DURING Antiquity in the Occident the cities, and during the 
1Jiddle Ages, the cities, the papal curia, and the emerging states 
were vehicles of financial rationalization, of money economy and 
of politically oriented capitalism. But, in China, we have seen 
that the monasteries were even regarded as detrimental to the 
retention of a metal standard. In China, there were no cities like 
Florence which could have created a standard coin and guided 
the state in monetary policies. And the state, as shown, not only 
failed in its currency policy but also in its attempt to establish 
the money economy. 
The valuation of temples and of many other prebends31 pri-
marily as payment in kind was characteristic until recent times. 
Thus, the Chinese city, despite all analogies differed decisively 
from that of the Occident. The Chinese character for city means 
"fortress," as was also true for occidental antiquity and the Middle 
Ages. In Antiquity, the Chinese city was a princely rcsidence32 
and until modern times prima1ily remained the residence of the 
viceroy and other dignitaries. In such cities as those of Antiquity 
and, let us say, the Moscow of the period of serfdom, it was pri-
marily rent that was spent. This was partly ground rent, partly 
income from office prebends, and other income that was either 
directly or indirectly politically dctennined. Of course the cities 
were the usual locus of trade and crafts, the latter to a noticeably 
lesser degree than in the occidental Middle Ages. The village, too, 
had the right to open markets under the protection of the village 
temple but no urban market monopoly was guaranteed by state 
privilege. as 
In contrast to the Occident, the cities in China and throughout 
the Orient lacked political autonomy. The oriental city was not 
a "polis" in the sense of Antiquity, and it knew nothing of the 
"city law" of the Middle Ages, for it was not a "commune" with 
political privileges of its own. Nor was there a citizenry in the 
sense of a self-equipped military estate such as existed in occi-
dental Antiquity. No military oath-bound communities like the 

» 14 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
Campagna Communis of Genoa or other coniurationes ever 
sprang up to fight or ally themselves with feudal lords of the 
city in order to attain autonomy. No forces emerged like the 
consuls, councils, or political associations of merchant and craft 
guilds such as the Mercanza which were based upon the military 
independence of the city district.34 Revolts of the urban populace 
which forced the officials to flee into the citadel have always been 
the order of the day. But they always aimed at removing a con-
crete official or a concrete decree, especially a new tax, never at 
gaining a charter which might, at least in a relative way, guaran-
tee the freedom of the city. This was hardly possible along occi-
dental lines because the fetters of the sib were never shattered. 
The new citizen, above all the newly rich one, retained his rela-
tions to the native place of his sib, its ancestral land and temple. 
Hence all ritually and personally important relations with the 
native village were maintained. This was rather comparable to 
the way in which a member of the Russian peasantry retained his 
birtlu·ight within his mir, with all ensuing rights and obligations, 
even though he had his permanent occupation in the city as 
factory worker, journey man, merchant, manufacturer or writer. 
In the Occident the Zeus Erkeios of the Attic citizen, and since 
Cleisthenes his demos, or the H antgemal of the Saxon, were 
residues of similar conditions.36 But the city was a "community"-
in Antiquity a religious association, in the Middle Ages a con-
iuratio (oath-bound fraternity). Of this China knows only pre-
liminary stages, not realization. The Chinese city god was only 
a local tutelary deity, not the god of an association, and as a rule 
he was a canonized urban mandarin.36 
In China, this was due to the absence of the oath-bound politi-
cal association formed by an armed citizenry. Craft and merchant 
guilds, city leagues, and even in some instances a "city guild," 
externally similar to the English gild.a mercatoria, have existed 
in China until now. Indeed, the imperial officials had to reckon 
with the various urban associations and actually these associations 
extensively controlled the economic life of the city. In fact they 
did so with greater intensity than the imperial administration, 

CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 
» 15 « 
and in many ways this control was firmer than that of the average 
occidental association. In some respects the condition of Chinese 
cities is suggestive of English cities at the time of the firma burgi 
or of the Tudors. Yet the obvious and significant difference is that 
the English city, even a.t that time had the "charter" which guaran-
teed its '1iberties." In China nothing of the kind could be found.37 
In sharp contrast with the Occident, but in harmony with Indian 
conditions, the city as an imperial fortress actually had fewer 
formal guarantees of self-governmenf38 than the village. Legally 
the city consisted of "village districts" under particular tipao 
(elders). Often it belonged to several lower ( hsien), in some 
cases even to several superior ( fu) districts under separate gov-
ernmental departrnentsll9-quite an advantage to thieves. Unlike 
the village, the city could not legally make contracts, either eco-
nomic or political ones. It could not file law suits and in general 
it could not function as a corporate body. The actual occasional 
rule of a powerful merchant guild over a city, to be found in 
India and in other parts of the world, was no substitute. 
This can be explained in terms of the different origins of the 
occidental and oriental city. The polis of Antiquity originated as 
an overseas trading city, however strong its base in landlordism, 
but China was predominantly an inland area. Nautically con-
sidered, the range of operations of Chinese junks was occasionally 
quite extensive and nautical technology ( eclimeter and com-
pass40)was highly developed. Nevertheless, oversea trade in 
relation to the land mass of the interior was of minor significance. 
Moreover, for centuries China had renounced seapower, the indis-
pensable basis of export trade. Finally, for the sake of preserving 
tradition, China, as is well known, had confined foreign contact 
to a single port, namely Canton, and to a small number of licensed 
firms, specifically thirteen. The result was not accidental. Even 
the imperial canal, as every map and every preserved report 
shows, was actually built for the sole purpose of avoiding the 
transport of rice from South to North by sea because of the 
hazards of piracy and especially because of typhoons. Even recent 
official reports state that the losses of the treasury through sea 

}) 16 (( 
THE HELlGION OF CHIN A 
transport warrant the tremendous costs for reconstmcting the 
canal. 
On the other hand, the characteristic inland city of the occi-
dental :tvliddle Ages, like the Chinese and the 1·1iddle Eastern 
city, was usually founded by princes and feudal lonls in order 
to gain money rents and taxes. Yet at an early date the European 
city turned iuto a highly privileged association with fixed rights. 
These could be and were extended in a planned manner because 
at the time the lord of the city lacked the technical means to 
administer the city. Moreover, the city represented a military 
association which could successfully close the city gates to an 
army of knights. In contrast, the great Middle Eastern cities, such 
as Babylon, at an early time were completely at the mercy of the 
royal bureaucracy because of canal construction and administra-
tion. The same held for the Chinese city despite the paucity of 
Chinese central administration. The prosperity of the Chinese 
city did not primarily depend upon the citizens' enterprising spirit 
in economic and political ventures but rather upon the imperial 
administration, especially the administration of the rivers. (Just 
as in Egypt the sign of "government" is the Pharaoh holding the 
lash in his hand, so the Chinese character identifies "governing" 
( chih) with the handling of a stick. In the old terminology this 
is identified with the "regulation of waters." The concept of "law" 
(fa) however, means "the release of water.") 11 
Our occidental bureaucracy is of recent origin and in part has 
been learned from the experiences of the autonomous city states. 
The imperial bureaucracy of China is very ancient. The Chinese 
city was predominantly a product of rational administration, as 
its very form indicated. First, there was the stockade or wall. 
Then the population, which was often insufficiently centered, was 
brought together within the walled area, possibly by coercion.42 
As in Egypt, a change of dynasty also meant a change of the 
capital or at least its name. The residence of Peking eventually 
became permanent but until recent times it was only in a limited 
way a place of trade and industrial exports. 
The paucity of imperial administration actually meant that the 

CITY, PlUNCE AND GOD 
». 17 « 
Chinese in town and country "governed themselves." Like the sibs 
in rural areas, the occupational associations in the city held sov-
ereign sway over the way of life of their members. This they did 
at the side of the sibs as well as over those who did not belong 
to any sib, or at least not to any old and strong one. With the 
exception of the Indian castes and their different forms, nowhere 
was the individual so unconditionally dependent upon craft and 
merchant guild (which were not differentiated terminologically) 
as in China.43 Although in a few instances there were monopolistic 
guilds and though these were not officially recognized, the guilds 
had often in reality appropriated absolute jurisdiction over their 
members. Formally this seemed to be especially hue of the Hwei-
kwan guilds of officials and merchants who derived from other 
provinces. These guilds may be compared to the German Hansa. 
They had definitely emerged by the 14th, but perhaps even by 
the eighth century, in order to protect these groups against the 
hostility of the local merchants. That, anyway, is occasionally 
stated in the preambles to the stah1tes. Membership was required 
and whoever wished to engage in business had to join at the risk 
of his life. The guilds owned club houses and levied taxes pro-
portionate to the official's salary or the merchant's turnover. They 
punished any member who appealed in court against another 
member. They provided tombs in a special cemetery as a substi-
tute for native soil. They bore the trial costs of their members 
suing outsiders and, were there conflict with local authorities, 
they managed the appeals to central authorities. Of course, they 
provided the requisite douceu1·s. In 1809, they protested the local 
prohibition of rice exports. Besides non-native officials and mer-
chants there were also non-native artisans enrolled in the guilds-
needle makers from Kiangsu and Taichow living in vVenchow. 
The goldbeater's guild of vVenchow consisted exclusively of peo-
ple from Ningpo. These organizations are residues of tribal craft 
organizations and the ethnic specialization of crafts. This is evi-
denced by the goldbeater's guild which denied membership and 
the imparting of its art to a native. In all these cases the absolute 
authority of the guild was a natural response to the always pre-

» 18 « 
THE HELICION OF CHIN A 
carious siluatiou of the guild members in an ethnically strange 
environment. lt \vas identical to the strict though far less rigorous 
discipline of the I-Iansa in London and Novgorocl. The local craft 
and merchant guilds (kung so), however, also held almost abso-
lute S\Vay over their members through expulsion, boycott, ami 
lynch justice. In the 19th century a guild member was bitten to 
death for infraction of the rule defining the maximum number of 
apprentices! 
The guild controlled all economic matters relating to its mem-
bers: \vcights and measures, or currency made by stamping silver 
bars, as pradiced, e.g., by the great guild of Ncwchwang which 
also proviJcd for street maintenance. Credit affairs of the mem-
bers were controlled especially by the hui-kuan guilds ( Hansa 
leagues) whose monopolistic practices stipulated the tem1s of 
delivery, storage, payment, insurance and interest rates. Thus, 
the opium guild at \Vuchow determined when opium could be 
brought to market; the bankers' guilds in Ningpo, Shanghai and 
elsewhere determined the interest rates; the tea guild in Shanghai 
the rates of storage and insurance. The guilds repressed feigned 
or otherwise illegal transactions. They provided for the orderly 
compensation of creditors in case of business transfer, e.g., the 
druggists' guilds of Wenchow did this. The bankers' guilds regu-
lated the monetary exchange rates. The guilds gave advances on 
goods in storage, as, for instance, the opium guild did because of 
the aforementioned regulation of the selling season. 
As regards artisans, it is important to note that the guilds regu-
lated and restricted the number of apprentices. They even ex-
cluded family members. Occasionally the guilds secured craft 
secrets. 41 
A fe\V guilds had at their disposal a fortune amounting to 
millions and often this was invested in joint landholdings. They 
taxed their members and from new members they raised initiation 
fees. They provided for hail and for the burial of impoverished 
members. They also financed theaters. Charity organization and 
common religious worship, however, were less developed than 
might be supposed by European analogy. If initiation fees were 

CITY, PHINCE AND GOD 
)) 19 (( 
occasionally paid to a deity (temple treasury) this arrangement 
(originally) served as security against seizure by political author-
ities. Only poor guilds, being unable to afford a club house of their 
own, would regularly use a temple as a meeting hall. The theater 
featured secular plays, not "mysteria" as in the \Vest. The religious 
fraternities ( hui) developed only slight religious interests. 
The majority of the occupational associations were open to all 
who engaged in a particular trade and usually membership was 
obligatory. There were numerous survivals of ancient sib and 
tribal crafts. Actually they represented hereditary monopolies or 
even hereditary secret arts.45 But there were also monopolistic 
merchant guilds which were established by fiscal interests or by 
the anti-foreign policy of the state. vVe may mention especially 
the Co-hong guild in Canton. Until the peace of Nanking its 
thirteen firms monopolized all foreign trade. It was one of the few 
guilds based on official privilege granted by the government. 
During the Middle Ages the Chinese administration repeatedly 
sought to shift to liturgical ways of providing for public needs. 
It seems justifiable to infer that the transition from inter-ethnic 
specialization of migrating itinerant sib and tribal crafts to resi-
dent handicraft, with free admission to apprenticeship for some 
crafts, has been consummated in stages. Possibly this transition 
was enforced from above by means of compulsory trade asso-
ciations which in tum were regimented for government commis-
sions. Consequently, a broad section of industry remained essen-
tially organized as sib and tribal crafts. Under the Han, manifold 
industrial pursuits were still strict family secrets. The art of pro-
ducing Foochow lacquer, for instance, died out during the T'ai 
P'ing rebellion because the sib who kept the secret had been 
eradicated. Generally, there was no urban monopolization of in-
dustry. The local division of labor between town and country 
which we refer to as "city economy" had developed as it had else-
where, and individual policy measures of the city economy can 
be found. In the occidental Middle Ages these were the guilds 
which, once in power, actually sought to execute the "policy of a 
city economy." In China, despite many beginnings, this sort of 

» 20 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
systematic city policy has never fully matured. To be sure, Chi-
nese public authorities have repeatedly reverted to liturgical con-
trols, but they failed to create a system of guild privileges com-
parable to that of the West during the Middle Ages. The very 
absence of these legal guarantees led the occupational associa-
tions of China to the road of relentless and incomparable seJf 
help. In China, this also accounted for the absence of fixed, 
publicly recognized, formal and reliable legal foundations for a 
free and cooperatively regulated organization of industry and 
commerce, such as is known in the Occident. These were the legal 
foundations beneficial to the development of petty capitalism in 
occidental medieval artisan crafts but in China they were absent 
because the cities and guilds had no politico-military power of 
their own. This in turn is explained by the early development of 
bureaucratic organization in the army (officer corps) and civil 
administration. 
3. Princely Administration and 
the Conception of Deity: A Com-
parison with the Middle East 
IN CHINA, as in Egypt, the need to control the rivers was pre-
requisite to a rational economy. This need was decisive for the 
inception of central authority and its patrimonial officialdom, 
which has existed throughout Chinese history. Distinct proof of 
this is the resolution of an alleged cartel of the feudal princes 
which Mencius mentions and which is ascribed to the seventh 
century B.C. Irrigation was already developed at the time when 
the art of writing emerged and perhaps the latter was connected 
with the administrative needs of the former. 46 In contrast to 
Egypt and Mesopotamia, however, at least in Northern China, 
the nucleus of the empire, priority was given to dike construction 
against :floods or canal construction for inland water transport, 
especially transport of forage. Canal construction for irrigation 
purposes was secondary. In Mesopotamia the latter was a pre-
requisite to the cultivation of the desert area. The river adminis-

CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 
)) 21 « 
trators and the "police" formed the nucleus of the pre-literary and 
purely patrimonial bureaucracy. The police are mentioned in 
early documents as forming a class below the "productive" estates 
but above the "eunuchs" and "carriers." 
It may be asked to what extent these conditions were con-
sequential not only as they unquestionably were for politics, but 
also for religion. The god of the Middle East was fashioned on 
the model of the king. To the Mesopotamian and Egyptian subject 
who hardly knew rain, weal and woe, and above all, the harvest 
depended upon the activities of the king and his administration. 
The king directly "created" the harvest. The case w~s somewhat 
similar, though by no means as compelling, in some parts of 
Southern China where the regulation of water was of paramount 
significance. Irrigation led to the direct transition from hoe culture 
to gardening. However, in Northern China, narural events, espe-
cially rainfall, loomed much larger despite the considerable devel-
opment of inigation. In the Middle East the old centralized 
bureaucratic administration undoubtedly promoted the concept 
of the supreme deity as a King of Heavens who had "created" 
man and the world from nothing. Now, as supramundane ethical 
ruler, he demands each creature to do his duty. Only in the Middle 
East has this idea of God retained the upper hand with such force-
fuh1ess. It must be added at once that this fact cannot be deduced 
solely from economic conditions. In the Middle East the Heavenly 
King also rose to the highest position of power and finally-though 
only with Deutero Isaiah in exile-to an absolutely supramundane 
supremacy. In Palestine, in contrast to the desert regions, rain and 
sunshine, the sources of fertility, were sent by the grace of this 
God. Jehovah expressly exposrulated with the Israelites about 
this. Obviously factors other than economic factors, namely for-
eign political ones, played a part in these contrasting conceptions 
of deity. This requires further elaboration. 
The contrast between the Middle and Far Eastern conception 
of deity was by no means always as sharp. On the one hand, 
Chinese antiquity k-new a dual god of the peasantry (She-chi) 
for every local association; it represented a fusion of the spirit of 

)) 22 « 
THE F.ELIGION OF CHINA 
fertile soil (She) and the spirit of harvest (Chi). This God had 
already assumed the character of a deity meting out ethical sanc-
tions. On the other hand, the temples of ancestral spirits (Chung-
miao) were objects of worship. These spirits together (She-chi 
chung-miao) were the main object of the local mral cults. As the 
tutelary spirit of the local community it was probably first con-
ceived naturalistically as a semi-material magical force or sub-
stance. Its position roughly corresponded to that of the local deity 
in Western Asia but at an early time the latter was essentially 
more personalized. With the increase of princely power the spirit 
of the ploughland became the spirit of the princely territory. As 
is usually the case, when a stratum of noble heroes developed in 
China, then too a personal God of Heavens originated who 
roughly corresponded to the Hellenic Zeus. The founder of the 
Chou dynasty worshipped as a dualist unit this God of Heavens 
together with the local spirit. Originally imperial power was like a 
feudal suzerainty over the princes. Thus, sacrificial rites to Heaven 
became the monopoly of the emperor who was considered the 
"S~n" of Heaven. The princes made sacrifices to the spirits of the 
land and to the ancestors; the heads of households made sacrifices 
to the ancestral spirits of their kinship group. As usual, the char-
acter of the spirits was tinged with animist-naturalist notions. This 
was especially true of the Spirit of Heaven (Shang Ti) who could 
be conceived either as the Heaven itself or as King of Heaven. 
Then the Chinese spirits, especially the mighty and universal 
ones, increasingly assumed an impersonal character.47 This was 
exactly in reverse to the Middle Eastern situation where the per-
sonal supramundane creator and royal ruler of the world was 
raised above the animist semi-personal spirits and the local deity. 
For a long time the concept of deity among Chinese philos-
ophers remained very contradictory. For Wang Ch'ung, God was 
not conceived anthropomorphically but He nevertheless had a 
"body," apparently a sort of fluid substance. The same philos-
opher, on the other hand, argued a denial of immortality by 
pointing to the complete "formlessness" of God and to this the 
human spirit-similar to the Israelite "ruach"-retnrned after life. 

CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 
)) 23 « 
A similar conception has been expressed in inscriptions. But the 
impersonal nature of the supreme supramundane po.,vers was 
more and more emphasized. In Confucian philosophy the idea of a 
personal god had been upheld during the eleventh century but 
vanished in the twelfth century. This was due to the influence of 
the materialist, Chu Fu-tzn, whom Emperor K'ang Hsi, the author 
of the "Sacred Edict," still regarded as an authority. That this 
development toward an impersonal conception of deity48 was not 
consummated without permanent residues of the personalist con-
ception v,rill be discussed later. But in the official cult the imper-
sonal conception gained the upper hand. 
In the Semitic Orient, too, the fertile land, the land with natural 
water, was the "land of Baal" and at the same time his residence. 
The Baal of the peasant's land, in the sense of harvest-yielding 
soil, also became the local deity of the political association of the 
homeland. But here this land was considered the "property" of the 
god; "heaven" was not conceived in the Chinese manner as im-
personal and yet animated, that is to say, as a heaven which might 
compete with a lord of heaven. The Israelite Yahwe was origi-
nally a mountain deity of storms and natural catastrophes. In war 
he made his approach through clouds and thunderstorms in order 
to render aid to the heroes. He was the federal deity of the con-
quering oath-bound confedemcy which had been placed under 
his protection by means of a covenant mediated by priests. Hence 
foreign affairs permanently remained his desmesne and the con-
cern of the greatest among his prophets, who were political publi-
cists in times when the mighty Mesopotamian robber states were 
tremendously feared. The final shaping of his image was deter-
mined by this circumstance. Foreign affairs set the stage for his 
deeds, namely, for the peripeties of war and the destiny of na-
tions. Therefore, he was and remained first of all a God of the 
extraordinary, that is, of the destiny of his people in war. But bis 
people could not create a world empire of their own and re-
mained a small state in the midst of world powers to which they 
finally succumbed. Thus Jehovah could only become a "world 
God" as a supramundane ruler of destiny. Even his own chosen 

» 24 « 
TilE RELIGION OF CHINA 
people were accorded mere creatural significance; once blessed 
they might also be rejected depending on their merit. 
In contrast, the Chinese Empire, in historical times, became an 
increasingly pacified world empire despite its war campaigns. To 
be sure, Chinese culture originated under the banner of pure mili-
tarism. Originally the shih is the "hero," later the official. The 
"hall of studies" (Pi-yung kung) where, according to ritual, the 
emperor in person interpreted the classics seems orginally to have 
been a "bachelor house" ( aJ•opdov) such as prevailed among almost 
all warrior and hunting peoples. There the fraternity of young 
warriors were garrisoned by age group away from family life. 
Mter having proven themselves they were armed and initiated 
through the "capping" ceremony which is still preserved. The 
extent to which the typical system of age groups was elaborated 
remains open to question. Etymology seems to suggest that 
women originally managed tillage alone, but never participated 
in non-domestic rites. Obviously the bachelor house was that of 
the (charismatic) warrior chieftain where diplomatic transactions 
(such as the surrender of enemies) were consummated, where 
weapons were stored, and trophies (cut-off ears) were deposited. 
Here the league of young warriors practiced rhythmic, that is 
disciplined archery, which allowed the prince to choose his fol-
lowers and officials by their merits (hence the ceremonial signifi-
cance of archery until recent times). It is possible that ancestral 
spirits also gave advice there. If all this is true, the reports con-
cerning original matrilineal descent accords with it. "~Jatriarchy," 
as far as can be ascertained, seems primarily and regularly to have 
resulted from the father's milita1y estrangement from family life.49 
All this was very remote in historical time. 
Use of the horse in individual hero combat-in China as well as 
the world over-led to the disintegration of the bachelor house of 
foot soldiers. The horse was first used as a draft animal for the 
war chariot and was instrumental in the ascendancy of hero com-
bat. The highly trained individual hero, equipped with costly 
arms, stepped forward. This "Homeric" age of China was also 
very remote in historical time. In China, as in Egypt and Meso-

CITY, PRINCE Al\"D GOD 
}) 25 (( 
potamia, the technique of knightly combat apparently never led 
to an individualist social order as strong as that of Homeric Hellas 
or the occidental Ivliddle Ages. 
vVe assume that the main counter-weight was the dependence 
on river regulation and therewith an autonomous bureaucratic 
management by the prince. As in India, the individual districts 
were obliged to furnish war chariots and armored men. Hence 
there was no personal contract like that of the occidental feudal 
association. The am1y of knights rested on the obligation of the 
districts to furnish warriors according to census registration. The 
"noble man," chiin tzu (gentleman) of Confucius was originally 
the knight trained in arms. But the static pressures of economic 
life never allowed the war gods to ascend to Olympian heights. 
The Chinese emperor executed the rite of ploughing; having 
become the patron saint of the ploughman, he was no longer a 
knightly prince. The purely chthonian mythologies''0 were never 
of paramount significance. With the rule of the literati the increas-
ingly pacifist hun of ideologies was natural and vice versa. 
Since the abolition of feudalism the Spirit of Heaven, like the 
Egyptian deities, has been conceived as a sort of ideal court of 
appeal against the office holders of this earth, from the emperor 
right clown to the lowest official. In China, this bureaucratic con-
cept produced a special fear of the curse of the oppressed and the 
poor. This also happened in Egypt and-less explicitly-in :rvieso-
potamia. (For the impact of this fear on their Israelite neighbors 
see "Das antike ]udentum," Ti.ibingcn, 1921.) It is characteristic 
of the bureaucratic and at the same time pacifist mentality of the 
Chinese that this idea-a quasi-superstitious 1-fagna Charta-was 
the only available and gravely feared weapon the subjects could 
use against the privileged, the officials, and the rich. 
In China, the period of genuine people's wars in any case be-
longs to remote times. To be sure, the bureaucratic state signified 
no break with the warlike epoch of China. It led its armies to 
Indo-China and central Turkistan. The early literary-documentary 
sources give special praise to the warrior hero. However, in his-
torical times, according to the official view, only once was a vic-

» 26 « 
THE RELIGJON OF CI-IJKA 
torious general proclaimed emperor by the army (\Vang Mang 
about the time of the birth of Christ). Actually of course, this has 
happened more often; but it occurred through the ritually re-
quired forms, or by ritually recognized conquest, or as rebellion 
against a ritually incorrect emperor. In the period between the 
eighth and the third centuries n.c., which was decisive for the 
formation of intellectual culture, tho empire was a very loose asso-
ciation of dominions. The latter formally recognized the suzerainty 
of the politically impotent emperor but were permanently em-
battled .in struggle for the position of rnajor domo. 
The fact that the imperial lord paramount was simultaneously 
and primarily high priest demarcated the Chinese from the occi-
dental Holy Homan Empire. This important state of affairs may 
be traced to pre-historic times and was comparable to the posi-
tion which the occidental pope had claimed in the manner of 
Boniface VIII.51 Its indispensable function determined its pres-
ervation. In the role of high priest the emperor was an essential 
element of cultural cohesion among the individual states which 
always varied in size and power. An at least formal homogeneity 
of ritual cemented this cohesion. In China, as in the occidental 
Middle Ages, religious unity determined the ritually free inter-
state mobility of the noble families. The noble statesman was 
ritually free to transfer his services from one prince to another. 
The unification of the empire, which proceeded with only minor 
interruptions from the third century B.c. onward represented the 
internal pacification of the empire, at least in principle. No longer 
was there legitimate opportunity for internal warfare. The defense 
against and the subjection of the barbarians became simply a 
governmental police duty. Thus, in China, the God of Heaven 
could not assume the form of a hero-God who revealed himself in 
the irrational destiny of his people through its foreign relations, 
or who was worshipped in war, victory, defeat, exile and nostalgia. 
Disregarding the :tvlongol invasion, such irrational fate was no 
longer of paramount importance in China after the construction 
of the Great vVall. \Vhen quiet religious speculation was being 
developed such events were too remote to be seized upon. They 

CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 
» 27 « 
were not constantly visualized as ordained menaces, or as ordeals 
which had been mastered, or as problems governing man's very 
existence. Above all, such matters of fate were not the business of 
the common people. Successful usurpation of the throne or suc-
cessful invasion simply meant a different tax receiver, not an 
altered social order. (Thus, Otto Francke much emphasizes the 
fact that the Manchu rule was not experienced as "foreign dom-
ination." But this does not hold for periods of revolutionary agita-
tion, as highlighted by the manifestoes of the T'ai P'ing.) 
Thus, the unshaken order of internal political and social life, 
with thousands of years behind it, was placed under divine tute-
lage and then considered as the revelation of the divine. The 
Israelite God also took note of internal social relationships; for he 
used misfortune in war as the occasion to punish his people for 
having broken the old order of the confederacy which he bad 
instituted. These offenses were, however, only one among many 
sins, the most important of which was idolatry. For the heavenly 
powers of China, however, the ancient social order was the one 
and only one. Heaven reigned as guardian of its permanence and 
undisturbed sanctity, and as the seat of tranquility guaranteed by 
the rule of reasonable norms-not as the fountainhead of irrational, 
feared, or hoped for peripetics of fate. Such peripeties implied 
unrest and disorder, and were specifically regarded as demonic in 
origin. Tranquility and internal order could best be guaranteed by 
a power which, impersonal in nature, was specifically above 
mundane affairs. Such a power had to steer clear of passion, above 
all, "wrath"-the most important attribute of Yahwe. 
These political foundations of Chinese life also favored the 
triumph of those clements of animist belief which inhered in all 
magic evolving toward the cult. In the \Vest this development had 
been broken by the ascent of hero-gods and eventually by the 
faith of plebeian strata in a personal and ethical God of world 
redemption. In China, the genuine chthonian cults along with 
their typical orgies were also eliminated, by the aristocracy of 
knights and later by the literati. 52 
Dances are not to be found-the old war dance had vanished-

THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
nor are sexual, musical, or other f01ms of toxic orgies found. There 
are scarcely even survivals of such. Only a single act of ritual 
seems to have assumed a "sacramental" character, and it was 
quite non-orgiastic. The God of Heaven was also trimphant here. 
Following Ssu-ma Ch'ien's biography of Confucius, the philos-
ophers argued that the gods of the mountains and rivulets rule 
the world because rain comes from the mountains. But the God 
of Heaven was victorious as the God of heavenly order, not 
heavenly hosts. It was a turn of religion which was specifically 
Chinese; for other reasons and in a different form, it had also 
remained dominant in India. Here the timeless and irrevocable 
attained religious supremacy. This was brought about by join-
ing an inviolate and uniform magical ritual to the calendar. The 
ritual compelled the spirits; the calendar was indispensable for 
a people of peasants. Thus, the laws of nature and of rites were 
fused into the unity of Ta.o. 5:; Not a supramundane lord creator, 
but a supra-divine, impersonal, forever indentical and eternal 
existence was felL to be the ultimate and supreme. This was to 
sanction the validity of eternal order and its timeless existence. 
The impersonal power of Heaven did not "speak" to man. It 
revealed itself in the regimen on earth, in the firm order of nature 
and tradition which were part of the cosmic order, and, as else-
where, it revealed itself in what occurred to man. The welfare of 
the subjects documented heavenly contentment and the correct 
functioning of the order. All bad events were symptomatic of 
disturbance in the providential harmony of heaven and earth 
through magical forces. This optimistic conception of cosmic 
harmony is fundamental for China and has gradually evolved 
from the primitive belief in spirits. Here as elsewhere, there was 
originally a dualism" 4 of good (useful) and evil (harmful) 
spirits, of the "shen" and the "kuei," which animated the whole 
universe and expressed themselves in natural events as well as in 
man's conduct and condition. l\tlan's "soul," too, was believed 
to be composed of the heaven-derived shen and the earthly kuei 
substance which separated again after death. This corresponds 
to the widely diffused assumption of a plurality of animating 

CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 
» 29 « 
forces. The doctrine held in common by all schools of philosophy 
summarized the "good" spirits as the (heavenly and masculine) 
Yang principle, the "evil" ones as the (earthly and feminine) Yin 
principle, explaining the origin of the world from their fusion. 
Both principles were, like heaven and earth, external. Here, as 
almost everywhere else, this consistent dualism was optimistically 
attenuated and supported by identifying the redeeming magical 
charisma of sorcerers and heroes with the shen spirits who origi-
nated in the benign heavenly power, the Yang. The charis-
matically qualified man obviously had power over the evil demons 
(the lwei), and the heavenly power was also certainly the good 
and supreme leader of the social cosmos. The shen spirits and 
their functions had to be supported in man and in the world.55 
To this end the demonic kuei spirits had to he kept at rest so 
that the heavenly protected order would function correctly. For, 
the demons could do no harm unless suffered by Heaven to do it. 
The gods and spirits were powerful beings. No single God, 
no apotheosized hero or spirit, however powerful, was "omnis-
cient" or "omnipotent." The Confucian's sober wisdom of life con-
cerning the misfortunes of the pious was simply that "God's will 
is often unsteady." All. superhuman beings were stronger than 
man but were far below the impersonal supreme power of Heaven, 
and also below the imperial pontifex who was in Heaven's good 
graces. Accordingly, only these and similar impersonal powers 
could be considered as objects of worship by the supra-individ-
ual community and such powers were conceived as determining 
its destiny.56 But the spirits, who could be magically influenced, 
might also determine the individual's fate. 
With these spirits one was on a footing of primitive mutuality: 
so and so many ritual acts brought so and so many benefits. If a 
tutelary spirit proved insufficiently strong to protect a man, in 
spite of all sacrifices and virtues, he had to he substituted, for 
only the spirit who proved to be tmly powerful was worthy of 
worship. Actually such shifts occurred frequently. Moreover, the 
emperor granted recognition to proven deities as objects of wor-
ship; he bestowed title and rank57 upon them and occasionally 

THE RELIGIO~ OF CHINA 
demoted them again. Only proven charisma legitimatized a spirit. 
To be sure, the emperor was responsible for misfortune, but mis-
fortune also disgraced the God who, through oracles drawn by 
lot or other imperatives, was responsible for the failure of a ven-
ture. As late as 1455 an emperor publicly gave verbal lashing to 
the spirit of the Tasi mountain. In similar cases worship and sac-
rifice were withheld from the spirits. Among the great emperors 
the "rationalist" unifier of the empire, Shih Huang Ti, according 
to Ssu-ma Ch'ien's biography, had a mountain deforested in order 
to punish a renitent spirit for obstructing access to the mountain. 
4. The Charismatic and Pontifical 
Position of the Central Monarch 
IN KEEJlJNG with the principle of charismatic authority, the 
emperor, of course, fared similarly. The whole construction, after 
all, issued from this political habihwtion. The emperor had to 
prove his charismatic authority, which had been tempered by 
hereditary successorship. Charisma was always an extraordinary 
force (maga, orenda) and was revealed in sorcery and heroism. 
The charismatic qualification of the novice was tested by trials in 
magical asceticism, or, given different ideas, it was acquired in the 
form of a "new soul." But originally the charismatic quality could 
be lost; the hero or magician could be "forsaken" by his spirit or 
God. Charisma seemed to be guaranteed only so long as it was 
confirmed by recurrent miracles and heroic feats. In any case, the 
magician or hero must not expose himself and his following to 
obvious failure. Originally, heroic strength was considered quite 
as much a magical quality as "magical force" in the narrower 
sense, for instance rainmaking, magical healing or extraordinary 
craftsmanship.66 For cultural evolution the decisive question was 
whether or not the military charisma of the warlord and the paci-
fist charisma of the (usually meteorological) sorcerer were united 
in the same hand. If they lay in the hand of the war lord-the case 
of Caesaro-papism-the question was: ·what charismatic source 
served as the basis for the evolution of princely power? 

CITY, PRINCE AND GOD 
» 31 « 
In China, as discussed above, some fundamental prehistoric 
events, themselves probably co-determined by the great signifi-
cance of river regulation, 511 caused imperial authority to emerge 
from magical charisma. Secular and spiritual authority were com-
bined in one hand, the spirih1al strongly predominating. To be 
sure, the emperor had to prove his ·magical charisma through 
military success or at least he had to avoid striking failures. Above 
all, he had to secure good weather for harvest and guarantee the 
peaceful internal order of the reahn. However the personal quali-
ties which were necessary to the charismatic image of the em-
peror were turned into ritualism and then into ethics by the rit-
ualists and philosophers. 
The emperor had to conduct himself according to the ethic-al 
imperatives of the old classical scriptures. Thus, the Chinese mon-
arch remained primarily a pontifex; he was the old rainmaker of 
magical religion60 translated into ethics. Since the ethically ration-
alized "Heaven" guarded eternal order, the charisma of the mon-
arch depended on his virtues.61 Like all genuinely charismatic 
rulers he was a monarch by divine right, and not in the comfort-
able manner of modern sovereigns who, by the grace of God, 
claim to be responsible to Him only for their blunders. The latter 
are de facto irresponsible, but the Chinese emperor ruled in the 
old genuine sense of charismatic authority. He had to prove him-
self as the "Son of Heaven" and as the lord approved by Heaven 
insofar as the people fared well under him. If he failed, he simply 
lacked charisma. Thus, if the rivers broke the dikes, or if rain did 
not fall despite the sacrifices made, it was evidence-such was 
expressly taught-that the emperor did not have the charismatic 
qualities demanded by Heaven. In such cases the emperor did 
public penitence for his sins, as happened even in recent times. 
The Annals record similar public confession of sins even by the 
princes of feudal times62 and the custom continued to exist. As 
late as 1832 rain soon followed the public confession of the em-
peror.63 If this was of no avail the emperor had to expect abdica-
tion; in the past, it probably meant self-sacrifice. Like other offi-
cials he was open to official reprimand by the censors.64 Moreover, 

» 32 ({ 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
were a monarch to offend the ancient and established social order 
theoretically his charisma would forsake him, for the social order 
was part of the cosmos and its impersonal norm and harmony sur-
passed all deities. Were the monarch, for instance, to change the 
absolutely divine natural law of ancestral piety it would be judged 
that charisma had abandoned him, that he had fallen prey to 
demonic forces. And theory, after all, was not quite irrelevant. 
Having become a private person the monarch could be killed,65 
though naturally not everyone was authorized to do this. Rather 
it lay within the jurisdiction of the great officials, in much the 
same way as Calvin ascribed the right of resistance to the estates.66 
Officialdom, the pillar of public order and the state, was held 
to partake of charisma too. 67 Like the monarch it was also con-
sidered a sanctified institution although until now the individual 
official could be ad nutum amovibel. The official's qualification 
was also charismatically determined. All unrest and disorder in his 
bailiwick-whether social or cosmic-meteorological in nature-
demonstrated that the official was not in the grace of the spirits. 
Without questioning the reasons, the official had to retire from 
office. 
This position of officialdom had evolved since prehistoric times. 
The old semi-legendary sacred order of the Chou dynasty, as 
transmitted in the Clwu Li, had already arrived at the point of 
primitive patriarchialism, initiating its transition to feudalism. 

CHAPTER II 
THE FEUDAL AND PREBEN-
DAL STATE 
I 
1. The Hereditary Charismatic 
Nature of Feudalism 
N CHINA, as far as one can judge, political feudalism was not 
prima1ily connected with landlordism in the occidental sense. 
Both emerged from the "state organization of the ge11tes," as in 
India, when the chieftains' sibs escaped the ancient fetters of the 
bachelor house and its derivatives. The sib, which according to a 
documentary note originally furnished the war chariots, was basic 
to the ancient status structure. The actual political constitution 
was clearly delineated at the threshold of recorded history. It 
directly continued the primeval administrative shucture common 
to all conquering empires including even the great nineteenth 
century Negro empires. 
Outlying areas ruled by tributary princes were increasingly 
affiliated with the "middle realm," i.e., the "inner" tenitory sur-
rounding the royal residence. This territory, as if under domestic 
authority, was directly administered by the victorious ruler and 
his officials, personal clients, and lower nobles. The emperor of 
the "middle realm" interfered with the administration of tribu-
tary princes only if this were practicable and necessary for main-
taining his power and, related thereto, safeguarding his interest 
in tributes. His intervention naturally became more sporadic and 
less intense the further removed the tributary prince was from 
the area of domestic control. 
• 33 • 

» 34 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
Some of the political problems were: 'Vere the rulers of out-
lying areas removable in practice or were they hereditary dynas-
tic rulers? Could the subjects make practical use of their right of 
appeal to the emperor, a right acknowledged in the theory of the 
Clwu Li, and if so, how often? Did such appeals lead to interfer-
ences by the imperial administration? Were the co-ordinate or 
subordinate officials of the princes, as theory had it, actually de-
pendent upon the emperor's officials and appointed and removed 
by them? Hence, could the central administration of the three 
great and the three little councils (kung and ku) actually extend 
beyond the domestic authority? And were the armed forces of the 
outlying states achwlly at the disposition of the lord-paramount? 
Such problems were always solved by unstable provisions, result-
ing in political feudalization. 
In China this took the same course that we shall find most 
consistently in India. There, only the sibs of already ruling politi-
cal overlords and their followings claimed and were considered 
for subordinate positions-from the tributory prince down to the 
court or provincial official. In this the emperor's sib had prece-
dence, but also the sibs of princes who had submitted in good 
time were left in partial or full possession of their power. There 
was often a reluctance to deprive chieftains' families of all their 
lands because of the powerful ancestral spirits of charismatic 
sibs. 1 The feudal and prebendal opporhmities were determined 
by sib charisma and this in turn partially explains the strong posi-
tion of the ancestral spirits. Finally there were the sibs of all those 
who had distinguished themselves as heroes and trustees. In any 
case, for a long time charisma was no longer attached strictly to 
the individual but to his sib, a typical phenomenon as we shall 
find in our discussion of India. Status was not created by the 
feudal fief nor by receiving fief as a vassal through free com-
mendation and investiture. Rather, at least in principle, the re-
verse obtained. One qualified for an office fief of a certain rank 
as a member of a noble family with a customary rank. 
During the Chinese Middle Ages we find posts of ministers and 
even of some ambassadors firmly vested in the hands of certain 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
» 35 « 
families. Confucius, too, was a genteel man because he stemmed 
from a ruling family. These "great families," as they appear in 
later inscriptions, were the charismatic sibs whose position was 
financed largely through political incomes and hereditary landed 
wealth. Of course, the contrast to the Occident, while in some 
respects only relative, was of no small significance. In the Occi-
dent the hereditary nature of the fiefs was a mere consequence of 
historical development. The fief-holders were differentiated by 
status into those who had and had not received judicial preroga-
tives; the beneficia were differentiated by type of service; and 
finally, the knights were segregated from the other estates, even 
from the urban patriciate. All this was consummated in a society 
firmly structured through appropriation of land and the fixed 
distribution of all sorts of profit opportunities. 
Often the hereditary charismatic position of the early Medieval 
German "dynasties" -at the time quite hypothetical dynasties-
seems to approximate Chinese conditions. In the essential areas 
of Western feudalism, however, reversal of traditional rank orders, 
conquest, and migration greatly loosened the firm sib structure. 
Besides, defense needs required the enrollment of every able man 
trained as a knight so that any man living as a knight was perforce 
admitted to knightly status. Hereditary charisma and the eventual 
proof of nobility were later developments. 
In China, during historical times the hereditary charisma of 
the sib was, at least theoretically, always primary, though there 
were always successful parvenus. A dictum in the Shu Ching 
reads: "A family is esteemed for its age, an object for its new-
ness." The hereditary nature of the fief itself was not decisive, as 
in the Occident it came to be, but was rather considered a gross 
abuse. However, it was decisive that the claim to a certain fief was 
based on the hereditary rank of the sib. It may well be legendary 
that the Chou dynasty established the five degrees of nobility and 
then introduced the principled distribution of fiefs according to 
noble rank. But it is quite credible that the high vassals of the 
time ( chu Twu, the princes) were exclusively selected from the 
descendants of the ancient rulers.2 

)) 36 « 
THE HEL1GION OF CHINA 
This corresponds to early Japanese conditions and was typical 
of the "state of the gentes." According to the Annals, after the 
downfall of the Han dynasty, the Wei moved their capital to 
Loyang and had the aristocracy follow suit. The aristocracy 
consisted of their own and other old hereditary, charismatic sibs 
who originally, of course, were families of tribal chieftains. Even 
at that time they were descendants of feudal and prebendal office-
holders; and they dishibuted rank (and therewith the claim to 
prebends) according to ancestral office, a principle identical with 
that of the Roman nobility and the Russian micslnicshestvo.3 
Similarly, during the Period of the Warring States, the highest 
offices \vere fim1ly vested in the hands of certain sibs of high, 
hereditary charismatic rank. 4 A true court nobility emerged only 
during the time of Shih Huang Ti ( hef!:inning 221 n.c.) and was 
concomitant with the downfall of Feudalism. The award of rank 
is first mentioned in the Annals at that timc. 5 Also financial needs 
for the first time compelled the sale of offices, and hence the selec-
tion of officials according to monied wealth. Hereditary charisma 
disintegrated despite the maintenance of rank differences in prin-
ciple. As late as 1.'399, even the degradation to a plebeian level 
(min) is mentioned,6 however under very different conditions and 
a totally different sense. It then meant that the graduate literati, 
exempt from corvee or being caned, could he degraded to servi-
tude. During feudal times, an order of fiefs corresponded to rank 
gradation by hereditary charisma. After the abolition of subin-
feudation, an order of prebends corresponded to the shift toward 
bureaucratic administration. The prebends were soon firmly clas-
sified under the Ch'in; the Han followed their example by classify-
ing them into 16 classes of money and rice rents. 7 This meant the 
complete abolition of feudalism. 
The transition was represented by the division of offices8 into 
two different ranks, namely, kuan nei hou, i.e., land prebends 
and lieh hou, i.e., rent prebends, which depended upon the taxes 
of certain localities. The old, purely feudal fiefs were succeeded 
by land prebends. In practice these entailed broad prerogatives 
over the peasants. They continued to exist until the army of 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
knights was replaced by the princely and later the imperial stand-
ing army of disciplined and drafted peasants. Hence, despite 
internal differences, there was a broad, external similarity be-
tween ancient Chinese and occidental feudalism. 
In China, as elsewhere, men who did not bear arms because of 
economic or educational disqualification were thereby deprived 
of political rights. It is certain that this held even in pre-feudal 
times. The prince of the period of the Chou allegedly consulted 
the "people," i.e., the anned sibs, before giving a verdict of capital 
punishment and before going to war, and the latter was compati-
ble with the prevailing draft system. Presumably, with the advent 
of the war chariot the old army system was shattered and only 
then did hereditary, charismatic "feudalism" emerge and spread 
to political offices. 
The aforementioned Chou Li,0 the oldest preserved document 
concerning admin:istrative organization, portrays a very schematic 
state organization10 under the rational leadership of officials. It 
was based upon bureaucratically controlled irrigation, special 
crop cultivation (silk), draft registers for the army, statistics, and 
magazines. Its actual existence, however, seems problematical 
since, according to the Annals, this administrative rationalization 
was produced only through the competition of the feudal Warring 
States.11 Yet it is possible that a patriarchal epoch like that of the 
Old Kingdom of Egypt preceded the feudal period,12 for in both 
cases the irrigation and construction bureaucracy was undoubt-
edly ancient and grew out of the royal clientele. From the begin-
ning its existence tempered the feudal character of the Epoch of 
the Warring States and repeatedly steered the thinking of the 
literati to the tracks of administrative technology and bureau-
cratic utilitarianism. In any case, political feudalism held sway 
for more than half a millennium. 
The ninth to the third century B.C. represented a period of 
well-nigh independent feudal states. The Annals portray rather 
clearly the conditions of this feudal age, briefly touched upon 
above.18 The emperor was lord-paramount, before whom the vas-
sals descended from their chariots. Ip. the :final analysis political 

THE llELIGION OF CHIN A 
property "1ights" could be deduced solely from infeudation by the 
emperor who received gifts from the princely vassals. These vol-
untary gifts increasingly weakened the emperor and brought him 
into an awkward dependency. He awarded degrees of princely 
rank; the sub-vassals had no direct contact with him. This prin-
ciple was of great political significance for the fu fung (sub vas-
sals) and is best explained by the fact that many originally inde-
pendent political vassals later emerged as tributary princes. 
Except for obligatory military contributions, the gifts of the vas-
sals, even those to the emperor, were considered voluntary and the 
emperor was obliged to compensate them in turn.14 
That fiefs originated through the award of a castle for guardian-
ship has often been reported of the feudal state of Ch'in. In theory, 
the fiefs were to be renewed by the heir, and the emperor was 
entitled to freely determine the qualified heir. According to the 
Annals, were the father's and the emperor's designation of the 
heir to conflict the emperor gave way. The knightly fiefs may 
well have varied in size. According to a note in the Annals,H; a 
fief was to comprise 10 to 50,000 mou ( 1 mou at 5.26 Ar hence 
526 to 2,630 ha) with 100 to 500 people. In other places the pro-
vision of one war chariot per thousand persons16 is considered 
normal. Another count ( 594 B.c.) considers four settlements of 
undefined size17 as equivalent to 144 waniors. Later counts, again, 
stipulate certain deliveries of war chariots, armored men, horses, 
and provisions (cattle), usually in return for very large units of 
land.18 The whole manner in which taxes, forced labor, and re-
cruits were subsequently allocated obviously continued these feu-
dal traditions. In the older period they also proceeded to levy 
chariots and knights, later to raise recruits for the army, laborers 
for corvees, taxes in kind, and finally money taxes, as we shall 
show below. 
There were joint fiefs, and hence joint heirs under a leading 
elder. By ritual the younger sons ranked lower than the oldest. 
No longer were they considered "vassals" but officials (office 
nobles), and they made sacrifices at side altars instead of the great 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
ancestral family altar.19 In the imperial house primogeniture and 
designation of a successor from among sons and relatives by the 
ruler or by the highest officials also obtained. Occasionally, by-
passing the oldest son or the son of the chief wife in favor of a 
younger son or the son of a concubine caused the vassals to rebel 
against the emperor. Later, up to the last phase of the monarchy 
and for ritual reasons connected with ancestral sacrifice, the rule 
was that a successor be chosen from an age group younger than 
that of the dead ruler. Thus, during the last decades of the mon-
archy minors succeeded one another and as a result a relative 
(Prince Kung) or the Empress dowager ruled. Politically, the feu-
dal prerogatives of the overlord were reduced to zero because 
only the border vassals, the overlords of frontier provinces, en-
gaged in warfare and represented military power. Probably for 
this reason, too, the emperors gradually became mere pacifist 
hierarchs. 
The emperor, as supreme pontifex, had rihml privileges which 
entitled him alone to offer the highest sacrifices. Warfare of a 
vassal against the emperor was theoretically a ritual offense and 
a possible source of magical evils, but this did not preclude occa-
sional warfare against the emperor. Just as the Bishop in the 
Roman Empire claimed the chair in church councils so the Chi-
nese emperor or his legate claimed the chair in the princely assem-
blies; this is repeatedly mentioned in the Annals. At the time when 
great individual vassals were powerful major-domos (lord pro-
tectors) this claim wa3 disregarded-in literary theory, a ritual 
offense. Such princely councils met repeatedly. One of tlwm in 
650 B.c., e.g., opposed disinheritance of the true heir, opposed 
hereditary offices and the accumulation of offices, capital punish-
ment of high officials, "crooked" politics, and prohibitions of grain 
resale; but piety, honor to old age and recognition of merit were 
upheld. 
The unity of the empire found practical expression less in those 
occasional princely assemblies than in cultural homogeneity. As 
in the occidental Middle Ages cultural unity was represented by 

» 40 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
three factors: first, the homogeneous status-mores of chivalry; 
second, religious or ritual unity; and third, the homogeneity of 
the literati. 
In point of ritual and status, the forms of homogeneity among 
chariot-fighting, chivalrous vassals and castled fief-holders were 
similar to the Occident. Just as "barbarians" and "heathens" were 
identified in the latter, so in China, a lack of ritual correctitude 
was considered a mark of the barbarian or semi-barbarian. \Vhen 
at a far later time the prince of Ch'in made mistakes in offering 
sacrifices he was considered a semi-barbarian. \Varfare against a 
ritually incorrect prince was considered meritorious work. In 
later times every one of the numerous conquering Tatar dynas-
ties of China was considered "legitimate" by the depositories of 
ritualist tradition when they correctly adjusted to the rules of 
ritual and thus to the authority of the literati caste. The demands 
of "international law," addressed to the conduct of princes in at 
least theoretical expression of culhual unity, originated partly in 
ritual, partly in the status groups of the knights. 
There was an attempt to have the princely assembly agree upon 
a "peace of the Janel." Theoretically, were a neighboring prince in 
mourning, or in need, or especially were he beset by famine, war-
fare was condemned as ritually incorrect. In the case of famine it 
was a stipulated duty to give brotherly aid in distress in order to 
please the spirits. He who wronged his feudal superior or fought 
for an unjust cause gained a place neither in Heaven nor in the 
ancestral templc.~ 0 To announce the time and place of battle was 
considered a chivalrous obligation. Somehow the fight had to be 
settled and, since the battle was an ordeal, it was necessary to 
know the victor and the dcfeated.21 
In practice, princely politics appeared instead to be a relentless 
struggle between great and small vassals. The sub-vassals sought 
every opportunity to gain independence. \Vith single-mindedness 
the great princes awaited the opportunity to fall upon their neigh-
bors so that the whole epoch, to judge from the Annals, was an 
age of unspeakably bloody wars. Yet the theory was not without 
significance and was a rather important expression of cultural 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
unity. The representatives of this unity were the literati, i.e., the 
scriptural scholars whose services the princes utilized in rational-
izing their administrations for power purposes just as the Indian 
princes used the Brahmans and occidental princes the Christian 
clerics. 
Even the odes of the seventh century sing the praises of war-
riors in preference to sages and literati. The proud, ancient 
Chinese stoicism and the complete rejection of interest in the 
"beyond" was a legacy of this militaristic epoch. In the year 753, 
however, there is mentioned the appointment of an official court 
annalist who was also court astronomer in the state of Ch'in. The 
"books" of the princes, i.e., books of Rites and Annals (collections 
of precedents), came to be considered booty and the literati ob-
viously gained significance.:!2 They kept the accounts and con-
ducted the diplomatic correspondence of the princes. Of the 
latter, the Annals have preserved numerous examples, perhaps 
edited as paradigms. They usually indicated rather Machiavellian 
means for overwhelming neighboring princes by war and diplo-
macy. They forged alliances and prepared for war, primarily 
through rational organization of the army, stockpiling, and taxa-
tion policy. Here the literati obviously qualified as budgetary 
experts of the princes.23 The princes sought to influence one an-
other in the choice of literati, and to entice them from their rivals. 
The literati in turn corresponded among themselves, changed 
their employment, and often led a sort of migratory existence.24 
They went from court to court just like the occidental clerics and 
secular intellectuals of the later Middle Ages and, like the latter, 
considered themselves homogeneous strata. 
Competition of the ·warring States for political power caused 
the princes to initiate rational economic policies.25 The literati 
executed them. Shang Yang, a representative of the literati, is re-
garded as the creator of rational internal administration; another, 
Wei Yang founded the rational state army system which was later 
to surpass all others. In China, as in the Occident, a large popula-
tion and especially the wealth of the prince and his subjects were 
political objectives which also served as means to power.26 As in 

}) 42 « 
THE RELIGION OF CIIII'\A 
the Ocddent, the princes and their literati, i.e., ritualist advisers, 
first had to struggle against the stubborn resistance of their sub-
vassals \Vho threatened them with a fate identical to the one which 
they had prepared for their own feudal overlords. Princely cartels 
against subinfeudation were formed and the literati established 
principles according to which inheritance of office was ritually 
offensive and neglect of official duty incurred magical harm (early 
death).27 This characterizes the way in which bureaucratic ad-
ministration displaced the administration of vassals, and hence 
the charismatically qualified great families. 
The corresponding transformation in the military sphere was 
effected when the princes established body guards,28 equipped 
and provisioned armies under officers with concomitant taxation 
and stock-piling policy instead of raising levies of vassals. 
Throughout the Annals the status antagonism between the com-
mon people and the great charismatically qualified sibs is pre-
supposed. With war chariots and retinue the latter followed the 
prince into the field. There were fixed statutes regulating dress.2u 
The great families sought to secure their position through mar-
riage policies,30 and even under the rational administration of 
Shang Yang in the state of Ch'in such status barriers were retained. 
The nobles were always distinguished from the people and it is 
apparent that "the people" referred not to the serfs but to free 
plebeian sibs who were simply excluded from the feudal hier-
archy, from :!-:nightly combat, and from chivalrous education. It 
was found that the people took political positions different from 
the nobles.31 Nevertheless, as we shall demonstrate later, the 
situation of the mass of peasantry was precarious and it was only 
when the patrimonial state developed that the princes allied 
themselves with the underprivileged strata against the nobility. 
2. The Restoration of the Unified 
Bureaucratic State 
STRUGGLE reduced the number of Warring States to an ever 
smaller circle of rationally administered, unified states. Finally, 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
in the year 221, after the nominal dynasty and all other vassals 
were displaced, the prince of Ch'in as first Emperor succeeded in 
incorporating all China into the "Middle Realm." That is to say, 
he placed it as the patrimonium of the ruler under his own bu-
reaucratic administration. A true "autocracy" displaced the theo-
cratic feudal order by removing the old feudal crown council and 
substituting two grand viziers in the manner of tho praefecti 
praetorio. Then military and civil governors were separated (as 
they were in late Roman institutions) and both placed under 
princely supervisory officials (as in Persia), such officials later 
becoming the travelling censors (missi dominici). 
With this a strictly bureaucratic order developed which was 
open to all and which promoted according to merit and favor. A 
financial factor operated alongside the universally effective and 
natural alliance of the autocratic ruler and the plebeian strata in 
opposition to the status dignitaries and in favor of "democratiza-
tion" of officialdom. As mentioned above, it was not accidental 
that the Annals ascribed the earliest sale of office to the first 
Emperor, Shih Huang Ti. This practice necessarily brought well-
to-do plebeians into state prebends. The struggle against feudal-
ism, however, was one of principle. Any transfer of political 
authority was prohibited, even within the sib of the Emperor, but 
the stahrs strucrure remained unaffected.32 
Ascent opporrunities for officials of lowly birth increased when 
a fixed hierarchy of offices was established, preliminary steps to 
which had been taken in the Warring States. But until the new 
imperial authority, aided by plebeian forces, had triumphed over 
feudal powers, men of plebeian descent could become politically 
influential only within the literati class and then only under spe-
cial conditions. Since the beginning of the administrative ration-
alization the Annals of the Warring States have contained exam-
ples of princely trustees who were poor and of common descent 
and who owed their position solely to their knowledge.aa The 
literati by virrue of their ability and mastery of the rites claimed 
preference for supreme offices even above the princely next of 
kin,34 a claim contested by the vassals. Thus, the literati usually 

)) 4.4 « 
THE HELIGION OF CHINA 
found themselves in unofficial positions rather like ministers with-
out portfolio or, if you will, in the role of father-eoufessor to the 
prince. 
The feudal nobility, as in the Occident, opposed the admission 
of strangers to offices which they tried to monopolize-hence the 
struggle between literati ancl nobility. During the early years of 
Shih Huang Ti's rule and before the unification of the empire, we 
find in the year 237 a report of the expulsion of foreign-born 
literati (and traders). The prince's interest in power, however, led 
him to revoke this mcasure3 " and henceforth his first minister was 
a literatus who referred to himself as a parvenu of lowly birth. 
After the unification of the empire, it is revealed in inscriptions30 
that the rational anti-traditionalist absolutism of the autocrat was 
also forcefully turned against this socially influential aristocracy 
of education, i.e., the literati. 
It was said, "The Emperor is more than Antiquity,"37 meaning 
that the past was not to rule the present and its interpreters were 
not to dominate the monarch. If \VO may trust tradition it describes 
a tremendous catastrophe. The Emperor tried to destroy the 
whole of classical literature and the estate of the literati by 
burning the sacred books and allegedly burying alive 460 literati. 
Therewith, pure absolutism was ushered in; it was a rule based 
upon personal favorites regardless of descent or education. It was 
signalized by the nomination of a eunuch for grand master of the 
household38 and instructor for the second son. After the Emperor's 
death, the eunuch and the parvenu literati brought the second 
son to the throne in opposition to the oldest son supported by the 
army commander. 
The favoritism of purely oriental sultanism, with its combina-
tion of stah1s-levelling and absolute autocracy, seemed to descend 
upon China. It was a system which the aristocracy of the cultured 
literati were to fight with varying success for centuries throughout 
the Middle Ages. 
The Emperor, in order to express the claim to his position, 
abolished for free commoners the anciently used name of "the 
people" (min) and replaced it with the name of ch'in shou, 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
"blackheads" or "subjects." The colossal increase in forced lab01·39 
for imperial constructions required-as in the Empire of the 
Pharaohs-the relentless and unlimited control over labor forces 
and over the tax resources of the land.10 On the other hand, the 
omnipotent palace eunuch41 of Shih Huang Ti's successor is ex-
pressly reported to have recommended that the ruler ally himself 
with "the people" and distribute offices without regard to station 
or education. Now is the time for the sabre to rule, not flne man-
ners. This advice is in perfect agreement with typical oriental 
patrimonialism. However, the emperor fought against the ma-
gicians' attempt42 to make him "invisible" under the pretext of 
raising his prestige. That would have meant interning him like 
the Dalai Lama and placing the administration entirely in the 
hands of oificials. Rather he reserved "autocratic mlc" in the 
proper sense for himself. 
Against this harsh sultanism a violent reaction carne simulta-
neously from the old families, the literati, the army (embittered 
over construction services) and peasant sibs (overburdened by 
army draft, corvees and taxes). The leaders were men of lowly 
descent: Ch'en She, the leader of the anny revolt, was a worker 
[a peasant, Ed.] Liu Pang, the leader of the peasants and 
founder of the Han dynasty, was the Reid-watchman of a village. 
The. nucleus of his power was a league of his sib and other peasant 
sibs. It was not one from the genteel strata but a parvenu who 
conquered. He brought about the fall of the dynasty and placed 
in power the new dynasty which reunited the realm after its 
separate states had fallen asunder. In the end, however, success 
fell to the literati whose rational administrative and economic 
policies were again decisive in restoring imperial authority. Also 
they were technically superior to the administration of favorites 
and eunuchs, who were constantly opposed, and, above all, they 
had on their side the tremendous prestige associated with knowl-
edge of precedent, ritual, and scripture-at that time something 
of a secret art. 
Shih Huang Ti had created or at least sought to establish uni-
fied systems of script, measurement, and weight, as well as unifled 

)) 46 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
laws and rules of administrative procedure. He boastfully ac-
credited to himself the abolition of wm-fare·18 and the foundation 
of peace and internal order all of which he attained by "working 
day and night."H Not all aspects of external unity were preserved. 
}.Jost important, however, was the abolition of the feudal system 
and the establishment of a regime of officials who qualified 
through personal merit. These patrimonialist innovations were 
retained with the restoration of the Han dynasty and ultimately 
only the literati profited by them even though they had cursed 
them as outrages to the old theocratic order. 
Feudal relapses occurred at a much later time. Under Emperor 
\Vu Ti and his favorite Chu-fu Yen during Ssu-ma Ch'ien's epoch 
(second century B.c.) the newly established feudalism had to be 
overthrown when it re-emerged in the office fiefs of imperial 
princes. First imperial resident-ministers were dispatched to 
supervise the vassals' courts. Then, in 127 B.c., in order to weaken 
the vassals, pmtitioning the fiefs among the heirs was ordered. 
Finally, under \Vu Ti, court offices, hitherto claimed by nobles, 
were granted to men of lowly birth (among them a former swine-
herd). The nobles violently opposed this measure, but in 124 B.c. 
the literati succeeded in having the high offices reserved for 
themselves. We shall show below how the Confucian literati 
fought the anti-literati Taoists who were averse to popular educa-
tion and whose magical interest ailied them first to the aristocrats 
and later to the eunuchs. This struggle was decisive for the 
stmcture of Chinese politics and culture, but was not definitely 
settled at the time. Strong feudal residues survived in the status-
ethic of Confucianism. One may infer to Confucius covelt and 
self-explanatory belief in classic;! education (he had that educa-
tion) as the decisive prerequisite for entering the mling status-
group. As a rule, educational attainment should de facto be re-
stricted to the ruling stratum of the traditional "old families." 
Thus, for the educated Confucian the term chiin tzu, princely 
man, originally meant "hero." Even for Confucius it was equiva-
lent to the "educated" man and it was derived from the period of 
the mling estates when the hereditary charismatic sibs qualified 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
» 47 « 
for political power. Yet one could not completely withhold recog-
nition of the new principle of "enlightened" patrimonialism which 
stipulated that personal merit and merit alone should qualify a 
man for office, including that of the ruler. To be sure, this princi-
ple made extremely slow headway and suffered continuous re-
lapse even on a theoretical level. Its practical significance will be 
discussed below. Feudal elements in the social order gradually 
receded and patrimonialism became the structural form funda-
mental to the Confucian spirit. In the Annals antagonism between 
the Confucians and the vassals is distinctly revealed in the latter's 
hatred and scorn for the scholars wandering from court to court. 45 
3. Central Government and Local 
Officialdom 
LIKE all farflung patrimonial states with undeveloped techniques 
of communication the scope of administrative centralization char-
acteristically remained very limited. After the bureaucratic state 
had been established the contrast and rank differences continued 
to exist between internal and external officials, i.e., employees of 
the old imperial patrimonium and provincial officials. Moreover, 
when successive attempts at centralization failed, patronage privi-
leges-except for some supreme provincial offices-together with 
almost the entire system of finance were relegated to the prov-
inces. Fresh struggles surrounded this question throughout the 
great periods of financial reform. Like other reformers \Vang An-
shih (11th century) demanded effective financial unification, the 
transfer of all tax income minus costs of collection, and an im-
perial budget. The tremendous transportation difficulties and the 
interests of provincial officials always watered this wine. Unless 
the ruler was exceptionally energetic the officials usually under-
stated the taxable area and the number of taxpayers by about 40 
percent as is shown by the figures of published registrations.46 
The local and provincial costs, of course, had to be deducted so 
that a very unpredictable tax-income remained to the central 
authorities. In the end they capitulated: from the 18th century 

)) 48 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
to modern times the governors, just like Persian satraps, trans-
ferred tribute normally fixed in lump sums and in theory only did 
this vary according to central need. Of this later. 
The regulation of taxes by quota had universal ramifications for 
the power of the provincial governors. They nominated and pre-
sented for appointment to ceutral authorities most of the district 
officials. They executed the appointments but the small number 
of authorized ofHcialsn leads one to conclude that they were 
hardly able personally to administer their gigantic bailiwicks. 
Considering the all-encompassing duties of Chi!<ese officials one 
must conclude that a district the size of a Prussian county, admin-
istered by oue official, could not be adequately administered even 
by hundreds. The empire resembled a confederation of satrapies 
under a pontifical head. Formal authority was exclusively in the 
hands of the high provincial officials. After the unification of the 
empire and for the sake of their personal autlwrity the emperors 
ingenuously employed characteristic patrirnonialist means. There 
were short office terms, formally of three years, after \\'hich the 
official \vas to be removed to a different province:'H Employment 
of an official in his home province was prohibited and likewise 
the employment of relatives in the same bailiwick. There was a 
thorough spy system in the form of so-called censors. Actually all 
of these measures failed to establish a precise and unified admin-
istration for reasons to be uiscussed presently. In the central and 
collegiate bodies the president of one yamen was subordinated 
as a member of other collegiate bodies to the presidents of other 
yamens. This principle handicapped administrative precision 
without contributing essentially to unity. In dealing with the 
provinces personal authority fared even worse. Except under 
occasionally strong rulers the local mlrninistrative districts de-
ducted their expenses from tax-collections and falsified land reg-
istrations. If there were financially "passive" provinces as places 
for garrisons and magazines a complicated system provided the 
transfer of yields from surplus provinces. For the rest there were 
only the traditional appropriations and an unreliable budget both 
at the central offices and in the provinces. 

THE FEUDAL A~D PREBENDAL STATE 
)) 49 (( 
The central authorities did not have clear insight into provincial 
finances, the results of which we shall show below. Until recently 
the provincial governors concluded treaties with foreign powers 
since the central government •.vas not sufficiently organized to do 
so. As we shall show, almost all important administrative meas-
ures which the provincial governors formally issued \VCre actually 
issued by their unofficial subordinates. Until recently, subordinate 
authorities commonly considered the decrees of the central gov-
ermncnt as ethical and authoritative proposals or desires rather 
than orders. This agreed ·with the pontifical aud charismatic 
nature of Imperial authority. Besides, as can be seen at a glance, 
these were essentially criticisms of administrative procedure 
rather than orders. To be sure, the individual official was remov-
able at any time but this did not benefit the central authorities. 
For the central authorities the official was prevented from becom-
ing independently powerful in the manner of the feudal vassal by 
prohibiting employment in his home province and prescribing his 
tri-annual shift, if not to another province, at least to another 
office. These measures conh·ibuted to the external unity of the 
empire but its price was the failure of the authorized official to 
strike roots in his bailiwick. 
The mandarin, accompanied by a whole flock of sib members, 
friends, and personal clients assumed office in an unknmvn prov-
ince. Usually he did not understand its dialect and from the begin-
ning was dependent upon an interpreter's services. Furthermore, 
not knowing provincial law, which '>Vas based upon precedent, he 
could only incur danger by infraction of its sacred traditions. Thus, 
he was entirely dependent upon the instructions of an unofficial 
adviser, a native man of literary education who was thoroughly 
familiar with local customs. He was a sort of father-confessor; the 
official treated him with respect, often with devotion, and called 
him his "teacher." Further, the official was dependent upon un-
official assistants whom he had to pay from his own pocket. 
Whereas his official state-paid staff had to be born outside the 
province, his unofficial assistants were chosen from a number of 
qualified candidates born in the province. It was necessary to rely 

TilE RELIGION OF CHINA 
upon such men not yet appointed to office but familiar with per-
sons and local affairs, since the official lacked orientation of his 
own. Finally, when assuming the governorship of a new province, 
he relied upon the chief of the usual provincial departments \vho 
had acquired knowledge about the subject matter and the lo-
cale.4v After all, the latter p1.Jcedcd him through several years of 
familiarity with local conditions. Obviously this resulted in actual 
power being vested in the hands of the unofficial, native subordi-
nates. And the higher the rank of the authorized official the less 
was he able to correct and control their management. Thus the 
local and central government officials were not sufficiently in-
formed about local conditions to facilitate consistent and rational 
intervention. 
The emergence of feudal status and thus the emancipation of 
officials from central authority was prevented under Chinese 
patrimonialism by world-famous and highly efficient means. These 
means were the introduction of examinations and appointment to 
office on the basis of educational rather than birth and rank quali-
fications. This was of decisive significance for Chinese administra-
tion and culture and will be discussed below. But given the con-
ditions, no mechanism could have functioned precisely in the 
hands of the central authorities. When we later discuss the edu-
cation of ofllcials we shall show further blockages resulting from 
the status honor of officialdom, the intimate nature of which was 
in part religiously detern1ined. In China, as in the Occident, the 
patrimonial bureaucracy was the firmly growing nucleus to which 
the formation of the great state was bound. In both cases colle-
giate authorities and "departments" typically emerged, but the 
spirit of bureaucratic work differed widely in the East and in the 
West as will be shovm below. 
4. Public Charges: the Corvee-
State and the Tax-State 
FROM the standpoint of sociological determinants, the spirit of 
Chinese bureaucracy was connected with the system of public 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
» 51 « 
charges as this developed with the vacillating money economy. 
As usual the chieftain or prince (kung t'ien, corresponding to the 
Homeric tenemor) originally received a land allotment which was 
jointly cultivated by the people. The universal corvee originated 
in the "well system" -the state field being in the centre sunounded 
by eight square fields-and found additional support in the com-
pelling need for waterworks. Land-use joined to river administra-
tion suggested the ever-emergent idea of imperial regality and is 
still terminologically retained (as in England). However, like the 
Egyptian Pharaoh, the Chinese emperor could scarcely prevent 
the distinction between leased desmesnes and taxed private lands. 
According to their apparent terminological traces, the taxes de-
veloped partly from customary gifts, partly from obligatory 
tributes of subject populations and partly from the claim to regali-
ties. Public land, obligatory tax, and forced labor were perma-
nently co-existent and variously interrelated. \Vhich predominated 
depended partly on the scope of the budgetary economy-very 
unstable for reasons of cunency as we have shown-partly upon 
the extent of pacification, and partly on the reliability of the 
bureaucratic machine. 
According to the legend, the "holy" (legendary) Emperor Yii 
controlled the incoming tide and regulated the construction of 
canals and Shih Huang Ti, the first Emperor to rule with a pure 
bureaucracy, was considered the greatest builder of canals, roads, 
fortifications, and especially the Great Wall (which he actually 
brought only to partial completion). Such legend graphically ex-
presses the origin of the patrimonial bureaucracy in the control of 
the incoming tide and canal construction. The monarch's power 
is derived from the servitude of his subjects, as indispensable for 
flood control as it was in Egypt and the Middle East. The legend 
also describes how the unified empire developed from a growing 
interest in unified flood control over wider areas, an interest con-
nected with the political need to secure the culture-area against 
nomadic invasions. 
Besides irrigation, the buildings served fiscal, military, and pro-
visioning needs. Thus the famous Grand Canal from the Yangtze 

)) 52 << 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
to the Huang Ho was used to transport rice tributes from the South 
to the new capital of the l'vfongol Khans (Peking). 50 According to 
official report, at one time 50,000 forced laborers \vorkeJ on a river 
dike but building work was piecemeal and extended through 
many cenhnies. Even Mencius considered tho con'lSe rather than 
the tax as the truly ideal method of meeting public requirements. 
After divination had designated the proper place for a new capital 
the Chinese king resettled his subjects despite resistance, just as 
was done in the :1\liddle East. Penal deportees and impressed sol-
diers stood guard over dikes and sluices and provided part of the 
labor force for construction and clearing. Step by step the labor 
forces of the atmy reclaimed desert soil in the border provinces of 
the West.rn .'vfournful complaints about the terrible burden of this 
monotonous fate, particularly the labor on the Great \Vall, are to 
be found in the poems preserved. The service was often almost 
life-time, wives missed their husbands and it seemed better not 
to rear sons.r.2 Classical doctrine had to oppose emphatically the 
wasteful expenditure of corvces by the prince for private con-
struction purposes in the Egyptian manner. In China, such \Vaste 
also accompanied the development of bureaucratically organized 
public works. Once the system of forced labor disintegrated the 
desert began to advance into the areas of Central Asia and the 
dearly-won soil is completely covered by sand today.~
3 Besides, 
the political strength of the empire gave out. The Annals bewail 
the negligent cultivation by the peasants on the royal estates. Only 
exceptional personalities could centrally organize and direct the 
state based on serfdom. 
The corvee remained the classical way of meeting state require-
ments. As means of financing public needs, the relationship be-
tween taxes in kind ( corvce) and money taxes (for commissions) 
is indicated in a seventeenth century discussion before the Em-
peror of the best system for making certain repairs on the Grand 
Canal. It was decided that the work should be commissioned for 
money payment since the repairs would otherwise require ten 
years time. 54 Repeated attempts were made to relieve the civilian 
populace by regimenting the peace-time army for corvces. Thus, 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
» 53 « 
untill47l under the Ming, it was prescribed that half of the grain 
for the capital should be transported by the army and half of it by 
the civilian population. In 1471, it was ordered that the army 
alone should ship the grain:"5 
Even in early times there were taxes besides army levies, corvees 
and lihugies. Apparently the corvee on royal land, in particular, 
was abolished very early in the state of Ch'in (during the sixth 
century B.c.); later, in the third century B.C., its ruler was to be-
come the first Emperor of the whole realm. 
Of course, taxes existed much earlier. As usual, the imperial 
requirements were levied in kind and distributed among certain 
regions56 and residues of this system survived until recently. The 
system of taxes in kind was intimately connected with the estab-
lishment of the patrimonial army and officialdom. As usual, both 
were provisioned from imperial magazines and fixed prebends-in-
kind developed. At times, however, the state money economy also 
advanced, as the documents indicate at least for the Han Dynasty 
around the beginning of our chronologyP Alongside the increas-
ing general drift toward money economy there continued to exist, 
until recently, sporadic servitude (especially for construction pur-
poses, courier and transportation services), fees, taxes in kind as 
well as in money, and a princely oikos economy for certain luxury 
demands of the court. 58 
This shift toward money taxes pertained also and especially to 
the land tax, until recently the most important tax. We do not 
intend to trace its interesting history in detail here,59 but shall 
discuss necessary points in connection with the agrarian system. 
Here it may suffice to state that the tax system in China, though 
occasionally more differentiated, increasingly tended toward a 
unified tax just as in the patrimonial states of the Occident; it was 
done by changing all other levies into surtaxes on the land tax. 
This resulted from the fact that wealth not invested in land 
remained "invisible" to the extensive imperial administration and 
could not be reached· by its taxation technique. That invisible 
wealth tends to evaporate perhaps partly determined the en-
deavors to meet as many state requirements as possible through 

» 54 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
means typical of subsistence economy, i.e., by corvees and 
liturgies. llrobably in addition to this, currency conditions were 
primarily and truly decisive. There are two developmental tend-
encies of the land tax which generally affect all extensively 
administered patrimonial states. First, there is a tendency to 
commute the land tax into a money tax, a tendency which spreads 
to all other charges, especially to forced labor and other liturgies. 
Second, there is a tendency to change the land tax into a lump 
sum tax and ultimately into a fixed tribute collected from the 
provinces according to fixed quota. We have already touched 
upon this highly important process. 
The pacification of the empire under the Manchu dynasty al-
lowed the court to renounce movable income and led to the 
famous edict of 1713, praised as a source of the renewed flowering 
of China in the 18th century. In intent this edict transmuted the 
land tax of the provinces into fixed charges, as we shall discuss 
presently. Besides the land tax, the gabelle, mine taxes, and, 
finally, the customs contributed to the income of the central ad-
ministration. The amount transferable to Peking became, de 
facto, traditionally fixed just as it was for the central administra-
tion. Only the wars with the European powers and the financial 
emergency following the T'ai P'ing rebellion ( 1850-1864) pushed 
the li kin customs of Sir Robert Hart's splendid administration into 
the foreground of the imperial .finances. 
With quota-regulation of taxes and subsequent pacific~tion of 
the empire, the population increased tremendously. Further rami-
fications were the expendability and elimination of servitude and 
the controls of occupational choice, of the compulsory passport 
and other barriers to free t:.~obility, of house ownership and con-
trol of production. According to the registration figures, which in 
part are highly questionable, the population of China apparently 
fluctuated widely but at the beginning of the Manchu dynasty 
the population was not much larger than under Shih Huang Ti 
almost 1900 years earlier. In any case, for centuries, the alleged 
population figure had fluctuated between 50 and 60 million peo-
ple, but from the middle of the 17th century until the end of the 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
19th cenhuy, this figure rose to some 350 to 400 million people.60 
Proverbial Chinese acquisitiveness developed on both a small and 
large scale and considerable fortunes were accumulated. The fol-
lowing phenomena must appear the most striking of the epoch: 
despite the astounding population increase and the material wel-
fare of the population, Chinese intellectual life remained com-
pletely static, and despite seemingly favorable conditions modem 
capitalist developments simply did not appear. 
The once considerable export trade of China did not revive and 
there was only passive trade in a single port (Canton) which was 
open to Europeans but strictly controlled. Popular endeavor, 
such as might have been nourished by internal capitalist interests, 
did not arise to shatter this barrier. All evidence points to the 
contrary, for in the European sense, "progressivism," generally 
speaking, emerged neither in the field of technology, nor economy, 
nor administration. Finally, the financial strength of the empire 
could not apparently withstand the serious pressures necessitated 
by requirements of foreign policy. It is our central problem to 
explain all these striking phenomena in view of the unusual popu-
lation growth which, despite all criticism, cannot be doubted. 
Both economic and intellectual factors were at work. The for-
mer, which we shall discuss first, pertained to the state economy 
and were therefore political in nature. The political-economic like 
the "intellectual" factors at work resulted from the peculiarity of 
the leading stratum of China, the estate of officials and candidates 
for office, the mandarins. First we shall discuss the material situa-
tion of the latter. 
5. Officialdom and Tax Collection 
by Quota Levies 
AS SHOWN above, the Chinese official originally depended on 
prebends in kind from royal magazines, but later on money sal-
aries were permanently substituted. Thus the government formally 
gave salaries to its officials, but only a fraction of the forces actu-
ally engaged in administration were so paid. Often the salaries 

» 56 (( 
THE RELICIO:'-r OF CHINA 
fomwd but a small, indeed an insignificant part of their income. 
ThP official could neither have lived on his salary, nor have cov-
ered the administrative costs which it was his official obligation 
to cover. \Vhat actually happened was this. The official, like a 
feudal lord or satrap, was responsible to the central government 
(the sub-olRcial to the provincial government) for the delivery of 
certain amounts. In turn, he financed most of his administrative 
expendihtres from fees and tax-income and retained a surplus. 
Though not recognized de iure, it was de facto the case and was 
among the lasting consequences of the tax-quota system. 
The so-called fixation of the land tax in the year 1713 \Vas 
actually the crown's financial and political capitulation to the 
office prebendaries. In reality, the charges on land were by no 
means transmuted into a fixed ground rent (as for instance in 
England). Instead the central administration fixed the amount of 
tax yield to be credited to the district and provincial officials. That 
was the sum from which the crown demanded a quota as its 
tribute. In effect, the central government had merely fixed taxes 
on the prebends of these satraps for an indefinite time. This mean-
ing is clearly revealed in an otherwise nonsensical formulation of 
the measure: a number of provincial districts were liable to taxa-
tion while other districts were completely exempted. Periodic 
population censuses actually listed the districts in that manner. 
Naturally, it did not mean that a corresponding number of inhabit-
ants were tax exempt but merely that officials counted them as 
tax exempt. As early as 1735, the emperors ceased to distinguish 
between the two categories in census enumerations since it served 
no purpose. 
It was thoroughly in keeping \Vith the nature of patrimonialism 
to have considered the official's income from administering a dis-
trict as his prebend, from which his private income was not really 
separated.G1 The office prebendaries felt the strongest reservations 
about raising the land tax or any other tax as a lump sum from 
the taxpayer. It cannot really be held that the imperial adminis-
tration seriously intended to fix taxes in such a manner. In keep-
ing with patrimonial principle, the official not only had to finance 

THE FEUDAL A~D PREBENDAL STATE 
)) 57 (( 
the civil and legal requirements of his district administration 
from this income but in addition his administrative staff. Experts 
estimated a staff varying from 30 to 300 even for the smallest 
administrative unit (ltSien) and frequently these men were re-
cruited from the scum of the populace. As we have seen, the 
official, a stranger in the province, was hardly in a position to 
administer without such a staff. His personal and adminish·ative 
expendihrres were not separated. Thus, the central administration 
did not know the actual gross income of the individual provinces 
and districts, the provincial governors did not know the prefects' 
income, etc. 
On the other hand, the taxpayers maintained a principled re-
sistance to any payments not fixed by tradition. That we shall see, 
and also why, within broad limits, they could very successfully do 
so. Their resistance to the continuous endeavors to raise surtaxes 
was precarious, and it depended essentially upon the power con-
stellation. Apart from this, officials had two means of increasing 
the income. First, they could raise a surtax of at least 10 percent 
to cover the cost of tax collection. Second, a similar surtax could 
be levied for untimely payments, whether the arrears were caused 
willingly or unwillingly by the debtor or (often enough) inten-
tionally by the official. Fmthermore, the taxes in kind were 
changed into money taxes; then the money taxes were changed 
into silver, next into copper, and again into silver, all of this at 
changing rates the determination of which was reserved to the 
tax collector himself. For this reason influential men always pre-
ferred, and successfully insisted on, payment in kind. 
It should not be overlooked that by patrimonial standards every 
official act had to be paid in "gifts," for there was no legal sched-
ule of fees. The gross income of the official, including extra profits, 
was first used to defray the material office costs and the cost of 
administrative duties. The state expenditure on internal admin-
istration was a minute fraction of the total expenditure. Moreover, 
superior officials drew their incomes from the gross income of the 
lowest-rung official who was directly at the source of the taxes. 
He had to transfer to his superior the often rather small amount 

THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
which represented his obligation in the traditional tax register. 
Upon assuming office, and on regularly recurrent occasions, he 
had to make the largest possible "gifts" in order to secure the 
good will of the superior so decisive for his own fate. 62 In addi-
tion, be had to provide ample tips for the superior's unofficial 
advisers and sub-officials inasmuch as they could influence his 
fate. This extended to the doorman should he wish to be received 
for a conference, and it continued upward to the palace eunuch 
who exacted tribute even from the highest officials. From the land 
tax alone, experts estimated a one to four ratio between the offi-
cially announced and the actual tax income.63 
In 1712-13, the central government and the provincial officials 
compromised on tax repartition. In terms of money economy this 
compromise was roughly comparable to the fixation of feudal 
obligations in the subsistence economy of the Occident. There 
were, however, differences. First, in China, as in all specifically 
patrimonial states, prebends not fiefs were at stake. There were 
tributes in kind and especially in money from both fee and tax 
prebendaries upon whose administrative services the central au-
thorities typically depended. It was not a question of the military 
services of self-equipped knights upon whom the prince de-
pended. There was a second significant difference. In the Occi-
dent, prebends, both fee and tax prebends, were also known. At 
first this was true only of church territory, but later the patri-
monial state was similarly modelled. However, the prebend was 
either for life (except in the case of formal removal) or it was 
hereditarily appropriated like the fief. Frequently it could even 
be transferred by purchase. The fees, customs, and taxes sup-
porting the prebends were fixed by privilege or custom. 
In China, as we have shown, it was precisely the authorized 
official who could be freely removed and transferred. Moreover, 
after short periods he had to move from one office to another. 
Partly (and mainly) this helped the central authorities to retain 
power, but partly it gave opportunity to other candidates, as is 
occasionally indicated.61 Officialdom as a whole was secure in its 
enjoyment of tremendous income from prebends, but the position 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
» 59 (( 
of the individual official was very precarious. Acquiring office was 
very costly (study, purchase, gifts, and "fees") and the olficial, 
often having plunged himself into debt, was compelled to make 
the most of his short term of olfice. In the absence of fixed taxes 
and guarantees he could do this. Indeed, it went without saying 
that the olfice existed for the making of a forbme, which was ob-
jectionable only if done to excess, as numerous rescripts reveal. 
According to the Peking Gazette of 1'1arch 23, 1882, a Canton 
official in a few months had accumulated 100,000 taels in excess 
of the usual amount (sic!). A hired scribe in Fukien was able to 
purchase the prefecture in Kiangsu. Customs officials had annual 
incomes of 100 to 150,000 taels. 
There were, however, other broader ramifications of this situa-
tion. First, the power-position of the central government was most 
effectively guaranteed by the system of transferring individual 
officials. Because of continuous regrouping and changing oppor-
tunity, each official competed with every other for prebends. Each 
was prevented from reconciling personal and inter-personal inter-
ests, and the relation of each to his superiors was very precarious. 
The whole authoritarian and internalized bondage of Chinese 
officialdom was connected with this. To be sure, there were "par-
ties" among the olficials. They grouped themselves by common 
regional descent or, connected with this, by the traditional charac-
ter of the schools where they had been educated. Recently the 
"conservative" school of the northern provinces was opposed by 
the "progressive" school of the central provinces and the "radical" 
school of the Cantonese. Imperial edicts even at that time spoke 
of the antagonism between those following the educational 
method of the Sung and those following that of the Han in one 
and the same yamen. Ilo\vever, no regional particularism such as 
to endanger the unity of the empire could develop on this basis 
for, by principle, the officials had to be strangers to the province 
and were continuously moved about. Besides the authorities were 
careful to mix adherents of rival schools and regional groupings 
within the same bailiwick and office rank. Separatism had quite 
different bases, as we shall discuss presently. The official paid for 

THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
his weakness in relation to superiors in being the dependent vic-
tim of his inferiors. An even more important result of this pre-
bendal structure was its extreme administrative and politico-
economic traditionalism. While originating in a special ethos this 
traditionalism also had a highly "rational" basis. 
Any intervention in the traditional economy and administration 
impinged upon the unforeseeable and innumerable interests of the 
dominant stratum in its fees and prebends. Since any official could 
once be removed to a less remunerative post, officialdom stood 
together as one man and obstructed as strongly as the tax payer 
every attempt to change the system of fee, custom, or tax pay-
ments. In the Occident the permanent appropriation of fees and 
profit opportunities made the interests involved abundantly clear. 
That was the case with payment of customs, convoys, tolls, and 
rights of way, or of storage and road passage. As a rule, definite 
interest groups had the opportunity to organize and to remove 
obstructions to communication by force, compromise, or privi-
lege. In China, however, this was out of the question. Profit 
opportunities were not individually appropriated by the highest 
and dominant stratum of officialdom; rather, they were appro-
priated by the whole estate of removable officials. It was the latter 
who collectively opposed intervention and persecuted with deadly 
hatred any rational ideologist who called for "reform." Only vio-
lent revolution from above or below could have changed this. In 
general, any innovation endangered either the present or future 
interest of each official in his fees-whether this meant substituting 
the much cheaper transport of tributes by ocean steamer for 
barge traffic through the Imperial Canal, changing traditional 
ways of collecting customs or of transporting persons, or settling 
petitions and trials. In going over the series of reforms projected 
by the Emperor in the year 1898, one can realize that even 
partially executing them would have produced tremendous re-
verses in income. Then one can estimate the complete hopeless-
ness of reform because of the vast material interests opposing it, 
and because there were no disinterested executive organs inde-
pendent of these interest groups. 

THE FEUDAL AND PREBENDAL STATE 
» 61 (( 
The particularism of the provinces, primarily financial particu-
larism, originated in this traditionalism. It arose because any ad-
ministrative centralization seriously jeopardized the prebends of 
the provincial official and his unofficial retinue. Indeed, it \vas this 
that prevented the central administrative rationalization of the 
empire as well as a unified economic policy. 
It is important to recognize in principle that, contrary to our 
expectations, the pure patrimonial state organizations in the 
Orient did not follow an otherwise almost universal destiny. For 
rather than weakening traditionalism, the money economy, in 
effect, strengthened it. This was because the money economy, 
associated with prebends, created special profit opportunities for 
the dominant stratum. Generally it reenforced their rentier men-
tality65 and rendered paramount their interest in preserving those 
economic conditions so decisive for their own profit from pre-
bends. With every advance of the money economy in Egypt, the 
Islamite states, and China, we observe the concomitant and in-
creasing prebendalization of state income. There are short inter-
mediary periods for the appropriation of prebends to be com-
pleted, but, in general, that phenomenon presents itself which we 
usually evalu'ate as "ossification" (Erstarrung). 
A general result of oriental patrimonialism with its pecuniary 
prebends was that, typically, only military conquest of the coun-
try, or successful military or religious revolutions could shatter 
the firm structure of prebendary interests, thus creating com-
pletely new power distributions and in turn new economic condi-
tions. Any attempt at internal innovation, however, was wrecked 
by the aforementioned obstacles. :tvlodern Europe, as noted, is a 
great historical exception to this because, above all, pacification 
of a unified empire was lacking. vVe may recall that, in the War-
ring States, the very stratum of state prebendaries who blocked 
administrative rationalization in the world -empire were once its 
most powerful promoters. Then, the stimulus \vas gone. Just as 
competition for markets compelled the rationalization of private 
enterprise, so competition for political power compelled the ra-
tionalization of state economy and economic policy both in the 

» 62 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
Occident and in the China of the Warring States. In the private 
economy, cartellization weakens rational calculation which is the 
soul of capitalism; among states, power monopoly prostrates ra-
tional management in administration, finance, and economic 
policy. The impulse toward rationalization which existed while 
the Warring States were in competition was no longer contained 
in the world empire. But this was not all. In China during the 
Period of the VVarring States the scope of administrative and 
economic rationalization was much more limited than in the 
Occident. In addition to the aforementioned differences, in the 
Occident, there were strong and independent forces. With these 
princely power could ally itself in order to shatter traditional fet-
ters; or, under very special conditions, these forces could use their 
own military power to throw off the bonds of patrimonial power. 
This was the case in the five great revolutions which decided the 
destiny of the Occident: the Italian revolution of the 19th and 
13th centuries, the Netherland revolution of the 16th century, the 
English revolution of the 17th century, and the American and 
French revolutions of the 18th century. vVe may ask: were there 
no comparable forces in China? 

CHAPTER III 
ADMINISTRATION AND 
RURAL STRUCTURE 
T ;ntense acqu;s;Hveness of the CMnese has undoubtedly 
been highly developed for a long time. This drive and the unscru-
pulous competitiveness toward sib outsiders were incomparably 
strong among the Chinese. The only possible exceptions to it were 
the monopolistic guilds of the wholesale and especially the 
overseas-traders. Ethically, their acquisitiveness was strongly tem-
pered for reasons of business. 
Industry and capacity for work among the Chinese have always 
been considered unsurpassed. The merchant guilds, as we have 
seen, were more powerful than in other countries and their auton-
omy was practically unlimited. By European conceptions the 
tremendous growth of the Chinese population since the early 18th 
century and the constant increase of precious metals would lead 
one to expect favorable opportunities for capitalist development. 
Again we return to our initial problem. Although we have ad-
duced some reasons for the fact that capitalism did not emerge we 
have no satisfactory answer as yet. 
The following features of Chinese development stand in sharp 
contrast to the Occident: The epoch beginning with the eight-
eenth century was characterized by a tremendously increasing 
population-not, as in England, by a relatively decreasing rural 
one. In the countryside there were typically more and smaller 
• 63 c 

» 64 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
holdings of peasants rather than the large scale agricultural enter-
prises to be found, for example, in Eastern Germany. Finally, and 
in connection with this, the cattle population was negligible. Cat-
tle were rarely slaughtered (practically only for sacrificial pur-
poses); milk consumption was absent; and "eating meat" was 
equivalent to being genteel, since it indicated the privilege of the 
official to share meat at sacrificial feasts. How did all this come 
about? 
1. Feudal and Fiscal Organization 
BECAUSE the sources available to the non-sinologist are limited, 
we cannot possibly describe the development of Chinese agricul-
ture.1 In our context we need consider it only insofar as problems 
of agrarian policy reveal the nature of Chinese state organization. 
For it will be seen at a glance that military and financial reform 
determined fundamental changes in the rural economy. Hence, 
the history of Chinese agriculture displays a monotonous to and 
fro between alternate, equally possible principles of taxation. The 
resultant ways of dealing with rural property have been quite 
unrelated to internal "evolution" ever since the breakdown of 
feudalism. 
In feudal times the peasants were undoubtedly serfs of the 
feudal lords to whom they owed taxes and labor. This was true, if 
not for all, at least for most of the peasants. At the time of Shih 
Huang Ti they apparently still retained some ability to bear arms. 
Even had this not been the case, manorial serfdom under a feudal 
lord in the Western sense should not necessarily be assumed. 
Rather political subjection to princely power was determined by 
river control in the manner of Egypt and the Middle East. 
Conditions called chien ping in the Annals were usually sharply 
fought by the government. Under these conditions the peasants, 
because of the threat of war and insecurity or because of over-
indebtedness through taxes and loans, crowded around the seats 
of the propertied and commended themselves as clients (t'ien k'e). 
The government sought to secure direct tax payment from the 

ADI\UNISTRATION AND RURAL STRUCTURE 
» 65 « 
peasants in order to prevent the rise of a politically dangerous 
caste of landlords. Yet, under the Han dynasty, landlords are at 
least sometimes expressly reported2 to have paid the taxes of their 
coloni. The military "usurper" Wang Mang, like the military mon-
arch Shih Huang Ti, sought to desh·oy the position .of the land-
lords by introducing imperial land regalia. Apparently he failed. 
We know nothing of the initial extent of a manorial economy 
like that of the Occident. In any case, such a manorial economy-
should its existence be demonstrated-would probably not have to 
be considered typical. Even less need it be regarded the result of 
feudalism, for the legal provisions do not allow us to ascertain 
whether manors of the occidental type could be based upon them. 
Nor do the sources available to the non-sinologist permit us to 
ascertain the nature of the agrarian community. It remains doubt-
ful whether, and how, the village community was connected with 
the feudal system. That is usually the case,3 but it is also possible 
that the community was fiscal in origin, as has often happened 
elsewhere. 
For instance, under the T'ang dynasty in 624 A.D., the peasants 
were organized into small administrative distTicts (hsiang) for pur-
poses of taxation. In these districts the peasants were guaranteed 
certain allotments which were perhaps received from public land. 
These facts are beyond doubt, since Japan has borrowed the in-
stitution. Retirement from the hsiang and land sale in this case 
was permissible, but pmchase into another tax collectivity was re-
quired. Certainly the associations of landlords did not end with 
this merely relative closure. 
The very radical regrouping of population into joint liability 
associations of tax payers, serfs, and draftees indicates that the 
duty of tilling the soil in the fiscal interest of the state was always 
considered primary. The corresponding "right" to the land was 
derivative. 
Apparently this did not result in a communal village economy 
which would correspond to Germanic, Russian, or Indian condi-
tions. The existence of village commons (Allmende) in the Western 
sense can only be inferred from occasional hints and as part of the 

» 66 « 
THE HELIGION OF CHINA 
remote past. The imperial tax rescripts define not the village but 
the family as the taxable unit. This included those from 15 to 56 
years who were its working members (ting). They were organized 
by rescript into artificial liability associations, at the latest during 
the 11th century and probably much earlier. V'le shall show below 
that the village nevertheless represented an association which was 
largely self-governing. Considering the sharp fiscal interventions 
it is not at all self-evident that a different association, which was 
perhaps originally confined to noble familics, 4 could have com-
prised, since remote times, the entire rural population in good 
standing. The association was not destroyed by these fiscal 
measures. 
The unbroken and continued existence of the cohesive sib and 
the pre-eminent position of its head, can be ascertained through 
thousands of years. Ancient landlordism in China may well have 
originated in this. As Wf' noted above, military service and pre-
sumably all public chr;.rg-cs were originally allocated to the sib. 
From numerou~ a:D.alogies and subsequent changes, we may infer 
that the head of the sib was held responsible for the allocation of 
taxes and labor. After private property had been instituted, i.e., 
after the land or its use had been fom1ally appropriated by indi-
vidual families, the head of the sib is reported to have occasion-
ally been replaced by the wealthiest landlord (according to tra-
dition in 1055). Thus the "old man" who had been entrusted with 
the allocation of land taxes, and who had thereby gained an op-
portunity for accumulating wealth, became a landlord. His im-
poverished sib members became his serfs. This change has numer-
ous and well-known parallels. Besides, this "privilege" of the 
wealthy was not experienced as such but rather as a liturgy. That 
was intended, and some sought to evade the burden by means of 
fictitious land sales and family divisions. The non-sinologist cannot 
judge whether a stratum of serfs without sib aHlliation existed 
alongside the sib members who, as usual, constituted an upper 
stratum and claimed a monopoly in land and slave holdings. In 
China, too, the right to own slaves \vas an exclusive privilege of 
high status groups. The existence of serfs has been ascertained 

ADMINISTRATION AND RURAL STRUCTURE 
» 67 « 
and originally most of the peasants were probably serfs. During 
the 4th century B.c. only the kuan families who qualified for office 
were allowed to own serfs. The serfs did not pay k'o (land tax) nor 
did they render yii (forced labor). Obviously, unless they had 
acquired tax immunity, their lords paid their taxes. According to 
the Annals individual families owned "up to forty" serfs. This 
permits us to conclude that the estates of wealthy landlords were, 
at that time, modest in size. Slavery has always existed in China, 
but apparently it was economically important only when moneyed 
wealth was being accumulated in trade and state commissions. 
Thus, slavery took the fonn of debt slavery and peonage, as we 
shall discuss below. 
Decisive changes in the rural economy apparently always ema-
nated from the government. They were connected with the regu-
lation of taxes and military service. The "First Emperor," Shih 
Huang Ti, repmtedly effected a general disarmament of the 
country. This measure was undoubtedly primarily directed against 
the armed forces of the feudal lords, radically suppressed by the 
Emperor. But the course of the rebellion which brought about the 
fall of the dynasty makes it apparent that, until then, broad strata 
of peasants were armed (just as in Germany before the disarma-
ment which followed the Peasant War). The founder of the Han 
dynasty and other rebels were peasants and relied, at least in part, 
upon the military support of their sibs. 
At the same time "private property" was instituted-a process 
which has since recurred in China. The institution of private 
property meant that land was distributed among peasant families 
(among which ones can hardly be ascertained); that the peasant 
owners were freed from the existing taxes (which ones?); and 
that new state burdens were directly imposed upon them. These 
state burdens were partly in the form of taxes, partly forced labor, 
and partly a draft for the emperor's patrimonial army. Decisive 
for later developments was the relative degree to which the gov-
ernment was concerned with defense, the corvee, or the peasant's 
tax-paying ability. It was important whether there were more 
taxes in kind or in money, and related to this, whether the army 

)) 68 ({ 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
was composed of regimented subjects or of mercenaries. Finally, 
what technical means were used by the administration to enforce 
these obligations5 was of decisive import. 
These component factors have all changed, and the antago-
nisms between literati schools-which have pervaded the entire 
Chinese literature-were largely centered in the technical prob-
lems of administra~ 'Jn. \'Vith the threatening stonn of the I\1ongols 
at the beginning of the 11th century A.D., these antagonisms be-
came acute. A central problem for all social reformers of the 
time-as for the Gracchi-was how to maintain or establish an 
adequate army to face the barbarians of the Nmthwest, and 
whether to raise the necessary means by money payment or pay-
ment in kind. 
The typical and hy no means peculiarly Chinese way of secur-
ing the various contributions from the peasants was to form 
compulsory and joint liability associations (of five to ten families) 
and tax classes of land owners, graded by holdings (for instance 
into five classes). The attempt was made to maintain and raise 
the number of taxable peasants in order to prevent the accumula-
tion of prope1ty and the development of uncultivated or ex-
tensively farmed lands. Moreover, repeated attempts were made 
to define maximal holdings, to link the right to own land to effec-
tive cultivation, to open up land for settlement, and to redistribute 
land on the basis of an average land allotment per working 
peasant-roughly comparable to the Russian "nadyel." 
The Chinese tax administration faced considerable difficulty in 
this as in all land registration, since its measuring technique was 
very poor. The only truly scientific and "geometrical" work6 was 
borrowed from the Hindus and indicates techniques of measure-
ment short of trigonometry. The measurement of the individual 
acres hardly equalled the ancient Germanic or even the truly 
primitive technique of the Roman agrimensores. Astounding er-
rors in measurement-comparable to the ~.fedieval bankers' mis-
calculations-apparently were commonplace. Obviously the unit 
of measurement, the Chinese "foot," differed from province to 
province despite Shih Huang Ti's reforms. The imperial foot 

ADMINISTRATION AND RURAL STRUCTURE 
» 69 « 
(equal to 320 mm.) was usually the largest, but the unit varied 
by 255, 306, 315, 318 to 328 mm. 
The basic unit of land measurement was the mou, in theory, a 
long strip of land which was at first 100, later 240 times 1 pu and 
equivalent sometimes to 5, sometimes 6 feet. In the latter case, if 
a foot of 306 mm. were the base, the strip equalled 5.62 ar. There 
were 100 mou to a ch'ing, equivalent to 5.62 ha. Under the Han 12 
mou were considered necessary for the individual-in Russian 
terms, the "soul nadyel." Each mou produced m shih of rice. The 
earliest note implies that before Wen Wang's rule (12th century 
B.c.), 50 mou (then 3.24 m·) were calcu Ia ted per capita, 5 mou of 
which (i.e., 1/10) were cultivated for the b"casury as kung hsien 
t'ier1. (royal land). Hence, a holding of 2.916 ha was considered 
the normal per capita holding. This note, however, is wholly un-
reliable.7 
For a thousand years or longer, not land units but families were 
normally counted as the unit and, as noted above, the classifica-
tion was perhaps by ting, i.e., number of working members.8 But 
the soil was crudely classified as "black" or "red," most probably 
as irrigated or nonirrigated land, and this resulted in two tax 
classes. Or, classification was by the extent of fallow: 1. land with-
out fallow, hence irrigated land; 2. the three field system; 3. pas-
ture (Feldgraswirtschaftsland). 
The oldest available notices calculated the normal family claim 
at 100 mou ( 5.62 ha) for the first soil category; 200 mou ( 11.24 
ha) for the second; 300 mou ( 16.86 ha) for the third. This would 
correspond to a single tax per family not per unit of land. Occa-
sionally the differences by age composition and size led to the idea 
of placing large families on good soil and small ones on poor soil. 
It is of course very doubtful to what extent this was realized. To 
be sure, resettlement of the population has always been consid-
ered an easy way to equalize standards of living, the conree, and 
the ability to pay taxes. The entire regular tax assessment could, 
however, hardly have been based on this possibility. At times the 
families were differentiated by their ownership or non-ownership 
of draft animals (5th century A.D.). But this system of personal 

» 70 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
taxation ( tsu system) constantly alternated with variations of 
the pure land tax ( tu systems). 
On the one hand, there was a tax quota on yields (Natural-
quotensteuer) such as was proposed by the minister Shang Yang 
for the state of Ch'in ( SGO B.C.). This quota was considerable, 
allegedly from * to 3f of the produce, and it bespeaks the impo-
tence of the peasant before strong princely prerogatives. Accord-
ing to the Annals, despite the size of taxes, land cultivation 
prospered because the peasant was personally interested in it. 
Later we find regularly lower tax quotas (from 1/10 to 1/15 of 
the yield). 
On the other hand, taxes in kind were fixed according to soil 
quality, as was the case under Shang Ti ( 78 B.c.) and apparently 
also during the 4th century A.D. Both times taxes were based on a 
rather crude soil classification. 
Finally, we meet with money taxes, as, for example, in 766 A.D. 
when 15 ch'ien were charged per mou. Unsatisfactory harvest 
yields in 780 necessitated taxes in kind and the tax collectors' esti-
mates of their cash value led to endless abuses. But authorities 
repeatedly turned to these experiments after having failed to 
establish a money economy. Obviously such attempts were made 
in order to establish an efficient army, i.e., an army of mercenaries. 
The form of taxation changed when under the usurper Heu tung, 
taxes in kind were "sold back" to the taxable subjects. One can 
imagine the result! While the Sung dynasty sought to establish 
one in 960 A.D., the absence of a reliable bureaucracy of tax col-
lectors was most important. Pao Chi's memorial of 987 painted in 
somber colors the mass flight of the tax payers and Wang An-shih's 
attempted registration of land ( 1072 A.D.) under Emperor Shen 
Tsung could not be executed. By the end of this regime estimates 
had not been made of some 70 percent of the land. The budget of 
107711 showed that money income had increased over income in 
kind but it was still a far cry from pecuniary accounting. The 
paper money of the 13th century and the debasement of coinage 
under Shang Ti (1st century A.D.) again caused collapse and 
reversion to taxation in kind. Only under the Ming do we .find a 

ADJ\'IINISTRATION AND RURAL STRUCTURE 
» 71 « 
considerable amount of silver along with a large receipt of grain 
and a moderate amount of silk. 
Pacification under the Manchus-partly a result of the Mongols 
being domesticated by Buddhism-together with the tax quotas 
of 1712-13 caused a tax decrease. During the first half of the 19th 
century the tax was fixed at a moderate one tenth of the produce. 
The last vestiges of "duty to the land" and control of cultivation 
were thus eliminated. Imperial edicts of recent decades have for-
bidden holding liable for taxes the heads of groupings of ten.10 
In the two thousand years following Shih Huang Ti, obligatory 
tillage has not been mere theory. Occasionally it has been tangible 
reality for all "ting," that is for all able-bodied workers subject to 
the corvee. The same was true for the sib communities and their 
sub-groups of ten who were jointly responsible for the corvee 
and for tax payments. Quite real also was the fixed maximum size 
of land holdings and the right of resettlement. Since taxes and 
corvees were charged to families,H fiscal authorities favored and 
even compelled the division of families in order to maximize the 
number of taxable units. This became usual because it was ex-
tremely difficult to establish systematic land measurement. Family 
division may have considerably influenced the emergence of the 
small holding which was typically Chinese, but from a social point 
of view this influence was limited. 
While all this handicapped the rise of large units of production, 
de facto it promoted cohesion among the old landowning peasant 
sibs who claimed usufruct rights when the emperor claimed land 
regalia. The sibs12 were actually the cadres of the tax liability 
associations.13 Attempted equalization of property-in the sense of 
the Nadfel principle-failed because the administration lacked 
efficient means of enforcement. The "state socialist" experiments 
of the 11th century as well as those of some later rulers were 
solely motivated by fiscal considerations. They obviously left an 
intense aversion toward each and every interference by central 
authorities. In this the local prebendaries of office agreed with 
other strata of the population. For instance, during the lOth cen-
tury the central government demanded that it have at its disposal 

)) 72 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
not fixed amounts but all surpluses of corv6cs and taxes above the 
\ocal requirements, but this was enforced only temporarily and 
IJy unusually energetic emperors. The measure thus gradually fell 
into abeyance and, as mentioned, was finally abandoned under 
the :Manchu. 
Some aspects of this agrarian and fiscal policy may be empha-
sized in order to round out the picture. 
Silk cultivation for the court and export trade and "wet," i.e., 
irrigated, rice cultivation occupied a special place in the agrarian 
economy. Silk was an ancient element of garden culture and of 
domestic industry. According to the Annals, during the 5th cen-
tury A.D., the cultivation of silk and fruit was imposed on the 
peasants' households according to land allotments. 
The land allohnent may be considered the actual or at least the 
original basis of the so-called "well system." Among Chinese 
authors the well system enjoyed quasi-classical status as a genu-
inely national system of land distribution. 14 The basic unit con-
sisted of a square field divided into nine parts by tripartitioning 
the sides. The centre part had to be cultivated by the eight sur-
rounding holders for the state, possibly for the landlord. The 
universal diffusion of the system is inconceivable for, apart from 
intrinsic improbabilities, it would contradict the data of the An-
nals concerning the history of land ownership. The abolition of 
the well system under the Ch'in dynasty in the 4th century A.D. 
is probably identical with the substitution of taxes for the general 
system of the ''king's field," and for the admittedly unsuccessful 
"restoration of the well system." It has been confirmed that the 
well system was localized. While undoubtedly it was essential for 
the irrigation of rice fields, it has only occasionally been trans-
ferred to ploughland and, in any case, it was not the historically 
basic institution of mral China that has sometimes been assumed. 
It was simply a form of the old kung-t' ien principle (royal land) 
occasionally applied to wet rice culture. 
VVhile agrarian institutions have changed, the imperial grants 
and enfeoHed estates have occupied a special legal position .. Usu-
ally they were renewed for life if qualified descendants assumed 

ADl\HNISTRATION AND RURAL STRUCTURE 
» 73 «. 
the obligations. Evidently they were partly prebends intended to 
provide sustenance for the trusted warrior, perhaps for his retire-
ment at the age of sixty as in the case of the Japanese inkyo. These 
military fiefs, graded by class of warrior, appeared especially after 
the 1st century A.D. and from the 7th to the 9th century; they 
played their role up to the time of the Ming dynasty. Only the 
:rvlanchu allowed them to fall into abeyance, or rather, replaced 
them by their banner fiefs. Similarly, at varying times, land grants 
were made to officials in lieu of payment in kind, especially with 
the decline of the magazine system which had been its basis. 
These were partly small plebeian fiefs and were charged with 
liturgies of all sorts: corvees for water regulation, bridge and 
road construction like the lex agraria of Antiquity ( 111 B.C.) and 
of the Middle Ages. In China, such properties were re-established 
as late as the 18th century.15 
After the so-called introduction of "private property" by Shih 
Huang Ti, the most varied changes in land distribution can be 
observed. Periods of great internal unrest have always known the 
rise of large landlordism. It was the result of voluntary commenda-
tion and the subjection and preemption of impoverished and 
defenseless peasants. The idea of defining maximal holdings nat-
urally tied the peasant again to the clod, or rather to the joint 
liability association. Formally these interventions were determined 
simply by fiscal and corvee interests. Thus, after some earlier 
beginnings, the Eastern Chin dynasty during the 4th century 
proclaimed a public land monopoly. The reports reveal that the 
decisive intention was to facilitate general regulation of the 
corvee. 
In the warring kingdoms of the 3rd century the idea emerged 
of equal "soul" shares for all those from 15-60 years of age, with 
annual redistribution of land. At that time the rather crude system 
of combining the land tax with a head tax for every t'ing soul-
at first simply from every holding-had led to quite unsatisfactory 
results. 
In 485 A.D., and again under the T'ang during the 7th century, 
there appeared in various "social policies" (in theory!) the idea 

)) 74 « 
THE HELIGION OF CHINA 
of providing separate houses for the aged, for war veterans, and 
similar groups. Thus, hereditary and b·ansferable holdings, Hke 
the "commons acreage" in Badenia or properties determined by 
rank, could be variously combined. In 624, the state of T'ang 
permitted basic holdings of a certain size to be hcrcdital)' and 
granted additional land according to size of family. Grain levies 
and corvees were based on the established tax unit; sometimes 
these were cumulative, sometimes alternate. 
At the beginning of the lith century the land holdings 'vere 
classified by rank and, in case of land scarcity, resettlement was 
permitted. At the time much land was available for settlement in 
the north and this accounts for the at least temporary possibility 
of executing the policy. In case of resettlement or of available 
surplus land over and above the norm, free land sales were per-
mitted if the sib had refused its preemption. Otherwise free sales 
were permitted only were there "genuine need," such as lack of 
funds to meet burial expenses. Actually land was soon quite freely 
transferred, and thus the attempt to establish equality in land 
holdings miscarried. This became especially the case when the 
new tax system of 780 caused the administration to Jose interest in 
the subject's ability to render military and other compulsory 
services. 
All of these measures, as noted, were conn0cted with fiscal and 
military requirements. Once the administration failed in its policy 
of protecting the peasants by equalizing land holdings, it only 
intervened in the accumulation of tenancy rents. The prohibition 
of corvees for private benefit, especially messenger service and 
the compulsory supply of relays, had, however, to be repeatedly 
emphasized during the lOth century. The cm·vee-exempt officials 
exploited this opportunity for enriching themselves \Vith land. 
Therefore, in 1022 maximal landholdings were set for officials and, 
according to the Annals, landownership was unusually precarious 
because of such interferences. Moreover, liturgical charges on 
land strongly discouraged land improvement. 
The "liturgy state" was always threatened by financial and 

ADMINISTRATION AND RURAL STHUCTURE 
» 75 <e 
military failure. These difficulties stimulated the many attempts 
at land reform. The famous edict of \Vang An-shi in the 11th 
century, primarily oriented toward military finance, provides an 
example. Let us consider the rcfom1 in its setting. 
2. Army Organization and Wang 
An-shih's Attempt at Rcfonn 
THROUGH disam1ament, as he repeatedly announced in his 
edicts, Emperor Shih Huang Ti sought permanent pacification of 
the country. Tradition maintains that the officials collected weap-
ons in the 36 districts fonned for that purpose and that the 
weapons were m.elted into bells. The frontier fortifications, how-
ever, had to be manned. Therefore, the population was regi-
mented for service-theoretically for one year-at border set-
tlements and for work on imperial construction. Thus, the 
establishment of the unified empire was accompanied by a tre-
mendous increase in constmction work by the civilian population. 
Yet civil wars were chronic, for the army remaiued essentially a 
professional army of praetorian guards. Under the Han dynasty, 
therefore, the attempt was made to replace, or at least supplement, 
the professional anny by conscription. Everyone 23 years of age 
was to serve for one year in the standing army (wei shih) and 
then for two years in the militia (chai huang shih). Exercises in 
archery, riding, and charioteering were planned for men up to 55. 
The annual corvee was to last one month; hiring of substitutes 
was permissible. 
To what extent these plans to organize a gigantic military 
force were ever realized is questionable. In any case, during the 
6th century A.D. the corvee was heavy. Officially, one worker per 
family was annually called to serve after the harvest for one to 
three decades. Added to this were manoeuvres and frontier service 
in the Far West. Because the latter rent families asunder for 
years, it was especially bewailed in Chinese poetry. During the 
land "reform" of the T'ang, servitude was extended upward and 

)) 76 ({ 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
might last five decades for tax exempt persons. It has been alleged 
that, on occasion, over a million men were drafted for construc-
tion work on the great rivers. There was, officially, a universal 
draft for the militia, but this evidently remained a dead letter and 
prevented the development of a technically efficient army. Under 
the Sung dynasty there was a standing guard as well as two local 
troop formations and militias, but after being unified, they disinte-
grated. At that time the recruits for the "guards" were impressed 
and, at least in some provinces, were branded as they were in the 
Middle East in 1042. The nucleus of the army, as all available 
reports show, was composed exclusively of mercenaries whose 
reliability, always doubtful, depended mainly on regular pay. 
In 1049, the chronic financial emergency required a reduction 
of the army at a time when the barbarians of the North West 
threatened to raid the empire. vVang An-shih then tried to intro-
duce rational reform as a means of raising an adequate and effi-
cient national army. His attempted reform has been called "state 
socialism." The term is properly applicable only in the narrow 
if not quite identical sense in which it has been used for the 
monopolistic banking and grain storage policy of the Ptolemies, 
although the latter was based on a highly developed money 
economy. 
Actually16 the central authorities sought to plan the subsidiza-
tion and regulation of grain production, and to monopolize and 
systematically organize grain sales by substituting money taxes for 
servitudes and taxes in kind (the ch'ien-shui-fa system). Thus it 
was hoped that money taxes could be raised in order to establish 
a large, disciplined, and trained national anny which would be 
ready unconditionally to serve the Emperor. Theoretically one of 
every two adults was subject to the draft. Census registration was 
introduced and the system of groups of ten ( pao chia fa) was re-
newed. The groups were headed by elected elders who were to 
deliver reprimands and take turns at night watches. :tvloreover, 
arms (bows) were to be distributed by the state to draftees who 
were assigned to the local militia. The state was also to purchase 

AD.IIHNISTRATION AND RORAL STRuCTURE 
» 77 « 
horses and place them at the disposal of drafted horsemen who 
were held responsible for them. The horsemen were subject to 
annual review and possibly entitled to premium pay. 
Formerly, the state magazines were supplied through levies in 
kind and liturgically administered by the propertied. Tl:tis was 
ruinous to them and led to every conceivable squeeze-play. Now 
the magazines were to be managed by paid officials and their 
pecuniary operation vvas systematically to implement the develop-
ment of the money economy. The administration distributed 
grain seed on credit ( ch'lng rniao, i.e., "green seeds"), and other 
credit in kind or in money, at 20 percent interest. Landed property 
was to be revalued and reclassified. Land tax, corvee (mo-chi), 
and per capita allotment were to be determined by classes. Money 
payment was to be substituted for corvee and laborers were to be 
hired by means of money taxes. 
Apart from the introduction of money taxes, the monopoly of 
the grain trade was the central point of reform proposals, which 
were subsequently often renewed. The government was to buy 
grain cheaply at harvest time, store it, and distribute credit from 
these stores. Moreover, the government was expected to make 
speculative profits. An administrative body of expert officials, 
especially trained jurists, was supposed to implement the reform, 
which included the drafting and presentation of annual budgets 
by all local authorities. In this way, a central and unified admin-
istration of finance was to be facilitated. 
Wang An-shih's Confucian opponents criticized 1. the militarist 
natum of the system; 2. the arming of the people, which they 
thought might provoke rebellion and endanger the official author-
ities; 3. the elimination of trade, which would jeopardize the tax 
capacity; 4. and above all, the Emperor's grain usury, the seed 
credits at interest,17 and the experiments in money taxation. 
·wang An-shih's reforms failed completely in the decisive point 
of army organization. From analogy it may be said that this was 
undoubtedly due to the absence of an indispensable staff, and 
due to the fact that the country's economic organization made 

» 78 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
the prompt collection of money ta.xcs impossible. The canoniza-
tion of Wang An-shih and the sacrifices inaugurated after his 
death in 1086 were revoked in the 12th century. By the end of 
the lith century the bulk of the army was again comprised of 
mercenaries. The literati knew how to sabotage the establish-
ment of expert officialdom for their prebendal interests were at 
stake, and these interests were the decisive force in the whole 
snuggle for and against the reform. The empresses, whose eunuchs 
saw their power jeopardized by such a new order, opposed the 
reform from the beginning.18 
While Wang An-shih's reform failed at that decisive point, it 
apparently left deep traces on the Chinese system of "self-govern-
ment." Through the rationalization of the much-mentioned groups 
of ten and a hundred a structure was preserved the influence of 
which is felt to this day. 
Later governments repeatedly interfered with land distribution. 
During the snuggle against the ?vlongols, in 1263, the government 
raised funds by expropriating all landholdings in excess of 100 
mou for government bonds. In later periods occasional confisca-
tions led to great increases of state property. vVhen the Ming 
dynasty rose to power in Chekiang one fifteenth of the land was 
supposedly private property. 
The system of state magazines per se (ts'un shu) was old19 and 
quite important even before Wang An-shih's plans. Since the 15th 
century it has acquired its pennanent form of operation: grain 
purchases in fall and winter and sales in spring and summer in-
creasingly served as measures of price control and as a basis for 
maintaining internal peace. Originally, the government purchased 
not voluntary but forced deliveries. The quota requirements on 
the harvest, which were credited as tax payment, normally oscil-
lated around one-half of the yield. The tax rates fluctuated widely 
between Ji 5 and Yto of the yield; as noted, a very low quota was 
the normal tax rate under the Han Emperors. Additional servi-
tude, however, has to be taken into consideration and it would be 
pointless to make a detailed analysis of tax rates since they do not 
represent the actual tax burdens. 

AD~HNISTRATION AND RURAL STRUCTUHE 
>> 79 « 
3. The Fiscal Protection of 
Peasants and Its Results 
Jot Rural Society 
THE various attempts at land reform by the state led to two 
results: the absence of rational and large scale agricultural enter-
prise, and the intensely suspicions aversion of the entire peasantry 
toward any governmental interference in landownership and land 
utilization. The laissez-faire theories of many Chinese camcralists 
enjoyed increasing popularity among the rural population. Of 
course, political measures for the control of consumption and 
dearth were necessarily retained. For the rest, only the policy of 
governmental protection of the peasants found support with the 
people, since this worked against capitalist accumulation, i.e., the 
conversion into landed wealth of profits from olRce holding, tax 
farming, and trade. This mood alone made possible the legislation 
-we have discussed it in part-which cut deeply into the property 
of the wealthy. It originated in the stmggle of the autocratic 
government against the vassals and the noble sibs who, originally, 
were alone fully qualified for military service. Later, legislation 
repeatedly opposed the capitalistic resurgence of landlordism. 
As shown above, the type of interference changed greatly. The 
Annals report for the state of Ch'in~ 0 (from which the "First 
Emperor" Shih Huang Ti set out) that during Hsiao Kung's reign 
(361-338) the scholar Wei Yang, his minister, taught him as the 
"highest wisdom" the art of "how to become master of his vassals." 
Land distribution aml reform of the tax system stood in the fore-
ground, directed particularly toward the substitution of the gen-
eral land tax for the tillage corvce. The measmes entailed family 
registration, the compulsory division of family communes, tax 
premiums for forming a family, corvcc exemption for intensive 
production, and the renunciation of private revenge. They were 
typical means for fighting the rise and establishment of landlord-
ism; likewise they indicate how population policy was typically 
bound to fiscal policy. As we have noticed, legislation wavered. 
The government alternately freed the peasants or handed them 

)) 80 (( 
THE HELIGION OF CHIN A 
over to the landlords by restricting their mobility and permitting 
their commendation into servitude. On the whole, the tendency 
to protect the peasantry prevailed. 
Under the \Vei dynasty in 485 A.D. the government, obviously 
for populationist reasons, permitted the sale of surplus land. 
The injunction against traffic in land and, especially in 653 A.D., 
the injunction forbidding land purchases by the wealthy were 
designed to protect the peasantry. This was likewise the aim of 
the injunction against land sales and the enjoinder (in 1205 A.D.) 
to stay on the land as the buyer's bondsman.21 The latter two 
provisions certainly allow us to infer that alienable private prop-
erty in land existed at the time of the reform legislation and even 
long before, according to other reports. The aim of such provisions 
was to forestall developments which have frequently occurred 
elsewhere, pmticularly in the early Hellenic polis. In Athens, e.g., 
moneyed wealth, accumulated in trade or iu politics, sought in-
vestment opportunities in land. This was done by buying out the 
indebted peasants and exploiting them as indebted serfs, tenants, 
or bondsmen on the small holdings which had been bought up. 
Enough of these monotonous repetitions which are not intended 
as a depiction of "economic history." So far, the decisive data on 
prices, wages, etc., are absent. From the above, the precarious 
nature of landownership is apparent through long centuries, that 
is, for one and one half thousand years. The largely irrational 
conditions of landownership were due to fiscal policies which 
altemated between arbitrary intervention and complete laissez-
faire. The literati rejected legal codification with the characteristic 
argument that the people would be contemptuous of the ruling 
classes if they knew their rights. Under such conditions, maintain-
ing the sib as an association for self-help was the only way out. 
The contemporary Chinese law of real property, therefore, 
contains traces of the earliest structure along with apparently 
modern feah1res. 22 Land transfer by mere transfer of documents 
has been greatly facilitated through general land registration, and 
the requirement-continually faltering in the face of popular ob-
struction-of a fee and seal (shou ch'i) for every document of sale. 

ADMINISTRATION" AND RlJRAL STRUCTURE 
» 81 « 
Similarly, the possession of titles of purchase, copies of the land 
register, and receipts for tax payment have come to be considered 
property certificates. Every document of sale (mai ch'i) contains 
the clause that the property is sold "in consequence of a real need 
for money and for a legitimate purpose." Today this clause is an 
empty formula. In connection, however, with the aforementioned 
explicit provision of 485 A.D., we may certainly conclude that 
originally sales were pennitted only in cases of "real nePd." \Vhile 
nowadays there is a purely formal preemption right of relatives 
accompanying this measure, in former days this right was un-
doubtedly obligatory. Moreover, such usage is confirmed by the 
fact that even today it is an "abuse" to demand, in distress, that 
the buyer, and under certain conditions his descendants, make 
one or several later payments as "charity"23 or tan ch'i ("billet de 
geminance").24 
In China, as in the ancient occidental polis, the typical land 
buyer was the creditor and man of moneyed wealth. However, 
originally, landmvnership was tied to the sib by right of retrac-
tion. The truly national form of alienation, therefore, was not the 
unconditional and permanent sale but rather the sale with reser-
vation of the right to re-purchase (hsiao mai)-a universally dif-
fused emergency transaction-or else the hereditary lease. For the 
t'ien mien, the owner of the surface was obviously the hereditary 
tenant in contrast to the t'ien ti, the landowner. The anti-cresis 
(t'ien tang) usually applied to rural properties; the mortgage, ti ya, 
only to urban real estate. 
All other aspects of agrarian institutions point in the same 
direction. For instance, the old sib, bound to the land, stmggled 
against the moneyed power of land buyers, and the patrimonial 
authorities intervened as moderators out of essentially fiscal in-
terests. The official terminology of the Shih Ching and the Annals 
of the Han dynasty-like Roman law-distinguish only private 
and public property, public tenants on royal land and tax payers 
on private land (people's land mien ti). The indivisible and in-
alienable ancestral land (for tombs and ancestral sacrifices) re-
mained family property.2G The oldest son of the chief wife and 

)) 82 << 
THE H.ELIGION OF CHINA 
his descendants succeeded as testators. After the victory of patri-
monialism, however, the estate, including the land, became legally 
subject to real division among all children. Provisions of the tes-
tator were considered mere ethical obligations, like "entailed 
estates" in the proper sense of the term. Ultimately, the forms of 
tenancy were share cropping, rents in kind, and money rents. 
The tenant could secure himself against the owner's notice by 
giving bail. The usual tenancy contracts indicate26 that the tenant 
was thought of as colonus in the sense of the ancient and South 
European tenant farmer of a small holding. Along with the right, 
he assumed the obligation to till the land and, as a mie, the lessee 
remained indebted to the lessor. A big landlord who exploited 
his scattered holdings by leasing them was the typical lessor. 
Landlordism of sib communities was especially frequent. Such 
sibs inherited and acquired numerous small scattered holdings, 
the documents pertaining to which they preserved and regis-
tered27 in special files and inventory books. The land ret:,r:ister 
listed the holdings under a special common name,28 as if desig-
nating a common firm for all holdings. 2n It was the same name 
which was posted on a tablet in the family hall. Through its elder 
the family mled the coloni with the tone and patriarchical man-
ner of the ancient or South European landlord or the English 
squire. As usual, the great old families and the wealthy parvenus 
of trade and politics firmly preserved their wealth and hereditary 
position in familial communities. Clearly, this form was the eco-
nomic substitute for the privileged status position of the old 
nobility which pabimonialism had shattered. 
Landlordism, quite extensive in some places, unfortunately can-
not be statistically evaluated.30 Only part of it has a long history 
and, in any case, it largely consisted of scattered holdings. Never-
theless, landlordism has existed until now and presumably was 
even more extensive in former days. Associated with it was the 
typical colonus of the patrimonial state. The landlord's power 
was strongly curbed by two peculiarly Chinese circumstances: 
the power of the sib (to be discussed presently), and the impo-
tence and extensiveness of the civil and legal administration. If 

ADMINISTRATION AND RURAL STRUCTURE 
» 83 « 
a ruthless landlord wished to use his power he had slight chance 
of seeing his legal claim promptly enforced unless he had per-
sonal connections or could purchase administrative coercion by 
way of costly bribes. But when the state official attempted to 
squeeze ground rent out of the tenant for the landlord he had 
to be as considerate as if he were squeezing taxes for himself. 
For aU social unrest was considered symptomatic of magical evil 
which might cost the local official his office if it bestirred the 
central authorities. Some highly characteristic usages of land-
lords show that this situation precluded the intensive exploitation 
of the coloni. The intensive work31 and the economic superiority 
of the small holder were patently expressed in immense land 
values32 and the relatively low interest rate for agricultural 
credit.33 Technological improvements were almost ruled out by 
the extensive partitioning of land; tradition held sway despite a 
developed money economy. 
The equalitarian levelling tendency corresponded to patrimo-
nial bureaucratization. Agricultural production based on intensive 
rice cultivation remained almost entirely in the hands of small 
peasants, and industrial production in the hands of the artisan. 
In the long run the hereditary partitioning of land greatly 
democratized landownership, although in individual cases the 
process was slowed down by joint inheritance. A holding of a few 
acres was regarded as sizeable. A holding of less than two and 
one half acres ( 15 mou = 85 ar) was considered sufficient to 
provide sustenance for five persons even without gardening. 
The feudal elements of the social order were, at least legally, 
divested of their status position. Even recent official reports al-
ways mention rural "notables" as the socially dominant stratum. 
But this rural "gentry" of village notables did not have a state-
guaranteed position vis-a-vis the lower strata. By law, the patri-
monial bureaucratic machine stood directly over the petty burgher 
and small peasant. The feudal stratum which mediated during 
the occidental Middle Ages was non-existent de jure and de facto. 
Only recent times and European influence have brought about 
capitalist conditions in their typically occidental form. Why? 

CHAPTER IV 
SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAW, 
AND CAPITALISM 
1. Absence of Capitalist Relationships 
the Period of the Warring Kingdoms and their 
contest for political power, there was a capitalism of money-
lenders and purveyors which was politically determined and ap-
parently very significant. High rates of profit seem to have been 
the rule. In China, as in other patrimonial states, this type of capi-
talism was customary. In addition to transactions which were 
politically determined, mining and trade are mentioned as sources 
for the accumulation of \Vealth. ~·1ultimillionaires (on a copper 
standard) are said to have existed under the Han dynasty. \:Vhen 
China was politically unified into a world empire like the unified 
orbis terrarum of Imperial Rome, the result was an obvious retro-
gression of this capitalism, essentially linked to competition he-
tween states. On the other hand, the development of pure market 
capitalism, seeking free trading opportunities, was only rudimen-
tary. 'Within industry the merchant obviously was in a position 
superior to the technician. This applied also to the cooperative 
forms of enterprise to be discussed shortly. The predominance 
of the merchant is clearly shown in the way profit was usually 
distributed within associations. Often inter-local industries also 
yielded considerable speculative gains. Even during the first cen-
tury B.C., the old and classical esteem for the truly sacred vocation 
of agriculture did not prevent that profit opportunities were 
• 84 « 

SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAW, AND CAPITALISM 
» 85 « 
judged to be greater in industry and greatest in trade. (From 
Talmudic references, it may be inferred that a similar develop-
ment occurred in the Middle East. ) 
Such forms of capitalist pursuits, however, were not a point of 
departure for modem capitalism. To this very day, the institu-
tions characteristically developed by the flourishing burghers of 
the Medieval cities are either entirely lacking in China or they 
typically display a different physiognomy. The legal forms and 
societal foundations for capitalist "enterprise" were absent in the 
Chinese economy. There was no rational depersonalization of 
business comparable to its unmistakable beginnings in the com-
mercial law of the Italian cities. In early Chinese history a point 
of departure for the possible development of personal credit was 
the joint liability of the sib. This survived in tax law and in the 
law of political crime but developed no further. To be sure, 
among the propertied strata, there were associations of heirs 
organized as household pa1tnerships for the joint pursuit of profit. 
Such associations played a role like that of the family associations 
from which our occidental "hading company" later emerged (at 
least in Italy). In China, however, the economic meaning was 
characteristically different. As is usual with patrimonial states, he 
who was formally an official, and actually a tax farmer, had the 
best opportunities to accumulate wealth. For example, the 
"hoppo," i.e., the supervisor and holder of the customs at Canton, 
was famous for his exploitation of tremendous profit opportuni-
. ties. The income of his first year, 200,000 taels, went for the pur-
chase of his office; that of the second for "gifts"; and that of the 
third and last year, the "hoppo" kept for himself (according to 
the account of the North China Herald). 
Retired officials invested their fortunes, more or less legally 
acquired, in landholdings. The sons, in order to preserve their 
wealth and influence, remained in hereditary partnership as co-
heirs and, in turn, raised the means enabling some members of 
the family to study. Since these members had the opportunity of 
entering remunerative offices, they, in turn, were usually expected 
to enrich the co-heirs and provide sib members with public offices. 

THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
Thus, through political accumulation of property, there had 
developed a stratum of land magnates who leased lots. This 
(albeit unstable) patriciate bore neither a feudal nor a bourgeois 
stamp, but speculated in opportunities for the purely political 
exploitation of office. As is characteristic of patrimonial states, 
the accumulation of wealth, and especially landed wealth, was 
not primarily a matter of rational profit-making. In addition to 
trade, a system of internal booty capitalism prevailed which also 
led to the investment of money in land. For, as noted above, the 
officials made their fortunes by jobbing tax premiums, that is, by 
arbitrarily defining the exchange rate of the currency in which 
the tax obligations had to be calculated. Examination degrees 
also constituted a claim to the feed from this trough. Accordingly, 
the examinations were always distributed anew among the prov-
inces, though it was exceptional to restrict them to a fixed quota. 
Thus, cessation of examinations in a district was a most effective 
economic sanction for the ranking families concerned. It is clear 
that this sort of acquisitive familial community pointed in a direc-
tion opposite to the development of rational economic corporate 
enterprises. Above all, this community was held together by rigid 
kinship bonds. This brings us to the discussion of the significance 
of the sib associations. 
2. The Sib Association 
THE sib, which in the occidental 1-Iiddle Ages was practically 
extinct, in China was completely preserved in the administration 
of the smallest political units as well as in the operation of eco-
nomic associations. Moreover, the sib developed to an extent 
unknown elsewhere-even in India. The pah·imonial rule from 
above clashed with the sibs' strong counterbalance from below. 
To the present day, a considerable proportion of all politically 
dangerous "secret societies" has consisted of sibs.1 The villages 
were often named after the sib2 which was exclusively or pre-
dominantly represented in the village. At times the village 
societies were confederations of sibs. The old boundary marks 

SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAW, AND CAPITALISJ\I 
indicate that the land was not allotted to individuals but to sibs. 
The cohesiveness of the sibs was important in maintaining this 
condition. 
The village head-often a salaried man-was elected from the 
sib most powerful numerically. "Elders" of the sib stood beside 
him and claimed the right to depose him. The individual sib, 
with which we must deal first, claimed the right to impose sane- · 
tions on its members and enforced this claim, however little 
modern public authorities officially recognized it. Only domestic 
authority and the jurisdiction of the imperial sib over its members 
were officially recognized. 
The cohesion of the sib undoubtedly rested wholly upon the 
ancestor cult. The sib withstood the ruthless encroadunents of 
the patrimonial administration, its mechanically constructed lia-
bility associations, its resettlements, its land repartitions, and the 
classification of the population in terms of ting, i.e., employable 
individuals. The ancestor cult was the only folk-cult that was 
not managed by the Caesaro-papist govermnent and its officials. 
Rather, the head of the household, as the house priest, managed it 
with the assistance of the family. Undoubtedly it was a classical 
and ancient folk-cult. Even in the "long house" of archaic militarist 
times, ancestral spirits seem to have played a role. vVe may 
mention in passing that the existence of the '1ong house" hardly 
seems consistent with true totemism. This suggests the proba-
bility that the long house, the most ancient form of organization, 
can be deduced from the routinization of hereditary charisma 
of the prince and his war following.3 However that may be, in 
historical times the most fundamental belief of the Chinese people 
has been to ascribe power to ancestral spirits, not exclusively but 
predominantly to the spirits of one's own ancestors.4 Ritual and 
literature testify to belief in the ancestral spirits and to their role 
as mediators of, the descendant's wishes before the Spirit or God 
of Heaven.5 Furthermore, it was believed absolutely necessary 
to satisfy the spirits and to win their favor by sacrifices. The 
ancestral spirits of the emperors were of almost equal rank with 
the following of the Heavenly Spirit.6 A Chinese without male 

THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
descendants, indeed, had to resort to adoption and, if he failed 
to do so, the family undertook a posthumous and fictitious adop-
tion on his behalf.7 This was done less in his interest than in their 
own concern to be at rest with his spirit. The social consequences 
of these all-pervasive ideas are evident in the enormous support 
gained by patriarchal power'! and in the reinforcement of sib 
cohesion. In Egypt, not the ancestral cult but the cult of the 
dead dominated evei)'thing, and there sib-cohesion was broken 
under the influence of bureaucratization and fiscalism just as it 
was broken later in l\1esopotamia. In China, the influence of the 
sib was maintained and grew to equal the prerogatives of the 
overlord. 
3. Organization of the Sib 
IN PRINCIPLE, to this very day, every sib has its ancestral hall 
in the village.0 In addition to paraments of the cult, the temple 
often contained a tablet with the "moral codes" recognized by 
the sib, for the sib had the unquestionable right to lay down 
the law for its members-a right which operated not only 
praeter legem but, under certain conditions and even in questions 
of ritual, contra legem.10 The sib faced the outside world with 
solidarity. Although joint liability did not exist outside of 
criminal law, nevertheless the sib was accustomed to settle the 
debts of its members whenever possible. \Vith the elder pre-
siding in the chair, the sib not only meted out lashes and ordered 
excommunication (meaning civil death) but, like the Russian 
Mir, also decreed punitive exile. The frequently intense need 
for consumer loans was essentially met by the sib which morally 
bound its propertied members to give succour. To be sure, a 
sufficient number of kotows also secured a loan to an outsider, 
for no one dared draw the wrath of the desperate man's spirit 
upon himself should he commit suicide.11 Nobody seems to have 
voluntarily repaid loans, least of all when the debtor knew he 
had a strong sib behind him. Nevertheless, only the sib was, by 
rule, clearly obliged to aid the needy and to give credit assistance. 

SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAvV, AND CAPITALISM 
If need be, the sib conducted feuds against outsiders.12 Here, 
where personal interest and personal tics were at stake, the relent-
less bravery of the Chinese contrasted most glaringly with the 
much vaunted "cowardice" of the governmental army which, after 
all, consisted of impressed recruits or mercenaries. ·where neces-
sary, again, the sib provided medicaments, doctors, and burial 
services; it cared for the aged and widows, and above all, it pro-
vided schools. 
The sib owned property, especially landed property (ancestral 
land, shih t' ien) P and prosperous sibs often owned extensive 
lands in trust. The sib utilized this land by leasing it out (usually 
for three years, by auction), but alienation of such land was per-
missible only with the consent of three-fourths of the sib. The 
yield was distributed among the heads of the households. The 
typical method of this distribution was to give all men and all 
widows one unit each; then from the age of fifty-nine on, two 
units; sixty-nine on, three units. 
\Vithin the sib a combination of hereditary-charismatic, and 
democratic principles prevailed. All married men had equal 
franchise; unmarried men had only the right to be heard in 
council; women were excluded from the sib councils altogether 
as well as from the right of inheritance (they had only dowry 
rights). The executive committee consisted of the elders, each 
representing a separate lineage within the sib. The elders were, 
however, annually elected by a vote of all sib members. The 
functions of the elders were to collect revenues, utilize posses-
sions and distribute income, and most important of all, attend 
to the ancestral sacrifices, the ancestral halls, and schools. The 
retiring elders nominated candidates for election according to 
seniority; in case the office was declined, the next eldest was 
presented. 
Up to the present, it was common to acquire land jointly 
through purchase or lease and to distribute it among the heads 
of the households. Manda1ins, merchants, or others who definitely 
moved off the land received compensation and an abstract from 
the family book as a record. They remained subject to the juris-

THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
diction of the sib and could repurchase their claim. Where the 
old conditions remained dominant, hereditary land seldom passed 
into the hands of strangers. 
Because of the home spinning, weaving, and tailoring of the 
women, and especially because the women also marketed their 
products,14 an independent textile industry could emerge only on 
a modest scale. Head and foot gear were also home-made. The 
sib association strongly supported the self-sufficiency of the house-
holds, thereby delimiting market developments. Socially the sib 
meant everything for its members-for those living far from home 
and especially for those living in the city.15 This is apparent and 
important for the following reasons: 
First, the sib was the ceremonial unit necessary for those 
festivities most important to the individual (especially the semi-
annual ancestor festivals). It was also the topical unit for the 
family history which the housefathers had to write. 
Second, hitherto it was considered proper for the sib to lend 
capital at low interest rates to apprentices and to wage-earning 
artisans without resources, thus enabling them to become "self 
employed" artisans. 
Third, as already noted, the sib elders elected young men who 
were qualified for study and provided for their expenses in-
curred by preparatory studies, examination, and purchase of 
office. 
As generally indicated above, the "city" was, therefore never 
the "hometown" but t}'pically "a place away from home" for the 
majority of its inhabitants. The alien character of the city was 
further sharpened by the above-mentioned absence of the or-
ganized self-government found in the village. Without undue 
exaggeration, it may be said that Chinese administrative history 
is replete with instances of the imperial administration endeavor-
ing to assert itself beyond the city districts. In this, apart from 
compromises over tax levies, the imperial administration suc-
ceeded only for short periods of time; given the territorial scope 
of the administration it could not do so permanently. The exten-
siveness of administration, i.e., the small number of actual offi-

SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAW, AND CAPITALISM 
» 91 « 
cials per administrative unit, resulted from the state of finances 
and that, in tum, determined the financial returns. 
The official imperial administration remained, in fact, an ad-
ministration of urban districts and sub-districts. Here, if it was 
amenable to merchant and craft guilds, the administration oper-
ated effectively for it did not encounter the intense kinship ties 
of the sibs as it did outside. Beyond the city walls the effective-
ness of administrative authority became narrowly circumscribed. 
For in addition to the power of the sibs, great in itself, the ad-
ministration also confronted the organized self-government of the 
village. There were also numerous peasants living in the cities 
and, since the latter were merely urban settlements of farmers, 
there remained only a technical administrative difference between 
city and village. A "city" was the seat of the mandarin and was 
not self-governing; a "village" was a self-governing settlement 
without a mandarin! 
4. Self-Government of the Chinese Village 
IN CHINA, village settlement16 was based upon the need for 
security which the extensive administration of the empire, lacking 
any notion of "police," was unable to meet. Originally, and often 
even today, the villages were fortified. Not only were they pro-
tected by palisades, like the ancient cities, but they were also 
frequently surrounded by walls. The village employed salaried 
watchmen, thus relieving its members of alternate turns of guard 
duty. 
Occasionally numbering many thousands of residents, the vil-
lages differed from the "cities"17 simply in that they took care 
of this function through their own organization. The village 
temple served as a central agency as Chinese law and the 
peasant's way of thinking naturally involved no concept of 
"corporation." In the modem period the village temple 1 ~ has 
usually been dedicated to any one of the popular deities, to 
General Kuan Ti (God of War), Po Ti {God of Trade), Wen 
Cn ang (God of Schools), Lang Wang (God of Rain), to T u Ti 

)) 92 « 
THE TIELIGION OF CHINA 
(a non-classical God who had to be notified in case of death 
to assure the deceased person's "conduite" in the beyond); and 
to others. The specific dedication of the temple appears to have 
been regarded rather indifferently. As in classical antiquity of 
the Occident, the "religious" significance of the templelll was 
confined to a few ritual manipulations and occasional prayers of 
individuals. For the rest, the significance of the temple lay in 
its secular social and legal practices. 
Like the ancestral hall the temple held property, especially 
real property,20 and frequently also money which it loaned at 
rates that were not consistently Iow.21 The pecuniary fund 
stemmed primarily from traditional market-fees. As is the case 
almost everywhere in the world, the market stands had always 
been under the protection of the local god. Like the ancestral 
land, temple land was leased, preferably to unpropertied vil-
lagers. Similarly, the collection of rents from this source and all 
revenues of the temple in general were annually allotted to tax 
farmers. The profits remaining after deduction of expenses were 
distributed. 
The administrative positions of the temple seem to have been 
mainly occupied and financed by a liturgy of the housefathers 
of the village. They took turns from house to house and for this 
purpose the village was divided into districts of 100 to 500 in-
habitants. Alongside these administrators were the "notables" of 
the village, the elders of the sibs, and the literati who received 
nominal remuneration. The political administration discouraged 
the legalization of corporations or their agents and recognized 
the notables as the sole represenatives of the village. The notables 
in turn, however, acted in the name of the "temple" and the 
"temple" concluded contracts for the village through them. 
The "temple" had jurisdiction over petty causes and ve1y often 
usurped jurisdiction over causes of all so1ts. The government in-
tervened only where interests of state were concerned. The temple 
court, not the court authorities of the state, enjoyed the confidence 
of the people. The "temple" took care of the roads, canals, defense, 
safety; it rotated obligatory guard-duty which, in actuality, was 

SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAW, AND CAPITALISM 
» 93 « 
mostly bought off. The temple took charge of defense against 
robbers or neighboring villages, and provided schools, doctors, 
medicaments, and burials insofar as the sibs could not or would 
not do so. The temple contained the armory of the village. The 
village legally and actually was capable of acting as a corporate 
body through the temple-an impossibility for the "city." Actually, 
not the city but the village was the armed association capable of 
defending the interests of those in its orbit. 
The government has not always taken a laissez-faire stand to-
ward this unofficial self-government, as was the case during the 
last period of the old regime. Under the Han Emperors, for in-
stance, the government sought to abandon the pure patrimonial 
absolutism of Shih Huang Ti by methodically calling on the vil-
lage elders to assume local government offices (san lao). They 
sought thus to regulate and to legalize the primeval village auton-
omy.22 The village chief (shou shih fen) was to be elected and 
confirmed and the landO\.vners were to guarantee his good con-
duct, but only occasionally did this actually happen. The govern-
ment again and again ignored the village as a unit, purely fiscal 
interest repeatedly coming to the fore. Wang An-shih, especially, 
rationalized the system from this point of view, as has been 
mentioned in another connection. 
Even today every ten families constitute a "pew" formally under 
a headman, every hundred families constitute a "chia" under a 
"pao chia" who usually is called "ti pao." At every house in village 
and city a placard has to be posted, and where tradition is alive, 
is actually posted which states the house number, the chia, the 
pai, the owner, the name of the family head, the nativity of the 
family (its denizenship), which lists the family members, the 
tenants and their occupations, absent family members (if so for 
how long?), the rent and tax liability, the number of rooms used 
and sublet. 
The pao chia was officially responsible for the policing and 
surveillance of criminals and secret societies. The duties of Im-
perial religious police were not the least of his responsibilities. 
This agent (ti pao) was meant to constitute the link between self-

THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
government and public authorities. \Vhere and when the system 
functioned well he would usually spend some time at the hsien 
magistrate's office to impart information. In modern times, how-
ever, all this has become quite formal; frequently-according to 
Chinese authors apparently as a rule-the ti pao's office has simply 
changed into an unclassical, hence less preferred government 
position. 
The forces which the state had to take practically into account 
were the sib elders behind the village administration who might 
function as a sort of vehme and, in conflict, might he dangerous. 
For all this peasant life in a Chinese village should by no means 
be imagined as a hannonious, patriarchical idyll. The individual 
peasant was frequently threatened by feuds outside the village. 
Moreover, the power of the sib and the administration of the vil-
lage temple all too frequently failed to protect efficiently prop-
erty, especially that of the wealthy. The solvent peasants (lao shih 
as they were called) were typically at the mercy of the arbitrary 
kuang kun or the kulaki (fists), as one would say in Russian 
peasant terminology. But they were not exposed to the domina-
tion of the "village bourgeoisie," of usurers and their interested 
affiliates, as were the kulaki in Russia. Against these, the Chinese 
peasant would easily have found human and divine assistance. 
Rather, the peasant was exposed to the non-propertied villagers23 
organized by the kuang kun, thus the biednata, the "village poor" 
in the terminology of Bolshevism which, in this respect, might be 
attractive in China. Against this organization every individual 
and even groups of large owners were often completely unpro-
tected and powerless.24 And if, during the last centuries, largei 
estates in China have been exceptional, the above circumstances 
have contributed. Their paucity has been due to a smt of ethical 
and naive peasant Bolshevism strongly tempered by the power 
of the sibs and to the absence of state sanctions guaranteeing 
property. 
Below the level of the hsien district, which after all was about 
the size of an English county, there .were only those governing 
agents who were, officially, honorific office holders and, actually, 

SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAW, AND CAPITALISM 
often kulaki. But very frequently committees functioned along-
side the official administration of the districts right up to the 
level of the province. Officially the committees were appointed 
or "delegated" authority for a three-year term and were subject 
to recall at any time. Actually, they held their positions through 
recognized or usurped charisma and they "gave advice"
2 ~ to 
the officials. We shall not be concerned here with the structure 
of these bodies. 
5. Sib Fetters of the Economy 
IT WAS necessary to reach agreement with this body, a firmly 
cohesive stratum of village notables, whenever any change what-
soever was to be introduced, for instance raising the traditional 
taxes. Otherwise the state official was just as certain of meeting 
stubborn resistance as were the landlord, lessor, employer, and 
in general any "superior" outside of the sib. The sib stood as one 
man in support of any member who felt discriminated against26 
and the joint resistance of the sib, naturally, was incomparably 
more efficacious than a strike by a freely formed trade union in 
the Occident. In this fact alone, "work discipline" and the free 
market selection of labor which have characterized modern large 
enterprise have been thwarted in China. And this has been true 
of all rational administration along occidental lines. The strongest 
counterweight to officials educated in literature was a-literate old 
age per se. No matter how many examinations the official had 
passed, he had to obey unconditionally the completely unedu-
cated sib elder in the traditionally fixed affairs of the sib. 
In practical terms, a con&iderable measure of usurped and con-
ceded self-government faced the patrimonial bureaucracy. On 
the one hand, there were the sibs and on the other hand, the 
organizations of the village poor. The rationalism of the bureauc-
racy was confronted with a resolute and traditionalistic power 
which, on the whole and in the long run, was stronger because 
it operated continuously and was supported by the most intimate 
personal associations. Moreover, any innovation could call forth 

» 96 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
magic evils. Above all, fiscal innovations were suspect and met 
with sharp resistance. No peasant would have chanced upon the 
idea of "disinterested" motives and in this he was quite similar 
to the Russian peasants in Tolstoy's Resurrection. Besides, the 
influence of the sib elders was mostly decisive for the acceptance 
or rejection of religious innovations, which is of special concern 
to us. Naturally, and almost without exception, their weight tipped 
the balance in favor of tradition, especially when they sniffed 
a threat to ancestral piety. This tremendous power of the strictly 
patriarchical sib was, in truth, the carrier of the much discussed 
"democracy" of China, which had nothing whatsoever in common 
with "modern" democracy. It was rather the expression first, of 
the abolition of feudal estates, second, of the extensiveness of 
patrimonial bureaucratic administration, aud third, of the un-
broken vigor and omnipotence of the patriarchical sibs. 
Economic organizations which went beyond the scope of the 
individual establishment rested almost wholly upon actual or 
imitated personal sib relationships. First we wish to consider 
the community of the tsung-tsu. This sib organization owned, in 
addition to the ancestral temple and the school building, sib 
houses for provisions and implements for the processing of rice, 
for the preparation of conserves, for weaving, and other domestic 
industries. Possibly a manager was employed. Apart from that, 
the tsung-tsu supported its members in need through mutual aid 
and free or cheap credit. Thus, it amounted to a sib and cumula-
tive household community which had been expanded into a pro-
ducers' cooperative. 
On the other hand, in the cities there were, besides the shops 
of individual artisans, specific entrepreneurial communities. 
Small-capitalist in nature, these were organized as communal 
workshops with an intensive division of manual labor. Further-
more, technical and commercial management were often special-
ized and profits were distributed partly according to capital shares 
and partly according to special commercial or technical services. 
Similar arrangements have been known in Hellenistic antiquity 

SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAW, AND CAPITALISM 
» 97 « 
and the Islamic Middle Ages. It seems that such establishments 
in China were found especially to facilitate joint sustaining of the 
slack period in seasonal industries and, of course, to facilitate 
credit and the specialization of productive work. 
These ways of establishing large economic units had, in their 
social aspects, a specifically democratic character. They pro-
tected the individual against the danger of proletarization and 
capitalist subjection. From a purely economic point of view, 
however, such domination could creep in through high invest-
ments by absentee capitalists and through the superior power 
and higher profit shares enjoyed by employed sales managers. 
The putting-out system, however, which introduced capitalist 
domination in the West, was apparently confined until the present 
to the various fonns of purely factual dependence of the artisan 
on the merchant. Only in individual trades did it advance to the 
level of domestic work with interspersed shops for finishing work 
and a central sales bureau. At present the putting-out system has 
developed on a significant scale in trades working for distant 
markets. As we have seen, it may well have been decisive that 
there was extremely little opportunity of coercing the services of 
dependent workers and getting them to deliver on time in pre-
scribed quantity and quality. Apparently, large private capitalist 
factories can scarcely be traced historically. Probably no factories 
producing mass consumer's goods existed since there was no 
steady market for them. Except for silk which could be marketed, 
the textile industry could hardly compete with the domestic 
industry even in distant places. Long-distance trade, however, 
was monopolized by the silk caravans of the imperial oikos. Metal 
industry, because of the low productivity of the mines, could 
develop only on a modest scale. This handicap resulted from 
the general conditions which we have discussed in part above 
and which will receive consideration in the passage below. In 
the processing of tea there are pictorial representations of large 
plants with specialization of labor. They are comparable to 
ancient Egyptian pictures. The state manufacturing establish-

THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
ments normally produced luxury goods, as in Islamic Egypt. The 
expansion of the state metal industry, for reasons of currency 
valuation, was only transitory. 
The guilds, discussed above, regulated a.pprenticeship, but 
there is no mention of journeymen associations. Only in in-
dividual cases did the workers combine against the masters in 
a strike; otherwise they had scarcely begun to develop into a class 
of their own, for reasons similar to those in Russia thirty years 
ago. As far as is known the workers were members of the guilds 
with equal rights. :More precisely, that the guild did not gener-
ally practice monopolistic exclusion of apprentices was in 
harmony with the handicraft nature of the trade which was 
not even petty capitalist. Similarly, the liturgical closure of oc-
cupations repeatedly emerged and for a time was apparently 
carried through. This might have led to caste formation, but 
never did. The Annals specifically mention an attempt of this 
nature which was made toward the end of the sixth century 
and ended in failure. A residue of magically "unclean" tribes 
and occupations had survived. Usually27 nine kinds of degraded 
"castes" were distinguished: certain kinds of slaves, descendants 
of certain slaves and coloni, beggars, descendants of former in-
surgents, descendants of immigrant barbarians (guest tribes), 
musicians and performers participating in family ceremonies, 
actors and jugglers as in the Middle Ages. As in India, patronage 
of the unclean occupations was of three types: fixed, hereditary, 
and alienable. Connubium, commensalism, and eligibility for 
degrees was denied. By imperial decree, however, those who left 
an unclean occupation could legally rehabilitate themselves by 
court action (for instance such decrees were made for some of 
these castes as late as 1894). Slavery originated after the wars 
of conquest through surrender or sale by parents, or as a f01m 
of punishment by the govenunent. As in the Occident, the freed 
man had to be obedient to his patron and was unable to acquire 
examination degrees. During their period of service contract 
laborers (ku kung) had to be obedient to their masters and were 
denied commensalism with them. The coloni and land laborers, 

SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAW, AND CAPITALISM 
» 99 « 
formerly helots of the ruling stratum, did not belong to this 
category. 
Whatever has survived of such caste-like phenomena is only 
a pitiful residue of the former status structure. Its principal 
consequence was that the privileged estates were exempted from 
corvee and corporal punishment (i.e., "the literati" and the 
"great families." The term "the hundred families," meaning the 
"empire," signified this latter stratum). Instead, corvee and cor-
poral punishment were transmuted into money fines and deten-
tion, and degradation to "plebeian" status was possible. At an 
~arly time, and for fiscal reasons, the old status structure based 
upon hereditary charisma was punctured by recurrent classifica-
tions solely according to property. 
Until recent times in China (for the past the outsider has no 
celiain evidence),28 club associations flourished (hui) alongside 
the sibs, the merchant and craftguilds. The club thrived in all 
spheres of life, especially in credit relations. 29 Details of this 
development shall not concern us here. In modern times, in 
equalitarian China just as in democratic America, the successful 
man has striven to legitimize himself socially by joining a highly 
esteemed club. Similarly in China, a guild membership card was 
affixed to the shop to guarantee quality products to buyers, or 
there was a corresponding announcement of the business principle 
of fixed prices, "one price," "truly one price."30 In contrast to the 
Puritans, however, strict adherence to the principle was not 
guaranteed. These phenomena resulted from the extensiveness of 
the patrimonial bureaucracy and the absence of a legally guaran-
teed status structure. 
In the modern period, apart from a titular nobility, no status 
differentiation by bilih has existed among the Chinese. This 
leaves aside the strict separation of the families registered in the 
Manchu army, the expression of a foreign rule which has existed 
since the seventeenth century. As early as the eighteenth century 
the "bourgeois" strata had succeeded in loosening the fetters of 
the police state. In the nineteenth century there was free resi-
dential mobility which had obviously existed for a long time. 

)) 100 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
Official edicts, however, did not recognize this. Freedom to settle 
and acquire land in a community other than one's native com-
munity had been imposed by taxation authorities, just as in the 
Occident. Since 1794, membership in a new community has been 
attained by acquiring real estate and paying taxes for twenty 
years, thereby forfeiting membership in one's native community.31 
For a long time there has been free choice of occupations, despite 
the Sacred Edict of 1671 which recommended adherence to one's 
occupation. In the modern period we find neither compulsory 
passport, schooling, nor military service. There are neither laws 
restraining usury nor any similar legal restrictions to trade. 
Though this state of affairs would seem to be very favorable to 
the free development of profitable, bourgeois enterprise, a bour-
geois sb·atum of occidental character has failed to develop. As 
we noted, not even those forms of capitalist enterprise which 
were known in the Occident during the I\Hddle Ages have fully 
matured. Again there is the old question that, from a purely eco-
nomic point of view, a genuine bourgeois, industrial capitalism 
might have developed from the petty· capitalist beginnings we 
have mentioned above. A number of reasons-mostly related to 
the stmcture of the state-can be seen for the fact that capitalism 
failed to develop. 
6. The Patrimonial Structure 
of Law 
IN THE patrimonial state, the typical ramifications of administra-
tion and judiciary created a realm of unshakable sacred tradition 
alongside a realm of prerogative and favoritism. Especially sen-
sitive to these political factors, industrial capitalism was impeded 
by them in its development. Rational and calculable administra-
tion and law enforcement, necessary for industrial development, 
did not exist. Be it China, India, or Islam, in general, wherever 
rational enachnent and adjudication of law had not triumphed, 
the dictum was: Prerogatives have precedence over common law. 
(WiUkii.r bricht Landrecht). However, this dictum could not bene-

SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAW, AND CAPITALISM 
» 101 « 
fit the development of capitalist legal institutions as it had done 
in the occidental Middle Ages. On the one hand, the cities lacked 
corporate political autonomy and on the other, decisive legal 
institutions, fixed and guaranteed by privilege, did not exist. Yet 
it was exactly by aid of these combined principles that all the 
legal schemata appropriate to capitalism were created in the occi-
dental Middle Ages. 
To a large extent the law was no longer a norm valid from 
the remote past and justice was no longer "found" by magical 
means alone. For imperial administration of the occidental Middle 
Ages enacted statutes en masse, and the legal provisions were 
distinguished, at least technically, by their relatively brief and 
business-like form. Criminal law, as J. F. Kohler has emphasized, 
knew a considerable sublimation of legal facts and took motives 
into consideration. 
This contrasted to the patriarchical instructions and admoni-
tions of the Buddhist monarchs of India whose ethical and ad-
ministrative decrees resembled some of the Chinese statutes. The 
Chinese statutes were also systematically collected in the Ta 
Citing l .. Ai Li. But there were few and only indirectly pertinent 
legal acts covering subject matter most important for commerce 
in our sense. No "fundamental freedoms of the individual" were 
guaranteed. In one case among the Warring States (the state of 
Ch' en, 563 A.D.), the rationalism of the literati officials found ex-
pression in a codification of the laws engraved on metal plates. 
But according to the Annals,32 when the question was discussed 
among the stratum of literati a minister of the state of Ch'in suc-
cessfully objected: "If the people can re.ad, they will despise their 
superiors." The charismatic prestige of the educated patrimonial ' 
bureaucracy seemed endangered and these power interests never 
again allowed such an idea to emerge. 
Though formally under separate secretaries for taxation and 
for justice, administration and law were not actually separated. 
The mandarin official, in patrimonial fashion, hired domestic 
servants at his own expense for both police work and minor 
office duties. The basically anti-formalist and patriarchical 

» 102 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
character of mandarin administration is unmistakable-offensive 
deportment was punished even without specific provisions. Most 
significant was the intrinsic character of adjudication. Patri-
monialism, being ethically oriented, always sought subrtantive 
justice rather than formal law. Hence, in spite of the tradi-
tionalism, there was no official collection of precedents • 'Cause 
legal formalism was reject(:;d and, above all, because there was 
no central court as in England. The local "shepherd" of the official 
knew the precedents. In following tried models, as advised, the 
judicial procedure of the Chinese official corresponded externally 
to the use of "similia" among our junior judges. What is im-
potence in the latter case was extreme virtue in China. 
For the most part, the administrative edicts of the Emperor 
were couched in the pedagogical form peculiar to papal bulls 
of the Middle Ages but without a similarly precise legal content. 
The best known statutes codified ethical rather than legal norms 
and excelled in literary erudition. For example even the second 
last Emperor announced in the Peking Gazette that the decree 
of a remote ancestor had been found and would be published in 
the near future as a code of conduct. Insofar as it was oriented to 
orthodoxy the whole imperial administration was controlled by 
an essentially theocratic board of literati. This was the oft-
mentioned "Academy" (Hanlin Yiian) which safeguarded Con-
fucian orthodoxy and perhaps corresponded to a congregation 
of the papal Curia. Accordingly, legal administration remained 
largely "Cadi" and possibly "Cabinet justice."33 
This was also the case of the judicial relation between English 
sheriffs and the lower classes. But in England in order to transact 
the fortunes important for capitalism there was the law of prece-
dent with its corresponding bailing justice. It had been created 
under the steady influence of the interested parties whose in-
:8.uence was guaranteed through the recruitment of judges from 
among lawyers. While not rational this law was calculable, and 
it made extensive contractual autonomy possible. 
However, in patriarchal Chinese justice, the advocate, in the 
occidental sense, was singularly out of place. Sib members, pos-

SELF-GOVERNMENT, LAW, AND CAPITALISM 
» 103 « 
sibly educated in literature, functioned as lawyers for their kin. 
Othervvise a "low brow" consultant made out written documents. 
This phenomenon was characteristic of all specifically patrimonial 
states, particularly theocratic and ethico-ritualistic states of 
oriental stamp. That is, in addition to non-capitalistic sources of 
accumulated wealth, such as the pure political office and tax 
prebend, a political capitalism of purveyors to the state and tax 
farmers flourished. Under certain conditions this capitalism had 
true orgies. Furthermore, the purely commercial capitalism of 
middlemen developed. 
However, the rational industrial capitalism which is specific 
for modern development originated nowhere under tbis regime. 
Capital investment in industry is far too sensitive to such irra-
tional rule and too dependent upon the possibility of calculating 
the steady and rational operation of the state machinery to emerge 
under an administration of this type. But why did this administra-
tion and judiciary remain so irrational from a capitalist point of 
view? That is the decisive question. We have become acquainted 
with some of the interests which played a part, but they deserve 
closer attention. 
Just as capitalism lacked a judiciary independent of substantive 
individualization and arbitrariness, so it lacked political prerequi-
sites. To be sure, the feud was not lacking. On the contrary, the 
whole of Chinese history is replete with great and small fP-uds, 
including the numerous struggles of individual villages, associa-
tions, and sibs. Since the pacification of the world empire, how-
ever, there has been no rational warfare, and what is more 
important, no armed peace during which several competing auton-
omous states constantly prepare for war. Capitalist phenomena 
thus conditioned through war loans and commissions for war 
purposes did not appear. 
The particularized state authorities of the Occident had to 
compete for freely mobile capital in Antiquity (before the World 
Empire) as well as during the Middle Ages and modem times. 
As in the Roman Empire, political competition for capital dis-
appeared following the unification of the Chinese Empire.84 The 

)) 104 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
Chinese Empire also lacked overseas and colonial relations and 
this handicapped the development of those types of capitalism 
common to occidental Antiquity, the :tvHddlc Ages, and modern 
times. These were the varieties of booty capitalism, represented 
by colonial capitalism and by Mediterranean overseas capitalism 
connected with piracy. \Vhile the barriers to overseas expansion 
partly depended on the geographical conditions of a great inland 
empire, in part, as we have seen, they resulted from the general 
political and economic character of Chinese society. 
Rational entrepreneurial capitalism, which in the Occident 
found its specific locus in industry, has been handicapped not 
only by the lack of a fonnally guaranteed law, a rational ad-
ministration and judiciary, and by the ramifications of a system of 
prebends, but also, basically, by the lack of a particular mentality. 
Above all it has been handicapped by the attitude rooted in the 
Chinese "ethos" and peculiar to a stratum of officials and aspir-
ants to office. This brings us to our central theme. 

PART II 
ORTHODOXY 


CHAPTER V 
THE LITERATI" 
E 
twelve centuries social mnk io Chioa has been deter-
mined more by qualification for office than by wealth. This 
qualification, in tum, has been determined by education, and 
especially by examinations. China has made literary education 
the yardstick of social prestige in the most exclusive fashion, far 
more exclusively than did Europe during the period of the 
humanists, or as Germany has done. Even during the period of 
the Warring States, the stratum of aspirants for office who were 
educated in literature-and originally this only meant that they 
had a scriptural knowledge-extended through all the individual 
states. Literati have been the bearers of progress toward a rational 
administration and of all "intelligence." 
As with Brahmanism in India, in China the literati have been 
the decisive exponents of the unity of culture. Territories (as 
well as enclaves) not administered by officials educated in 
literahtre, according to the model of the orthodox state idea, 
were considered heterodox and barbarian, in the same way as 
were the tribal territories that were within the territory of Hin-
duism but not regulated by the Brahmans, as well as landscapes 
not organized as polis by the Greeks. The increasingly bureau-
• "The Chinese Literati" reprinted by permission of Hans H. Gerth and 
C. Wright Mill~ and Oxford University Press from From Max Weber: Essays 
in Sociology. Copyright 1946 by Oxford University Press, Inc . 
• 107 c 

» 108 « 
THE HELIGION OF CHINA 
cratic structure of Chinese polities and of their carriers has 
given to the whole literary tradition of China its characteristic 
stamp. For more than two thousand years the literati have defi-
nitely been the ruling stratum in China and they still are. Their 
dominance has been interrupted; often it has been hotly con-
tested; but always it has been renewed and expanded. According 
to the Annals, the Emperor addressed the literati, and them alone, 
as "My lords"1 for tl1e first time in 1496. 
It has been of immeasurable importance for the way in which 
Chinese culture has developed that this leading stratum of in-
tellectuals has never had the character of the clerics of Chris-
tianity or of Islam, or of Jewish Rabbis, or Indian Brahmans, or 
Ancient Egyptian priests, or Egyptian or Indian scribes. It is sig-
nificant that the stratum of literati in China, although developed 
from ritual training, grew out of an education for genteel laymen. 
The '1iterati" of the feudal period, then officially called po-shih, 
that is, "living libraries," were first of all proficient in ritualism. 
They did not, however, stem from the sibs of a priestly nobility, 
as did the Rishi sibs of tl1e Rig-Veda, or from a guild of sorcer-
ers, as did in all likelihood the Brahmans of the Atharva-Veda. 
In China, the literati go back, at least in the main, to the 
descendants, probably the younger sons, of feudal families who 
had acquired a literary education, especially the knowledge of 
writing, and whose social position rested upon this knowledge 
of writing and of literature. A plebeian could also acquire a knowl-
edge of writing, although, considering the Chinese system of 
writing, it was difficult. But if the plebeian succeeded, he shared 
the prestige of any other scholar. Even in the feudal period, 
the stratum of literati was not hereditary or exclusive-another 
contrast with the Brahmans. 
Until late historical times, Vedic education rested upon oral 
transmissions; it abhorred the fixing of tradition in writing, an 
abhorrence which all guilds of organized professional magicians 
are apt to share. In contrast to this, in China the writing of 
the ritual books, of the calendar, and of the Annals go back to 
prehistoric times.2 Even in the oldest tradition the ancient scrip-

THE LITERATI 
» 109 « 
tures were considered magical objects,3 and the men conversant 
with them were considered holders of a magical charisma. As we 
shall see, these have been persistent facts in China. The prestige 
of the literati has not consisted in a charisma of magical powers 
of sorcery, but rather in a knowledge of writing and of literahJ.re 
as such; perhaps their prestige originally rested in addition upon 
a knowledge of astrology. But it has not been their task to aid 
private persons through sorcery, to heal the sick, for instance, 
as the magician does. For such purposes there were special pro-
fessions, which we shall discuss later. Certainly the significance 
of magic in China, as everywhere, was a self-understood pre-
supposition. Yet, so far as the interests of the community were 
concerned, it was up to its representatives to influence the spirits. 
The emperor as the supreme pontifex, as well as the princes, 
functioned for the political community. And for the family, the 
head of the sib and the housefather influenced the spirits. The 
fate of the community, above all of the harvest, has been in-
fluenced since olden times by rational means, that is, by water 
regulation; and therefore the correct "order" of administration 
has always been the basic means of influencing the world of 
the spirits. 
Apart from knowledge of scriptures as a means of discerning 
tradition, a knowledge of the calendar and of the stars was re-
quired for discerning the heavenly will and, above all, for know-
ing the dies fasti and nefa.ni, and it seems that the position of the 
literati has also evolved from the dignified role of the court 
astrologer.4 The scribes, and they alone, could recognize this im-
portant order ritually (and originally probably also by means of 
horoscopes) and accordingly advise the appropriate political 
authorities. An anecdote of the Annals5 shows the results in a 
striking manner. 
In the feudal state of the Wei, a proved general-Wu Ch'i, the 
alleged author of the textbook in ritually correct strategy which 
was auth01itative until our time-and a literary man competed 
for the position of first minister. A violent dispute arose between 
the two after the literary man had been appointed to the post. He 

» 110 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
readily admitted that he could neither conduct wars nor master 
similar political tasks in the manner of the general. But when 
the general thereupon declared himself to be the better man, the 
literary man remarked that a revolution threatened the dynasty, 
whereupon the general admitted without any hesitation that the 
literary man was the better man to prevent it. 
Only the adept of scriptures and of tradition has been con-
sidered competent for conectly ordering the internal administra-
tion and the charismatically conect life conduct of the prince, 
ritually and politically. In sharpest contrast to the Jewish 
prophets, who were essentially interested in foreign policy, the 
Chinese literati-politicians, trained in ritual, were primarily 
oriented toward problems of internal administration, even if 
these problems involved absolute power politics, and even though 
while in charge of the prince's correspondence and of the chan-
cellery they might personally be deeply involved in the guidance 
of diplomacy. 
This constant orientation toward problems of the "correct" 
administration of the state determined a far-reaching, practical, 
and political rationalism among the intellectual stratum of the 
feudal period. In contrast to the strict traditionalism of the later 
period, the Annals occasionally reveal the literati to be audacious 
political innovators.6 Their pride in education knew no limit,7 
and the princes-at least according to the lay-out of the Annals 
-paid them great dcfcrencc.x Their intimate relations to the 
service of patrimonial princes existed from ancient times and· has 
been decisive for the peculiar character of the literati. 
The origin of the literati is veiled from us in darkness. Appar-
ently they were the Chinese a-ugurs. The pontifical cesaro-papist 
character of the imperial power has been decisive for their posi-
tion, and the character of Chinese literature has also been deter-
mined by it. There were official Annals, magically proved hymns 
of war and sacrifice, calendars, as well as books of rihial and 
ceremony. \Vith their knowledge the literati supported the 
character of the state, which was in the nature of an ecclesiastic 

THE LITERATI 
)) 111 « 
and compulsory institution; they took the state for granted as 
an axiomatic presupposition. 
In their literature, the literati created the concept of "office," 
above all, the ethos of "official duty" and of the "public weal."0 
If one may trust the Annals, the literati, being adherents of the 
bureaucratic organization of the state as a compulsory institution, 
were opponents of feudalism from the very beginning. This is 
quite understandable because, from the standpoint of their in-
terests, the administrators should be only men who were per-
sonally qualified by a litera1y education.10 On the other hand, 
they claimed for themselves to have shown the princes the way 
toward autonomous administration, toward government manu-
facture of arms and construction of fortifications, ways and means 
by which the princes became "masters of their lands."11 
This dose relation of the literati to princely service came about 
during the struggle of the prince with the feudal powers. It dis-
tinguishes the Chinese literati from the educated laymen of Hel-
las, as well as from those of Ancient India (Kshatriya). It makes 
them similar to the Brahmans, from whom, however, they differ 
greatly in their ritualist subordination under a cesaro-papist 
pontifex. In addition, no caste order has existed in China, a fact 
intimately connected with the literary education and the sub-
ordination under a pontifex. 
The relation of the literati to the office has changed its nature 
[in the course of time]. During the period of the feudal states, 
the various courts competed for the services of the literati, who 
were seeking opportunities for power and, we must not forget, for 
the best chances for incomeP A whole stratum of vagrant 
"sophists" (che-she) emerged, comparable to the wayfaring 
knights and scholars of the occidental J\.Jiddle Ages. As we shall 
later see, there were also Chinese literati who, in principle, re-
mained unattached to any office. This free and mobile stratum 
of literati were carriers of philosophical schools and antagonisms, 
a situation comparable to those of India, of Hellenic Antiquity, 
and of the Middle Ages with its monks and scholars. Yet, the 

)) 112 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
literati as such felt thetnselves to be a unitary status group. They 
claimed common status honors13 and were united in the feeling 
of being the sole bearers of the homogeneous culture of China. 
The relation of the Chinese literati to princely service as the 
nom1al source of income differentiated them as a status group 
from the philosophers of Antiquity and from at least the edu-
cated laymen of India, who, in the main, were socially anchored 
in fields remote from any office. As a rule, the Chinese literati 
strove for princely service both as a source of income and as a 
nonnal field of activity. Confucius, like Lao-tzu, was an official 
before he lived as a teacher and writer without attachment to 
office. We shall see that this relation to state-office (or office in 
a "church state") was of fundamental importance for the nature 
of the mentality of this stratum. For this orientation became in-
creasingly important and exclusive. The opportunities of the 
princes to compete for the literati ceased to exist in the unified 
empire. The literati and their disciples then came to compete for 
the existing offices, and this development could not fail to result 
in a unified orthodox doctrine adjusted to the situation. This 
doctrine was to be Confucianism. 
As Chinese prebendalism grew, the originally free mental 
mobility of the literati came to a halt. This development was 
fully underway even at the time when the Annals and most of 
the systematic writings of the literati originated and when the 
sacred books, which Shih Huang Ti had destroyed, were "redis-
covered."14 They were "rediscovered" in order that they might 
be revised, retouched, and interpreted by the literati and there-
with gain canonical value. 
It is evident from the Annals that this whole development came 
about with the pacification of the empire, or rather that it was 
pushed to its conclusions during this period. Everywhere war has 
been the business of youth, and the sentence sexagenarios de 
ponte has been a slogan of warriors directed against the "senate." 
The Chinese literati, however, were the "old men," or they rep-
resented the old men. The Annals, as a paradigmatic public 
confession of the prince :rvlu Kung (of Ch'in), transmitted the 

THE LITERATI 
)) 113 « 
idea that the prince had sinned by having listened to "youth" 
(the warriors) and not to the "elders," who, although having 
no strength, did have experience.15 In fact, this was the decisive 
point in the turn toward pacifism and therewith toward tradi-
tionalism. Tradition displaced charisma. 
1. C onfuciu.-; 
EVEN the oldest sections of the classic writings connected with 
the name of K'ung-tzu, that is, with Confucius as editor, permit 
us to recognize the conditions of charismatic warrior kings. (Con-
fucius died in the year 478 B.c.) The heroic songs of the hymn-
book (Shih Ching) tell of kings fighting from war chariots, as do 
the Hellenic and Indian epics. But considering their character as a 
whole, even these songs are no longer heralds of individual, and 
in general, purely human heroism, as are the Homeric and 
Germanic epics. Even when the Shih Ching was edited, the king's 
army had nothing of the romance of the warrior followings or 
the Homeric adventures. The army already had the character of 
a disciplined bureaucracy, and above all it had "officers." The 
kings, even in the Shih Ching, no longer win simply because they 
are the greater heroes. And that is decisive for the spirit of the 
army. They win because before the Spirit of Heaven they are 
morally right and because their charismatic virtues are superior, 
whereas their enemies are godless criminals who, by oppression 
and trespass upon the ancient customs, have wronged their sub-
jects' weal and thus have foregone their charisma. Victory is the 
occasion for moralizing reflections rather than heroic joy. In 
contrast to the sacred scriptures of almost all other ethics, one is 
struck at once by the lack of any "shocking" expression, of any 
even conceivably "indecent" image. Obviously, a very systematic 
expurgation has taken place here, and this may well have been the 
specific contribution of Confucius. 
The pragmatic transformation of the ancient tradition in the 
Annals, produced by official historiography and by the literati, ob-
viously went beyond the priestly paradigms performed in the Old 

» 114 ({ 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
Testament, for example, in the Book of Judges. The chronicle 
expressly ascribed to Confucius' authorship contains the driest 
and most sober enumeration of military campaigns and punitive 
expeditions against rebels; in this respect it is comparable to the 
hieroglyphic protocols of Assyria. If Confucius really expressed 
the opinion that his character could be recognized with special 
clarity from tlus work-as tradition maintains-then one would 
have to endorse the view of those (Chinese and European) schol-
ars who interpret this to mean that his characteristic achievement 
was this systematic and pragmatic correction of facts from the 
point of view of "propriety." His work must have appeared in this 
light to his contemporaries, but for us its pragmatic meaning, in 
the main, has become opaque.16 
The princes and ministers of the classics act and speak like 
paradigms of rulers whose ethical conduct is rewarded by Heaven. 
Officialdom and the promotion of officials according to merit are 
topics for glorification. The princely realms are still ruled heredi-
tarily; some of the local offices are hereditary fiefs; but the classics 
view this system skeptically, at least the hereditary offices. Ulti-
mately they consider this system to be merely provisional. In 
theory, this pertains even to the hereditary nature of the dignity 
of the emperor. The ideal and legendary Emperors (Yao and 
Shun) designate their successors (Shun and Yii) without regard 
to birth, from the circle of their ministers and over the heads of 
their own sons, solely according to their personal charisma as 
certified by the highest court officials. The emperors designate 
their ministers in the same way, and only the third Emperor, Yii, 
does not name his first minister ( Yi) but his son ( Ch'i) to become 
his successor. 
In contrast with the old and genuine documents and monu-
ments, one looks in vain for genuinely heroic minds in most of the 
classic writings. The traditional view held by Confucius is that 
caution is the better part of valor and that it ill behooves the wise 
man to risk his own life inappropriately. The profound pacification 
of the country, especially after the rule of the Mongols, greatly 
enhanced this mood. The empire became an empire of peace. 

THE LITERATI 
» 115 « 
According to Mencius, there were no "just" wars within the fron-
tiers of the empire, as it was considered as one unit. Compared 
to the size of the empire, the am1y had finally become very tiny. 
After having separated the training of the literati from that of the 
knights, the emperors retained sport and literary contests and gave 
military certificates17 in addition to the state examinations of the 
literati. Yet for a long time the attainment of such military certifi-
cates had hardly any connection with an actual career in the 
anny.18 And the fact remained that the military were just as 
despised in China as they were iri England for two hundred years, 
and that a cultivated literary man would not engage in social 
intercourse on an equal footing with army officers.19 
2. The Development of the Examination System 
DURING the period of the central monarchy, the mandarins be-
came a status group of certified claimants to office prebends. All 
categories of Chinese civil servants were recruited from their 
midst, and their qualification for office and rank depended upon 
the number of examinations they had successfully pas~ed. 
These examinations consisted of three major degrees,20 which 
were considerably augmented by intermediary, repetitive, and 
preliminary examinations as well as by numerous special condi-
tions. For the first degree alone there were ten types of examina-
tions. The question usually put to a stranger of unknown rank was 
how many examinations he had passed. Thus, in spite of the an-
cestor cult, how many ancestors one had was not decisive for 
social rank. The very reverse held: it depended upon one's official 
rank whether one was allowed to have an ancestral temple (or a 
mere table of ancestors, which was the case with illiterates) . How 
many ancestors one was permitted to mention was determined by 
official rank. 21 Even the rank of a city god in the Pantheon de-
pended upon the rank of the city's mandarin. 
In the Confucian period (sixth to fifth century B.c.), the possi-
bility of ascent into official positions as well as the system of ex-
aminations was still unknown. It appears that as a rule, at least 

» 116 « 
THE RELIGION OI•' CHINA 
in the feudal states, the "great families" were in the possession of 
power. It was not until the Han dynasty-which was established 
by a parvenu-that the bestowal of offices according to merit was 
raised to the level of a principle. And not until the T'ang dynasty, 
in 690 A.D., were regulations set up for the highest degree. As we 
have already mentioned, it is highly probable that literary educa-
tion, perhaps with a few exceptions, was at first actually, and 
perhaps also legally, monopolized by the "great families," just as 
the Vedic education in India was monopolized. Vestiges of this 
continued to the end. Members of the imperial sib, although not 
freed from all examinations, were freed from the examination for 
the first degree. And the trustees, whom every candidate for ex-
aminations, until recently, had to name, had to testify to the can-
didate's "good family background." During modem times this 
testimony bas only meant the exclusion of descendants of barbers, 
bailiffs, musicians, janitors, carriers, and others. Yet alongside this 
exclusion there was the institution of "candidates for the man-
darinate," that is, the descendants of mandarins enjoyed a special 
and preferred position in fixing the maximum quota of examina-
tion candidates from each province. The promotion lists used the 
official formula "from a mandarin family and from the people." 
The sons of well-deserved officials held the lowest degree as a title 
of honor. All of which represent residues of ancient conditions. 
The examination system has been fully carried through since 
the end of the seventh century. This system was one of the means 
the patrimonial ruler used in preventing the formation of a closed 
estate, which, in the manner of feudal vassals and office nobles, 
would have monopolized the rights to the office prebends. The 
first traces of the examination system seem to emerge about the 
time of Confucius (and Huang K'an) in the sub-state of Ch'in, a 
locality which later became autocratic. The selection of candidates 
was determined essentially by military merit. Yet, even the Li Chi 
and the Chou Li22 demand, in a quite rationalist way, that the dis-
trict chiefs examine their lower officials periodically with regard 
to their morals, and then propose to the emperor which of them 
should be promoted. In the unified state of the Han Emperors, 

TilE LITEHA TI 
» 117 (( 
pacifism began to direct the selection of officials. The power of the 
literati was tremendously consolidated after they had succeeded 
in elevating the couect Kuang Wu to the throne in 21 A.D. and in 
maintaining him against the popular "usurper" Wang f\1ang. Dur-
ing the struggle for prebends, which raged during the following 
period and which we shall deal with later, the literati developed 
into a unified status group. 
Even today the T'ang dynasty irradiates the glory of having 
been the actual creator of China's greatness and culture. The 
T'ang dynasty, for the first time, regulated the literati's position 
and established colleges for their education (in the seventh cen-
tury). It also created the I-I an lin Y iian, the so-called "academy," 
which first edited the Annals in order to gain precedents, and 
then controlled the emperor's correct deportment. Finally, after 
the Mongol storms, the national Ming dynasty in the fourteenth 
century decreed statutes which, in essence, were definitive.23 
S€hools were to be set up in every village, one for every twenty-
five families. As the schools were not subsidized, the decree re-
mained a dead letter-or rather we have already seen which pow-
ers gained control over the schools. Officials selected the best 
pupils and enrolled a certain number in the colleges. In the main, 
these colleges have decayed, although in part they have been 
newly founded. In 1382, prebends in the form of rice rents were 
set aside for the "students." In 1393, the number of students was 
fixed. After 1370, only examined men had claims to offices. 
At once a fight set in behveen the various regions, especially 
between the North and the South. The South even then supplied 
candidates for examinations who were more cultured, having ex-
perienced a more comprehensive environment. But the l\'orth was 
the military foundation stone of the empire. Hence, the emperor 
intervened and punished (!) the examiners who had given the 
"first place" to a Southerner. Separate lists for the North and the 
South were set up, and moreover, a struggle for the patronage of 
offices began immediately. Even in 1387 special examinations were 
given to officers' sons. The officers and officials, however, went 
further, and demanded the right to designate their successors,. 

)) 118 ({ 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
which meant a demand for re-feudalization. In 1393 this was con-
ceded, but in the end only in a modified fonn. The candidates 
presented were preferentially enrolled in the colleges, and pre-
bends were to be reserved for them: in 1465 for three sons, in 
1482 for one son. In 1453 we meet with the purchase of college 
places, and in 1454 with the purchase of offices. During the fif-
teenth century, as is always the case, these developments arose 
from the need for military funds. In 1492 these measures were 
abolished, but in 1529 they were reintroduced. 
The departments also fought against one another. The Board 
of Rites was in charge of the examinations after 736, but the 
Board of Civil Office appointed the officials. The examined candi-
dates were not infrequently boycotted by the latter department, 
the former answering by going on strike during the examinations. 
Formally, the minister of rites, actually, the minister of offices (the 
major-domo) were in the end the most powerful men in China. 
Then merchants, who were expected to be less "stingy," came into 
office.24 Of course, this hope was quite unjustified. The Manchus 
favored the old traditions and thus the literati and, as far as possi-
ble, "purity" in the distribution of offices. But now, as before, 
three routes to office existed side by side: ( 1) imperial favors for 
the sons of the "princely" families (examination privileges) ; (2) 
easy examinations (officially every three to six years) for the 
lower officials by the higher officials who controlled patronage; 
tltis inevitably led each time to advancement also to higher posi-
tions; ( 3) the only legal way: to qualify effectively and purely by 
examination. 
In the main, the system of examinations has actually fulfilled 
the functions as conceived by the emperor. Occasionally (in 
1372), it was suggested to the emperor-one can imagine by whom 
-that he draw the conclusion from the orthodox charisma of 
virtues by abolishing the examinations, since virtue alone legiti-
mizes and qualifies. This conclusion was soon dropped, which is 
quite understandable. For after all, both parties, emperor and 
graduates, had a stake in the examination system, or at least they 
thought they had. From the emperor's standpoint, the examination 

THE LITERATI 
» 119 (( 
system corresponded entirely to the role which the m;estnit-
shestvo, a technically heterogeneous means, of Russian despotism 
played for the Russian nobility. The system facilitated a com-
petitive struggle for prebends and offices among the candidates, 
which stopped them from joining together into a feudal office 
nobility. Admittance to the ranks of aspirants was open to every-
body who was proved to be educationally qualified. The examina-
tion system thus fulfilled its purpose. 
3. The Typological Position of 
Confucian Education 
WE SHALL now discuss the position of this educational system 
among the great types of education. To be sure, we cannot hera, 
in passing, give a sociological typology of pedagogical ends and 
means, but perhaps some comments may be in place. 
Historically, the two polar opposites in the field of educational 
ends .are: to awaken charisma, that is, heroic qualities or magical 
gifts; and, to impart specialized expert training. The first type 
corresponds .to the charismatic structure of domir:ation; the latter 
type corresponds to the rational and bureaucratic (modern ) stn1C-
ture of domination. The two types do not stand opposed, with no 
connections or transitions between them. The warrior hero or the 
magician also needs special training, and the expert official is 
generally not trained exclusively for knowledge. However, they 
are polar opposites of types of education and they form the most 
radical contrasts. Between them are found all those types which 
aim at cultivating the pupil for a conduct of life, whether it is of 
a mundane or of a religious character. In either case, the life con-
duct is the conduct of a status group. 
The charismatic procedure of ancient magical asceticism and 
the hero trials, which sorcerers and warrior heroes have applied 
to boys, tried to aid the novice to acquire a "new soul," in the 
animist sense, and hence, to be reborn. Expressed in our language, 
this means that they merely wished to awaken and to test a 
capacity which was considered a purely personal gift of grace. 

» 120 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
For one can neither teach nor train for charisma. Either it exists 
in nuce, or it is infiltrated through a miracle of magical rebirth-
otherwise it cannot be attained. 
Specialized and expert schooling attempts to train the pupil for 
practical usefulness for administrative purposes-in the organiza-
tion of public authorities, business offices, workshops, scientific or 
industrial laboratories, disciplined armies. In principle, this can 
be accomplished with anybody, though to varying extent. 
The pedagogy of cultivation, finally, attempts to educate a culti-
vated type of man, whose nature depends on the decisive stratum's 
respective ideal of cultivation. And this means to educate a man 
for a certain internal ~nd external deportment in life. In principle 
this can be done with everybody, only the goal differs. If a sepa-
rate stratum of warriors form the decisive status group-as in 
Japan-education will aim at making the pupil a stylized knight 
and courtier, who despises the pen-pushers as the Japanese 
Samurai have despised them. In particular cases, the stratum may 
display great variations of type. If a priestly stratum is decisive, 
it will aim at making the disciple a scribe, or at least an intellec-
tual, likewise of greatly varying character. In reality, none of these 
types ever occurs in pure form. The numerous combinations and 
intermedia1y links cannot be discussed in this context. What is 
important here is to define the position of Chinese education in 
terms of these forms. 
The holdovers of the prinleval charismatic training for regen-
eration, the milk name, the previously discussed initiation rites of 
youth, the bridegroom's change of name, and so on, have for a 
long time in China been a formula (in the manner of the Protes-
tant confirmation) standing beside the testing of educational 
qualifications. Such tests have been monopolized by the political 
authorities. The educational qualification, however, in view of the 
educational means employed, has been a "cultural" qualification, 
in the sense of a general education. It was of a similar, yet of a 
more specific nature than, for instance, the humanist educational 
qualification of the Occident. 
In Germany, such an education, until recently and almost ex-

THE LITERA Tl 
» 121 « 
elusively, was a prerequisite for the official career leading to posi-
tions of command in civil and military administration. At the same 
time this humanist education has stamped the pupils who were to 
be prepared for such careers as belonging socially to the cultured 
status group. In Germany, however-and this is a very important 
difference between China and the Occident-rational and special-
ized expert training has been added to, and in part has displaced, 
this educational status qualification. 
The Chinese examinations did not test any special skills, as do 
our modem national and bureaucratic examination regulations 
for jurists, medical doctors, or technicians. Nor did the Chinese 
examinations test the possession of charisma, as do the typical 
"trials" of magicians and bachelor leagues. To be sure, we shall 
presently see the qualifications which this statement requires. Yet 
it holds at least for the technique of the examinations. 
The examinations of China tested whether or not the candi-
date's mind was thoroughly steeped in literature and whether or 
not he possessed the ways of thought suitable to a cultured man 
and resulting from cultivation in literature. These qualifications 
held far more specifically with China than with the German 
humanist gymnasium. Today one is used to justifying the gym-
nasium by pointing to the practical value of formal education 
through the study of Antiquity. As far as one may judge from the 
assignments25 given to the pupils of the lower grades in China, 
they were rather similar to the essay topics assigned to the top 
grades of a German gymnasium, or perhaps better still, to the 
select class of a German girls' college. All the grades were in-
tended as tests in penmanship, style, mastery of classic writings,26 
and finally-similar to our lessons in religion, history, and German 
-in conformity with the prescribed mental outlook.27 In our con-
text it is decisive that this education was on the one hand purely 
secular in nature, but, on the other, was bound to the fixed norm 
of the orthodox interpretation of the classic authors. It was a 
highly exclusive and bookish literary education. 
The literary character of education in India, Judaism, Chris-
tianity, and Islam resulted from the fact that it was completely in 

)) 122 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
the hands of Brahmans and Rabbis trained in literature, or of 
clerics and monks of book religions who were professionally 
trained in literature. As long as education was Hellenic and not 
"Hellenist," the Hellenic man of culture was and remained pri-
marily ephebe and hoplite. The effect of this was nowhere thrown 
into relief more clearly than in the conversation of the Symposium, 
where it is said of Plato's Socrates that he had never "flinched" in 
the field, to use a student term. For Plato to state this is obviously 
at least of equal importance \vith everything else he makes 
Alcibiades say. 
During the Middle Ages, the military education of the knight, 
and later the genteel education of the Renaissance salon, provided 
a corresponding though socially different supplement to the edu-
cation transmitted by books, priests, and monks. In Judaism and 
in China, such a counterbalance was, in part altogether, and in 
part ~s good as altogether, abseut. In India, as in China, the lit-
erary means of education consisted substantially of hymns, epic 
tales, and casuistry in ritual and ceremony. In India, however, 
this was underpinned by cosmogonic as well as religious and 
philosophical speculations. Such speculations were not entirely 
absent from the classics and from the transmitted commentaries 
in China, but obviously they have always played only a very minor 
role there. The Chinese authors developed rational systems of 
social ethics. The educated stratum of China simply has never 
been an autonomous status group of scholars, as were the Brah-
mans, but rather a stratum of officials and aspirants to office. 
Higher education in China has not always had the character it 
has today. The public educational institutions (Pan kung) of the 
feudal princes taught the arts of the dance and of arms in addition 
to the knowledge of rites and literature. Only the pacification of 
the empire into a patrimonial and unified state, and finally, the 
pure system of examinations for office, transfonned this older 
education, which was far closer to early Hellenic education, into 
what has existed into the twentieth century. Medieval education, 
as represented in the authoritative and orthodox Hsiao Hsiieh, 
that is "schoolbook," still placed considerable weight upon dance 

THE LITERATI 
)) 123 « 
and music. To be sure, the old war dance seems to have existed 
only in rudimentary form, but for the rest, the children, according 
to age groups, learned certain dances. The purpose of this was 
stated to be the taming of evil passions. If a child did not do well 
during his instruction, one should let him dance and sing. Music 
improves man, and rites and music form the basis of self-control.28 
The magical significance of music was a primary aspect of all 
this. "Correct music"-that is, music used according to the old 
mles and strictly following the old measures-"keeps the spirits 
in their fetters."29 As late as the Middle Ages, archery and char-
ioteering were still considered general educational subjects for 
genteel children.30 But this was essentially mere theory. Going 
through the schoolbook one finds that from the seventh year of 
life, domestic education was strictly separated according to sex; 
it consisted essentially of instilling a ceremonial, which went far 
beyond all occidental ideas, a ceremonial especially of piety and 
awe toward parents and all superiors and older persons in gen-
eral. For the rest, the schoolbook consisted almost exclusively of 
rules for self-control. 
This domestic education was supplemented by school instruc• 
tion. There was supposed to be a grade school in every hsien .. 
Higher education presupposed the passing of the first entrance 
examination. Thus two things were peculiar to Chinese higher 
education. First, it \vas entirely non-military and purely literary, 
as all education established by priesthoods has been. Second, its 
literary character, that is, its written character, was pushed to ex-
tremes. In part, this appears to have been a result of the peculi-
arity of the Chinese script apd of the literary art which grew out 
of it.31 
As the script retained its pictorial character and was not ra-
tionalized into an alphabetical form, such as the trading peoples 
of the Mediterranean created, the literary product was addressed 
at once to both the eyes and the ears, and essentially more to the 
former. Any "reading aloud" of the classic books was in itself a 
translation from the pictorial script into the (unwritten) word. 
The visual character, especially of the old script, was by its very 

» 124 (( 
THE HELIGION OF CHIN A 
nature remote from the spoken word. The monosyllabic language 
requires sound perception as well as the perception of pitched 
tone. With its sober brevity and its compulsion of syntactical 
logic, it stands in extreme conb"ast to the purely visual character 
of script. But in spite of this, or rather-as Grube has shown in an 
ingenious way-in part because of the very rational qualities of 
its sb"ucture, the Chinese tongue has been unable to offer its 
services to poetry or to systematic thinking. Nor could it serve the 
development of the oratorical arts as have the structures of the 
Hellenic, Latin, French, German, and Russian languages, each in 
its own way. The stock of written symbols remained far richer 
than the stock of monosyllabic words, which was inevitably quite 
delimited. Hence, all phantasy and ardor fled from the poor and 
formalistic intellectualism of the spoken word and into the quiet 
beauty of the written symbols. The usual poetic speech was held 
fundamentally subordinate to the script. Not speaking but writing 
and reading were valued artistically and considered as worthy of 
a gentleman, for they were receptive of the artful products of 
script. Speech remained truly an affair of the plebs. This contrasts 
sharply with Hellenism, to which conversation meant everything 
and a translation into the style of the dialogue was the adequate 
form of all experience and contemplation. In China the very finest 
blossoms of literary culture lingered, so to speak, deaf and mute 
in their silken splendor. They were valued far higher than was 
the art of drama, which, characteristically, flowered during the 
period of the Mongols. 
Among the renowned social philosophers, M eng Tzu ( Mencius) 
made systematic use of the dialogue form. That is precisely why 
he readily appears to us as the one representative of Confu-
cianism who matured to full "lucidity." The very strong impact 
upon us of the "Confucian Analects" (as Legge called them) also 
rests upon the fact that in China (as occasionally elsewhere) the 
doctrine is clothed in the form of (in part, probably authentic) 
sententious responses of the master to questions from the disciples. 
Hence, to us, it is b"ansposed into the form of speech. For the 
rest, the epic literature contains the addresses of the early war-

THE LITERATI 
» 125 « 
rior kings to the anny; in their lapidar forcefulness, they are 
highly impressive. Part of the didactic Analects consists of 
speeches, the character of which rather corresponds to pontifical 
"allocutions." Otherwise speech plays no part in the official litera-
ture. Its lack of development, as ·we shall see presently, has been 
determined by both social and political reasons. 
In spite of the logical qualities of the language, Chinese thought 
has remained rather stuck in the pictorial and the descriptive. The 
power of logos, of defining and reasoning, has not been accessible 
to the Chinese. Yet, on the other hand, this purely scriphtral edu-
cation detached thought from gesture and expressive movement 
still more than is usual with the literary nature of any education. 
For two years before he was introduced to their meaning, the 
pupil learned merely to paint about 2,000 characters. Further-
more, the examiners focused attention upon style, the art of 
versification, a firm grounding in the classics, and finally, upon 
the expressed mentality of the candidate. 
The lack of all training in calculation, even in grade schools, is 
a very striking feahtre of Chinese education. The idea of posi-
tional numbers, however, was devcloped32 during the sixth cen-
tury before Christ, that is, during the period of Warring States. 
A calculative attitude in commercial intercourse had permeated 
all strata of the population, and the final calculations of the 
administrative offices were as detailed as they were difficult 
to survey, for reasons mentioned above. The medieval school-
book (Hsiao 1-lsiieh 1, 29) enumerates calculation among the 
six "arts." And at the time of the Warring States, there existed 
a mathematics which allegedly included trigonometrics as well 
as the rule of three and commercial calculation. Presumably this 
literature, apart from fragments, was lost during Shih Huang Ti's 
burning of the books.=>3 In any case, calculation is not even men-
tioned in later pedagogy. And in the course of history, calculation 
receded more and more into the background of the education of 
the genteel mandarins, finally to disappear altogether. The edu-
cated merchants learned calculation in their business offices. Since 
the empire had been unified and the tendency toward a rational 

» 126 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
administration of the state had weakened, the mandarin became a 
genteel literary man, who was not one to occupy himself with the 
"crx.o/l.f of calculation. 
The mundane character of this education contrasts with other 
educational systems, which are nevertheless related to it by their 
literary stamp. The literary examinations in China were purely 
political affairs. Instruction was given partly by individual and 
private tutors and pattly by the teaching staffs of college founda-
tions. But no priest took part in them. 
The Christian universities of the Middle Ages originated from 
the practical and ideal need for a rational, mundane, and eccle-
siastic legal doctrine and a rational (dialectical) theology. The 
universities of Islam, following the model of the late Roman law 
schools and of Christian theology, practiced sacred case law and 
the doctrine of faith; the Rabbis practiced interpretation of the 
law; the philosophers' schools of the Brahmans engaged in specu-
lative philosophy, in ritual, as well as in sacred law. Always ec-
clesiastic dignitaries or theologians have formed either the sole 
teaching staff or at least its basic corps. To this corps were 
attached mundane teachers, in whose hands the other branches of 
study rested. In Christianity, Islam, and Hinduism, prebends were 
the goals, and for the sake of them educational celtificates were 
striven after. In addition, of course, the aspirant wished to qualify 
for ritual activity and the curing of souls. With the ancient Jewish 
teachers (precursors of the Rabbis), who worked "gratis," the goal 
was solely to qualify for instructing the laymen in the law, for 
this instruction was religiously indispensable. But in all this, edu-
cation was always bound by sacred or cultic scriptures. Only the 
Hellenic philosophers' schools engaged in an education solely of 
laymen and freed from all ties to scriptures, freed from all direct 
interests in prebends, and solely devoted to the education of Hel-
lenic "gentlemen" (Caloicagathoi). 
Chinese education served the interest in prebends and was tied 
to a script, but at the same time it was purely lay education, partly 
of a ritualist and ceremonial character and partly of a traditional-
ist and ethical character. The schools were concerned with neither 

THE LITERATI 
» 127 « 
mathematics .nor natural sciences, with neither geography nor 
grammar. Chinese philosophy itself did not have a speculative, 
systematic character, as Hellenic philosophy had and as, in part 
and in a different sense, Indian and occidental theological school-
ing had. Chinese philosophy did not have a rational-formalist 
character, as occidental jurisprudence has. And it was not of an 
empirical casuist character, as Rabbinic, Islamite, and, partly, 
Indian philosophy. Chinese philosophy did not give birth to 
scholasticism because it was not professionally engaged in logic, 
as were the philosophies of the Occident and the :\'Iiddle East, 
both of them being based on Hellenist thought. The very concept 
of logic remained absolutely alien to Chinese philosophy, which 
was bound to script, was not dialectical, and remained oriented 
to purely practical problems as well as to the status interests ot 
the patrimonial bureaucracy. 
This means that the problems that have been basic to all occi-
dental philosophy have remained unknown to Chinese philosophy, 
a fact which comes to the fore in the Chinese philosophers' man-
ner of categorical thought, and above all in Confucius. With the 
greatest practical matter-of-factness, the intellectual tools re-
mained in the form of parables, reminding us of the means of 
expression of Indian chieftains rather than of rational argumenta-
tion. This holds precisely for some of the truly ingenious state-
ments ascribed to Cor.fucius. The absence of speech is palpable, 
that is, speech as a rational means for attaining political and 
forensic effects, speech as it was first cultivated in the Hellenic 
polis. Such speech could not be developed in a bureaucratic patri-
monial state which had no formalized justice. Chinese justice 
remained, in part, a summary Star Chamber procedure (of the 
high officials), and, in part, it relied solely on documents. No oral 
pleading of cases existed, only the written petitions and oral hear-
ings of the parties concerned. The Chinese bureaucracy was inter-
ested in conventional propriety, and these bonds prevailed and 
worked in the same direction of obstructing forensic speech. The 
bureaucracy rejected the argument of "ultimate" speculative prob-
lems as practically sterile. The bureaucracy considered such 

» 128 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
arguments improper and rejected them as too delicate for one's 
own position because of the danger of innovations. 
If the technique and the substance of the examinations were 
purely mundane in nature and represented a sort of "cultural 
examination for the literati," the popular view of them was very 
different: it gave them a magical-charismatic meaning. In the eyes 
of the Chinese masses, a successfully examined candidate and 
official was by no means a mere applicant for office qualified by 
knowledge. He was a proved holder of magical qualities, which, 
as we shall see, were attached to the certified mandarin just as 
much as to an examined and ordained priest of an ecclesiastic 
institution of grace, or to a magician tried and proved by his 
guild.34 
The position of the successfully examined candidate and official 
corresponded in important points, for example, to that of a Cath-
olic chaplain. For the pupil to complete his period of instmction 
and his examinations did not mean the end of his immaturity. 
Having passed the "baccalaureate," the candidate came under the 
discipline of the school director and the examiners. In case of bad 
conduct his name was dropped from the lists. Under certain con-
ditions his hands were caned. In the localities' secluded cells for 
examinations, candidates not infrequently fell seriously ill and 
suicides occurred. According to the charismatic interpretation of 
the examination as a magical "trial," such happenings were con-
sidered proof of the wicked conduct of the person in question. 
After the applicant for office had luckily passed the examinations 
for the higher degrees with their strict seclusion, and after, at long 
last, he had moved into an office corresponding to the number and 
rank of examinations passed and depending on his patronage, he 
still remained throughout his life under the control of the school. 
And in addition to being under the authority of his superiors, he 
was under the constant surveillance and criticism of the censors. 
Their criticism extended even to the ritualist correctness of the 
very Son of Heaven. The impeachment of the officials85 was 
prescribed from olden times and was valued as meritorious in the 
way of the Catholic confession of sins. Periodically, as a rule every 

THE LITERATI 
}) 129 (( 
three years, his record of conduct, that is, a list of his merits and 
faults as determined by official investigations of the censors and 
his superiors, was to be published in the Imperial Gazette.30 Ac-
cording to his published grades, he was allowed to retain his post, 
was promoted, or was demoted.37 As a rule, not only objective 
factors determined the outcome of these records of conduct. \Vhat 
mattered was the "spirit," and this spirit was that of a life-long 
penna.lism by office authority. 
4. The Status-Honor of 
the Literati 
AS A STATUS group, the literati were privileged, even those 
who had only been examined but were not employed. Soon after 
their position had been strengthened, the literati enjoyed status 
privileges. The most important of these were: first, freedom from 
the sordida munera, the corvee; second, freedom from corporal 
punishment; third, prebends (stipends). For a long time this third 
privilege has been rather severely reduced in its bearing, through 
the financial position of the state. The Sheng (baccalaureate) still 
got stipends of $10.00 yearly, with the condition that they had to 
submit every three to six years to the Chu fen or i\hster's examina-
tion. But this, of course, did not mean anything decisive. The 
burden of the education and of the periods of nominal pay actu-
ally fell upon the sib, as we have seen. The sib hoped to recover 
their expenses by seeing their member finally enter the harbor of 
an office. The first two privileges were of importance to the very 
end; for the corvee still existed, although to a decreasing extent. 
The rod, however, remained the national means of punishment. 
Caning stemmed from the terrible pedagogy of corporal punish-
ment in the elementary schools of China. Its unique character is 
said to have consisted in the following traits, which remind one 
of our Middle Ages but were obviously developed to even greater 
extremes.88 The fathers of the sibs or of the villages compiled the 
"red cards," that is, the list of pupils (Kuan-tan). Then for a cer-
tain period they engaged a schoolmaster from among the over-

» 130 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
supply of literati without office, which always existed. The 
ancestral temple (or other unused rooms) was the preferred 
schoolroom. From early until late the howling in unison of the 
written "lines" was to be heard. All day long the pupil was in a 
condition of mental daze, which is denoted by a Chinese charac-
ter, the component parts of which signify a pig in the weeds 
(meng). The student and graduate received slaps on the palm of 
his hand, no longer on what, in the terminology of German 
mothers of the old hue, was called "the God-ordained spot." 
The graduates of high rank were entirely free from such punish-
ment so long as they were not demoted. And in the Middle Ages 
freedom from the corvee was firmly established. Nevertheless, in 
spite and also because of these privileges, the development of 
feudal ideas of honor was impossible on their basis. Moreover, as 
has been observed, these privileges were precarious because they 
were immediately voided in the case of demotion, which fre-
quently occurred. Feudal honor could not be developed on the 
bases of examination certificates as a qualification for status, pos-
sible degradation, corporal punishment during youth, and the not 
quite infrequent case of degradation even in old age. But once, 
in the past, such feudal notions of honor had dominated Chinese 
life with great intensity. 
The old Annals praise "frankness" and "loyalty" as cardinal vir-
tues.39 "To die with honor" was the old watchword. "To be unfor-
tunate and not to know how to die is cowardly." This applied 
particularly to an officer who did not fight "unto the death."40 
Suicide was a death which a general, having lost a battle, valued 
as a privilege. To permit him to commit suicide meant to forego 
the right to punish him and therefore was considered with hesi-
tation.41 The meaning of feudal concepts was changed by the 
patriarchal idea of hsiao. Hsiao meant that one should suffer 
calumny and even meet death as its consequence if it served the 
honor of the master. One could, and in general should, compen-
sate for all the mistakes of the lord by loyal service. The kotow 
before the father, the older brother, the creditor, the official, and 
the emperor was certainly not a symptom of feudal honor. For 

THE LITERATI 
» 131 « 
the correct Chinese to kneel before his love, on the other hand, 
would have been entirely taboo. All this was the reverse of what 
held for the knights and the cortegiani of the Occident. 
To a great extent, the official's honor retained an element of 
student honor regulated by examination achievements and public 
censures by superiors. This was the case even if he had passed the 
highest examinations. In a certain sense, it is true of every bu-
reaucracy (at least on its lower levels; and in Wurttemberg, with 
its famous "Grade A, Fischer," even in the highest positions of 
office); but it held to quite a different extent in China. 
5. The Gentleman Ideal 
THE peculiar spirit of the scholars, bred by the system of exami-
nations, was intimately connected with the basic presuppositions 
from which the orthodox and also, by the way, nearly all hetero-
dox, Chinese theories proceeded. The dualism of the shen and 
kuei, of good and evil spirits, of heavenly Yang substance as over 
against earthly Yin substance, also within the soul of the individ-
ual, necessarily made the sole task of education, including self-
education, to appear to be the unfolding of the Yang substance 
in the soul of man.
4 ~ For the man in whom the Yang substance has 
completely gained the upper hand over the demonic kuci powers 
resting within him also has power over the spirits; that is, accord-
ing to the ancient notion, he has magical power. The good spirits, 
however, are those who protect order and beauty and harmony 
in the world. To perfect oneself and thus to mirror this harmony 
is the supreme and the only means by which one may attain such 
power. During the time of the literati, the chiin t;:;u, the "princely 
man," and once the "hero," was the man who had attained all-
around self-pelfection, who had become a "work of art" in the 
sense of a classical, eternally valid, canon of psychical beauty, 
which literary tradition implemented iu the souls of disciples. On 
the other hand, since the Han period at the latest,43 it was a fim1ly 
established belief among the literati that the spirits reward 
"beneficence," in the sense of social and ethical excellence. Benev-

» ].'32 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
olence tempered by classical (canonical) beauty was therefore 
the goal of self-perfection. 
Canonically perfect and beautiful achievements were the high-
est aspiration of every scholar as well as the ultimate yardstick of 
the highest qualification certified by examination. Li Hung-
chang's youthful ambition was to become a perfect literary man,44 
that is, a "crowned poet," by attainment of the highest degrees. 
He was, anJ he remained, proud of being a calligrapher of great 
craftsmanship and of being able to recite the classics by heart, 
especially Confucius' "Spring and Autumn." This ability occa-
sioned his uncle, after having tested it, to pardon the imperfec-
tions of his youth and to procure him an office. To Li Hung-chang 
all other branches of knowledge (algebra, astronomy) were only 
the indispensable means of "becoming a great poet." The classical 
perfection of the poem he conceived in the name of the Empress-
Dowager, as a prayer in the temple of the tutelary goddess of 
silk-culture, brought him the Empress' favor. 
Puns, euphemisms, allusions to classical quotations, and a re-
fined and purely literary intellectuality were considered the con-
versational ideal of the genteel man. All politics of the day were 
excluded from such conversation.45 It may appear strange to us 
that this sublimated "salon" cultivation, tied to the classics, should 
enable man to administer large territories. And in fact, one did 
not manage the administration with mere poetry even in China. 
But the Chinese prebendary official proved his status quality, that 
is, his charisma, through the canonical correctness of his literary 
forms. Therefore, considerable weight was placed on these forms 
in official communications. Numerous important declarations of 
the emperors, the high priests of literary art, \Vere in the form of 
didactic poems. On the other hand, the official had to prove his 
charisma by the "hatmonious" course of his administration; that 
is, there must be no disturbances caused by the restless spirits of 
nature or of men. The actual administrative "work" could rest on 
the shoulders of subordinate officials. We have noticed that above 
the official stood the imperial pontifex, his academy of literati, 

THE LITERATI 
» 133 « 
and his collegiate body of censors. They publicly rewarded, pun-
ished, scolded, exhorted, encouraged, or lauded the officials. 
Because of the publication of the "personal files" and all the 
reports, petitions, and memorials, the whole administration and 
the fateful careers of the officials, with their (alleged) causes, took 
place before the broadest public, far more so than is the case with 
any of our administrations under parliamentary control, an ad-
ministration which puts the greatest weight upon the keeping of 
"official secrets." At least according to the official fiction, the offi-
cial Gazette in China was a sort of nmning account of the emperor 
before Heaven and before his subjects. This Gazette was the 
classic expression for the kind of responsibility which followed 
from the emperor's charismatic qualification. However dubious in 
reality the official argumentation and the completeness of pub-
lication may have been-that, after all, also holds for the commu-
nications of our bureaucracy to our parliaments-the Chinese 
procedure at least tended to open a rather sh·ong and often a quite 
effective safety-valve for the pressure of public opinion with re-
gard to the official's administrative activities. 
6. The Prestige of Officialdom 
THE hatred and the distrust of the subjects, which is common to 
all patrimonialism, in China as everywhere turned above all 
against the lower levels of the hierarchy, who came into the closest 
practical contact with the population. The subjects' apolitical 
avoidance of all contact with "the state" which was not absolutely 
necessary was typical for China as for all other patrimonial sys-
tems. But this apolitical attitude did not detract from the signifi-
cance of the official education for the character formation of the 
Chinese people. 
The strong demands of the training period were due partly to 
the peculiarity of Chinese script and partly to the peculiarity of 
the subject matter. These demands, as well as the waiting periods 
which were often quite long, forced those who were unable to live 

» 134 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
on a fortune of their own, on loans, or on family savings of the sort 
discussed above, to take up practical occupations of all sorts, from 
merchant to miracle doctor, before completing their educational 
careers. Then they did not reach the classics themselves, but only 
the study of the last (the sixth) textbook, the "schoolbook" (Hsiao 
Hsiieh), 46 which was hallowed by age and contained mainly ex-
cerpts from the classic authors. Only this difference in the level 
of education and not differences in the kind of education set these 
circles off from the bureaucracy. For only classic education 
existed. 
The percentage of candidates who failed the examinations was 
extraordinarily high. In consequence of the fixed quotas,47 the 
fraction of graduates of the higher examinations was proportion-
ately small, yet they always outnumbered many times the avail-
able office prebends. They competed for the prebends by personal 
patronage, 48 by purchase money of their own, or by loans. The 
sale of prebends functioned here as in Europe; it was a means of 
raising capital for the purposes of state, and very frequently it re-
placed merit ratings.'19 The protests of the reformers against the 
sale of offices persisted until the last days of the old system, as is 
shown by the numerous petitions of this sort in the Peking 
Gazette. 
The officials' short terms of office ( three years), corresponding 
to similar Islamic institutions, allowed for intensive and rational 
influencing of the economy through the administration as such 
only in an intennittent and jerky way. This was the case in spite 
of the administration's theoretical omnipotence. It is astonishing 
how few permanent officials the administration believed to be 
sufficient. The figures alone make it perfectly obvious that as a 
rule things must have been permitted to take their own course, as 
long as the interests of the state power and of the treasury re-
mained untouched and as long as the forces of tradition, the sibs, 
villages, guilds, and other occupational associations remained the 
normal carriers of order. 
Yet in spite of the apolitical attitude of the masses, which we 
have just mentioned, the views of the stratum of applicants for 

THE LITERATI 
» 185 « 
office exerted a very considerable influence upon the way of life 
of the middle classes. This resulted, first and above all, from the 
popular magical-charismatic conception of the qualification for 
office as tested by examination. By passing the examination, the 
graduate proved that he was to an eminent degree a holder of 
shen. High mandarins were considered magically qualified. They 
could always become objects of a cult, after their death as well 
as during their lifetime, provided that their charisma was 
"proved." The primeval magical significance of written work and 
of documents lent apotropaic and therapeutic significance to their 
seals and to their handwriting, and this could extend to the ex-
amination paraphernalia of the candidate. A province considered 
it an honor and an advantage to have one of its own sons selected 
by the emperor as the best graduate of the highest degree,50 and 
all whose names were publicly posted after having passed their 
examinations had "a name in the village." All guilds and other 
clubs of any significance had to have a literary man as a secre-
tary, and these and similar positions were open to those graduates 
for whom office prebends were not available. The officeholders 
and the examined candidates for office, by virtue of their magical 
charisma and of their patronage relations-especially when they 
stemmed from petty bourgeois circles-were the natural "father 
confessors" and advisers in all important affairs of their sibs. In 
this they corresponded to the Brahmans (Gurus) who performed 
the same function in India. 
Alongside the purveyor to the state and the great trader, the 
officeholder, as we have seen, was the personage with the most 
opportunities for accumulating possessions. Economically and 
personally, therefore, the influence on the population of this 
stratum, outside as well as inside their own sibs, was approxi-
mately as great as was the combined influence of the scribes and 
priests in Egypt. Within the sib, however, the authority of old age 
was a strong counterweight, as we have already emphasized. 
Quite independent of the "worthiness" of the individual officials, 
who were often ridiculed in popular dramas, the prestige of this 
literary education as such was firmly grounded in the population 

)) 136 « 
TI-IE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
until it came to be undermined by modern \Vestern-trained mem-
bers of the mandarin strata. 
7. Views on Economic Policy 
THE social character of the educated stratum determined its 
stand toward economic policy. According to its own legend, for 
millennia, the polity had the character of a religious and utili-
tarian welfare-state, a character which is in line with so many 
other typical traits of patrimonial bureaucratic structures bearing 
theocratic stamps. 
Since olden times, to be sure, actual state policy, for reasons 
discussed above, had again and again let economic life alone, at 
least so far as production and the profit economy were concerned. 
This happened in China just as in the ancient Orient-unless new 
settlements, melioration through irrigation, and fiscal or military 
interests entered the picture. But military interests and interests 
in military finance had always called forth liturgical interventions 
in economic life. These interventions were monopolistically or 
financially determined, and often they were quite incisive. They 
were partly mercantilist regulations and partly in the nature of 
regulations of status stratification. Toward the end of national 
militarism, such planned "economic policy" eventually fell into 
abeyance. The government, conscious of the wealmess of its ad-
ministrative apparatus, confined itself to the care of the tide and 
the maintenance of the water routes, which were indispensable 
for provisioning the leading provinces with rice; for the rest, to 
the typically patrimonial policy of dearth and consumption. It 
had no "commercial policy" in the modern sense. 51 The tolls the 
mandarins had established along the waterways were, so far as 
is known, merely fiscal in nature and never served any economic 
policy. The government on the whole pursued only fiscal and 
mercantilist interests, if one disregards emergency situations 
which, considering the charismatic nature of authority, were 
always politically dangerous. So far as is !mown, the most gran-
diose attempts to establish a unified economic organization were 

THE LITERATI 
» 137 « 
planned by \Vang An-shih, who during the eleventh century tried 
to establish a state trading monopoly for the entire harvest. In 
addition to fiscal gains, the plan was intended to serve the 
equalization of prices and was connected with a reform in land 
taxes. The attempt failed. 
As the economy was left to itself to a large extent, the aversion 
agairist "state intervention" in economic matters became a lasting 
and basic sentiment. It was directed particularly against monopo-
listic privileges,ll2 which, as fiscal measures, are habitual to 
patrimonialism everywhere. This sentiment, however, was only 
one among the quite different attitudes which resulted from the 
conviction that the welfare of the subjects was dependent upon 
t.he charisma of the ruler. These ideas often stood in unmediated 
fashion beside the basic aversion to state intervention, and con-
tinually, or at least occasionally, made for bureaucratic meddling 
in everything, which again is typical of patrimonialism. Moreover, 
the administration of course reserved the right to regulate con-
sumption in times of dearth-a policy which is also part of the 
theory of Confucianism [as reflected] in numerous special norms 
concerning all sorts of expenditures. Above all, there was the 
typical aversion against too sharp a social differentiation as de-
termined in a purely economic manner by free exchange in 
markets. This aversion, of course, goes without saying in every 
bureaucracy. The increasing stability of the economic situation 
under conditions of the economically self-sufficient and the 
socially homogeneously composed world-empire did not allow 
for the emergence of such economic problems as were discussed 
in the English literature of the seventeenth century. There was 
no self-conscious bourgeois stratum which could not be politically 
ignored by the government and to whose interests the "pamph-
leteers" of the time in England primarily addressed themselves. 
As always under patrimonial bureaucratic conditions, the ad-
ministration had to take serious notice of the attitude of the 
merchants' guilds only in a "static" way and when the main-
tenance of tradition and of the guilds' special privileges were at 
stake. Dynamically, however, the merchant guilds did not enter 

» 138 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
into the balance, because there were no expansive capitalist in-
terests (no longer!) of sufficient strength, as in England, to be 
capable of forcing the state administration into their service. 
8. Sultanism and the Eunuchs as 
Political Opponents of the Literati 
THE total political situation of the literati can be understood only 
when one realizes the forces against which they had to fight. vVe 
may disregard the heterodoxies here, for they will be dealt with 
below. 
In early times the main adversaries of the literati were the 
"great families" of the feudal period who did not want to be 
pushed out of their office monopolies. Having to accommodate 
themselves to the needs of patrimonialism and to the superiority 
of the knowledge of script, they found ways and means of paving 
the way for their sons by imperial favor. 
Then there were the capitalist purchasers of office: a natural 
result of the leveling of status groups and of the fiscal money 
economy. Here the struggle could not lead to constant and abso-
lute success, but only to relative success, because every demand 
of war pushed the impecunious central administration toward 
the jobbery of office-prebends as the sole means of war finance. 
This held until recent times. 
The literati also had to fight the administration's rationalist 
interests in an expert officialdom. Specialist, expert officials came 
to the fore as early as 601 under Wen Ti. During the distress of 
the defensive wars in 1068 under Wang An-shih, they enjoyed a 
short-lived and full triumph. But again tradition won out and this 
time for good. 
There remained only one major and permanent enemy of the 
literati: sultanism and the eunuch-system which supported it.53 
The influence of the harem was therefore viewed with profound 
suspicion by the Confucians. Without insight into this struggle, 
Chinese history is most difficult to understand. 
The constant struggle of the literati and sultanism, which lasted 

THE LITERATI 
)) 139 « 
for two millennia, began under Shih Huang Ti. It continued under 
all the dynasties, for of course energetic rulers continually sought 
to shake off their bonds to the cultured status group of the 
literati with the aid of eunuchs and plebeian parvenus. Numerous 
literati who took a stand against this form of absolutism had to 
give their lives in order to maintain their status group in power. 
But in the long run and again and again the literati won out.64 
Every drought, inundation, eclipse of the sun, defeat in arms, 
and every generally threatening event at once plaeed power in 
the hands of the literati. For such events were considered the 
result of a breach of tradition and a desertion of the classic way 
of life, which the literati guarded and which was represented by 
the censors and the "Hanlin Academy." In all such cases "free 
discussion" was granted, the advice of the throne was asked, and 
the result was always the cessation of the unclassical form of gov-
ernment, execution or banishment of the eunuchs, a retraction of 
conduct to the classical schemata, in short, adjustments to the 
demands of the literati. 
The harem system was of considerable danger because of the 
way in which successorship to the throne was ordered. The 
emperors who were not of age were under the tutelage of womell:; 
at times, this petticoat-government had come to be the very rule. 
The last Empress-Dowager, Tz'u Hsi, tried to rule with the aid 
of eunuchs. 55 We will not discuss at this point the roles which 
Taoists and Buddhists have played in these struggles, which run 
through all of Chinese history-why and how far they have been 
natural coalitionists, specifically of the eunuchs, and how far 
they have been coalitionists by constellation. 
Let us mention in passing that, at least by modem Confu-
cianism, astrology has been considered an unclassical supersti-
tion.66 It has been thought to compete with the exclusive signifi-
cance of the emperor's Tao charisma for the course of government. 
Originally this had not been the case. The departmental 
competition of the Hanlin Academy against the board of astrolo-
gers may have played a decisive part;57 perhaps also the Jesuit 
origin of the astronomic measures had a hand in it. 

)) 140 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
In the conviction of the Confucians, the trust in magic which 
the eunuchs cultivated brought about all misfortune. Tao Mo in 
his JV1emorial of the year 1901 reproached the Empress that in 
the year 1875 the bue heir to the throne had been eliminated 
through her fault and in spite of the censors' protest, for the 
censor \Vu Ko-tu had acknm.vledged this by his suicide. Tao Mo's 
posthumous memorial to the Empress and his letter to his son 
were distinguished by their manly beauty.58 There cannot be the 
slightest doubt of his sincere and profound conviction. Also the 
belief of the Empress and of numerous princes in the magical 
charisma of the Boxers, a belief which alone explains her whole 
policy, was certainly to be ascribed to the influence of eunuchs.69 
On her death bed this impressive woman left as her counsel: ( 1) 
never again to let a woman rule in China, and ( 2) to abolish 
the eunuch system forever. 60 This counsel was ful£lled in a dif-
ferent way than she had undoubtedly intended-if the report is 
accurate. But one may not doubt that for the genuine Confucian 
everything that has happened since, above all the "revolution" and 
the downfall of the dynasty, only confirms the correctness of the 
belief in the significance of the charisma of the dynasty's classic 
virtue. In the improbable but possible event of a Confucian 
restoration, the belief would be exploited in this sense. The Con-
fucianists, who are ultimately pacifist literati oriented to inner 
political welfare, naturally faced military powers with aversion 
or with lack of understanding. We have already spoken of their 
relationship to the officers, and we have seen that the whole 
Annals are paradigmatically filled with it. There are protests to 
be found in the Annals against making "praetorians" into censors 
(and officials) .61 As the eunuchs were especially popular as favo-
rites and generals in the way of Narses, the enmity against the 
purely sultanist patrimonial army suggested itself. The literati 
took pride in having overthrown the popular military usurper 
Wang :1\.Jang. The danger of ruling with plebeians has simply 
always been great with dictators, yet only this one attempt is 
known in China. The literati, however, have submitted to de 
facto established power even when it was created purely by 

THE LITERATI 
» 141 « 
usurpation, as was the power of the Han, or by conquest, as was 
the power of the .Mongol Manchus. They submitted even though 
they had to make sacrifices-the Manchus took over 50 per cent 
of the offices without having the educational qualifications. The 
literati have submitted to the ruler if the ruler in turn submitted 
to their ritualist and ceremonial demands; only then, in modern 
language, have they accommodated themselves and taken a 
"realistic" stand. 
"Constitutionally" -and this was the theory of the Confucians-
the emperor could rule only by using certified literati as officials; 
"classically" he could rule only by using orthodox Confucian of-
ficials. Every deviation from this rule was thought capable of 
bringing disaster and, in case of obstinacy, the downfall of the 
emperor and the ruin of the dynasty. 

CHAPTER VI 
THE CONFUCIAN LIFE 
ORIENTATION 
J 
1. Bureaucracy and H ierocracy 
usT as it was spared the power of an increasingly expro-
priated feudalism or a bourgeois stratum which never developed, 
so also patrimonial bureaucracy was spared the competition of 
an autonomous hierocracy. Nothing whatever is known of so-
cially powerful prophecy, be it of Middle Eastern, Iranian or 
Indian character.1 There were no prophets raising ethical "de-
mands" in the name of a supra-mundane God; the nature of 
religiosity remained unbroken and precluded the very existence 
of such demands. The pontific~..!, cesaro-papist authority had only 
feudal lords, not prophets, to :fight seriously. The mere thought of 
prophets led it to eliminate violently and systematically every 
heterodox movement as heresy. 
The Chinese "soul" has never been revolutionized by a 
prophet.2 There were no "prayers" of private individuals. The 
ritualist and literary officeholder and, above all, the emperor 
toolc care of everything, and they alone were able to do so. 
Allowing for reservations with regard to Taoism, no powerful 
priesthood has ever existed so far as is known historically. Above 
all, there were no independent religious forces to develop a doc-
trine of salvation or an autonomous ethic and education. Hence, 
the intellectualistic rationalism of a stratum of officials could 
freely unfold itself; here as elsewhere this intellectualism inwardly 
• 142 c 

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIE:'~TATION 
» 143 « 
despised religions unless they were needed for the taming of the 
masses. Intellectualism allowed the professional religionists only 
that measure of official prestige which was indispensable for its 
taming purposes, a prestige which was ineradicable in the face 
of the powerful associations of local sibs bound by tradition. All 
further external and internal development, hmvcver, was radically 
cut oH. The cult of the great deities of heaven and earth, with 
which some deified heroes and special spirits3 were connected, 
was an affair of the state. These cults were not managed by priests 
but by the holders of political power. The one "lay religion" 
prescribed by the state was the belief in the power of ancestral 
spirits and its cult. Popular religion otherwise remained, in prin-
ciple, a completely unsystematic pluralism of magical and 
heroistic cults. Patrimoni~l bureaucracy, in its rationalism, was 
far from seeking to transform systematically these chaotic con-
ditions which it inwardly despised. The bureaucracy rather ac-
cepted the situation. 
On the one hand, when viewed in the perspective of Confucian 
reasons of state, religion had to be "upheld for the people." The 
order of the world, according to a word of the ~\taster, could not 
be maintained without belief. Therefore, the retention of religious 
belief was politically even more important than was the concern 
for food. On the other hand the imperial power \vas the supreme 
and religiously consecrated structure; in a sense it stood above the 
crowd of popular deities. The emperor's personal position, as we 
have seen, was based exclusively on his charisma as the pleni-
potentiary ("Son") of Heaven where his ancestors resided. But 
the veneration and significance of the individual deities were still 
subject to the charismatic principle of success, just like a Nea-
politan driver's or a boatman's Saint. This charismatic character 
of the religion suited officialdom's interest in self-preservation. 
For any evil which befell the country did not disavow officialdom 
per se, but at most the individual official and the individual em-
peror whose divine legitimation appeared to be forfeited; other-
wise it disavowed the special deity. By the special and irrational 
anchorage of the mundane orders, an optimal fusion was effected 

)) 144 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
between the legitimate power of officialdom and the supra-
mundane powers minimally represented on earth; for independ-
ently the latter might conceivably compete with officialdom. 
Any rationalization of popular belief as an independent re-
ligion of supra-mundane orientation would inevitably have con-
stituted an independent power opposed to officialdom. This 
exigency repeatedly made itself felt in the resolute resistance of 
the officials toward any attempt to loosen a stone in this historic 
edifice. 
Chinese language has no special word for "religion." There was 
first: "doctrine"-of a school of literati; second: "rites" -without 
distinguishing whether they were religious or conventional in 
nature. The official Chinese name for Confucianism was "doctrine 
of the Literati" (fu chiao). 
Whether magical or cultic in nature, religion remained of a 
this-wordly turn of mind. This attitude was far stronger and 
more principled than is usually the rule. The hope for long life 
played a major role in the very cults which, besides the state cult 
of the great spirits, were the most favored ones. It is possible that 
the original meaning of every concept of "deity" in China has 
rested in the belief that the men of greatest perfection have suc-
ceeded in eluding death and in living forever after in a realm of 
bliss.4 In any case, in general, it may be said that the orthodox 
Confucian Chinese, but not the Buddhist, performs his rites for 
the sake of his fate in this world-for long life, children, wealth, 
and to a very slight degree for the good of the ancestors, but not 
at all for the sake of his fate in the "hereafter." This is in sharp 
contrast with the Egyptian care of the dead which was wholly 
oriented toward man's destiny in the hereafter. For a long time 
it was the unofficial but prevailing view of the enlightened Con-
fucians that after death the soul evaporated, flew away in the 
mist, or otherwise perished. 
This doctrine was supported by Wang Ch'ung's authority and, 
as has been said, his concept of God was inconsistent. God, ac-
cording to him, must not be conceived in anthropomorphic terms. 
Yet God is "body," a shapeless fluid into which the essentially 

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 145 « 
similar human spirit merges at death, and death is an extinction 
of the individual personality. 
The definitive disappearance of ideas of a personal God and 
of immortality was attained by the materialist and atheist Chu-
Fu-tzu during the twelfth century. This did not prevent the 
emergence of later orthodox philosophers who believed in a per-
sonal God. Still official Confucianism, which was articulated in 
the sacred edict of Emperor K'ang Hsi in the seventeenth century, 
has retained the materialist and atheist standpoint mentioned 
before. 
In Confucianism there prevailed, anyway, an absolutely ag-
nostic and essentially negative mood opposed to all hopes for a 
beyond. Even where this stand had not permeated or where it 
was outweighed by Taoist or Buddhist influences (to be dis-
cussed below) the interest in man's fate in the beyond remained 
quite subordinate to the possible influence of the spirits on life 
here and now. 
The "Messianic" hope for a this-worldly Savior-Emperor is 
found in China, as in almost all patrimonial associations. G But 
this hope is not hope for an absolute utopia, as was the case in 
Israel. 
In the absence of any other eschatology or doctrine of salva-
tion, or any striving for transcendental values and destinies, the 
religious policy of the state remained simple in form. In part, the 
policy was to transfer the management of the cult to the state; in 
part, it was a policy of tolerating the private practitioners of 
magic inherited from the past and indispensable to the private 
citizen. 
The state cult was deliberately sober and plain; it consisted of 
sacrifice, ritualist prayer, music, and rhythmic dance. Obviously 
all orgiastic elements were strictly and intentionally eliminated. 
This held also for official pentatonic music. In the official cult 
almost all ecstasy and asceticism, as well as contemplation,6 were 
absent and were considered elements of disorder and irrational 
excitement. This, bureaucratic rationalism could not stand and 
deemed it as dangerous as the Roman nobility of office considered 

» 146 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
the cult of Dionysos. Official Confucianism, of course, lacked in-
dividual prayer in the occidental sense of the word and knew 
only ritual formula. The master, when sick, is said to have de-
clined prayers on his behalf and it is reported that he had not 
prayed for long years.7 However, the prayers which princes and 
high officials said for the good of the political association have 
always been cherished as effective up to the very present. 
Confucianism, for these reasons, necessarily lacked the notion 
that men are differently qualified in a religious way, and beyond 
these reasons Confucianism was indifferent to religion. Hence, 
any religious idea differentiating a "state of grace" was absent. 
The very concept had to remain unknown to Confucianism. 
The patrimonial bureaucracy was politically antagonistic to 
feudalism and to any status structure based on descent. This 
antagonism was correspondingly found in classical Confucian 
ethical theory in which the principled equality of man was pre-
supposed. This assumption was not primitive in origin, as we 
have seen above. 
The feudal period rested upon the idea of the charismatic 
difference between the "noble" sibs and the people. The rule 
of the literati created the sharp cleavage between the educated 
and the uneducated or "stupid people" (yii min), as the founder 
of the Ming dynasty called them during the fourteenth century. 
Official theory, however, maintained that not birth but education, 
in principle accessible to all, should be decisive. "Equality" did 
not, of course, mean unconditional equality in all natural endow-
ments. One man might well have "greater" natural disposition 
for doing what another could do only by exertion. But everybody 
could at least attain what was demanded by Confucian bureau-
cratic reasons-of-state and social ethics-an ethic which never 
reached for the stars. 
Given a good state administration, then, every man had to 
search for the reasons of external or internal success or failure 
within himself. 1vlan was good; evil was internalized from without 
through the senses; and differences in quality were differences 
in the harmonic development of the individual, a view which 

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 147 c 
characteristically followed upon the absence of a supra-mundane 
deity. These ideas, moreover, reflected the status conditions in 
the patrimonial state. The cultured man, to be sure, wished to 
have his name honored after death but only for reasons of per-
sonal merit. 
2. Absence of Natural Law and 
Formal Logic of Legal Thought 
IN PRINCIPLE, living conditions alone differentiated people. 
Identical economic position and education made for essentially 
identical character. To anticipate: in sharp contrast to the unani-
mous view of all Christian confessions, material wealth was not 
ethically considered a primary source of temptation though, of 
course, temptations were recognized. Rather, wealth was held to 
be the most important means for promoting morals. We shall 
learn the reasons below. 
On the other hand, in terms of natural law, no sphere of per-
sonal liberty was sanctioned. The very word "liberty" was foreign 
to the language. This can readily be explained from the nature 
of the patrimonial state and from historical vestiges. 
Actually private property in goods was the one institution 
which was fairly well fenced in. But this institution emerged after 
long periods of liturgically negating the private sphere, and it was 
not guaranteed in the occidental sense. For the rest, there were 
no legally guaranteed liberties. Actually "private property" in 
goods was only relatively secure, and it did not enjoy that nimbus 
of sanctity found, for instance, in the statements of Cromwell 
against the Levellers.8 
Patrimonialist theory, to be sure, held that the emperor could 
be no one's guest and that the superior official could not be the 
guest of the subordinate since all possessions of the inferior be-
longed rightfully to the superior. This, however, had essentially 
no more than ceremonial significance. On occasion the authori-
ties interfered severely with the tillage and distribution of land, 
mostly for plain fiscal reasons. However, among other things, for 

)) 148 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
centuries these interferences had animated the nimbus of the 
semi-legendary ching-t'ien system with its patrimonially regulated 
"right to the land." 
Interest in maintaining social tranquillity led to the predilection 
for the most equal distribution of property possible which in turn 
was expressed in such ideals as a subsistence economy. In the 
interest of preventing a dearth of food, the subsistence economy 
was dovetailed with a storage policy in the Egyptian manner. The 
ideal of patrimonialism in this field, as in others, was substantive 
justice not formal law. Hence, property and income remained, on 
the one hand, problems of practical expediency and, on the other 
hand, problems of social-ethical concern for feeding the masses. 
This must not be understood in the occidental sense of an in-
dividualist social ethic of natural law which originated in modern 
times precisely out of the tension between formal law and sub-
stantive justice. For in their view, understandably, the educated 
and the ruling strata should also be the wealthiest strata. Still the 
ultimate goal was to have property as widely distributed as pos-
sible in the interest of universal contentment. 
A divine, unchangeable law of nature existed only in the form 
of sacred ceremonies, the magical efficacy of which had been 
tested since time immemorial, and in the form of sacred duties 
toward the ancestral spirits. A development of natural law of 
modern occidental stamp, among other things, would have pre-
supposed a rationalization of the existing law which the Occident 
had in the form of Roman law. 
Roman law, however, was first a product of autonomous urban 
business life which required fixed schemata of complaint; second, 
of the rationalization through the juridical technology of the 
Roman notables; and third, the rationalization of the bureaucracy 
of the Eastern Roman Empire. 
In China, no estate of jurists existed because there was no ad-
vocateship in the occidental sense. It was absent because the 
patrimonialism of the Chinese welfare state, with its weak office 
authority, did not appreciate the formal development of secular 
law. VVe should add to what was said earlier that local custom 

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 149 « 
held even contra legem by vi.Itue of the principle "arbitrariness. 
breaks common law" (Willkiir bricht Landrecht). Furthermore, 
the Chinese judge, a typical patrimonial judge, discharged busi-
ness in thoroughly patriarchal fashion. That is, insofar as he was 
given leeway by sacred tradition he precisely did not adjudicate 
according to formal rules and "without regard to persons." Just 
the reverse largely obtained; he judged persons according to their 
concrete qualities and in terms of the concrete situation, or ac-
cording to equity and the appropriateness of the concrete result. 
This "Solomonic" Cadi-justice also lacked a sacred book of laws 
such as Islamism had. The systematic imperial collection of laws 
was considered inviolate only insofar as it was supported by 
compelling magical tradition. 
Under such conditions the tension between sacred and secular 
law was competely absent, a tension which exists in the Occident, 
in Islamism, and to a certain extent even in India. A doctrine of 
natural law in the sense of Antiquity, especially Stoicism, and of 
the Middle Ages would have presupposed what evidently could 
not emerge in Confucianism. This was the tension between phi-
losophical or religious postulates and the "world" which resulted 
in the doctrine of an "original state." The central and prerequisite 
ethical concepts for such a doctrine were alien to Confucianism. 
About this later. 
Our modem occidental rationalization of law has been the 
result of two forces operating side by side. On the one hand, 
capitalism was interested in strictly formal law and legal pro-
cedure. It was interested in having law function in a predictable 
way, possibly like a piece of machinery. On the other hand, the 
rationalism of officialdom in absolutist states led to the interest 
in codified systems and in homogeneous law to be handled by a 
rationally trained bureaucracy striving for equal, interlocal op-
portunities of promotion. No modern system of law has emerged 
when one of these two forces was lacking. Modern capitalism, as 
is shown by Anglo-Saxon common law, could indeed prosper on 
the soil of an unsystematic law guaranteeing the autonomy of the 
economically powerful stratum. It was a law that lacked a strict 

)) 150 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
logico-Iegal articulation but was formal law created by a class 
of lawyers whose mode of legal thought was conditioned by 
Homan and Canonical law. Formally, on the other hand, ration-
alist bureaucracy had a heartfelt interest in the compendious col-
lection of statutes, in the ubiquitous employability of the official, 
in homogeneous law, above all, in the paramountcy of authorita-
tive enactment over inviolate tradition and over the arbitrary 
autonomy of locally and socially differentiated law. Bureaucracy, 
wherever it held sway alone, was not only interested in the 
juridical perfection of legal forms but rather in their substantive 
"justice" which alone could correspond to the immanent ethos of 
bureaucracy. 
Bureaucracy has substantively rationalized and systematized 
law unless checked by economically powerful capitalist interests 
or a socially powerful estate of jurists. Otherwise bureaucracy has 
destroyed formal juristic technology which is indifferent to sub-
stantive "justice." Chinese patrimonialism, after the unification of 
the empire, had neither to reckon with powerful and indomitable 
capitalist interests nor with an autonomous estate of jurists. But 
it had to take account of the sanctity of tradition which alone 
guaranteed the legitimacy of patrimonialism; and it had to realize 
the limited intensity of its administrative organization. Therefore, 
not only did formal jurisprudence fail to develop, but a systematic, 
substantive, and thorough rationalization of law was never at-
tempted. In general, the administration of law retained the nature 
which usually characterizes theocratic welfare justice. Thus a 
juristic, theological, and philosophical "logic" failed to develop. 
3. Absence of Natural Sciences 
SYSTEMATIC and naturalist thought also failed to mature. Oc-
cidental natural science, with its mathematical foundation, is a 
combination of rational forms of thought grown on the soil of 
ancient philosophy and the technical "experiment" which origi-
nated on the soil of the Renaissance. The specifically modern 

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIE:-.rTATION 
» 151 « 
element of all naturalist disciplines did not first develop in the 
field of science but in art. The "experimenting," great art of the 
Renaissance was the child of a unique blend of two elements: the 
empirical skill of occidental artists based on craftsmanship, and 
their historically and socially determined rationalist ambition. 
They sought eternal significance for their art and social prestige 
for themselves by raising art to the level of "science." The latter 
point was specific to the Occident. Here also was the strongest 
incentive for a "return" to Antiquity, as this was understood. Be-
sides the type represented by Leonardo, music, especially six-
teenth cenhuy music with its experimental keyboards ( Zarlino), 
was central to this tremendous endeavor which operated with the 
characteristically Renaissance artistic concept of "nature." Spe-
cial conditions for the highly competitive elaboration of artistic 
practice came into play as in Antiquity. 
Economic and technological interests of the Northern Euro-
pean economy, above all, the needs of the mining industry as-
sisted intellectual forces in transferring the experiment to the 
natural sciences. Details are out of place here. 
In its masterly refinement Chinese art lacked all these under-
stood incentives to rationalist ambition. Under the conditions of 
patrimonial bureaucracy, the contest of the ruling stratum was 
discharged entirely into competition among prebendary and 
degree-hunting literati and all other pursuits were stilled. 
Moreover, the relatively slight development of industrial 
capitalism did not allow the emergence of those economic 
premiums which were necessary for the transition from empirical 
to rational technology.9 Thus all remained sublimated empiricism. 
Consequently, practical rationalism, the intrinsic attitude of 
bureaucracy to life, free of all competition, could work itself out 
fully. There was no rational science, no rational practice of art, 
no rational theology, jurisprudence, medicine, natural science or 
technology; there was neither divine nor human authority which 
could contest the bureaucracy. Only an ethic congruent with 
bureaucracy could be created and this was limited solely by con-

» 152 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
sideration of the forces of tradition in the sibs and by the belief 
in spirits. Unlike \Vestern civilization, there were no other spe-
cifically modern elements of rationalism standing either in com-
petition or in support of bureaucracy. Western culture in China 
was grafted upon a base which, in the ·west, had been essentially 
overcome with the development of the ancient polis. Hence, the 
culture of this bureaucracy can be considered an experiment 
which approximately tests the practical rationalism of government 
by office prebendaries and its effects. Orthodox Confucianism 
resulted from this situation. 
The rule of orthodoxy followed from the unity of the theocratic 
world empire and its authoritative regulation of doctrine. During 
the Period of the Warring States with its violent struggles we find 
mobile intellectual currents contesting for dominance just as in 
the polis-culture of occidental Antiquity. Chinese philosophy, in 
all its contrast, was developed roughly during the same span of 
time as the philosophy of Antiquity. Since the unification, at 
about the beginning of the Christian era, no entirely independent 
thinker has appeared. Only Confucians, Taoists, and Buddhists 
continued the struggles. Within the recognized or licensed Con-
fucian doctrine there remained the struggles of philosophical and 
their related administrative-political schools. The rule of the 
Manchu definitively canonized Confucian orthodoxy. 
4. The Nature of Confucianism 
CONFUCIANISM, like Buddhism, consisted only of ethics and 
in this Tao10 corresponds to the Indian dharma. However, in 
sharp contrast to Buddhism, Confucianism exclusively repre-
sented an innerworldly morality of laymen. Confucianism meant 
adjustment to the world, to its orders and conventions. Ultimately 
it represented just a tremendous code of political maxims and 
rules of social propriety for cultured men of the world. This was 
in still greater contrast to Buddhism. 
The cosmic orders of the world were considered fixed and in-

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 153 « 
violate and the orders of society were but a special case of this. 
The great spirits of the cosmic orders obviously desired only the 
happiness of the world and especially the happiness of man. The 
same applied to the orders of society. The "happy" tranquillity of 
the empire and the equilibrium of the soul should and could be 
attained only if man fitted himself into the intemally harmonious 
cosmos. If man in the individual case did not succeed, human 
unreasonableness and, above all, disorderly leadership of state 
and society were to be blamed. Thus, in a nineteenth century 
edict the prevalence of bad winds in a province was traced to 
negligence in certain police duties, namely, in surrendering sus-
pects and unduly drawing out trials. This had caused the spirits 
to become restless. 
The charismatic conception of imperial prerogative and the 
identity of order in the cosmos and in society determined these 
basic presuppositions. Everything depended upon the behavior 
of the officials and these men were responsible for the leadership 
of a society which was conceived as one large, patrimonially ruled 
community. The monarch should deal with the uneducated mass 
of the people as children. His primary duties were to care for 
officialdom materially and spiritually and to maintain good and 
respectful relations with them. 
The individual best served Heaven by developing his true 
nature for in this way the good within every man would unfail-
ingly appear. Thus, everything was an educational problem and 
the educational aim was the development of the self from one's 
natural endowment. There was no radical evil. 
One has to go back to the third century B.c. to find philosophers 
who taught the heterodox doctrine of the original wickedness of 
man.11 There were only faults and these were the result of de-
ficient education. Certainly the world, the social world in par-
ticular, was, as it were, just as imperfect as man. Evil demons 
existed alongside the good spirits but, given respectively the 
educational level of man and the charismatic quality of the ruler, 
the world was as good as could be. The order of the world re-

)) 154 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
suited from the natural development of cultural needs and the 
unavoidable division of labor, which in turn led to collision of 
interests. According to the i\'Iaster's realistic conceptions, the 
basic impulses of human conduct were economic and sexual. 
Hence, creatural wickedness and a "state of sin" were not neces-
sary reasons either for coercive power or social subordination. 
The latter were considered simply as the economic state of affairs 
where means of subsistence were scarce in relation to ever-grow-
ing needs. 'Without coercive power a war of all against all would 
result. Therefore, the coercive order per se, the differentiation of 
property, and the struggles of economic interests were not, in 
principle, problems at all. 
Although the school developed a cosmogony, Confucianism 
was in large measure bereft of metaphysical interest. The scien-
tific claims of the school were no less modest. The development 
of mathematics had progressed to trigonometry12-but this soon 
decayed because it was not used.13 Confucius evidently had no 
knowledge of the precession of the equinoxes14 which had been 
known in the Middle East for a long time. The office of the court 
astronomer, that is the calendar maker, must be distinguished 
from the court astrologer who was both an annalist and an in-
fluential adviser. The former was a carrier of secret knowledge 
and his office was hereditarily transmitted. But relevant knowl-
edge can hardly have developed, witness the great success of the 
Jesuits' European instruments. Nah1ral science as a whole re-
mained purely empirical. Only quotations seem to have been 
preserved from the old botanical, that is pharmacological work, 
allegedly the work of an emperor. 
The historical disciplines benefited from the importance given 
to early times. The archeological contributions seem to have 
flourished during the tenth and twelfth centuries as did the art 
of annalism soon after. In vain Wang An-shih attempted to create 
an estate of professional jurists to occupy the offices. For orthodox 
Confucianism took no interest in any but purely antiquarian or 
purely practical subjects. (This statement will be qualified in 
Chapter VII.) 

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 155 « 
5. Freedom from Metaphysics 
and Innerworldly Nature of Confucianism 
THE CONFUCIANS, in principle, doubted the reality of magic 
as little as did the Jews, Christians, and Puritans. Witches were 
also burned in New England, but magic had no significance for 
salvation and that was important. The Rabbis maintained that 
"For Israel the stars are not decisive," and thus astrological de-
termination was powerless before Yahwe's will for the pious. Con-
fucianism correspondingly maintained that magic was powerless 
in the face of virtue. He who lived the classical way of life need 
not fear the spirits; only lack of virtue in high places gave power 
to the spirits. 
Moreover, Confucianism was completely distanced from the 
Buddhist Saint's contemplation and its Taoist imitators. Tradition 
makes the Master reject "living in hiding and performing miracles 
in order to win fame among later generations," which is not with-
out polemical point against Lao-tzu's mystical Taoism. The atti-
tude toward some of the great Confucian sages of the past, who 
according to tradition withdrew into solitude, to be sure, became 
somewhat twisted. It was held that one might withdraw only 
from a poorly governed state. For the rest, the Master occasionally 
promised the gift of knowing the future as a reward of virtuous 
perfection, the only turn of phrase which indicates mystical foun-
dations. Upon closer observation one notices that only the ability 
to interpret omina correctly was meant. This was said in order 
not to lag behind the professional divinatory priests. The one 
Messianist hope was for a future model emperor. This hope, as 
mentioned above, was diffused all over the world and was of 
popular origin. It was neither rejected nor touched by Con-
fucianism. After this fairy tale of a model emperor had been ac-
cepted, it was elaborated that he was to be preceded by a 
phoenix.15 Confucianism was only interested in affairs of this 
world such as it happened to be. 

)) 156 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
6. The Central Concept 
of Propriety 
THE conventionally educated man will participate in the old 
ceremonies with due and edifying respect. He controls all his 
activities, physical gestures, and movements as well with polite-
ness and with grace in accordance with the status mores and the 
commands of "propriety," a basic concept (I) of Confucianism. 
The sources like to dwell on describing the Master as one who 
moved about with perfect elegance, a man of the world who 
knew how to greet all participants according to rank and accord-
ing to the most intricate forms of etiquette. "Cultivated man," 
"princely," or "noble" man is a central concept which recurs in 
many transmitted statements of the Master. He is a man who is 
both inwardly and in relation to society harmonically attuned and 
poised in all social situations, be they high or low; he behaves 
accordingly and without compromising his dignity. Controlled 
ease and correct composure, grace and dignity in the sense of a 
ceremonially ordered court-salon characterize this man. 
In contrast to the passion and ostentation of the feudal warrior 
in ancient Islam we find watchful self-control, self-observation,. 
and reserve. Above all, we find repression of all forms of passion, 
including that of joy, for passion disturbs the equilibrium and the 
hannony of the soul. The latter is the root of all good. However, 
detachment does not, as in Buddhism, extend to all desire but to 
all irrational desire, and it is not practiced as in Buddhism for 
the sake of salvation from the world but for the sake of integra-
tion into the world. Confuci;m ethic, of course, had no idea of sal-
vation. The Confucian had no desire to be "saved" either from 
the migration of souls or from punishment in the beyond. Both 
ideas were unknown to Confucianism. The Confucian wished 
neither for salvation from life, which was affirmed, nor salvation 
from the social world, which was accepted as given. He thought 
of prudently mastering the opportunities of this world through 
self-control. He desired neither to be saved from evil nor from a 
fall of man, which he knew not. He desired to be saved from 

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 157 « 
nothing except perhaps the undignified barbarism of social rude-
ness. Only the infraction of piety, the one basic social duty, could 
constih1te "sin" for the Confucian. 
7. Piety 
FEUDALIS.M rested on honor as the cardinal virtue, patrimo-
nialism on piety. The reliability of the vassal's allegiance was 
based upon the former; the subordination of the lord's servant 
and official was based upon the latter. The difference is not a con-
trast but a shift of accent. The vassal of the Occident "com-
mended" himself and too, like the Japanese vassal, he had duties 
of piety. The free official also has a stah1s honor which must be 
counted as a motive of conduct. This was identical in China and 
in the Occident, but in contrast to the Middle East and Egypt 
where officials rose from a state of slavery. Everywhere the rela-
tionship of the officer and official to the monarch retains certain 
feudal traits. Even today the oath which is rendered personally to 
the monarch is characteristic of this relationship. Monarchs 
usually emphasize these elements of the official relation for 
dynastic reasons; the officials do so out of status interests. Residues 
of feudalism still inhere rather strongly in Chinese status ethics. 
Piety (hsiao) toward the feudal lord was enumerated along with 
piety toward parents, superiors in_ the hierarchy of office, and 
officeholders generally, for the identical principle of hsiao applied 
to all of them. 
In substance, feudal allegiance was transferred to the patronage 
relationships of officials. And the basic character of allegiance was 
patriarchical, not feudal. The absolutely primary virtue, con-
stantly inculcated in children, was filial piety toward parents.16 
In case of conflict, piety preceded all other virtuesP 
In a statement of the Master, praise is given to a high official 
who continued to tolerate indisputable abuses out of piety and in 
order not to disavow his father. He tolerated them because his 
father had done so when occupying the same position. However, 
this is in contrast to a paragraph of the Shu Ching which tells 

)) 158 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
how the emperor continues a son in his father's office that he 
might compensate for his father's trespasses.18 No man's conduct 
met the test of the Master until his way of mourning his parents 
was observed. In a patrimonial state where filial piety was trans-
fened to all relations of subordination, it can be readily under-
stood that an official-and Confucius for a time was a minister-
would consider filial piety as the virtue from which all others 
issue. Filial piety was held to provide the test and guarantee of 
adherence to unconditional discipline, the most important status 
obligation of bureaucracy. 
The sociologically basic change of the army from the combat 
of heroes to disciplined formations was consummated in China 
in pre-historic times. The universal belief in the omnipotence of 
discipline is found in very old anecdotes and was finnly estab-
lished even among the contemporaries of Confucius. "Insubordi-
nation is worse than low thinking." Thus "extravagance," that is 
to say lavish expenditure, is worse than thrift. The reverse, how-
ever, also holds; thrift leads to "low" or plebeian thinking which 
is unbecoming to a cultured man's station. Therefore, thrift must 
not be positively valued. \Ve see that the attitude toward things 
economic, here as in every status ethic, is a problem of consump-
tion and not of work It is not worth while for a "superior" man to 
learn economic management; actually it is not proper for him 
to do so. This does not result from a principled rejection of 
wealth per se: on the contrary, a well-administered state is the 
state in which people are ashamed of their poverty. In a poorly 
administered state people are ashamed of their wealth which in 
some cases might have been dishonestly acquired in office. There 
were only reservations concerning the acquisition of wealth. 
Economic literature was a literature of mandarins. 
The ethic of Confucianism, like every bureaucratic ethic, re-
jected the direct or indirect participation of officials in profitable 
enterprise. This was regarded as morally dubious and unbecom-
ing to one's station. The more the official actually had to depend 
upon exploiting his office position the more was this insisted upon. 
His income was not high and was, as in Antiquity, income in kind. 

THE CONI<'UCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 1.59 « 
However, this neither feudal nor ascetic but utilitarian ethic has 
developed no principled anti-chrematistic theories. On the con-
trary, Confucianism has produced theories of supply and demand, 
of speculation and profit, which sound very modern. In contrast 
to the Occident the profitability of money went without saying, 
and theory apparently knew no barriers to interest. Interest, in 
Chinese as in Greek, is called the "infant" of capital. Certain im-
perial statutes, to be sure, rejected certain kinds of "usury." But 
the capitalist, as a privately interested man, was not to become an 
official and the educated literati were to stay away from chrema-
tistics. Where social doubts about the profit motive per se 
emerged they were essentially political in nature. 
8. The Confucian Attitude toward the 
Economy and Confucianism's Rejection 
of the Professional Expert 
THE Master considered acquisitiveness a source of social unrest. 
Obviously, he meant the rise of the typical, pre-capitalist class 
conflict between the interests of the buyers or the monopolists and 
the consumers' interests. Naturally, Confucianism was predomi-
nantly oriented toward a consumers' policy. Still hostility toward 
economic profit was quite remote, as it was also in the popular 
mind. Extortionist and unfair officials, especially tax and other 
petty officials, were bitterly chastized on the stage, but not much 
seems to have been made of the accusations or mockery of 
merchants and usurers. The hostile wrath of Confucianism toward 
Buddhist monasteries led to Emperor Wu Tsung's campaign of 
annihilation in the year 844. But Confucianism primarily justified 
itself by the argument that the monasteries distracted people from 
useful work. Actually, as we have seen, "currency policy" played 
a role in this. 
Economic activity is highly appreciated throughout orthodox 
literature. Confucius, too, might strive for wealth, "even as a 
servant, with whip in hand," if only the success of the endeavor 
were fairly guaranteed. But the guarantee does not hold and this 

)) 160 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
fact leads to the one really essential reservation concerning eco-
nomic acquisitiveness: namely, the poise and harmony of the 
soul are shaken by the risks of acquisitiveness. Thus, the position 
of the office prebendary appears in ethically hallowed form. It is 
the one position becoming to a superior man because the office 
alone allows for the perfection of personality. :t\fencius reasons 
that without permanent income the educated man can be of 
constant mind only with difficulty, and the people not at all. 
Economic, medical, priestly income represent the "little path ... 
This leads to professional specialization, a very important point 
and closely connected with what has been said above. The cul-
tured man, however, strives for that universality which in the 
Confucian sense education alone provides and which the office 
precisely requires. This view characterizes the absence of rational 
specialization in the official functions of the patrimonial state. 
Yet, as in politics Wang An-shih's attempted reform indicated 
specialization so in literature it was recommended that spe-
cialized competencies of officials in the modern bureaucratic 
manner replace the traditional universality of official business 
which no single man could possibly master. 
The old educational ideal of the Chinese, however, stood in 
sharp contrast to these functional demands and, concomitantly, 
to the execution of a functional administrative rationalization in 
the manner of our European mechanisms. 
The Confucian aspirant to office, stemming from the old tradi-
tion, could hardly help viewing a specialized, professional train-
ing of European stamp as anything but a conditioning in the 
dirtiest Philistinism.lll This was undoubtedly the locus of much 
of the important resistance to "reform" in the occidental sense. 
The fundamental assertion, "a cultured man is not a tool" meant 
that he was an end in himself and not just a means for a specified 
useful purpose. The all-round educated Confucian "gentleman," 
as Dvorak has translated the term chiin-tzu, or the "princely man," 
supported a status ideal of cultivation that was directly opposed 
to the socially oriented Platonic ideal. 
The Platonic ideal was established on the soil of the polis and 

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 161 « 
proceeded from the conviction that man can attain fulfillment by 
being good at only one task. There was even stronger tension 
between the Confucian ideal and the vocational concept of ascetic 
Protestantism. 
Confucian virtue, based upon universality or self-perfection, 
was greater than the riches to be gained by one-sided thorough-
ness. Not even in the most influential position could one achieve 
anything in the world without the virtue derived from education. 
And vice versa, one could achieve nothing, no matter what one's 
virtue, without influential position. Hence, the "superior" man 
coveted such a position, not profit. 
Such, in brief, are the basic propositions concerning the atti-
tude to vocational life and property, generally ascribed to the 
Master. 
9. The Gentleman Ideal 
THE Confucian attitude toward vocational life and possessions is 
opposed to that feudal enjoyment of lavish expenditure promi-
nent in statements of the prophet in early Islam, and it is op-
posed to the Buddhist rejection of attachment to worldly goods. 
It is opposed to the strictly traditionalist, vocational ethic of 
Hinduism and to the Puritan hallowing of inner-worldly ascetic 
and profitable work in a rationally specialized vocation. If, for 
once, we may disregard this fundamental contrast, there are all 
sorts of particularized affinities to be found between Confucianism 
and the sober rationalism of Puritanism. 
The princely man avoids the temptations of beauty. As the 
Master correctly said, "No man loves virtue as one loves a beau-
tiful woman."20 According to tradition, the jealous neighboring 
prince had pressured the Master out of his position with the 
prince of Lu by donating to the overlord of Lu a collection of 
beautiful girls which gave the morally ill-advised prince greater 
pleasure than did the doctrines of his political father-confessor. 
In any case, Confucius viewed woman as a thoroughly irrational 
creature often as difficult to deal with as servants.21 Condescen-

» 162 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
sion makes both women and servants forget their distance, strict-
ness in turn makes them ill-humored. The Buddhist horror of 
women, which was determined by flight from the world, thus 
found its counterpart in Confucianism's lack of esteem for women, 
determined by rational sobriety. Confucianism has, of course, 
never considered outlawing concubines who were necessarily ac-
cepted along with the legitimate wife for tl1c sake of producing 
descendants. The repeatedly mentioned cartel of the feudal 
princes was directed solely against giving the sons of concubines 
equal rights as heirs, and the struggle against the illegitimate in-
fluences of the harem cloaked itself as a struggle against the 
threatening predominance of the Yin (feminine) substance over 
the Yang (masculine) substance. 
Constancy in friendship is highly praised. :Man needs friends, 
but one should select friends from one's peers. To status inferiors 
benevolent kindness should be extended. For the rest, all ethics 
in this sphere go back to the principled mutuality of the neigh-
borhood association of peasants, "I shall do unto you as you do 
unto me." That is the "reciprocity" which the Master, when ques-
tioned, presented as the very foundation of social ethics. 
However, the love of one's enemy among the radical mystics 
(Lao-tzu, Mo Ti) was decidedly rejected as running counter to 
fundamental state interests. Justice toward enemies, love for 
friends-what in addition could one offer friends were one to offer 
love to one's enemies? All in all, the cultured gentleman of Con-
fucianism was a man who combined "benevolence" with "energy," 
and ''knowledge" with "frankness." All this, however, was de-
limited by "judicious caution" which the common man lacked, 
wherefore he was denied the path to the "correct middle." ]\..'fore-
over, what gave this ethic its special stamp was that everything 
was to proceed within the confines of social propriety. For only 
the sense of propriety molds the "princely" man into a "person-
ality" in the Confucian sense. Therefore, the barrier to the car-
dinal virtue of frankness was the command of propriety. Not only 
duties of piety had an unconditional precedence (a fib was 
permissible for reasons of piety) but social proprieties had 

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 163 « 
precedence, too, according to the Master's practice and as trans-
mitted by tradition. "Where we are three I find my master," Con-
fucius has allegedly said, which meant, I bow to the majority. He 
selected the classical writings according to this "propriety." Ssu-
ma Ch'ien presumably knew of 3,000 (?) Shi Ching odes from 
which Confucius is said to have selected 306 odes. 
Perfection could be reached only by unceasing study, and that 
meant literary studies. The "princely" man reflects and "studies" 
everything incessantly and anew. Allegedly ninety year old candi-
dates were by no means rare at official state examinations. Still 
this incessant study consisted of the mere assimilation of existing 
ideas. According to a communication ascribed to him, the Master 
even in old age tried vainly to create from his own mind only to 
fall back again upon reading. In his view, unless one read, the 
mind operated in neutral gear as it were. The phrase "concepts 
without percepts are empty" was replaced by "thought without 
reading is sterile." For without study, as was said, the quest for 
knowledge squanders intelligence, benevolence makes for stu-
pidity, candor for injudiciousness, energy for rudeness. Audacity 
leads to insubordination, and firmness of character leads to er-
raticism. The "correct middle," which for this ethic of social ad-
justment was the supreme good, was then missed. 
Piety, the mother of discipline, was the one truly absolute duty 
and a literary education was the one universal means of perfec-
tion. The prince's ·wisdom of state, however, was thought to be 
the selection of the "correct" minister in the classical sense, so 
Confucius is reported to have said to the Duke of Nagi. 
10. The Significance of the 
Classics 
THIS education was transmitted only through the study of the old 
classics whose absolutely canonical prestige and purified form of 
orthodoxy went without question. 
To be sure, one occasionally finds a statement to the effect that 
a man consulting Antiquity about problems of the present may 

)) 164 « 
THE RELIGION Of' CHIN A 
easily do harm. Yet this should be interpreted as a rejection of the 
old feudal conditions rather than anti-traditionalism, as Legge 
assumes. The whole of Confucianism became a relentless cano-
nization of tradition. 
Li Sst'i's famous ministerial :\Iemorial which was truly anti-tra-
ditionalist, was directed against Confucianism and led to the great 
catash'ophe of the burning of the books after the creation of the 
bureaucratic and unified state in 213 B.c. The guild of the literati, 
we read, praises Antiquity at the expense of the present, hence 
teaches contempt for the emperor's laws and criticizes the laws 
in terms of the allegedly authoritative books of literati. The 
only useful books are those on economics, medicine, and divina-
tion-a characteristic reversal of Confucian values. This was the 
completely utilitarian rationalism of the desh'oyer of feudalism 
who for the sake of his power position, divested himself of all 
those fetters of tradition which \Vcre always a barrier to Con-
fucian rationalism. But in so doing he upset the prudent compro-
mise between the interest of the ruling sh·atum in power and its 
interest in legitimacy. On this compromise the raison d'etat of the 
system was based. 
Undoubtedly, reasons of security made the Han dynasty duly 
fall back upon Confucianism soon afterward. A pah'imonial of-
ficialdom, finding itself in a position of absolute power and 
monopolizing both the official and priestly functions, could indeed 
have none but a h'aditionalist mentality regarding literature. The 
sanctity of literature alone guaranteed the legitimacy of the order 
which supported the position of officialdom. 
At this point bureaucracy had to restrict its rationalism; like-
wise, in confronting the religious belief of the people it had to do 
so. Popular belief guaranteed the docility of the masses and, as 
noted, set limits to the criticism of the system of government. 
The individual ruler could be a poor ruler, hence devoid of 
charisma. In that case the ruler did not rule by divine right and 
was to be deposed just like any incompetent official. The system, 
however, had to rest on piety, which was endangered with every 
shattering of b'adition. For these well-known reasons Confucian-

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 165 « 
ism has not made the slightest attempt ethically to rationalize 
the existing religious beliefs. It presupposed as an element of the 
given secular order the official cult which was managed by the 
emperor and the officials, and the ancestor cult of the house-
father. The monarch of the Shu Ching reached decisions not only 
after consulting the lords of the realm and the "people" (then, un-
doubtedly, the anny) but also after using two traditional means 
of divination. The course of conduct was merely casuistically de-
bated if these sources contradicted one another. Especially be-
cause of the attitude of the educated stratum, the private need 
for advisory cure of soul and religious orientation remained on 
the level of magical animism and the worship of functional deities. 
These are always to be found unless prophecies intervene and in 
China prophecies did not arise. 
Chinese thought has brought magical animism into a system 
which de Groot has named "Universism." But Confucianism has 
not alone contributed to its creation and we must consider the 
participating forces which, from the Confucian viewpoint, were 
heterodox. 
11. Historical Development of 
Orthodoxy 
FIRST, we have to realize that Confucianism was the only doc-
trine among the theories of the literati which was ultimately also 
absorbed by the other schools. But Confucianism has not always 
been the only accepted doctrine, nor the exclusively state-ap-
proved philosophy of China. Hung-fan, that is "the great plan," 
is the technical tenn for this. The further back one goes in history 
the less identified with Confucian orthodoxy are the literati. The 
Period of the Warring Kingdoms knew of competing philosophical 
schools and their competition did not vanish even in the unified 
Empire. It was especially keen whenever imperial power reached 
a low point. The victory of Confucianism was decided only about 
the eighth century of the Christian era. This is not the place to 
recapitulate the history of Chinese philosophy; nevertheless, the 

» 166 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
development of orthodoxy may he illustrated by the following 
data. 
For the time being we may by-pass the position of Lao-tzu and 
his school since it stood very much apart. After Confucius there 
are still such philosophers to be found as Yang Chu, an Epicurean 
fatalist who, in opposition to the Confucians, eliminated the sig-
nificance of education because the uniqueness of a person was 
held to be his irremediable "fate." There was Mo Ti, who emanci-
pated himself from tradition to a considerable degree. Before and 
during I\1encius' time in the fourth century R.C., imperial power 
was at a low and Sung K'cng, an active official of one of the \Var-
ring Kingdoms, stood on an anti-Confucian platform maintaining 
the wickedness of human nature. The dialecticians, the asceticists, 
and the pure physiocrats such as Hsii Hsing opposed one 
another with programs widely differing in economic policy. As 
late as the second century A.D. the Chung Lun of Chu Hsi took 
a strictly anti-pacifist position, arguing that degeneration of mores 
during long periods of peace leads to debauchery and lascivious-
ness.22 
All these were non-classical heresies and \.fcncius fought those 
of his time. Hut his contemporary, Ilsiin-tzu, took the Confucian 
view that human goodness was an artificial product not of God 
but of man. Thus, politically, he maintained: "God is the expres-
sion of the heart of the people." 
Also the absolute pessimist, Yang Chu, stood aloof from Men-
cius and considered the end of all wisdom to be the bearing of 
life and casting o[ the fear of death. A reason often presented for 
the sufferance of the pious was that God's will is "unsteady." 
A system of the antagonist literati schools of his time is to be 
found in Ssu-ma Ch'ien, whose father seems to have been a 
Taoist.2s Six schools arc distinguished: First, metaphysicians, with 
their Yin and Yang speculations based upon astronomy; second, 
Mo Ti ( f\1ocius and his school), influenced by mysticism be-
lieving in plain burials and absolute simplicity of conduct even 
for the emperor; third, the school of the philologists, with their 
interpretation of words and conceptual realism, who were rela-

THE CONFUCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 167 « 
tivcly apolitical and had survived from the time of the sophists; 
fourth, the Legists, men who represented, as Tsui Shui later did, 
the theory of dcterment; fifth, the Taoists, to be discussed later; 
sixth, the school of the literati, the Confucians, whom Ssu-ma 
Ch'ien follows. Yet Ssu-ma Ch'ien represents the Confucian 
standpoint in a way which later appeared, in several respects, to 
be non-classical. 
12. The "Pathos" of Early 
Confucianism 
SSU-MA CH'IEN esteemed the well-kllown Emperor Huang Ti 
who became au auchoret in a way suggestive of Taoism.24 His 
cosmogony, a doctrine of five clements, is evidently of astrological 
origin. The orthodox Confucians would surely go along with his 
appreciation of wealth; they would also endorse the notion that 
only the rich arc motivated to adhere correctly to the rites. Though 
the recommendation of trade as a means of income was shocking 
to the Confucians,2" some of them would not have objected to 
Ssu-ma Ch'ien's doubts about the absolute detcnninism of "provi-
dence" for .it was known that virtuous people do die of starvation. 
The monuments of the Han period bear similar statements. For 
example an inscription from a tombstone of the Han period 
(about 25 n.c.) bemoaning the premature death of a man reads: 
"There have been men since Antiquity who have led an impec-
cable life without having been rewarded for it." "His memory 
lives on" ( cf. Ssu-ma Ch'ien). ''l-Ie will ennoble his descendants." 
(This is the old conception of hereditary charisma; the newer con-
ception dilfers from this, as mentioned above.) "He has departed 
for a cold shadowy realm." 
An inscription from a tomb of 405 A.D. reads: "All life must 
die." Perfect man has no individual characteristics. (He is united 
with Tao. Cf. Chapter VII. Is this Chuang-tzu's influence?) 
Praise is given to indifference toward promotion or loss of office. 
Promotion is determined by frankness, filial piety, and piety to-
ward the dead. 

» 168 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
But generally it was felt that, "Heaven knows no mercy, he 
fell sick and died." A "god" is never mentioned. The mentality 
and mood on the whole is related to that of Ssu-ma Ch'ien and 
the forced optimism of the later period is absent.26 
Yet, Ssu-ma Ch'icn's position was not acceptable without reser-
vation. That heroism might be "useless" corresponded to the later 
doctrine and was ascribed to the Master. But it was hardly classi-
cal that the celebrated name was everything, that virtue was pre-
sented as an "end in itself," or that the prince was to be pedagogi-
cally directed. Yet this was what the castrate Ssu-ma Ch'ien 
taught. The absolute equanimity of tone in the Annals was prac-
ticed by Ssu-ma Ch'icn in a masterful manner and accorded ex-
cellently with Confucius' practice. The letter which Ssu-ma Ch'ien 
wrote to his friend Jen Yen,27 who was in custody and who in 
vain sought his help, strikes us as being in the most orthodox 
Confucian style. Ssu-ma Ch'ien, at one time suspect politically, 
had been castrated.28 He was later employed but wrote that he 
actually could not or would not help him for fear of incurring 
risks. For the soul of one "who has taken to the long path'~29 
might harbor wrath against him, i.e., Ssu-ma Ch'icn, and hence 
might harm him. He wished to state his reasons for not helping 
Jen Yen, for the "virtuous man puts himself out for one \vho 
knows how to esteem him," a tmly Confucian expression. Instead 
of discussing the fate of the unfortunate in detail, he merely 
presents his own misfortune, that is his castration. How did the 
writer manage to get over his sufferance? He lists four main 
points: 
First, hy not dishonoring one's ancestors; second, by not losing 
one's own honor; third, by not violating reason and dignity; 
four, by not trespassing the "rules binding upon all." As for 
Ssu-ma Ch'ien, he would wash off the stain by writing his book. 
The whole letter reminds us of Abaclard's letters to Heloi:se 
which hurt us by their cold didactic manner (for presumably 
similar reasons!). Yet this cool temperature of inter-human rela-
tions is tmly Confucian. There are things which may run counter 
to our feelings but we should not forget that the magnificent and 

THE CONI<'UCIAN LIFE ORIENTATION 
» 169 « 
proud documents, cited at the end of the preceding chapter, are 
done in the Confucian spirit. Shih Huang Ti's inscription, repro-
duced by Ssu-ma Ch'ien,:lO defines acting against "reason" as 
objectionable. This would be interpreted by Ssu-ma Ch'ien and 
the Confucians to mean that guidance for reasonable conduct 
can be attained only through study31 and knowledge. For Con-
fucianism the last word was "knowledge," and that meant knowl-
edge of tradition and of the classical norm as acquired through 
literary studies. In this emphasis, as we shall see, Confucianism 
was separated from other systems of Chinese attitudes toward 
the world. 
13. The Pacifist Character 
of Confucianism 
THE "reason" of Confucianism was a rationalism of order. Chen 
Ki Tong says, "Rather be dog and live in peace than be man 
and live in anarchy."32 As this statement indicates, Confucian 
reason was essentially pacifist in nature.33 Historically, this 
peculiarity was accentuated to the point where Emperor Ch'ien 
Lung could write in the history of the Ming dynasty, "Only 
he who seeks to shed no human blood can hold the realm to-
gether."34 For, "The ways of Heaven are changeable and reason 
alone is our aid." This was the final product of the unified Em-
pire. In contrast, Confucius had demanded vengeance for the 
killing of parents, older brothers, and friends and regarded this 
as a manly duty. But the ethic remained pacifist, inner-worldly, 
and solely oriented to the fear of the spirits. 
The spirits were not without moral qualifications. On the 
contrary, we have seen that in China, as in Egypt, the irra-
tionality of the judiciary was founded in the belief that the 
cry of the oppressed inevitably induced the vengeance of the 
spirits. It was especially true when the victim had died of 
suicide, grief, and despair. Emerging at the latest under the 
Han dynasty, this firm belief grew out of the idealized projection 
of the bureaucracy and the right of appeal to Heaven. We 

)) 170 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
have also seen the great power of hmvling masses accompanying 
a real or supposed victim of oppression in the train of officials. 
An identical belief in the vengeance of spirits compelled every 
official to give way before mass hysteria with its danger of 
suicide. 
A crowd forced a capital verdict to be passed against a man-
darin who had beaten his kitchen boy to death (in 1882) .35 The 
belief in spirits and their way of functioning was the one and 
very effective official Magna Charta of the masses in China. But 
the spirits also kept watch over contracts of all sorts. They denied 
protection to coerced or immoral contracts.3f' Legality as a virtue 
was thus animistically guaranteed in concreto and not merely 
as a total habituation of the whole personality. Yet, the central 
force of a salvation religion conducive to a methodical way of 
life was non-existent. 

[ 
PART Ill l 
T AOIS1fl 


CHAPTER VII 
OB.THODOXY AND 
HETEHODOXY 
T 
1. Doctrine a11d Ritual in China 
IIE official Chinese state cult everywhere served only the 
interests of the community; the ancestor cult served those of 
the sibs. \Vith both of them individual interests per se remained 
out of the picture. The great spirits of nature were increasingly 
depersonalized. Their cult was reduced to official ritual, the ritual 
was gradually emptied of all emotional clements and finally be~ 
came equated with mere social convention. This was the work 
of the culhued stratum of intellectuals who left entirely aside 
the typical religious needs of the masses. The proud renuncia~ 
tion of the beyond and of religious guarantees of salvation for 
the individual in the here and now could be sustained only 
among cultured intellechuils.2 
This gap (between the masses and the intellectuals) could 
not be filled by imposing the Confucian attitude upon non~ 
manclarins, that is to say inculcating them with classical doc-
trine, the only available instruction. 
Shortly after Confucius, a variety of functional deities and 
apotheosizcd heroes suddenly appeared in literature. It is hardly 
conceivable that the process of developing such divine figures was 
only then initiated, for elsewhere these formations belong to 
earlier stages. Certain typical functional deities ("masters") of 
thunder, winds, etc., are characteristic of the earlier religion of 
• 173 c 

» 174 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
peasants; apothcosized heroes bespeak of feudal hero combat 
and belong to a period long since passed in China. But the special-
ization aml fixation of the functional deities down to the goddess 
of the privy, like the similar specialization of numina in ancient 
Tiorne, may have resulted from increasing cultic conventionalism 
under the rule of bureaucracy. 
The canonization of Confucius is the first certain example of 
a historical figure becoming a subject of worship.3 Pictorial rep-
resentations, even more than numerous features of the ambig-
uous official terminolorrv, allow us to discern in the God of 
b, 
Heaven a being originally conceived as a person. As \VC have 
seen, not until the twelfth century of the Christian era was his 
depersonalization brought to a materialistically determined end. 
The masses were blocked from direct access to the impersonalized 
highest being in the prayer and sacrifice of the state cult. For 
them the primeval "Lord of Heaven," legends of whose birth, 
government, hermitage, and ascent to Heaven were later elabo-
rated, seems to have lived ever after and has been worshiped 
in the household. The representatives of the official cult of 
Heaven naturally ignored this. 
Other popular deities known in modern times may well be 
similarly derived from ancient functional deities. These the offi-
cial cult ignored and Confucianism merely counted them among 
the crowd of "spirits." Only an expert could approach the difficult 
problem of relating the original character of these deities to 
their later form, i.e., to assign a place to "animism." Only an 
expert could conceive the miraculous nature and the efficacy 
ascribed to natural and artificial objects and thPreby assign a 
place to "fetishism." vVc arc not concerned with these problems 
here. vVe are interested in the cleavage between the official 
institution of grace and non-classical popular religion. And we 
wish to inquire whether the latter could have or has been the 
source of a methodical way of life differing from the official cult 
in orientation. Such might appear to he the case. The cults of most 
popular deities, unless they were Buddhist in origin, were con-
sidered part of a religious current which Confucianism and the 

ORTUODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
)} 175 (( 
institution of grace under its control have ahvays heated as hetero-
dox. This curreut, like the institution of grace oriented to Con-
fucianism, on the one hand consisted of cultic and magical prac-
tice and on the other hand, doctriue. This \Ve shall soon discuss. 
First, however, it seems useful to clarify further the principled 
relationship of the old popular deities to the ethical doctrine of 
Conhicianisrn. 
\Ve may use the example closest at hand: let us consider the 
relation of the Hellenic philosophical schools of social ethics to 
the old Hellenic popular deities. Again we c:an observe the awk-
ward situation which, in principle, has been shared by the cui-
hired intellectual strata of all times when confronting historically 
given, robust folk belief. The Hellenic state gave ample leeway 
to metaphysical and social-ethical speculations. The state merely 
demanded the observance of the cultic duties which were be-
queathed, for neglect of them could bring misforhme to the polis. 
The Greek philosophical schools corresponded to Confucianism 
in their social-ethical orientation and the main representatives of 
the classical period, like the Chinese intellectuals of the Confucian 
school, esseutially left the gods aside. On the whole they simply 
went along with the transmitted rites, as the circles of genteel 
intellectuals in China did and as such circles generally do with 
us. At one point, though there was a significant difference. 
For pedagogical purposes, the Coufucian edition of classical 
literature had succeeded in eliminating not only these folk deities 
but also all matters offensive to their ethical conventionalism. This 
was perhaps the most important contribution made by Con-
fucius, as already indicated. 
One need only read Plato's famous discussion of Homer in 
the Republic to recognize how much classical Hellenic philosophy 
would have liked to do in social pedagogy as Confucianism had 
done. Though there was no place for Homer in the ethically 
rational state, he was a tremendous force in knightly education 
and was considered classical. In the military polis the role of 
Homer and his hero-gods could not possibly have been ignored 
by public authorities and educators. Nor was it possible to cstab-

» 176 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
lish a rule of literati based on an ethically purified literature (and 
music) such as Patrimonialism has executed in its interest in 
China. !vloreover, even after the polis had been subdued and 
political inhibitions thus removed within the pacified empire, none 
of the co-existing philosophical schools succeeded in attaining 
the exclusive canonical prestige which Confucianism had attained 
in China. For the analogy would have been the acceptance of 
a special philosophy as the only correct state philosophy, i.e., 
as if the Caesars had tolerated only Stoic philosophy and had 
appointed only Stoic philosophers to office. This was impossible 
in the Occident because no philosophical school claimed or could 
claim the legitimacy of absolute traditionalism. But Confucius, 
finding himself in such a position, deliberately did this. For 
this reason occidental philosophy could not be of political service 
to a world ruler and his officials in the way Confucian doctrine 
could be. 
The Greek philosophers in their inner nature were oriented 
to problems of the free polis. Duties of citizens, not duties of 
subjects, was their basic theme. An internal connection with 
ancient and sacred religious commandments of piety was lacking; 
such commandments might have been of service to a patrimonial 
ruler interested in legitimacy. In their zeal, the politically most 
influential philosophers were quite remote from that absolute 
adjustment to the world and from the rejection of all dubious 
metaphysical speculations whose absence recommended Con-
fucianism so urgently to the Chinese overlord. Stoicism down to 
the Antonines remained the doctrine of the opposition hostile to-
ward opportunism. Only the disappearance of the opposition 
after Tacitus facilitated the acceptance of Stoic theories by the 
Caesars. This followed from the uniqueness of the ancient polis 
and was perhaps its most important result for the history of ideas. 
Thus the tension between philosophical theory and social 
ethics, as opposed to the popular cult of the pre-Cluistian Occi-
dent, continued to exist in the following sense. The cult of the 
heroic and folk deities of "Homeric" times was correspondingly 
developed as the official institution; but the teachings of the 

ORTHODOXY AND llETEHODOXY 
» 177 (( 
philosophers were the optional concern of private citizens. It 
was exactly opposite to what was found in China. There a 
canonical doctrine and religiously sanctioned state rites co-
existed with deities whose cult was in part only officially prac-
ticed, in some degree merely tolerated, and in part suspiciously 
viewed as a private affair. Of course, officially unauthorized, par-
tially suspect cults also existed in occidental Antirp1ity alongside 
the official cult of the gods. Certain of these private cults were 
distinguished by a soteriology of their own and a corresponding 
ethic. Beginning with Pythagoreanism, this continued through the 
cults of saviors during the time of the Caesars. The same held for 
some unofficial cults in China. 
In contrast, development in the Occident led to the world his-
torical alliance between public authorities and one of these sote-
riological communities-i.e., Christendom-an alliance .still in-
fluential today. Chinese development followed a di.fferent course. 
For a time in China it seemed as if Buddhism might play a similar 
role since it had been formally accepted by the emperors. 
Buddhism, however, was confined to the position of a tolerated, 
though influential, cult practiced alongside others. This was 
due to the interests which we hav·e indicated, such as the resist-
ance of the Confucian bureaucracy, mercantilist and currency 
policies, and finally to a tremendous catastrophe. Above all, as 
we shall sec later, the influence of Buddhism in China had rela-
tively little bearing on the matter which is of special interest 
here, namely, economic mentality. In China, most of the old 
folk deities, as well as a whole swarm of new creations, had come 
under the patronage of a priesthood which was tolerated because 
it claimed to have originated with a philosophical personage, Lao-
tzu, and his doctrine. Originally the meaning of this doctrine did 
not differ in the main from that of Confucianism. Later it be-
came antagonistic to Confucianism and was finally considered 
thoroughly hctcrouox. \Vc cannot dispense with a review of this 
heterodoxy. 
The individual's mystic or ascetic quest for salvation was an 

)) 178 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
interest entirely alien to (classical) Confucianism. In India, this 
search for salvation flowed from strata of educated laymen, 
especially nobles who were learned or semi-learned in the 'vedic 
scriptures, ami whose education was not bound to a priesthood. 
The quest for individual salvation had, of course, just as little 
place in Chinese bureaucratic rationalism as it had in the way 
of life of any bureaucracy. 
2. Anchorelisrn and Lao-tzu 
Al'\CHOHETS 1 have always existed in China, and not only ac-
cording to Chuang-tzu." For their existence has also been pre-
served in pictorial rcprcscntationsn and the Confucians themselves 
acknowledge them. There <lre even notes leading us to assume 
that originally the early heroes and literati retired in old age 
to a solitary life in the \\!Oods. In a pure society of warriors, the 
"aged," considered worthless, were often left to exposure and 
it is quite possible that the anchords were first recruited from 
among these age groups. These assumptions arc, however, un-
certain. 
In historical times, unlike India, a Vanaprastha existence of the 
aged \Vas never considered nonnal. Nevertheless, only withdrawal 
from the "world" gave time and strength for "thinking" as well 
as for mystic feeli-ng. Confucius, like -his couutcrpart; Lao-tzu, 
lived alone and without oilke. The only clifierencc was that the 
mystics, Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu, declined office-holding because 
of their quest for salvation, whereas Confucius felt himself de-
prived of office. For politically nnsucc<'ssful literati, the anchoret 
existence was considered the wmnal fonn of retirement from 
politics rather than committing suicide or petitioning for punish-
ment.' The brother of the prince of one of the \Varring Kingdoms, 
Chang Yang in Yii, withclrew into anchorctism. 8 Chnang-tzu also 
reported that the successful emperor, Huang Ti, abdicated and 
b(•came an anchorct. One may only conceive of the early anchor-
ets' goal of salvation as oriented first, mncrohiotically and second, 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 179 (( 
magically. Long life and magic powers were the goals of the 
masters and of a small number of disciples ·who resided with 
them in their service. 
3. Tao and Mysticism 
TO THIS point of view a mystical attitude toward the worlJ 
could be enjoined. A philosophy could be Lased upon it, and 
this actually happened. Emperor Huang Ti, upon questioning, 
received the answer that the sage could teach only men who 
had retired from the world, especially from the secular station 
and office. They were the "scholars, who sit at home," i.e., did 
not accept office. The later contrast with the Confucian aspirants 
to office is already indicated here, for the "philosophy" of the 
anchorets w.ent far beyond this. As with all true mysticism, 
absolute indifference to the world was self-implied; and, it is not 
to be forgotten that the macrobiotic goal was, as said before, one 
of the anchorets' strivings. According to the primitive "meta-
physics" a thrifty and rational management (one might say 
economy) of the obvious bearer of life, i.e., one's breath, seemed 
important. 
The physiologically ascertainable fact that the regulation of 
breathing may facilitate mental conditions of a specific sort led 
further afield. The "saint" must be "neither dead nor alive" and 
should behave as if not alive. "'I am a stupid man," hence I have 
eluded worldly wisdom, said Lao-tzu in affirming his sanctity. 
Chuang-tzu did not wish to be ''harnessed" to an office but rather 
to exist "like a pig in a muddy ditch." 
The aim was "to make one's self equal to ether," to "throw off 
the body." Experts hold different opinions when asked whether 
Indian influences have been present in this rather old phenomenon 
of regulation of brcathing.H Indian vestiges do not seem to be 
absent in the case of the most famous of these anchorets who 
fled from office, namely Lao-tzu, alleged by tradition to be older 
but contemporary \vith Confucius. 10 

» 180 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
4. The Practical Consequences 
of Mysticisnt 
HEHE we are not concerned with Lao-tzu as a philosopher11 
but with his sociological position and his influence. The opposition 
to Confucianism is evident even in tenninology. The harmonic 
state appropriate to the charismatic emperor was designated 
in the Chung Yung by Confucius' grandson, Tzu Ssu, as a state 
of equilibrium. In the writings influenced by Lao-tzu or claiming 
to follow him, the state is called emptiness (hu), or non-existence 
(wu), which is attainable by wu-wei (doing nothing) and pu-yen 
(saying nothing). Obviously, these are typically mystic and 
by no means exclusively Chinese categories. According to Con-
fucian doctrine the Li, the mles of ceremony and ritual, are 
the means for producing chung; 12 but the mystics viewed these 
means as being quite worthless. The inner attitude by which 
one can achieve the power of a Tao shih, a doctor of Tao so to 
say, is to behave as if one did not have a soul, thereby liberating 
the soul from the senses. Like the Confucians the Tao Teh 
Ching, 13 ascribed to Lao-tzu, teaches that life is equal to the 
possession of a "shen"; hence macrobiotics is equated with cultiva-
tion of the shen. The macrobiotic point of view was the same, but 
the means differed. 
vVe have met repeatedly with the basic category, Tao, in 
terms of which heterodox Taoists were later separated from 
Confucians. Both schools, and generally all Chinese thought, 
held the concept of Tao in common. All the old deities were 
likewise common to them. But Taoism has enriched the pantheon 
with numerous deities who are essentially apotheosized men 
-a facet of macrobiotics, whereas orthodoxy considered these 
deities as non-classical. Both had in common the classical litera-
ture; but the heterodox school added Lao-tzu's Tao Teh Ching 
and Chuang-tzu's \vritings which the Confucians rejected as non-
classical. Confucius himself did not reject the basic categories of 
his opponents, as de Groot greatly emphasizes. Also Confucius has 
not rejected wu-wei (laissez-faire) and obviously he has been quite 

ORTHODOXY AND llETERODOXY 
» 181 « 
close on occasion to the doctrine of the magical charisma of 
men, which in Tao means abstention from all action. Let us 
pursue the contrast somewhat further. 
5. The Contrast Between the 
Orthodox and Heterodox Schools 
CONFUCIANISM had eliminated all ecstatic and orgiastic ves-
tiges of the cult and, like the Roman nobility of office, rejected 
these as undignified. Still magical practice here as everywhere 
knew ecstasy and orgy. The wu (men or women) and shih (men), 
the old medicine men and rainmakers, still exist today and are 
mentioned in the literature of all times. At temple festivities they 
are still ecstatically active. Originally they absorbed the magical 
"power," then the "spirit," then the "god" and worked through 
him. The wu and shih represented themselves later as "Taoists" 
and until the present were considered so. But in the initial phase, 
Lao-tzu and his disciples did not seck the orgiastic ecstasy which 
they would certainly have rejected as undignified; rather, like 
all mystic intellectuals, they sought apathetic ecstasy. As we 
shall see below, only later did all the magicians agree to consider 
themselves as "Taoist" successors of Lao-tzu and to regard him 
as their archegetes because he happened to be or was considered 
to be one of the literati. The mystics were in their worldliness, i.e., 
their macrobiotics, still more radical than the Confucians. \Vhat 
was the substance of their central theories and in what way 
did they differ? In relation to Confucianism one tends to desig-
nate all heterodoxy as "Taoism." 
"Tao" per se is an orthodox Confucian concept. It means the 
eternal order of the cosmos and at the same time its course, an 
identification frequently found in a metaphysics which lacks a 
thorough dialectical structure.14 'With Lao-tzu, Tao was brought 
into relationship with the typical god-seeking of the mystic. Tao 
is the one unchangeable element and therefore it is the absolute 
value; it means the order as well as the god-head of matter and 
the all-inclusive idea of the eternal arch-symbols of all being. In 

)) .182 ({ 
TilE HELIGIO!'Ii OF CHINA 
shori, it is the divine All-One of which one can partake-as in all 
contcmpbtive mysticism-by rendering one's self absolutely void 
of worldly interests and passionate desires until release from all 
activity is attained (wu wei). r\'ot cnly Confucius, but also his 
school could and did accept this. Tao was the same and was 
equally valid for both Confucius a11d Lao-lzu. 
The Confucians, however, were not mystics. Interest in union 
with the divine substance and in the stale attainable by contem-
plation should have led Lao-tzu, like most of the mystics, to the 
complete devaluation of inner-worldly culture as a source of re·· 
ligious salvation. To some extent this held for Lao-tzu, too. To 
him tlw supreme good was a psychic state, a unio my~tica, and 
not a state of grace to be proved in active conduct like occidental 
asceticism. 
As with all mysticism this state was determined psychologically 
and did not operate externally in a rational way. Universal 
acosmistic charity typically results from the objectless euphoria 
of these mystics and their characteristic apathetic ecstasy; per- . 
haps it had been created by Lao-tzu. This purely psychic state 
was also rationally interpreted here. IIeaven and earth were 
legitimated as the greatest deities because of the absolute un-
selfishness of their services to man and because of the uncon-
ditional goodness peculiar to divinity. The macrobiotic element 
of the doctrine constitutes the basis for the permanence of forces 
of nature which at least appwxirnate that of the solely eternal 
1'ao. The mystic's conduct followed this model. 
The physiologically dctcnnincd internal condition was likewise 
rationally interpreted. Everywhne the snbstall{:e of mysticism 
is to maintain one's goodnl'SS and humility by leading an incognito 
existence in the world. This constitutes the mystic's specifically 
broken relationship with the world. If action is not absolutely 
suspended it is miuimizcd, for therein lies the only possible 
proof of the mystic's state of grace. And only in this manner 
is it possible to demonstrate that the world cannot touch him. In 
accord with Lao-tzu's theories it is at the same time the best 
guarantee for the permanence of one's life on earth, perhaps 

ORTHODOXY A:XD IIETEHODOXY 
}} 18:3 « 
even permanence beyond life on earth. Lao-tzu or his inter-
preter did not develop a true doctrine of immortality; this seems 
to be a product of later times. Though the thought of being re-
moved to etemal paradise once the inJividual had attained 
perfect Tao is a rather early idea, it \Vas not a dominant one. 
\Vith Lao-tzn the minimization of action resulted, at least 
prirnari!y and directly, from the nature of the mystic possession 
of the holy. Lao-tzu has only indicated, not consummated, certain 
implications of mystic religiosity. The "saint" whom Lao-tzu 
places above the Confucian ·'gentleman" ideal, not only has no 
need for worldly virtue, but basically this is dangerous since it 
may deflect him from the pursuit of the holy. In the paradoxical 
formulation favored by the Chinese, Lao-tzu regards worldly 
virtue and its esteem as a sign thut th0 world has become unholv 
and godless. For him a w~rld which is held together by th~ 
cardinal virb1e of Confucian Li, that is "propriety," stands at 
the lowest level. This \vorld happens to exist, hovvever, awl 
what matters is to accommodate one's self to its ways. 
Such accommodation is possible only through relativities of 
some sort. Lao-tzu- did not take as his conclusion the reso.iute 
rejection of the world. Nor, above all, did he reject in principle 
the iJeal of the educated gentleman ( chiin tzu) which was vital 
for the mandarins as a status group. Had he done so, traces 
of his thoughts might never have come down to us. 
To he sure, he demanded the "great" virtue as opposed to 
the "little" virtue of Confucianism, i.e., accommodation to the 
world. This means he demanded the ethic of absolute perfection 
as against the socially relativist ethic. This demand, ho\vever, 
could ultimately lead him neither to asceticist conclusions nor to 
positive demands in the field of social ethics. In part this \Vas 
so because coutemplativc mysticism cannot give birth to such 
demands; in part also because the ultimate conclusions were not 
drawn. 
According to a tradition, the real content of which is ques-
tionable but which some eminent experts still maintain, the 
personal antagonism of Confucius toward Lao-tzu was deter-

)) 184 « 
TH£ HELlGJON OF CHI;'\; A 
mined only by certain relativist consequences which Lan-tzu's 
mysticism had for politil'al ideals. On the one ham\ tlw ration-
alist literati tended toward the centralism of the rationallv and 
-· 
bureaucratically governed welfare-state. On the other band the 
mystic advocated the grcatL'st possible auto11omy and self-
sufficiency for the individual parts of the state, those small com-
munities which might form a locus of plain peasant or civic virtue. 
The mystics upheld the slo?;all: as little bureaucracy as possible, 
for their self-perfection could not possibly be promoted hy the 
busy state policy of civilization. At the famm1s mel'ti11g of L~o-tzn 
and Confucius, tradition ascribes to the former the warning to 
Confucius, "may the !\Jaster banish his [own] proud spirit, his 
many wants, his Hatt<~ring br~aring, his grandiost; plans." To this 
is added the argmnent which is as implicit· for the mystic as it 
is inadequate for the rationalist man of social ethics. "All this is 
useless for you personally," i.e., useless for attaining the unio 
mystica with the divine principle of Tao. 1\Iystical illumination 
(ming) meant that all things come by themselves to man. But 
if one may draw conclusions from his transmitted statemc1tts, this 
was a personally unattainable goal for the founder of Con-
fucianism and oue that lay lwyond his cnd(nvnwuts. Confucius 
iu astonishmt~nt is said to have referred to Lao-tzu as the "dragon," 
thus indicating his lirnitatior 
The concept of sanctity (hsing), basic Jor Lao-tzu, plays no 
part in the Confucian system. It is by no means unknmvn, hut 
Confucius cons.iclcrc(l this state as never having been attained, 
not even by himself. Hence, this concept remains unconnected 
\Vith the Confucian ideal of chiin lzu, thP "cultured" man. Sanc-
tity, as is the case with ~Icncins, is basically vicvvetl as a gentle-
manly virtue enhanced to perfection. 
The scriptural symbol for Lao-tzu's sanctity expresses lmmility. 
As a category of strictly individualist self-salvation Lao-tzu's 
concept of sanctity points in its consequences to a direction op-
posite the Confucian ideaL The latter is guided by the yardstick 
of cultivation ancl accommodation to world and society as 
they happen to be. Lao-tzu rejected the scriptural scholars, who 

OHTHODOXY AND HETEHODOXY 
)) 18.5 ({ 
in China represeut theology, for the same reason that occidental 
mystics rejected theology: because it leads away from God. 
11en of social ethics out to master and order real life typically 
and naturally reproached Lao-tzu,s mystic salvation, as they 
would reproach all consistent mystic salvation, for its "egotism." 
Consistently carried through, the mystic could indeed search 
only for his own salvation; he could seek to inHuence others only 
by example, not by propaganda, or by social action. \Vhen fully 
consistent, mysticism \Vould have to reject irmer-worhlly action 
completely because it is irrelevant for the salvation of the soul. 
Some beginniugs of principled abstention from politics are to 
be found in rather distinct form. It is, ho\vevcr, the characteristic 
trait and the source of all paradoxes and difficulties in Lao-tzu,s 
system that in this it is not consistent. 
Lao-tzu (or his interpreter) belonged to the same stratum as 
Confucius and therefore, like all Chinese, look certain things 
for granted. The first of these was the positive value of govern-
ment which inevitably contradicted the assumption that salvation 
lay beyond this world. This value followed from what was 
generally presupposed as the charismatic vocation of the ruler. 
For Lao-tzu, too, the good of man ultimately depended upon 
the qualities of the ruler. From this the mystic concluded that the 
ruler ought to have the charisma of one mystically united with 
the Tao, and further, that mystic redemption \Vas to be im-
parted to all subjects as "gift of grace" through the charismatic 
efficacy of the ruler's qualities. However, for the social, ethical 
man it was sufficient that the ruler per se he approved by Heaven 
and that his virtues be adequate as social ethical qualities from 
the standpoint of the spirits. 
Confucius aml Lao-tzu, or at least their successors, neve1theless 
shared the belief in spirits and the whole official Pantheon, 
whereas the Tao Teh Ching was apparently largely free of magic. 
An educated Chinese, oriented to practical politics could not 
reject all this. The ideas of the supra-mundane, personal god, who 
\vas creator and ruler of this \vorld, who held sway over all crea-
tures as he saw fit and before whom all creatures were unsancti-

» 186 {( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
fieJ, could be consummated neither by Chinese education, nor in 
the main, by Indian education. Therefore, the approach to an 
asccticist ethic which contrasts God and creature was precluded. 
It goes without saying that the given, essentially animist religion 
ultim2.tely meant little to the mystic in search of salvation. \Ve 
noticed and we shall note repeatedly that the same held for the 
social ethical man educated in Confucianism. 
Both held the conviction that good order in worldly govern-
ment would best serve to keep the demons at rest. This charis-
matic turn of the belief in demons was one of the reasons which 
also made it impossible for Lao-tzu's disciples to draw radically 
apolitical conclusions. On the other hand it is understandable 
that an intellectual stratum of officials ami aspirants to office 
in a pahimonial state could neither accept the individualist 
quest for salvation nor the broken humility of the mystic. Above 
all they could not accept the demand for a charismatic, mystic 
qualification for the overlord and the administrators, which would 
be like requiring a personal pneuma and charisma for the Roman 
bishop's church. 1·1oreover, it was perfectly understood that the 
bureaucratic power state of the rationalists would hold the field 
in practical politics. This was so much the case that while it might 
be repeatedly felt that only a Chinese could correctly interpret 
Confucianism in detail, a similar thing could not be said of 
Taoism. European scientists usually ag1ce that nowadays no 
correct Chinese could understand with complete empathy Lao-
tzu's (or his interpreter's) views in their original, inwardly ex-
perienced context. 
. Among his successors or those who pretended to be successors, 
the ethical consequences of Lao-tzu's mysticism contributed to 
securing the predominance of Confucianism. The internal incon-
sistency of the mystic's attitude assisted this. 
All religiously motivated, active antagonism to the world is 
lacking in Lao-tzu as is mostly the case with contemplative mys-
ticism. The contemplatively determined demand for rational self-
sufficiency is motivated by the argument that it prolongs life. But 
all tension behveen the di\'ine and the creatural is lacking, a 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 187 <~ 
tension which would have been guaranteed only by the retention 
of an absolutely super-creatural, supra-mundane, personal creator 
and ruler of the world. For Lao-tzu, too, the goodness of human 
nature was the self-evident point of departure. The conclusion 
drawn was not tme indifference to the world or even rejection 
of the world but only minimization of worldly action. Only Con-
fucian economic utilitarianism elevated to hedonism could have 
practical results for social ethics in the world as it happened to be. 
The mystic "enjoys" Tao. The rest who cannot or will not do 
so, may enjoy what is accessible to them. In this, a principled 
antagonism toward Confucianism evidently found expression with 
regard to the ethical and religious qualification of men. For the 
Confucian, the common man in contrast to the superior man was 
also the man who thinks only of bodily needs. He wished to see 
this undignified condition alleviated through the creation of pros-
perous living conditions and through education from above. For 
virtue per se was accessible to eve1y man. As we have noticed, 
no fundamental qualitative dillerences existed among men. For 
the mystic Taoist, however, the difference between the illuminated 
mystic and the man of the world had to be a difference in 
charismatic endowment. The immanent aristocracy and the 
particularism of grace in all mysticism express the experience 
that men are differently qualified in a religious way. He who 
lacked illumination stood--in occidental terms-outside the state 
of grace. He had to remain the way he was. 
There was one consummate mystic hostile to the literati and 
usually considered as belonging to Lao-tzu's school who reached 
the peculiar conclusion that "The rulers may fill their subjects' 
bellies not their minds; they may strengthen their limbs hut not 
their character." 
Even one of Lao-tzu's views was that the state would do well 
to confine itself to caring for the mere sustenance of men. This 
view is rooted in his disinclination for Jiterary lrnowlcdge since 
itr hindered true illumination. If the mystically illumined ruler 
could not exert a charismatic and exemplary influence by his 
mere existence it was better for him to abstain from all action. 

)} 188 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
One should let things and men go as they can. Too much knowl-
edge on the part of the ruler's subjects and too much government 
by the state are truly dangerous evils. Only absolute compliance 
with the unchangeable cosmic and social order leads to "acquies-
cence," to subduing of the passions. In Lao-tzu's doctrine of salva-
tion this was also promoted by music, edifying practice of the 
ccrcmoniab, taciturnity, and training in ataraxy. The Tao Teh 
Ching, ascribed to Lao-tzu with the reservations made above, 
demanded in consequence the greatest non-intervention possible. 
This demand was opposed to the prevailing inclination toward 
patriarchical tutelage of the subjects in classical Confucian doc-
h·inc. The Tao Teh Ching argued that the happiness of the people 
would be promoted most safely through the natural laws of the 
harmonic cosmos. 
\Vc noticed that theories of non-intervention were also to be 
found in orthodox doctrine. They could be deduced with extraor-
dinary ease from the idea of providential harmony (the Tao) 
in the world. Very early they led to theories of the harmony of 
class interests almost in the manner of Bastiat. These theories 
corresponded to the genuinely low intensity and steadiness of the 
administration in relation to economic life. The position of hetero-
dox Taoism was even more consistent. The active motive of a 
"vocational ethic" was of course entirely lacking in this Chinese 
and especially Taoist "Manchcsterism." This was due to the 
contemjJlative mystic base of Taoism. Only an asceticist ethic of 
laymen, originating from a tension behvcen God's will and the 
orders of the world, could have offered such an activating note. 
Therefore the strongly emphasized Taoist virtue of thriftiness 
did not have an asceticist but an essentially contemplative 
character; the major concrete issue in the dispute with orthodoxy 
was the question of reducing costs of funerals. 
Having repeatedly spoken of "successors" and "disciples" of 
Lao-tzu we should realize that this designation does not quite 
agree with the facts. Lao-tztt, whatever his personal teaching 
may actually have been, has hardly left a "school." However, there 
were philosophers quite some time before Ssu-ma Ch'ien who 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
)) 189 « 
referred to Lao-tzu as an authority. In far later historical times 
in China, mysticism found some eminent representatives who 
at least partially considered themselves as "disciples" of Lao-tzu. 
This development is only of limited interest here. 
Semi-legendary tradition describes the personal antagonism 
between Confucius and Lao-tzu. But as yet one could hardly 
have spoken of a "contrast of schools," especially of one clearly 
separating these two antagonists. Rather there existed a sharp 
difference of temperaments, ways of life, and attitudes, especially 
attitudes toward the practical state-problem-the office. The con-
trast of schools obviously ( cf. de Groot) was articulated only by 
Confucius' grandson, Tzu Ssu, on the one hand, and in Chuang's 
sharply pointed polemic on the other. It is certain and experts 
like de Groot emphasize that the typical mystic's rejection of 
rational knowledge as a means of working for one's own or the 
general good was the thesis theoretically most important yet 
unacceptable to the Confucians and even to their Master. Every-
thing else might have been tolerable. De Groot emphasizes that 
"quietism" (wu-wei) was not altogether alien to the Confucian. 
The common descent from the early, solitary ways of the 
"thinkers" was responsible for this. The early attitude of the 
sages had changed considerably under the political pressures of 
the "sophists" during the Period of the \Varring Kingdoms. How 
should one adjust to the Tao without certain knowledge of the 
true rites, which the "old men" possessed and which was acquired 
only by study? Underlying this change in attitude was of course 
the profound contrast between mystic indifference and the ac-
commodation or the will to reform the world. 
Chuang-tzu fonnulated the opposition to the Confucians by 
sharpening Lao-tzu's fonnulations as follows: first, search for 
"intelligence" means attachment to externals; second, search for 
"reason" means attachment to sound (words) ; third, search for 
the "love of man" means confusion in one's practice of virtue; 
fourth, seeking to do one's duty means to rebel against laws of 
nature (the omnipotence of Tao); fifth, adherence to "Lf' (rules) 
means attachment to extemals; sixth, love of music means to be 

» 190 i( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
given to immorality; seventh, adherence to sanctity means adher-
ence to affectation; eighth, quest for knowledge means hair-
splitting.15 
Points one, two, five, and eight, may well have been the ones 
which the Confucians abhorred most strongly, for the four car-
dinal virtues of Confucian man were: shen, that is, love of man; 
li, that is, rules of living; I, that is, liberality (duties); chi, that is, 
knowledge. Among these Zi and chi were most important. Any-
thing which deviated from tllis was heretic and non-classical (pu 
ching), incorrect (pu tuan), morally dubious and \Hong Tao (tso 
Tao). 
The split between the followers of Confucius and Lao-tzu has 
existed since Tzu Ssu's attacks. But the bitterness of the dispute 
was created only by the development of the schools and by the 
competition for prebends and power. The later literati who felt 
themselves to be Lao-tzu's successors at least occasionally at-
tempted to establish an organization similar to that of the Con-
fucian literati, and this despite the principle of wu-wei and tl1e 
abhorrence of holding office. 
The Tao Teh Ching is not absolutely and in toto condemned 
as heretic by the Confucians, but like the works of Chuang-tzu 
and Kuan Chung, it is always rejected as non-classical. That is, 
the Tao Teh Ching is not counted among the "sacred" scriptures. 
Once and at least for a short time, the emperors placed the Tao 
Teh Ching among the classics which the candidates had to study 
for the examination. 
The Confucians in turn maintained that "knowledge" was im-
portant and also virtuous for the emperor. The emperor might 
behave "quietly" if he were a scholar and only in that case would 
he do so. The Confucians put this thesis into practice by estab-
lishing the gigantic official encyclopedia ( Ku chin t' u shu chi 
ch'en, published in 1715). Neither of the two parties has doubted 
the decisive importance of imperial charisma, which the Shu 
Ching already contained explicitly, but the interpretation differed. 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
)) 191 « 
6. Taoist Macrobiotics 
A GENERAL tendency in the Chinese value scheme facilitated 
the development of a special school on the basis of Lao-tzu' s 
teachings. This was the appreciation of physical life per se, hence 
of long life and the belief that death is an absolute evil. For when 
rightly considered death should be avoidable for a truly perfect 
man. The tmly perfect man (chen, ching, hsin) must be endowed 
with invulnerability and magical powers;16 for in what other 
way could his perfection be proved?17 This yardstick was very 
old. There was high esteem for the common milfoil, combinations 
of which play such a conspicuous part in the well known orac-
ular lines of the I Li. This was like\vise h,_IC of the turtle as an 
oracular animal. Both attained their role through their longevity. 
According to Confucian belief practice of virtue and, in particu-
lar, studies had macrobiotic effect; so, too, had silence and the 
avoidance of bodily exertion without absolute abstention from 
activities. The gymnastics of breathing, mentioned above, were 
especially developed as a macrobiotic means. 1-iacrobiotic plants 
became specific medicaments and the search for the elixir of life 
was systematically practiced. We have seen that Shih Huang Ti 
for this very reason extended his favor to this school. According 
to all experience the restriction of excitement and quiet living 
were macrobiotically effective. The thesis seemed to be unassail-
able that abstention from passionate desires was the primary 
macrobiotic means and the cardinal virtue-hence the wu wei of 
the anchorets and mystics. 
With this as a point of departure, the development led further 
afield through the doctrine of demons shared by both parties. 
Systematization of macrobiotics once undertaken, the way was 
clear for conceiving the rationalization of all apotropaic and 
therapeutic magic. That has indeed happened and the theoretical 
results have essentially become the common property of both 
schools. The practical exploitation, however, was left to the non-
classical school. This was because for the Confucian every de-
parture from the Dogma of (classically oriented) omnipotent 

» 192 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
virtue simply endangered the unity of ethics. Besides, we cannot 
forget that the emperor was constantly pressed in the direction 
of magic through the harem. 
The purely magical aspect of Lao-tzu's doctrine facilitated and 
elicited an influx of all the old magicians into the community of 
the Taoists. They were most numerous in the South, the richest 
agricultural area, and it was there that this development was 
preeminent. 
The union of teacher and pupils in solih1de outside the cities, 
was the nuclear cell of the "Taoist" monasteries in China as in 
India (and in contrast to the Occident). To be sure, the extent 
of Indian influence on Lao-tzu (however independent-minded 
he was) is disputed; this problem can hardly be soh·ed in re-
gard to Taoist formation of monasteries. Taoism with its hermi-
tages probably paved the way for Buddhism, and Buddhist 
competition brought about the Taoist monastic movement, a 
movement for the organized association of the anchorets which 
probably had a quick pace. The autonomy of Taoism seems 
most distinctly guaranteed by the fact that not all of the func-
tionaries, but only the most characteristic of them-the magicians 
-lived outside monastic communities.18 Taoism had emerged 
when the escapist doctrine of intellectuals was fused with the 
primeval, this-worldly trade of the magicians. The "Tao-shih," the 
practitioners, lived a worldly life, married and managed their 
art as a vocation. They had altars founded en masse for all 
sorts of saints but these were often deserted after a short time 
because the saints failed to prove themselves. They created the 
great official collection of prescriptions and liturgies during the 
sixteenth century19 and, given the opportunity, they engaged in 
politics. 
7. The T aoi..'>t Hierocracy 
T AOIS:\f was hardly generally diliused when it accepted a fixed 
hierocratie organization. In the province of Kiangsi a hereditary 
charismatic sib had monopolized the manufacture or life elixirs20 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 193 « 
and had appropriated the name of t'ien shih (heavenly master). 
A descendant of Chang Ling, who had been councilor of the Han 
and had written about the art of breathing, created an organiza-
tion during the days of unrest and weakness of the Han dynasty. 
This organization had an administrative staff, collected taxes, 
enforced strict discipline, and successfully competed with the 
political authorities. In the end it created in Szechwan a truly 
autonomous "church state." At first, to be sure, it existed in the 
form of a camorra-like secret organization, namely the t'ai-p'ing 
tao,'the "Kingdom of Peace." It was the predecessor of a modem 
organization which we will have to discuss below. 
The church state was denounced in the year 184 by an apostate 
and was outlawed and persecuted by the Han. This church 
state, a typical organization of the South against the North, 
maintained itself against the government by the so-called "re-
bellion of the yellow kerchiefs,"' a ferocious religious war (the 
first of its kind). This lasted until the hereditary hierarch in 215 
A.D. thought it prudent to submit as a princely tributary to General 
Wei.21 In that role he was confirmed and acknowledged with high 
honors. His secular power waned considerably by tl1e doings of 
the govemment; officially he became only, in Grube's happy 
phrase, the "keeper of the files of the gods" who took care of 
cases of canonization. He, by the way, was not the only man in 
such a position. In addition to the ancestral cult, the apotheosis 
of men was the source of "non-classical," "Taoist," gods. The 
number of these had greatly swollen but tl1ey \Vere ignored by 
the official cult. The highest god P'an Ku, the God of Heaven, was 
enthroned with his wives on the Jaspis mountain of the \Vest. 
His image is taken from the ancient conception of a personal 
god as the lord of Heaven. 
The political career of the tao shih now began and it was 
based upon their claim to have power over the demons. For 
in the struggle hehveen the literati and the powers hostile to them, 
we always find the Taoists with the party opposing the literati. 
First the Taoists were "aristocratic." The uneducated feudal 
pressure groups used them as their tools. Their opposition to the 

» 194 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
Confucian rites and cerernonies 2 ~ and craze for order and educa-
tion enabled them to take the position that "the people shall re-
main uneducated." This was their position during Ssu-ma Ch'ien's 
epoch and the literati succeeded only a~ late as 124 in gaining 
mastery over the Taoists. They saw to it that all prebends were. 
reserved for themselves and that the pepiniere of the seventy 
court literati was recruited from all parts of the empire. 23 
However, once feudalism had come to an end the main ad-
versary of the literati was Sultanism, supported by the eunuchs, 
generals, and "a-literate" favorites. The Taoists regularly took the 
side of the latter. Every upsurge of the power of the eunuchs led 
to political influence by the magicians. This struggle repeatedly 
ended in the victory of the literati, a victory most decisive under 
the pacifist Manchu, but it continued down to the rule of the 
Empress Dowager. 
One should not entertain mistaken notions based upon one 
concept of religious denominations. The Confucian mandarin also 
claimed the Taoist for certain services,2·1 just as classical Hellenic 
man had enrolled the othenvise despised "prophet" and (later) 
horoscopist. The very ineradicability of Taoism rested upon the 
fact that the victorious Confucians themselves never seriously 
aimed at uprooting magic in general and Taoist magic in particu-
lar. They only sought to monopolize office prebends. 
They did not even entirely succeed in this. 'Ve shall demon-
strate below the geomantic reasons which frequently blocked the 
complete removal of once existent buildings. However, having 
once allowed monasteries to exist, one had willy nilly to allow for 
their inmates. This, as we shall sec, also held for the Buddhists. 
All strata of literati given to demonology and magic repeatedly 
shied away from provoking the "spirits," including the non-
classical spirits. Hence, the Taoists were tolerated and in a ce1tain 
sense recognized by the state. The official position of the Tao 
Lu Ssu, subordinate to the Chang T'ien Shih-the Taoist heredi-
tary hierarch-was obviously modeled after the position of Bud-
dhist superiors. In certain state temples, Taoist priestly positions 
existed. There were, as a rule, first, a director; second, a hiero-

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 195 « 
phant; third, a thaumaturgist (for drought and inundation); 
fourth, ordinary priests. 25 There are certainly Taoist traits in the 
inscriptions o£ some of the neighboring~ll princes who had become 
independent. The absolute rejection of Taoism by K'ang Hsi's 
sacred edict and by all Jv!anchu rulers changed nothing in this 
respect. 
Before resuming the discussion of the specifically Chinese 
"image of the world," created jointly by the orthodox and the 
heterodox, we wish merely in anticipation to record that the 
position of Buddhism, viewed politically, was very similar.27 
8. The General Position of Buddhism in China 
BUDDHISM was imported from India as a means of gaining 
convenient, literate, administrative forces and as a means of 
taming the masses. 
The "a-literate" character of reformed Buddhism (Mahayana 
Buddhism) ,28 appealing especially to the feminine emotive aspect, 
made it a favorite faith of the harem. Again and again we find 
eunuchs as its patrons, just as with Taoism. This was especially 
true during the eleventh century under the :t\Jing.20 
There were various motives for the terrible persecution of 
Buddhism. Among these were the currency and mercantilist in-
terests of Confucianism; and, naturally, the widespread competi-
tion for prebends. There was also the antagonism of Confucians 
toward Sultanism which was supported by the Buddhists. None-
theless, Buddhism was as little eradicated in practice as Taoism 
was, despite the sharply worded edicts of the emperors and 
despite the many secret societies which were linked to Buddhism 
("white Lotos"). In addition to geomantic reasons which will be 
discussed further below, there were ceremonials which the Chi-
nese certainly did not wish to forego and which were alone 
offered by Buddhism-the masses for the dead. Belief in the 
migration of souls remained one of the popular conceptions of a 
beyond once Buddhism had gained a foothold. Therefore, recog-
nized Buddhist prebends were to be found just like the Taoist 

)) 196 « 
THE RELIGlO:\' OF CHINA 
prebends.30 Their position does not concern us as yet and we shall 
resume the discussion of Taoism. 
The "a-literate" and anti-literate character of later Taoism ac-
counts for the interesting fact that it took strong (though not 
exclusive) root among the circles of traders. This is a very distinct 
example of a fact which we shall learn repeatedly: the nature 
of a stratum's religiosity has nowhere been solely determined by 
economic C'OIKlitions.:!l J3ut vice versa the peculiar nature of Tao-
ism could not be irrelevant for the way of life of the merchants. 
For Taoism had become absolutely irrational and, frankly speak-
ing, had turned to very inferior magical macrobiotics, therapy, 
and apoh·opaia. Taoism promised to prevent premature death 
which was considered a punishment for sins;32 it promised to 
move in the supplicant's favor the (Taoist, non-classical) god of 
wealth and the numerous apotheosized bureaucratic and func-
tional deities. Anything resembling a "civic ethic" was of course 
most unlikely to be found in Taoism. Here we arc not at all in-
terested in this aspect of Taoism, but rather in its indirect, nega-
tive effects. 
9. The Systematic Rationalization 
of Magic 
THE toleration of magical and animist conceptions by both 
orthodoxy and heterodoxy and their positive cultivation by Taoism 
have been decisive for their continued existence and their tre-
mendous power in Chinese life. Let us briefly consider their 
effects. 
In general, one may say that every sort of rationalization of the 
archaic empirical knowledge and craft in China has moved toward 
a magic image of the world. Astronomy became astrology insofar 
as it was not a calendric science. The latter was archaic and first 
served to allocate agricultural functions to the proper seasons. 
Technology was primitive and in no way approximated Babylo-
nian accomplishments. ''Tith the revision of the calendar under 
Shih Huang Ti, v1.·ho was hostile to the literati, chronomantics 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 197 (( 
began its ascent. That is, purely in terms of analogies and macro-
cosmic notions tasks were allocated to the months, to dies fasti et 
nefasti, not generally but for concrete matters in each case. The 
Ta Shih ("superior writer"), a board of calendar makers who 
were originally identical with the annalists, was transformed into 
the official department of astronomy and astrology. However, the 
management of chronomantics by means of numerous copies of 
the government-produced Shih I-lsien Shu (calendar, chronoman-
tic land register) became a source of profit for the "day-masters" 
who were to be consulted when choosing a day for a task. 
Astrology, on the other hand, was connected with archaic me-
teorology, conjecture, visibility of Venus, the nature of stellar 
light, and the determination of the winds. Originally, as de Groot 
assumes,33 the latter was important because of the trade-winds. 
Furthermore earthquakes, mountain slides, aeroliths, monstrous 
births, interpretations of fortuitous utterances of children (as 
especially direct media) and magical "meteorology" of all sorts 
produced an immense literature. It served exclusively to examine 
whether or not the spirits were in order; if they were not the state 
leadership had to be concerned with the consequences. The wu 
and shih, the primeval meteorological magicians and rainmakers 
who engaged in this, were considered "Taoists." Not infrequently 
hysterical (clairvoyant) women engaged in this trade with spe-
cial success. 
Medicine, and connected with it pharmacology, once mani-
fested estimable empirical accomplishments. They were com-
pletely rationalized in an animistic direction. "\Ve have mentioned 
before that macrobiotic plants provided the shen-;o medicaments 
and like the tree of life of the Hebrews, they grew in enormous 
quantities in the "Paradise of the West," the grove of Queen Hsi 
Wang Mu. The extent to which Chinese expansion was co-
determined by hope for the discovery of this paradise, such as 
Shih Huang Ti's sea expedition for the life elixir, is hardly debata-
ble. Characteristic of early conditions was the firmly believed 
legend of the prince who heard ( ! ) the spirits of disease in his 
entrails debating how best to settle down. These may be in-

» 198 « 
THE RELIGION OF C:HINA 
terprctcd as animistically :rationalized fever dreams and were 
still relatively primitive as against other rationalizations. 
Elements, seasons, kinds of taste and weather were brought 
into relation with the five (!) human organs-thus, in turn, macro-
cosm and microcosm-and magical therapy was oriented to such 
notions. The old breathing technique which the Tao Teh Ching 
advised was directed toward "storing up" breath, the carrier of 
life, and continued to exist along with gynmastics as a therapy. 
Already Tang Chuan-shu during the second century B.C. rejected 
passionate desire as dangerous to efficient breathing. The Su 
Wen, of post-Christian origin according to de Groot, was con-
sidered a classical text on the scientific method of breathing. 
To this method were added fu, i.e., brushstrokes of the charis-
mat:ic mandarins on amulets and the like. We wish, however, to 
put aside these matters which are taken from de Groot. To us 
the tremendous geomantic development of the fang shu or feng-
shui ("wind and water") is of incomparably 6'l'catcr significance. 
'Ve noticed V'ith de Groot that the chronomancers (shih) de-
tennined the time for all sorts of building. But it was of greatest 
import tlmt they came to determine the forms and location of 
construction. After a struggle between several gcomantic schools 
during the ninth century the school of "forms" triumphed over 
the more substantively animist opponent.31 The far greater op-
portunities for these gcomanccrs to receive fees may have been 
important in this. 
Ever since then the forms of mountains, heights, rocks, plains, 
trees, grass, and waters have been considered geomantically sig-
nificant. A single piece of rock by its form could protect whole 
areas against the attacks of evil demons. Nothing at all could be 
irrelevant. I\.foreover the geomantically very sensitive tombs were 
considered seats of pestilential influence. And geomantic control 
became indispensable for all construction, even for such internal 
construction as water mains in homes. Hence every death at a 
neighbor's might be traced back to one's building, or might sig-
nify revenge; any new funeral place might disturb all the spirits 
of the tombs and cause terrible misfortunes. 

ORTllODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 199 « 
\Vith regard to innovations, the manner of mining was always 
thought especially apt to incense the spirits. Finally, railroad and 
factory installations with smoke were thought to have magically 
infested whole areas (anthracite coal in China was used in pre-
Christian times). The magic stereotyping of technology and 
economics, anchored in this belief and in the geomancers' inter-
ests in fees, completely precluded the advent of indigenous mod-
ern enterprises in communication and industry. To overcome this 
stupendous barrier occidental high capitalism had to sit in the 
saddle aided by the mandarins who invested tremendous for-
tunes in railroad capital. The wu and the shih, as well as the 
chronomancers and geomancers, were relegated more and more 
to tbe category of "swindlers." But this could never have come 
about through China's own resources. 
Often detours of many miles were made because, from the 
gcomantic viewpoint, the construction of a canal, road, or bridge 
was deemed dangerous. Not infrequently Buddhist, that is heretic 
monasteries, were licensed for the sake of feng shui. They were 
geomantic "improvements" of nature and the monks wer~ obliged 
to engage in geomantically important ceremonials which were 
highly compensated. !vloreovcr, the profits of the gcDrnancers are 
said to have reached fabulous sums indeed and every party paid 
for its geo.mancer when a building dispute or such like was at 
issue. 
Thus a superstructure of magically "rational" science, survivals 
of which we find everywhere, cloaked the simple empirical skills 
of early times as well as considerable technical enuowments, as 
is evident from the "inventions." This super-struchue consisted of 
chronometry, chronomancy, geomancy, mcteoromancy, annalis-
tics, ethics, medicine, and classical mantically-detennined state-
craft. In these the magician's position among the people was 
foremost and his profit interests were often practically predomi-
nant (hence heterodoxy). The caste of the literati in their turn, 
though, took a decisive part in this rationalization. 
Cosmogonic speculation with the sacred number five operated 
in terms of five planets, five elements, five organs, etc., macrocosm 

)) 200 « 
THE HELIGION O:F CHINA 
and microcosm being correspondent (apparently in an entirely 
Babylonian manner, but every comparison demonstrates it as 
absolutely indigenous) .35 This Chinese "universist" philosophy 
and cosmogony transformed the \VOrld iuto a magic garden. Every 
Chinese fairy talc reveals the popularity of irrational magic. \Vild 
and unmotivated dei ex machina swarm through the world and 
can do anything; only eountercharms help. In the face of this 
the ethical rationality of the miracle is out of the question. 
All this-to state it clearly-\vas not only tolerated and per-
mitted but was enhanced by acknowledging the magic image of 
the world. It \vas anchored in the profit opportunities available en 
nwsse to the 1DU and shih of all sorts. Taoism, becanse of its 
a-literate and irrational character was even more traditionalist 
than Conf·ucianism. Taoism knew no "ethos" of its own; magic, 
not conduct, was decisive for man's fate. In the final stage of its 
development this separated Taoism from Confucianism which, as 
we have seen, maintained the reverse and considered magic as 
impotent in the face of virh1e. Confucianism was helpless when 
confronted with the magic image of the world, however much it 
disdained Taoism. This helplessness prevented the Confucians 
from being internally capable of eradicating the fundamental, 
purely magical conceptions of the Taoists. To tackle magic ahvays 
appeared dangerous for the Confucian's own power. To the sug-
gestion that such nonsense be stopped, one of the literati once 
decisively answered: "\Vho will hinder the emperor from doing as 
he pleases when he no longer believes in the om ina and portenta?" 
In China the belief in magic was part of the constitutional founda-
tion of sovereign power. 
Taoist doch"ine may also be differentiated from these magical 
crudities and from "univcrsist" theory. Even so it did not operate 
more rationally, nor did it form a counterbalance. The dochine 
of "actions and compensations," a product of the ::\fiddle Ages, 
was considered Taoist. As we noticed, the same name was ap-
plied to the management of magic which was not practiced by 
the Buddhist bonzes. This was vested according to all known 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 201 « 
history in the hands of a special class of priests, or rather magi-
cians who were recruited among plebeians. 
As is to be expected from what has been said, Taoism shared 
part of its non-ritualistic literature with Confucianism. Thus a 
"book of secret bliss" was allegedly both Confucian and Taoist. 
The same held for the general magical presuppositions. 
However, as described previously, these were highly developed. 
Besides, in contrast to Confucianism, they were linked with cer-
tain positive promises for the here and now and the beyond. Dis-
dained by the cultured intellectual stratum, the folk deities were 
valued by the masses for these very promises. 
Therefore, what Confucianism failed to do the plebeian priest-
hood of Taoism did. They satisfied the need for a certain sys-
tematization of the pantheon on the one hand and the canoniza-
tion of proved human benefactors or spirits on the other. Hence 
Taoism grouped together the triad of the "three pure ones." This 
consisted of the old personal God of Heaven, de-personified by 
the official doctrine as Yii-huang-shang-ti, Lao-tzu, and a third 
figure of unknown derivation. It schematized the ubiquitously 
worshiped and popular eight main genies (partly historical per-
sons) as well as the other hosts of heaven. The god of the city, 
who was frequently a canonized mandarin, was guaranteed his 
function as official keeper of files concerning the fate of the in-
habitants in the beyond; thus his function as lord over paradise 
and hell was guaranteed. It took in hand the organization of his 
cult (if a permanently organized cult emerged at all) and that of 
the other canonized spirits of nature and of heroes. The means 
were mostly raised through subscription by the local interest 
groups and they took turns; masses were read by the priests only 
at the great festivals. 
Thus an unofficial, though tolerated and genuine cult was 
established. Since the time of the earliest writers whc professed 
to be Lao-tzu's "disciples" an esoteric Taoism existed alongside it, 
treating those endowed with the gift of Tao as carriers of super-
human forces of all sorts and passing on to them the task of 
providing magical goods to the needy. 

)) 202 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
This development was by no means astonishing if, after what 
has been said, there was a real historical connection between this 
e~oteric Taoism and Lao-tzu or other mystics. Here no path could 
be found from the aristocratic charisma of man endowed with 
grace to rational asceticism. Here as elsewhere the development 
of non-classical contemplation per se and of early anchoretism 
necessarily led directly from the mystic pantheist union with the 
divine to sacramental magic. That is, it led to magical in.Huence 
over the world of the spirits and practical adjustment to the 
magical lRwfulness of their operation. As we have already dis-
cussed in the inb_.oduction,"" the aristocratic salvation of men 
partaking of illumination could scarcely have taken any other 
road to folk-religiosity. 
For political reasons, anthropolatry was as little tolerated by 
the Chinese government in the nineteenth century as it had been 
earlier. Such anthropolatric development usually appears when 
a turn toward ritualism is made and when aristocratic redemption 
by illumination is adjusted to the needs of the masses. Then the 
charismatic magician, as a carrier of the "Yang"-substance be-
comes an object of worship and a living "redeemer." Adoration 
and prayer for good harvests along with cultist worship of a Jiving 
bearer of charisma is reported from the fourth century n.c.36 The 
later practice of orthodoxy, however, allowed this only were the 
persons deceased and preferably were they charismatically proven 
officials. There were careful attempts to forestall naming any 
living man a prophet or savior. This was in case he proc:ccdcd 
beyond the ineradicable magical techniques of the specialists or 
in case his practices suggested a tendency toward hierocratic 
formation. 
Nevertheless, Taoism repeatedly succeeded in gaining the ac-
knowledgment of the emperors. In the eleventh cenhuy a Taoist 
system of examinations with five grades was established alongside 
• [Cf. From Max W"eber, Essays in Sociology, tr. edited and \vith an 
Introduction by Hans H. Gerth and C. \Vright !\!ills, Oxford University 
Press, New York, 1946, Ch. XI, pp. 267-301.] 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
the orthodox examinations and modeled after them. In such cases 
the question was one of making ofRces and prebends accessible 
to students educated in Taoism. However, the Confucian school 
unanimously protested every case and succeeded in driving the 
Taoists from their enjoyment of prebends. For in its economic and 
social aspects, the dispute revolved about the tax yields of the 
empire and who was to enjoy them. Yet in these conflicts, also, 
the profound internal antagonism of Confucianism toward all 
emotional religiosity and toward magic had its effects. As we have 
seen, it was almost always t.lrrough the eunuchs and the harem, 
the traditional enemies of the literati, that the Taoist sorcerers 
found their way to the palace. 
In 741, a eunuch succeeded in becoming the president of the 
Academy. Always the proud, masculine, rational, and sober spirit 
of Confucianism, similar to the mentality of the Romans, struggled 
against interference in the guidance of the state when such inter-
ference was based upon the hysterical excitation of women given 
to superstition and miracles. The contrast continued to exist in 
this fo1m up to the last days of the dynasty. We have quoted in a 
different connection a Hanlin professor's report of 1878 concern-
ing the general unrest due to a great drought. He expressly rec-
ommended to the two ruling Empresses that to maintain and 
restore the cosmic order not excitement, but only a "composed 
and unshaken spirit" and beyond that the correct discharge of 
the ethical and ritualistic duties of state were necessary. In true 
Confucian manner the petitioner added that he claimed neither 
the gift of revealing the secrets of the demons and spirits nor of 
divining signs; and he continued with the distinctly polemical 
point that the eunuchs and servants of the still youthful emperor 
should beware of the superstitious prattle which is an inherent 
danger of heterodoxy. He concluded, with the above-quoted ad-
monition, that the Empresses should do justice to the situation in 
no way other than practicing virtue. This document of the Con-
fucian spirit is impressive in its proud frankness and at the same 
time it reveals unmistakable echoes of the old antagonism.37 

» 204 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
10. The Ethic of Taoism 
AS WE HAVE seen, it was decisive for the adherence of mer-
cantile circles to Taoism that their special god of wealth, the 
vocational god of the merchants, was cultivated by the Taoists. 
Taoism brought quite a number of such special deities to a posi-
tion of honor. Thus the hero of the imperial troops was canonized 
as a god of war; student deities, gods of emdition and especially 
gods of longevity were honored. As with the Eleusian mysteries 
the center of gravity for Taoism was its promise of health, wealth, 
and happy life in this world and in the beyond. In theory, the 
spirits held out rewards and punishments for all deeds, be it in 
this world or in the beyond; be it for the actor or, in contrast to 
the doctrine of migration of souls, his descendants. The promises 
of a beyond were especially attractive to a large public. For both 
the Taoist and the Confucian, it was implicitly understood that 
just as "correct living" is decisive for the individual's behavior, so 
the "correct living" of the prince is decisive for the fate of the 
realm and the cosmic order. Therefore Taoism, too, had to raise 
ethical demands, but its unsystematic beginnings toward connect-
ing the fate in the beyond with an ethic remained inconsequential. 
Naked magic, never seriously fought by the stratum educated in 
Confucianism, was rampant again and again. For this reason and 
in the way described, Taoist doctrine was increasingly developed 
as sacramental therapy, alchemy, macrobiotics, and a technique 
for gaining immortality. The enemy of tl1e literati who instigated 
the burning of tl1e books was united with the literati through the 
immortality-brews of the Taoists. His expedition in search of the 
isles of the immortals in the Eastern Sea is reported in the Annals. 
Other mlcrs turned to the Taoists because of their attempts at 
producing gold. Among the officials educated in literature-the 
stratum which dominated the way of life of the educated-the 
original meaning of Lao-tzu's teaching was not understood 
and its consequences were sharply rejected. The magic of the 
priests bearing his name, however, was treated with tolerant dis-
dain and regarded as a diet suitable for the masses. 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
In general, sinologists do not doubt that Taoism in its hier-
archical organization, its fonnation of a pantheon (especially the 
triad of supreme gods), and its cultic forms has copied much if 
not everything from Buddhism, but the degree of dependency 
is disputable. 
11. The Traditionalist Character 
of Chinese 01thodox and 
11 eterodox Ethics 
TAOISM, in its effects, was essentially even more traditionalist 
than orthodox Confucianism. Nothing else could be expected from 
its magically oriented technique of salvation nor from its sor-
cerers. For their entire economic existence made them directly 
interested in conserving tradition and especially the transmitted 
demonology. Hence, it is not surprising to find ascribed to Taoism 
the explicit and principled formulation: ,.Do not introduce inno-
vations." In any case not only was there no path leading from 
Taoism to a rational method of life, be it inner or other-worldly, 
but Taoist magic necessarily became one of the most serious 
obstacles to such a development. For laymen the genuine ethical 
imperatives in later Taoism were substantially the same as those 
in Confucianism; while the Taoist expected personal advantages 
the Confucian expected rather the good conscience of the gentle-
man from their fulfillment. While the Confucian operated with 
the polar opposites "right" and "wrong" the Taoist, like all magi-
cians, operated rather ·with "clean-unclean." Despite the interest 
in immortality and in rewards and punishments in the beyond 
the Taoist retained a worldlv orientation like the Confucian. The 
founder of the Taoist hiera;chy is said to have expressly appro-
priated the words of the philosopher Chuang-tzu, which surpass 
Achilles' statement" in the netherworld: "The turtle prefers living 
and dragging its tail through dirt to being dead and worshipped 
in a temple.'; 
Indeed we have to remind ourselves that magic also retained 
° Cf. Homer, The Odyssey, Book XI, 489, Tr. 

» 206 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
its acknowledged place in orthodox Confucianism, and that it had 
its traditionalist effects. \iVe have mentioned that as recently as 
1883 a censor protested utilizing modern techniques in building 
dykes at the Huang Ho because this would deviate from the way 
planned by the classics. Undoubtedly the fear of causing unrest 
among the spirits was decisive in this. Confucianism strictly re-
jected the emotional ecstasy to be fonnd only among the popular 
magicians, the apathetic ecstasy among the Taoists, and every 
form of monachal asceticism. In general, all magic was rejected 
as "irrational" in this psychological sense. 
Neither in its official state cult nor in its Taoist aspect could 
Chinese religiosity produce sufficiently strong motives for a reli-
giously oriented life for the individual such as the Puritan method 
represents. Both for:ms of religion lacked even the traces of a 
satanic force of evil against which the pious Chinese, whether 
orthodox or heterodox, might have stmggled for his salvation. 
The truly Confucian wisdom of life was "civic" in the sense that 
officialdom possessed an optimist rationalism. It had its supersti-
tious elements as is the case with aU enlightenment. As a "status" 
religion it was a morale of literary intellechtalism \vhose specific 
note was pride in education. 
In view of the actual distribution of fortunes and the unpre-
dictability of man's destiny the fact was necessarily faced that the 
greatest utilitarian optimism and conventionalism imaf!;inable did 
not satisfy even modest demands for justice in this best of all 
possihle social orders. 1vlisfortunes and injustice in thi:; order were 
supposed to be the result only of individual educational deficien-
cies or governmental charismatic deficiencies or, according to Tao-
ist doctrine, the result of magical trespasses. The eternal problem 
of theodicy also necessarily emerged here. For the Confucian, at 
least, neither a bey(md nor a migration of souls was conceivable. 
But indications of a somewhat esoteric belief in predestination 
are traceable in the classic scriptures. The conception was rather 
dualist in meaning since the Chinese bureaucracy was charac-
teristically a stratum of literati who were essentially distanced 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
from the heroism of warriors and at the same time a status group 
which was segregated from purely bourgeois life. 
Folk belief apparently lacked any conception of providence. 
However, it developed a distinct, if incipient, astrological belief 
that the stars mled over the individnal's fate. The belief in provi-
dence does not seem entirely foreign tu Confucian csoterics, in-
sofar as one may speak of such esoterics. In general, however, 
providence did not refer to the concrete fate of the individual 
man, as is evident especially in 1\.fcncius. It referred only to the 
hannony and the eventual destiny of the social collectivity per se, 
as is the case with all primitive community cults. But Confucian-
ism did not really v.rork out the specific concept of predestination, 
for example, in the sense of the Hellenic moira, an irrational, 
impersonal, and fateful power detennining the great peripeteia of 
individual life. This conception is specific to all purely human 
heroism which has always proudly refused to believe in a benevo-
lent providence. Both elements existed side by side. 
Confucius obviously regarded his mission and its underlying 
influences as positively and providentially ordered. To be sure, 
beside tllis is found the belief in irrational moira, with a charac-
teristic twist. Only the "superior man," it is said, knows of fate; 
and without belief in fate, one cannot be a cultured man. Here 
as elsewhere, the faith in providence served to underpin the kind 
of Stoic heroism which alone is accessible to the intellechtal 
literati, namely, a "preparedness" approximating :rvtontaigne's at-
titude. That meant accepting the unalterable \vith equanimity 
and in so doing the attitude of the cultivated and educated 
cavalier was proved. Common man, without fate or fearsome of 
fate, pursues happiness and goods; or he faces the change of 
fortune with resignation as fatum-not as kismet, even though in 
practice the latter seemed to be the case according to missionary 
reports. Confucian "superior" man, however, leamed to live in the 
knowledge of fate and to face up to it inwardly with proud equa-
nimity. For he was devoted to his personality and its perfection.38 
In addition to other irrational elements of Confucian rationalism 

» 208 « 
THE RELIGION OF CI-11:.'\JA 
known to us it is evident that this faith in irrational predestination 
also served to support gentility. This faith rejected a completely 
rational this-worldly thcodicy, at least for the individual. There-
fore, some philosophers rejected as ethically dangerous a faith 
which produced tension within the othenvisc rationalist system 
of Confucianism. The Confucian belief in predestination, how-
ever, differs in meaning from the Puritan belief in predestination 
which is oriented to a personal god and his omnipotence. Also the 
Puritan finnly and clearly rejects the benevolence of providence 
but in so doing, he looks out for himself in the beyond. In Con-
fucianism, however, neither the cultured nor the common man 
bothered about the beyond. The cultured Confucian's one interest 
beyond death was that his name be honored; to protect this honor 
he had to be prepared to endure death. Confucian rulers and 
generals indeed knew how to die proudly when Heaven was 
against them in the high gamble of war and human destiny. They 
knew better how to die than their Christian colleagues, as we in 
Gennany know."' The strongest motive for highminded deport-
ment known to Conh1cianism311 may well have been this specific 
sense of honor, which characterized a cultured man and was 
linked essentially to a man's accomplishments not to his birth. In 
this regard the Confucian way of life was oriented to status and 
not to "bourgeois" values in the sense of the Occident. 
This implies that such an ethic of intellectuals was necessarily 
limited in its significance for the broacl masses. First, the local and 
next the social differences in education were enormous. The 
traditionalist and hitherto strong subsistence economy was main-
tained among the poorer strata of the people by a masterful art of 
thrift (in the sense of consumption). This almost unbelievably 
intensive thrift was unequaled anywhere else in the world. It was 
possible only with a standard of living which precluded any in-
ternal relationship to the gentleman ideals of Confucianism. Here 
as elsewhere only the gestures and external forms of behavior of 
the ruling stratum could be generally assimilated. 
0 \Veber refers to the rulers of imperial Germany and their exit in 
1918. Tr. 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
In all probability the educated stratum decisively inAueneed 
the way of life of the masses through negative effects. On the one 
hand, the emergence of a prophetic religiosity was completely 
inhibited and, on the other, the orgiastic elements of animist re~ 
ligiosity were almost completely expurgated. Possibly this deter-
mined at least part of those traits which are sometimes considered 
racial qualities of the Chinese. Above all the cool temperature of 
Confucian social ethics might be so considered as well as its re-
jection of other than purely personal ties among family members, 
stud~nts or companions. 
The retention of personalism is especially evident in its effect 
on social ethics. Hitherto in China no sense of obligation has 
existed toward impersonal communities, be they of political, ideo-
logical, or any other nature. 40 All social ethics in China merely 
transferred the organic relations of piety to other relations con-
sidered similar to them. Within the five natural social relations the 
duties to master, father, husband, older brother (including the 
teacher), and friend comprised the sum total of the ethically 
binding. There was no element of devotion in the Confucian 
principle of reciprocity, which was basic to all natural functional 
obligations outside these relationships. There are duties which 
have always been firmly rooted in the genuine social ethics of the 
neighborhood association. Especially is there the obligatory lib-
eral hospitality and ehaiity of the propertied, eveJ}'Where praised 
by sacred singers as a sign of noble living. This has been assimi-
lated by all religious ethics. 
Under the impact of Confucian rationalism and conventionalism 
in life-conduct these duties assumed a strongly formalist charac-
ter. This was especially true of the "practicing of virhw," the 
characteristic and usual expression for the form of hospitality for 
the poor held on the eighth day of the twelfth month. Ahns-
giving, the primitive and central imperative of all religious ethics, 
had become a traditional tribute which it was dangerous to with-
hold. The Christian significance of alms led to regarding the 
"poor" as a god-ordained "estate" within the Christian community, 
since their existence was necessary for saving the souls of the 

» 210 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
rich. In China the poor had gathered into \vcll-organized guilds 
which no one lightly 1·isked having as his principled enemy. 
In general, it may well repre~ent the normal case for it is not 
only in China that charity is expected to begin solely where there 
is a concrete personal or functional cause. Experts knowing the 
country can alone judge whether this alleged charity is actually 
stronger in China than elsewhere. As all magical religion origi-
nally did, Chinese folk religion considered permanent bodily ail-
ments a result of some ritual sin. Since no motive of religious 
sympathy came into the balance it may well be the case that this 
sentiment was not particularly developed, despite the great praise 
which ethics (!vfencius) bestowed upon the social value of S)Om-
pathy. In any case sympathy was not greatly developed on the 
soil of Confucianism. Even the (heterodox) representatives of 
love for one's t:memies ( :ivfo Ti, for instance) justified sympathy on 
essentially utilitarian grounds. 
Since the sacred personal duties of social ethics could conflict 
with one another, they had to be relativized. This is evident in 
the compulsory division of familial and fiscal interests, in suicides 
and the refusals of fathers to arrest their sons (for high treason). 
Bamboo canings were decreed for officials who moumed too little 
and in tum for those who mourned too much. The latter were 
troublesome to the administration because they refused office. 
A conflict in the Christian manner between the interest in the 
salvation of one's soul and the dem:;~nds of the natural social order 
was inconceivable. Any contrast between "god" or "nature" and 
"statutory law" or "convention" or any other binding force was 
absent. Therefore, any religious or religiously substructured nat-
ural law which might h..'lve produced tension or led to compromise 
with a sinful or nonsensical world was absent. The only exceptions 
were the slight beginnings of natural law mentioned above, as is 
at once obvious from the instances in the classics which occasion-
ally refer to the "natural." In these instances, what is meant is 
always the cosmos of the internally harmonic order of nature and 
society. Certainly, hardly anyone was really expected to attain 
the level of absolute perfection. Every man, however, is quite 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 211 (( 
adequate for acquiring a sufficient degree of personal perfection 
within the social orders. He is not in the least hindered from this 
in practicing the official social virtues: namely, human kindness, 
righteousness, frankness, ritual piety and lmowledge, whether 
with a more active (Confucian) or more contemplative (Taoist) 
coloration. As we have repeatedly noticed, the ruler insufficiently 
endowed with charisma is personally guilty if the social order 
fails in regard to the welfare and contentment of all, regardless of 
whether or not he has fulfilled the above-mentioned duties. 
Confucianism, therefore, knew no blissful original state at least 
according to classical doctrine. It merely knew uncultured bar-
barism at the pre-civilized stage, for which there was the ready 
example of the savage mountain tribes who always threatened 
invasion. 
\Vhen questioned how man was to be improved in the short-
est time, the Master stonily replied that one should first enrich, 
then educate man. As a matter of fact, the English formalistic 
"How do you do?" characteristically corresponded to the greeting 
formula of the Chinese, "Have you eaten rice?" Since poverty and 
stupidity were the sole original sins, so to say, and since education 
and economic life were all-powerful in stamping man, Confucian-
ism necessarily viewed the possibility of a golden age not as an 
innocent and primitive state of nature but rather as an optimal 
state of culhuc. 
Now, a striking passage of the classical scriptures describes a 
condition in which imperial dignity is not determined by hered-
ity but by election. Parents do not love their children simply 
because they are theirs or vice versa; and children, widows, the 
aged, the childless, and the diseased are maintained from com-
mon funds. J\.fen have their work and women their homes. Goods, 
to be sure, are saved but not accumulated for private ends; work 
does not serve individual advantage and thieves and rebels do 
not exist. All doors are open and the state is not a power state. 
This is the "great path" and it results in the "great homogeneity." 
In contrast, the empirical coercive order with the individual right 
of inheritance, the individual family, the military power state, and 

» 212 ({ 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
the exclusive mle of individual interest is caiied, in characteristic 
terminology, the "little h·anquility.'' The description of this :mar-
chist social ideal falls so far outside the framework of empirical 
Confucian social thought and, especially, is so irreconcilable with 
the filial piety basic to all Confucian ethics that orthodoxy has 
partly inferred textual cormption and partly sensed "Taoist" 
heterodoxy (as Legge did, by the way). 
Nowadays, for understandable reasons, K'ang Yu-wei's modern 
school would quote this statement in proof of the Confucian 
legitimacy of the ideal socialist future. Actually this statement, 
like many other of the Li Chi, may well be expressive of the view 
which de Groot presents especially clear. That is: many doc-
trines, often considered heterodox or at least non-classical or even 
considered a special religion, were originally related to mthodoxy 
in about the way Christian mysticism was related to Catholicism 
and Sufist mysticism to Islamism. 
Only artificially could the grace of an ecclesiastic institution he 
brought to compromise with the mystic's individual search for 
salvation. But the ecclesiastic institution must not in principle 
reject mysticism per se. 
Confucian optimism ultimately concluded and hoped to attain 
perfection on earth solely through the individual's ethical strength 
and through the power of orderly administration. Eventually this 
created tension since it is an equally basic Confucian view that 
the material and ethical welfare of the individual and the whole 
people is ultimately determined by the charismatic qualities of 
the ruler who is legitimated by Heaven and by the welfare policy 
of his officials. This very doctrine, however, led Taoism to its own 
conclusions. The doctrine that the source of all good was absten-
tion from action was held to be heterodox. But it was only the 
final conclusion of orthodox Confucian optimism turned into 
mysticism. Its acosmistic trust in its own qualification and the 
resultant devaluation of institutional grace led immediately to the 
danger of heresy. To surpass the this-worldly morality of laymen 
by searching for special paths to salvation was dubious for insti-

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 213 « 
tutional grace just as in the case of ecclesiastic non-asceticist 
Protestantism. 
\Ve have seen that Tao as the "path" to virtue was perfectly 
understood and was also a cenhal orthodox Confucian concept. 
~~fysticism could refer to the significance of the god-willed, the 
natural, cosmic, and social harmony from which the principle of 
non-interference could be deduced. Mysticism could do this as 
well as the aforementioned, more or less consistent laissez-faire 
theories of some Confucians. The latter reserved state interven-
tion for cases of all too dubious excess in the differentiation of 
wealth. For Confucianism to ascertain whether these doctrines 
were still orthodox was just as difficult and doubtful as it was for 
the medieval church to determine whether or not a mystic was 
still orthodox. Thus, it is understandable why de Groot rejects 
altogether the usual treatment of Taoism as a special religion 
alongside Confucianism. The religious edicts of the emperors re-
peatedly and expressly mention Taoism alongside Buddhism as a 
merely tolerated, non-classical faith. In contrast to this, the so-
ciologist has to consider in fact the special hierocratic organi-
zation. 
Ultimately, the substantive differences between orthodox and 
heterodox doctrines and practices, as well as any decisive pecu-
liarities of Confucianism, had two sources. On the one hand, Con-
fucianism \Vas a status ethic of the bureaucracy educated in litera-
ture; on tl1c other hand, piety and especially ancestor-worship 
were retained as politically indispensable foundations for patri-
monialism. Only when these interests appeared to be threatened 
did the instinct of self-preservation in the ruling stratum react by 
attaching the stigma of heterodoxy:11 
12. Sects and the Pet·secution of 
Heresies in China · 
THE most important and absolute limit to practical tolerance for 
the Confucian state consisted in the fundamental importance of 
the ancestor cult and this-worldly piety for the docility of the 

)) 214 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
patrimonial snbjectY The tolerance of the state evinced both 
affinities with and differences from the comparable altitude in 
occidental antiquity. The state cult knew only the official great 
spirits. However, on given occasions the emperor saluted the Tao-
ist and Buddhist shrines, too, with the qualification that a polite 
bow was deemed sufficiCnt instead of a Kotow which \vas even 
made to St. Confucius. The state paid for geornantic scrviccs4a 
and the jeng shui were officially recognized.H 
Occasional suppressions of exorcists from Tibet were to be 
found; the ancients called them wu-so it was said in the de-
crees concerning them;15 These suppressions, to be sure, occurred 
simply for police reasons. The city mandarin officially participated 
in the cult of the Taoist city god and the canonizations by the 
Taoist patriarch required the imperial placet. No claims to "free-
dom of conscience" were guaranteed, nor were purely religious 
views persecuted as a rule, unless either mab>ical reasons (similar 
to the religious trials of the Hellenes) or political considerations 
called for such persecutions. These considerations, however, were 
rather exacting. 
The religious edicts of emperors made the persecution of heresy 
a duty. Even a writer like I\Jcncius agreed with this. The means, 
intensity, concept, and scope of "heresy" changed. The Chinese 
state fought heresies, which in its view were hostile to the state, 
partly through indoctrination (as late as the nineteenth century 
by an officially distributed cdu cational poem of a monarch). 
Partly it did so by fire and sword, like the Catholic Church £ght-
ing the denial of sacramental grace and the Roman Empire 
fighting the rejection of the cult of the emperor. 
Despite tl10 legend of unlimited toleration in the Chinese state 
almost every decade of the nineteenth century has seen all-out 
persecutions of heresies, including the torture of witnesses. On the 
other hand almost every rebellion was intimately connected with 
a heresy. In comparison with the ancient Roman state, for in-
stance, the Chinese state was in a special position. For it had an 
exclusively and officially recognized dochine after Confucianism 
was definitively placed beside the official state cult and the obliga-

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
)) 21.5 « 
tory ancestor cult of the individuaL To that extent the Chinese 
state approached a "denominational" state and stood in contrast 
to the pre-Christian ancient imperium.. The "sacred edict" of 1672 
(in the seventh of its sixteen sections) expressly ordered the re-
jection o£ false doctrines. The orthodox doctrine, however, v.·as not 
a dogmatic religion but a philosophy and wisdom of life. The re-
lation would indeed have been similar if, for example, the Roman 
emperors of the scc<md century had officially adopted the Stoic 
ethic as orthodox and had made the acceptance of .Stoic ethic 
prerequisite for delcg<ttion to state offices. 
In contrast to this the popular form of sectarian religiosity 
consisted in the minish·ations of sacramental grace as in India. 
And everywhere this happened on the soil of religiosity leading to 
mystic redemption. ·whether turning prophet, propagandist, pa-
triarch, or father confessor, the mystic in Asia inevitably became 
also a mystagogue. Imperial charisma of office, however, tolerated 
powers with an independent authority of grace at its side as little 
as the institutional grace of the Catholic Church could have done. 
Accordingly, in their arguments, the impe1ial edicts almost always 
reproached the heretics wii:h identical facts. First, of course, the 
fact was mentioned that novel and non-licensed deities were wor-
shiped. However, this point v;•as not decisive, for basically the 
whole popular pantheon deviated from the state cult and was 
considered non-classical and barbaric. The truly decisive points 
were rather the following three: 16 
( 1) The heretics banded together, allegedly in order to practice a 
virtuous liie. However, they formed non-licensed associations and man-
aged collections. 
(2) They had leaders, partly incarnate gods, partly patriarchs, "vl10 
preached compensation and promised salvation of soul in the beyond. 
( 3) They removed the ancestral tablets from their houses and sepa-
rated themselves from their parental families for the sake of monachal 
or otherwise non-classical way of life. 
The first point was an offense against the political police who 
prohibited non-licensed associations. The Confucian subject was 
expected to practice virtue privately in the five classical social 

» 216 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
relations. He did not require a sect for this and the very existence 
of a sect violated the patriarchical principle on which the state 
rested. 
The second point for the Confucian meant defrauding the peo-
ple openly, for there was no compensation in the beyond and no 
special salvation of the soul. But it also meant contempt for the 
this-worldly charisma of the Confucian state oHice. The care for 
the (this-worldly) salvation of soul within the Chinese state was 
the concern of the ancestors. For the rest it was the concern of the 
officials and their emperor vvho alone was legitimated by Heaven. 
Hence, any belief in redemption and any striving for sacramental 
grace threatened not only piety toward the ancestors but the 
prestige of the administration. 
For a similar reason the third reproach was the most decisive 
of all. To reject the ancestor cult meant to threaten the cardinal 
virh1e of politics, i.e., piety and on this depended discipline in the 
hierarchy of offices and obedience of subjects. A religiosity which 
emancipated [the subjects] from believing in the all-decisive 
power of imperial charisma and the eternal order of pious rela-
tions was unbearable in principle. 
The motives of the decrees, according to circumstances, might 
also ·be mercantilist or ethieal.47 Contemplative life, the individual 
contemplative search for salvation, and especially the monachal 
existence were vievvcd by the Confucians as parasitical laziness. 
It drew income from the productive citizens, for the Buddhist 
men did not plough (because of the "ah.imsa," i.e., the prohibition 
against endangering living beings, worms, and insects) and Bud-
dhist women did not weave. 1\..foreover, monkdom was quite often 
a mere pretext for escaping the public corvee. Occasionally even 
rulers who owed their thrones to the Taoists or Buddhists at a 
time when the latter were powerful turned against them in due 
course. Begging was the true kernel of Buddhist monachal asceti-
cism and was repeatedly forbidden to the clergy; so, too, was 
redemptory preaching outside the monasteries. After having been 
placed under obligatory licenses, the monasteries were numeri-
cally sharply curtailed, as we shall point out. In contrast, the 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 217 « 
decisive favors temporarily bestowed upon Buddhism were based 
on the hope that this doctrine of med.'"11ess might be used for 
taming the subjects. It was similar to the introduction of Lamaism 
under the ~fongol Khans. 
Afterward the tremendo11s diffusion of monasteries and the 
rampant interest in redemption very soon led to sharp repression. 
Then in the ninth century the Buddhist Church received the blow 
from which it has never completely recovered. Part of the 
Buddhist and Taoist monasteries were retained and were even 
placed on the state budget, with the strict rule that every monk 
be publicly certified. That is, a sort of "cultural examination" was 
demanded in the marmer of the Prussian Kulturkampf. According 
to de Groot's very plausible assumption, the fcng shui were 
decisive in this, for it was impossible to remove places once 
licensed for worship without incurring a perhaps dangerous ex-
citement of the spirits. This essentially determined the relative 
toleration which was granted to heterodox cults for reasons of 
state. This tolerance by no means meant positive esteem but 
rather the disdainful "toleration" which is the natural attitude of 
every secular bureaucracy toward religion. It is an attih1de mod-
erated only by the need for taming the masses. 
The "superior" man confronted these as he did all other beings 
who were not officially worshiped for reasons of state. He fol-
lowed the very modern principle ascribed to the !\-'laster, who 
advised appeasing the spirits by the proven ceremonials but 
"keeping them at their proper distance." ln these tolerated hetero-
dox religions participation of the masses had nothing in common 
with our concept of "religious affiliation." Depending on circum-
stances, occidental man of Antiquity worshiped Apollo or Di-
onysos and the Southern Italian worshiped competing saints and 
religious orders. So, too, according to need and proven efficacy, 
the Chinese paid respect to or withdrew it from Taoist mantics 
and Buddhist masses alike. The latter were always popular even 
among the highest circles. In Peking folk customs, Buddhist and 
Taoist sacraments were used side by side and the classical ances-
tor cult furnished the ground coloration. In any case it was non-

» 218 {( 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
sense to enumerate the Chinese as "Buddhist" by religious affilia-
tion though this often used to be done. By our yardstick only 
the registered monks and priests may be called "Buddhists." 
The monachal fonn of heterodoxy did not by itself detennine 
the opposition of public authorities. But when Buddhism, and 
Taoism under its influence, developed communities of laymen 
with married secular priests, that is, when religious affiliations of 
a sort began to emerge, the government naturally intervened 
quite sharply. It placed before the priests the choice of being 
interned in the licensed monasteries or of returning to profane 
vocations. Some customs copied by the sects from Indian models 
were singled out for suppression by the government. Such was 
the case when distinguishing signs in painting and dress were 
adopted for initiation ceremonies by way of ordering the novices 
according to religious worth and the rank of the mysteries to 
which they were admitted. At this point, the specific aspect of 
sectarianism began to develop. The value and worth of the "per-
sonality" were guaranteed and legitimated not by blood ties, 
status group, or publicly authorized degree, but by being a mem-
ber of and by proving oneself in a circle of specifically qualified 
associates. This basic function of all sect religiosity is far more 
odious to any compulsory institution of grace, to the Catholic 
Church as well as to the cesaro-papist state, than is the easily 
controlled monastery. 
Here we disregard the temporary, politically determined pro-
motion of Lamaism, which meant little historically. vVc likewise 
disregard the destiny of Chinese Islamism,48 which was quite 
important, and the lot of Jewry, which was reduced in a peculiar 
way and, unlike anywhere else in the world, strongly divested of 
its character. The Islamite lords in the far \Vest of the empire are 
mentioned in some edicts with a characteristic request that crimi-
nals be sold to them as slaves. 
The persecution of the "European worship of the Lord from 
Heaven" which was the official name of Christianity, will not be 
discussed here, an omission which requires no further explanation. 
This persecution would have occurred despite greater tactfulness 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
)) 219 « 
among the missionaries. Only military force led to contractually 
stipulated toleration once the meaning of Christian propaganda 
had been recognized. The old religious edicts to the people argued 
for the toleration of the Jesuits by explicitly mentioning their 
astronomical services. 
The number of sects (de Groot enumerates fifty-six) was not 
small and their following was large, especially in Honan, and in 
some other provinc.es. Sectarian adherents were often found 
among the servants of mandarins and among the personnel of 
the rice fleet. The fact that orthodox ( ching) Confucianism treated 
every heterodoxy (i tuan) as attempted rebellion-such is the way 
of the church-state-has impelled most of them to use force. 
Quite a few sects go back half a millennium and some are even 
older, despite the persecution. 
13. The T'ai P'ing Rebellion 
IT WAS not an insmmountable "natural disposition" that hin-
dered the Chinese from producing religious struch1rcs comparable 
to those of the Occident. In recent times this has been proved by 
the impressive success of Hung Hsiu-ch'uan's iconoclastic and 
anti-magical prophecy of the Tien Wang ("Heavenly King") of 
the T ai P'ing49 T'ien Kuo (Heavenly Kingdom of Peace; from 
1850-1864). To our knowledge it was by far the most powerful 
at~d thoroughly hierocratic, politico-ethical rebellion against the 
Confucian administration and ethic which China has ever ex-
perienced.50 The founder allcgedly51 belonged to a rusticated sib 
of nobles and was a severely epilcptic52 and ecstatic man. Like 
the Byzantine iconoclasts of Islamism, and perhaps stimulated in 
part through the influence of Protestant missions and the Bible, 
he radically and puritanically rebuked every belief in spirits, 
magic, and idolatry. His ethic was half mystic-ecstatic and half 
ascetic. He was educated in Confucianism, had failed to pass his 
state examination, an(!. was influenced by Taoism. The Genesis 
and the New Testament belonged to the canonical books of the 
sect which he had founded with the support of his sib. Among 

» 220 ({ 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
the customs and symbols of the sect were: a water bath copied 
from baptism, instead of the Lord's Supper, a sort of tea-eucharist 
due to abstention from alcohol, the modified Lord's Prayer, and 
a likewise characteristically modified Decalogue. Besides, he 
quoted the Shih Ching and other classical works by selecting a 
medley of passages to suit his purposes. In so doing, he fell back, 
of course, like all reformers, on announcements and orders of the 
emperors of the legendary archaic period. 
The result was a peculiar mixture of Christian and Confucian 
forms, reminiscent of Mohammed's eclecticism. \Ve find the God 
Father of Christianity'-3 and Jesus54 at his side-though "holy," not 
in substance his equal. Finally, we find the prophet as Christ's 
"younger brother" and upon him the holy spirit rested.55 There 
was profound horror of the veneration of saints and images and 
especially of the cult of the Virgin :Mother. Prayers were at fixed 
hours, sabbatical rest was on Saturdavs with two services which 
included Bible reading, litany, sermon', reading of the Decalogue, 
and hymns. vVe find the Christmas festival, the ministerial cere-
mony of (insoluble) wedlock, the admissibility of polygamy, 
prohibition of prostitution under pain of capital punishment, and 
rigid segregation of unmanied women and men. \Ve find also 
strict abstinence from alcohol, opium, and tobacco; the abolition 
of the braid and of the crippling of women's feet; and propitiary 
sacrifices at the tomb of the dead.5u 
Like the orthodox emperor, the T'ien \Vang was supreme 
pontifex. The officials of the five highest boards next to him had 
the titles of "King" of the West, East, South, Nmth, and a fifth 
King served as an assistant. The three examination degrees were 
also to be found in the T'ai· P'ing empire. Traffic in offices was 
abolished and all officials were nominated by the Emperor. The 
magazine storage policy and the corvee were taken from the old 
orthodox practice, but important differences existed in some 
points such as the sh"ict separation of "external" and "internal" 
administration. For the latter, women wer~ drawn into economic 
life as leaders. The policy of communication, road building and 
commerce was relatively 'liberal." The contrast in principle was 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
» 221 (( 
about the same as that between Cromwell's regiment of Saints-
with some traits reminiscent of early Islamism and the anabaptist 
regime of Miinster-and Laud's cesaro-papist state. 
In theory the state was the commonwealth of an ascetic order 
of warriors. A typical military booty communism was intemlixed 
with acosmistic charity in the early Christian manner; nationalist 
instinct was pushed into the background in favor of international 
religious fraternization. Officials were to be selected according to 
religious charisma and proven moral worth. The administra-
tive districts were districts for military recruitment and provision-
ing on the one hand; on the other, they were church parishes with 
prayer halls, state schools, libraries, and clerics appointed by 
the Tien Wang. rvlilitary discipline was as puritanically strict as 
the order of life. Jewelry and all precious metals were confiscated 
in order to defray collective expenditures. 57 Suitable women were 
also enrolled in the army. I>ayments from a common fund were 
made to families drafted for administrative functions. 58 
In ethics the Confucian belief in fate was brought into connec-
tion with vocational virtue59-a transposition made in the spirit 
of the New Testament. l\1oral "rectitude," in lieu of the ceremonial 
correctih1de of the Confucian, "differentiates man from animal";60 
and with the prince too, everything depended on rectitude.61 For 
the rest Confucian "reciprocity" held, except for the command-
ment which prohibited one from saying that he did not wish to 
love his enemy. ·with this ethic "happiness is easily obtainable." 
In contrast to Confucianism, however, human nature by itself was 
considered incapable of really fulfilling all the commandments. 62 
Repentance and prayer were means of redemption from sin. ~Jili­
tary bravery was held to be the most important and god-pleasing 
vutue.m3 Taoist magic and Buddhist idolatry were as sharply re-
jected as the orthodox cult of spirits. This was in contrast to the 
friendly attitude toward Jewry and Protestant Christianity. Prot-
estant missionaries of the Dissenting and of the Low Church 
repeatedly held services in T'ai P'ing prayer halls. But from the 
beginning the Anglican High Church and the Jesuits were hostile 
because of the iconoclasm and the sharp rejection of the cult of 

» 222 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
the Virgin 1-Iother. Due to the religious discipline behind their 
c1·usade, the T'ai P'ing armies were as superior to the armies of 
the orthodox government as Cromwell's army was to that of the 
King. 
For political and commercial64 reasons, Lord Palmerston's gov-
ernment saw fit to prevent this church-state from gaining the 
upper hand and especially to prevent the treaty harbor of Shang-
hai from falling into its hands.65 ·with the aid of Conlon and the 
Navy the T'ai P'ing power \Vas broken. Given to visionary ecsta-
sies and a seraglio cxistence,GG the T'icn \Vang had secluded him-
self for years in the palace. After the fourteen years his realm had 
lasted he finished his life and that of his harem by self-cremation 
in his Nanking residence. As much as a decade later "rebel" 
leaders were still taken prisoners.67 The human loss, the financial 
weakness, and the devastation of the particular provinces were 
not fully retrieved for a much longer time. 
The T'ai P'ing ethic, after what was said above, was a peculiar 
mixture of chiliastic-ccshltic and ascetic elements. The latter was 
outstanding and was unsmvassed anywhere else in China. l\1ore-
over, the magical and idolatrous fetters were broken and tllis was 
unknown elsewhere in China. The personally benign and uni-
versal god of the world, freed of national barriers, \Vas adopted. 
And this god would othernrisc have remained entirely alien to 
Chinese religion. To be sure, one can hardly say what develop-
mental course tllis religion migbt have taken in case of victory. 
Sacrifices at the ancestral tombs had to be retained just as the 
Jesuit missions had to allow them until the curia intervened upon 
the denunciation of competing orders. The beginning emphasis 
on correctness in good works might have led again into ritualist 
tracks. The increasing ce1·emonial regulation of all public order68 
might well have restored the principle of institutional grace. 
Nevertheless, the movement signified a break with orthodoxy in 
important points and it allowed an indigenous religion to arise 
which inwardly was relatively close to Christianity. This oppor-
tunity was incomparably greater than that offered by the hopeless 
missionary experiments of the occidental denominations. And it 

OllTHODOXY AND HETETIODOXY 
» 223 ({ 
may well have been the last opportunity for such a religion in 
China. 
Politically, the concept of "private association" was strongly 
suspect eveu before this; afterward it came to be largely identi-
fied with "high treason." Despite the tough struggle the bureauc-
racy opposed a merciless persecution of this "silent China." It 
was a persecution at least externally successful in the cities and 
for understandable reasons less conspicuous in the open country. 
The quiet and correct-living man anxiously stayed away from such 
affairs. This attitude reinforced the trait of "personalism" which 
we have treated above. 
The Confudan literati-bureaucracy largely succeeded in con-
fining sect formation to an occasional Rare-up. This it did by 
using force and by appealing to the belief in spirits. Moreover, 
all sects about which detailed information is available were abso-
lutely heterogeneous as compared with the sectarian movement 
with which occidental Catholicism or Anglicanism had to deal. 
It was always a matter of incarnation prophecy or of prophets of 
the mystagogue type who were often in possession of this heredi-
tary dignity for generations. They lived secretively and promised 
advantages to their followers in this world as well as in the be-
yond. Their redemptory prerequisites, however, were of an ex-
clusively magical, sacramental, ritualist, or at the most, contem-
plative-ecstatic character. The regularly recurrent sotcriological 
means were ritual purity, devout repetition of the same formula, 
or certain contemplative exercises. As far as is known, rational 
asceticism is never found.69 
As we have seen, genuine heterodox Taoist humility and rejec-
tion of all feudal ostentation were essentially motivated by con-
templation. The same held undoubtedly for the abstention from 
certain kinds of lw..-ury consumption (pedumes, precious orna-
ments) which the Lung-hua sect, e.g., imposed upon its believers, 
in addition to the regular rules of Buddhist sects. Asceticism was 
also absent where sects considered using force in fighting their 
oppressors and therefore systematically practiced boxing, like the 
famous sect in modern times.70 The "League of righteous energy," 

TilE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
the real name of the "Boxers" in English, sought invulnerability 
through magical trainingY 
All these sects were derivatives and eclecticist fusions of 
heterodox Taoist and Buddhist soteriology. They did not contrib-
ute any important new elements to the latter. 
The sects apparently did not follow class lines. Naturally, the 
mamlarins were the most strictly orthodox Confucians. But het-
erodox Taoists and especially the followers of the Lung-hua 
sect-essentially practicing a house cult with prayer-formula-
appeared to be rather numerous among the propertied classes 
from \·Vhich the mandarins \Vcre also recruited. 
\'\'omen obviously formed a strong contingent here as in all 
sotcriological religions. This is easy to understand because their 
religious evaluation by the (heterodox, hence unpolitical) sects in 
China as in the Occident rated, in most instances, significantly 
above their level of esteem in Confucianism. 
14. The Bcsult of the Development 
THE elements borrowed from or influenced by Taoism or 
Buddhism obviously played a considerable role iu the workaday 
life of the masses. In the Introduction<> it was stated generally that 
religions of salvation aud saviors always found their permanent 
and pre-eminent locus among the "civic" classes and usually dis-
placed magic among them. At f-irst they offered the only retreat 
available to the suffering and needy individual per se. The purely 
religious communities of mystagogues usually grew out of the 
individual search for salvation with the magician. 
In China, where the state cult also took no note of individual 
distress, magic has never been displaced by a great prophecy of 
salvation or by an indigenous savior-religion. Only a substratum 
of redemptory religiosi1y emerged which corresponded partly to 
the Hellenic mysteries and partly to Hellenic orphics. This re-
ligiosity in China \Vas stronger than in Hellas but it remained 
purely magical in character. Taoism was merely an organization 
° Cf. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, pp. 284 If. 

ORTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY 
)) 225 ({ 
of magicians. Buddhism in its imported form was no longer the 
redemptory religion of early Indian Buddhism, hut had become 
the magical and mystagot,rical practice of a monastic organiza-
tion. Hence, in both cases the formation of religious communities, 
at least for laymen, was lacking; and that is sociologically decisive. 
The popular, redemptory religions which were stuck in magic 
were usually quite unsocial. The individual qua individual hu·ned 
to the Taoist magician or Buddhist bonze. Only the Buddhist 
festivities formed occasional communities; only the heterodox 
sects, often pursuing political ends and hence politically perse-
cuted, formed enduring communities. Anything corresponding to 
our cure of souls was absent. Moreover, there was not a trace of 
"church discipline," which meant in turn that the means for a 
religious control of life were lacking. Instead, as in the 11 ythras 
mysteries, there were stages and degrees of sanctification and of 
hierocratic rank. 
From the sociological viewpoint these beginnings of redemptory 
religiosity were rather pitiful. Nevertheless from the viewpoint of 
moral history they had considerable ramifications. Despite the 
persecutions to which it was exposed, Buddhism imported about 
all that Chinese folk life knew of the religious sermon and individ-
ual search for salvation, belief in compensation and a beyond, 
religious ethic and inward devotion. The same holds for Japan. In 
order to be called a "folk religion" at all this monachal soteriology 
of Indian intellectuals had to undergo the most profound internal 
transition imaginable. Hence, we shall first have to consider 
Buddhism on its native ground. Only then can it be fully under-
stood why no bridges could connect its monachal contemplation 
with rational routine conduct. And only then can we comprehend 
why the role conceded to Buddhism in China deviated so widely 
from the role which Christianity could assume in late Antiquity, 
despite the seeming analogy. 

CHAPTER VIII 
CONCLUSIONS: 
CONFUCIANISM AND PUHITANISM 
KN TillS context we m'y be't gain pwpective on the fmegoing 
by clarifying the relationship between Confucian rationalism-
for the name is appropriate-and what is geographically and his-
torically closest to us, namely, Protestant rationalism. 
To judge the level of rationalization a religion represents we 
may use two primary yardsticks which arc in many ways inter-
related. One is the degree to which the religion has divested itself 
of magic; the other is the degree to which it has systematically 
unified the relation between God and the world and therewith its 
own ethical relationship to the world. In the former respect the 
varying expressions of ascetic Protestantism represent a last phase. 
The most characteristic fonns of Protestantism have liquidated 
magic most completely. In principle, magic was eradicated even 
in the sublimated form of sacraments and symbols, so much so 
that the strict Puritan had the corpses of his loved ones dug under 
without any formality in order to assure the complete elimination 
of superstition. That meant, in this context, cutting o!I all trust in 
magical manipulations. Nowhere has the complete disenchant-
ment of the world been carried through with greater consistency, 
but that did not mean freedom from what we nowadays cus-
tomarily regard as "superstition." 'Witch trials also Hourishecl in 
New England. Still while Confucianism left untouched the sig-
• 226 c 

CONFUCIANISM AND PURITANISM 
» 227 {( 
nificance of magic for redemption, Puritanism came to consider 
all magic as devilish. Only ethical rationalism was defined as 
religiously valuable, i.e., conduct according to God's command-
ment and at that, proceeding from a God-fearing attitude. Finally, 
from our presentation it should be perfectly dear that in the 
magic garden of heterodox doctrine (Taoism) a rational economy 
and technology of modern occidental character was simply out of 
the question. For all natural scientific knowledge was lacking, 
partly as a cause and partly as an effect of these elemental forces: 
the power of chronomancers, geomanccrs, hydromancers, mete-
oromancers; and a crude, abstruse, universist conception of the 
unity of the world. Furthermore, Taoism was interested in the 
income opportunities of prebendal office, the bulwark of magical 
tradition. 
The preservation of this magic garden, however, was one of 
the tendencies intimate to Confucian ethics. To this, inter-
nal reasons were added which prevented any shattering of 
Confucian power. 
In strong contrast to the nai·ve stand of Confucianism toward 
things of this world, Puritan ethics construed them as a tremen-
dous and grandiose tension toward the "world." As we shall see 
further in detail, every religion which opposes the world with 
rational, ethical imperatives finds itself at some point in a 
state of tension with the irrationalities of the world. These ten-
sions with individual religions set in at very different points, 
and the nature and intensity of the tension varies accordingly. 
With the individual religions this depends largely on the path 
of salvation as defined by metaphysical promises. \Ve must note 
that the degree of religious devaluation of the world is not iden-
tical with the degree of its rejection in actual practice. 
Confucianism, we have seen was (in intent) a rational ethic 
which reduced tension with the world to an absolute minimum. 
This was true of its religious depreciation as well as its prac" 
tical rejection. The world was the best of all possible worlds; 
human nature was disposed to the ethically good. Men, in this 
as in all things, differed in degree but being of the same nature 

» 228 << 
THE RELIGION O:F CHINA 
and capable of unlimited perfection, they were in principle 
adequate for fulfilling the moral law. Philosophical-literary edu-
cation based upon the old classics was the universal means of 
self-perfection, and insufficient education along with its main 
cause, insufficient economic provision, were the only sources of 
shortcoming. Such faults, however, and especially the faults of 
government, were the esssential reason for all misfortunes since 
they caused the unrest of the purely magically-conceived spirits. 
The right path to salvation consisted in adjustment to the eternal 
and supra-divine orders of the world, Tao, and hence to the re-
quirements of social life, which followed from cosmic harmony. 
Pious confonnism with the fixed order of secular powers reigned 
supreme. The corresponding individual ideal was the elaboration 
of the self as a universal and harmoniously balanced personality, 
in this sense a microcosm. For the Confucian ideal man, the 
gentleman, "grace and dignity" were expressed in fulfilling tradi-
tional obligations. Hence, the cardinal virtue and goal in self-
perfection meant ceremonial and rih1alist propriety in all cir-
cumstances of life. The appropriate means to this goal were 
watchful and rational self-control and the repression of whatever 
irrational passions might cause poise to be shaken. 
The Confucian desired "salvation" only from the barbaric lack 
of education. As the reward of virhle he expected only long life, 
health, and wealth in this world and beyond death the retention 
of his good name. Like for truly Hellenic man all transcendental 
anchorage of ethics, all tension between the imperatives of a 
supra-mundane God and a creatural world, all orientation toward 
a goal in the beyond, and all conception of radical evil were 
absent. He who complied with the commandments, fashioned 
for the man of average ability, was free of sin. In vain Christian 
missionaries tried to awaken a feeling of sin where such presup-
positions were taken for granted. Then, too, an educated Chinese 
would simply refuse to be continually burdened with "sin." 
Incidentally, the concept of "sin" is usually felt as rather shock-
ing and lacking in dignity by genteel intellectuals everywhere. 
Usually it is replaced by conventional, or feudal, or aestheti-

CONFUCIANISM AND PURITANISM 
» 229 ({ 
cally formulated variants such as "indecent" or "not in good 
taste." There were sins, certainly, but in the field of ethics 
these consisted of offenses against traditional authorities, parents, 
ancestors, and superiors in the hierarchy of office. For the rest 
they were magically precarious infringements of inherited cus-
toms, of the traditional ceremonial, and, finally, of the stable 
social conventions. All these were of equal standing. "I have 
sinned" corresponded to our "I beg your pardon" in violating a 
convention. Asceticism and contemplation, mortification and 
escape from the world were not only unknown in Confucianism 
but were despised as parasitism. All forms of congregational and 
redemptory religiosity were either directly persecuted and eradi-
cated, or were considered a private affair and little esteemed, 
as were the orphic priests by the noble Hellenic men of classic 
time. This ethic of unconditional affirmation of and adjustment 
to tl1e world presupposed the unbroken and continued existence 
of purely magical religion. It applied to the position of the em-
peror who, by personal qualification, was responsible for the 
good conduct of the spirits and the occurrence of rain and good 
harvest weather; it applied to ancestor worship which was equally 
fundamental for official and popular religiosity; and it applied to 
unofficial (Taoist) magical therapy and the other survival forms 
of animist compulsion of spirits (i.e., anthropo- and hero Iatric 
belief in functional deities). 
Like the educated Hellene, the educated Confucian adhered 
to magical conceptions with a mixture of skepticism while occa-
sionally submitting to demonology. But the mass of the Chinese, 
whose way of life was influenced by Confucianism, lived in 
these conceptions with unbroken faith. 'With regard to the beyond 
the Confucian might say with old Faust, "Fool who turns his 
eyes blinking in that direction"; but like Faust he would have to 
make the reservation, "If only I could, remove magic from my 
path ... " Also the high Chinese officials, educated in the old 
Chinese way, did not hesitate to be edified by the stupidest 
miracle. Tension toward the "world" had never arisen because, 
as far as known, there had never been an ethical prophecy of 

» 230 {{ 
THE H.ELIGION OF CHINA 
a supramunclane Cod who raised ethical demands. Nor was 
there a substitute for this in the "spirits" who raised demands 
and insisted upon faithful fulfillment of contract. For it was 
always a matter of specific duty placed under the spirits' guard-
ianship, oath, or whatever it happened b be; never did it involve 
inner formation of the personality per senor the person's conduct 
of life. The leadin!! intcllechral strabun, of-ficials and candidates 
for office, had cm;:~istcntly supported the retention of ancestor 
worship as absolutely necessary for the undish1rbcd preservation 
of bureaucratic authority. They suppressed all upheavals arising 
from religions of redemption. Besides Taoist divination and sacra-
mental grace, the only religion of salvation permitted was that 
of the Buddhist mouks for, being pacifist, it was not dangerous. 
In China, its practical ellect was to enrich the scope of psychic 
experience by certain nuances of moody inwardness as we shall 
see. For the rest, it was a further source of magical-sucramental 
grace and tradition-strengthening ceremony. 
This means that such an ethic of intellectuals was necessarily 
limited in its significance for the broad masses. First, local and, 
above all, social differences in education were enormous. The 
traditionalist and, until modem times, strongly subsistence-
oriented pattern of consumption among the poorer strata of the 
people was maintained by an aLnost incredible virtuosity in 
thrift (in consumption matters), which has nowhere been sur-
passed and which precluded any intimate relation to the gentle-
man ideals of Confucianism. 
As usual, only the gestures and forms of external conduct 
among the master stratum became the object of general diffusion. 
In all probability the educated stratum has decisively influenced 
the way of life of the masses. This influence seems to have been 
consummated especially through negative effects: on the one 
hand, completely blocking the emergence of any prophetic 
religiosity, and on the other hand, eradicating almost all orgiastic 
elements in the animist religion. It is possible that at least part 
of the traits which some authors are occasionally wont to refer 
to as the racial qualities of the Chinese are co-determined by 

CONFUCIANISM AND PURITANISM 
)) 231 « 
these factors. Nowadays, here as elsewhere, even experienced 
and knowing men can say nothing definite about the extent to 
which Liological heredity is influential. For us, however, there 
is an important observation which can easily be made and is 
coniim1ed by eminent sinologists. In the traits relevant for us, 
the further back oue goes in history the more similar the 
Chinese and Chinese culture appear to what is found in the Occi-
dent. The old popular beliefs, the old anchorets, the oldest songs 
of the Shih Ching, the old warrior kings, the antagonisms of the 
philosophical schools, feudalism, the beginnings of capitalist de-
velopments in the Period of the \Varring States-all of which are 
considered characteristic-are more closely related to occidental 
phenomena than arc the traits of Confucian China. Hence, one 
has to reckon with the possibility that many of the Chinese traits 
which are considered innate may be the products of purely his-
torical and cultural influences. 
Regarding such traits, the sociologist essentia1ly depends upon 
the literature of missionaries. This certainly varies in value but 
in the last analysis remains relatively the most authentic. Always 
emphasized are such observations as these: the striking lack of 
"nerves" in the specifically modern European meaning of the 
word; the unlimited patience and controlled politeness; the 
strong attachment to the habitual; the absolute insensitivity to 
monotony; the capacity for uninterrupted work and the slowness 
in reacting to unusual stimuli, especially in the intellectual sphere. 
All tllis seems to constitute a coherent and plausible unit but 
other seemingly sharp contrasts appear. There is an extraordinary 
and unusual horror of all unknown and not immediately apparent 
things which finds expression in ineradicable distrust. There is 
the rejection or lack of intellectual curiosity about things not 
close at hand and immediately useful. These traits stand in con-
trast to an unlimited and good-natured credulity in any magical 
swindle, no matter how fantastic it may be. In the same way the 
strong lack of genuine sympathy and warmth, often even among 
people who arc personally close, stands in apparent contrast 
to the great and close-knit cohesion of social organizations. The 

)} 232 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
absolute docility and ceremonial piety of the adult toward his 
parents hardly seems compatible with the alleged lack of love 
and respect for authority in small children. Likewise what is 
repeatedly maintained as the incomparable dishonesty of the 
Chinese, even toward their own defense attorneys, could scarcely 
be reconciled with the obviously remarkable reliability of mer-
chants in big business-compared to countries with a feudal past 
such as Japan, for example. Retail trade, to be sure, seems to 
know littlP- of such honesty; the ":fixed" prices appear to be 
fictitious even among native Chinese. The typical distmst of 
the Chinese for one another is confirmed by all observers. It 
stands in sharp contrast to the trust and honesty of the faithful 
brethren in the Puritan sects, a trust shared by outsiders as well. 
Finally, the unity and unshakability of the general psycho-
physical bearing constrasts sharply with the often reported in-
stability of all those features of the Chinese way of life which 
are not regulated from without by fixed norms. 
~'lost traits, 
however, arc so :fixed. More sharply formulated, the bondage 
of the Chinese, which is produced by their innumerable con-
ventions, contrasts basically \Vith the absence of an inward 
core, of a unified way of life flowing from some central and auton-
omous value position. How can all this be explained? 
The absence of hysteria-producing, asceticist religious prac-
tices and the rather thorough elimination of toxic cults could 
not fail to influence the nervous and psychic constih1tion of a 
human group. As regards the use of taxies the Chinese belong to 
the relatively "sober" peoples. This has been since the pacification 
as compared to the former carousing in the old long house and 
at princely courts. Frenzy and orgiastic "obsession" were divested 
of the charismatic value attaching to sacredness and were only 
considered symptomatic of demonic rule. Confucianism rejected 
the use of alcohol except for rudimentary use at sacrifices. That 
the alcoholic orgy was not rare among the lower strata of the 
people in China, as elsewhere, does not change the rekztive signif-
icance of the difference. Opium, the toxic considered specifically 
Chinese, has been imported only in modern times. As is well 

CONFUCIANISM AXD PURITANIS:11 
)} 233 (( 
known, it was imposed by war from without, despite the sharpest 
resistance of the ruling strata. Its effects, moreover, lie in the 
direction of apathetic ecstasy, a straight continuation of the 
line of "wu wei," and not in the direction of heroic frenzy or 
the unchaining of active passions. The Hellenic sophrosyne did 
not prevent Plato in "Piwidros" from considering beautiful ecstasy 
as the source of everything great. In this the rationalist Roman 
nobility of office-who translated "ekstasis" as "superstitio" -
and the educated stratum of China were of different mind. The 
"nai:vete," as well as what is felt to be indolence, is perhaps 
partly connected with this complete lack of Dionysian clement 
in Chinese religion, a lack which resulted from the deliberate 
sobering of the cult by the bureaucracy. In the bureaucracy 
nothing existed and nothing was allowed that might bring the 
psyche out of its equilibrium. Every inordinate passion, especially 
wrath, ch'i, produced evil charms; thus, on feeling any pain, 
the first question to ask was to \vhat ch'i it might be ascribed. 
Animistic magic, as the only remaining form of popular religion, 
determined the traditionalist fear of any innovation which might 
bring evil charms or stir up the spirits. To be sure, this magic 
was despised by the educated Chinese; but it was the form of 
religion supported because of the character of the official cults. 
The preservation of this animistic magic explains the great cre-
dulity of the Chinese. Thus, magical also is the belief that disease 
and misfortune arc symptoms of divine wrath which the individ-
ual has brought upon himself. In tum this belief facilitated a 
certain in:1ibition of those sympathetic emotions which, in the 
face of suffering, usually originate from the we-feeling of salva-
tion religions. These emotions have always strongly governed 
popular ethics in India. 
From the retention of magic in China there also resulted the 
specifically cool temper of Chinese humanity and fonnal kindli-
ness toward one's fellow man. Even in intra-familial relationships 
there was a ceremonious punctilio and a selfish fear of the 
spirits. 
Immeasurable ceremonial fetters surround the life of the Chi-

TilE RELIGION OF CHINA 
nese, from the stage of the embryo to the cult of the dead. In 
their unexampled elaborateness and inviolabiHty of detail they 
constitute a treasure house for folklorist research. W. Grube's 
works have especially exploited this material. Part of tllis cere-
monial is evidently magical, especially apotropaic in origin. Part 
is to be attributed to Taoism and popular Buddhism, to be dis-
cussed elsewhere. Both Taoism and popular Buddhism have left 
profound traces in the workaday life of the masses. But there re-
mains a very considerable residue of the purely conventional and 
ceremonial. Ceremonial prescription regulated questions and an-
swers, indispensable offers as well as the exact manner of grateful 
decline, also visits, presents, expressions of respect, condolence, 
and joyful sympathy. This surpassed anything preserved from 
ancient peasant tradition, such as is found in Spain where that 
tradition was influenced by feudalism and probably also by 
Islamism. In the field of gesture and of .. face" one may assume 
Confucian origins to be predominant even where the origin can-
not be traced. 
While the Confucian ideal of propriety did not always exert 
its influenct in the form of prevailing customs it revealed itself 
in the "spirit" in which they were practiced. The aesthetically 
cool temper caused all duties bequeathed from feudal times, 
especially duties of charity, to be frozen into a symbolic cere-
monial. On the other hand, the belief in spirits bound the 
sib members more closely together. Undoubtedly, as in Egypt, 
the much bewailed dishonesty was partly a direct product of 
that patrimonial fiscalism which everywhere proved a training 
ground for dishonesty. For both in Egypt and China the proeess 
of tax collection involved raids, flogging, assistance of sib mem-
bers, howlings of the oppressed, fear of the oppressors, and 
compromise. To this must certainly be added the exclusive cult 
of ceremonial and conventional propriety in Confucianism. Still 
there were lacking the feudal instincts which branded all trade 
with the adage "Qui trompe t'on?" Among the monopolistically 
secure and cultured status group of wealthy oversea traders of 
the Ko Hang guild, a much vaunted business integrity could 

CONFUCIANISM AND PURITANISM 
)) 235 « 
develop out of the exigencies of their interest-situation. This 
honesty, if it existed, seems to have been a factor of acculturation 
rather than an internal development like the Puritan ethic. This, 
however, applies to all ethical traits of the Chinese. 
A true prophecy creates and systematically orients conduct 
toward one internal measure of value. In the face of this the 
"world" is viewed as material to be fashioned ethically accord-
ing to the norm. Confucianism in contrast meant adjustment to 
the outside, to the conditions of the "world." A well-adjusted 
man, rationalizing his conduct only to the degree requisite for 
adjustment, does not constitute a systematic unity but rather 
a complex of useful and particular traits. In Chinese popular 
religion the animistic ideas which perpetuate the belief in plural 
souls of the individual could almost stand as a symbol of this 
fact. Not reaching beyond this world, the individual necessarily 
lacked an autonomous counterweight in confronting this world. 
Confucianism facilitated the tami~g of the masses as well as 
the dignified bearing of the gentleman, but the style of life thus 
achieved must necessarily he characterized by essentialJy nega-
tive traits. Such a way of life could not allow man an inward 
aspiration toward a "unified personality," a sh·iving which we 
associate with the idea of personality. Life remained a series 
of occurrences. It did not become a whole placed methodically 
under a transcendental goal. 
The contrast between this socio-ethical position and the whole 
religious ethic of the Occident was unbridgeable. Outwardly 
some patriarchical aspects of the Thomist and the Lutheran 
ethic might appear to resemble Confucianism, but this is merely 
an external impression. The Confucian system of radical world-
optimism succeeded in removing the basic pessimistic tension 
between the world and the supra-mundane destination of the in-
dividual. But no Christian ethic, however entangled in mundane 
compromises, could attain this. 
Completely absent in Confucian ethic was any tension between 
nature and deity, between ethical demand and human short-
coming, consciousness of sin and need for salvation, conduct on 

}) 286 << 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
earth and compensation in the beyond, religious duty and socio-
political reality. Hence, there was no leverage for influencing 
conduct through inner forces freed of tradition and convention. 
Family piety, resting on the belief in spirits, was by far the 
strongest influence on man's conduct. Ultimately family piety 
facilitated and controlled, as we have seen, the strong cohesion 
of the sib associations. This was likewise true of the above-
mentioned cooperative associations which may be considered 
as enlarged family enterprises with specialization of labor. This 
firm cohesion was in its way religiously motivated and the strength 
of the truly Chinese economic organization was roughly co-
extensive with these personal associations controlled by piety. 
Chinese ethic developed its strongest motives in the circle of 
naturally grown, personalist associations or associations affiliated 
with or modeled after them. This contrasts sharply with the 
Puritan ethic which amounts to an objectification of man's duties 
as a creature of God. The religious duty toward the hidden and 
supra-mundane God caused the Puritan to appraise all human 
relations-including those naturally nearest in life-as mere means 
and expression of a mentality reaching beyond the organic rela-
tions of life. The religious duty of the pious Chinese, in contrast, 
enjoined him to develop himself within the organically given, 
personal relations. A.fencius rejected the universal "love of man" 
with the comment that it would extinguish piety and justice and 
that it is the way of animals to have neither father nor brother. 
In substance, the duties of a Chinese Confucian always consisted 
of piety toward concrete people whether living or dead, and 
toward those who were close to him through their position in 
life. The Confucian owed nothing to a supra-mundane God; 
therefore, he was never bound to a sacred "cause" or an "idea." 
For Tao was neither; it was simply the embodiment of the bind-
ing, traditional ritual, and its command was not "action" but 
"emptiness." For the economic mentality, the personalist principle 
was undoubtedly as great a harrier to impersonal rationaliza-
tion as it was generally to impersonal matter of factness. It 
tended to tie the individual ever anew to his sib members and 

CONFUCIAl'\lSj\f AXD P'LHITANISM 
» 237 « 
to bind him to the manner of the sib, in any case to "persons" in-
stead of functional tasks ("enterprises"). This barrier was inti-
mately connected \Vith tho nature of Chinese religion, as our 
\vhole presentation has shown. For it was an obstacle to rational-
iziag the religious ethic, an obstacle which the ruling and edu-
cated stratum maintained in the interest of their position. It is 
of considerable economic consequence whether or not confidence, 
which is basic to business, rests upon purely personal, familial, 
or semi-familial relationships as was largely the case in China. 
The great achievement of ethical religions, above all of the 
ethical and asccticist sects of l)rotestantisrn, was to shatter the 
fetters of the sib. These religions established the superior com-
munity of faith and a common ethical way of life in opposition 
to the community of blood, even to a large extent in opposition to 
the family. From the economic viev•,rpoint it meant basing busi-
ness confidence upon the ethical qualities of the individual proven 
in his impersonal, vocational work. The economic ramifications 
of univer~al and mutual distmst must probably be rated high, 
though \VC have no yardstick for this. Thus, uuiver~al distrust 
resulted from the official and exclusive sway of conventional dis-
honesty and from the Confucian emphasis on keeping face. 
Confucianism and Confucian mentality, deifying ''wealth," 
could facilitate political-economic measures of a sort comparable 
to the worldliness of the Renaissance in the Occident. At this 
point, however, one can observe the limited significance of eco-
nomic policy as compared to economic mentality. In no other 
civilized country has material welfare ever been so exalted as 
the supreme goolP The politico-economic views of Confucianism 
were comparable to those of our Carneralists. The oldest docu-
ment of c·hinesc political cconomy2 is a b:act by the Confucian 
Ssu-ma Ch'ien on the "balance of trade" in which the usefulness 
of wealth, including commercial profit, is emphasized. Economic 
policy alternated between fiscal and laisscz-fairc~ measures; in 
any case it was not deliberately anti-chrematistic. The merchants 
of the occidental 1Jiddle Ages were and are "despised" by Ger-
man literati just as in China. Still economic policy did not create 

)) 238 (( 
THE HELIGION OF CHINA 
the economic mentality of capitalism. The money profits of the 
traders in the Period of the Warring States were political profits 
of commissioners to the state. The great mining corvees were 
used to search gold. Still no intermediate link led from Confucian-
ism and its ethic--as firmly rooted as Christianity-to a civic and 
methodic£d way of life. This was all-important. Puritanism did 
create it, and unintentionally at that. This strange reversion of 
the "natural," \vhich is strange only on first, superficial glance, 
instructs us in the paradox of unintended consequences: i.e., the 
relation of man and fate, of what he intended by his acts and 
·what actually came of them. 
Puritanism represents the polar opposite type of rational dealing 
with the world, a somewhat ambi~:,ruous concept as we have shown 
elsewhere. The "ecclesia pura," in practice and in true meaning, 
represented the Christian communion at the Lord's Supper in 
honor of God and purged of all morally rejected participants. 
This honor might have a Calvinist or Baptist foundation, its 
church constitution might be more synodical or more congrega-
tionalist. Broadly understood, Puritanism may refer to the morally 
rigoristic and Christian asccticist lay communities in general. This 
includes the Baptist, Mennonite, Quaker, ascetic Pietist, and 
Methodist communit-ies which had spiritual mystical beginnings. 
As against the Confucian type, it was peculiar to these types 
that they should oppose the Hight from the world in order to ra-
tionalize it, despite or indeed because of their asccticist rejection 
of the world. 1-.·1en arc equally wicked and fail ethically; the world 
is a vessel of sin; and there can be no dilferences in creatural 
wickedness in the face of the Lord. Adjustment to vanity fair 
would be a sign of rejection; self-perfection in the sense of Con-
fucianism would be idolatrous blasphemy. \\lcalth and surrender 
to its enjoyment would be the specific temptation, reliance on 
philosophy and liter:ny education would be sinful and creatural 
pride; all trust in magical coercion of spirits and deities would 
be not only despicable superstition but impudent blasphemy. All 
things reminiscent of magic, all vestigial ritualism and priestly 
pO\vers were eradicated. The Quakers, in theory, did not even 

COX.FUCIANISl\1 AND l'UHITANJS:\f 
)} 239 « 
have an appointed preacher; the majority of the Protestant sects 
had no paid pmfessional prea(;her. ln the small and light meeting 
halls of the Quakers the last traces of religious emblems are gone. 
}den \vere held to be equally sinful by nature even though their 
religious opportunities were not: equal but highly unequal, tem-
porarily and for all time. Either this was the rcsul t of arbitrary 
predestination as with the Calvinists, the particularist Baptists, 
the Whitefield l\Jcthodists, and the reformed Pietists; or it was 
the result of differing disposition for spiritual endowment. Finally, 
inequality of religious opportunity was due to the varying in-
tensity and SU(;cess of the endeavor to attain "conversion" (de-
cisive with the old Pietists), "penitance,'"' "winning through," or 
whatever the nature of rebirth might be. Hmvever, besides the 
unreasoning, unmerited, "free" grace of a supra-mundane God, 
Providence was always instnunental in these dilferences. Thus 
the belief in predestination was but one, though by far the most 
consistent, dogmatic form of this religion of virtuosi. 
Only a few of the rnassa perditionis were called to attain the 
holy whether they alone were destined for it by virtue of a pre-
destination of yore, or whether all-according to the Quakers 
this included non-Christians-had received the offer but only 
a small company, capable of seizing it, could reach the goal. 
According to some Pietist doctrines, salvation was offered only 
once in a lifetime; according to others, the so-called Tcrminists, 
it was offered once and for all. Men always had to prove him-
self capable of grasping the holy. Hence, everything was directed 
toward God's free grace and the destiny in the beyond; life in 
the here and now was either a vale of tears or a mere tnmsition. 
Therefore, a tremendous emphasis was placed upon tllis tiny 
span of time and upon what happened during it. This was per-
haps encompassed by Carlyle's words: "Millennia had to pass 
ere thou camest to life and millennia wait in silence for what 
thou shalt do with this thy life." It was not that it was possible 
to attain eternal grace by one's own achievement. The latter 
was impossible. The individual could receive and above all recog-
nize his call to salvation only through consciousness of a central 

)) 240 (( 
THE HELIGION OF CHINA 
and unitary relation of this short life toward the supra-mundane 
God and His will in "sanctification." Sanctification in turn could 
prove itself only thmugh God-onlained activities, and as in all 
active ascdicisrn, through an ethical conduct blessed hy Gocl. 
Thus, the individual could gain certainty of salvation only in 
being God's tool. The strongest premium imaginable was thereby 
placed upon a rational and moral way of life. Only life conduct 
abided by finn principles and controlled at a unitary center 
could )Je considered a God-pleasing way of life. Though na"ivc 
surrenuer to the world unconditionally led away from salvation, 
nevertheless the creatural world and creatural man were God's 
creation and to them He addressed certain demands. According 
to Calvinist conception God had created the world "in His 
honor." Therefore, however creaturally wicked men might be, 
He wished to see His honor realized by subduing sin, possibly 
also sufferance and wished to subject them to ethical discipline 
through rational order. To "work the works of him that sent me, 
while it is day" here became a duty and the works posited were 
not ritual but rational-ethical in nature. 
The contrast to Confucianism is clear: both ethics had their 
irrational anchorages, the one in magic, the other in the ultimately 
inscrutable resolves of a supra-mundane God. But from magic 
there followed the inviolability of tradition as the proven magical 
means and ultimately all bequc~athed forms of life-conduct were 
unchangeable if the wrath of the spirits \Vcrc to be avoided. From 
the relation between the supra-mundane God and the creaturally 
wicked, ethically irrational world there resulted, hO\vever, the 
absolute unholiness of tradition and the truly endless task of 
ethically and rationally subduing and mastering the given world, 
i.e., rational, objective "progress." Here, the task of the rational 
transformation of the world stoou opposed to the Confucian ad-
justment to the \vorl d. Confucianism demanded constant and 
vigilant self-control in order to maintain the dignity of the uni-
versally accomplished man of the world; Puritan ethics demanded 
this self-control in order methodically to concentrate man's atti-
tudes on God's will. The Confucian ethic intentionally left people 

CO::\'FUCIANISM AND PUHITANISM 
}) 241 « 
in their personal relations as uatnrally grown or given by rela-
tions of social super- and subordination. Confucianism hallowed 
alone those human obligations of piety created by inter-human 
relations, sueh as prince and servant, h.igher and IO\ver o!ficial, 
father and sou, brother and brother, teacher ami pupil, friend 
and friend. Puritan ethic, however, rather suspected these purely 
personal relationships as pertaining to the creatural; hut Puritan-
ism, of course, did allow for their existence and ethically con-
trolled them so far as they were not against God. The relation to 
God had prccccknce in all circumstances. Overly intensive idol-
atrous relations of men per se \·Vcre by all rneans to be avoided. 
Trust in men, and precisely in those closest to one by nature, 
would endanger the soul. Thus, the Calvinist Duchess Renate 
d'Este might curse her next of kin if she knew them rejected by 
God through arbitrary predestination. From this, very important 
practical differences of the two ethical conceptions resulted even 
though we shall designate both of them as rationalist in their 
practical turn of mind and allhough both of them reached 
"utilitarian" conclusions. These differences did not alone result 
from the autonomy of the laws of political structures. In part 
the cohesion of the sibs was an essential result of forms of 
political and economic organization which were thcrnsdves tied 
to personal relations. To a striking degree they lacked rational 
matter-of-factness, impersonal rationalism, and the nature of an 
abstract, impersonal, purposive association. True "communities" 
were absent, especially in the cities, because there were no 
economic and managerial forms of association or enterprise 
which were purely purposive. Almost none of these originated3 
from purely Chinese roots. All communal action there remained 
engulfed and conditioned by purely personal, above all, by 
kinship relations. This applied also to occupational associations. 
\Vhereas Puritanism objectified everything and transformed it 
into rational enterprise, dissolved everything into the pure busi-
ness relation, and substituted rational law and agreement for 
tradition, in China, the pervasive factors were tradition, local 
custom, and the concrete personal favor of the official. Another 

)) 242 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHI:'\ A 
factor seems still more important. In conjunction \Vith the tre-
mendous density of population in China, a calculating mentality 
and self-sufficient frugality of unexampled intensity developed 
under the influence of worl(lly-minded utilitarianism and belief 
in the value of wealth as a universal means of moral perfection. 
The Chinese shopkeeper haggled for and reckoned with every 
penny, and he daily counted over his cash receipts. Reliable 
travelers reported that the conversation of the native Chinese 
was about money and money aliairs, apparently to an extent 
seldom found elsewhere. But it is very striking that out of this 
unceasing and intensive economic ado and the much bewailed 
crass "materialism" of the Chinese, there failed to originate on 
the economic plane those great and methodical business con-
ceptions which are rational in nature and arc presupposed by 
modem capitalism. Such conceptions have remained alien to 
China, except, for instance, in Canton where past or present 
foreign influence and the incessant advance of occidental capi-
talism have taught them to the Chinese. 
In the past, especially in times of political division, political 
capitalism arose independently in the form of usury connected 
with office, emergency loans, wholesale h·ade and industrial 
ergastcria. This Chinese political capitalism was comparable to 
the capitalism of late Antiquity, Egypt, and Islam. Hecently 
there has also been the usual dependency upon the merchant and 
buyer. In general, however, the Chinese lacked the strict organiza-
tion of the sislenw domestico, such as existed even during the 
late Middle Ages in the Occident. But in spite of the rather 
intensive internal and, for a time at least, considerable foreign 
trade, there existed no bourgeois capitalism of the modern or 
even late Medieval type. There were no rational forms of late 
Medieval and scientific European capitalist enterprise in industry, 
and no formation of capital in the European manner. Chinese 
capital, which took part in exploiting modern opportunities, was 
predominantly the capital of mandarins; hence, it was capital 
accumulated through extortionist practices in office. There was 
no rational method of organized enterprise in the European 

CONFUCIANISM AND PURITANISM 
)) 243 (( 
fashion, no truly rational organization of commercial news serv-
ices, no rational money system-the development of the money 
economy did not even equal that of Ptolemean Egypt. There 
were only beginnings of legal institutions and these compare 
with our law of firms, of commercial companies, of checks, bonds, 
shares. (These beginnings were characterized essentially by their 
technical imperfection.) The numerous technical inventions were 
little used for economic purposes.4 Finally, there was no genuine, 
technically valuable system of commercial correspondence, ac-
counting, or bookkeeping. 
Thus, we meet with conditions very similar to those of Mediter-
ranean Antiquity, though in consequence of the pacification of 
the empire slavery \X.'as insignificant. In some respects, however, 
these conditions \Vere even more remote from the "spirit" of 
modern capitalism and its institutions than those of Antiquity. 
In spite of all the heresy trials, there was extensive religious 
tolerance, at least compared to the intolerance of Calvinist Puri-
tanism. Peace existed and there was a far reaching freedom of 
commodity trade, freedom of mobility, freedom of occupational 
choice and methods of production. There was no tabooing what-
-soever of the shopkeeper spirit. All of this has not favored the 
rise of modern capitalism in China. In this typical land of profit-
eering, one may well sec that by themselves neither "acquisitive-
ness," nor high and even exclusive esteem for wealth, nor utili-
tarian "rationalism" have any vonnection as yet with modem 
capitalism. The Chinese petty and middle class business man, 
as well as the big business man who adhered to the old tradition, 
ascribed success and failure, like the Puritan, to divine powers. 
The Chinese, hO\vever, ascribed them to the Taoistic god of 
wealth. For him success and failure in business were not sympto-
matic of a state of grace but of magically and ceremonially signifi-
cant merit or o1fensc, and compensation was sought in terms of 
ritually "good" works. The Chinese lacked the central, religiously 
determined, and rational method of life which came from within 
and which was characteristic of the classical Puritan. For the 
latter, economic success was not an ultimate goal or end in itself 

» 244 ({ 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
but a means of proving one's self. The Chinese did not delib-
erately cut himself oif from the impressions and influences of 
the "world"-a world which the Puritan sought to control, just 
as he did himself, by means of a definite and one-sided rational 
effort of will. The Puritan was taught to suppress the petty ac-
quisitiveness which destroys all rational, methodical enterprise 
-an acquisitiveness which distinguishes the conduct of the 
Chinese shopkeeper. Alien to the Confucian was the peculiar 
con£nement and repression of natural impulse5 which was 
brought about by strictly volitional and ethical ratjonalization 
and ingrained in the Puritan. 
For the Confucian the pruning of freely expressed and original 
impulse was of a different nature. The watchful self-control of 
the Confucian was to maintain the dignity of external gesture 
and manner, to keep "face." This self-control was of an aesthetic 
and essentially negative nah1re. Dignified deportment, in itself 
devoid of definite content, was esteemed and desired. The equally 
vigilant self-control of the Puritan had as its positive aim a 
definitely qualified conduct and, beyond this, it had as an inward 
aim the systematic control of one's own nature which was re-
garded as wicked and sinful. The consistent Pietist would take 
inventory, a sort of bookkeeping practic-ed daily even by such 
an Epigonus as Benjamin Franklin, for the supra-mundane, omnis-
cient God saw the central internal attitude. However, the world 
to which the Confucian adjusted merely observed the graceful 
gesture. The Confucian gentleman, striving simply for dignified 
bearing, distrusted others as generally as he believed others dis-
tmsted him. This distmst handicapped all credit and business 
operations and contrasted with the Puritan's trust, especially 
his economic tmst in the absolutely unshakable and religiously 
determined righteousness of his brother in faith. Faced with the 
creatural wickedness of the world and of man, especially of 
those in high places, this confidence just sufficed to prevent his 
profoundly realistic and thoroughly unrespecting pessimism from 
becoming a blockage to the credit indispensable for capitalist 
commerce. It merely caused him to assess soberly the objective 

CONFLJCIANJSl\f AND l'lJRITANlS::.Vf 
)) 24:5 « 
external ancl internal ability of the partner, to take stock of the 
constancy of motives indispensable for business according to 
the adage ''honesty is the best policy." 
The Confucian's word was a beautiful and polite gesture as 
an end in itself; the Puritan's word was an impersonal and busi-
nesslike communication, short and absolutely reliable: "Yea, yea; 
Nay, nay: for whatsoever is n1ore than these cometh of evil." 
The thriftiness of the Confucian was narrO\vly circumscribed 
by the stah1s proprieties of the gentleman. The excessive thrift 
found in the mystically determined humility of Lao-tzu and 
some other Taoists was fought by the Confucian school. Thrift, 
for the Chinese petty bourgeois classes, meant hoarding. This 
was fundamentally comparable to the peasant's way of hoarding 
wealth in his stocking. It served to safcg11ard bmial riles and good 
name, honor and enjoyment of possession per sc, as is usual 
where asceticism has not yet broken the enjoyment of wealth. 
For the Puritan, however, possessions were as great a tempta-
tion as they were for the monk. Like the income of monasteries, 
his income \vas a secondary result and symptom of successful 
asceticism. John \Vesley said: "\Ve have no choice but to recom-
mend that men be pious, and that means;" as an unavoidable 
effect, "getting rich." But obviously the dangerous nah1re of riches 
for the pious individual was the same as it had ]JCen for the 
monasteries. 'Veslcy expressly focused upon the observed and 
apparent paradox between the rejection of the world and acquisi-
tive virtuosity. 
For the Confucian, as a statement handed down by the l\-'Jaster 
expressly teaches, \vealth was the most important means for a 
virtuous, i.e., dignified life and for the ability to dedicate oneself 
to self-perfection. Hence inquny as to means of improving 
men was answered by, "enrich them," for only a rich man 
could live according to rank and station. However, for the 
Puritan, income was an unintended result, an important symptom 
of virtue. The expenditure of wealth for purposes of personal 
consumption easily constituted idolatrous surrender to the w·orld. 
Confucius might not disdain the acquisition of riches but wealth 

)} 24() « 
TITF. RELIGION OF CHl~A 
seemed insecure and could upset the equilibrium of the genteel 
soul. Thus, all truly economic and vocational work was the-Philis-
tine activity of expert professionals. For the Confncian, the spe-
cialistie expert could uot be raised to truly positive diguity, no 
mat!"er \vhat his social usefulness. The decisive factor was that 
h 
" 1 
I 
" ( 
1 
) 
" 
1" 
l 
· 
· 
t e cu tnrec man 
gent eman 
was not a too. ; t 1at Is, 1n 
his adjustment to the world and iu his self-perfection he was 
an end unto hirnsclf, not a means for any functional end. This 
core of Confucian ethics rejected professional specialization, 
modern expert bureaucracy, and special training; above all, it 
rejcctf~d training in ccouomics for the pursuit of profit. 
To this "idolatrous" maxim Puritanism contrasts the task of 
proving oneself in vocational life aud in the special functions of 
the world. The Confucian was the man of literary education, 
more precisely the man of bookish education, a man of scrip-
ture in tlw highest form. Confuciauism was as foreign to the 
Hellenic valuation and development of speech and conversation 
as it \Vas to the en<~r)Sy of ratiow1l action in military or economic 
affairs. Though they did so with differential intensity most .Pnri-
tan denmninations opposed philosophic literary education since 
it conflicted with an indispensable grounding in the Bible. The 
Bible was cherished a~ a sort of book of statutes and a mana-
gerial doctrine. Thus, philosophical literary education, the highest 
ornanwnt of the Confucian, was, for the Puritan, an idle waste 
of time and a danger to religion. Scholasticism and dialectics, 
Aristotle all(l his dlorivatives, \'Vere a horror and a menace to the 
Puritan; thus Spencr, for instance, preferred mathematically-
founded Cartesian r~ttional philosophy. Useful and naturalist 
kmrwlcdge, especially empirical knowledge of natural sciences, 
geographical orientation as well as the sober clarity of a realist 
mind and specialized expert knowledge were first cultivated as 
planned educational ends by Puritans-in Gennany particularly 
by Pietist circles. 
Such kno\\rlcdge wa~ the only avenue to kuowlcdge of God's 
glory and the providence embodied in His creation. On the other 
hand, such knowledge served as a means of rationally mastering 

CONFUCIAN1S~I AKD PUHITANISM 
)) 247 « 
the world in one's vocation and it enabled one to do one's duty 
in honor of God. Hellenism and, essentially also, the Renaissance 
at its height were equally distant from both Confuciauism and 
Puritanism. The indispensable ethicai qualities of the modern cap-
italist entrepreneur were: radical concentration on God-ordained 
purposes; the relentless and practical rationalism of the aseeticist 
ethic; a methodical conception of matter-of-faetness in business 
management; a horror of illegal, political, colonial, booty, and 
monopoly types of capitalism \vhich depended ou the favor of 
princes and men as against the sober, strict legality and the har-
nessed rational energy of routine enterprise; the rational calcula-
tion of the technically best way, of practical solidity and ex-
pediency instead of the traditionalist enjoyment of transmitted 
skill or the beauty of product characteristic of the old artisan 
craftsman. This must be added to the pious worker's special 
will for work. The relentlessly and religiously systematized utili-
tarianism peculiar to rational asceticism, to live "in" the world 
and yet not he "of" it, has helped to produce superior rational 
aptitudes and therewith the spirit of the vocational man which, 
in the last analysis, was denied to Confucianism. That is to say, 
the Confucian \vay of life was rational but was determined, 
unlike Puritauism, from without rather than from witllin. The 
contrast can teach us that mere sobriety and thriftiness combined 
with acquisitiveness and regard for wealth \vere far from repre-
senting and far from releasing the "capitalist spirit," in the 
sense that this is found in the vocatioual man of the modern 
economy. 
The typical Confucian used his own and his family's savings 
;_;I order to acquire a literary education and to have himself 
trained for the examinations. Thus he gained the basis for a cul-
tured status position. The typical Puritan earned plenty, spent 
little, and reinvested his income as capital in rational capitalist 
ente11)rise out of an asceticist compulsion to save. "Rationalism" 
-and this is our second lesson-was embodied in the spirit of 
both ethics. But only the l)uritan rational ethic with its supra-
mundane orientation brought economic rationalism to its con-

» 248 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
sistent conclusion. This happened merely because nothing was 
further from the conscious Puritan intention. It happened because 
inner-worldly work was simply expressive of the striving for a 
transcendental goal. The world, as promised, fell to I>uritanism 
because the Puritans alone "had striven for God and his justice." 
In this is vested the basic difference behveen the two kinds of 
rationahsm. Confucian rationalism meant rational adjustment to 
the world; Puritan rationalism meant rational mastery of the 
world. Both the Puritan and the Confucian were "sober men." 
But the rational sobriety of the Puritan was founded in a mighty 
enthusiasm which the Confucian lacked completely; it was the 
same enthusiasm which inspired the monk of the Occident. The 
rejection of the world by occidental asceticism was insolubly 
linked to its opposite, namely, its eagerness to dominate the 
world. In the name of a supra-mundane God the imperatives of 
asceticism were issued to the monk and, in variant and softened 
form, to the world. Nothing conflicted more with the Confucian 
ideal of gentility than the idea of a "vocation." The "princely" 
man was an aesthetic value; he was not a tool of a god. But the 
true Christian, the other-worldly and inner-worldly asceticist, 
wished to be nothing more than a tool of his God; in this he 
sought his dignity. Since this is \\'hat he wished to be he was a 
useful instrument for rationally transforming and mastering the 
world. 
The Chinese in all probability would be quite capable, prob-
ably more capable than the Japanese, of assimilating capitalism 
which has technically and economically been fully developed 
in the mocbm culture area. It is obviously not a question of 
deeming the Chinese "naturally ungifted" for the demands of 
capitalism. Rut compared to the Occident, the varied conditions 
which externally favored the origin of capitalism in China did 
not suffice to create it. Likewise capitalism did not originate 
in occidental or oriental Antiquity, or in India, or \'-'·here lslarnisrn 
held swav. Yet in each of these areas different and favorable 
circumsh{nccs seemed to facilitate its rise. ~Iany of the cir-
cumstances which could or had to hinder capitalism in China 

CONFUCIANISM AND PURITANISM 
similarly existed in the Occident and assumed definite shape in 
the period of modern capitalism. Thus, there were the patrimonial 
traits of occidental rulers, their bureaucracy, and the fact that 
the money economy was unsettled and undeveloped. The money 
economy of Ptolemaic Egypt was carried through much more 
thoroughly than it was in fifteenth or sixteenth century Emope. 
Circumstances which are usually considered to have been ob-
stacles to capitalist development in the Occident had not existed 
for thousands of years in China. Such circumstances as the fetters 
of feudalism, landlordism and, in part also, the guild system were 
lacking there. Besides, a considerable part of the various trade-
restricting monopolies which were characteristic of the Occident 
did not apparently exist in China. Also, in the past, China knew 
time and again the political conditions arising out of preparation 
for war and warfare between competing states. In ancient Baby-
lon and in Antiquity, there were conditions conducive to the rise 
of political capitalism which the modern period also shares with 
the past. It might be thought that modem capitalism, interested 
in free trading opportunity, could have gained ground once the 
accumulation of wealth and profit from political sources became 
impossible. This is perhaps comparable to the way in which, 
in recent times, North America has offered the freest space for 
the development of high capitalism in the almost complete ab-
sence of organization for war. 
Political capitalism was common to occidental Antiquity until 
the time of the Roman emperors, to the ~diddle Ages, and to the 
Orient. The pacification of the Empire explains, at least indirectly, 
the non-existence of political capitalism but it does not explain 
the non-existence of modern capitalism in China. To be sure 
the basic characteristics of the "mentality," in this case the prac-
tical attitudes toward the world, were deeply co-determined by 
political and economic destinies. Yet, in view of their autonomous 
laws, one can hardly fail to ascribe to these attitudes effects 
strongly counteractive to capitalist development. 

NOTES 
l. City, P-rince and God 
l. The great central works of classical Chinese literature will not be 
cited separately when reference is made to a passage. They have been 
tTanslated and edited \vith textual criticism by J. Legge in the series 
Chinese Classics. Some of them have hccn incorporated in :~\lax 1\.tuel-
ler's Sacred Books of the F:ast. 
The most convenient introduction to the personal or (what here 
amounts to the same thing) presumably pt~rsonal views of Confucius 
and his authoritative disciples may \Veil be the three writing~ which 
Legge has edited with an introduction, the small volume entitled The 
Life and Teachings of Confucius (London, l.S67). They comprise the 
Lun Yii (translated as Confucian Analects), the Ta Hsiieh (The Great 
Learning), and the Chung Yung (Doctriue of the ,\Jean). In addition 
there are the famous annals of Lu (Ch'un Ch'iu: "Spring and Autmnn 
Annals"). For translations of 1\.-Icncius' writings see Sacred Books of the 
East and Faber, The Mind of Mencius. The Tao Teh Ching has ap-
peared in many translations. The German translation hy v. Strauss 
(1870) is masterly and an English translation by Carus ,,_ppeared in 
1913. ~vfeanvvhilc, von \\-'ilhclm has edited a good selection of Chinese 
mystics and philosophers (Diederichs, Jena). Of late, a pwoccupation 
with Taoism has become almost fashionable. The older popnlarizing 
work of Williams, The Midden Empire, is still a useful introductory 
treatise on political and social conditions. Then there i~ von Richthofen's 
grandiose and predominantly geographical work wl1ich on the side 
takes these conditions into consideration. Otto Franke gives an excel-
lent sketch in Die Kultur dc1· Cegenwart (II, II, 1) along with bibliog-
raphy. [Franke's unfinished magnum opus Geschichte des Chinesischen 
Reiches, Eine Darstellung seiner Entstehung, seines \Vescns und seine1' 
Entwi.cklung bis ZAII" Ne1/esten Zeit 3 vok appeared at Berlin-Leipzig 
in 1930, 1936, 1937. The first two volumes include the rise of the Han 
empire and the establishment of the Confucian state; the third volume 
(pp. 576) contains annotations, supplements and corrections to vols. I 
and II, as well as indices of subject matter and names. Ed.] 
For literature on the Chinese citv see H. Plath, "Ucher die Ver-
fassung und Vcnvaltung Chinas m;ter den dn~i ersten Dynastien," 
Abhandlungen der Koeniglichen Baytisrlwn Akademie der "\Vissen-
• 250 « 

NOTES 
» 251 (( 
sclwftcn, 186.5, I. Cl. X, Abt. 2, p. 45:3 fi. The best work thus far on 
the ccorJOulic life of a (modem) Chinese city i~ that of a Jisciple of 
Karl Buecher, Dr. l\"yok Ching Tsur, "Diu gewcrblichen lklricbsfonnen 
der Stadt 1\ingpo," Zeitschrift fuer die Gesamte Staat.\·tviS.\'C11.W:Iwft, 
Supplement 30 ( Tuchingen, 1808). 
For aucicut Chinese religion (so· called "Sinism") see E. Chavannes, 
Reuue de I'l-l i.\foire des Religions, vol. 3'1, p . .1.25 ff. For the religion 
and ethic of Confucianism and Taoism, commendable are Dvorak's two 
tr·eatises in Darst.ellungcn aus dcm Gebiet der nichtchristlirhc11 l{eli-
givnsgcschicht.e. For tfw re:;t, sec \Vilhelm Grube, "Die H.eligion der 
alteu Chinesen" Religio11sgeschichtlichcs Lescbuch, A. Bcrlholet eel., 
(Tiibingen, 180o) pp. J -68 and JJuckdcy 011 China in Lelll'buch der 
Heligiorisgcschichl:c, Chanlepic de La Saussaye ed., 3rd ed. (Tucbingen, 
1904). At pre~ent [in 1820 Ed._] de Groot's great \Vork on the official 
religiou i~ outstanding. 
Cf. l1is main work, Tlw Rdigio11s System of China (dc"ling thus 
far mainly with ritual, especially wilh Lhe riles uf death). De Groot 
gives a compwhensive smvey of lhc rcligiou~ systems of China in 
Kultur der Gegcntca.rt. For the Lolcranee of Confuci~mism, see his 
spirited polernie.-d treatise "Sectarianism a11d Heligious Persecution in 
China,'·' Vcrh. dcr Kon. Ak. van lFctensch. te Arnsterdam, Afd. letterk. 
N. Hceks, IV, l, 2. For the history of religious affairs sec his essay in 
vol. VII of the A.rchiv fuer Hdighm.;tcissel!.w)wjt ( J 004)- See also the 
review of Pclliot in the 13ullctiu du ['f.;colc franr,;aisc du l' Extreme 
Orient, vol. Ill ( 1\)0:3), p. 105. Conceming Taoism sec Pclliot, loc. cit. 
p. 317. Concerning the sncrcd edict of Lhe founder of the .\ling dynasty 
(t·he precedent for the "sacn~d edict" of 1671) see Chnvaimcs, Bulletin 
de l'Ecolr: fran{:aisc de l'Extri!mc Orient vol. III (190:3), p. 549 f!'. 
For a presentation of the Confucian doctrine from the vicwrloint of 
the modem reform parly of K'ang \'u-wci sec Chen Huan-chrmg, The 
Economic Principles of Confucius and His School (Doctoral thesis, 
Columbia University, New York, 1911). 
Tl1e impact of the various religious systems on style of life is eluci-
dated in \'Vilhclm Grube's beautiful essay "Zur Pekinger Volkskuncle," 
Vcroefje11tlichungen aus dcrn Koeniglichen Museum ft;er '1/oelkcrkunde 
(Berlin, vol. VH, 1801). Cf. also Grube's "H.cligion u!l(l :Kultur der 
Chinesen, Ueber ehinesische Philosophic," Kultur uud Cegcnu;art, I, 5. 
Grube, Geschichte dur chincsi.w:hcn Uteratur (Leipzig, 1902). 
From the missionary lituratnrc s<~e Jos. Edkins, Religion in China 
(3rd ed. 1884). 1t is rather valuahl<' because il reproduces nurrwrous 
conversations. Douglas' Society in China conlai:1s some valuable mate-
rial. For hu-ther literatmc one has lo pc~ruse the greal ami well-known 
English, French and German periodicals, as well as the Zei.tschrift fuer 

)) 252 << 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft and the Archiv fuer Religiomwissen-
schaft. 
For a descriptive introduction of modern Chinese conditions see 
Freihcrr von Hichthofen's Tagehuecher aus China and the books by 
Lauterer, Lyall, Navarra and others. Coneeming Taoism ef. the notes 
to Chapter VII below. 
For a modern history of ancient China see A. Conrady in Welt-
geschichte ed. by Pflugk-Harttung (Berlin, 1911), vol. III, pp. 459-
567. The new work of de Groot, Universismus, Die Gmndlage der 
Religion und Ethik, des Staatswesens und der Wissenschaft Chinas 
(Berlin, 1918), came to my attention only when tllis book was in press. 
Among short introductory sketches we wish especially to refer to a 
small brochure by one of the best experts, Frciherr von Hosthorn, Das 
soziale Leben der Chinesen ( 1919). Of the older similar literature we 
should name J. Singer's Ueber soziale Verhaeltnisse in Ostasien (1888). 
More instructive than many a book is the study of the collection of 
imperial decrees. Originally intended for internal administrative use, 
these have interested Englishmen for decades and have been translated 
under the title of Peking Gazette. Further literature and translated 
sources arc cited below. 
Only a small portion of the documentary sources and inscriptions 
have been translated and that is a great handicap for the non-sinologist. 
Unfortunately, I did not have an expert sinologist to cooperate on the 
text or check it. For that reason the volwne is published with mis-
givings and with the greatest reservation. 
2. This is also the concltL~ion of H. B. !vlorse in The Trade and 
Administration of the Chinese Empire (New York, 1908), p. 74. Basic 
facts which justify the judgment are: the absence of excise taxes and 
all taxes on mobile wealth, very low custom tariffs until modern times, 
and a grain policy which \Vas handled exclusively from the point of 
consumption. Furthermore, given the nature of officialdom, the wealthy 
trader could actually have his own way-for money. 
3. The h·ansition to this system, which corresponded to our bank 
currency as exemplified by the Hamburg Bank, was only brought about 
thmugh the emperors' debasement of coinage and paper issues. Hence 
the transition is secondary. The report and imperial decree published 
by the Peking Gazette of 2 June, 1896, demonstrate the essential con-
fusion which could be produced even in recent times by a sudden 
conh·action of copper money at a given place. It led to the increased 
issue of local bank notes and resulted in agio differences and specula-
tion in bullion silver. Moreover, government intervention was com-
pletely inept. For the best presentation of currency (.'Onditions see H. B. 
Morse, The Trade and Admini.\tration of the Chinese Empire, (New 

NOTES 
» 253 ({ 
York, 1908), Chapter V, p. 119 ff. CL also J. Edkins, Banking arul 
Prices in China ( 1905). From ancient Chine5e literature we may refer 
to Ssu-ma Ch'ien ( Se .Ma Tsien), Chavannes ed., vol. III, Chapter 
XXX. 
4. The term for money is huo, means of exchange. Pu huo means 
valuable means of exchange. 
5. Besides the chapter in H. B . .Morse, op. cit., and Jos. Edkins, 
Chinese Currency (London 1913) see the publication of l:liot, ]oum<Jl 
Asiatique (3rd Serie, vol. 3, 1837) which is still useful. Biot relies 
essentially on the authority of Ma Tuan-lin. The ]\" ew York doctoral 
thesis of W. P. Wei, "The Currency Problem in China," Studies in 
History, Economics, etc. No. 59 (1914), the first chapter of which 
contains some material, came to my attention only during proofreading. 
6. With every earthquake geomantic superstition (discussed below) 
led to the suppression of miniJ1g operations. But it is a ridiculous exag-
geration for Biot, Zoe. cit., to compare these miJlCs to those of Potosi. 
Richthofen definitely settled this issue. The mines in Yunnan reportedly 
yielded only about 13 million tacls from 1811 to 1890, despite the 
relatively low royalty of 15%. Even ill the 16th century ( 1556) a silver 
mille was opened at the cost of 30,000 taels which subsequently yielded 
28,500 taels. The recurrent prohibitions of lead milling precluded the 
yield of silver as a by-product. Only during Chinese rule of farther 
India (Cambodia, Annam) and Burma, wllich were rich in silver, did 
the permanent influx of silver increase. Also Western trade via Bokhara, 
especially durmg the 13th century, brought an influx of silver for silk 
exports. Then, again, smce the 16th century, trade with Europeans has 
brought silver. From the Annals, it may be concluded that an impor-
tant reason for tlw usually low profitability of the silver mines was t :1e 
great uncertainty, besides an imperfect technology. 
7. Emperor Ch'icn Lung's history of the Ming dynasty reports t 
~­
mendous corvees for tlw exploitation of gold mines [Yu t'siuan tung k1 n 
kang mu, tr. by Delamarre (Paris, 1865) p. 362]. In the year 141 1, 
550,000 (?) people were allegedly regimented for such corvees. 
8. According to ~'eil, loc. cit. p. 17, minting profits are said to have 
been w1known in early Chmese mintmg policy. But this is unbeliev-
able since the notoriously tremendous counterfeit minting would not 
have tl1en been profitable. Besides the Annals expressly report the 
contrary (see below) . 
r 9. Concerning the impact of the feng-shui see Varietes Sino-
logiques No. 2 (H. Havret, "La Province de Ngan Hei," 1893), p. 39. 
10. According to a comment of the vVen hian tong kao, reproduced 
by Biot (Journal Asiatique, 3rd Scrie, vol. 6, 1838, p. 278), tllC coin-
age of the entire country under Yuan Ti ( 48-30 B.c.) is supposed to 

)) 254 « 
THE RELIGION O:F CHIN A 
have been estimated at 730,000 yiian at 10,000 ch'irn (copper coins) 
of which .'330,000 were held by the state (!). !via Tuan-lin considers 
this amount to be lo.w. 
11. The Annals 
(;~vf:,. Tuan-lin) state that copper, at that time by 
weight, \vas .I ,1:>40 times more valuable than grain (other sources stu.te 
507 times as much), \vhereas under the Han copper was allegedly 
I to S times more valuable than rice. In Honw, too, during the last 
century of th1~ Hepublic, the exchange rate of wheat was surprising. 
12. ThP "p'icn-ch'iun" paper money of the lOth century \Vas re-
deemed by the treasury. 
13. The heavy iron money in Szechwan, even in the Hrst century, 
caused the Guild of the Sixteen to issue certificates (ch'an-t;:;u), i.e. 
bank money which later became irredeemable through insnlvellcy. 
14. An older Chinese statement of slate inconno frurn tl1e Annals 
L!vta Tuan-lin) appeared as follows: 
997 B.C. 
grain ............ . 
(in thousands) 
21,707 shih 
}()2} A.D. 
(in thonsancb) 
22,71-l2 shih 
copper coins ...... . 
4,656 kuan 
7,.364 kuan 
heavy silk goods ... . 
light silk good~ ... . 
( I ,000 ch'icn each) 
1,625 p'i (pieces) 
273 p'i 
1,615 p'i 
lSI p'i 
silk thread ....... . 
gauze (very fine silk) 
tea ............. . 
hay, fresh and dried . 
fire wood ........ . 
coal 
iron ............ . 
1,410 ounces 
5,170 ounces 
490 pounds 
.'30,000 shih 
280 shou 
530 shcng 
~300 pounc_ls 
802 ounces 
.'3, H9.S ounces 
I ,668 pounds 
28,99.') shih 
? 
26 shcng 
In addilio11 in 9D7 B.c.: items for arrow wood, goose feathers (for 
arrows) and vegetables. 
However, in 1021 A.D.: items for leather ( 816,000 shrug), hemp 
(370,000 pounds), salt (577,000 shih), paper (123,000 sheng). 
In 1077 A.D.: the year of the monetary all(l monopolistic trade 
reform of \Vang A.n-shih (sec below). 
silver ................ · · · · · · · 
copper ..................... . 
grain ................ · · · · · · · 
l1cavy silk material ........... . 
silk thread and light materials .. . 
hay ........................ . 
60,137 ounces 
5,.5S.S,819 kua11 
lS,202,21i7 shih 
2,672,323 p'i 
5,847,:358 ounces 
16,754,844 shall 

NOTES 
>> 2.55 « 
To this is added a mixture of items such as tea, salt, cheese, bran, 
wax, oil, paper, iron, coal, safHower, leather, hemp, elc., which the 
annalist, for no clear reason, states in terms of total weight ( 3,200,253 
lbs.). As regards grains, one figured l3f shih to be the moulhly per 
capita allowance (the shih, however, varied considerably in size). 
The silver income on the last balance, which is absent in the two first 
ones is to be explained either as the result of the trade monopoly, or 
as a result of the tax collectors having continued to figure copper 
money in silver, or because the latter account states net receipts, the 
former supposed rec~!ipts (?). 
In contrast, the first account of the 1\ .. ling dynasty in 1360 shows 
only three items: 
grain ..................... . 
money (in copper and paper) .. . 
silk materials .............. . 
29,433,350 shih 
450,000 ounces (of silver) 
288,546 pieces 
This means a considerable increase in the silver horde and an elimi-
nation of the numerous, specified taxes in kind, which at that time 
obviously figured only in the budgets of the provinces where the re-
ceipts were spent. Not much can be done with these figures because 
the initial deductions cannot be ascertained. 
From 1795 to HHO the central government received 4.21 million 
shih of grain (of 120 Chinese pounds each). This was accompanied 
by a considerable increase, both relative and absolute, in the silver 
receipts, facilitated by the strongly active balance of Chinese trade 
with the West after the godsend of American silver. (Hecent develop-
ments arc of no interest here.) 
Acc'{)rding to the Annals, in olden times it was customary to demand 
tax deliveries of increasingly valuable goods with increasing distance 
from the capital; less valuable goods were required from the environs 
of the capital. [For the above ligures see Biot, op. cit. pp. 315, 316, 
319, 330. A few obvious mistakes in the German edition have been 
corrected. Ed.] 
15. This happened, for instance, in 689 A.n., according to :\.fa Tuan-
lin. 
16. Cf. the export of grain in 6S3 A.D. to Japan which then had a 
copper standard. 
17. According to the Annals this happened, for instance, in 702 A.D. 
18. For the first time in 780 A .D. 
19. During the eighth century the minting masters argued that 1,000 
units of copper transformed into works of art (vases) were equivalent 
to 3,600 units and, thus, that the industrial use of copper was more 
profitable than its monetary use. 

)) 256 « 
THE RELlGION OF CHINA 
20. In 817, and often since that time, no more than 5,000 kuan 
(of 1,000 ch'ien each) were allow·ed. Time limits on the sale of surplus 
copper holdings were stipulated according to their size. 
2l. Apparently this was first used for the official seals. After Shi 
Huang Ti it became the external mark of the transition from feudalism 
to the patrimonial state. 
22. Thus in 1155 the Tatarian rulers of l\torthern China demanded 
m percent. 
23. This happened even in 1107. The notes were devalued to one 
hundredth of their face value by inflation. 
24. Thus, in 1111, when paper money was issued for the frontier 
war. 
25. This was the regular form which, initially, had also been recom-
mended by interested traders. These notes were in the nature of 
treasury bills. 
26. Old or worn paper issues occasionally were exchanged at only 
1/10 to l/3 of their face value. 
27. Even in 1107, because of the war against the Tartars, one half 
of every payment of sums over 10,000 ch'ien had to be paid in paper. 
This often happened. 
28. Marco Polo's description cannot be accepted. A 3% deduction 
on the worn notes turned in and exchanged for new (paper!) notes 
and the issue of gold and silver for notes upon anybody's request is 
impossible. This remains so even were one to understand :rvfarco Polo 
to mean-which the text would permit-that the industrial purpose had 
to be stated. ~·Iarco Polo also reports the compulsory sale of precious 
metal for notes. 
29. By the middle of the 19th century the ratio allegedly dropped 
from 500:1 to JIOO:l. 
;'30. J. Edkins, Chinese Currency (1890), p. 4. 
31. The prebends of the officials of the Ch'in and Han were graded 
in sixteen classes of partly fixed sums of money and partly fixed pay-
ments in rice, as stated by Chavamws in vol. Il, Appendix I of his edi-
tion of Ssu-ma Ch'ien. To be refused the privilege of offering sacrificial 
meat as payment in kind was considered a sign of imperial disfavor. 
TI1is happened, for instance, to Confucius, according to Ssu-ma Ch'ien·s 
biography. To be sure, docwnents contuining pure pecuniary accounts 
were to be met with in what 'vas then Chinese Turkestan. 
32. Stone construction replaced 'Nood construction during the 
fourth centmy B.C. Earlier the stockatkd capitals were removed fre-
quently and easily. 
~1~'3. L. Gaillard's S. J.'s work on Nanking does not yield much knowl-

NOTES 
)) 257 « 
edge of Chinese urbanism. Cf. l'ari6tes Sinolugiques, vol. 2:3 (Shang-
hai, 1903). 
34. \Vc shall discuss below the great ~ignificance of the Chinese 
guilds. Their differences, which form a contrast to the \Vest, as well as 
the reasons for these differences, will be clarifled. The signiflcance of 
the guilds is even more strikiug because their economic- control and 
their social power over the individual were far more extensive than in 
the Occident. 
35. Naturally, also in China, it was far from the case that every 
urban resident maintained connection with the ancestral shrine of his 
native place. 
36. The god of wealth was considered the universal city god in the 
official pantheon. 
37. On the Chinese city cf. Eugene Simon, La Cite Chinoisc (Paris, 
1885, la<:king conciseness). 
38. The honorary official (Giles calls him "headborough"), who 
was responsible to the government for the peace or a place, otherwise 
merely forwarded petitions and acted as a nobuy. lie had a ( vv"Ooden) 
seal but was not considered an official and he ranked below the lowliest 
mandarin in the locality. Cf. H. A. Giles, China and the Chinese (New 
York, 1912), p. 77. 
Besides, there was not a special municipal lax !Jilt rather govern-
mentally prescribed contributions for schools, charities, aud water 
service. 
39. Peking consisted of five administrative <listricts. 
40. To be sure, the compass was mainly used for inland tra!Tic. 
41. Cf. l'lath, China vur 4,000 Jahren (rvluenchen, 1869), p. 125. 
42. According to the tradition, Shih Huang Ti for instance ordered 
a compulsory synmcism of the 120,000 (?) wealthiest families of the 
entire country to his residence. Emperor Ch'ien Lung's chronicle of 
the !\·Iing dynasty reports syncccisms of wealthy people to Peking in 
1403. Cf. Yu -tsiuan tung kian kang mu, op. cit., p. 130. 
4-3. See H. n. ivlorsc, The Gilds of China (London, HJ09). From the 
older literature see MacCowau "Cbiuese Guilds," fmmwl of the North 
China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Sot:icty, 1888/9, and Hunter, Can-
ton Before Treaty Days 1821-44 (London, 1882). 
44. The guild of the goldbeatcrs from Ningpo iu \\,..enchow denied 
guild membership and teaching of the craft to those \\"ho were native 
bonl. This emphasizes the derivation horn the inter-et-hnic specializa-
tion of tribal crafts. 
45. Cf. the a1JOve mentioned instance of Ningpo which has numer-
ous parallels. 

)) 258 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
46. Cf. footnote 41 above. 
47. Under the Chm1 dynasty the personal God of Heaven, with his 
six dignihu-ies hesid~ him, \Vas allegedly replaced in the cult by the 
impersonal exprcssicms of "Heaven and Earth," as Legge also assumes. 
( Cf. Shu Chin~, Prolegomena, p. 193 H.) The spirit of the emperor and 
the spirits of those among his vassals who were of good conduct pro-
ceeded to heaven. There the spirit could appear in order to give warn-
ings. (Legge, p. 238.) There was no hell. 
48. The instability of this development toward impersonalism is 
shown, for instance, in a curse inscribed in the year 312 by the King 
of Ch'in· against the hostile King of Ch'u, who had allegedly violated 
moral codes and broken a contract. As witnesses and avengers the King 
of Ch'in called upon l. Heaven, 2. the ruler on high (hence, a personal 
God of Heaven), 3. the spirit of a river (where presumably the con-
tract had been concluded). Cf. the inscription in Appendix Ill, vol. 
II of Chavannes' edition of Ssu-ma Ch'ien and Chavanncs in the 
j(mrnal Asiatique, !viay-June, 189.'3, p. 473 f. 
49. Cf. the excellent Leip.-ig doctoral thesis (1913) of M. Quistorp 
(a disciple of Conrady) "tvlaenne:igesellschaft und Altersklassen im 
alten China," 1\Jitteilungen des Seminars fiir Orientalische Sprachen, 
vol. XVHI ( 1915), p. 1 ff. Only an expert could judge \>Vlietber to-
temism has ever prevailed in China, as Conrady assumes. [Otto Franke, 
after having examined the sources and the literary controversy, con-
cludes that there is evidence enough of totemist survivals up to the 
twelfth ccntmy. "Today they have vanished." Op. cit. vol. Ill, p. 377. 
See also vol. I, p. 74; vol. II, 403; vol. III, pp. 51, 311, 375 ff. See 
also Chapter IV, footnote :3, below. Ed.} 
50. Quistorp, op. cit. finds traces in certain rudimeutary mythologies 
of Lao-tzu. 
51. [Otto Franke has documented and greatly enlarged on this com-
parison. He cites Boniface's hull Unam sanctam of 1:302 "as demon-
strating quite clearly the identity of traits which characterize the 
Catholic world-church and Chinese universal state." Op. cit., vol. III, 
p. 104. Cf. also vol. I, 120 ff., 161; vol. III, p. 83 f., 167. Eel.] 
52. Hou T'u, one of the six minhters of Emperor Hnang Ti, \V".lS 
deified under the name "Genius of the Earth" (Cf. Schih Luh Kiang 
Yuh Tschi, llistoire Geographique des XVI B.oyaumes, translated and 
edited with annotations by Michels (Paris, 1891, p. LII, fn. 215). 
According to this, a chthonian cult could hardly have yet existed or 
such a title would have been blasphemy . 
. 53. The source of "universalism" in the idea of Tao obviously rested 
in this very fusion. The idea has been elaborated into a cosmic system 
of analo~:,ries with far greater sophistication than were the Babylonian 

NOTES 
)) 259 (( 
concepts derived from the inspection of the liver, not to mention the 
"metaphysical" ideas of ancient Egypt. For a philosophical interpreta-
tion ~cc Chapter Vll below and the detailed discussion in de Groot's 
beautiful book on Universismus, op. cit., a sy~temlltic treatise v .. ·hich 
does not explore the question of origin. Hut the chnmomantic interpre-
tation d calendar making and of tlw calendar per sc is obviously sec-
ondary. Likewise secondary is the absolute stereotyping of the ritual. 
Connected with both is the rational philosophy of Tao which departed 
from mvslicism and will be discussed below. The oldest calendar 
(Hsiah -~iao clwng_, "small regulator") ~ecms least burdened with such 
theologumerw, and was obviously developed after the calendar reform 
of Shih Huang Ti. Later the government produced a basic text on 
chronomancy, Shih hsien shu, and severely persecuted all private and 
unauthorized cnlcudar making. The Shih hsien shu has often hecn re-
printed as a popular book and provides material to the "day masters," 
the professional chronomancers. The ancient calendar board of the la 
shih (superior writers) was the historical source for the offices of asb·on-
omers (calendar makers) as well as the astrologers (interpreters of 
portent). ll also was a source for the purely excmpla1y and paradig-
matically conceived court annals. Originally the latter was joined with 
calendar making (sec below·), the annalists being calell(lar makers. 
54. Far the following cf. de Groot, Religum of the Chinese, espe-
cially p. 33 f., 55 f. 
55. This argu;nent was occusionally used to close the ranks to the 
all too powerful concubines of empemrs. Petticoat government was 
said to mean preponderance of the Yin over the Yang. 
56. According to de Groot's clear and painstakingly accurate presen-
tation of the official cult in his Universismus, the following \Vere wor-
shipped: 
1. "Heaven," which, however, according to de Groot, appeared at 
the great sacrificial act as primus inter pares among the nncestral spirits 
of th~ emperor. 2. Earth ("Empress Earth"). 3. The imperial ances-
tors, also their cults. ·1. She Chi, the tnlclatory spirit of the soil and the 
fruits of the field. 5. The sun and the moon. 6. Shen Nung, the arche-
getes of agriculture. 7. The archegethis of silk-culture (the sacrifice 
was given hy the empress). 8. The w·eat emperors. Ho\vcver, since 
1722, this iucludecl all emperors of former dynasties except those 
who had suHered violent deaths or were overthrown bv successful 
rebellion, fo1· these ·were indications of the lack of charis~a. 9. Con-
fucius and some eoryph(le~ of his school In principle, all of these were 
worshipped by the emperor in person. 
To these were added, 10. The Gods of Hain and of the V\Tinds (T'ien 
Shen) and the Gods of the !\fountains, Seas, a.nd Rivers (Ti Ke). ll. 

THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
Jupiter as the God of the Calendar (the spirit of the great-Jupiter-
year). 12. The archegetes of the art of healing together with the God 
of Springtime (which may suggest former chthonian orgies as the 
source of magical therapy). 13. The God of 'War (the canonized gen-
eral Kuan-ti, 2nd-.3rd century A.D.). 14. The God of the classical 
studies (the tutelary god against heresy). 1.5. The Spirit of the North 
Pole (canonized in 16.51). 16. The God of Fire, Iluo Shen. 17. The 
gods of the guns. 18. The gods of the fortresses. 19. "The Holy Moun-
tain of the East" 20. The dragon and water deities, or the deities of 
building, tile-works and grain storage. 21. The canonized provincial 
officials. All these were (normally) ministered to by the authorized 
officials. Eventual1y, it is clear, almost the entire external machinery of 
state was canonized. But the supreme sacrifices were obviously olfered 
to impersonal spirits. 
57. The Peking Gazette contains reams of official requests for such 
canonizations. There is further correspondence to Catholic procedures 
in that advancement follows step by step and in accordance with proof 
of further miracles. Thus, in 1873, a governor reported on l11e attitude 
of a "presiding Spirit of the Yellow River" when inundations threatened. 
Admission of the spirit to l11e cult was granted, hut the motion to 
bestow an honorific title upon the spirit was left in su.~peme until such 
time as further mmit might be reported. In 1874 (Peking C',azette, 
17 Dec., after it had been reported l11at the procurement of his effigy 
had brought the threatening flood to a stand~till, the spirit received the 
title. The Peking Gazette of 13 July, 1874, carried a motion which 
would grant recognition to the miraculous power of a temple of the 
Dragon God in Honan. On 23 May, 1878, a new title of the "Dragon 
Spirit" was granted (Peking Gazette of that date). Likewise, accord-
ing to the Peking Gazette of 4 April, 1883, the authorized officials 
requested the promotion of a canonized deceased mandarin of the river 
area, since his ~pirit had been seen hovering over the water and, in 
supreme danger, was actively seeking to quiet the water. Similar re-
quests by officials \vho are ve1y well known in Europe are frequently 
to be found, among others that of Li Hung-chang in the Peking C',a-
zette of 2 December, 1878. On 31 November, 1883, a censor, as advo-
catus diaboli, protested the canonization of a mandarin whose admin-
istration had been by no means excellent ( cf. Peking Gazette of the 
date). 
58. It is impossible to distinguish strictly between "charm" and 
non-charm in the world of pre-animist and animist ideas. Even plough-
ing, or any other ordinary act which was a means to an end, was 
"magic" in the sense of taking into service specific "forces" (later on 

NOTES 
)) 261 « 
"spirits"). Here only sociological distinction~ can be made. 'fhe pos-
session of cxtraordiuary <pmlitics differentiated the state of ecstasy 
from that of workaday life, the professional magician from ordinary 
people. "Extraordinariness," then, was rationalistically transformed 
into the "supcrnatlmtl." The artistic crallsrnan \vho 
prodw.:<-~d the 
paraments of t1Je Temple of Yahw<~ was possessed of the "ntach" of 
Yahwe, just as the medicine man was possessed of the force which 
qualified him for his accomplishments. 
59. Tbis does not suilice as thf' sole explanation, because otherwise 
the same development would have occurred in J\-'iesopotamia. It has to 
be aecepted that-as C. Jellinek has already statcu ou occasion-the 
centrally important development of the relations lJetwccn imperium 
and sace-rdotium has often rested simply on "accidental" historical 
fates and these we can no longer assess. 
60. Therefore, the absence of rain (or of snow) leads to the most 
spirited discussions and proposals ia the circle of comt and ritualist 
olficials. The Peking Gazette, in such cases, is full of all sorts of nwgi-
cal and remedial proposals. Cf. for instance, the Peking Gazette of 
11 and 24 Jnne, 1878, during the threatening drought of that year. 
The Yamen (committee) of state astnmorners turned lo the classical 
astrological authorities wi1o referred to the coloration of sun and moon, 
whereupon a member of the Hanlin Academy pointed out that this 
must have aroused excitement. Hf) demanded that the memorial be 
publicized but that the still youthful Emperor be protected from the 
prattle of eunuchs about evil premonitions and evf:n asked that the 
palace be guarded. For the n~st, the Empress Dowagers were to attend 
to their moral duties, and rain would follow. This report was published 
"\vith reassuring explanations e-Oncerniug the way of life of the high 
ladies and it referred to t}Je rain which, in the meanwhile, had fallen. 
Earlier in the same year a "girl angel" ( anehoret, deceased in 1469) 
had hBen proposed for canonization because she had frequently given 
aid during famine (Peking Gazette, 14 January, 1878). Several similar 
promotions had occurred pwviously. 
61. This fundamental assertion of Confucian orthodoxy is empha-
sized repeatedly in numErous imperial edicts, memorials, or proposals 
of the Hanlin Academy. Thus, the rrwrnorial of the I-Lmlin "professor," 
which was cited in footnote 60 all(l ~vill be cited repeatedly below, 
contains the seutcnee "It is the practice of virtue alone that can influ-
ence the power of Heaven ... " (See also lhc following notes.) 
62. Tsehcpe, op. cit., p. 53. 
63. The Peking Gazelle of 6 October, 1899, carri<-~d a decree of the 
Emperor (who had been placed tmder guardianship by the coup d'etat 

» 262 « 
THE HELIGION OF CEliNA 
of the Empress DU\vag-er) in which he bewails his sins as the probable 
reason for drought. He added that the princes and ministers had 
burdened themselves with a share of guilt through their incorrect 
conduct. lu the same situation in lls77, the t\vo Empress Dowagers 
promised to !teed the admonition of a censor thai' tltey preserve their 
"reverential attitude," which had already conlrilmted to ending the 
drought. 
64. Cf. the end of foohwte 6:3. lu J 894, when a censor had criticized 
intervention into slate a!Tairs as tmbecoming to the Empress Dowager 
(cf. tl1e report of the l'elring Gazette, 28 December, Hl94), he was 
dismissed from oiTicc a1Hl condemned to hard labor on the mail roads 
of 1-longolia. This was not because his criticism \·Vas per sc inadmissible, 
but because it was allegedly based "on mere hearsay;'' rather than 
proof. In 1882, a member of the Hanlin Academy knew better how to 
handle tlte aims of this energetic woman when he expressed the wish 
that the Empress Dowager (Peking Gazette, 19 August, 1882) devote 
herself rather to the affairs of governmcut, since the Emperor \vas still 
young and teuder aml since work for the members of the dynasty was 
best. OtlH~nvisc, too, those surrounding the Empress might begin to 
criticize her gnidance. 
65. This theory coucerning the responsibility of the monarch was, by 
the way, in opposition to other theories wl1ich declared that "ven-
geance" toward the emperor was not admissible (sixth centmy B.c.), 
and that grave (magical) evils would befall anyone who laid hands on 
a crowned head. (E. H. Parker, Ancient Chilw Simplified, London, 
J 908, p. :308.) The theory, like the whole predominantly pontifical 
positiou of the emperor, had simply not ahvays been established. Ap-
pareutly, there is only one emperor whom the army almte proclaimed 
a legitimate monarch. Uut, besides designation, originally acclamation 
by the "hundred families," that is the great feudal vassals, was un-
doubtedly th!~ legal prerequisite for successorship to tiH-~ throne. 
66. \Vherevcr Chinese civilization gained a foothold this whole 
charismatic conception of the prince has perrneatcd. After tlHo Prince of 
Nan Chao had thrown oU the Chinese rule an inscription published by 
Chavannes (Journal i\siatique, Dth St'•rie, vol. 16 [1900], p. 435) states 
that the king had "a force \vhich contains halauee and harmony" ( bor-
rowed from the Chung Yung), that he had the ability "to cover and to 
feed" (like Heaven). As Si.[.,'l1S of his virtue are mentioned "meritorious 
works" (alliance with Tibet). Like the Chinese model emperor, he 
sought out and surrouudcd himself with the "old families" (p. 443). 
This should be compared with the Slw Chi.ng. 
67. Cf. footnote 65. Below, mention will have to he made of tlw fact 
that the mandarins were considered carriers of magical forces. 

NOTES 
II. The Feudal and Prebendal 
State 
~) 263 « 
l. E. H. Parker, Ancient China Simplified (London, Hl08), p. 57. 
2. Sec for the data, Fr. Hirth, The Ancient J-l i.stor11 of C hiua (I\ cw 
York, 1908). Translations from the "Bam boo-Annals" arc to be found 
hy lliot in the ]ounwl Asiatique, 3rcl Seric, vol. Xll, p. 537 ff., XIII, 
p .. '381 H. The inscriptions on bronze vases and the odes of the Shu 
Ching, as sources for the period from the 18th to the 12th cculmy B.c.., 
are discmsed in Frank 11. Chalfant, "Early Chinese; \Vriting," iYfemoirs 
of the Carnegie ;uuseum, vol. IV, No.1 (Pittsburgh, S!:'ptember, 1906). 
[Since 1928-2D archaeological work of the Academia Sinica (in 
Peiping) has unearthed a great many objects-turtle shells covered with 
many characters, urns, tripods, vases, bones, etc. For a discussion of 
the especially important bronze objects, their material, form, and 
decoration see H. G. Creel, "On the Origins of the Mrmufactrl1'e and 
Decorathm of Bron;;;u in the Shang Period," Monumeutn Sr:ricn, vol. I, 
p. 39 H. For a discussion of the literatme see Otto Franke, op. cit., 
vol. III, p. 52 ff. Eel.] 
.'3. Cf.-Chavannes, Journal Asi<Itfque, 14th Serie, vol. X (1909), p. 
33, note 2. 
4. Cf. Kun-Yu (Discours des Hoyaumes), de Harlez, eel. (Louvain, 
1895), pp. ll, V, 110. 
5. Cf. Ssu-ma Ch'ien's (Sc ~fa Tsien) biogTaphy of Shih Haang Ti 
( Sehi-Hoang-Ti), Chavannes, ed. ( 1897), p. 139. 
6. Yn t.~·iua.n tung kian kong mu, op. ell. 
7. Chavannes' edition of Ssu-ma Ch'ien II, Appendix I, note 1, p . 
.'526. 
8. Ssu-ma Ch'icn's hiogmphy of Shil1 Huang Ti, Chavaunes, ed., p. 
149, note. 
9. Le Tscheou-li, (nt rites des Tscheou, Tr. by Biot, 2 vols (Paris, 
1851). Allegedly, it derives from the govenmwnt of Ch'eng \Vang, 
lll5-1079 B.c.. Only the nucleus of it is believed to be authentic. 
10. Designations of the :'v!ajor Domo, i\-'finister of Agriculture, 1·1as-
ter of Ceremonies, \Iinister or Justice, of \-Var, of Labor as Minister 
of Heaven, Earth, Spring, Summer, Aulnmn, \Vinler are doubtlessly the 
product of lit<•mti. The notion that the hmlget was determined by the 
mandarin of Heaven is certainly unhistorkal. 
11.. Ssu-ma Ch'ien has reconlccl the aetna! administrative organiza-
tion of the Ch'in and Han. (Cf. Part II of Chavannes' edition of Ssu-ma 
Ch'ien, Appendix II.) The t'ai wei, as military chief of the generals, 
was placed beside two viziers ( unlil Emperor \Vu). The tszmg sheng 

THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
was chmJCellor and head of the missi dominici and provincial officials. 
The fung cheng was in charge of sacrificial rites. At the same time he 
was Grand Astrologer, Grand Augur, Grand Physician and-character-
istically-responsible for dykes aud canals. Then follow the po she 
(literati); the lang chung ling, i.e., the superintendent of the palace; 
the wei wei, the commandant of the palace guards; the t'ai 1/u, chief 
of the armory, the t'ing wei, the minister of justice; the tien k'o, chief of 
the vassals and barbarian princes; the tsung sheng, overseer of the 
imperial family; the chi su nei shih, ovcr~eer of magazines and hence 
minister of abtriculturc and commerce; the sluw fu, the chief of the 
imperial household [a "vice-chief," Ed.]. Under the shfw fu stood: the 
shang .~hu, a eunuch [the financial administrator of the court, Ed.]; 
the shung wei, the police chief of the capital; the chiang cho shao fu, 
the superintendent of buildings; the chung she, overseer of the house-
hold of the empress and the successor to tbe throne; the nei she, the 
prefect of the capital; the chu chiieh chung wei, ~upervisor of the vas-
sals, an office which was later combined with that of the tien k' o (see 
above). In contrast to the rational and hence historically unreliable 
constructions of the Chou Li, this list portrays all the inationalism of a 
patrimonial officialdom emerging from the management of the house-
hold and the conduct of ritual. Then by accretion came the manage-
ment of the army, the administration of justice, the control of the 
inigation economy, and finally, purely political interests. 
12. "Patriarchal" is not to be equated with sultanism, hut refers to 
the patriarchalism of hereditary sib charisma as manifested in a ritualist 
pontifex. Perhaps the latter originally transmitted his charisma by 
designating a successor, as the classical books postulate, and only later 
did his charisma become hereditary. 
13. The Annals of Ssu-ma Ch'ien (first century B.c.) have in part 
been b·anslated and edited by Edouard Chavannes. P. Tschepe (loc. cit. 
p. 7) has deseribed the political development of the feudal states of 
Chin, Han, Wei, Chou, and \oVu on the basis of the Annals. (Tschepe's 
work is useful despite the unavoidable "Christian" reflections, which 
often strike u~ as somewhat naive.) \oVhen Tschepe is quoted alone the 
reference is to the Chin Annals. In addition, we shall refer to the 
"Discours des Rortaumes" which we have repeatedly quoted. 
14. For these conditions, see E. H. Parker, op. cit., p. 144 f. 
15. Cf. P. A. Tschepe (S. J.), Histoires du Hoyaume de Tsin, 777-
207. 
16. That is, they were figured per 1,000 consumers of salt in the 
state of Chin which "\Vas the first to be rationalized. This is based on 
Hirth's interpretation of a paragraph of Kuan-tzu. See Hirth's Ancient 
History of China (New York, 1908). 

NOTES 
» 265 « 
17. By now, statements of E. H. Parker (np. cit., p. 83) ~eem 
unacceptable. 
18. Of this, more will follow in our discussion of the land tax. 
19. Cf. s~u-ma Ch'ien's tract "Rites," vol. III, Chavannes, cd. 
20. Tschepe, op. cit., p. 54. 
21. Ibid., p. 66. 
22. \.Ye cannot cUscuss here the technical nature of these old "books." 
Paper is a product which was imported at a much later time. Reading 
and writing were practiced long before, and doubtlessly long before the 
time of Confucius. Von Hosthorn's assumption (to he mentioned), that 
the ritual literature was orally transmitted and hence that the "burning 
of the books" was a legend apparently is not acknowledged by de 
Groot, who accepts the latter as fact even in his latest work. 
23. The Annals (Tschepc, op. cit., p. 133) contain from a plan for 
alliance calculations of the military strength of the various states. Ac-
cording to these figures, an area of 1,000 square li (I li = 537 
meters) could presumably muster 600 chariots, 5,000 horses, and 
50,000 men of whom 40,000 were fighters, the rest service troops. An 
(alleged) tax reform plan from the 12th century n.c. called for 10,000 
war chariots from an area of the same size. Analogies from the Middle 
East lead us to assume that this was several centuries after the intro-
duction of the war chariot. 
24. Cf. Tschepe, op. cit., p. 67. 
25. During the Period of the Warring StatHS a strong pah·iotism 
aroused by the barbarians prevailed in the border states, c.spccially the 
state of Ch'in. When the king of Ch'in was taken prisoner "2,500" 
families subscribed the funds for continuing the war. In 112 A.D., a 
Han emperor, in financial straits, sought such a "cavalier loan" -in 
Leopoldian Austria a similar attempt was made even in the seventeenth 
century-but apparently had faint success. 
26. Tschepe, loc. cit., p. 142. 
27. Both are mentioned in a lecture of one of the literati reproduced 
by Tschepe, lac. cit., p. 77. 
28. Ibid., p. 61. 
29. Ibid., p. 59. 
30. Ibid., p. 14. 
31. Ibid., p. 38. 
:'32. "The nobles and the people preserve their rank and station," says 
the emperor in an inscription recorded in the Annals (Tsdwpe, op cit., 
p. 261). Another inscription distinguishes behveen "nobles, officials, 
and people." 
33. See the paragraph in Tschepe (to be discussed presently) in 

» 266 « 
TilE RELIGION OF CHINA 
his "Histoire du Royawne de Han," Varietes Sirwlogiques, vol. 31, 
p. 4;3 (for the principality of \Vei in 407 B.c.). 
34. Ibid. 
35. Tradition has the scholar Li Ssu, the powerful miuister of old, 
state in a memorial the importance of the literati (and generally also, 
of the foreign-born, iueluding the merchants) for princely power, ibid., 
p. 231. 
36. For instance, the inscription preserved by Ssu-ma Ch'ien in his 
biography ( Clmvannes, ed. vol. V, p. 166) states that all conduct con-
trary to reason is objectionable. Numerous other inscriptions (ibid.) 
praise the rational order, which the Emperor established in the realm. 
This "rationalism" did not prevent him from spon~oring the search for 
the elixir of life. 
37. This statement of Shih Huang Ti is transmitteu in his biognJ.phy 
by Ssu-ma Ch'ien (Chavannes, ed. vol. II, p. 162). By the way, the 
literati ministers of the Warring States, and even \Vang An-shih 
(eleventh century A.D.), were not always disinclinetl in principle to a 
similar view. 
38. Apparently court eunuchs first appeared during the eighth cen-
tury B.C. 
3~. Forced laborers working on the Great \Vall reportedly nwnbered 
300,000 (?). Even higher figures are stated for servitude as a whole. 
To be sure, the Great \Vall was erected over long periods of time. The 
requisite labor might well be estimated since the wall comprises at least 
160 million cubic meters of massive structure, according to Elisee 
Reclus' calculution. 
40. The main concern was to furnish the necessary provisions for the 
soldiers and convicts doing corvee. The annalists (Tsehepe loc. cit., 
p. 275) calculated the costs of transportation to the place of consump-
tion at 18,200% of shipment. Because of consumption on the way only 
one of 182 loads is said to have reached its destination, which of course 
may occasionally have been the case. 
41. Tschepe, loc. cit., p. 363 f. The eunuch stemmed from a noble 
family which had previously been convicted. 
42. The Annals and especially Ssu-ma Ch'ien in his biography of 
Shih Huang Ti ( Chavannes, ed. vol. II, p. 178), present some data on 
this attempt. The originator of the plan apparently was "Master Lu," a 
Taoist, whom Shih Huang Ti had commissioned to search for the herb 
of life. "True man," it was said, "is hiding himself and does not show 
himself," which is a special application o.f certain principles of Lao-
tzu, to be discussed bclov.:. But Shih Huang Ti actually ruled person-
ally and the complaint of "sages" of all persuasions was that he failed 
duly to seek their advice (loc. cit., p. 179). The successor Erh Shih 

NOTES 
» 267 « 
Huang Ti, lived as "ch'en," i.e., as a "hidden man" under the guardian-
ship of his favorit1~ and consequently Jid not receive officials (ibid., 
p. 266). This was the typical complaint of the Confucians when the 
Taoists and the ctmuchs were ill power. Their alliance will be discussed 
below. Even under the founder of the Han dynasty, the "following," 
that is the feudal lords, returned to power after the Emperor's clown-
fall. This lwppenecl even though Lhc entim bureaucracy of Shih Huang 
Ti was retainecl anJ even when the literati were restored to influential 
posi tious. 
4;3, Tsdwpc, op. cit., p. 259 f. (allegedly an inscription). 
44. Ibid., p. 267 f. 
45. ibid., p. 67. Sec also the 1liscussion of Yang with Lhc vassals at 
the court of Prince Hsiao Kung, ibid., p. 118. 
46. Characteristic arc the figures for the gross income of the treasury 
as stated by !'vla Tuan-lin. Chinese autl10rs ascribe to this their tre-
mendou~ aml entirely unmotivated clilfereuces (especially during the 
sixlecnlh centmy). (CL Hiot, ]oumal Asiatique, ~3rd Scric, vol. 5, 1838, 
and ihul., vol. 6, 18:38, p. :328.) After all, it is obvious what it means if 
even in 1370, 8.4 million ch'ing (equal to 48 million ha) of taxable land 
had been registered, in l!':i02, however, 4.2 million, in 1542, 4.3 million, 
but in 1582, agaiu 7 million ch.'ing (equal to 39.5 million ha) were 
counted. (ln 1745, ;)() y1~ars after the introduction of tax quotas, al-
legedly 161.8 million ha \VCn-! counted.) 
47. At the end of the Peking Gazette for 1879, we find an estimate 
of the munbcr of living candidates for office who had been promoted 
to the second civilian degree and hence were fully qualified for office. 
There are estimates, loo, on the average age of the candidates, on 
whom a maximum quota was iixed for each of the two degrees, and 
their probahle longevity. Tlwre arc too mf<ny, unless the numher of 
promoted caudidatcs of aclvanc1~d age is quite small; there are too few 
because the number of transfers from military careers, especially the 
:M:mchus, has to he added. l\'1oreover, there were candidates v.+w had 
purchased their (liJaliHcation for office. Even assuming :30,000 instead 
of roughly 21,200 living candidates and assuming a population of 350 
millions, then~ \vould be but one candidate per 11-12,000 population. 
In the 11:1 provinces, including :tvfanchnria, there were only 1,'170 ad-
ministrative districts of the lowest rank under an independent state 
official ( Lhc chih h.1·ien). Ceteris parilms, there was roughly one official 
per 248,000 population. If we include the higher independent o!Tices, 
which arc provided for in the budget, there would be one higher official 
per 200,000 population. Even \Vcre one to add part of the dependent 
and temporary officials, a ratio would result which would allow Ger-
many, e.g., to function with only 1,000 administrative and judicial offi-

» 268 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
cials with second law degrees. Quito different figures result if one extra-
polates the family and population figures of the Chinese police. The 
figures from these materials for the year 1895/6 were placed at the 
disposal of Sacharov ( Arbeiten der Kaiserlich Russischen Gesandt-
schaft, a Christian mission, translated by Abel and Meckenberg, Berlin 
1858). According to these figures, in the district of Peking and in two 
other districts there were resident (hence not employed) in 1845 about 
26,500 military and civilian officials; in 1846, 15,866 active officials 
were provided for in the budget and 23,700 officials were classified 
as candidates, two hardly reconcilable figures. Obviously not only the 
holders of second degrees but also the aspirants, and all Manchu 
officers, arc included. 
48. For some high officials a breach of this principle was frequently 
necessary: Li Hung-chang, for instance, remained chief administrator 
of Chihli for several decades. A single prolongation of three years has 
been permitted but othcrwi~e the principle has been adhered to rather 
strictly until now. 
49. Often there were as many as six ministers, but the only officials 
of any importance other than the Viceroy were the provincial gover-
nors, judges, and chancellors of the exchequer. The chancellor of the 
exchequer originally was the sole and highest administrative official, 
for the governor was a missus dominicus (formerly often a eunuch) 
who ultimately became a resident agent. All departments other than 
those of finance and justice were unofficial. Even the lowest official 
(chien), whose formal title means "herdsman," had two secretaries-for 
justice and for finance. His superior, the prefect of the fu, retained 
visible or at least demonstrable functions (the management of water-
ways, agriculture, studs, grain, shipments, provision of quarters for 
troops, and general police administration), though his office was con-
sidered essentially a supervisory board and a channel of communica-
tions to higher offices. The functions of the lowest official, however, 
were simply encyclopedic in natme, for he was virtually in charge of 
and responsible for everytl1ing. With tl1e large provincial boards special 
taotai were employed for the ga.belle, road construction, etc., as in all 
patrimonial states where special officials may be commissioned and 
authorized ad lwc. Concerning the concept of a "jurist" (knower of 
precedents) and the legal profession in China, cf. Alabaster, Notes and 
Cvmmentaries on Chinese Criminal Law, which is not available to me 
now. 
50. Its official name was "Canal of the Tribute Transports." Cf. 
P. Dom. Gandar S.J., "Le Canal Imperial," Varietes Sinologiques, 
No.4 (Shanghai, 1894). 
51. The memoranda and receipts concerning these enterprises are 

NOTES 
}) 269 « 
in part preserved in the documents \Vhich Aurel Stein has gathered jn 
Turkestan. In some places the reclamation of dry land advanced three 
steps daily, d. Chavannes, Lcs Vucunwnts Chino-is decotwerts par 
Aurel Stein dan.Y le sahle du Turkestan Oriental (Oxford, I 913). 
52. Cf. Chavannes, Zoe. cit., p. XI H. 
53. Despite the common assumption, it iq quite uncertain whether 
climatic changes played any part iu this. In auy event the disintegra-
tion of the corvee system would be sufficient explanation, for in these 
areas land could lJc kept under cultivation only if the question of "costs" 
was never raised. V'{ith special crops a worker could subsist on this soil 
but could never extract a full livelihood. Obviously the land was kept 
m1der the plough, despite certainly tremendous subsidies, only in order 
to provision the garrisons and missions with easily perishable goods. 
54. P. D. Gandar, S.J., op. cit., p. 35. 
55. Yu t.\'iuan kian ka11g mu, op. cit., p. 351. 
56. See above, p. 330-32, footnote 14. for budgetary accounts of the 
central government from the lOth, 11th, and 14th century. According 
to the Annals, the taxes in kind on the whole appeared to be scaled by 
distance from the capital. Thus, for example, the first zone sent grain 
with sh·aw, the second only grain, and every following zone sent goods 
of higher specific value, i.e., embodying more labor. This is quite be-
lievable and accords with other reports. 
57. Cf. Aurel Stein's findings covering the period 98-1:37 A.D. 
( Chavannes, ed., op. cit.). The officers receive their military pay in 
money but it is questionable whether this is also true of the troops (No. 
62) though their clothing was at least partly purchased with money 
(No. 42). Moreov1~r, the book of expenditures of a Buddha temple (of 
a later time, though) shows a full money economy \Vith the hiring of 
artisans as wage workers and the rccord~ng of all payments in terms of 
money (ibid., :-.ro. 969). Later these practices relapsed . 
. 58. In the yc:u· 1883, the imperial factories delivered 405,000 taels 
worth of silk and porcelain at cost-price to the court (Peking Gazette, 
23, 24, 27, 30 January; 13, .14 June, 1883). Added to this were the 
deliveries in kind from the provinces, which at least partly were des-
tined for the court (silk, precious paper, etc.) and partly for political 
purposes (iron, sulphur, etc.). In 1883, the province of Shansi vainly 
petitioned for supplementary funds, since the goods to be delivered 
(except iron) had to he purchased first. 
59. On the land tax see .!:Hot's work, which is still useful in many 
ways. Journal Asiatiq1w, Srd Scrie, vol. 6 ( 18.'38). 
60. To be sure, these figures are very unreliable. One has to con-
sider that, before the tax compromise of 171.'3, the officials were inter-
ested in minimizing or fixing the number of taxable subjects (there \Vas 

)) 270 « 
TilE RELIGION OF CHINA 
a hP-ad tax then). vVith the fixing of tax quotas this interest subsided 
(see below). After that, the reverse obtained and it was in tbP. oilicial's 
interest to boast of big population figures. Since then, ouly the gods-
to ·whom they were communicated-were interested in these figmes. 
High fif,'1u·es thm proved the charisma of the particular offieial. Even 
figures from th!~ 19th century are quite dubious, for instance, the ab-
normal increase of the population in the province of Szechwan. Still 
Dudgeon, On the Population of China ( H:l95), computes the popula-
tion fignre of the 14 provinces for the li)I)O's at 325 million. 
GL Duriug the last 30 yc;u·s all schemes for direct taxation have 
failed, for they would l1ave mainly proposed taxes ou the prehends of 
manclarius. The patrimonial conception of the income of tl1e olficial 
comes to prceminciH.:c in all the ramifications of mouwing his death. 
According to the ancient meaning, which was preserved in Chinese 
officialdom with ~pecial distinctiveness, mourning was to \-vnrd off the 
wrath and envy of the spirit of the departed toward those who, as heirs, 
had appropriated his possessions. Disregarding the fact that originally 
a considerable part of his belongings 'vere to accompany him to Hades 
(including the widow and other human sacrifices), the heirs had to 
avoid the dead-house and the touching of his possessions for a long 
time. Poorly clad, they lived in auother hut and abstained from enjoy-
ment of their possessions. 
1\'"ow, the office being as much valued as a mere prebend and the 
prebend as much as the mere private possession of the prebendary, a 
case of death \.vith obligatory mourning uuconditionally resulted in re-
tirement from office. The constant and numerous vacancies, the tempo-
rary unemployability of numerous officials, and the piling up of candi-
dates who had b~t their ofTiccs through mourning, constituted a great 
political calamity. This was especially so during t~pidemics, hence, for 
reasons of state the emperors allernittely prohibited too greatly ex-
tended mournings, or, fearsome of the spirits, they enjoined mournings 
-both entailing corporal punishment. 
Li Hung-chang was sharply thm1gh vainly ordered by the Empress 
Dowager to take a vacation from office, instead of retiring upon the 
death of his mothr~r (Peking Gazette, J 1\.Iay, 18S2). 
62. This is suggestive of the way the American party hoss taxes 
officials whom the elected head of the victorious party has appointed. 
He docs so for his own as well as his party's henefit, the di/Terencc being . 
tha l these taxes arc usually fixed. 
63. Jamieson, Parker. Cf. the latter's computations and estimates in 
his Trade and Administration of the Chinese Empire, p. H5 fL 
64. This conception is clearly revealed in the rescript reproduced in 
the Peking Gazette, J 1 January, 1895. The complaint is that certain 

NOTES 
)) 271 ({ 
(lower) officials retain the prebends for more than three years and thus 
deny others "their tum" ("nicht drankmnmen"). 
65. 011 the renticr spirit, see for instance, E. H. Parker, China, Her 
Histoqf, Diplomacy and Commerce (London, HJOl). "lle is a 2,000-
hundmdweight- (rice-) man," i.e., he receives an annual rent of this 
amount, the llstwl classification of a rich man. 
III. Administration and Ruml 
Structure 
I. It is not possible to discuss prehistoric China here, particularly the 
original nomadism which has been supposed by sinologists. Naturally, 
the nomadic peoples of inner Asia repe<Ltedly invaded and conquered 
the river plains even in prehistoric times. Only the :\Iongols seriously 
prepared to maintain themselves as nmnaus before the superior culture 
of the agriculturists, and they did so for a time by forbidclir.g the culti-
vation of bnd surrouuding the capitaL Consumption of milk, however, 
remained alien to the Chinese and this speaks more clearly than any 
b·aditiou for the continuity of the primeval hoe and garden culture. Be-
sides, the ceremony of handling the plough was among the ritual acts 
of the imperial pontifcx maxirnus. Tn view of this, the nomadic deriva-
tion of part or even all of the old ruling stratum may well be insignifi-
cant. The existence of the "bachelor house" (see <tbove), of course, has 
nothing to do with "nomadism," but iudientes that in these comruunities 
the men engaged in }muting and warfare \vhile the women cultivated 
the lane!. :\-Iilk consumption has obviously been absent in China a long 
time and this fact contradicts the nomadic hypothesis. Large cattle 
were used for work or were sacrificed; only small cattle were normally 
consumed. 
For the history of the rural structure in connection with the fiscal 
system sec N. J. Kochanovsknj, "Semljcvlacljenie i semljcdjclje w 
Kitajc (Ts£jestiia Vostotschnavo lnstit11ta d.g. isd., 1907 /H, vol. XXIII, 
2 (Vladivostok, 1909) and A. J. Iwanoff, 'iVang-An-Schi i jevo reformy 
(St. Petersburg, 1906). Unfortunately other H.ussian literature was no.t 
available to me. I did not have access to A. M. Fielde, "Land Tenure 
in China," }ot11'"11Lll of the China Branch af the Royal Asiatic Society, 
vol. 23, p. 110 ( J888), and scarcely to any other publications of this 
journal. For further references see below. 
2. Reproduced by Biot, loc. cit. 
3. Cf. R. Leonhard's statements which are correct in this point if not 
in others, especially not anything concerning Antiquity. Sec his review 
of the valuable but somewhat one-sided hook of Lacombe, "L' evolution 
de la proprietc fonciere," Schmollers ]ahrbuch. 

» 272 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
4. Tllis would be certain if totemist associations could be shown to 
have existed in China, as Conrady maintains. With the development of 
the sib, the emergent ruling stratum has universally withdrawn from 
the essentially plebeian totem association. [See Chapter I, note 49, Ed.] 
5. For instance, in the state of Lu, tho model Confucian state, the 
following levies were at one time prescribed for the existing registration 
unit of 64 ch'ing: 1 chariot, 4 horses, 10 head of cattle, 3 armored 
and 64 non-armored foot soldiers. Obviously this register presupposed 
that the sibs, associated in a registration unit, would in their turn meet 
the miLitary requirement by providing the soldiers' pay. Presumably, 
recourse to direct compulsory <h·aft remained subsidiary. Elsewhere we 
shall show, how in India, similar conditions led to prebendal landlord-
ism. In other places in China the army draft extended directly to the 
individual family. In the state of Lu even this arrangement shows a pre-
liminary phase of army recruitment by the patrimonial prince instead of 
a summons of vassals, and hence indicates the elimination of feudalism 
as a military system. European analogies are to be found in Delbriick's 
excellent presentation of these conditions for the feudal army. 
6. Suan fa tong tsang, cf. Biot, Journ(d Asiatique, 3rd Serie, vol. 5, 
1838 (the presentation is based on the Wen hien t'ung k'ao). 
7. It must always be kept in mind that the Hrst fairly well ascertained 
date in Chinese history ( Chavannes) is the year 841 n.c. 
8. Today it is Hgured that a family of five could live on 15 mou 
(about 85 ar) of cultivated land that is not exclusively used for garden-
ing. To us this is still an ahnost unbelievably low figure. 
9. Cf. Chapter I, above. 
10. Peking Gazette of 14 June, 188.'3. 
11. Examples of Japanese household re,6tisters including a calculation 
of their allotments, arc furnished by 0. Nachod in his history of Japan, 
Weltgeschichte, ed. by Pflugk-Hartung (Berlin, 1910), vol. III, p. 
592 ff. 
12. These groups of ten are to be understood as associations of ten 
sibs each. The attempts to revert to the family or to the individual, 
instead of the sib, have only lately been successful. 
13. \Nhile Hussian authors may wish to rediscover the nadiel of the 
Russian optshina in the normal land claim, it should not be overlooked 
that a village communism resulted from these purely tax-determined 
measures only under 1\ussian conditions, particularly the tax liability of 
the village community. But the latter has apparently been absent in 
China. 
14. Presumably the '\veil" system was named from the Chinese char-
acter which represents a square partitioned into nine Helds. However, it 
was so named, too, because irrigation ditches, pipes, and a long-lasting 

NOTES 
)) 273 « 
inundation of the dammed-up area were indispensable to rice cultiva-
tion. Throughout Asia (including Java), this involved thoroughgoing 
innovations in property relations and everywhere it particularly meant 
fiscal intervention, the basis of which lay in the indispensable chan-
nelization of water. But it is quite possible that the system, which is 
usually considered quite old, rationally evolved from the original cul-
tivation of the chieftain's land by sib members. 
15. Proprietors living close to the Imperial Canal and burdened with 
Canal liturgies played a considerable role in the T'ai P'ing Rebellion. 
16. See Wang An-shih's memorial reproduced by Iwanoff, op. cit., 
p. 51 f. 
17. Cf. the two reports of Su Shih against ·wang An-shih, ibid., p. 
167 ff., 190 f. and the objections of other opponents, among them, 
Ssu-ma Kuang, ibid., p. 196. 
18. These matters are connected with the structure of internal ad-
ministration and will be discussed below. 
19. Even in the 8th century magazines for silk and linen are said to 
have existed. 
20. Cf. the excerpts from the Annals in P. A. Tschepe (S.J.) "His-
toire du Royaume de Tsin, 777-207," Vanetes Sinologiques, vol. 27, 
especially p. 118 f. 
21. This prohibition would seem to have actually arrested the de-
velopment of the colmwte. For even nowadays small tenancy does not 
seem to be widespread. 
22. Here, banner fiefs of the Manchu garrisons, the hereditary land 
prebends of the border troops drafted for lihrrgies, and the proprietors 
living close to canals, streets, etc., may be bypassed. 
23. And this was enforced by the courts! The judge, to be sure, had 
to reject the complaint, usually "admonishing" the buyer not to be 
"hard-boiled" but to pay. Only influential people could escape. See 
Hoang, loc. cit., and the text below. 
24. Thus P. Pierre Hoang translates the term. Cf. his "Notion tech-
nique sur la propriete en China" (Shanghai, 1897), Vari6tes Sino-
logiques, vol. 11 § 20. 
25. The ancestral land is frequently referred to in the Peking 
Gazette. 
26. Hoang, loc. cit., for instance, Appendix XXIII, p. 119. We have 
mentioned above that tenancy is not, relatively speaking, very ex-
tensive. Besides the general prohibition of the col.onate in 1205, the 
difficulty of collecting farm rents seems to have been primarily decisive. 
27. Hoang, op. cit., p. 12, No. 31, p. 152, 157 f. 
28. An example is: "family of the eternal peace." 
29. In this connection, the system of registration and the land regis-

)) 274 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
ter were first elucidated in a note of Bumbaillif, "Land Tenure in 
China," China Review (1890j91). The unit of registration was a sib 
property designated at the time of the registration by the ancestral head 
of a sib. In case division had already occurred, the part holdings were 
listed. Even in the event of land division or change of ownership, the 
original registration number with its designation was retained, and only 
the amount of the tax and the family .which was to pay part or all of it 
were recorded. Ten heads of sibs (or about this number) formed a 
group and, according to ancient law, were responsible for the tax. They 
were guardians of the peace and they also owned in common land 
whid1 was either farmed or leased by the head of the sibs. The head of 
each sib collected the taxes of his sib, and whosoever might fail to 
present his tax receipt by 0Jovemher 16 could be deprived of his land 
by the group of ten. If the households of a sib could not raise the tax, 
the sib's ancestral land was seized. The composition of the groups of ten 
was subject to change. The above-mentioned note reports the request 
of the head of a sib (or part sib) to form jointly with nine others a new 
group of ten. The size of the sib holdings varied considerably. A vary-
ing number of groups of ten was organized into a higher unit, again 
for meeting what were originally military and lih:rgical charges. More 
on the sibs follows. 
30. It is maintained that unified property holdings of 300 ha were to 
be found but that essentially larger property units of individual land-
lords were rare. The (Frankfurt) doctoral dissertation of \Ven Hsian 
Liu, Die V o-rteile des laeruilichen Grund und Bodens und seine Bewirt-
schaftung in China (Berlin, 1920), which carne to my attention at the 
last moment, docs not present figures. 
[J. L. Buck has computed the average farm of owners to be 4.22 
acres, of part owners 4.25, and of tenants :3.56 acres. He estimates that 
17% of the fanners are tenants, less than one third part-owners, 
and over one half O\VIlcrs. See his Land Utilization in China (Chicago, 
1937), p. 192. According to Ch'en Han-seng, as much as 40% of all 
fann land in certain areas of Kwangtung is ow11ed by landed sibs. Cf. 
his Landlord and Peasant in China (New York, 1936), pp. 37-41. H. T. 
Fei contains some material on sib landlordism in Yunnan. See his Earth-
bound China (Chicago, 1945). Cbronie conditions of warfare, inflation, 
and usury capitalism, of course, have greatly increased the burden of 
the peasantry, many of whom have been forced into debt, bankruptcy 
and the loss of their lands. Even in 1936, Leonard T. K. \.Yu stated that 
"the choice for them is either continued collapse of their economy or a 
complete alteration of the usury-merchant-landlord sy~tem." Cf. his 
"Merchant Capital and Usury Capital in Rural China." Far Eastern 
Su1'vey, :t\.Iarch 25, 1986, p. 68, Ed.] 

NOTES 
}) 275 « 
31. There "vere some 15 official holidays but no Sunday rest. 
32. At the beginning of the twentieth century in the gardening areas 
of the plains, credits amounted to $750-1,000 per ha. This does not 
take account of the much larger purchasing power of the vVestern 
money in the Orient. Interest was calculated at 7-9% on loans, or better, 
the yield of labor, for according lo available figures, as the quality of 
the soil increaS(~d the percentage of this "rent" decreased. 
33. It amounted to 8-D% in agriculture and 12-30%, in retail trade and 
industry. 
IV. Self-government, Law and 
Capitalism 
l. \Ve may refer to the nucleus of the T'ai P'ing "rebels" ( 1850-64). 
According to the Peking Gazette, tbc Hung Yi Tang, the sib of the 
founder of the T'ai P'ing rebellion, was persecuted as a secret society 
as late as 1895. 
2. According to Conrady, loc. cit., Chang chia tsung means the "vil-
lage of the Chang family." 
3. Possibly both forms of the bachelor house, the "cooperative" and 
the "authoritarian" one, existed side hy side in different regions. On 
the whole, evidence compiled by Quislorp, loc. cit., speaks rather for 
the former type. But note that the legendary Emperor Yao handed the 
government over to his successor Shun in the ancestor-l1all. One em-
peror threatened his vassals by pointing to the \Vrath of their ancestral 
spirit;;. Such examples, compiled by Hirth in his Ancient fli.s·tory of 
China, support the assmnption of the authoritarian type of bachelor 
house as do Emperor F'an Keng's in the Shu Ching (cf. Legge, op. cit., 
p. 238), and the apparition of an emperor's ancestral spirits demanding 
an explanation from the emperor for his abuse of power. Totemist 
survivals are listed by Conrady, lac. cU. Although important, they are 
not entirely convincing. [See Chapter T, note 49, Ed.] 
4. The above-111entioned sparing of the last descendant of an over-
thrown dynasty is rooted in the concern that the ancestral spirits should 
not he disturbed. The spirits, after all, were those of former emperors 
and hence powerful. 
The Peking Gazette of 13 April and 31 July, 188:3, reports the corn-
plaint of the Chang Tuan, the representative of the :tvting dynasty, 
concerning cultivation of the ancestral sites of the Ming. We may refer 
to adoptions and recall the above-mentioned state sacrifices for the 
spirits of those who died without leaving descendants. 
5. Cf. the speech of the Prince of Chou in the Shu Ching (Legge, 

» 276 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
p. 175). The prayer on behalf of the sick Emperor was made not to 
Heaven but to the ancestors. Ibid., p. 391 If. 
6. De Groot's references in his Universismu.s show clearly that the 
Spirit of Heaven is treated as primu.s inter pares. According to the re-
script published in the Peking Gazette of 29 September, 1898, the 
"spirits of the ancestors" had condemned the abortive attempts at re-
form of the Emperor and of K'ang Yu-wei. Besides a person's own 
merits, Heaven considers those of the ancestors (de Groot, The Re-
ligion of the Chinese, New York, 1910, p. 27 f.). Hence Confucian 
doctrine maintained that for a time Heaven may watch the sins of a 
dynasty and interfere only at the point of complete degeneration, 
which, of course, is quite a convenient "theodicy." 
7. There are cases in which adoption has been revoked because the 
death sacrifices for the natural father were endangercU. (Peking Ga-
zette, 26 April, 1878). 
8. Pah·icide was considered such a ten-ihle event (punishable by 
"slow death") that the governor of the province was removed from 
officE' just as in cases of natural catastrophe (Peking Gazette, 7 August, 
1894). In 1895, when a drunkard killed his grandfather the father was 
also punished for having failed to educate the son to "endure even the 
most severe punishments from his elder." 
9. Occasionally sub-sibs had their "sub-ancestor halls." 
10. According to classical rih1al, adoption could be consummated 
only within the sib. Even in the same village, however, family statutes 
made widely varying dispositions. Parts of the old ritual had been 
almost universally abrogated. Thus, the daughter-in-law no longer 
mourned only her parents-in-law, as prescribed, but also her own 
parents. There was "deep" mourning not only of the father's death, as 
was officially prescribed, but also of the mother's. 
11. Therefore A. Merx's version is highly probable. He reads p:YJ8lva 
U7TEA7T£tuvn.; instead of p:rjl'>f.v a7r£A7T[tovT£>· Here, too, we confront the 
fear of "crying" to God, and in case of suicide, fear of the "spirit" of 
the desperate man. 
12. Feuds against outsiders were occasioned by tax repartition, 
death feuds, and especially conflicts which the feng shu.i, i.e. geo-
mancers, provoked among neighbors. Every building, and especially 
every new grave, could harm the ancestral spirits of tl1e existing graves 
or could upset the spirits of the rocks, rivulets, hills, etc. To settle such 
feuds was often well-nigh impossible because of the gcomantic interests 
at stake on both sides. 
13. The Peking Gazette of 14 December, 1883 reports, for instance, 
the purchase of 2,000 mou. ( 1 mou = 5.62 ar) for 17,000 taels. Besides 

l'\'OTES 
» 277 ({ 
sacrifices, explicit mention is made of ~npporting \·Vidows <.tnd orphans 
and financing the school from rents. 
J 4. vVe may refer to Eugene Simon, La Cite Chinoisc (Paris, 188.5), 
and to Leong and Tao, Village and Town Life in China (London, 
1915). 
15. As btc as 1899, the police were enjoined not to treat as "un-
known strangers" pcopl<~ who had a claim to their ancestral land but 
who had gone ahroad. (Peking Gazette, 12 October, 11:199.) 
16. As a result- of hereditary partitions individual properly often 
consisted of scattered holdings of five to fifteen lots. 
17. As noted above, in the city they w·ere the guilds that had often 
usw·ped exlcHsivc self-governing functions. 
18. This should he compared to the book by the two Chinesn 
bachelors which has already been cited. The part dealing with the vil-
lage is far better than that dealing with the' city. One simply cannot 
say much about tlu~ "city" as a social structure. Analogies can be found 
in Germanic law. 
19. The village temples were not considered "Taoist" shrines. ( Cf. 
Chapter VII.) 
20. Especially, the temple priest held landed properly. If the temple 
had been fmmded by donors honnriHc titles such as shcm chu, i.e., 
Master of Youth, were given in compensation. The priest lived from 
fees and grain stipends, hence the more m1merous the temples, the 
poorer the village. However, only one of the temples was the village 
temple. 
21. To raise loans through the temple was considered meritorious. 
For this see Doolittle, Social Life of the Chhwse (London, 1866). 
22. Data on the existence of the sib elde1·s can apparent-ly be found 
for all periods. Under the Han variously composed sub-groups fnne-
tioned at their side. As a mle they were elected officials in their fifties 
who were entrusted with security police, joint liability, the duty of 
reprimanding, supervision of sacrifices, allo:;ation of the corvce, tax 
collection and hence also tax liability. Under certain conditil;ns they 
might he justices of the peace or they might administer adult educ.<t-
tion; occasionally they might also be respomible for recruiting and 
training the militia. According to the new arrangements under the Han, 
nine by eight families officially constituted a li; ten li comprised one 
t'ing under an elected elder; ten t'ing made one san headed by an 
elected san-lao whose main task was popular education. To this must 
be added the shih fu, i.e., the tax supervisor and justice of the peace, 
and the fu tse, the police commissioner. The main purpose was mili-
tary. Cf. the discussion of A. J. Iwanoff, Wang-An-Shi i fevo reformy, 
(St. Petersburg, 1906). 

» 278 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
23. For this point see A. 11. Smith, Village Life in China (Edin-
bmgh, 1 H99) . 
24. Usually the kuang kun was athletically trained. Like the mem-
ber of the Canwrra or Maffia he sought unofficial relations with the 
yamen of the hsien-official who had no power over him. A village em-
ployee, the village head, a justice of the peace, or at the opposite end, 
a beggar could function as a kuang kun. The situation for the rest of 
the villagers could become hopeless if he had a literary education and 
was possibly related to an oHicial. 
25. The decrees of the Peking Gazette refer to them as "gentry and 
notables" whose advice ought to be sought. 
26. Cf. the report of the l'eking Gazette of 14 Aptil, 1895. Two sib 
associations freed a man who had been arrested by the tax collector. 
27. S. Hoang, "i\Iclangcs sur I' administration," Varietes Sinologiques, 
21 (Shanghai, 1902), p. 120 f. 
28. I did not have access to the several recent and good doctoral 
dissertations on these associations. 
29. The forms of the associations were suggestive of the lpavot. A 
credit association (she) might accumulate a money fund and auction it 
off for usc or distribute it by lot (Smith, lac. cit.). Credit might he pro-
vided by friends in which case the debtor was made president of a 
club and by honor of the club repaid his debts in installments to the 
members (his creditors). Doolittle (up. cit., p. 147) gives examples of 
such clubs. Those who received refunds \Vere often determined by lot, 
an artificial substitute for the old neighborhood credit association and 
for baukruptcy proceedings. 
30. According to Doolittle, Toe. cit. 
31. The government was interested in this question with reference 
to applications for examinations since a quota of prebends was allocated 
to the provinces. Even dming the Han period the candidate's home 
town and district were always added to the name or official registers 
such as tl1at of the army. At that time the district was undoubtedly the 
home of the sib. 
32. For this see E. H. Parker, Ancient China Simplified (London, 
1908)' p. 112 f. 
33. Even in recent decades the imperial rescripts took issue with 
judicial decisions made on the basis of private letters from influential 
persons (Peking Gazette, 10 March, 1894). The intenuinability of 
trials was such that imperial rescripts ascribed to their length unfavor-
able weather and droughts or the ineffectiveness of prayers (Peking 
Gazette, 9 March, 1899). Legal guarantees were completely lacking. 
Between the lines of imperial rescripts can be read the party intrigues 

NOTES 
)) 279 (( 
which created antagonisms within officialdom upon the founding of a 
factory (Peking Gazette, 4 !\'larch, 1895). 
34. ~vleanwhilc, to my knowledge, only J. Plengc has occasionally 
and independently argued in such a way that it is certain he has largely 
recognized the significant reason for the collapse of politically oriented 
capitalism. Unfortunately, I cannot locate the passage at the moment. 
V. The Chinese Litemti 
I. Yu tsiuan tung kian kang mu [Afing History of Emperor Ch'ien 
Lung], trans. by Delamarre (Paris, 1865), p. 417. 
2. As eminent an authority as von Rosthorn disputes this point in his 
"The Burning of the Books," Journal of the Peking Oriental Society, val. 
IV, Peking, 1898, pp. 1 fT. He believes that the sacred texts were orally 
transmitted until the Han period, and hence that they are in the same 
tradition that prevailed exclusively in early India. The outsider is not 
entitled to pass judgment, but perhaps the following may be said. The 
annalistic scriptures at least cunnot rest on oral tradition and, as the 
calculation of the eclipses of the sun shows, they go back into the 
second millennium. Very much of what elsewhere is (according to the 
usual assumption, reliably) reported of the archives of the princes and 
the importance of script and the written communication of the literati 
could just as little be reconciled with the above, if one were to extend 
the view of the eminent expert beyond the ritual literature (that is, 
literature which has been brought into poetic form). Here, of course, 
only expert sinologists have the last word, and a "criticism" on the part 
of a non-expert would he presumptuous. The principle of strictly oral 
tradition has almost everywhere applied only to charismatic revelations 
and to charismatic commenturies of these, and not to poetry and didac-
tics. The great age of script as such comes out in its pictorial form and 
also in its arrangement of the pictorial characters: at a late period the 
vertical columns divided by lines still referred back to the origin from 
scored disks of bamboo sticks which were placed side by side. The 
oldest "contracts" were bamboo scores or knotted cords. The fact that 
all contracts and documents were made out in duplicate form is prob-
ably rightly considered a survival of this technique (Conrady). 
3. This explains also tl1e stereotyping of script in such an extraor-
dinarily early stage of development, and hence it produces an after-
effect even today. 
4. E. de Chavannes, Jo-urnal of the Peking Oriental Society, vol. III, 
1, 1890, p. 1v, translates Tai che ling by "grand astrologer," instead of 
"court annalist," as it is usually rendered. Yet, the later, and especially 

THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
the modem period knows the representatives of literary education to 
be sharp opponents o£ the astrologers. Cf. belr)w. 
5. P. A. Tschepe ( S.J.), "Histoire du Royaume de Han," Varietes 
Sinologiques, 31 (Shanghai, 1910), p. 48. 
6. During the fourth century the rcpr0sentatives of the feudal order, 
foremost among them the interested princely sibs, argued against the 
intended bureaucratization of the state Ch'in by pointing out "that the 
forebears had improved tl1e people by education, not by administrative 
changes" (this harmonizes fully with the later theories of Confucian 
orthodoxy). Thereupon the new minister Yang, belonging to the 
literati, comments ir1 highly un-Confucian manner: "the ordinary person 
lives according to tradition; the higher minds, however, create tradi-
tion, and for extraordinary things the rites give no precepts. The weal 
of the people is the highest law," and the prince accedes to his opinion. 
(Cf. the passages in Tschepc's "Histoire du Royaume de Tsin," 
Varietb Sinologiques, 27, p. 118.) It is quite probable that when Con-
fucian orthodoxy articulated and purified the Annals it very strongly 
erased and retouched these features in favor of the b·aditionalism which 
was later considered correct. On the other hand, one must beware of 
simply taking at face value all the reports referred to below which 
testify to the astonishing deference paid to the early literati! 
7. Although the princely heir of Wei alights from tl1e chariot he re-
ceives no response to his repeated salutations from the king's courtier 
and literary man, who is a parvenu. To the question "whether the rich 
or the poor may he proud" the literatus replies "the poor," and he mo-
tivates this by saying that he might flnd employment any day at another 
court. (Tschepe, "Histoire du Royaumoe de Han," op. cit., p. 43.) One 
of the literati is seized by a great rage about a brother of the prince 
being preferred over him for the post of a minister. ( Cf. ibid.) 
8. The prince of Wei listens only in standing to the report of the 
conrt literatus, a disciple of Confucius (lac. cit.; cf. preceding note). 
9. Cf. the statements of Tschepe, "Histo:ire du Royaume de Tsin," 
p. 77. 
10. The hereditary transmission of the ministerial position is con-
sidered ritually objectionable by the literati (Tschepe, Zoe. cit.). When 
the prince of Chao orders his minister to scrutinize and find some land 
suitable as fiefs for several worthy literati the minister thrice declares 
after having thrice been warned, that he has as yet not found any land 
worthy of them. Thereupon the prince finally understands and makes 
them officials. (Tschepe, "Histoire du Royaume de Han," pp. 54-5.) 
11. Cf. the passage concerning the respective question by the King 
of \Vu in Tschepe, "Histoire du Royaume de U," Varietes Sinologiques 
10 (Shanghai, 1891). 

NOTES 
» 281 « 
12. That also income was an end sought goes without saying, as the 
Annals show. 
13. Once when a prince's concubine laughed at one of the literati, 
all the prince's literati went on strike until she was executed ( Tschepe, 
"Histoire du Royaume de Han," loc. cit., p. 128). 
14. The event reminds one of the "finding" of the sacred law under 
Josiah with the Jews. The contemporary great annalist, Ssu-ma Ch'ien, 
does not mention the find. 
15. Tschepe, "Histoire du Royaume de Tsin," loc. cit., p. 53. 
16. Individual concealments are confirmed (for instance, the attack 
of the state Wu upon its own state Lu). For the rest, in view of the 
scantiness of the material, one may seriously raise the question as to 
whether one should not rather consider the great, strongly moralizing 
commentary to the Annals as his work. 
17. In 1900 the Empress Dowager still took very unfavorable notice 
of a censor's request to abolish them. Cf. the rescripts in the Peking 
Gazette concerning the "orthodox anny" (10 January, 1899), concern-
ing the "review" during the Japanese war (21 December, 1894), con-
cerning the importance of military ranks ( 1 and 10 November, 1898), 
and from an earlier period, e.g. (23 May, 1878). 
18. Concerning this practice cf. Etimme Zi ( S.J.), "Pratique des 
Examens ~lilitaires en Chine," V(trwtes Sinologiques, No. 9. Subjects 
for examination were archery and certain gymnastic feats of strength; 
and, formerly, the writing of a dissertation; since 1807, however, the 
writing of a section of one hundred characters from the Wu Ching 
(theory of wlu), allegedly dating from the time of the Chou dynasty, 
was required. A great many officers did not acquire degrees and the 
r.fanchus were freed from taking them altogether. 
19. A taotai (prefect) for his military merits had been taken over 
from the officers' ranks into the civil administration. In response to a 
complaint an imperial rescript (Peking Gazette, 17 September, 1894) 
comments as follows: although the officer's conduct in the matter in 
question has substantively been found free frorn fault, he nevertheless 
has shown his "rough soldierly manners" by his conduct, "and we have 
to ask ourselves whether he possesses the cultivated manners which for 
a person of his rank and position must appear indispensable." There-
fore it is recommended that he resume a military position. 
The abolition of age-old archery and of other very old sports as 
elements of "military" training was made almost impossible by the rites, 
which in their beginnings probably were still connected with the 
"bachelor house." Thus the Empress, when rejecting the reform pro-
posals, makes reference to these rites. 
20. The French authors for the most part designate sheng yiian, hsiu 

)) 282 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
ts'ai by "baccalaureate" [bachelor's degree], chii jen by "licentiate" 
[master's degree], chin shih by "doctorate." The lowest degree gave a 
claim to a stipend only to the top graduates. The bachelors who had 
received a stipend were called lin sheng (magazine prebendaries), 
bachelors selected by the director and sent to Peking were called pM 
kung, those among them who were admitted to the college yu kung, 
and those who had acquired the bachelor degree by purchase were 
called chiian sheng. 
21. The charismatic qualities of the descendant simply were proof 
for those of his ~ib, hence of the forebears. At the time, Shi Huang Ti 
had abolished this custom, as the son was not to judge the father. But 
since then almost every founder of a new dynasty has bestowed ranks 
to his ancestors. 
22. By the way, this is a rather certain symptom of its recent origin! 
23. Cf. for this: Biot, Essai sur l'histoire de l'i.nstruction publique en 
Chine et de la corporation des Lettres (Paris, 184 7) . (It is still useful.) 
24. Complaints at Ma Tuan-Lin, translated in Biot, p. 481. 
25. Themes for them are given by Williams, cf. Zi, Zoe. cit. 
26. This held especially for the examinations for the master's degree, 
where the theme of the dissertation often called for an erudite, philo-
logical, literary, and historical analysis of the respective classical text. 
Cf. the example given by Zi, loc. cit., p. 144. 
27. This held especially for the highest degree ("doctorate") for 
which the emperor, often in person, gave the themes and for which he 
classified the graduates. Questions of administrative expediency, pref-
erably connected with one of the "six questions" of Emperor Tang, 
were customary topics. (Cf. Biot, p. 209, note l, and Zi, Zoe. cit., p. 209, 
note 1.) 
28. Siao Hioh, ed. de Harlez, val. V, p. 11, vol. I, pp. 29, 40. Cf. the 
quotation from Chu Hsi, ihid., p. 46. Concerning the question of 
generations, cf. I, 13. 
29. Lac. cit., I, 25, furthermore 2. Introduction No .. 5 f. 
30. There were literary prescriptions also for this. 
31. It need hardly be mentioned that what is here said about 
language and script reproduces exclusir,ely what such eminent sinolo-
gists, as especially the late W. Grube, teach the layman. It does not 
result from the author's own studies. 
32. J. Edkins, "Local Values in Chinese Arithmetical Notation," 
Journal of the Peking Oriental Society, I, l\'o. 4, pp. 161 f. The Chinese 
abacus used the (decimal) positional value. The older positional system 
which has fallen into oblivion seems to be of Babylonian origin. 
33. De Harlcz, Siao Hioh, p. 42, note 3. 

NOTES 
)) 283 « 
34. Also, Timkovski, Reise durch China (1820-21), Gemwn by 
Schmid (Leipzig, 182.'5), emphasizes this. 
35. For such a self-impeachment of a frontier officer who had been 
inattentive, sec No. 567 of Aurel Stein's docmncnls, edited by E. de 
Chavannes. It dales from the Han period, hence long before the intro-
duction of examinations . 
. '36. The beginnings of the present Peking Gazette go back to the 
time of the second ruler of the Tang dynasty ( 618-807). 
37. Actually one finds in the Peking Gazette, with reference to the 
reports partly of censors, partly of superiors, laudations and promotions 
(or the promise of such) for dt!Serving officials, demotions of insuf-
ficiently qualified officials for other offices ("that he may gather ex-
periences," Zoe. cit., 31 December, 1887 antl many other issues), sus-
pension from office with half pay, expulsion of totally unqualified offi-
cials, or the statement that the good services of an official are halanccd 
by faults which he ·would have to remedy before further promotion. 
Almost always detailed reasons are given. Such announcements were 
especially freque11t at the end of the ye~n but there was also a great 
volume at other times. There nrc also to be found posthumous sentences 
to he whipped for (obviomly) posthumously demoted officials (Peking 
Gazette, 26 May, 1895). 
38. Cf. A. H. Smith, Village Ufe in China (Edinburgh, 1899), 
p. 78. 
39. For the following sec Kun Yu, D~1·cours des Royaumes, Annales 
Nationales des Etats Chinoises de X a.u V siecles, etl. de Harlez [Lon-
don, 1885], pp. 54,75, 89, 1.'59, 189, and c~cwhcre. 
40. Tschepc, Varietcs Sinologiques, 27, p. 38. He begs to be 
punished. Similarly in A. Stein's documents, loc. cit., No. 567. 
41. Sec, however, the rescript in tlJe Peking Gazette of 10 April, 
1895, by which promotions were posthumously given to officers who 
chose death after the surrender of Weihaiwei (obviously because they 
took the b'l.Jilt upon thems·elves and thus prevented the compromise of 
the Emperor's charisma by tllC disgrace). 
42. There was, ho\vever, at least in one district, also a temple of 
Tai Chi, the primary matter (chaos), from which the two substances 
arc said to have developed by division ("Schih Luh .Kuoh Kiang Yuh 
Tschi," translated by !vlichels, p. 39.) 
43. According to de Groot. 
44. Cf. the e~cerpts translated from his memoirs by Gri.ifiu Hagen 
(Berlin, 1915), pp. 27, 29, 33. 
45. Cf. the elegant and ingenious, though quite shallow, notes of 
Cheng Ki Tong, which were intended for Europeans. (China und die 

)) 284 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
Chinescn, German by A. Schultze [Dresden und Leipzig, 1896], p. 
158) . Concerning Chinese conversation, there are some observations 
which well agree with what has been said above in Hermann A. Keys-
erling, The Travel Diary of a Philosopher, trans. by J. Holroyd Reece 
(New York, 1925). 
46. ''Siao Hsiieh" (trans. by de Harlez, Annal~;s du Musee, Guimet 
XV, 1889) is the \'<lork of Chu llsi (twelfth century A.D.). His most 
essential achievement was the definitive canonization of Confucianism 
in the systematic form he gave to. it. For Chu Hsi cf. Gall, "Le Phi-
losophe Tdwu Hi, sa doctrine, etc.," Variites Sinologiques, 6 (Shang-
hai, 1894). It is essentially a popular commentary to the Li Chi, 
making use of historical examples. In China every grade school pupil 
was familiar with it. 
47. The number of "masters" was allocated to the provinces. If an 
emergency loan was issued-even after the T'ai P'ing rebellion-higher 
quotas were promised occasionally to the provinces for the raising of 
certain minimum sums. At every examination only ten "doctors" were 
allowed to graduate, the first three of whom enjoyed an especially high 
prestige. 
48. The paramount position of personal patronage is illustrated by 
the comparison between the extraction of the three highest !,>Taduates 
and that of the highest mandarins as given by Zi, loc. cit., Appendix II, 
p. 221, note 1. Disregarding the fact that of the 748 high official posi-
tions, occupied from 1646 to 1914, 398 were occupied by Manchus 
although hut three of them were among the highest graduates (the 
three tien she put in the first place by the Emperor), the province of 
Honan procmed 58, that is, one sixth of all high official.~, solely by 
virtue of the powe1ful position of the Tseng family, whereas almost 
two thirds of the highest grmluates stemmed from other provinces 
which altogether had a share of only 30 per cent in these offices. 
49. This means was first systematically used by the Ivfing Emperors 
in 1453. (But, as a financial measure, it is to be found even under Shih 
Huang Ti.) The lowest decree originally cost 108 piasters, equal to the 
capitalized value of the study prebends, then it cost 60 taels. After an 
inundation of the Iluang Ho, the price had been reduced to about 20 
to 30 tacls in order to expand the market and thereby procure ample 
funds. Since 1693 the purchasers of the bachelor's degree were also 
admitted to the higher examinations. A taotai position with all second-
ary expenses cost about 40,000 taels. 
50. That is why the emperors under certain conditions when placing 
the canc1idatcs took into consideration whether or not the candidate 
belonged to a province which as yet had no graduate who had been 
put in first place. 

NOTES 
» 285 {( 
51. Ssu-ma Ch'icn's treatise on the balance of trade (ping .>'heng) 
(No. 8, Chap. 30, in vol. III of Chavannes' edition) represents a rather 
good example of Chinese cameralism. It is also the oldest document of 
Chinese economics that has been preserved. Topics which in our view 
do not belong to the "balance of h·ade" arc: big trading profits during 
the period of the \Varring States, degradation of the merchants in the 
unified empire, exclusion from office, fixation of salaries and, in ac-
cordance with them, fixation of land taxes, taxes of commerce, forest, 
water (appropriated by the "great families"), the question of private 
monetization, the danger of too large an enrichment of private persons 
(but: where there is wealth there is 'Virtue, which is quite Confucian in 
thought), costs of lransport, purchases of tit-les, monopolies of salt and 
iron, registering of merchants, intemal tariffs, policies of price stabiliza-
tion, struggles ag<tinst commissions being given to wholesale purveyors 
to the state instead of direct commissions being given the artisans. The 
objective of this cameralist financial policy was inte1'rlal order through 
stability, and not a favorable bnlance of foreign trade. 
52. The Co-hong merchants' monopoly of the h·ade of Canton 
harbor, the only one open<!d to foreigners, existed until 1892 and had 
been set up in order to choke any intercourse of the Barbarians with 
the Chinese. The enormous profits which this monopoly yielded caused 
the concerned office prebendaries to be disinclined to any voluntary 
change in this condition. 
5:1. Not only the oiTicial rvfing history ( cf. the following note) is full 
of this but ~o is the "Chili kuo chiang yii chih" (Histoim geogmphique 
des XVI Royawnes, ed. Michels [PaTis, 1891]). Thus, in 1368 the 
harem is excluded from affairs of state at the request of the Hanlin 
Academy (p. 7); in 1498 representation of the Hanlin Academy at the 
occasion of the palace fim and the demand (typical for accidents) tr;J 
"speak freely" against the favorite eunuch ( cf. following note). 
54. Numerous cases illustrating this struggle arc to be found, for 
instance in the "Yiichuan t\mg chien kang mu," op. cit. Consider the 
fifteenth centmy: in 1404 a eunuch is at the head of the army ( p. 155). 
Since then this nccnrs repeatedly; thus, in 1428 (p. 22.3). Hence, the 
inh,Ision of palace officials into the administration in 1409 ( p. 168). In 
.144:1 a Hanlin doctor demands the abolition of cabinet rule, a reduction 
of the corvee, and above all, council me0tings of the emperor, with the 
literati. A eunuch kills him (p. 254). In 1449 the favorite eunuch is 
killed at the request of the literati (p. 273), in 1457, however, temples 
are established in his honor. 
In 1471 the counselors have to communicate with the emperor 
through the eunu<:h ( p. 374,). The very same is reported by Hsiao Kang 
( 361-28 u.c.). In 1472 \VC meet eunuchs as secret policemen ( p. 273), 

)) 286 « 
THE HELIGION OF CHINA 
which in 1481 is abolished at the request of the censors (p. 289). HI 
141515 the old ritual is restored (the same occurs in nwncrous instances). 
The removal of a euuueh in 14115 took an awkward course for the 
literati when the list \Vas found on the eunuch of the literati who had 
bribed him. The literati were successful in having Lhe list secreted and 
in seeing to it that a differenl' pretext was found for the removal of tbe 
literati who had done the bribing (ibid. p. 422). 
55. CL E. Backhouse and J. 0. P. Bland, China. under the Empress 
Dowager (Heinemann, 1810) anu, against this, the famous memorial 
of Tao :Mo from the year J 901. 
56. When in 1441 a sun eclipse prcilictcd by the astrologers failed 
to occur, the Board of Hiles congratulated him-but the Emperor re-
jected this. 
57. See the (previously cited) memorial, 1878, of the Hanlin 
Academy to the Empress. 
58. Loc. cit., Chap. 9, pp. 130 f. 
59. See the decree of the Empress of February, 1901. 
60. Loc. cit. p. 457. 
61. For instance, "Yu t~iuan tung kicn kang rnu" (loc. cit. pp. 167, 
223), 1409 and 1428. An edict forbidding in a similar manner inter-
ference in the administration was given the military even in 1388 
(ibid.). 
VI. The Confucian Life 
Orientation 
1. Concerning the anchorcts of the early period., cf. Chapter VII. 
2. Concerning Buduhism cf. below and l'viax \Veber, 1-limlui,l·mus 
und Buddhi.s·mus ( Gcsarnmelte Aufsaet;:;e zur Religionssoziologie vol. 
II) (Tiibingen, 1821). 
3. Cf. Chapter I. 
4. Cf. Chavannes in the preface to his edition of Ssu-ma Ch'icn's 
tracts concerning the Fang and Chang sacrifices, Journal of the Peking 
Oriental Society, vol. Ill, No. 1 ( 1890). 
5. Cf. also the poem "Chiu Yung" of the third centmy. Cf. Conrady 
in Hochschulvortraege fuer ]cdcrma.nn, vol. XIX, XX (Leipzig, 1903). 
6. For a discussion of the beginnings, cf. Chapter VII. 
7. \Vcbcr's interpretative statemcut ~cems to be controversial, a 
point to which Professor L. Chen of the National Chekiang Univer-
sity, Hangchow, was good enough to draw my attention. Professor 
Chen (with others, e.g., \Villiam Edward Soothhill) translates tbe 
passage of the dirge (Analects, Book VII, 34) "I have prayed for 

NOTES 
» 287 {( 
long." Arthur \Valey's translation "The Master said, 'l'vly expiation 
began long ago1'" and hi~ ammtation would seem to confirm \Veber's 
point. \Valcy's note reads: "What justi£es me in the eyes of Heaven 
is the life I have led. There i.s· no need for any rite now." In a frag-
ment of one of the lost books of Chuangtzu there is a parallel story in 
which Tzu-lu \vants to take the omens about Confucius' chance of rc-
cm:ery, and Coufucius says ").-Iy omen-laking rcas done long ago!" 
See T'ai l)'ing Yu Lan 84H, fol. I. verso. The Anal-ects of Confucius, 
translated and annotated by Arthur \Valey (London, HJ:38), p. 131. 
(Our Italics, Eel.) 
8. This is to be found in the stenographic reports of the Clarke 
papers from the military camp where equal franchise was discussed in 
terms of natural law for the first time in world history. 
9. The compass was invented and it was used on river boats, and by 
couriers along the land routes of inner Asia; book printing was in-
vented and used for administrative purposes to overcome the slowness 
of copying in long hand. Gunpowder was invented., abo paper, porce-
lain, silk, alchemy, astronomy (used for astrological purposes of state). 
Gunpowder was utilized for military purposes probably during the 
twelfth, certainly during the thirteenth century, in any case, one cen-
tury before the Florentines arc credited "\Vith its use in wars. But the 
Chinese used gunpowder in a very primitive manner. The pacification 
of the empire simply did not stimulate its perfection. It seems that the 
guns of the Occident were feared, in the beginning especially because 
of their presumed magically-determined efl'ect, and the Chinese sought 
to import them. Concerning the inventions cf. \V. A. P. !vlartin, 
"Chinese Discoveries in Art and Science," ]ottrnal of the Peking 
Oriental Society, vol. IV, p. 19 fT. 
10. The term is ambiguous, as we shall see below. 
11. They did so with the highly uuChristian conclusion thr,t the 
good in man is an artificial product of culture. This resulted in a still 
greater affirmative emphasis on the "world" of "cultme" and educa-
tion than had been given to it by the orthodox doctrine. 
One may indicate some of ils metaphysical assertions ( cf. F. Farjenel 
in the Journal Asiatique, vol. XX ( 1902), p. 113 ff). The eternity of 
matter is asserted. Its spiritual principle (ai-chi) is pantheistically con-
ceived as a principle of goodness and as producing the world. Since the 
eleventh century it has been represented by an orthodox school of com-
mentators; logically, it seems, it had little consistency. For the rest, it 
is assumed that even Confucius believed in the astrologically based 
cosmogony later advocated by Ssu-ma Ch'ien (the five elements suc-
ceed one another in the form of the early rulers). Cf. Chavannes in the 

» 288 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
preface to vol. I of his edition of Ssu-ma Ch'ien (Paris, 1895), p. 
CXLIII. Of this more below. 
12. Allegedly the positional value of numbers was known in Chinese 
arithmetic during the sixth century. Cf. J. Edkins, "Local Value in 
Chinese Arithmetical Notation," journal of the Peking Oriental So-
ciety, vol. 1, f\'o. 4, p. 161 f., who traces thi:; know·ledge back to Baby-
lon (?). This alleged knowledge remains questionable. During the 
nineteenth century, as mentioned above, the abacus with balls of 
local value was used. 
1.3. Until the present, however, mathematics was included among 
the nine subjects of the elective, additional examination which one 
could take either to attain preferential promotion or to secure himself 
again:;t degradation. 
14. According to Eitel, China Review, vol. XVIII, p. 266. T. de 
Lacouperie has nevertheless maintained the Babylonian origin of 
ancient Chinese civilization (Western Origin of the Arwient Chinese 
Civilization, London, 1894). 
(Precession of Equinoxes: "A slow change in direction of the 
earth's axis and consequently weshvard motion of the equinoctial 
points along the ecliptic caused by the action of the sun, moon, and 
planets upon the protuberant matter about the earth's equator, in con-
nection with its diurnal rotation;-as is so called because either equinox, 
owing to its westerly motion, comes to the meridian sooner each day 
than the point it would have occupied if there were no motion of 
precession and thus precedes that point continually with reference to 
the time of transit ... " -Webster's Dictionary uf the English Lan-
guage). (Ed.) 
15. Cf. the Shi l~uh Kuoh Kiang Yu Tschi, tr. by Michels, p. XXI 
of the "Notes" to the commentary. 
16. This holds also in relation to the mother. A son in drunkenness 
had manhandled his scolding mother (in 1882). The mother engaged 
some men, had the son put in bonds and buried alive, in spite of the 
heartfelt pleas of all participants. The men were punished because of 
a formal incorrectness but they were pardoned at once. Sanctions 
against tl1e mother were entirely out of the question. (Hescript in the 
Peking Gazette of 13 tvlarch, 1882.) 
17. It also preceded obedience to the prince. During feudal times 
an official \Vas ordered by a prince to seize his son because of felony. 
The official refused to do so, and the official who was ordered to seize 
the father because of his disobedience did like\vise. The father then 
committed suicide and tradition burdened the prince with the sin of 
this misdemeanor. Tschepe, loc. cit., p. 2.17. 
18. Cf. the request of the son of the commander of )J"uichuang re· 

NOTES 
» 289 « 
ported in the Peking Gazette o£ 6 Jrn1e, 1896. During the war with 
Japan, the commander had been accused of cowardice and had been 
degraded to compuls01y labor at the mail routes in the west. The son 
pleaded permission to take the punishment of his father who had fallen 
sick under hardships or to pay 4,000 taels for his father's release. The 
report was passed on to the emperor with a comment pointing up the 
praiseworthy piety of the petitioner .. 
19. The memorial underlying the rescript of 2 September, 1905, 
concerning the abolition of the old "culture"-examinations is rather thin 
in substance. In essence, it argues merely that the zeal for popular edu-
catiOn is inhibited because everybody relies on the examination for 
entitling him to a prebend. 
20. Ssu-ma Ch'ien's biography of Confucius, ed. Chavannes, p. 336. 
21. "Sensuality," inimical to all virtue, is viewed as incurable even 
by the old Annals ( Kun Yu, Discours des Royaumes, p. 163, takes the 
form of a doctor's statement conceming a sick prince). The conflict 
between love and the interest of the state is resolved strictly in favor of 
the state. The "tragedy" of this situation is poetically treated at least 
once. 
22. Fr. Kuhn, Ablwullungen der Berliner Akndemie (1914), 4. 
23. See Chavannes, preface to his edition, p. XIII. 
24. Edkins, "The Place of Hwang Ti in Early Taoism," China Re-
view, vol. XV, p. 233 f. 
25. Against tllis cf. Pen Piao in Appendix II of Chavanncs, lac. cit. 
26. Journal Asiatique, vol. X, Serie 14, 1909, ed. Chavmmes, pp. 
33, 36. 
27. Concerning him cf. Chavannes, vol. I, Appendix I, p. CCXXVI f. 
28. For tl1e Chinese, castration is an especially terrible misfort>me 
because of the ancestor cult. 
29. The belief in inunortality would not be classical. Only the belief 
in spirits is meant. 
30. See p. 166 of his biography of Shih Huang Ti, ed. Chavannes. 
31. Praised in the inscriptions of the Han period, cited above. 
32. China und die Chinesen ( Gern1an by A. Schultze, 1896), p. 222. 
33. Confucius is even said to have declared himself incompetent in 
military matters. 
34. Yu tsiaun tung kian kang mu, tr. by Delamarre (Paris, 1865), 
p. 20. 
35. Giles, China and the Chinese (New York, 1912), p. 105. 
36. "Coerced contracts have no force for the spirits do not guard 
them." This is maintained even in earliest times, cf. E. H. Parker, 
Ancient China Simplified (London, 1908), p. 99. 

» 290 « 
THE RELIGION OF CHINA 
VII. Orthodoxy and Heterodoxy 
(Taoism) 
1. Concerning Taoism, consult de Harlez and Legge for sources. 
In general, see the excellent posthumous work of W. Grube, Religion 
und Kultur der Chinesen and especially de Groot's Universismus Die 
Grundlagen der Religion und Ethik, de.<; Staatswesens und der Wissen-
schaftChinas (Berlin, 1918). 
2. Besides the previously cited monumental documents we may 
refer tci Chinese literature. Thus, the educational work of Hsiao I-lsiieh, 
tr. by de Harlcz warns against the swindles of the Buddhist priests who 
seek to provide otherworldly bliss for the dead. It argues that one can 
be neither useful nor harmful to the dead for with the decomposition 
of their bodies their spirits also vanish (lac. cit., Book V, No. 86). 
3. Like the Catholic Church the patrimonial institution of grace 
makes the distinction here that the canonized man enjoyed-in Catholic 
terms-mere "veneration" and not, like tl1e great spirits of nature, 
"adoration." In the mind of the masses, to be sure, this distinction was 
a purely formal one, in this as in similar cases. 
4. Sheng means Saint; i, yin mean the segregated ones; Hsien, a 
sign composed of "men" and "mountain," means anchorets. 
5. Cf. de Groot's presentation in his Universisnws; further, A. Con-
rady, "China," in Weltgeschichte, die Entwicklung der Menschheit in 
Staat und Gesellschaft, in Kultur und Gel.,<,tesleben, cd. by J. von Pllugk-
Hartung (Berlin, Ullstein, 1910), vol. III, pp. 457-.567, and the com-
ments in Ssu-ma Ch'icn's Annal~, ed. by Chavarmes. 
6. There are paintings which usually portray the Rishis as coarse 
plebeians. 
7. A case in the Annalistics concerns the minister Fan Li of the state 
of Yiieh. '"1hen his king lost a city he declared that according to the 
old rules he ought to commit suicide, but he did not do so. Apparently 
the man later built up the enormous fortune which l1e had collected 
as a minister through :-• fortunate war against the Ch'i. Later he actually 
distributed his wealth among his friends and turned anchoret just as 
some of the Indian ministers have done up to the present. Cf. Tschepe, 
"Histoire du Royaume de Ou," Varietes Sinowgiques, 10 (Shanghai, 
1891), p.I57,Appendixi. 
8. Tschepe, lac. cit. (sixth century n.c.). 
9. De Groot argues against this in reference to the early period. 
10. De Groot argues for this tradition. 
11. Today one may well speak of him as a modish philosopher. We 
may disregard that Lao-tzu is a semi-mythical figure, that the Tao 

NOTES 
» 291 « 
'l'eh Ching is strongly suspected of containing interpolations en masse, 
or that its existence is ~crtain only at a late date. Even if Lao-tzu were 
a fictitious figure the contrast of schools would remain, and that is of 
exclusive interest to us here. 
12. Clt'ung means equilibrium (in English: "weak"). It is a basic 
Confucian coi1ccpt which in Taoism is interpreted to mean "void." 
13. Par. 30. Cf. de Groot, Religion in China (London, 1912). 
14. For the following see especially de Groot who places the great-
est emphasis upon the secondary nature of this schism. 
15. De Groot, Zoe. cit. 
16. \Vith \Van Fei, third century A.D. Cf. de Groot, Zoe. cit. 
17. In reference to this, sec the previously cited insc1iptions. 
18. Tu be sme, this also holds for Mayana Buddhism with its bonzes 
as the secular clergy. But with Buddhism the secondary natme of the 
phenomenon is quite clear; with Taoism that is not the case. 
19. To my knowledge the Tao Tsang has not been translated; it 
seems to be rare. 
20. Cf. de Groot, who follows Ko Hung's Hagiography. 
21. De Groot has been used for this and the usual literature. De 
Groot's lecture in the Transactions of the Third International Congress 
of Religions (Oxford, 1907), vol. I, was not available at the time. The 
same holds for Imbault-Huart, "La lcgende du premier pape des 
Taoistes ct l'histoire de la famillc ponlificale des Tchang," Journal 
Asiatique, Nov.-Dec., 1884, p. 389. 
22. Coneerning this enmity, see Chavannes about Ssu-ma Ch'ien's 
treatise, Rites, vol. III, p. 210, footnote 1. 
23. See Chavanncs' preface to Ssu-ma Ch'ien. Ssu-ma Ch'ien, their 
opponent, laments their ever-renewed ancestry. 
24. Thus Jung Lu in 1903. 
25. See the official dictionary of prebends of the Chinese state. 
W. F. Mayer, The Chinese Government (Shanghai, 1878), p. 70. 
26. This is the case for the above noted inscriptions of the King of 
Nan Chao, ed. by Chavannes, Journal A.siatique, 9th Serie, vol. 16 
(1900). 
27. The developmental course and results of the bon-owing of 
Buddhism from India wHl be dealt with in the history of Buddhism; 
here we shall consider only certain formal aspects. 
28. We shall discuss this at the proper place. It was not the original 
Buddhism. 
29. See the registration of the cases in Emperor Ch'ien Lung's Yu 
chuan t'ung chien kang mu. For example: in 14.'51, fifty thousand 
bonzes were ordered, in spite of the protests of the Confucians ( Dela-
marre, op. cit., p. 288); in 1452, the dominant eunuch was a follower 

» 292 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
of Buddha (ibid., p. 292) and hence an enemy of the "officials" (Con-
fucians); in 1481, a bonze became Grand Almonsier ( p. 379), who, in 
1487 (p. 385), was deposed upon the request of the officials after the 
fall of an aerolite. 
30. Mayer's book of state prebends, Zoe. cit. The local authorities 
select the shen lu ssu (superior), of whom there are two in each dis-
trict, from the fang chang (elders) of the monasteries. The superiors 
are responsible for the good conduct of the bonzes. 
31. This was often maintained with reference to the former essays 
on Puritanism. [1'he Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, 
tr. by Talcott Parsons; "The Protestant Sects and the Spirit of Capi-
talism," in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology (New York, 1946), 
Chapter XII, pp. 302-322. Ed.] 
32. This held also for orthodoxy, cf. Se Ma 1'sien (Ssu-ma Ch'ien), 
ed. Chavannes, vol. I, p. 196: "Heaven does not by it~elf send prema-
ture death. Heaven rather adjusts to Man's behavior." Compare, how-
ever, the momuncntal documents quoted in the beginning of Chap-
ter II. 
33. Universismus, p. 343; the book has been used here throughout, 
as every reader will see. 
34. De Groot, loc. cit. p. 373. 
35. In view of de Groot's book the "pan-Babylonian" thesis is no 
longer likely to be maintained. 
36. De Groot, Religion of China, p. 64 f. The adoration of living 
men (mandarins) is declared punishable in a rescript as late as 1883 
(Peking Gazette, 18 January, 1883). 
37. Peking Gazette, 24 June, 1878. 
38. During religious disputations between Confucians and Buddhists 
the Buddhist doctrine of Karma usually was declined with special em-
phasis. It was maintained that the social position of an individual did 
not result from former deeds but from fate which makes some leaves 
of a b·ee swirl upon carpets and others upon dirt. 
39. The ease with which this pride in names could turn into the 
naked craving to live simply in order to live is obvious from the parable 
of the turtle mentioned above. Its author was not a pure Confucian 
but quotes Confucius \vith great reverence. The truly Confucian men-
tality, however, is not reflected in this but in Ssu-ma Ch'ien's letters and 
the memorials of the censors to the Empress Tzu Hsi, which are quoted 
above. 
40. At the last moment the rather good doctoral thesis of Wu Chang 
(Berlin, 1917), comes to my attention, a thesis which is influenced by 
Herkner, Bortkiewicz, and Eberstadt. The "Chinese Credit Associa-
tion" represents a type of community bearing the usual club name 

NOTES 
)) 293 « 
htoui with appropriate additions which may well serve to illustrate the 
effects. 
The thesis describes the primitive structures of these previously men-
tioned associations (Chapter I) which are fashioned to serve peasants, 
small holders at t.hat, and which depend upon the strictly personal 
acquaintance of the associates. 
The contributing members arc selected in terms of their purdy per-
sonal trust\vorthiness. There arc three different types of organizations; 
in the simplest case, at the first meeting, all members except the first 
pay to the "first member" their contributions and the current interest 
on his debts, which meanwhile has perhaps accumulated through capi-
tal usc. At the "second meeting" all pay for the "second member" and 
so forth down the line to the "last" member, who thus receives back 
only his contributions plus interest. The sequence of the members re-
ceiving the contributions is mostly determined by lot; if the issue is to 
rehabilitate a "debtor" he is, of course, the "first member," whereas 
donators perhaps volunteer to be the '1ast member." The result is that 
all members placed before the last one for some time have at their free 
disposal capital of varying amounts according to their placement. 
The individual member makes contributions and pays interest toward 
the refunding or saving of capital The credit association required 
either a certain measure of mutual supervi~ion or precise knowledge of 
the members' ways of doing business. In its effects the association obvi-
ously approximated the Raiffeisen Darlehenska.9sen system. For the 
small holding peasant population with whom the banks did not do 
business the credit associations substituted mortgage credit needed to 
purchase land, but it could serve all conceivable ends. 
In contrast to the previously described conditions of the sects ( cf. 
"The Protestant Sects and the Spirit of Capitalism," From Max Weber: 
Essays in Sociology, Chaper XJI) aside from the form, the following 
were characteristic of the Chinese credit association: ( 1) the concrete 
economic purpose was primary or rather exclusive; (2) in the absence 
of the sect's qualifying examination the individual's qualification as a 
possible credit-recipient had to be determined purely on an individual 
basis. By the way, these credit associations may indeed serve to illus-
trate the nabJTe of the Greek "eranos." 
41. Piety, to he sure, could also lead to consequences which the 
political authorities had to reject. In contrast to the mercantilist and 
stah1s-motivated restriction of luxury-expenditures, especially for fes-
tive purposes, the permissible expense for funerals, in accordance with 
the importance of piety as the ultimate ethical yardstick, was quite 
horrendous to our mind. 
42. In this connection see de Groot's temperamental pamphlet 

)) 294 ({ 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
"Sectarianism and religious persecution in China," Verh. der. Kon. Ak. 
van W etensch. te Amsterdam, Afd. Letterk. N. lkp~;(t§.•:::v, 1, 2. 
43. Peking Gazette, 13 January, 1B74. 
44. Ibid., 13 April and 31 March, 1883. 
45. Ihid., 2 October, 1874; for a case of an illsane person subjected 
to exorcism cf. ihid., 20 August, 1B78. 
46. \Ve wish to emphasize that here we give only a sketch of the 
relations of Confucianism and the public authorities to the sects. After 
having presented Buddhism we shall have to return to the sects proper, 
the most important of which go back to Buddhist influence. Cf. de 
Groot's presentation in his "Sectarianism and religious persecution in 
China," Zoe. cit. 
47. For a multitude of reasons; sec de Groot, loc. cit. 
48. To maintain that Islamism in China had not undergone any 
change, as vV. Grube occasionally points out, would seem to be some-
thing of an overstatement. The peculiar position of the Imams has 
developed since about the seventeenth century and has certainly 
emerged under the influence of the example given by Indian and other 
Far Eastern mystagogucs. 
49. The name is old; we recall that the Taoist church state used the 
same name. 
50. The official documents of the T'ai P'ing Emperor were first pub-
lished by tl1e missionary ~Iedhurst in Shanghai with a correspondingly 
naive commentary in a missionary magazine. They appeared under the 
title Pamphlets in and by the Chinese Insurgents of Nanking (Shang-
hai, 1853). They comprised above all the "Book of the Interpretation 
of the Divine Will"; the "Imperial Declaration of the T'ai P'ing"; the 
"Book of Religious Precepts"; the "Book of Celestial Decrees"; the 
so-called "Tr.imetrical Canon"; the proclamation against the Manchus 
of 1852; the stah1tes concerning ceremonial and military organization 
and the new calendar, which the English man-of-war "Hermes" had 
brought to Shanghai. The great rebellion was often described, espe-
cially in almost all works on China. In German the popular work of 
C. Spillmann (Halle, 1900) may be mentioned. It is unfortunate that 
the best expert on the history of Chinese sects, de Groot, has declined 
discussing more closely the nature of the T'ai P'ing rebellion and disre-
gards the Christian elements. These are certainly not comprehensible 
in the official documents of the Manchu which are the only ones he 
cautiously uses. De Groot, however, rates the missionary value low. 
Hence our presentation claims but hypothetical value. 
51. It is impossible for me to check the much disputed facts. 
52. Essentially upon this depended the failure at the militarily de-
cisive moment. Without doubt, after the communications had been cut 

NOTES 
» 295 « 
by the occupation of the Imperial Canal and the conquest of Nanking 
and the whole Yangtze valley, the destiny of the repeatedly and almost 
crushingly beaten Peking government would have been scaled, and 
a completely diLierent course of history for East Asia, at least, might 
not have been impossible. 
5.3. The name of Jchova for God is found mice in the official docu-
ments; otherwise, according to the count of the missionaries one finds 
most frequently ( 421) the name~ of the popular God of Heaven, only 
half as frequently (2l:i-) the Confucian name of Spirit of Heaven, 
somewhat oftener the personalist expression of T' ien fu or T' ien ( .3.3%) ; 
far less often ( 4%) Shen, which mostly means "spitit." 
54. Jesus is conceived as having been married like T'ien \-Vang. The 
prophet in a vision had seen his own wife. 
55. He rejected fur himself the attribute of "lwliness" as well as the 
designation of "father." 
56. This was especially offensive to lhe missionaries. It did indeed 
represent a concession to tradition although officially any interpretation 
of the ceremony as a sacrifice to or for the ancestral spirits was rejected. 
The sacrifice was conceived as a sacrifice to God and, like a Christian 
death mass, was meant to serve the souls of the ancestors. 
57. "\.Yhcn you have money you must make it public and not con-
sider it as belonging to one or another." (The same holds for jewelry.) 
Book of Celestial Decrees, Zoe. cit. 
58. The accessible reports evince strong contradictions about the 
details. The actual scope of state socialism remains especially obscure. 
To a large degree it is, of course, to be interpreted as a war economy. 
In the same way great caution is advisable when accepting the state-
ments of the English missionaries. These have necessarily been used 
and perhaps de Groot rejects them too sharply. In their zeal the mis-
sionaries perhaps noticed more "Christian" elements than actually 
existed. 
59. The commandment of fulfilling one's vocational duty witlwut 
squinting at success should be followed because in business life, too, 
success is believed to depend upon fate, not upon man: "Follow your 
proper avocations and make yourselves easy about the rest." Froru the 
Imperial Declaration of the Tai Ping, loc. cit. The author refers to 
Confucius. 
60. Lac. cit. 
61. "In trade principally regard rectitude." "In learning be careful 
to live by the rule." Ibid. 
62. The Book of Religious Precepts begins with the confession that 
no man has lived in the world without having sinned against "the com-
mands of Heaven." 

» 296 (( 
THE RELIGION OF CHIN A 
63. Trimctrical Canon, Zoe. cit. 
64. Cultivation and exports of silk decreased only during the last 
year of the war. Previously they had increased considerably. 
6t5. At the last moment Palmerston gave orders to support the 
":tvianchu" no longer because of sharp attacks in the Home; also be-
cause he did not wish to let the Manchus get out of theil· awkward 
situation. 
66. The T'ien \.Yang personally and his officers practiced polygamy 
in the Chinese sense (concubinage) . 
67. Peking Gazette, 2 October, 1874. 
68. The T'ien \Yang's lent \Vas called "the little Heaven." His rejec-
tion of attributes of holiness might very well have been disregarded by 
possible successors. The ceremonial prescriptions, including titularies 
of rank, were completely Chinese in character. There was, e.g., among 
others, a title of "Your Chastity" (I) for high female officials. 
69. This holds unless one wishes to classify the festival days, avoid-
ance of ornaments, etc., as asceticism. These, however, remained in-
dividual postulates. 
70. This sect (I 1w ch'iian) had emerged even at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century. De Groot, Sectarianism, p. 425. 
71. This sect, indeed, believed in this invulnerability. The accessible 
and examined materials do not suffice for a presentation of the sect. 
It was constituted as an order, an "ecclesia militans," only against the 
foreign Barbarians. Concerning the sect see the previously cited me-
morial to the Empress Tz'u Hsi who, like the princes, believed in the 
sect's magical charisma. In the same vvay they believed in the magical 
qualities of the Krupp cannon. cf. Peking Gazette, IS June, 1878. In 
view of these Chinese documents one is hardly permitted, in this case, 
to share de Groot's doubt that heretics such as the "Boxers" had been 
protected by a "Confucian" government. Cf. Sectarianism, p. 430, 
footnote. 
VIII. Conclusions: Confucianism 
and Puritanism 
1. In addition to the aforesaid, compare de Groot, The Religion of 
the Chinese (New York, 1910), p. 130. 
2. Reprinted in Chavannes' edition, op. cit. vol. III, Chapter XXX. 
3. See the earlier discussion of "credit associations" as weak be-
ginnings. 
4. It is crystal-clear that defects of technical and inventive genius 
carmot be attributed to the Chinese. The backwardness of mining (a 
cause of currency cri~es), the failure to use coal for the production of 

NOTES 
iron (despite the alleged knowledge of the coking process), and the 
increasing t·estriction of shipping to river traffic in traditional forms and 
along traditional routes were not due to lack of inventiveness. F6ng 
shui (magicians) of all sorts, prebend interests-products of magic and 
the form of state-were the decisive factors. 
5. Very good remarks about this are to be found in Ludwig Klages' 
writings. 

GLOSSARY AND INDEX 
Abaelard and Heloise, 168 
Achilles, 205 
Acosmism: denial of the reality of 
the world opposite the sole reality 
and importance of Cod, hence de-
valuation of the world, 212 
Ad nutum amovibel: removable at 
will, 32 
America, 99, 250, 270 
Analects, 124f. 
Ancestor worship, 87, 165, 173, 
213ff., 229, 230, (ancestral spirits) 
143, (ancestral temple) 115 
Anchoret: one who retreats from the 
world to live in seclusion; hennit, 
178, 231 
Anglican High Church, 221 
Animism: belief in spirits presum-
ably standing "behind" and deter-
mining the behavior of charismat-
ically qualified natural objects, 
artifacts, animals, and men. First 
level of abstraction from pre-ani-
mist magical belie£ in extraordi-
nary, i.e., charismatic forces, 165, 
169£., 179, 194, 229 
Annals, 36, 38, 41, 110, 112, 130, 
140, 204 
Anthropolatry: worship of men, 173, 
20lf., 229 
Anti-cluesis: a form of mortgage 
contract by which the mortgagee 
takes possession of the mortgaged 
property and has its 
fruiL~ of 
profits in lieu of interest, 81 
Apotheosis: deification, 173f., 193 
Apotropaic: designed to ward off, 
135, 196 
Archery, 123, 281 
Army, 25, 42, 158, 26.'5, 269, 272, 
(under the Han) 751f., (morale) 
89, (officers) 117 
Art, 290, (Buddhist) 8, (Chinese) 
97, 151, 198, (magic) 260, ( Ren-
aissance) 151 
Asceticism: 
methodical abstention 
from sleep, food, sexual gratifica-
tion, etc. Weber distinguishes two 
main types of asceticism: the 
"other-worldly" asceticism of the 
monk and the "inner-worldly" as-
ceticism of the Puritan who lives 
among 
the "worldly" 
without 
being of them, 186, (and Con-
fucianism) 229, (monachal) 206, 
216, 
(and Protestantism) 237, 
247, (of T'ai P'ing) 220, 223 
Assignat: inflated note issued during 
the French Revolution, 7, 10 
Astrolot,')', 139, 1.'54, 167, 196f., 207, 
261 
Astronomy, 196 
Ataraxy: peace of mind, calmness, 
188 
Atharva-Veda, 108 
Athens, 14, 80 
Augur: an official diviner of andcnt 
Rome, 110 
Baal, 23 
Babylon, 196, 200, 2.58 
Bachelor house, 24, 271, 275, 281 
Beneficia: feudal estates in land, 35 
Billet de geminance, 81 
Boniface VIII, 26, 258 
• 298 c 

GLOSSARY AND INDEX 
» 299 « 
Bonze: a Buddhist monk, 200, 216, 
22.5, 291 
Boxers, 140, 223f., 296 
Brahman, 126, 135, (Guru) 108 
Buddhism, 152, 155£., 159, 162, 
213f., 2H:i, 224, 225, (deities) 
174, 177, 205, (function) 230, 
(Mahayana) 195, 291, (masses 
for the dead) 195, (membership) 
218, (monasteries) 159, 218, (and 
pacification of !vlongols) 71, 217, 
(persecution of) 7, 159, 195, 216f. 
Bureaucracy (under Ch'in and Han) 
263£., (and law) 149f., (patri-
monial) 48, 136, (and religion) 
217 
Burning of books, 14, 164, 201, 265 
Cadi justice: administration of jus-
tice without formal rules of law. 
The judge considers each case on 
it~ merits with regard to persons 
and circumstances, 102, 149 
Calendar, 108, 196, 258f. 
Camorra: Italian secret society prac-
ticing exlort.ion and violence, 193, 
278 
Canals, 20, 5lf. 
Canton, 15, 54, 55, (Cantonese 
school of official>) 59 
Capitalism: refers to different modes 
of profit making. Weber distin-
guishes modem industrial capital-
ism with its rational capital ac-
counting from various universally 
diffused and ancient types of po-
litical capitalism oriented to booty, 
fiscal, colonial, etc., f.rofit oppor-
tunities, 12, 97, 103 ., 104, 138, 
149, 242, (barriers to) 199, 227, 
244, (beginnings of) 231, 238, 
(booty) 86, 104, (bureaucracy 
and law) 103, 150, (industrial) 
151, (petty capitalism of the Mid-
dle Ages) 20, 100, (political) 
85f., 238, (rational) 85, 104, 247, 
(recent) 83 
Capping ceremony, 24 
Caravan trade, 97 
Carlvlc 239 
Ca:t~ls ' (of princes) 162, (capitalist) 
62 
Caste: an Indian statvs group whose 
way of life is not only legally and 
conventionally but also ritually 
sanctioned, 17, 98 
Castration, 168 
Casuistry: technology of deal.ing with 
moral and/or ].,gal questions from 
case to case 
Catholicism, 128, 212, 214f., 258, 
260, 290, (papal Curia) 102 
Cattle, 64, 271 
Cesaro Papism: defined 30, llOf., 
142 
Chang Ling, 193 
Chang T'icn Shil1, 194 
Chang Yang, 178 
Chariot colllbat, 24f., 33, 37, 42, 158 
Charisma: originally it is conceived 
to be a magklil quality of an 
extraordinary person, leader, ruler 
who daim authority and leader-
ship on its basis. \Vhere leadership 
and grovp cohesion is based on 
the belief of the followers in the 
alleged, presumed, or actual ex-
traordinariness and irreplaceability 
of the leader, Weber speaks of 
charismatic leadership, charismatic 
authority, etc., 30, 190, (and edu-
cation) 108£., ll9f., 135, (virtue 
of dynasty) 140, 141, 164, ( heredi-
tary): the belief in the transfer of 
extraordinary endowments of a 
religious, 
political, 
or military 
lead.or to his descendants. \Veber 
uses also the term "gentile cha-
risma" with relercnce to such fam-
ilies, 3.5, 167, 264 
Charity, 209 
Ch'en She, leader of anny revolt, 45 
Chi, Spirit of Harvest, 21 
Ch'ien Lung, Emperor ( 1736-1799), 
169 

GLOSSARY AND INDEX 
Ch'ien-shui-fa system: commutation 
of taxes in kind and servitudes 
into money taxes, 76 
Ch'in, state of, 38, 42, 70, 280 
Ch'in dynasty, 72, 263£. 
Chinese traits (acquisitiveness 55, 
243, (apolitical masses) VH, 137, 
(dishonesty) 23lf., 234, 237, (dis-
trust) 237, 244, (industry) 231, 
(int.,rnalizcd bondage of official-
dom) 
5~1, (money mindedness) 
125, 242, (outer not inner directed 
personality) 232, 235, (pacifist 
mentality) 114, 250, (personal-
ism, see below) 209, (thrift) 208, 
230, 245 
Chou dynasty, 22, 32, 35 
Chou Li, 32, 34, 37, 116 
Chrcmatistic: pertuining to the ac-
quisition of wealth, 159 
Christendom, 126, 177, 209, (and 
T'ai P'ing) 219f., 222, 225, (mis-
sionary) 219, 229, 295 
Christianity (persecution of) 218£. 
Chronomantics: magical belief and 
practice oriented to "fortunate" 
and 
"unfortunate" 
hours 
and 
times, 196If. 
Chthonian: in or under the earth, 
( chthonian 
mythologies) 
26, 
( ehthonian culL~) 2.5, 27 
Chuang-tzu, 167, 178, 189, 190, 205 
Chu Fu-tzu, atheist materialist, 12th 
century, 23, 145 
Chu-fu-Yen, 46 
Chu hou, the princes, 35 
Chu Hsi, author of the Chung Lun, 
1G6 
Chiin tzu, gentleman, 24, 25, 46, 
131ff., 183£., 228, 244 
City: a dense settlement of a large 
number of households without 
mutual acquaintance of the inhab-
itants, Regular exchange of goods 
in a local market is essential for 
their economic life, 13ff., 16 
Cleisthencs, 14 
Club associations (hui) 99, 293 
Cumpag1U/. Communis of Genoa, 14 
Competition (among officials) 59, 
151, (among philosophical schools) 
165, (interstate) 41, 61£., 103 
Concubines, 1.62, see 'Women and 
Harem 
Confucianism (iu chiao) 29, 144, 
152If., 167£., 213, (cardinal vir-
tues of) 190, 228, (equality of 
men) 146, (ethics) 227, 236, 
(functions of) 235, (religious in-
difference) 146, 156, (spirit of) 
203, (and traditionalism) 200 
Confucians (and magic) 194, 200f., 
(typical life orientation) 247, ( vs. 
\Vang An-shih) 77 
Confucius ( 551-478 n.c.) 28, 46, 25, 
112, 113If., 143, 154ff,, 161£., 163, 
168, 
169, 
(canonization) 
174, 
(and Lao-tzu) 184, 189£., 207 
Coniuratio, H, 
Copper, 3ft. 
Corporal punislunent, see Sanctions 
Cortcgiano, courtier, 131 
Corvec: servitudes, taxes in the form 
of forced labor (see below) 38, 
51ff., 73 
Cosmogony: speculation about the 
origin of the world, 154, 199£, 
Cromwell, 147, 221, 222 
Dalai Larna: Pontiff of Lamaism, 
resident in Lhasa, Tibet, since the 
sixteenth century, 45 
De Groot, 165, 189, 197, 213, 217 
Deities, 29, 115, 143, 174f., 177, 
196, 201, 204, 214, 217, 259 
Democracy, 96 
D'Este, Renate, 241 
Dcutcro Isaiah, 21 
Dhanna: legal and moral rules regu-
lating the way of life of Hindu 
castes in India. Each caste has its 
special dharma, 152 
Dies fasti et nefasti: religiously sanc-
tioned days for legal and public 
business in Rome, 109, 197 
Discipline, 158 

GLOSSARY AND INDEX 
)) 801 « 
Disenchantnu·nt of the world, 226 
Douceur: tip or bribe, 17 
Economic determinism, 2.5, 61, 196, 
200£., 224, 237£. 
Ecstasy (apathetic) 181, 206, 283, 
(emotional) 206 
Edicts, 185, (Sacred) 215 
Education, 46, (Chinese) 153, 187, 
206, 228, 230. 246, (in Germany) 
120£., 246, (Hellenic) 122, 246, 
(types of) ll9ff., (Vedic) 108 
Egypt, 3, 16, 20ff., 24£., 37, 51, 88, 
98, 135, 144, 157, 169, 234, 242 
Empathy: to Jeel as the other does, 
186 
Emperor, 25, 30ff., 132, 143, 145, 
147, 1.53, 165, 185, 187, 190, 200, 
211, 212, 262 
Empire (Chinese) 61, 102, 114, 
137, (Holy Roman) 26, (Roman) 
102, 103, 214£. 
England, 51, 63, 137, 211 
Ephebe: a Greek youth entering 
manhood, 122 
Equality, 146 
Eschatology: teaching of last or final 
things for individual or world, 
e.g., judgment day, day of Yahwc, 
millennium, etc., 145 
Esoterics: designed for and under-
stood by sckct circle of initiates, 
(Confucian) 206f. 
Ethics, 31, 204, 236, (acculturated) 
234£., (of capitalist entrepreneur) 
24 7, (Confucian) 229, (Puritan) 
247£., (social) 209 
Eucharist: a consecrated meal of a 
religious community, for instance, 
the Lord's Supper, (tea eucharist) 
220 
Eunuch, 44, 46, l-'38£., 110, 194, 203, 
266, 285f., 291£., (and Taoism) 
HJ5 
Euphoria: state of emotional exalta-
tion, 182 
Europe (the great historical excep-
tion) 61 
Examinations, 282, (candidates) 163, 
(degrees) 
12~1, (economic func-
tion of) 86, 117, (finance of) 134, 
(origin) 116, (popular image of) 
128, 135, (privileges) 117, (Tao-
ist) 202f. 
Exorcist (from Tibet) 214 
Experiment, 1501f. 
Exploitation (magical checks upon) 
83 
Fa'Jst, 229 
Feng-shui, 199, 214, 217, 276, 297 
Fetishism: belief in objects supposed 
to have magical power, 174 
Feudalism: political structure based 
upon grants or land or prebends 
for military and/or administrative 
services; Weber distinguishes ac-
cordingly between two types of 
feudalism, one primarily based on 
fiefs, the other on prebends. The 
latter type is also called "pre-
bendalism," 32, 114, 193 
Feudal vassals, 47, 83, (hero) 24£., 
( hierarchv and fiefs) 37f. 
Fiscalism, 88 
Francke, Otto, 27, 250 
Franklin, Benjamin, 24.4 
Friendship, 162 
Gabelle: salt tax, 54, 268 
Gentes: sibs, (state of U1e Gentes) 
36 
Geomancer: 
practitioner of 
geo-
mancy, i.e., divination by means of 
coutours of mountaim, shapes of 
trees, rivers, etc., 19.5, 198, 199, 
214 
Gilda mercatoria, merchant guild in 
England, 14 
Gold ( i) 4if., 238 
Cracchi, 68 
Great Wall, 26, 51, 2fi6 
Green sprout measure of 1069, 77 
Gmbc, \V., 193, 234 
Guild (of artisans) especially 14ff., 
17ff., (of bankers) ll, 18, (Co-

» 302 « 
GLOSSARY AND lNDEX 
hong guild in Canton) 19, 285, 
( goldbcaters guild of \Venchow) 
17, ( hui-kuan guilds) 18, (kung 
w, locnl craft and rnerchant guild) 
18, 137, 210, (opium guild) 18 
Guru: 
teacher, 
spiritual 
adviser, 
father confessor, 135 
Han dynasty, 208 n.c.-220 A.D., 36, 
45, 53, 59, 116, 131, 164, 169, 
193, 263f., (inscriptions) 167 
Handicraft, 19, 98 
Hanlin Yuan (Academy) 117, 140 
Hansa: Hanseatic Le:;gue, a medi-
eval league of Genrian merchant 
guilds and trading cities, 17£. 
Hrmtgemal, 14. 
Harem, 138, 162, 195, 203, 222, 2S9 
Hart, Sir Hobert, 1835-1911, Admin-
istrator in the Chinese service 
1863-1907, .54 
Heaven, 26, 28f., 153, 166, 174, 193, 
259, 276, 292, (god of) 201, 
(hosts of) 201, (Son of) 31, 128, 
212 
Hellenic man, 228£., 247 
Heresy, 213ff. 
Heroism, 168, 207 
Herolatric belief, hero worship, 229 
Heterodoxy: belief deviating from 
official standard ( Orthodoxv), lle-
retical opinion, HJ9, 213 
-
Heu tun, Emperor, 70 
Hierocracy: priestly rule or inilucnce 
by means of ministering or with-
holding grace, 142, 202, 213 
Homer, 17.5, 20.5 
Honor (feudal) 130, 157, 168, 176, 
(Confucian sense of) 208 
Hoplite: heavily armed footsoldier 
of Greek Antiljuity, 122 
Hsiao (piety) defined 130, 157 
Hsiao Ilsileh schoulbook, 123, 125, 
134 
Hsiung Nu, thr' Huns, 7 
Hsi.i Using, 166 
Hsi.in-tzu, 1.66 
Hui, religious fraternities, 19, 99 
I U, 191 
India, 1 GO, (army) 272, (education) 
Ill, (monasteries) 192, 224, (sib) 
34, (unclean oceupatiom) 98 
Indoctrination, 214 
Intaglio; an incised design on stone 
or the like, depressed below the 
surface of the material so that an 
impression from it yields an image 
in relief 
Intellectuals, 173, 228, 2.30 
Islam, Islamism, 100, 126, 13·1, 156, 
161,212,219,234, 242, (Chinese) 
218, 29·1 
J::pan, 36, 120, 225 
Jen Yc;n, 168 
fesuits, 1~39, 1.54, 221£. 
Judaism, 23f., 113f., 121, 126, 155, 
221, 281, (in China) 218 
K'ang Hsi, Emperor (1662-1722), 
author of the "Sacred Edict," 23, 
145, 195 
K'ang Yu-wei ( .1858-1927 ), reformer 
Kohkr, J. F., 101 
Kshatriya ( Inrlia) Ill 
Kuan Chung, 190 
Kuang \Vu, Emperor, 117 
Kublai Khan, 10 
Kuci, evil ( 1Htmlf1Il) spirits, 28, 131 
Labor (apprentice) 98, (class) 98, 
(forced) 5, .5lf., 71, 74, 216, 220, 
238, 269, ( l•andicraft) 83, 90, 217, 
(sib and tribal crafts) 17, 19, 
(despised skills) 98, 116, (market 
selection of) 95 
Lamaism, 217, 218 
Land 
(distribution) 
72ff., 
147, 
( holrlings) 71, 74, (IarHllorrlisrn) 
64£., 73, 81ff., 86, 272, 274f., 
(obligatory 
tillage) 
71, 
(pre-
bends) 36, (reclamation) 52, 269, 
(registration) 80, 267 
Landlordism, 85f., 89 
Language, 1231f., (and script) 279, 
(and speech) 127, 246 

GLOSSARY AND 1:\'DEX 
» 303 (( 
Lao-tzu, 1.55, 162, 177, 178f., l8lff., 
I9lf., 201, 204 
Law (fa) 16, 17, (and c-apitalism) 
1.50, (codification) 80, l01, ( irra-
tionality of Chinese) 169, ( natu-
ral) 149, 210, (Roman) 81, (of 
real property ) 80 
Legge, Jam<es, 124 
Leonardo, 151 
Levelling tendency, 83 
Lex agraria of Antiquity ( Ill B.C. ) : 
Roman agrarian law opening the 
ager puhlic11s for private appropri-
ation and investment, 73 
Libertv, 147 
Li Chf, 116, 212 
Li Hung-chang, 132, 268, 270 
Li Pang, founder of !Ian dynasty, 45 
Li Ssu, migrant scholar-statesman, 
legalist, dlief adviser to Shi Huang 
Ti; 164, 266 
Literati, 41, 41, 68, 107ff., 178, 194 
Literature, 95, 107f., 114, 123ff., 
164, (poetry) 52, 75, 132, 212, 
(popular elrama) 135, 159 
Liturgical closure of occupations: 
barring entrance into occupational 
groups and holding them respon-
sible for public services and/or 
financial contributions, 98 
Liturgy: 
public 
expenditure 
de-
frayed by wealthy citizens out of 
their private fortunes. \.Y eber clas-
sifies 
states 
according 
as 
to 
whether state finance is based 
uRon tax colle;;tion or liturgies, 
(liturgy state) i4f. 
Lung-hua sect, 223 
Lu Ssu, 194 
Lu, state of, 161 
Machiavellism, 41 
Macrobiotics: striving for long life 
by magical means, 181, 19lf., 196, 
204 
Magic, defined, 185, 191£., 204, 260f., 
(image of the world) l96ff., (and 
Puritanism) 226f., 
(reality of) 
155, (of script) 13.5, (and tradi-
tion) 240 
Maneltcsterism, laissez faire individ-
ualism, 188 
~vfanchu (dynasty) 11, 54, 7lf., 141, 
152, 194, 195, (garrison) 273£., 
(officials) 267, 281 
!1-Iandarin, Chinese official, ·19f., 116, 
135, 198 
lvfantic: of or pertaining to divina-
tion, 21.7 
!viarco Polo, 10 
Massa perditionis: the mass of the 
lost ones (or condemned) 23U 
i\fasscs (religious needs of) 173, 
202, 204, 208, 217, 229, 230, 235 
1\·fatriarehy, 24 
;\h Tuan-lin, 
thirteenth 
cent11ry 
scholar who compiled the '-V en 
Shien T'ung K'ao. This work con-
tains a weti.lth of information on 
government, population data, etc., 
.5, 2.54 
:tvkdicine, 197 
M"ng Tzu, :\•fencius, social philoso-
pher, 20, 52, 115, 124, 156, 184, 
210, 214, 236 
Mercantilism: system of economic 
policies of European despotism 
especially from the sixteenth to the 
eighteenth century 
;\.Icsopotamia, 20, 25, 88 
:tvliddle Healm, 33 
i\-!ilk consumption, 6'1, 271 
Ming dvnasty, 10f., 1-16, 195, 284 
1\Iir: ofd Russian village commune 
based on periodical redistribution 
of land by apportioning it to each 
"soul" not to each household as 
a unit of production, 88 
:'vfjestnitshcstvo: :tvluscovite principle 
of basir1g social nmk upon the 
Czar's grant of military or admin-
istrative office. The Czar compen-
sated the officclJO!der with a fief. 
The nobles thus were made to 
compete for ofRces and court fa-
vors. They failed to develop into 

GLOSSARY AND INDEX 
a cohesive status group with com-
mon interests in the face of the 
autocratic ruler, 36, 116 
Mobility (of intellectuals) 111, (in-
terstate mobility of nobles) 5, 26, 
54, (mental) Il2, (of officials) 
58£., (residential) 89, 100 
Moira, defined, 207, "The Fates, 
Daughters of Necessity," (Plato, 
Republic X) 
Mongols, 7, 10, 26, 52, 68, 114, 217 
Montaigne, 207 
Moscow, 13 
Mo Ti ( f.Iocius) 162, 166, 210 
Mou: one mou equals 733l~ square 
yards; 6.6 mou equal 1 acre, 69 
Music, 28, 123, 145, 151, l89f., 209, 
(musicians) 116 
Mystagoguc: leader of mystery cult, 
215, 223 
Mysteria: medieval religious dramas 
based on Bible, 19 
1Iystery: 
a secret 
religious rite 
( Eleusian) 204, ( I-Ieilenie) 225 
Mysticism, 1791f., 181, 187, 202, 212, 
213, (contemplative) 183, Sulist: 
a system of ;\Iohammedan mysti-
cism. It originated during the 
eighth century, its sywbolic elab-
oration inspired poetry; ecstasy 
and contemplation served the end 
of gaining union with and insight 
into the Divine Being, 212 
Mythras mysterk•s, 225 
Nadjel; the right of each "soul" to 
his share in the Russian village 
land, 71, 272 
Narses, 140 
Negro Empires, 33 
Notables, 83 
Officials, officialdom, 47ff., .50, 1.'38, 
268, (age of) 37, (charisma of) 
32, 101, 128, (cliques within lJier-
archy) 
59, 
(competition) 
59, 
(and education) 122, (insecurity 
of individual officials) 58£., 210, 
(levelling function of) 83, (low 
density) 134, 267, (mobility of) 
48£., 59, (prestige of) 101, (privi-
leges of) 129, (salary of) 12, 56ff., 
158, (unofficial aids) 49£., 101 
Oikos: organization of specialized 
unfree labor in large domtJstic 
workshops of Lords. Production 
for private and/or political needs 
of Lords, 53, 97 
Old age, 135, 178 
Or~:,riasticism: 
pursuit 
of 
ecstasy 
through intoxicants, dance, music, 
etc., 27£., 230, 232, (and Con-
fucianism) 209 
Orpl1ie; pertaining to Orpheus or the 
mysteries, or secret rites of the 
Dionysus cult aBcrihed to Orpheus, 
224, 225, 229 
Ossification, 61 
Pacifism, Pacification, 25, 61, 103, 
114, 169, (of literati) 140 
P'an Ku (god of Heaven) 193 
Pao Chi, 70 
Paradigm: A model or pattern, 113 
Paradox of unintended consequences, 
238 
Patriarchialism: Hereditary domestic 
authority of the family head who 
demand~ personal obedience from 
the group members in the name 
of sacred traditions, 32, .'37, 264, 
(and landlordism) 82 
Patrimonialism: Type vf traditional 
authority. Patriarchical rnle imple-
mented with an administrative 
staff, 45, 47, 56ff., 61, 133, 136, 
137, 138, 164, 176, 213, (and 
ethics) 234 
Peasant, 36, 45, 52, 64£., 83, 162, 
(and Bolshevism) 94, (tradition 
in Spain) 234 
Pennallsm: 
Student rowdyism at 
German universities, 129 
Pentatonic music: is based on a seale 
dividing an octave into five tones. 
The five black keys of the piano, 

GLOSSARY AND INDEX 
e.g., would represent such a scale. 
A Chinese tradition ascribes its 
calcu1tti ve fixation to the third 
millennium B.c., 145 
J>eripety: A change from one state 
of things within a play to its op-
posite (Aristotle, Poetics); a turn-
ing point, 207 
Persecution, 214, 223 
Personalism; Dealing with others and 
with affairs in terms of primary 
group contacts, 20'J, 223, 23!1£. 
Petty bourgeois mass, 12 
Philosophy, 127, 153, 165ff., (Greek) 
175£. 
Piety, filial: Bas!c for belief in patri-
arch.ical domestic authority inter-
nalized during childhood through 
dependence on primary domestic 
group. "Paternal authority and 
filial piety are not primarily based 
upon actual blood ties, however 
nonnal they may be" (Weber, 
:Max, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, 
p. 680), 123, 158, 163£., 167, 212, 
213, 232, 236, 241 
Plato, 122, 160£., 175, 233 
Pneuma: (Greek) term of "spirit," 
especially used in the New Testa-
ment, 1.86 
Police, 21, 91, 93f., 214 
Polis: City state of Antiquity, 13, 
15, 80, 107, 1.52, 175f. 
Pontifcx: (Latin) priest, 132, 142, 
220 
Population, 41, (growth) 54£., ( cen-
sus) 56, 76, (policy) 79f. 
Porcelain, 5, 269 
Pra.efectl praetorio: The two com-
manders of tl1e Imperial guards, 
43 
Praeter legem-contra legem: Because 
of the law-against the law, 88 
Prayer, 142, 286ff. 
Prebend: Right of an officeholder to 
yields from state or church lands 
or from 
other public income. 
Weber terms such officeholders 
"prebendaries." A political social 
system based upon a staff of pre-
bendaries V\.'eber calls "prebendal-
ism," 36, 56, 58, 59, 138, (Bud-
dhist) 195, (goal of apsiration) 
126, (for students) 117, (Taoist) 
195£. 
Priesthood: A special circle of cult 
leaders officiating at regular recur-
rent times at fixed places accord-
ing to definite norms on behalf of 
religious communities worshipping 
God or gods, 142, 177, 194£., 201, 
204 
Property (private) 73f., 80, 147 
Prophecy, 23, llO, 142, 202, 209, 
219, 223, 229f., 235 
Propriety (Li) 114, 127, 156£., 162£., 
183, 228, 234 
Prussian Kulturkampf: 
Bismarck's 
conflict with the catholic church 
in the 1870's 
Puritanism, 16lf., 206, 208, 226, 232, 
238, (inner directed personality) 
240, 244, 247, (one price system) 
99, (trtL~t) 241, 244 
Qui trompe t' on? who cheats whom? 
Adage which according to Bis-
marck characterized trade, 234 
Rational: 1. not magical, 2. logically 
consistent, 3. systematically or-
dered, 4. in agreement with sci-
entific rules of evidence, 30, 240 
Rationalism (bureaucratic) 95, 142£., 
178, 207, (economic) 247f., (limits 
to} 164, (Protestant and Con-
fucian) 226, 24If. 
Rationalization (administrative) 37, 
45f., 6lf., (barriers to) 236f., (and 
bureaucracy) 15lf., (fiscal) 13, 
(of law) 149, 150, (of magic) 
196f., (of popular belief) 144, (in 
science) 150£., (economic) 62, 
(and war) 103£. 

)) 306 « 
GLOSSARY AND INDEX 
Refonns, 60, 68, 134 
Regalia: 
Kingly 
prerogatives, 
5, 
(mining and minting) 51, 65 
Renaissance, 151, 237, 247 
Rcntier mentality, 61 
Repression (Ptuitan and Confucian) 
244 
Revolution, rebellion, 60, 6lf., (T'ai 
P'ing) 2191f., (Western) 14, 62, 
(yellow kerchiefs ) 193 
lUg-Veda, 108 
Ritualism, rites, l07f., 167, 202, 222, 
223, 270, 276 
River control, 20, 64, (Huang Ho) 
206 
Rome, Roman (Empire) 5, 214£., 
(law) 148, 150, (nobility) 36, 
146, 181 
Ruach: The "spirit"; "breast of life"; 
in the Old Testament especially 
in connection with the spirit of 
God, 22 
Salvation (Christian) 21.0, (and Con-
fucianism) 156, 228, (religions) 
224, 227, 229, 233, (and Taoism) 
177f., 185 
Sanctions, 102, 117, 129, 170, 262, 
276, 288f., (caning) 99, 129, 210 
Satrap: Governor of a satrapy, a 
province of ancient Persia, 48, 56 
Schools, 117, 126, 129£. 
Secret and secret society, 86, 133, 
195 
Sects, 218£., 22.3f. 
Self-government, 16f., 91, 95 
Serfdom, 66f. 
Sexagenarios de ponte: Roman elders, 
rule of elders, 112 
Shang Ti, Emperor, 70 
Shang Ti., spirit of Heaven, 22 
Shang Yang, schohr statesman, 41£., 
70, 280 . 
She, spirit of fertile soil, 21 
She-chi, dual god of the peasantry, 
21£. 
Shen, good (useful) spirits, 28, 131 
Shen Tsung, Emperor, 70 
Shih Ching (hyrnn book) 81, US, 
163, 220, 231 
Shih Huang Ti: Born 259 n.c., Unifier 
of China, called himself "The First 
Emperor." He crushed feudalism 
and established a new model state, 
'!, 36, 44, 45, 51, 54, 64, 65, 67, 
68, 71, 73, 139, 164, 167, 169, 
178, 179, 191, 196, 197,204, 266f. 
Shu Ching, 35, 157, 165, 190 
Shun, Emperor, ] 14 
Sib, 17, 33, 71, 86ff., 277, (cohesion) 
71, S8f., 242, (elders) 89, ( emer-
gence of) 272, (and education) 
129f., (feuds) 89, (Indian) 34, 
(holdings) 82, (leadership) 193, 
(noble) 
146, 
(old age) 
135, 
(property) 89, (sanctions) 88 
Silk, 5, 37, 71, 72, 97, 269 
Silver, 3ff., 18 
Sin, 228f., 235 
Slavery, 98, 218 
Socialism, 71, 211£., 295 
Son of Heaven, see Heaven 
Sophrosyne: Good sense resulting 
from intelleclual discipline and 
self control, 233 
Sorcerer, 30, 108, 119, 203 
Sordida munera (sordid labor) 129 
Soteriology: Heligious teaching of 
salvation and a redeemer, 177, 
223, 225 
Specialization, 138, 160 
Squeeze, 83 
Ssu-ma Ch'ien ( 145-85 B.C.), Con-
fucian historian, 28, 163, l86ff., 
194, 237, 285 
Status group: Comprises people en-
joyin~ the same amount of the 
same kind of deference, respect, or 
prestige. This prestige position 
may rest on differences in political 
or sacerdotal power, education, 
wealth, military function, etc., 
(feudal) 34, (levelling) 44, ( re-
ligion) 208, (stratification) 99, 
Il7, 119, 129, 137, 146 

GLOSSARY AND INDEX 
» 307 « 
Stoicism (Chinese) 41, (Confucian) 
14lJ, 207, (Roman) 176f. 
Successorship, 44, 114, 262 
Suicide, 88, HO, 169£., 208, 210, 276 
Sultanism: Exh·emc form of Patri-
monialism, maximizing autocratic 
absolutism of the ruler, hacked by 
bodyguard, aided by upstart fa-
vorites ( cun11chs) 44, 138, 195 
Sung dynasty, 59, 70, 76 
Sung K'ellg, 166 
Su \Ven, 198 
Synoecisrn: Process of settling in a 
city. The Hellenic term refers to 
the founding of cities by noble 
families, 3 
Tacitus, 176 
Tael: A Chinese money of account 
T'ai P'ing rehtollions, 11, 19, 27, 54, 
19.'3, 219ff., 2~)4 
Tang dynasty ( 618 A.n.-904 A.D.), 
65, 73, ll6, 117 
Tau, Taoism, Taoists, defined, 181/2; 
8, 27f., 46, 142, 152, 155, 167, 
181f., 185, 187, 190, 192, 1941f., 
200H., 217, 228 
Tao Mo, 140 
Tao-shih, I92f. 
Tao Teh Ching, 180, 185, 188, 190, 
290f. 
Taxes, 47, .5!, 64, 269£., ( collectiDn 
of} "234, (joint liability) 68, (and 
land measurement) 68f., (land 
tax) 53, 56, 79, 27 4, (systems of) 
69£., (tax farming) 85 
Tea, 5, 97, 220 
Temples, 22, 92£., 194 
Thatm1aturgist: A miracle worker, a 
magician, 195 
Theatre, 18, 19, 159 
Theocracy: Government of a state 
by experts in divinity 
Theodicy, 206 
T'ien Wang, 219 
Tolstoy, 96 
Totemism, 258, 272 
Traders, 196, 234 
Traditionalism, 49, 95, 138, (and 
literature) 164, 205, (and mone-
tmy reform) 6, (and money econ-
omy) 60£., 83, (and patrimonial 
state) 61, 100 
Tsni slmi, HJ7 
Tz'u Hsi, Empress-Dowager, (?-
1908 ), 1-'32, 140, 194, 203, 261£., 
296 
Tzu Ssu, 189, 190 
Utilitadanism, 187, 24lf. 
Vanaprastha: Bralunanic hermit, 178 
Village, 91, (commons) 65, (elders) 
87 
Virgin :\·Iollwr, 222 
\Vang An-shih, scholar and states-
man ( 1021 A.o.-1085 A.D.), 47, 
70, 77, 93, 136f., 138, 154, 266 
Wang Ch'ung, seholar (first century 
A.D.), (conception of god) 22, 
111£. 
\Vang Mang, Regent and Emperor 
from I A.D.-23 A.D., 7, 65, 140 
vVar dance, 27, 12.'3 
Warfare, 24f., 37, 40£., 103, 140, 
(and finance) 68, 136, 138, (and 
rationalization) 61£., Ill, see army 
Warring States, 43, 62, 107, 125, 
152, 165, 190, 238, 265 
\:Vealth, 53, 147, 158f., 167, 196, 204, 
213, 237, 238, 246, (god of) 242 
Wei dynasty, 80 
\Vci, c,~neral, 193 
Wei Yang, 41 
Well system, 72, 272f. 
Wen Ti, Emperor, 7, 138 
Wesley, John, 245 
White Lotos, 19,5 
Women, 89, 162, 203, 224, 296, 
( magieians) 
197, 
(under T'ai 
P'ing) 220, 221, (widows) 89 
Work discipline, 95 
Wrath (ch'i) 168,233,240 
Wu Ko-tu, 140 

GLOSSARY AND INDEX 
Wu Ti, Emperor, 4, 46 
Wu Tsung, Emperor, 159 
Wu-wei, defined, 180Jf. 
Yahwe, 23, 27, 155, 260 
Yamen: Board, council, committee, 
48,59 
Yang Chu, 166 
Yao, Emperor, 114 
Yin and Yang, 29, 131, 162, 202 
Yii, Emperor, 51, 114 
Yii min (stupid people) 146 
Yuan Ti, 7 
Zarlino, Giosclfo ( 1517-1590) Ital-
ian musical theorist, musician and 
composer, 151 
Zeus Erkeios, 14, 22 

