Gavin F. Redelman, RedStarResume
The Ultimate Australian Job Search
Handbook
Download free books at

2 
 
RedStarResume
The Ultimate Australian Job Search 
Handbook
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

3 
 
The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
1st Edition
© 2013 RedStarResume & bookboon.com
ISBN 978-87-403-0359-9
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
4 
Contents
Contents
	
Introduction	
7
1	
Australian Resume Writing 	
8
1.1	
The Australian Resume:	
8
1.2	
Strategic Keywords, Achievements & Presentation:	
8
1.3	
100 Powerful Resume Words:	
10
1.4	
Spelling & Grammar Mistakes On Your Australian Resume:	
10
1.5	
Top 10 Resume Writing Blunders:	
11
1.6	
Qualifications Profile:	
14
1.7	
Should I Include Hobbies On My Resume?	
16
1.8	
How Many Years Of Work Experience Should I Include?	
16
1.9	
Do References Belong On An Australian Resume:	
17
2	
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia	
19
2.1	
Job Seeking Is A Full Time Job:	
19
2.2	
Job Search Tactics – What Else Can I Do?	
20
2.3	
The Importance Of Having A Professional Email Address:	
22
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
5 
Contents
2.4	
Your Online Profile: 	
25
2.5	
Advantages & Benefits Of Creating A LinkedIn Profile:	
26
2.6	
Your Facebook Account:	
28
2.7	
Set Realistic Job Expectations:	
29
2.8	
Dressing For The Job Interview:	
30
2.9	
Staying Positive While Looking For A New Job:	
32
2.10	
Listing Salary Requirements:	
34
2.11	
Switching Up Your Job Seeking Tactics:	
35
2.12	
Finding A Job Without Local Experience:	
37
2.13	
Selecting The Best Job Recruitment Agent:	
38
3	
Job Interviewing	
40
3.1	
Job Interview Preparation	
40
3.2	
Making The Best First Impression:	
41
3.3	
The Telephone Interview:	
42
3.4	
Job Interview Killers:	
44
3.5	
Traditional Job Interview Questions Part 1:	
45
3.6	
Traditional Job Interview Questions Part 2:	
49
3.7	
Ice Breaking Job Interview Questions:	
52
3.8	
Open Ended & Closed Ended Interview Questions:	
53
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
6 
Contents
3.9	
Behaviour Job Interview Questions:	
53
3.10	
50 Popular Behaviour Job Interview Questions:	
56
3.11	
Situational Job Interview Questions:	
58
3.12	
Employer Interview Questions:	
60
3.13	
Questions You Can Ask In The Job Interview:	
61
3.14	
Following Up After The Job Interview:	
64
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
We will turn your CV into 
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Send us your CV on
www.employerforlife.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
7 
Introduction
Introduction
FIND A JOB IN AUSTRALIA!
Are you currently seeking a job in Australia? 
Are you a highly skilled migrant or an international student looking to find employment opportunities 
in Australia? Or perhaps you’re an Australian job seeker trying to find a new job?
No matter who you are, if you require a job in Australia this EBook is for you!
The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook will give you all the tips that you require to find job 
success in Australia.
Every job market from around the world is unique, and the Australian job market is no different. In 
order to find a job in Australia you need to properly prepare yourself for the entire job process. This 
includes preparing an “Aussie” resume (that targets Australian hiring managers and recruitment agents), 
establishing your job searching strategies and acing the job interview. This EBook will also help you with 
every stage of the job interview process including preparing for common interview questions, how to 
answer those tough interview questions, preparing for phone interviews and even how to dress on the 
day of your big interview in order to create that first impression.
The purchase of the EBook is your first step to finding your dream job in Australia.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
8 
Australian Resume Writing
1	 Australian Resume Writing 
1.1	
The Australian Resume:
A well written and properly presented Australian resume can be your ticket to finding an Australian 
job. The Australian job market is different to job markets around the world and it is important that your 
resume is presented in the “Australian way”
• Responsibilities, achievements and duties need to be written clearly and backed up with 
supporting evidence. If these are not present, it is assumed you do not have any experience 
at all
• Use British English ONLY in your Australian Resume – words such as “specialise” and 
“realise” need to be spelled with an “s” not a “z”
• Ensure you tailor EVERY application to suit the job for which you are applying. If you 
are going to stand out from the crowd, you have to make sure that your application is 
outstanding
• No picture is necessary on your Australian Resume
• Do not include personal information such as marital status, date of birth, number of 
children, occupation of spouse, gender, religious affiliation, colour or race on your resume. It 
is true that in certain countries (South Africa, for example) personal information is included 
and is required, however it is not necessary or needed on your Australian Resume
• Spend as much time as possible ensuring you address EXACTLY what the Australian 
employer wants. For example, if the job advertisement lists certain duties for the job, make 
sure you incorporate these duties into your current resume. If the job requires excellent 
customer service skills, provide examples about how you have provided excellent customer 
service
1.2	
Strategic Keywords, Achievements & Presentation:
Strategic Keywords
Using strategic keywords throughout your resume is imperative for a number of reasons. Recent reports 
suggest 80% of companies use some kind of software or scanning program to search for candidate resumes. 
In today’s society it is no longer good enough to target your job toward the role you are applying for – 
you also need to target your resume toward software programs that are now performing first rounds 
of candidate selections. In this technological world where applying for a job can literally take a couple 
of clicks of a button, hiring managers are seeing hundreds of resumes (sometimes thousands) for one 
particular job. As much as we would like a hiring manager or recruiter to read through our entire resume, 
this rarely happens. As such, using strategic keywords will help your resume rank higher and ensure that 
it passes the first test of being read by either a recruiter or hiring manager.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
9 
Australian Resume Writing
Highlight Your Achievements
Resume writing and job seeking has changed a lot over the past couple of years. With new online 
networking sites such as LinkedIn being available and making it easier for a job seeker to network with 
a potential boss, highlighting your achievements on your resume and cover letter is more important 
than ever. When a boss or hiring manger decides to employ a new person to their staff, the first thing 
they want to know is how this person is going to add value to their organisation. Including basic duties 
and responsibilities is not enough to make you stand out as the perfect person for the job. You need to 
prove that you are the best person by highlighting your skills and achievements. 
1.2.1	
What Types of Achievements should you include in your resume?
Employers want to know the value you are going to add to the business and therefore want to see examples 
of your past behaviours to indicate your future behaviours. 
Types of achievements to include are:
• Ways you saved the company money
• Examples of how you reduced costs
• Examples of new ideas or implementations that resulted in positive outcomes
• Special awards or recognitions you received (e.g. voted #1 salesperson for two consecutive 
years)
• Training, hiring, mentoring, leading, managing staff
• Resolution of problems or issues that led to a positive outcome
• Training courses, seminars, workshops that you successfully completed
Presentation & Format
Your resume is the first impression a hiring manager will make about you. A well-presented and structured 
resume that is written in a clean font will portray your resume in a professional manner and immediately 
give your resume application a higher ranking. Alternatively, a resume application that has spelling and 
grammar errors, different sized fonts, long sentences (as opposed to bullet points) and a lack of headings 
will not portray a positive image to the reader, and you won’t look like the right person for the job. A 
lack of professionalism may even lead to your resume being deleted without even being read. No matter 
how good your skills and experience may be, once your resume is deleted, it will never be read again.
In order to prepare the perfect resume follow these three main ingredients. Take time to prepare your 
resume and ensure that you give yourself every opportunity to succeed!
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
10 
Australian Resume Writing
1.3	
100 Powerful Resume Words:
Your Australian resume is the most important document you have to get yourself an interview. Including 
power resume words will increase your chance of getting hired by 80%! When a hiring manager is seeing 
the same old resume time and time again which includes the cliché words and phrases such as “highly 
dedicated individual” or “great team player” you are guaranteeing yourself that your resume will be deleted.
Poorly chosen words and clichéd phrases can destroy the interest of the reader. Power words when chosen 
correctly can have the opposite effect of motivating and inspiring the reader 
Power Resume Words will make help you stand out from your competition and increase your chances 
of getting hired!
100 Power Resume Words!
Advanced, Assigned, Assessed, Absorbed, Accelerated, Attained, Attracted, Announced, Appraised, 
Budgeted, Bolstered, Balanced, Boosted, Bargained, Benefited, Beneficial, comply, Critiqued, Closed, 
Collaborated, Designed, Delegated, Demonstrated, Developed, Detected, Efficient, Enhanced, Excelled, 
Exceeded, Enriched, Fulfilled, Financed, Forecasted, Formulated, Generated, Guided, Granted, Helped, 
Hosted, Implemented, Investigated, Increased, Initiated, Influenced, Integrated, Innovated, Instituted, 
Justified, Listed, Logged, Maintained, Mentored Measured, Multiplied, Negotiated, Observed, Operated 
Obtained, Promoted, Presented Programmed Provided Projected, Qualified, Quantified, Quoted, 
Recommended, refine, revamp, reacted, Retained, Recovered, Reinstated, Rejected, Sustained, Skilled, 
Saved, Scheduled, Supported, Secured, Simplified, Screened, Segmented, Streamlined, Strengthened, 
Triumphed, Troubleshot, Taught, Tutored, Translated, Trained, Uncovered, United, Unified, Updated, 
Upgraded, Validated, Viewed, Worldwide, Witnessed
1.4	
Spelling & Grammar Mistakes On Your Australian Resume:
It’s common knowledge that spelling and grammar mistakes can be extremely damaging to your resume’s 
chances of landing you a job interview. Everyone seems to be aware of this fact, and this is why they are 
constantly reminded to check and then recheck their resumes.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
11 
Australian Resume Writing
So then why are these mistakes found all the time on resumes? A lot of times, people are reluctant to share 
and have their resumes edited by others, and failing to do so can result in small errors going undetected.
Showing your resume to someone else benefits you in more ways than one. For one, it provides an extra 
pair of eyes to look for any spelling of grammar mistakes. While you may be absolutely positive that there 
are none, especially since you’ve edited it numerous times, it can’t hurt! I can tell you from experience 
that 7 out of the 10 resumes I read contain some sort of spelling error, and I’m willing to bet that most 
of these people did several edits on their resumes.
Have you ever read something so many times that you started memorising and reciting it more than 
actually reading it? This happens a lot with resumes. We get so caught up in what we think it says that 
we sometimes forget how this translates onto paper. I notice a lot of times that people write things like 
“…responsible updating data…” or “…selected represent the company at various trade shows.” If you 
just read that for the first time, you probably noticed that a few words are missing there. Obvious, right? 
Read it a few more times and you might find yourself automatically inserting the missing words. This is 
what happens quite often with people who write and then edit and re-edit their resumes.
Showing your resume to someone else eliminates the chances of this happening as they will be more 
likely to catch small mistakes like these. They can also provide an objective critique on your resume.
While you clearly know more about your past experience than anyone, translating this onto paper for 
a stranger to understand is sometimes very difficult, and the person critiquing it can point out any job 
descriptions that don’t make sense or aren’t very clear.
Overall, having another person or two look at your resume before you send it off can do nothing but 
help you. The job market out there is tough at the moment and you want to give yourself the best chance 
possible – don’t let small errors that you looked over damage your chances of landing an interview.
1.5	
Top 10 Resume Writing Blunders:
Abbreviations
Avoid abbreviations! They are unprofessional and not universally accepted. Trust me; nothing looks 
worse on a resume than seeing sentences resembling the following: “duties included answering the 
fone and going 2 c clients.” This is a resume, not a text message or a twitter post. Make sure you use 
correct words and proper sentences. First impressions count, make sure your first impression is a 
professional one.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
12 
Australian Resume Writing
Personal Information
Your resume is a professional document as opposed to a facebook profile. Leave off anything related to 
hobbies or personal interests. If it doesn’t relate to employment it doesn’t belong on a resume. Information 
such as weight and height is irrelevant (unless of course you’re trying out for basketball team). I have 
seen resumes where people include their eye colour and comments about their skin (“glowing skin”). 
Do not give the reader a reason to eliminate you because of your personal characteristics. Again, stick 
to the formula – if it does not relate to the job it doesn’t belong on the resume.
Graphics / Artwork
Graduates often feel that in order to be noticed they need their resume to look like a piece of artwork. 
This perception is wrong and actually can have the opposite effect of appearing unprofessional and 
amateur. At the end of the day, the employer only wants to see skills, duties, and achievements. He or 
she is not interested because your resume is shaded yellow with a butterfly in the top right-hand corner.
Negativity
Never, never, never be negative on your resume or cover letter (and most importantly, in your interview). 
If you left your previous job because you hated your boss, keep it to yourself. Do not try to explain this 
on your resume because you cannot explain those reasons in writing. Remember, a resume’s job is to 
promote and sell. Do not get eliminated immediately for being negative.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
AXA Global 
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
13 
Australian Resume Writing
No Dates
DO NOT MAKE THE READER HAVE TO GUESS! This is such a killer on any resume. INCLUDE 
DATES. What years did you go to high school? How long did you go to university? When did you 
graduate? How long did you work at your current job?
Do not make the person reading your resume have to ask these questions. The minute this happens, your 
resume is going to one place – the trash bin! Make sure your resume flows and you have no gaps in your 
dates. If you took a year off to go travelling, include this. When you include dates DO NOT just include 
years. For example, “I worked at McDonalds from 2006–2008” – what does this mean? Did you work for 
3 years (January 2006 to December 2008), or for a little over 1 year (December 2006 to January 2008)
Long-Winded
Long long long long long resumes are boring!!!! If an employer sees an extremely long resume, they will 
immediately develop a negative frame of mind. Remember, resume readers tend to have little patience, 
especially considering that most graduate recruiters or employers can receive in excess of 100, 200 
even 500 resumes for one particular job. You do not gain extra brownie points for writing the longest 
resume – enough said!
No Achievements
I never understand how people get this wrong, but so many times people fill up their resumes with 
irrelevant information, and they leave off the most vital part of a resume – showing off your highlights 
and achievements. Think about it – most people who apply for the same job can all do the standard 
day to day duties. So what separates the good resume from the bad resume? It’s the one that includes 
achievements and highlights. It includes how they were an asset at their previous job. Employers want to 
see not that you just worked and did a good job, but that you added value to the company. Leaving off 
your achievements is the best way to get your resume tossed in the bin. Alternatively, including value-
added achievements is the best way to get your resume put on the top of the list and ensures that you 
resume application will stand out from your competition.
Unrelated Information
Everyone is proud of achievements they have accomplished throughout their life. Finishing second 
place in the 100 metre sprint final in my first year of high school was a great thrill, but is it relevant on 
my resume. Use common sense when including “extra information.” Receiving your CPR certificate is 
relevant when you’re applying for a job that requires this, such as a lifesaver or swimming instructor. It 
isn’t so relevant if you received your CPR certificate 10 years ago, and now you’re going for a job in a 
corporate environment.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
14 
Australian Resume Writing
Spelling Errors
People read this point and think, “Obviously my resume isn’t going to have spelling mistakes and typos.” I 
can tell you from experience that 1 in 5 resumes will make this vital mistake. When an employer has 100 
resumes, the first 20 are eliminated because of grammar mistakes or typos. These mistakes are glaringly 
obvious on a resume. Make sure you use spell-check, but more importantly, re-read your resume. Even 
give it to someone else to read over.
Trying to Sound “Too Clever”
You may think that using words such as “meticulous,” “scrupulous” or “industrious” to describe 
yourself may make you sound smart, unfortunately they can have the opposite effect. Your resume is a 
representation of you. Hiring managers were not born yesterday – Don’t forget this!
1.6	
Qualifications Profile:
Replacing the Objective Statement with a Qualifications Profile
Does your current resume begin with a generic objective statement telling the reader what type of jobs 
you are looking for? Let me guess that it reads something similar to this:
“I am seeking the opportunity to expand my skills, knowledge and experience in a challenging professional 
environment. I am honest, reliable, eager to learn and open to tackling a range of tasks. I am a strong and 
empathetic team player and always complete tasks to a high degree of quality and to deadlines”
If this is how your resume begins, it’s time to make changes. In the competitive job environment where 
hiring managers may receive upwards of 500 applications for a single position, an objective statement is 
more likely going to lead to your resume being deleted. From a hiring manager’s perspective, they are 
not interested in a non-specific, all-purpose statement that adds no value to the resume and provides 
them with no reason to want to hire you. You may have the best skills and be the perfect fit for the job 
however, you may never get this opportunity because your resume has already been deleted. 
1.6.1	
What is a Qualifications Profile?
A great way to introduce yourself on your resume is by creating a qualifications summary or career 
summary. Rather than telling the reader you are seeking an opportunity to expand your skills, rather 
promote what skills you actually can bring to this specific role. A targeted resume including a targeted 
profile will encourage the reader to continue reading the resume as opposed to pressing the delete button. 
For example, if you are applying for an IT job that requires programming skills, list you’re programming 
skills within your introductory profile. That way, the reader will straight away be interested to read on 
as they know that you have skills that are required for this position. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
15 
Australian Resume Writing
1.6.2	
How long should my Qualifications Profile be?
The last thing you want to do is turn your qualifications profile into an essay! Statistically, a hiring 
manager will only spend between 15 to 20 seconds when initially reading your resume. If they open 
your resume and see a half page profile they are more likely to be turned off as they won’t be bothered 
to read all this information. A well written profile should be no longer than 2–4 sentences. It needs to 
be targeted and present value. 
1.6.3	
Final Thought:
When you begin to write your new resume, don’t forget the number one rule. Your resume is a marketing 
document. The more you can showcase your skills and achievements the greater chance you will have 
of being selected for the interview stage. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
ibili
because 
e Graduate Programme  
for Engineers and Geoscientists
Month 16
I was a construction
supervisor in 
the North Sea 
advising and 
helping foremen 
solve problems
I was a
he
s
Real work 
International opportunities 

ree work placements
al 
Internationa
or

ree wo
I wanted real responsibili 
 I joined MITAS because 
www.discovermitas.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
16 
Australian Resume Writing
1.7	
Should I Include Hobbies On My Resume?
I frequently come across resumes that include a section for “hobbies and interests” or something similar. 
Many people think it’s necessary to include something like this, however I can assure you that it’s probably 
best to avoid doing so. There is a limited amount of space for content on your resume and just a small 
amount of time for the reader to look over your information. That being said, you should use it strictly 
to highlight your professional qualifications and achievements, not your personal hobbies and interests.
Hiring managers are looking to see how you can specifically help them and their companies, not whether 
you enjoy skiing or bike riding. This sort of information is often times seen as “fluff” – in other words, 
irrelevant information that is used solely to take up space on a resume to make it seem longer. If you’re 
concerned about your resume looking too short, there are lots of ways to increase the content without 
having to lists your hobbies and interests. Think about substituting them for something more work-related, 
like a section for your professional qualifications or computer-related skills. Or maybe try adding some 
achievements onto your professional experience section.
While I feel I make a strong point against listing these on your resume, people are always going to be 
adamant about using them. So, if you absolutely must include your hobbies and interests, try to at least 
make them pertain to the job you are applying for. Do any of your hobbies involve using your leadership 
skills, for example? Do they show a pattern of long-term commitment? The most important thing to 
remember is to keep the content on your resume professionally relevant.
1.8	
How Many Years Of Work Experience Should I Include?
I recently came across a resume that listed a summer cashier position in 1976 as part of a person’s 
“professional experience.” While it may seem a little strange or ridiculous to include an irrelevant position 
from nearly 25 years ago, I can tell you that it’s actually not that uncommon to come across something 
like this. A lot of people think that they literally need to include everything they’ve ever been involved 
with on their resumes, and I can assure you that not only do you not have to follow suit, you also don’t 
really need to go back any longer than 10 years.
The main goal of your resume should be to impress the reader with the specific qualifications and 
experiences that make you fit to be hired for a desired position. That being said, the reader is most interested 
in what you have done recently, not in what you did over 10 years ago. The bulk of your resume should be 
devoted to the last few years of your working history – this is what potential employers want to know about.
If you’re like most people, you’ve probably held a number of jobs over time if you include the part-time 
and casual positions. If wrote a little bit about each one of these, your resume would probably near the 
4 page mark on experience alone. Considering it shouldn’t be longer than 2 pages, this is far from ideal.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
17 
Australian Resume Writing
When it comes to listing your professional experiences, stick to the most recent and relevant positions. 
There is no need to include everything, and writing about too much will sometimes blur your positions 
together and detract from your real qualifications. Unless you’ve held the same position for over 10 years, 
there is really no reason to go back any longer than this, and employers don’t even expect to go back that 
far on your resume anyway. If you do have quite an extensive work history of relevant positions, focus 
on the most recent ones and then simply list the earlier positions under a new category for “previous 
or other employment.”
Just remember that there is such a thing as “too much” on a resume. Focus on what the hiring manager 
wants to see, not on how much information you can cram onto it.
1.9	
Do References Belong On An Australian Resume:
I recently had a conversation with a job seeker who told me that she was unable to send out her resume 
because she was waiting on a reference to come back to her. I was shocked to hear this and asked her 
why she was even putting references on her resume in the first place. She told me it was “the standard 
thing to do on a resume”.
A hiring manager wants to know what value you can bring to the business. They are interested in your 
experience and skills, and therefore these are the areas that need to be highlighted. Including referees/
references on your resume is not required. Not only does it take up an unnecessary amount of room 
on your resume, but it also does not add any value to your initial application. All that is required is to 
write the following four words at the very end of your resume:
1.9.1	
“References Available Upon Request”
Employers will NEVER contact referees without speaking to you first. Think about it – why would they? 
Would you bother doing research on a potential candidate without even having a conversation with them 
first? A hiring manager or recruiter sees hundreds of resumes on a daily basis. Do you think they have 
time to start reading through candidates referees and contacting them directly. This will never occur.
Contacting a referee is generally the final stage in the job process. Employers and hiring managers, more 
than anything, rely on their own judgments and will contact your referees as a final step in the process. 
Only at this time will an employer ask you for a list of references to contact.
Great references do help and if the decision is down to two candidates, your choice of references could 
be the extra difference in getting offered the job. Have your references ready and available if they are 
going to be contacted, however first try to focus on presenting all the right information in your resume 
and cover letter. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
18 
Australian Resume Writing
1.9.2	
How the job search process works:
Write a professional resume and cover letter that highlights your achievements, skills and experiences 
to convince the hiring manager that you are the right person for the job:
• Apply for jobs
• Interview stage
• The employer will contact references and perform background checks
• Job offer!
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
mim.admissions@ie.edu
Follow us on IE MIM Experience
www.ie.edu/master-management
#10 WORLDWIDE
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT 
FINANCIAL TIMES
55 Nationalities
in class
5 Specializations
Personalize your program 
Length: 1O MONTHS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
Format: FULL-TIME
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
  THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
  PROFESSIONAL GOALS
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
  EXPERIENCE
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
19 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
2	 Preparing To Find A Job In 
Australia
2.1	
Job Seeking Is A Full Time Job:
A true story… A candidate was applying for a job that he felt was probably beyond him in terms of 
experience and skills, however he figured he’d apply and “hope for the best”. The job application asked for 
a resume and personally written cover letter to be submitted to the hiring manager. When the candidate 
went to send the resume and cover letter he decided that instead of writing the generic “To whom it 
may concern” on the top of his letter, he would call up the company and find out the name of the hiring 
manager. Thus, he began his letter with “Dear Mr. XXXX.”
As insignificant as this seems, the candidate ended up getting the job. Years later this young man 
became the right hand man to the hiring manager who had now become the CEO of the firm. When the 
hiring manager was asked why he had originally employed the boy he said, “He was not the strongest 
academically or experienced candidate, but he was the only person out of 100 candidates who had taken 
the time and effort to find out my name…”
Although gaining employment is subject to many unpredictable factors that are far beyond your control 
(such as employer perceptions, competition and personal choice), there are countless factors that are 
controllable that you may be doing wrong. Remember, your resume only has 10 seconds to make an 
impact. When the hiring manager has 100 resumes on his or her desk and needs to pick the top 5, all 
it takes is the simplest error for your resume to be deleted.
My advice is this: If you’re going to spend time applying for jobs then DO IT PROPERLY. You are not 
going to get an interview by sending out a resume that is written or formatted incorrectly. By doing just 
the smallest things correctly you will find that success is just around the corner.
Is your resume full of clichés? Do you use words such as “hardworking”, “loyal worker” or “enthusiastic”? 
Do you send out the exact same resume for every job? If the answer is yes, then you need to take greater 
effort to differentiate your resume and make it stand out from the crowd. Include your achievements 
with examples. Don’t just write “I am a hardworking individual” as this does not inspire. Rather, explain 
to the reader why you are a hardworking individual. If you’re not inspired by your resume then why is 
a hiring manager going to be inspired?
Your resume is your selling tool. Take a look at it. Are you proud of how it reads? Does it sell your 
strengths, skills and accomplishments? In this tough economic climate you need to go the extra length 
to get an interview.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
20 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Find below 15 reasons why you may be missing out on getting that interview:
• Generic resume
• Resumes that do not inspire
• Clichéd resume
• Your resume does not use key words
• Your resume is formatted incorrectly
• Your resume is not targeted
• You don’t use a cover letter
• Your cover letter is boring/generic/clichéd
• Your resume and cover letter are too embellished
• Your job search is restricted to the Internet/Google/Yahoo
• You are only seeking out the perfect job (Is there such a thing?)
• Spelling mistakes / bad grammar
• Lack of professionalism
• No follow up
• Unqualified / Overqualified (you need to be realistic)
2.2	
Job Search Tactics – What Else Can I Do?
What can you do to be competitive when looking for a new job? Writing a quick resume late at night and 
applying for random jobs is NOT going to get you the job you are looking for. Is there an educational 
or university course being offered which could help you now or in the long term? What skills do you 
have to shine above and beyond other candidates. Make a portfolio of your accomplishments you have 
achieved in your academic or professional life. In the current economic climate employers want to know 
what YOU have to offer them. You need to sell yourself! And sell your success. 
Below are some further ideas and suggestions to find yourself a new job.
Learn new skills: 
It’s never too late to try to learn a foreign language, or a new piece of computer software. (Best example 
was a senior archaeologist of 10 years who came to me wanting to change life direction. After 6 months 
learning Spanish then travelling through Spain for another 6 months, The senior archaeologist is now a 
junior English/Spanish translator.)
Research: 
Find out where the demand is. While many industries are having trouble in this recession and laying 
off employees other areas are increasing employment.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
21 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Sell yourself: 
Take time writing your resume, and tailor your resume specifically to each job you are applying. Do not 
send out the same resume to every job advert you see. Remember if you’re sending out generic resumes 
then you will get the same generic responses.
Use your social network. 
Don’t be embarrassed about looking for work. Tell your friends and family. You never know who may 
be looking at hiring staff with your set of skills.
Use free networking sites to advertise yourself and your skills. 
Promote yourself via sites like LinkedIn: http://www.linkedin.com/
Use a recruitment agency that specialises in your particular area. 
Get to know the recruitment consultant, and follow them up weekly. The more you appear visible, the 
more they will remember you.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
22 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Share with friends:
Brainstorm ideas and share experiences with friends that are also looking for jobs. Exchange advice, 
strategies, and plans.
Act straight away: 
When you get a lead or hear about a job opening apply immediately. There is no need to wait. Prepare 
your resume and send it immediately. The longer you wait the more likely another candidate will apply 
ahead of you.
Don’t let a lack of experience discourage you from applying for jobs: 
When tailoring your resume towards the job you are applying for, concentrate on the skills and abilities 
you have to match that certain job.
Don’t give up – Never stop looking. While you’re searching for your new job is there something else 
in the meantime you could be doing. Do you have skills to freelance? Maybe you can sell goods online. 
Keeping yourself occupied helps you to stay positive and upbeat rather than moping around the house 
feeling sorry for yourself.
2.3	
The Importance Of Having A Professional Email Address:
First impressions are important when it comes to job seeking, and an email address can make quite a 
first impression. Often times, the email address is the first thing a hiring manager sees – before even 
seeing your name! Before you send out your next resume, consider what your email address alone might 
say about you. Do you “appear” professional? 
As most job applications are sent via email these days, your email address alone can play a huge role 
into whether or not your resume is opened. I have heard numerous stories from hiring managers about 
applications getting tossed simply because of someone’s email address. Often times, email addresses 
at face value appear to be spam and are never even opened. Email addresses like “sexykitten0007” or 
“bigmuscles”, for example, might be automatically filtered into a spam folder by an email server because 
of word content. 
The good news is that hiring managers are quite straightforward in what they believe makes up an 
“unprofessional” or unappealing email address. While it may sound harsh that most hiring managers 
critique email addresses, it does happen because they do create a first impression. Below are 7 deadly 
email sins to make sure to stay away from so you don’t end up in the “unprofessional” pile.
Wrong Name: John_smith@….com (when your real name is David Jones).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
23 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Don’t confuse the reader from the start! Is your name John Smith or David Jones? There is no reason to 
have the hiring manager ask this type of question at the start of your resume. 
Fantasy Name: Invisibleman@….com
Are you applying for a job or are you auditioning for a video game?
Creepy Name: collegestrangler@….com
Given the fact that over 80% of companies now run background checks on potential employees, there 
is no reason to give an employer the impression that you may have a criminal record.
Sportsperson: tigerwoods50@….com
This might have been ok when you were in high school, but not in the workplace.
The numbers: 998877665544@….com
Confusing! You are just asking for someone to send an email to the wrong place.
The Crude Name: hairychest@….com
Not a good first impression. Also, many of these email addresses contain words that will usually get 
filtered into the spam folder
Confess love email address: bonjovilover@….com
Again, you are applying for a job, not a role as a groupie.
So…what should you do? Stick to the basics. 
The best email addresses will contain your full or partial name, followed by either characters or numbers. 
Think about how most workplace email addresses are set up – most of them contain a combination of an 
employee’s first and last name. Try to mimic this – a professional email address represents a professional 
job candidate. Don’t give your reader the wrong impression!
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
24 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
“The perfect start 
of a successful, 
international career.”
CLICK HERE 
to discover why both socially 
and academically the University 
of Groningen is one of the best 
places for a student to be 
www.rug.nl/feb/education
Excellent Economics and Business programmes at:

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
25 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
2.4	
Your Online Profile: 
I recently “Googled” my name (It was a slow day in the office!) and found an assortment of results 
come up that I didn’t even realise were out there and visible to the public. Social media sites, registries I 
created, and websites that I’ve registered on and long forgotten about. When it comes to job searching, 
employers are now able to see more about our personal lives than ever before through the internet. This 
can either help or hurt us when it comes to applying for jobs. 
It is said that an estimated 2 out of 5 companies search the online profiles of job candidates. As we use 
more and more social media sites and more tasks are accomplished online, this number is expected to 
grow. It’s important that we be aware of the fact that our co-workers, bosses and hiring managers are 
able to see certain things about us that we might not even realise. To be prepared, you should do a little 
research on your online profile and see which websites, profiles and forums of yours are visible to the 
public. 
You should make sure that the online profile you portray to the public matches the image you want to 
present to potential employers, co-workers and supervisors. There are a couple of things you can do to 
help create the image you want to portray through your online profile. To start, you can review your 
privacy settings on social media sites and limit the types of information that is visible to the public or 
to members of the site you’re not connected to. Many sites now allow you to customise the people that 
can see your posts; however some online forums and web reviews are visible to the public so you should 
be aware of the things you write about that everyone can see. 
This doesn’t mean that you can’t enjoy social media sites to share pictures and stay connected to family 
and friends, but be conscious of what you’re putting out there. It is becoming more and more common 
for individuals to create a personal profile as well as a professional one to categorise what types of 
information are shared with whom. Creating a separate professional account to social media sites, such 
as Facebook for example, can be a good idea and a way for you to maintain a professional image while 
also being able to use these sites for personal enjoyment. It will allow you to share things with family and 
friends without worrying about your boss seeing it on Monday or a hiring manager getting the wrong 
impression of you because he doesn’t know about your sarcastic sense of humor or an inside joke you 
have going with your friends. 
On the other hand, your online profile can enhance your chances at a job if it demonstrates the skills and 
experiences you have that are related to the jobs you’re applying for. For example, if you’re applying for 
a position as a web developer and your blog page is innovative and dynamic, this may show employers 
that you have what it takes. In any case, you should make your online profile what you want it to be and 
not what happens to pop up about you. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
26 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
2.5	
Advantages & Benefits Of Creating A LinkedIn Profile:
The advent of Internet has opened new avenues for people to build and sustain professional and business 
relationships. LinkedIn is one such communication channel that facilitates a robust and authentic pool 
of talent. By employing LinkedIn profile writing services, professionals and businesses can support their 
claims in the most effectual manner. Still wondering why you should become a part of LinkedIn? Read on! 
LinkedIn was created with the sole objective of promoting talents, skills, and products to millions of 
people around the globe. When you sign up for a LinkedIn profile, you become an exclusive part of 
a community that includes companies, recruiters, vendors, customers, and competitors. What makes 
LinkedIn unique and attractive to people is the fact that it fulfills their professional objectives, unlike 
other social networking sites where entertainment is the key focus. Here are some of those unique benefits 
that make LinkedIn worth every effort. 
2.5.1	
Gain Visibility for Unique Professional & Business Opportunities: 
LinkedIn offers a search engine. When recruiters or companies are searching for specific talent to fill 
their vacant positions or when people are searching for specific products and services, LinkedIn search 
engine permits your profile to be populated. You can gain and enhance your profile’s visibility, making 
it readily accessible to the targeted audiences by optimizing it with appropriate usage of keywords. It is 
recommended that you examine the keywords before constructing your profile. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
27 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
2.5.2	
Build Professional & Business Relationships: 
The chief objective of marketing platforms like LinkedIn is to make connections. Through such podiums 
you gain the opportunity to meet the right companies or individuals that aptly fit with your set of 
business or professional requirements. Connecting with significant people in your industry strengthens 
your credibility and consolidates the position of your business. 
Furthermore, recommendations play a vital role in improving your profile and its visibility. The more 
recommendations you’re able to gather, the more appealing and credible your profile appears. It works 
like an endorsement for your skills, products, services or company and increases your trustworthiness. 
Recruiters or customers always prefer candidates, services or products that have been approved by others. 
So, always request your clients or colleagues to leave reviews on your profile.
2.5.3	
Identify Business and Job Trends:
LinkedIn tools are highly effective in identifying new business trends and job opportunities in your 
industry. By knowing the current trends you will be able to formulate appropriate strategies that will 
carve your path to success. Job seekers and businesses that remain abreast with emerging trends stay 
coordinated with the professional and business requirements. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
American online      
LIGS University 
▶▶enroll by September 30th, 2014 and 
▶▶save up to 16% on the tuition!
▶▶pay in 10 installments / 2 years
▶▶Interactive Online education
▶▶visit www.ligsuniversity.com to 
      find out more!
is currently enrolling in the
Interactive Online BBA, MBA, MSc, 
DBA and PhD  programs:
Note: LIGS University is not accredited by any 
nationally recognized accrediting agency listed 
by the US Secretary of Education. 
More info here. 

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
28 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
2.5.4	
Generate Job and Business Opportunities: 
Marketing is a method designed to promote and sell skills, products and services, and the LinkedIn 
interface as a marketing tool just does that. By creating an impressive LinkedIn profile you effortlessly 
launch your skills and services into the market. However, leaving it unattended for months at a stretch 
will lead you to nowhere. In order to derive the optimum levels of benefits from this incredible marketing 
platform, you need to explore what it has to offer you – things like search tools, forums and direct ads. 
If other social networking sites are able to facilitate emerging professionals and businesses to a large 
extent, then LinkedIn ought to be ahead in the competition as it is specially oriented to marketing 
professional skills and business products/services. The core advantage is that you build up a relevant 
network of professionals without wasting your precious time.
2.6	
Your Facebook Account:
It is estimated that over 80% of employers conduct background checks on potential candidates that they 
are looking to hire, and some of these background checks now include social media checks on Facebook, 
LinkedIn and Twitter accounts. Almost everyone is on Facebook these days, and while it’s great for your 
personal life and for keeping in contact with friends and acquaintances, I am finding that it is becoming 
more and more detrimental to candidates’ job searches.
Companies conduct background checks in order to try to paint an accurate picture of who you really 
are and to avoid negligent hiring. They want to hire people they can trust to represent the company, and 
what better way to find out about “the real you” than through social media sites.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
29 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Facebook is an interesting (and free) way for employers to check up on you. Not only can they see your 
basic information, but they can also see your photos and what you discuss with other people on your 
wall. They can see what networks you belong to and even where you work. For the most part, companies 
don’t care about how you spend your free time – as long as it’s legal. What they are looking for are racist 
remarks (not only by you, but also by people who post on your page), sexually explicit photos or videos, 
and flagrant displays of illegal activity. Any signs of these will raise red flags to anyone performing your 
background check, and this can hinder your chances at securing your job. 
You don’t need to panic and start deleting all of your photos and wall posts right away…especially if you 
don’t think you have anything to worry about. To start with, what you can do is check – and frequently 
recheck – your privacy settings on these sites. You might think that your privacy settings are all turned 
on, but the truth is that many social media sites update and reset these settings on a regular basis, and 
you might not even know that yours have accidentally been switched off. 
The most important thing you can do is be more aware of what you have on your social media sites and 
go from there. Go through your photos (yes, even from those college days) as you never know what 
you might find. Are there “questionable” photos of you? Are there inappropriate remarks somewhere on 
your page that might be taken the wrong way? If you have to think about it, un-tag yourself or delete 
it…it’s not worth the risk.
2.7	
Set Realistic Job Expectations:
The best advice I give job seekers is to set realistic job expectations. Too many times candidates cause 
themselves heartache and misery because they have unrealistic expectations when applying for jobs. Yes, 
it’s true you need to aim high, but aiming too high can just lead to a longer time of being unemployed. 
I recently met a candidate who told me they had applied to over 100 banking jobs, but had not received 
a single interview request.
The first thing I did was review his resume as a poorly written resume is usually the reason behind 90% 
of failed attempts at securing interviews. The resume is the first impression a hiring manager has, so if 
there’s something fundamentally wrong with it, it doesn’t matter how good your qualifications are if the 
resume is never going to be read.
This time, however, his resume was very well written. His achievements were highlighted and the resume 
was structured and well presented, so I was quite confused as to why he was not getting a single interview. 
As a job seeker with 2 years of relevant work experience there didn’t seem to be a reasonable reason why 
this candidate should not be getting interviews or job offers.
The next thing we did was sit down together and analyse the jobs he had applied for, and there was the 
answer.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
30 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Within 60 seconds it became obvious why he wasn’t getting any interview requests. With 2 years of 
experience and on a base salary of $50,000, he was applying for senior roles with base salaries of $80,000–
$120,000. With many of the jobs he didn’t even tick the essential requirements on the job description 
such as minimum years in a manager position.
Not only was he wasting his own time by applying for these positions, but he was also causing unnecessary 
stress and anxiety in the meantime. I encourage candidates to strive for bigger and greater jobs and to 
seek out higher salaries, but just remember to be realistic in your job search. To be a manager or in a 
senior role takes experience and it is very unlikely that a company will hire an outside person to fulfil a 
role without the relevant experience. The more likely scenario is the company will promote within the 
company.
Go for gold and strive to succeed, but just remember to be realistic with your job expectations.
2.8	
Dressing For The Job Interview:
“Don’t dress for the job you have, dress for the job you want to have”
Does what you wear in an interview really going to make a difference in the hiring process? The answer 
is Yes! Depending on the job you are applying for dress does matter. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
31 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Don’t allow your appearance to damage your chances of being hired for a job. As the old phrase goes 
“dress for success” Walking into an interview room the first thing an interviewer does is look at you. No 
matter how many skills you have and how relevant your experience is, do not allow being incorrectly 
dressed place you in danger of not being employed. 
Make no mistake dressing properly will not get you the job but dressing inappropriately can lose you 
the job. 
Gaining employment is subject to numerous variables beyond your control and factors significantly 
unknown to you. You have no control over employer perceptions, personal preferences or the competitors 
for the job. You do however have control of your image and how you present yourself. How you look 
can send a powerful message to the interviewer and can portray a signal that you are a winner or a loser. 
You have made it this far in the interview process. Do not let your appearance sabotage your opportunity 
to get the job. 
So make sure you exude confidence and look successful. 
2.8.1	
The Psychology of Colour:
Different colours evoke different emotions and it is imperative when you’re interviewing that you evoke 
the right emotions from the interviewer.
Examples:
Blue: Words that describe the colour blue include: trust, loyalty, wisdom, peaceful. These are exactly 
the type of feelings you want to be portraying in your interview. Blue is a calming colour (Think Ocean 
and sky) and sends out a signal to the interviewer that you are indeed honest and sincere. Studies have 
shown that wearing the colour blue to an interview will increase your chances of getting hired more 
than any other colour.
Red: In contrast to the colour blue, the colour red stirs emotions more than any other colour. Red is a 
strong colour, very emotional, an extreme colour that in an interview scenario can work against you. 
Unlike blue which has a calming effect, the colour red is a fiery colour (the colour of love and passion), 
and can be an intimidating colour for the interviewer.
Orange: Similar to red. A colour that stirs emotion and therefore a colour I would avoid wearing in a 
job interview. Although orange is not seen to be as an aggressive as the colour red, it is still perceived 
as a colour that can evoke feelings of power and aggression.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
32 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Grey: My second favourite colour to wear after blue. Grey gives the look of sophistication and authority. 
In a corporate environment the colour grey is professional and portrays an individual as being confident 
without being intimidating.
Purple: The colour of “Royalty”. The colour symbolizes power, aristocracy, lavishness, and extravagance.
Black: Be careful when wearing just black to an interview. The colour black is seen as a power colour 
and can be viewed as threatening. Wearing black outfits can portray an individual as being powerful or 
even arrogant. Black is also associated with negative implications such as death, sin, and fear.
Just remember that first impressions count a lot when you go to interview. Know your audience and 
dress accordingly.
2.9	
Staying Positive While Looking For A New Job:
Don’t let the media and the news put you down. No matter how bad they say it is companies are always 
looking to hire the best available staff. If you have the right skills and passion, there will be a job waiting 
for right around the corner. You just need to remain upbeat and positive. Below is a list of things you 
need to do in order to help you through the job search process….
Keep a routine: Don’t get into the bad habits of waking up late, sleeping in the afternoons or procrastinating 
around the house. Get up at your normal time, eat properly and get some exercise (walking is free)!
Volunteering at a church, hospital, homeless shelter or non-profit organization will open your eyes to 
people who are less off than you and give you a sense of contribution. There is no greater reward than 
helping people who are less fortunate than us.
Stay up to date with what’s happening in your industry: Don’t let yourself fall behind just because you’re 
not working. The best approach is to learn more about your particular industry. This way you will be 
ahead of your competition when it comes time to interview.
Explore potential new careers: It’s never too late to try to learn a foreign language or a new piece of 
computer software. I remember working with a senior archaeologist of 10 years experience who came 
to me wanting a change in his life direction. After 6 months of learning Spanish and then travelling 
through Spain for another 6 months, the senior archaeologist is now a junior English/Spanish translator!
Positive Thinking: Do not focus on the negatives – you need to be able to bounce back. Concentrate on 
the skills and knowledge you have. Sitting around saying “what if” all the time is only going to further 
depress you.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
33 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Support Group: You may feel as though you’re the only person in your situation without a job, but guess 
what – you’re not. Reach out to people for support. There are many groups that provide excellent assistance 
in the areas of resume writing, interviewing, and job hunting. Aside from the secular groups, there are 
also many faith groups ready to offer you a supporting hand. Don’t feel ashamed or embarrassed to ask 
for help. Let people help you change your life.
Avoid negative people! Negative thinking is of no value to you. You need to be around positive people 
and people who can have a positive impact on your life.
Network: maintain contacts and stay in touch with people. Make sure you network with positive people!! 
Again, avoid negativity. Negative thinking does nothing to help your situation.
Last but not least – manage your expectations. Not every job you apply for will be a success. Don’t be 
put off by this. Instead, concentrate on the positives and look at what you achieve each day. For example, 
you could have applied to 3 great jobs, connected with 2 people who are great resources or maybe you 
found a course or book that will help to improve your skills.
Don’t give up! Jobs don’t find you, you find them!
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
 
  
 
                . 

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
34 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
2.10	
Listing Salary Requirements:
Some job advertisements ask you to include your desired salary, and if they ask for this, it usually means 
that you can’t avoid doing so. Listing salary requirements is always tricky because it’s hard to “guess” 
what the employer will think about your preference. Asking for too much can rule out your chances 
right away because you might appear unrealistic, but asking for too little can signal a red flag and tell the 
hiring manager that you don’t value your skills and experience. So the question is – what do you say?
My advice is to always include a range because you give yourself a little bit of breathing room. A range 
not only eliminates you from this potential scrutiny, but it could also tell the hiring manager that you 
need a little more information before you give them a definite answer. In other words, you leave yourself 
some option, and you also put yourself in a good position to negotiate. Chances are that full details of 
the job haven’t already been provided, so if you make it to the interview and hear more about the job’s 
requirements, you can then argue why you are qualified to receive the higher end of your salary range.
So how do you determine this range? Try to search for similar positions and what they offer in terms 
of salary. Look up job search websites and try to ballpark a range that most of the positions fit into, and 
then use this range when you’re writing your cover letter. The range you include is entirely dependent 
on what you find, but I would probably suggest not making it any larger than $10,000 – it may be too 
general otherwise.
All in all, it’s always best to keep your options open.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
35 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
2.11	
Switching Up Your Job Seeking Tactics:
Many times, job applications go entirely unnoticed. A friend of mine recently tried something new because 
she realized she wasn’t getting any interview requests. Like most people, she would search through popular 
websites and apply for jobs straight away, always including a personalized cover letter and resume. Then 
she’d wait and “hope for the best.” And nothing happened. It was at this point that she started re-applying 
for the same positions. And guess what? She received a couple of invitations to interview.
This is not the first time I’ve heard of this happening. In this age of emailed applications and very little 
personal contact, it’s hard to figure out why the interview requests are not coming. Of course, this has a 
lot to do with the quality of your resume and cover letter, but sometimes it can also be just because of 
plain bad luck. In some cases, your application could have just gone unnoticed through no fault of your 
own. Below are some of the reasons for this:
Bad timing:
You could have simply applied at the wrong time, literally. A hiring manager could have opened your 
email while in the middle of something and then simply forgotten about it a minute later. It does happen.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
36 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Your application was accidentally deleted:
Do you ever quickly go through your email list and hold your finger down on the delete button? You’re 
not the only one. If a hiring manager is posting advertisements on job websites, the probability of their 
receiving spam emails is quite high. They could have accidentally deleted your application.
Too many applications:
A lot of times, hiring managers will have a stopping point for accepting applications. They either received 
too many or they’ve already narrowed the list down to just a few candidates. Whatever the reason, they 
won’t bother to delete the advertisement, and they might automatically delete your application. It is not 
uncommon, however, for them to become dissatisfied with their applicant pool. When this happens, 
they’re not likely to review the same applicant pool from before – they’ll focus on the new applicants.
My advice is to always try again because you never know what may happen. I am not suggesting that 
these scenarios happen all the time, but they do happen somewhat frequently, so give yourself the benefit 
of the doubt. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.mastersopenday.nl
Visit us and find out why we are the best!
Master’s Open Day: 22 February 2014
Join the best at
the Maastricht University
School of Business and
Economics!
Top master’s programmes
• 33rd place Financial Times worldwide ranking: MSc 
International Business
• 1st place: MSc International Business
• 1st place: MSc Financial Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Management of Learning
• 2nd place: MSc Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Econometrics and Operations Research
• 2nd place: MSc Global Supply Chain Management and 
Change
Sources: Keuzegids Master ranking 2013; Elsevier ‘Beste Studies’ ranking 2012; 
Financial Times Global Masters in Management ranking 2012
Maastricht
University is
the best specialist
university in the
Netherlands
(Elsevier)

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
37 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
2.12	
Finding A Job Without Local Experience:
As a foreign job seeker trying to find work in Australia, not only are you competing against other foreign 
job seekers, but you’re competing against domestic job seekers who share similar skills and experiences. 
After working with foreign job seekers from all over the world in every type of industry, I have found 
that the most common excuse these workers use to explain the lack of interview requests is the fact that 
they don’t have “local experience”.
It frustrates me so much when I hear this, and I know how depressing it can be to a foreign worker 
trying to get a foot in the door of their new country. Rather than being put off or depressed by not 
having “local experience” (and how hard must it be to put on a brave face and carry on), let’s prepare 
strategies that can improve the chances of finding a job as a foreign visa holder.
Online Networking:
With no local experience you need to become an expert in networking and become an expert ASAP. Use 
online networking websites such as LinkedIn to make contacts with as many people as you can. Talk to 
people in your industry and find out comparisons (and differences) between the role you performed in 
your country of origin and the types of roles you are applying for in your new country. This way you 
can incorporate this into your resume and interview preparation. The more you understand about your 
new country, the greater chance you can prepare yourself for finding a new job.
Think Outside the Square:
There are many ways to search for job openings – don’t get stuck with just applying for roles online. 
My advice is to seek out hiring managers and people in positions to help you. Don’t be intimidated to 
approach these people directly. Although there may not be a current role open at their organisation, 
there is a possibility that they may know of other job openings or other areas within their business that 
is looking to hire. Finding the perfect job takes time and people appreciate pro-activeness. I have heard 
of stories of hiring managers keeping resumes in their database for over 12 months before positions 
come up.
Social Networking:
Step away from the computer and begin to enjoy your new country! Again, the more you can learn about 
your new country, the more help you will have with your job seeking. No matter what your hobbies are, 
you can always find other people who share the same hobbies and interest. You can begin to gain local 
experience by participating in extracurricular activities or even by volunteering. This is a great way to 
begin to gain local experience.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
38 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Patience:
One of the least favourite words a job seeker likes to hear. Patience. Unfortunately, job seeking takes 
time. Do not get despondent if you can’t find immediate success. Moving abroad takes a lot of guts, 
determination and courage. Be proud of your efforts in doing something that many people wish they 
could do but never try. Finding success may take time but will definitely be worth it in the long run.
2.13	
Selecting The Best Job Recruitment Agent:
Every job market is unique and in order to gain the most out of your job search, working alongside 
a specialised recruiter can be your ticket to success. Just as you may use a mechanic to help you with 
your car or a plumber to help stop your leaking tap, an expert recruiter can help you find a new job that 
matches your requirements. Best of all, it’s completely free for you to use. Even if they find you a job, 
you will never have to pay a cent. The employer fits this bill. 
In order to find the best recruiters, the first thing you need to do is spend some time researching recruiters 
in your industry. For example, if you are a senior accountant, you need to align yourself with accounting 
recruiters who specialise in senior management accounting positions. There is no point in wasting time 
speaking to accounting recruiters who only specialise in graduate recruitment. To further maximise your 
research, do some investigating into the recruiter company’s clients. Many times, recruiters will work 
with the same set of clients. If you wish to work for a large multinational company, you will need to 
find recruiters who have these contacts. A small boutique recruitment firm is more likely to work with 
smaller clients as they don’t have the size to be able to recruit for larger organisations.
How can I begin to find a job recruiter who can help me?
Creating a LinkedIn profile and networking would be my number one piece of advice to job seekers. 
Once you have a professional LinkedIn profile that highlights your experience, achievements, skills and 
expertise, you can begin to network and research recruiters in your field. Typically, most recruitment firms 
are listed on LinkedIn and you can search within their company profiles to find individual recruiters.
How do I know if a certain recruitment agent is right for me?
Building up trust and rapport with your recruiter is vital to finding success. Many people send their 
resume blindly to a recruitment company and wonder why no one calls them back. In order to have 
the recruiter searching for jobs on your behalf (remember recruiters don’t get paid until they place you) 
they need to know that you’re serious about the job search. Go and meet your recruiter face to face. Be 
upfront with your recruiter and tell them the types of roles you require and the companies you wish to 
work for. If you can provide a recruiter with all the information that they require they will be able to 
work as best as they can on your behalf.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
39 
Preparing To Find A Job In Australia
Final thought:
Finding the right recruiter can certainly help you in your job search. Having someone with inside 
knowledge will increase your odds of finding a new job. However, just because you have a recruiter 
working on your behalf don’t think that you can just sit back and relax. Finding the right recruiter is only 
one aspect of job seeking. In the competitive job environment, you need to be constantly networking to 
ensure that you are ready when the opportunity presents itself.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
40 
Job Interviewing
3	 Job Interviewing
3.1	
Job Interview Preparation
3.1.1	
Rule number 1: Research:
Congratulations! You have been invited for the interview. Now what do you do?
The first step is beginning to research the company. Once you have done this you will be ready to prep 
for the interview questions, learn how to improve your interviewing skills and begin to think about what 
you’re going to wear to the interview.
In order to succeed in the interview you need to do your homework on the company. There is no set of 
rules to how to do your research but preparing yourself as much as possible will greatly enhance your 
chances of getting hired.
Make sure you use every available resource to help you with your preparation. By doing a basic Google 
on the company you can easily learn important facts about the company. Publically listed companies 
are easier to prepare your background research than privately listed companies as public companies are 
legally required to make certain information available. In the 21st century the Internet has made a lot 
of the pre interview research more available and easier to find. Don’t forget that you can also use other 
sources of information like public libraries or bookstores. Many magazines and journals can provide 
important and up to date information on your company and also provide you with information that 
your competitors who are also applying for the same job won’t know.
A true story…
A candidate of mine was applying for a job at one of the large investment banks. Out of 150 candidates the 
hiring manager had selected the top 10 best resumes to perform first round interviews. Every interview 
was 15–20 minutes long. The final question the hiring manager asked to each of the candidates was “Tell 
me something about the company.” Nine out of ten of the candidates rattled off information they had 
read from the company’s “about us page”, but one candidate stood out. After reading about the company’s 
strategic purchase of a new acquisition, the candidate was able to impress the hiring manager with his 
(somewhat different) knowledge.
The hiring manager later offered this candidate the role not because he was the smartest candidate, but 
because he showed his dedication by going the extra step in his interview preparation.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
41 
Job Interviewing
Your research for the job interview preparation should give you a better insight on:
• The history of the business
• How old the business is
• The types of services the business offers
• The hierarchy structure
• How many offices/locations the business has
• Number of employees
• Career progression
• The business culture
• Competitors
• Benefits
Check out the Competitors websites as well – they are also a good source of information for your job 
preparation.
3.2	
Making The Best First Impression:
Making the right impression in your job interview is one of the most important steps in your future 
career. Many people don’t know this, but job interviews require careful planning and research, otherwise 
you will significantly reduce the chance of getting the job. In the current economic climate it is very hard 
to land yourself a job, thus planning your interview before is the key to success
The first (and often the most important) thing to prepare for is your attire. Don’t wait until the last minute 
to find something to wear – you should prepare for it days in advance and get it properly cleaned and 
ironed. Remember that you should always dress to fit the context of a job. If you’re applying for a casual 
gardening company, a suit might not be ideal, but if you’re applying for a position as an accountant or 
a banker, then a full suit would be the required minimum. Despite what people say, first impressions 
are everything.
Conducting research about the job and company you’re applying for is imperative. Consider doing a 
web search and learn as many facts about the company as you can. You can subtlety include these facts 
during the interview (when appropriate) to show the interviewer that you have done your homework on 
the company. Don’t overdo it though – you don’t want to sound like you’re repeating their whole website!
Non-verbal messages are often more important than words, so make sure that you greet your interviewer 
with a firm handshake. Maintaining correct posture and eye contact are also two very important non-
verbal messages as they make you appear more confident and presentable. These are two big qualities 
that hiring managers will be looking for.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
42 
Job Interviewing
You should also be able to recite your resume off by heart. As a general rule, you should not need to 
consult your resume. The interviewer will already have a copy of your resume, and they will ask you 
questions about it, so don’t try to make up an answer as there is a big chance that you will get it wrong. 
Highlight your achievements and the value added skills you can bring to the job and back up your 
statements with examples.
As preparation is the key to a successful job interview, consider doing a short role-play with a friend 
or family member. Ask them to question you on your resume and the job to fully prepare you for the 
interview. The more you are prepared the greater your chances of success. Following the interview, thank 
the interviewer for his or her time and ask when they expect to make a final decision and don’t feel 
discouraged to follow up with them if you haven’t heard back within a few days.
3.3	
The Telephone Interview:
Phone interviews are becoming increasingly popular as a means of narrowing down candidates for a more 
traditional face to face interview. In the ultra-competitive society we now live, a job advertisement can 
attract hundreds of resumes from candidates with similar set of skills and backgrounds. The recruitment 
process is all about finding the one perfect candidate among the basket full of candidates. The phone 
interview has become a popular, flexible, inexpensive and speedy way of finding that one person.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Get Help Now
Go to www.helpmyassignment.co.uk for more info
Need help with your
dissertation?
Get in-depth feedback & advice from experts in your 
topic area. Find out what you can do to improve
the quality of your dissertation!

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
43 
Job Interviewing
3.3.1	
Preparing for a Telephone Interview
Before you begin your phone interview make sure that you are confident in your understanding of 
the position you are applying for and the company you are applying with. Do extra homework on the 
company’s history and research recent company news. Preparation is the key and will make a great 
impression on your interviewers.
Prepare your Interview location. Make sure you’re in a comfortable place with no distractions. Keep your 
resume in clear view, have a pen and pad to take notes and a glass of water sitting close by. Minimise 
any outside distractions that could potentially take your mind off the interview (HOT TIP: Disable call 
waiting on your phone). Dress the part so you feel and sound professional. The more professional you 
feel the more professional you will come across on the telephone.
Most importantly – Practice Interviewing. Rehearse and Practice. There are many ways to help you prepare 
for the telephone interview. Have a friend/ family member conduct an interview. Ideally, rehearse with 
someone from the same industry. The best way to hear how you sound is to tape yourself. Remember 
the more preparation you put into the interview the better prepared you will be.
Preparation is the key! Write down answers to questions you believe are going to be asked. Have questions 
ready to go so when the interviewer says “Do you have any questions to ask us” you’re ready and prepared.
What to do during the phone interview:
• Remember to Smile. Experts say that smiling puts you in a better state of mind and will 
project a positive image to the listener
• Speak in a steady voice. Don’t rush what you’re trying to say. Ensure that you sound 
enthusiastic and passionate.
• Don’t forget to breathe. It will help you stay calm and sound more relaxed.
• LISTEN – Answer the questions which are being asked. Do not make the mistake of telling 
the interviewer what you want to tell them. Give them the answers to their questions.
• Keep a glass of water handy – Nothing is worse than having a dry mouth
• Address the interviewer in the appropriate way. Do not shorten people’s name. They are 
your potential employer not your “mate”
• Take your time – Don’t rush the interview. This is your time to shine. If you’re feeling 
nervous take a moment or two to collect your thoughts
• “Cheat Notes” Prepare beforehand with notes to help drive you through the interview. If the 
interview is going to be technical than have notes ready to prompt yourself if needed
• Don’t forget to ask questions. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
44 
Job Interviewing
What NOT to do during the interview:
• Don’t eat, drink, chew gum
• DO NOT SMOKE
• Don’t interrupt the interviewer.
• Don’t answer with just a “yes” and “no” – elaborate your answers, provide examples if 
applicable
• Don’t be too Casual/informal
• Long winded answers to questions
3.4	
Job Interview Killers:
When it comes to your job interview, you want to leave it with nothing but positive energy. You want to 
leave the interviewer thinking that you will most certainly be a positive addition to his or her company. 
The last thing you want to do is to kill your chances with a simple mistake or two. While there are a 
number of ways to prepare for a successful interview, there are also a number of ways to quickly end 
your chances of getting hired. Below are some simple things to avoid during an interview:
Showing up late: 
This is not only rude, but it also reflects poorly on your work ethic. Do you routinely show up late? Are 
you someone who can’t be counted on? Don’t disqualify yourself before even meeting the interviewer.
Forgetting to turn your cell phone off (or keeping it on silent): 
Having a cell phone ring during an interview is not only disruptive – it’s also disrespectful. While it may 
not be an automatic interview-killer, it certainly won’t improve your chances.
Chewing gum: 
This looks/sounds unprofessional and tacky. No employer appreciates someone talking to them with a 
mouthful of gum. It’s even worse if you’re someone who chews loudly without even realising.
Using “I don’t know” as a response to questions: 
The purpose of an interview is to provide the interviewer with more information about you. The more 
you give them, the better.
Using slang or profanity: 
This is never a positive in the workplace. Speak professionally.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
45 
Job Interviewing
Bringing up personal problems: 
An interview is about the job in question and about your specific qualifications, not about your personal 
life. While you will almost always be asked to talk a little bit about yourself, try to keep the personal talk 
to a minimum. Certainly don’t bring up any “issues” that will raise red flags.
These “killers” may seem a little obvious, but they happen all the time. Avoid these mistakes and you’re 
already ahead of a large part of the competition.
3.5	
Traditional Job Interview Questions Part 1:
3.5.1	
What are General Interview Job Questions?
Best to prepare answers to these types of questions, but do not try to memorize exact answers word for 
word. It will sound scripted and will be easily picked up. What you need to do is have your answers 
planned, but be ready to adapt or change your answers depending on how well the interview is going.
There are literally thousands of “general interview questions”. We have selected the most frequently asked 
questions and have given you examples of how best to answer these questions.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
By 2020, wind could provide one-tenth of our planet’s 
electricity needs. Already today, SKF’s innovative know-
how is crucial to running a large proportion of the 
world’s wind turbines. 
Up to 25 % of the generating costs relate to mainte-
nance. These can be reduced dramatically thanks to our 
systems for on-line condition monitoring and automatic 
lubrication. We help make it more economical to create 
cleaner, cheaper energy out of thin air. 
By sharing our experience, expertise, and creativity, 
industries can boost performance beyond expectations. 
Therefore we need the best employees who can 
meet this challenge!
The Power of Knowledge Engineering
Brain power
Plug into The Power of Knowledge Engineering. 
Visit us at www.skf.com/knowledge

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
46 
Job Interviewing
(1) Tell Me About Yourself?
This is the most common question to begin the interview. It is so important that you are prepared for 
this question so you can give a good solid first impression before the interviewer moves onto the more 
challenging questions. Be careful to not to give the interviewer your life story or provide “too much 
information”. I have had candidates who have told me how they have a criminal past or how they despised 
their family, and this is not something you need to voluntarily bring up in an interview. Relevant facts 
about education and your career is all you need to be speaking about.
Tip: Remember to tailor your answers toward the job you are applying for. If you’re applying for a role 
as a fashion editor for a magazine, tell the interviewer how from an early age you have always had a love 
for fashion and writing, and provide examples about how your passion has bought you to that interview.
(2) Why Did You Decide To Leave Your Last Job?
Be careful!!! Do NOT (and I can’t stress this enough) bad mouth your old employer. Present yourself 
in a positive way. It is extremely unprofessional to talk badly about your previous company, boss or 
peers, no matter what the reason. You also don’t know if this new hiring manager knows people from 
your old company. The best way to answer this question is to tell them that you are looking for career 
advancement and you see this new company being the right career choice for you. 
3.5.2	
How to answer this question if you were fired:
TIP: If you were fired from your last job do not try to lie about it or cover it up in the interview. More 
than likely the company will do a background check on you anyway, so it is best to be upfront and 
honest. Trust me, you are not the first person to be fired. The best way to answer the question is to keep 
it brief and ensure the interview keeps flowing forward. Turn the negative into a positive by letting the 
interviewer know how you learnt from the experience and are now ready to move on.
Example: “The job was going in a different direction to where I wanted to be going. My boss and I both 
thought it was best to move on to a job where I could be of greater value and offer my skills in the most 
maximising way.”
(3) Where Else Have You Been Interviewing?
Don’t be afraid to answer this question. The key to answering this correctly is to prove to the hiring 
manager that you are serious about finding a new job. This being said, you only want to mention a 
couple of places you’ve applied to rather than going into major details. If you’ve applied to many jobs, 
don’t admit this as you don’t want to come across as desperate. The aim of this question is to see if you 
really are seriously looking for a new job. There is nothing wrong with showing the employer that you 
are serious to find a new role.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
47 
Job Interviewing
(4) What’s Your Greatest Strength?
This is one of the easier interview questions, but to get the most out of your answer the best response needs 
to be related to the job you are applying for. IF you’re an accountant and applying for an accountancy 
role, the best response you can give for your greatest strength is your ability with numbers, your computer 
skills and your attention to detail. How about if you’re a dancer applying for a role? Your greatest strengths 
need to be balance, team work, dedication etc.
Rather than using generic clichéd answers such as “hard-working” and “loyal”, use this question to show 
the value you can add to the organisation.
(5) What’s Your Biggest Weakness? 
Without doubt one of the hardest questions to answer. Being too honest can severely affect your interview. 
Everyone has something they can work on, so saying you have no weaknesses makes you sound arrogant. 
The best way to approach this is to think of a weakness that won’t impact your getting the job. Remember 
that this question is a work-related question, so don’t say that your biggest weakness is not helping enough 
around the house or, the worst answer I ever heard, “chocolate cake.”
Tips:
• Do not mention a weakness that will prevent you from being hired. If you’re going for a job 
as a telemarketer, don’t say your greatest weakness is speaking on the telephone!
• No clichéd responses. “My greatest weakness is that I am a perfectionist.”
• Do not avoid the question. The interviewer has asked you this question and you need to 
answer it.
My advice is to provide a real work-related weakness and follow it up with examples of how you are 
fixing the problem.
Example:
If you’re asked this question, give a small, work-related flaw that you’re working hard to improve. Example: 
“I’ve been told that I occasionally focus on details and miss the bigger picture, so I’ve been spending 
time laying out the complete project every day to see my overall progress.”
Admitting a real weakness and then following up with what you’re doing to improve yourself is preferable. 
“My presentation skills are not as strong as I’d like, so I signed up for weekend presentation skills classes 
and also joined a Toastmasters club.” Remember that the specific job you are interviewing for will help 
to determine how you answer the question.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
48 
Job Interviewing
(6) Why Have You Applied For This Job?
This is a fairly innocent question and easy enough to answer. To answer this question successfully you 
need to show your motivation for this role, but also your desire to work for the company. Through your 
research into the company provide further examples why this job is the job for you.
Tip: Never say “money”!
(7) Where Do You See Yourself In Five Tears Time?
This type of question is seeing the extent of your ambition. Be careful when answering this question 
not to make it seem as though this job is a stepping stone in your career (even if it is). For example, if 
you are applying for an accounting job at an accounting firm, don’t tell the interviewer that your long 
term goal is to work at an investment bank. This is not what the interviewer is going to want to hear. 
The last thing an employer wants to do is employ you, train you and then see you leave the firm. The 
best answer you can offer is to demonstrate that your 5 year goals are suitable and match the position 
you are applying for.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
49 
Job Interviewing
3.6	
Traditional Job Interview Questions Part 2:
(1) Why Should We Hire You For This Job?
The reason they should hire you is because you’re best person for the job because of your skills and 
competence and also because of the enthusiasm you will bring to the role. You can be assured that 90% 
of the candidates will start pitching their skills and achievements, but what makes you stand out more is 
your enthusiasm and passion for the role. When describing your skills and achievements, relate them to 
the job description and give reasons why you would add value to the business. When pitching yourself, 
remember the importance of body language. Sit up in your chair and be positive.
Tip: Prepare for the interview by taking the job description and write down the skills you bring to each 
description and examples of accomplishments and achievements. Having examples ready to go can really 
help you when answering this question.
Example answer: (applying for a sales position)
“With my 5 years of work experience I have developed, maintained and expanded customer relationships, 
positioned new products to drive sales growth and developed new marketing strategies to ensure sales 
targets are exceeded and market share increased. I have expertise in the implementation of account 
strategies, tactical sales and marketing plans. As you can see my sales records speak for themselves, and 
in my previous role I was awarded for consistently exceeding sales and profit targets. Most importantly, 
I am extremely passionate about what I do and have a love for sales.”
(2) Do You Work Well Under Pressure?
This is an easy question to answer if you have done your research and prepared for this question. (Tip – 
telling the employer that you crumble under pressure and burst into tears is not going to help you get the 
job). Although this is a closed question and can be answered with a one word answer, always provide an 
example of a time where you worked under pressure and how you rose above the pressure to succeed.
Tip: It may seem obvious, but keep the example work-related. I have interviewed a young man who told 
me that he kicked the winning goal with only one minute left on the clock. It may have been an example 
of working well under pressure, but what I was really asking for was a work-related answer.
(3) How Do You Handle Change?
This is a classic interview question that always makes a candidate think! It is incredible the amount of 
times a candidate will say “I handle change well” before an awkward silence as they try to think about 
an example. Change is natural part of life and it is about adapting to change that makes you a stronger 
person. Choosing to embrace change is an opportunity for personal growth.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
50 
Job Interviewing
The best answer is that you embrace change rather than opposing change out of fear or routine. 
No matter what the job throws at you, you’re able to handle it. Provide an example of where you were 
able to handle change and come out stronger as a result.
(4) Briefly Describe Your Ideal Job?
This is a “curve ball” question. My ideal job would be earning a million dollars a week and only working 
about 3–4 hours a day. Perhaps my ideal job is playing first base for the New York Yankees. Either 
way, neither of these answers is right. The right answer to this question is to keep it in line with the 
characteristics of the job and company you are interviewing with. 
Concentrate on your strengths and what you best bring to the job. A sample answer would be along 
the lines of, “My ideal job is where I can utilize my key strengths including X, Y, and Z and as a valued 
member of the team make a positive and significant contribution.”
(5) What Makes You Want To Work Hard?
This is a good question from the interviewer’s perspective, but also an easy question to answer if you’re 
prepared. If we were to answer this question in a court room under oath a large percentage of people 
(myself included) would naturally say material rewards, higher salary, big bonus, perks etc. Luckily we 
are not in a court room. Focus more on being part of a successful team, adding value to the organisation 
and the satisfaction you derive from it.
(6) How Would Your Co-Workers Describe You?
This is a time for you to show off the attributes that make you unique and further convince the interviewer 
that you are the right person for their organization. This question is designed for you to put forward 
your strengths, but remember there is a difference between pride in how you believe you’re perceived 
and arrogance. Answers such as “My co-workers think I am wonderful” or “They think that I am the 
greatest thing since sliced bread” do not go down well in interviews. As per every good answer, provide 
examples of accomplishments you have achieved.
(7) What Motivates You?
This is a great interview question and a question that every potential job seeker should ask themselves 
while preparing for the interview. The right answer is providing a mixture of what motivates you as a 
person and what motivates you about the job you are applying for. Remember to be specific and tailor 
your answer to the job you are applying for.
Question: Do you mention money or not?
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
51 
Job Interviewing
Typically saying that money or benefits motivates you is not the response a hiring manager is looking 
for. But as per always, the rules change depending on what industry you are applying for. For example, 
if you are applying for a sales role that offers high commission, being motivated to succeed and earn 
greater commission is definitely a motivation. Rather than just saying money motivates me (which is 
not advised), tell the interviewer that you are motivated to sell and succeed and enjoy working in an 
environment where the more you put in, the more you can gain in return.
(8) What Are Your Salary Expectations?
It goes without saying that everyone wants to make as much money as possible. The best way to answer 
this question is by researching the market value of the job you are applying for. Honesty is the best policy 
when it comes to salary expectations because if you are looking for a role that pays 60,000 but the role 
will only pay 40,000, it won’t be long before you begin to lose interest in the role and start searching all 
over again for a new job. Show the hiring manager that you have thoroughly researched the role and 
have an understanding of how much the role pays. Many people try to avoid giving the interviewer a 
straight answer when answering this question as not to “rock the boat”.
The Worst Answer is a “Desperate Answer”.
Example Question: What are your salary expectations for this job?
Example Answer: “I’m easy – whatever you guys are willing to pay.”
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
52 
Job Interviewing
A Good Answer is a “Researched Answer”
Example Question: What are your salary expectations for this job?
Example Answer: “From my research, I know that the salary range for this position is between $60,000 
and $70,000 – having worked in the industry for 5 years I feel that my value would fit into this range”.
3.7	
Ice Breaking Job Interview Questions:
When you first enter the interview, the opening question is always designed to introduce yourself so you 
feel comfortable in the surroundings before the questions become more specific. Generally speaking, 
“ice breaking questions” are broad, yet they can be so important with how they impact the rest of your 
interview. Just like in a sports game, the opening minutes of the game are not where the game can be 
won, but where it can potentially be lost. The same goes for the interview – you are not going to get 
the job because of the answer you provide, but you can lose the job with your answer. Although the ice 
breaking question will be a general question about yourself or how your day is going, remember this 
is the hiring manager’s first impression of you. Giving off the wrong first impression can severely affect 
the outcome of the interview.
Examples:
• Tell me a little about yourself…
• Were there any problems finding our office today?
• Have you visited our location before?
• If there is a major sporting event like the Olympics going on the hiring manager may ask 
something along the lines of “Have you been following the Olympics?”
• Would you like some coffee or a glass of water?
• Are you enjoying this weather?
• Why have you applied for this role? (Trickier ice breaker question)
The most important aspect of answering an ice breaking question is to build early rapport with the 
interviewer. As I mentioned, you are not going to get the job just because you answer the ice breaking 
question in a brilliant way, but answering the question the wrong way can give off the wrong first 
impression.
Tips:
Keep the answer related to the question and be brief and polite. This is not the time to tell the interviewer 
your life story
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
53 
Job Interviewing
Use proper English – If you are asked how you are doing the correct answer would be “Very well thank 
you, and how are you? or “Fine thank you, how are you today?” – Using slang or lazy English can create 
an unprofessional or even careless impression.
How to blow the ice breaking question:
A colleague of mine was interviewing candidates for a new role. As a polite introduction he would ask 
the candidate if they found the company building ok. Most of the candidates smiled and said yes to this 
question. One candidate, however, told the interviewer how it took him a long time to find the building 
and how his train was late. He rambled on for 2 minutes about the difficulty in finding the building. 
Before the interview had formally even begun he had already created a negative impression on the 
interviewer. He had lost the job before the interview had even started.
3.8	
Open Ended & Closed Ended Interview Questions:
Open-Ended Job Interview Questions:
The one thing to keep in mind with an open-ended question is that you need to give the interviewer 
more than a yes or no answer. If you do the research beforehand, you will be in a position to adequately 
open-ended question.
Closed-Ended Job Interview Questions:
There are times when an interviewer will need to know a specific piece of information and only require a 
brief response. My tip is to always answer the question directly in a brief, but complete sentence – never 
just in a one word answer.
Examples:
Q: Have you finished your bachelor degree?
A: Yes I did – I have a Bachelor of Commerce degree, majoring in Finance, from the University of XYZ.
Q: How many years of experience do you have as a truck driver?
A: This is my 6th year as a qualified truck driver with company XYZ.
Q: Are you proficient in using Microsoft Excel?
A: I am an advanced Microsoft Excel user and am also proficient in all Microsoft programs including 
Word and PowerPoint.
3.9	
Behaviour Job Interview Questions:
“Past behaviour is a better predictor of future behaviour”
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
54 
Job Interviewing
It is estimated that 80% of the interview is made up of behavioural questions. In order to understand 
how to answer behaviour questions we need to first define what a behavioural question is.
This type of interviewing is based on the philosophy that your past actions and behaviours will be a 
good indicator of your future behaviours. Therefore, how you acted to certain circumstances in your 
previous job is a reliable indicator of how you will act in your new job. As there are literally thousands 
of behaviour type questions, you can best prepare for this type of questioning by researching the culture 
of the company to get an understanding of the behavioural traits that are essential to working at that 
particular organisation.
Behavioural questions differ to standard interview questions as they focus more on experiences, 
behaviours, knowledge, skills and abilities. Rather than the standard question of “Do you have leadership 
skills” a behavioural question is more likely to be “Give me an example of your previous role when you 
displayed leadership abilities.” As the interviewer has already determined which skills are necessary for 
the role it is important that you are prepared for these questions.
The best way to begin studying for these questions is to look at the job description! The list of skills that 
they require are the skills they will more than likely focus on. When the job description mentions they 
require a person with good teamwork skills or negotiation skills, it is more than likely that this will be 
turned into a behavioural question to see if you really do possess these skills.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
EXPERIENCE THE POWER OF 
FULL ENGAGEMENT…
     RUN FASTER.
          RUN LONGER..
                RUN EASIER…
READ MORE & PRE-ORDER TODAY 
WWW.GAITEYE.COM
Challenge the way we run

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
55 
Job Interviewing
In good news, behavioural questions are not to be feared. When prepared properly, these questions can 
be easily answered.
3.9.1	
How to Answer Behaviour Job Interview Questions:
The best way to answer a behavioural question is to use the STAR Format.
Situation: 
The interviewer wants you to present a recent challenge and situation in which you found yourself.
Task: 
What did you have to achieve? The interviewer will be looking to see what you were trying to achieve 
from the situation.
Action:
What did you do? The interviewer will be looking for information on what you did, why you did it and 
what were the alternatives.
Results: 
What were the outcomes of your actions? What did you achieve through your actions and did you meet 
your objectives. What did you learn from this experience and have you used this learning since?
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
56 
Job Interviewing
3.10	
50 Popular Behaviour Job Interview Questions:
• Describe a time when you were faced with a stressful situation and how you overcame the 
situation
• Tell me about a difficult decision you’ve made in the last year
• Give an example of a time when a project you were on failed
• Provide an example of when you showed initiative and took the lead
• Tell me about a situation where you have had to speak with an unhappy customer
• Give me an example of a time when you motivated others and how this led to a positive 
outcome
• Give an example of a goal you set and how you reached it
• Describe a decision you made that was unpopular with your co-workers and how you 
handled this
• Describe a situation in which you were able to use negotiation to successfully change a 
person’s opinion
• Describe an instance when you had to think on your feet to make a split second decision
• Describe a situation where you knew your boss wrong – how did you handle it?
• Give an example of a time when you used good judgment in solving a problem
• Describe a major change or adjustment to your job and your reactions to the change
• Describe a situation where the situation changed and you forced to adjust to the changes – 
how did you handle this adjustment?
• Describe a time when you were able to effectively communicate an error to your supervisor
• Tell me about a time when you encountered conflict in the workplace and how you handled 
the conflict?
• What was your most difficult decision in the last 6 months? What made it difficult?
• Provide an example of when you had to go above and beyond your normal duties in order 
to get the job done
• Describe a time when you put the needs of your workmates before your own when 
completing a task
• Tell me about a time when your knowledge or skills significantly enhanced an outcome or 
decision
• Provide an example of a problem you had with a co-worker or boss and how you resolved it
• Give an example of a pressure situation you faced and how you reacted to the pressure
• Provide an example of a time when you felt you were able to motivate
• Describe a situation when you were able to have a positive influence on others
• Describe a time when you did not put in 100% into your job or performance and what you 
did about it
• Tell me about a time when you had to solve a problem with very little guidance or direction
• Tell me about a time when you were successful in a team environment?
• Tell us about a time that you were able to adapt to a culturally different environment
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
57 
Job Interviewing
• Give an example of a situation that you have gone out of your way to make someone feel 
comfortable in the working environment
• Tell us about the most effective contribution you have made as part of a task group or 
special project team
• Describe a team experience you found rewarding
• Describe a team experience you found disappointing
• What was the most stressful situation you have faced? How did you deal with it?
• Have you ever had difficulty getting others to accept your ideas? What was your approach? 
• Have you ever had to deal with conflicting deadlines? How did you decide which task to 
complete?
• Explain a complex problem you recently encountered
• What have you done in the past to contribute toward a teamwork environment?
• Provide an example of an annoying or unpopular co-worker and how you deal with that 
person
• Tell me about a time when you went overtime on a deadline
• Describe a time where you were wrong in your decision making – what did you do to fix it
• Describe a time where you had to delegate tasks
• Provide an example where you were unsure what to do but afraid to ask for guidance
• Give an example of when you had to use different management styles for different people
• Provide an example of how you were able to promote morale
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
PDF components for PHP developers
www.setasign.com
SETASIGN
This e-book  
is made with 
SetaPDF

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
58 
Job Interviewing
• What is the biggest contribution you made in your current role?
• What are you most proud of in your working career?
• Have you ever had to “go the extra mile” for a customer? What did you do?
• When was the last time a supervisor gave you constructive criticism – how did you react?
• Discuss a setback you have overcome in the last 12 months
• Give me an example of a time when you felt that someone wasn’t being honest with you in 
the workplace and how confronted it
3.11	
Situational Job Interview Questions:
Situational interview questions, more commonly known as “hypothetical interview questions” are 
questions an interviewer uses to find out how you would approach certain problems if they were to 
arise. This type of questioning is designed to help the interviewer with determining how you would 
handle a certain situation. Unlike behavioural interviews which you are required to provide examples 
of how you handled a certain situation, situational questions ask you to envisage and hypothesise how 
you would handle a particular situation if it were to arise.
Examples of Situational Questions:
• If you found out an employee was stealing from the business how would you approach this 
employee?
• What would you do if your supervisor asked you to do something that you felt was 
unethical?
• Imagine you have a deadline and you are running out of time. What would you do?
• How would you handle an employee that is disrupting the work environment?
• In a position of management, how would you handle a heavy workload if you were short 
staffed?
• If your supervisor makes a decision you do not agree with how would you handle this?
• How would you react if a team member was not contributing towards a project?
• As a leader what would you do to build team spirit?
Keys to answering situational interview questions:
Remember that situational interview questions deal with hypothetical situations and not necessarily 
past experiences – while a hypothetical question may seem daunting to answer, the best way to prepare 
yourself is similar to the steps involved a problem solving exercise.
Rule 1: Be prepared and have a definite understanding of the role and the position that you are applying 
for. By understanding the position, you can already second guess the questions that an interviewer might 
ask. For example, if you are applying for a managerial position, it is more than likely that the situation 
questions will be about how you would handle certain scenarios as a manager.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
59 
Job Interviewing
Example: “How would you react if a team member was not contributing toward a project?” By researching 
the type of organisation and hierarchy you are in a better position to answer this question.
Rule 2: During your research, make a list of events that happened in your previous role or in your past 
that led to a positive outcome. If you’re a recent graduate or entry level, draw on other areas such as 
volunteer work or memberships you belong to.
Rule 3: Develop a few short stories about specific examples where you solved the problem and how you 
solved the problem. Most important is to have a clear understanding of how you resolved the issues.
Rule 4: Apply these examples to the questions.
Sample questions and excellent answers:
Question 1: How would you react if a team member was not contributing towards a project?
Answer: Unfortunately, I have been in this situation before where one team member was not contributing, 
and it caused a detrimental effect on the whole team. I would handle this situation with honest 
communication at the very beginning. What I have found is that the more you ignore the problem, the 
worse it can get. Speaking with the team member in a non-confrontational way is the best approach. 
Often the reason for a team member not contributing is that they don’t understand the work or what is 
expected of them. By communicating with the individual, I am at least able to find out what the cause 
of the problem and then be able to work toward a solution.
TIP: As you can see from my answer I have drawn upon my experience, listed the event that occurred 
and presented a positive solution to the problem.
Question 2: If you believed your supervisor was wrong how would you handle the situation?
Answer: I would present my reasons to the supervisor and provide an alternate solution. In my experiences 
I find that telling someone they are wrong without providing facts or examples is the wrong way to go 
about it. I would ensure that I was fully prepared and had analysed the situation before speaking to the 
supervisor. Most importantly, I would discuss my reasons in private, in a one on one situation, not in 
front of other team members.
Question 3: How would you react if a project you had been working on suddenly changed or the deadline 
had been changed?
Answer: My first response would be to speak with the supervisors to get an understanding why the 
project had been changed and ensure that I had all the facts and answers before approaching the rest of 
the team. As soon as I had the answers I would notify the team to let them know things had changed. 
Once everyone was aware of the changes I would want to sit down with the team to develop a new 
strategy to move forward with the project.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
60 
Job Interviewing
3.12	
Employer Interview Questions:
With the current economic climate and changing job market, employers have now started to alter the 
types of questions they ask in interviews. With hundreds of Internet pages dedicated to types of interview 
questions and all listing the same “general” type questions (what are your strengths, where do you see 
yourself in 10 years, etc.), employers are now steering away from these types of questions and introducing 
a new set of questions that test your creativity and flair. Below is a list of questions which you may not 
have thought about previously. Think about how you would answer these questions if faced with one 
of these in an interview:
• If you had the option, would you change your college career?
• How do you go about deciding what to do first when given a project?
• What are the most important rewards you expect in your business career?
• Provide an example of how you are a risk taker.
• If you could have any job in the world, what would it be?
• Why do you want to work for us and not for our competitor?
• What did you think of your previous manager/supervisor?
• What did you do in your last job to increase value?
• What are some of the things that bother you?
• Tell me about the last time you felt anger on the job.
• Do you need other people around to stimulate you or are you self-motivated?
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
61 
Job Interviewing
• What management style gets the best results out of you?
• How can our company offer you what your previous company could not offer?
• How long do you think it would take before you were making a significant contribution to 
our business?
• How ambitious are you? Would you compete for my job?
• What do you like and dislike about the job we are discussing?
• Why did you choose a career in…?
• What do you think is the most important dilemma facing our business today?
• How much does your last job resemble the one you are applying for? What are the 
differences?
• Why did you decide to join your previous company? Did the job live up to your 
expectations? Why are you leaving now?
• Explain the organisational structure and hierarchy in your last company and how you fitted 
into it. Did this suit you?
• Do you prefer to work in a small, medium or large company?
• What interests you about our company, product or service?
• You have not done this sort of job before. How will you cope/succeed?
• Do you consider yourself successful in your career to date?
• What was your greatest success in your professional career? How did you achieve it?
• What has been your biggest failure in your professional career?
• Did you feel you advanced and progressed in your last job?
• How do you handle criticism?
• What would you like to avoid in your next job?
• How did you get on with your previous manager, supervisor, co-workers and subordinates?
• What will your referees say about you?
• Fantasy questions – What would you do if you won the Lottery? Would you come to work 
tomorrow?
3.13	
Questions You Can Ask In The Job Interview:
As a job candidate what is the best question to ask in an interview? At some point in the interview 
(typically at the end) the hiring manager will turn to you and ask “Do you have any questions which 
you would like to ask me?” 
There are two main benefits in asking the right questions. Firstly don’t forget the number one rule from 
chapter one. The interview is a two way process and you need to ensure that this organization is the 
right fit for you. If you are uncertain about certain aspects of the role or need greater clarification, than 
this is the time to ask those questions. Don’t be shy or intimidated. Secondly by asking clever questions 
will not just help you in deciding if this job is right for you but will impress the interviewer and leave a 
positive image as someone who comprehensive and professional.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
62 
Job Interviewing
What you need to do:
• Prioritise your questions based on the interview situation – Is this the first interview or the 
second interview? 
• The best questions you can ask are open ended questions
• Have 3–5 questions prepared (The more the better)
• Only ask questions that you are interested in knowing the answer! 
• Only ask questions that are relevant to the job, department, management and organization
Sample 15 Job Interview Questions to ask:
• How will my leadership responsibilities and performance be measured?
• Do you provide any sort of professional development or training?
• How do you measure performance and how often is it reviewed?
• Who was in this job before and why did they leave? 
• Is this a new position? How long has this position existed?
• Could you explain your organizational structure?
• How many people work in this office/department?
• How much travel is expected?
• What’s the makeup of the team as far as experience? 
• With whom will I be working most closely?
• Why do you enjoy working for this company?
• How will my leadership responsibilities and performance be measured?
• Can you describe the company’s management style?
• What would be the goals of the department in the coming year?
• What are the traits and skills of people who are the most successful within the organization?
Types of Job Interview Questions NOT to ask:
• Salary and benefits
• Questions that are clearly stated on the website
• Generic / Obvious questions
• Questions that the interviewer is unable to answer. Do not try to “outsmart the interviewer” 
Asking questions that appear to be challenging the interviewer or a question that the 
interviewer is unlikely to know will only create a negative vibe between you and the 
interviewer. Remember you are trying to build rapport with the interviewer not challenge 
the interviewer.
• Questions that are irrelevant to the job or organization
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
63 
Job Interviewing
Sample 15 Job Interview Questions NOT to ask:
• How many sick days and holiday days do I get?
• Do I still get paid for a sick day?
• If I start next week how long until I will get a pay rise?
• How long is the lunch break?
• What is it that your company does? 
• Are the working hours flexible?
• Am I able to have my own office?
• Who are the “coolest” people on my team? 
• How many warnings do you get before you are fired? 
• Are there many coffee shops close by?
• How financially sound is this company?
• What are your strengths and weaknesses?
• Will I be given an employee handbook?
• What is the company policy on internet use?
• Can I use Facebook?
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
64 
Job Interviewing
3.14	
Following Up After The Job Interview:
The final stage of nailing the interview is the follow up. After doing all the hard work of preparing for 
the interview, dressing correctly and being able to answer all the questions which the interviewer asks, 
the final stage is to follow up from the interview.
Find below a list of the best follow up tactics to use to continue to show your enthusiasm for the role.
Follow up with a letter or email thanking the interviewer for their time and re-expressing your desire 
for the role and because of your skills and experience you are the right person for the role. A thank you 
letter not only reiterates your desire, but continues the rapport you already built during the interview.
Rules to follow:
When writing a thank you letter always remember to correctly use their right title and spell their name 
correctly. Nothing is worse than receiving an email with the persons name spelt incorrectly.
Send your thank you email that evening. You want the interviewer to receive the email in the morning 
so that they continue to remember who you are and you stay in the forefront of their mind.
Don’t be afraid to follow up with a phone call 3–5 days after the interview. Ideally it is best to ask the 
interviewer in the interview when they expect to make a decision, but a follow up call is great way to 
further reiterate your desire for the job.
Do not burn any bridges. You may have felt the interview did not go well or that the role was not for 
you. That’s ok. Continue your professionalism until the very end. You just never know what else can 
potentially come from that interview. I have seen cases where the interviewer was impressed with a 
candidate and although they did not have the right skills for that particular job they created a new 
position for that candidate.
The big misconception from candidates is that the interviewer does not want to be disturbed with follow 
up. THIS IS WRONG. Many hiring managers will observe the candidates who do follow up. Stand out 
from other potential candidates by making sure you follow through to the end.
Example thank you email
Dear Mr./Ms. Last Name:
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to interview for the position of XYZ. It was a pleasure to meet 
you, and I appreciate your time and consideration in interviewing me for this position.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The Ultimate Australian Job Search Handbook
65 
Job Interviewing
Following our discussion I consider that I have all the skills and requirements to fulfil your job. Having 
been a manager for 3 years and a project manager for 2 years, I have the desire to lead the team in a 
positive and productive way.
In addition to my technical skills I bring enthusiasm and energy into everything I do in order to get the 
job done in an efficient and timely manner.
I am very keen on this role and working for company ABC. If you require any further information from 
me please contact me anytime on XXX XXX XXXX.
Thank you again for your time and consideration.
Sincerely, 
Your Full Name
© RedStarResume Publications – www.redstarresume.com
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

