The Book of Overclocking—Tweak Your 
PC to Unleash Its Power  
Scott Wainner 
Robert Richmond 
Copyright © 2003 No Starch Press, Inc. 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by 
any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the 
copyright owner and the publisher. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 – 06 05 04 03 
Trademarked names are used throughout this book. Rather than use a trademark 
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, we are using the names only 
in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of 
infringement of the trademark. 
Publisher: William Pollock 
Editorial Director: Karol Jurado 
Cover and Interior Design: Octopod Studios 
Composition: 1106 Design, LLC 
Developmental Editor: Heather Bennett 
Proofreader: Robyn Brode 
Indexer: Broccoli Information Management 
Distributed to the book trade in the United States by Publishers Group West, 1700 
Fourth Street, Berkeley, CA 94710; phone: 800-788-3123; fax: 510-658-1834. 
Distributed to the book trade in Canada by Jacqueline Gross & Associates, Inc., One 
Atlantic Avenue, Suite 105, Toronto, Ontario M6K 3E7 Canada; phone: 416-531-
6737; fax 416-531-4259. 
For information on translations or book distributors outside the United States and 
Canada, please see our distributors list in the back of this book or contact No Starch 
Press, Inc. directly: 
No Starch Press, Inc. 
555 De Haro Street, Suite 250, San Francisco, CA 94107 
phone: 415-863-9900; fax: 415-863-9950; info@nostarch.com; 
http://www.nostarch.com  
The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While 
every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the author 
nor No Starch Press, Inc. shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect 

to any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the 
information contained in it. 
Library of Congress Cataloguing-in-Publication Data  
Wainner, Scott. 
The book of overclocking : tweak your PC to unleash its power / 
Scott Wainner and Robert Richmond. 
p. cm. 
Includes index. 
1-886411-76-X 
1. Microcomputers–Upgrading. 2. Computer organization. 3. High performance 
computing. I. Richmond, Robert, 1980-II. Title. 
TK7887 .W85 2003 
621.39'16–dc21 
Dedication 
For Bill Turney, Phyllis, and Robyn. 
—S.W. 
To Doreen, for believing in me. 
—R.R. 
About the Authors  
Scott Wainner founded SysOpt.com, one of the first PC hardware enthusiast sites, 
and ran it for seven years until in late 2001 he launched TechIMO.com, a knowledge-
sharing community of PC hardware enthusiasts, gamers, and web developers. 
Wainner's opinions on overclocking have been cited by PC World, CNN, the Toronto 
Star, Entrepreneur Magazine, and countless hardware web sites. 
Robert Richmond's background experience in IT-related journalism extends to 
many well-recognized publications, such as SysOpt.com, SharkyExtreme, 
HardwareCentral, Romulus2, EarthWeb, and as a hardware editor for TechIMO.com. 
Robert holds Associate of Science degrees in Mathematics, Computer Sciences, and 
Scientific Application Development. Robert offers a rather untraditional approach to 
computers, as he is often more interested in "why" a device works rather than "how" 
it works. 
Chapter 1: What The Computer 
Industry Does Not Want You to Know 

Overview 
Everyone understands the potential for increased productivity or enhanced 
entertainment afforded through computers, but most users often view the 
technologies and hardware driving the phenomenal demand for desktop computers 
as "behind the scenes" components. Indeed, computers are often regarded as 
mysterious or even troublesome devices. A significant number of computer users do 
not understand the workings of a computer system's internal hardware beyond the 
minimal basics. 
This lack of knowledge is often a byproduct of the computer industry itself. 
Technology follows a consistent evolutionary path, with the arrival of new 
architectures and platforms every 6 to 12 months. The backlash of this process is the 
users’ inherent belief that systems are outdated as soon as they are purchased. This 
neverending cycle fuels the computer technology industry, thus leading to ever 
increasing costs associated with upgrades, or even complete system replacement. 
The upgrade cycle forces computer users into a price-concentric upgrade path based 
on what the industry wants the user to believe, thus leading to the increased demand 
for upgrades or system purchases. This model does not benefit the end user, as 
hardware costs are increasing at an exponential rate for those hoping to keep pace 
with the public relations hype generated by the industry. (The impact of the current 
industry model is not meant to be negative or malicious toward the end user; it is 
simply the marketing approach being adopted in nearly all industries these days.) 
In order to sustain their business models, many corporations within the computer 
industry often prey upon the fact that the vast majority of end users have limited 
hardware knowledge. The Book of Overclocking dispels the myths surrounding the 
politics of the technology business and fully equips you with a cost-effective 
alternative to upgrading by extending the life of your current hardware while 
increasing your satisfaction with your existing PC's level of performance. Why 
purchase expensive upgrades when increasing your current PC processor's clock 
speed could be the key to realizing your desired level of performance? 
Current Industry Players 
Many computing enthusiasts choose not to conform to the tech industry's upgrade 
path propaganda by implementing overclocking techniques. Overclocking is the 
process of increasing the speed or clock frequencies of devices, such as processors, 
beyond their factory defaults. 
Our primary concern in this book is with extending the processor (CPU) clock speed 
and examining the intricate relation it has with the computer system's other 
components. The procedures involved with the overclocking process can vary 
according to different system architectures, but the basic concepts remain essentially 
the same. We'll focus on desktop personal computing, with the IBM compatible being 
the dominant market player. 
The term IBM compatible has undergone a radical departure from the early days of 
desktop computing, but the fundamental concepts behind the technology remain 

essentially the same. The entire range of desktop systems once designated under 
the blanket umbrella of IBM compatibility can now be referenced to the base 
architecture being utilized, in this case, "x86," a derivative of the naming process 
applied to system architectures from the original 8086 in the early 1980s through the 
release of the 80486 nearly a decade later. While different manufacturers and 
developers have adopted various naming strategies to increase market 
differentiation, all current so-called IBM-compatible desktop platforms remain nothing 
more than extensions to the x86 core processor architecture. 
The market has witnessed the rise and fall of a variety of processor manufacturers 
over the years. The three remaining x86 market players are Intel Corporation, 
Advanced Micro Designs (AMD), and VIA Technologies, and their major product 
offerings are listed in Table 1-1. 
 
 
Table 1-1: Major Processor Manufacturers and Product Offerings  
Manufacturer  
Architecture  
MHz Rating  
Intel Corporation 
Pentium 
60 – 200 MHz 
  
Pentium MMX 
133 – 233 MHz 
  
Pentium Pro 
150 – 200 MHz 
  
Pentium II 
233 – 450 MHz 
  
Celeron 
233 – 333 MHz 
  
Celeron A 
300 – 533 MHz 
  
Pentium III Katmai 
450 – 600 MHz 
  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
500 – 1133 MHz 
  
Celeron II 
533 – 1100 MHz 
  
Pentium III Tualatin 
1100+ MHz 
  
Celeron Hybrid 
1200+ MHz 
  
Pentium 4 Willamette 1300 – 2000 
MHz 
  
Pentium 4 Northwood 1600 – 3000+ 
MHz 
  
Pentium Xeon 
All Pentium 
Ranges 
Advanced Micro Designs 
K5 
75 – 117 MHz 
  
K6 
166 – 300 MHz 
  
K6-2 
266 – 550 MHz 
  
K6-3 
350 – 450 MHz 
  
K6-2/3+ 
450 – 550 MHz 
  
Athlon K7 
500 – 700 MHz 
  
Athlon K75 
550 – 1000 MHz 
  
Athlon Thunderbird 
600 – 1400 MHz 

Table 1-1: Major Processor Manufacturers and Product Offerings  
Manufacturer  
Architecture  
MHz Rating  
  
Athlon Duron 
600 – 950 MHz 
  
Athlon 4/MP 
1200 – 1400+ 
MHz 
  
Athlon Duron Morgan 1000+ MHz 
  
Athlon XP 
1333+ MHz 
VIA Technologies/Cyrix/National 
Semiconductor 
686 M1 
80 – 150 MHz 
  
686MX M2 
133 – 300 MHz 
  
Cyrix III 
350 – 450 MHz 
  
VIA C3 
533 – 933+ MHz 
 
Intel remains the dominant player across all ranges of the desktop computing 
marketplace, and has retained its significant market share ever since the first 
implementation of its 8086 processor within IBM's earliest x86 desktop computing 
systems. The architectures driving competition from other manufacturers are 
extensions to technologies pioneered by Intel over the past 30 years. 
The Pentium 4 represents Intel's current flagship platform. The Pentium 4 platform is 
based on a radical departure from its earlier P6 architectures, though binary 
compatibility is maintained with nearly all 32-bit x86 programming code. The older P6 
core technology is still represented through Intel's active support and manufacturing 
of the Pentium III and Celeron microprocessors. 
AMD has rapidly gained market share over the past decade due to its superb 
architectural designs and dedication to cost efficiency. This increased competition is 
a welcome addition to the computer markets, as AMD can effectively influence the 
pricing strategies across the entire microprocessor market, thus leading to decreases 
in end-user pricing due to increased competition for Intel's product offerings. 
AMD's core business model is based around the Athlon series microprocessor, which 
has undergone a multitude of revisions since its first inception just a few years ago. 
The Athlon remains the most efficient x86 architecture currently available in terms of 
raw per-MHz performance, regardless of the marketing hype and paranoia generated 
by competing manufacturers. The current AthlonXP, AMD's flagship product series, 
represents a pinnacle of x86 computing not even conceptualized just a decade ago. 
Once popular processor favorites like National Semiconductor's Cyrix and IDT 
Centaur's WinChip are now only memories, though both of these corporations still 
live on through acquisitions by the Taiwanese technology giant VIA Technologies. 
VIA has resurrected the technologies from these manufacturers with its C3 series of 
processors. The C3 is a relatively underpowered chip compared to competing entry-

level designs, though its architecture does offer a good performance to price ratio for 
users interested only in basic desktop applications. 
Additional Architectures 
Other manufactures have come and gone, but their processors have been only of 
mild interest to most end users, so we won't discuss them here specifically. Still, the 
techniques we'll address are often applicable to additional architectures not directly 
covered because most X86 platforms are similar. Older processors often overclock 
like their later siblings, the only difference being the operating speeds and other 
architectural values. 
Topicalities to Be Presented 
Your path to understanding overclocking begins with a view of today's market in 
Chapter 2. This background information explains how you can use overclocking to 
offset the increasing costs of computing. We'll do a cost analysis of common 
overclocking scenarios versus the actual monetary cost of both purchasing a prebuilt 
PC and upgrading individual hardware components, so that you can better 
appreciate the fundamental benefits of overclocking. 
Chapters 3 and 4 provide the concepts that create the foundation of overclocking. 
We'll cover the basic techniques and ideas required to attain a successful overclock 
without concentrating on platform-specific data. 
Chapter 5 covers perhaps the most important factor in attaining a successful 
overclock: cooling. Proper thermal regulation of both the microprocessor and the 
entire system is required to maintain stability at extended operating speeds, 
especially as the latest 1+ GHz architectures push the envelope in terms of extreme 
heat generation. The overclocking of a processor without proper cooling is tempting 
fate, as this is the leading cause of component failure when pushing systems beyond 
their factory defaults. 
Chapters 6 through 8 offer extended information about each of the latest platforms 
from the three primary manufacturers: AMD, Intel, and VIA. Topics include platform 
specifics and detailed information about the latest generations of processors. We'll 
cover background information, architectural data, operating speeds, and detailed 
overclocking procedures for all current, popular platforms. 
Chapter 9 tackles troubleshooting, which is often required to diagnose potential 
instabilities or device failures within an overclocked computing system. Overclocking 
increases the possibility of instability because it places additional stress on the 
various system components. The majority of problems arise from mismatches in the 
communication rates between each of the PC's components. 
Chapter 10 discusses benchmarking applications and procedures, the ability to 
assess the performance return offered by overclocking. We'll look at the intricate 
testing and analysis of system performance at all component levels with a balance of 
both synthetic and real-world benchmarking routines. A complete system benchmark 

testing process can also offer you the ability to determine the proper mixture of 
various overclocking procedures for maximum performance. 
Chapter 11 offers advice on whether or not you should overclock once you know 
how, as well as smart shopping tips, and what to do with your PC's increased 
performance. Just because you know how to overclock, doesn't mean that it's right 
for you, since overclocking can increase system instabilities and the potential for data 
loss. And of course, it may make more sense for you to buy cheap and fast 
components rather than overclock your existing hardware, so the smart shopping tips 
section will help you find the lowest prices on quality hardware from the best retailers. 
The Appendix answers your most frequently asked overclocking-related questions, 
defines terms, and provides a list of resources where you can further advance your 
knowledge and overclocking skills. You will also find a list of software applications to 
help you diagnose, benchmark, and overclock your PC. Several retailers are listed 
that provide overclocking equipment such as water coolers, fans, Athlon unlocking 
kits, and PC cases. 
Chapter 2: Overclocking Versus 
Industry Hype—Technical Background 
Overview 
The popularity of overclocking has undergone extensive growth within the tech 
enthusiast community as a response to the increasing costs of maintaining a cutting-
edge yet affordable PC. Overclocking serves as a solution to the high prices 
associated with today's latest processors. Trying to keep pace with the latest 
releases in processor technologies can become costly, as new releases of increased 
speed ranges become available at an exponential rate compared to just a few years 
ago. 
No longer do just a few megahertz (MHz) separate the fastest processors from the 
slowest within a single processor family. For just one processor design, today's 
market offers processor speed ranges of several hundred MHz, though the 
manufacturer's associated pricing strategies of this business model do not benefit 
you. Processor manufacturers spend millions of dollars to hype the "latest designs," 
when in reality the newest processors are little more than the same processor core 
operating at a higher MHz rating. The pricing of each speed-rated processor varies 
as widely as the hype surrounding the MHz rating game. As illustrated by Figure 2-1, 
where we look at the Intel Pentium 4 processor as an example, the cost of the higher-
speed processors often exceeds the cost of the lower-speed processors of the same 
processor family by hundreds of dollars. Overclocking successfully circumvents the 
industry's hype by working to obtain maximum performance from the more cost-
efficient lower spectrum of a particular processor family. 

 
Figure 2-1: Intel Pentium 4 retail pricing and speed range  
Overclocking allows users to select lower speed, and thus lower cost, grades of a 
processor family, then increase the clock speed of the processor core to a level that 
is comparable to the upper-range processors of that processor family. A properly 
designed overclocking implementation can often exceed the speed ratings of the 
latest processors available while utilizing much lower-cost processors to minimize 
expense. Overclocking existing systems may prove more problematic compared to 
building a system with overclocking in mind, but the potential for increasing operating 
speeds by several percent still remains a reality for the widest range of designs. 
Processor manufacturers are well aware of the overclocking community, but most do 
little to circumvent such efforts, since the majority of mainstream computer users 
know little about the processes and procedures involved in overclocking. Still, the 
industry has implemented various features to deter overclocking attempts over the 
years. Such attempts have been implemented across all stages of processor design, 
from the earliest engineering to the latest fabrication stages of production. Some 
manufacturers have even attempted complete locking of processor core operating 
speeds, known as clock locking. Fortunately, the cost of implementing clock locking 
has limited its introduction within the retail market segment of the industry. 
Prebuilt Versus Custom Systems 
Preconfigured systems from original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) offer clear 
pricing advantages for initial retail cost, though the long-term maintenance and 
upgrade costs may be significantly higher compared to a custom configured system 
from a smaller system integrator, local vendor, or self-build. OEM-assembled 
systems are clearly not the choice for maximum overclocking potential, but the 
possibility of successfully overclocking these systems remains high due to increased 
efforts of the enthusiast community to provide overclocking-related information, 
custom software, and hardware hacks for OEM-assembled computers. 
OEM systems are commonly built atop hardware with minimal overclocking 
capabilities to minimize costs associated with supporting end-user overclocking 
attempts. Owners of such systems must often look to online enthusiast communities 
for specialized procedures and tricks for successful overclocking. Thus, it's trickier to 
overclock OEM-configured systems, but the rewards in terms of increased operating 
speeds and improved performance can rival that of a custom-built overclocking 
system. 
 Note OEMs have no desire to support overclocking options within their system 

designs. Overclocking not only voids component warranties, but also it can lead 
to system instability and component failures for those users unwilling to 
undertake the precautions required for successful overclocking. Integrating 
support for overclocking would lead to a customer support nightmare for these 
large corporations. 
 
 
Table 2-1: The Pros and Cons of OEM- and Custom-Configured Systems  
System 
Type  
Pros  
Cons  
OEM 
Configured 
• 
Low upfront cost 
• 
Easy to acquire 
• 
Higher upgrade cost 
• 
Difficult overclocking 
Custom 
Configured 
• 
Superior overclocking 
potential 
• 
Every component 
tailored exactly to your 
computing needs 
• 
Less expensive 
upgrades 
• 
Self-build requires some 
specialized knowledge to select 
and assemble system 
components 
• 
Increased upfront cost 
 
The cost of implementing overclocking-friendly components within a system would 
serve to increase retail prices for the consumer market segment. 
Overclocking-capable systems are generally built atop quality hardware developed 
for direct retail sales to consumers, while OEM systems are usually built utilizing 
mass-produced, off-the-shelf components in the hopes of lowering production costs. 
While overclocking is still a possibility for many OEM system owners, aftermarket 
custom-configured systems offer superior overclocking potential for enthusiasts. 
A custom-configured (or self-built) system can provide optimum tweaking options to 
offer the most potential for successful overclocking. The effort required to either build 
or attain overclocking-friendly systems is more intensive than an off-the-shelf retail 
system from a major OEM manufacturer, but the enhanced overclocking potential is 
clearly evident. When building your own custom-configured system, you can also 
precertify each of the system's components for its "overclockability" by researching 
product reviews and articles from a variety of publications, such as popular hardware 
review websites like those in Table 2-2. 
 
 
Table 2-2: Recommended Websites for Precertifying the Overclockability of 
Hardware Components  
Website Name  
Website Address  

Ace's Hardware 
http://www.aceshardware.com  
AnandTech 
http://www.anandtech.com  
HardOCP 
http://www.hardocp.com  
TechIMO 
http://www.techimo.com  
Overclockers.com 
http://www.overclockers.com  
Overclocking Examples 
Examples of typical overclocking scenarios offer better illustrations of the cost 
savings and performance improvements than any amount of technical data. Table 2-
3 reflects a substantial savings in cost for an overclocked slower-speedrated 
processor versus a nonoverclocked faster-speed-rated processor, for both AMD and 
Intel processors. Both the AMD Athlon and the Intel Pentium 4 represent the latest 
architectures from each of the largest industry players. Each platform offers rated 
processors that scale several hundred MHz within the same model family, with prices 
varying widely from the lowest to highest MHz offerings. 
 
 
Table 2-3: Cost Analysis of an Overclocked, Slower-Rated Processor Versus a 
Nonoverclocked, Faster-Rated Processor  
Processor to 
Overclock  
Market 
Price[*]  
Potential 
Overclock[**] 
Equivalent to 
Overclocked 
Speed  
Equivalent 
Cost[*]  
Comparative 
Savings  
Intel Pentium 
4 2000 MHz 
$143 
2600 MHz 
Intel Pentium 4 
2600 MHz 
$378 
62% 
AMD Athlon 
XP 1600+ @ 
1400 MHz 
$53 
1800 MHz 
AMD Athlon XP 
2100+ @ 1800 
MHz 
$141 
62% 
[*]Average market prices as of 4/11/02. 
[**]May not be typical of all processor samples. 
 
The Athlon Thunderbird series of processors offers a great example of overclocking 
potential. A typical entry-level AMD system now comes configured with a 1000 MHz 
Thunderbird processor, as this chip offers a great price to performance ratio. 
However, overclocking can serve to further extend that ratio by allowing the 
processor to operate at a speed beyond the factory-defined 1000 MHz rating. For 
example, many of the best 1000 MHz Thunderbird processors can be overclocked to 
1200+ MHz with little more than a minor change in the system's user-configurable 
BIOS configuration setup or motherboard jumper settings. The potential exists for 
even higher overclocking ranges with additional user effort, such as improving case 

or processor cooling to maintain better thermal regulation in order to reach higher 
core processor operating speeds. 
Intel's latest Pentium 4 platform offers superb overclocking potential assuming the 
user thinks ahead when designing and assembling a custom-configured system. 
Even the earliest Pentium 4 1.5-GHz processors can usually attain 1.7+ GHz with 
little effort beyond a single change in the system's BIOS setup or motherboard 
jumper settings. As with the first example, those willing to undertake additional effort 
to increase cooling capabilities and other system design aspects can often witness 
much improved overclocking potential. Many of the best Pentium 4 1.5-GHz 
processors can attain operating speeds upwards of 2 GHz with a careful and patient 
system design plan. 
Chapter 3: Technical Theory—
Evolution of the Integrated Circuit 
Learning about the terms and technologies associated with overclocking will help you 
understand the techniques involved. PC performance depends not only on the 
technology of the processor itself, but on a number of subsystems as well. 
Measuring Processor Performance 
Early processor performance was measured in terms of how many instructions per 
second the architecture could execute on a standard set of data. As processors 
evolved and increased in complexity, a new approach was required. Frequency (the 
ability to switch a circuit quickly) became the popular measurement of computational 
speed. 
Frequency is best described as the rate at which an IC can change between its two 
states in a given period of time. Computer processor frequency is generally 
measured in megahertz. The term megahertz refers to millions of cycles per second, 
and the abbreviation is expressed as MHz. Gigahertz (expressed as GHz), or billions 
of cycles per second, is becoming the de facto standard due to significant speed 
gains in the latest generation of processors. 
Physical Properties of Integrated Circuits 
Several physical properties directly influence a processor's speed potential, but the 
die fabrication size of the processor's core circuitry is the most important. The core 
die size represents the actual physical distance between each trace signal route 
used to construct transistor pathways within the processor. A smaller die size means 
that the processor can generally operate at higher clock frequencies while using less 
voltage and producing less heat. 
The current industry standard die size is .18 micron (µ), which represents a balance 
between electrical and thermal constraints, yet retains scalability beyond 1 GHz. 
Popular designs using the .18 -micron die size include Intel's Pentium III Coppermine 
and Pentium 4 Willamette, and AMD's Athlon Thunderbird. 

 
Figure 3-1: .18-micron Pentium 4  
A significant number of PCs still in use contain processors fabricated with the much 
older .25-micron core die size. These include processors like the Pentium II and K6-
2. Massive cooling systems are needed when overclocking .25-micron processors, 
because these chips demand much higher voltage levels compared to those required 
by their .18-micron counterparts. It is difficult to scale these older designs beyond 600 
MHz. 
The core die size for the latest generation of processors, like Intel's Pentium III 
Tualatin and Pentium 4 Northwood, is the radically small .13 micron. These chips 
offer relatively low thermal dissipation rates (up to 50% lower than .18-micron 
models), as well as significantly lower core voltage requirements. Improved MHz 
scalability is the direct result of these advancements, and many .13-micron designs 
are expected to scale to 3 GHz and beyond before the next-generation fabrication 
process, which should be in the range of .7 to .9 micron, is introduced. 
These overclocked chips need more power to keep them stable at extended MHz 
operating speeds. Current designs are built atop a split-voltage architecture. Core 
voltage represents the internal electrical properties of the processor and corresponds 
with the die size employed during fabrication. Input/output voltage represents the 
operational voltage of the processor-to-chipset bus. It usually includes the power 
levels of other front-side bus components within a traditional system configuration. 
Thermal Dissipation Rate 
The thermal dissipation rate is a measurement of heat generated within an electrical 
circuit. The actual thermal unit employed in this measurement is watts. Assuming that 
the core die size remains consistent, the thermal rate increases proportionally to rises 
in operational speeds and core voltage levels. The processor's heatsink cooling 
mechanism is worth examining in any PC. 

 
Figure 3-2: Processor heatsink cooler  
Most designs use a large metal heatsink coupled with a fan to provide a forced-air 
cooling system for maximum heat dissipation at a relatively low cost. Other cooling 
systems are available, including vapor-phase and thermoelectric technologies, but 
their associated costs are usually prohibitive for the average desktop PC user. 
Whatever the cooling system, efficient thermal regulation is an important factor in 
successful overclocking. If core temperatures exceed normal operating 
specifications, the system can become unstable. Circuits can also be damaged 
during prolonged periods of intense heat. 
Fabrication 
While overclocking is often regarded as a rogue process, the premise behind it is well 
documented within the computer industry. Once a particular processor design has 
been finalized and taped out for silicon production, the manufacturer moves into the 
production and marketing phase of development. The manufacturing of processors or 
of any circuit device, is known as fabrication. 
 
Figure 3-3: Processor fabrication process  
The fabrication of an integrated circuit device begins with the selection of a substrate 
material. The substrate provides a base for the layers of electrical circuits that create 

transistor pathways. Both the type and quality of the substrate are important in 
determining maximum operating speed for a given processor design. 
Silicon Substrate 
All commercial processors currently on the market are built atop a silicon substrate. 
Silicon is a readily available element with good electrical isolation properties. It can 
be harvested from a variety of sources, and can even be obtained from common 
sand. The use of silicon minimizes production costs for processor manufacturers. 
 
Figure 3-4: Silicon substrate circuit  
Silicon substrates in today's processors contain impurities left during the extraction 
process. These limit the substrate's electrical insulation efficiency, and lead to lower 
yield rates and slower core operating speeds. 
CMOS fabrication techniques will likely change to accommodate upcoming 
generations of processors. Processors are currently manufactured using aluminum or 
copper metal layers within the transistor gate array. Copper offers less resistance 
and better conductivity than its aluminum counterpart. Nearly all newer processor 
designs therefore incorporate copper trace-route technologies, though an evolution in 
substrate technologies will be required to consolidate the gains in speed and 
efficiency. 
The SOI Standard 
Silicon-on-insulator (SOI) is primed to be the next substrate manufacturing standard. 
It differs from CMOS in that it places the transistor silicon junction atop an electrically 
insulated layer, commonly of glass or silicon oxide. Capacitance, a measure of ability 
to store an electrical charge, can be minimized in the gate area using the SOI 
switching technique. 
 
Figure 3-5: Silicon-on-insulator circuit  
Any transfer medium that can conduct electricity will exhibit capacitance to some 
degree. A MOS transistor is regarded as a capacitance circuit, implying that the MOS 
circuit must actually charge to full capacitance before it can activate its switching 
capability. The process of discharging and recharging a transistor requires a 

relatively long time compared to the time needed to switch the voltage state of a 
metal layer within a traditional transistor architecture. SOI is an attempt to eliminate 
this capacitance boundary: a low capacitance circuit will allow faster transistor 
operation. Accordingly, the ability to process more instructions in a given timeframe 
increases as latency in the transistor array decreases. 
New Technologies 
 
Figure 3-6: IBM SIMOX process  
IBM has pioneered research into SIMOX, a silicon purification method that uses a 
high-temperature injection to introduce oxygen into a silicon wafer and thus purify the 
substrate material. Oxygen bonds with silicon at high temperatures; thus a thin layer 
of silicon oxide film is formed. This nearly perfect layer allows for direct bonding of a 
pure crystalline silicon substrate. The greatest advantage of SIMOX is its significantly 
lower production costs compared to crystalline-based SOI methods that use 
expensive ruby or sapphire design materials. 
Silicon-on-insulator is not the only upcoming technology to revolutionize the substrate 
production process. Perhaps the most promising future technology involves the 
compression and purification of nitrogen. In this process, purified nitrogen gas is 
compressed and tempered into a solid form. Once depressurized, the nitrogen 
remains in a solid state. Substrates produced from this technique are expected to be 
almost perfectly pure, while the abundant supply of nitrogen within our atmosphere 
could lower production costs. 
Light Lithography 
Light lithography is used to etch specific circuit pathways within a processor core. A 
shadow mask is created from a scaled blueprint of the processor's core circuitry. This 
shadow mask is then used in conjunction with a light etching process that literally 
burns the circuit pathways into the processor substrate. Additional shadow masks are 
then applied to create the complex multilayer circuitry found within a processor. 
Figure 3-7 shows a silicon wafer being tested after etching. 

 
Figure 3-7: Silicon wafer being tested after etching  
Etching can lower production costs by producing multiple processors at once. A large 
wafer of silicon is placed within the light masking system, which produces a "batch" of 
processors during a single pass. Each processor shares a common circuit design, 
with certain fail-safe and redundancy features embedded into the core architecture. 
Variation in quality among processors is due to the physical limitations involved in 
production. 
 
Figure 3-8: Intel processor fabrication lab  
Silicon-on-Insulator Processors 
AMD is scheduled to release a silicon-on-insulator processor based on its popular 
Athlon architecture before the end of the year 2002. This new Athlon design should 
arrive under a development project codenamed Thoroughbred, the first introduction 
of SOI technologies into the mainstream computing market for x86 architectures. 
Assuming the Thoroughbred design proves successful, other manufacturers, 
including Intel, will move quickly to adopt similar production techniques to extend the 
operating speed of current processor designs. 

 
Figure 3-9: AMD processor roadmap  
Laboratory testing shows that SOI-based processors can achieve up to a 25% 
improvement in transistor cycle time compared to the same architecture 
manufactured with more traditional CMOS fabrication techniques. Performance gains 
can average 25 to 35% when SOI is employed. Considering the efficient scalability of 
such an advanced design, the upcoming Athlon Thoroughbred could rapidly emerge 
as the dominant choice for overclocking enthusiasts. 
Quality Control and Overclocking 
As with any fabrication process, the actual quality of each unit in production can vary 
under the influence of numerous variables, both internal and external. For example, 
consider automobile manufacturing. Thousands of vehicles are manufactured during 
every production year. One individual vehicle may outperform another of the same 
make and model simply because no two cars rolling off the assembly line are exactly 
the same. 
Assembly lines operate within tolerances. Designers set base specifications that 
represent a minimum standard of quality before the product can be sold in the retail 
market. Let's take the automotive industry example to the next level. Assume that 
each vehicle within a given model line must perform at a specific minimum miles-per-
hour rating before being released for retail consumption. Imagine that a speed limit of 
100 miles per hour is such a minimum. In order to test the production quality, 
designers could sample two individual vehicles of the same model manufactured on 
different days. Vehicle A reaches maximum performance at 100 mph, so the 
designers are satisfied. Vehicle B offers even better performance, reaching 105 mph 
during testing. While both vehicles were produced at the same plant with the same 
materials, small differences between them can result from even smaller variances in 
the manufacturing process. 

 
Figure 3-10: Intel quality control testing  
Most computer processor manufacturers use more exacting tolerances than those 
illustrated in the automobile example, though the general analogy holds. Because the 
average processor is comprised of millions of microscopic transistor circuits, the 
possibility for variances is considerable. For example, each speed grade of the 
Athlon XP processor from AMD is fabricated to essentially the same expected 
tolerances. Minor fabrication differences among units may lead one processor to 
reach a maximum stable operational speed of 1.4 GHz, while another chip of the 
same design may operate at 1.6 GHz. 
The Economics of Speed Binning 
Automobile companies sell all comparably equipped vehicles of a particular model at 
the same base price, while a processor company can choose to sell the better 
performing chip at a higher price to maximize profit yields with lower capital costs. If 
the automobile manufacturer in the above example operated like a processor 
manufacturer, it would sell the car that reached 100 mph at one price and the car that 
reached 105 mph at a higher price, even though both vehicles were essentially 
identical in every other respect. Conversely, a processor manufacturer like AMD 
could behave like an automobile maker, offering each CPU without any performance 
rating beyond the flat minimum speed requirement. This marketing strategy would 
yield the same base revenue for all processors. Profits would decline due to the 
standard economies of supply and demand. 
Offering varying speed grades of the same product means maximizing profit. Most 
computer users exhibit a consistent desire for better performance, whether they need 
it or not. Computer performance is dictated by megahertz ratings, assuming all other 
subsystem characteristics are identical. Most buyers equate MHz ratings to 
performance, though many other aspects of processor design contribute to 
performance. The cost of acquiring higher MHz models can prove limiting, which 
leads some consumers to investigate the benefits of overclocking. 
Popular fabricators and chip suppliers like Intel and UMC produce millions of circuit-
based devices each year. The trend toward bulk fabrication techniques leads to a 
practice known as speed binning, which allows the computer industry to differentiate 

cost and performance characteristics while protecting profits. Still, the sheer number 
of chips being produced each year prevents manufacturers from testing every 
individual processor for its maximum operating speed potential. 
 
Figure 3-11: Intel quality control testing  
In Speed Binning, the manufacturer selects processors from a given production batch 
and puts those processors through reliability testing to determine the maximum 
reliable speed that is common to all processors in that batch. The processors in the 
batch are then usually marked for sale at the speed rating determined in the testing 
process. 
Even though speed binning is a well-developed and highly efficient process, quality 
variances still exist among processors in any given batch. These variances often 
allow processors to be overclocked beyond their rated speed, since the speed rating 
for any given batch must be such that all processors in the batch can operate at the 
speed rating, even though each and every individual processor is not speed tested. 
Speed binning produces unique benefits for both manufacturers and consumers. 
Manufacturers can charge higher selling prices for better performing processors. 
Consumers can opt for lower speed grades to minimize costs, while enthusiasts 
among them may obtain an even greater performance-to-price ratio if they are willing 
to push the stability envelope and overclock their processors. 
Processor-to-Chipset Relation 
The frequency of a processor represents only the core operating speed; each 
subsystem within a computer may operate at various other rates. It is important to 
understand how these frequencies interact with each other before embarking on the 
overclocking process. Additional factors related to the processor's physical properties 
play a key role in understanding the process. These include core die sizes, electrical 
aspects, and thermal regulation. 

 
Figure 3-12: Traditional motherboard layout  
PLL Circuit 
A phased locked loop or PLL circuit resides at the simplest level of the frequency 
generation equation. Some older designs were based around a set frequency crystal, 
though PLL circuits have been the mainstay logic timing control technology for many 
years now. The PLL acts as a base frequency synthesizer by cycling its generated 
signal according to a preprogrammed routine. The locking of the circuit in a specific 
pattern creates a phase shift in the signal, thus producing a cycling effect that drives 
the frequency generation scheme. The PLL signal travels across a motherboard bus, 
dedicated to timing, to dictate the frequency needed for the operation of other buses. 
The primary recipient of the PLL signal is the motherboard's main controller, known 
as the chipset. 
Chipset designs differ greatly across the wide range of platforms available, though 
the basic concept is shared. The frequency rate at which the chipset operates is the 
motherboard's primary operating speed. The chipset provides a communications hub 
for all of the system's various components. It also controls routing and logic for most 
primary control operations, ranging from memory addressing to data transfers across 
different bus standards. 
The term front-side bus rate is widely used to describe the motherboard's frequency 
rate, as this same rate is often also used for the memory and processor buses within 
a traditional system design. To confuse matters, many of the latest architectures like 
the AMD Athlon or Intel Pentium 4 blur the relationships among each of these three 
primary buses by separating each bus at the chipset connection point. The back-side 
bus, on the other hand, is generally composed of additional input/output 
mechanisms, such as PCI and AGP connection buses. 

 
Figure 3-13: Intel i850 chipset diagram  
Upon receiving the base PLL signal, the chipset generates a signal to the other 
buses. The most important signal to overclockers is the processor bus rate of the 
front-side bus, as this directly determines the central processing unit's core operating 
speed when combined with the processor multiplier value. The PLL circuit provides 
the base timing signal for the motherboard chipset, which in turn passes the value to 
the processor. The processor then internally multiplies this clock rate to derive its 
core clock operating frequency. 
Frequency Timing Scheme 
The best way to describe this process is to refer to a common system design, such 
as the Pentium III platform. A quick examination of a common chipset, such as the 
VIA's Pro133A model, shows how the process actually works. The Pro133A chipset 
is built primarily for a 100-MHz operation, though the Pentium III processor itself 
features a much higher operating speed. The core processor rate is determined by 
inserting a multiplier into the timing signal. Thus, a Pentium III 650e processor uses a 
6.5x clock multiplier, given that the chipset is operating at 100 MHz. Multiplier values 
are generally spaced in .5x increments; this scheme allows for a wide range of 
operating frequencies when speed-binning processors. 
Most platforms use the timing scheme presented in the Pentium III example, though 
some of the newer architectures, notably AMD's Athlon and Intel's Pentium 4, can 
alter the interpretation. The x86 Athlon uses a modified bus architecture developed 
from a non-x86 DEC Alpha EV6. The Athlon inserts a double data rate (DDR) 
signaling pattern into the processor-to-chipset interconnect bus. DDR signaling uses 
the rising and falling edges of the base clock signal to effectively transfer twice as 
much data as traditional buses can transfer in a similar period of time. 

 
Figure 3-14: QDR signal pattern  
The Pentium 4 goes one step further with a pseudo quad data rate (QDR) processor 
bus design. Without going deeply into deeply technical issues, the P4 processor bus 
can be viewed as implementing DDR signaling across two 180-degree co-phased 
timing signals that travel essentially the same bus pathway. More about each of 
these platforms can be found in the architecture-specific overclocking sections of this 
book. 
The Pentium 4 goes one step further with a pseudo quad data rate (QDR) processor 
bus design. Without going deeply into deeply technical issues, the P4 processor bus 
can be viewed as implementing DDR signaling across two 180degree co-phased 
timing signals that travel essentially the same bus pathway. More about each of 
these platforms can be found in the architecture-specific overclocking sections of this 
book. 
 
Figure 3-15: CPU-Z CPUID application  
A software application called CPUID can help you determine the particular model and 
speed grade of your PC processor if you are unsure of its configuration. CPU-Z by 
Frank Delatree is a popular freeware example. This valuable utility can be obtained at 
http://www.cpuid.com/cpuz.htm. CPU-Z can provide information about multiplier 
values, bus rates, and various other technological aspects of most currently available 
processors. 
Chapter 4: How to Overclock 

Motherboard Configuration 
Overclocking involves manipulating the processor's multiplier and the motherboard's 
front-side bus speed, in small increments, until a maximum stable operating 
frequency is reached. The idea is simple, but variation in both the electrical and 
physical characteristics of x86 computing systems complicates this process. 
Processor multipliers, bus dividers, voltages, thermal loads, cooling techniques, and 
many other issues can affect your ability to push any given system to its maximum 
potential. 
On most systems, processor multiplier values, motherboard bus speeds, and voltage 
levels can be adjusted, either through hardware-level jumpers and dipswitches or 
firmware BIOS settings. The brand and model of the motherboard determine how 
easy and effective the process will be. Most boards allow you to configure at least a 
portion of these settings, though many low-end and original equipment manufacturer 
(OEM) designs opt for autodetection routines that prevent manual manipulation. 
 
Figure 4-1: Jumper configuration  
Jumpers and dipswitches are the predominant methods for adjusting motherboard 
values in many computing platforms. Jumpers are small electrically conductive 
devices that push into place over a series of pins to establish an electrical connection 
(essentially, a removable on/off switch). Jumper points are usually arranged in block 
patterns, each jumper connecting two pins within the series. Connecting a series of 
pins in a specific sequence within the block creates the signaling data required to set 
parameters for proper motherboard operation. 
 
Figure 4-2: Dipswitch configuration  

Dipswitches are tiny switching devices, usually found in groups among a single 
interface block. Electrically, dipswitches work the same way their jumper cousins do. 
The dipswitch design was introduced to simplify the motherboard configuration 
process. Dipswitches are available in a variety of sizes. The smallest types require 
particular care because they can be damaged easily, especially after multiple 
changes in position or through the overexertion of force. 
Many of the latest motherboard architectures allow for advanced hardware 
configuration through the system's CMOS BIOS Setup. Methods of entering the BIOS 
interface vary according to brand, but basic procedures are generic. Most systems 
prompt for a specific keystroke to enter the BIOS Setup menu. The most common of 
these are DEL and F2, but others include DEL-ESC, CTRL-ESC, and F10, F12, 
CTRL-ALT, ESC, CTRL-ALT-ENTER, CTRL-ALT-F1, CTRL-ALT-S, and simply ESC. 
If your system boots with a custom graphics screen, you can often press the ESC key 
to bypass it and view the standard interface. Custom boot screens are common in 
OEM-built systems. 
No two motherboards are alike, so it is nearly impossible to determine how to alter 
hardware settings without researching the documentation provided by the 
motherboard manufacturer or system integrator. Some companies even choose to 
implement a combination of hardware and BIOS-level configuration options. They 
may use both jumpers or dipswitches and a BIOS Setup menu in order to appeal to 
both the OEM and retail markets. 
Preferred Motherboards 
Retail-level manufacturers usually want to maximize system configuration options, so 
their motherboards are likely to be easier to tweak. In contrast, prebuilt systems from 
larger OEMs and system integrators often lack advanced user-definable options. 
Prebuilt systems are engineered for maximum stability across the widest range of 
users, so the incentive to allow user configuration of hardware is limited. 
Taiwan-based Abit Computer Corporation is perhaps the most popular of these retail-
level companies. Its motherboard designs support many customizable options. 
Companies like Asus, Epox, Gigabyte, and Transcend also offer great designs for the 
enthusiast market. Nearly all motherboards allow some overclocking, either through 
hardware or software. Feature sets vary widely, however, even among similar 
motherboard models from the same manufacturer. 
Motherboards may contain only some of the features that would facilitate 
overclocking. Optimal support would include the ability to manipulate the processor's 
multiplier, configure processor-to-chipset bus speeds, and set processor core and 
motherboard input/output voltages. A feature called active thermal monitoring, which 
uses onboard sensors to maintain optimum temperature at extended operating 
speeds, also promotes stability and improves overclocking capability. 
Overclocking via Processor Multiplier 
Manipulating the processor multiplier is the optimal overclocking method, since it 
neither interrupts nor changes motherboard-level bus speeds. The processor 

multiplier number that you select in your BIOS Setup menu (see Figure 4-3), or via 
dipswitches or jumpers on your motherboard, will determine your processor's 
operating frequency since the processor will multiply the motherboard's front-side-
bus frequency by the processor multiplier. Therefore, by increasing the processor 
multiplier beyond its default setting, you will increase your processor's operating 
frequency beyond its default as well. 
 
Figure 4-3: Award BIOS configuration  
System stability can only be compromised if the maximum operating frequency of the 
processor's core is exceeded. Maximum performance potential is best realized by 
combining several overclocking techniques, but multiplier overclocking is a favorite of 
many enthusiasts because it creates fewer problems. 
 
Figure 4-4: Multiplier configuration example  

Depending on your system hardware, overclocking through multiplier manipulation 
alone may be impractical. For example, the most recent Intel processors feature a 
locked core multiplier, except for the earliest Pentium II-based designs and the 
occasional unlocked engineering sample that surfaces in the underground market. All 
current and near-future Intel processors are completely locked, thus forcing owners 
to rely on front-side bus overclocking techniques. 
Knowing your motherboard is critical to assessing the overclocking potential of any 
current AMD Athlon system. The majority of Athlon-based motherboards lack the 
features users need to control multiplier values. The required circuitry increases 
manufacturing costs. Those willing to risk hardware-level modifications can overcome 
this limitation. 
Overclocking via Front-side Bus 
Front-side (or processor-to-chipset) overclocking is the best way to maximize system 
performance, especially when it can be combined with multiplier overclocking. If your 
system lacks multiplier adjustment capabilities, you must rely solely on bus 
overclocking at the motherboard level. The difficulty lies in the fact that overclocking 
the front-side bus can affect the rates of all buses throughout the system. 
 
Figure 4-5: Front-side bus configuration example  
The front-side bus rate is linked with other bus rates in most x86 systems. The 
peripheral component interconnect bus, or PCI, the accelerated graphics port bus, or 
AGP, and the various memory buses, are examples of this design paradigm. Each of 
the system's interconnect buses serve to connect various devices to the processor, 
and each operates at a rate fractional to the operating rate of the front-side bus. 
While not all motherboard chipsets offer identical capabilities, most follow industry 
design specifications for compatibility reasons. 
The Memory Bus 
The memory bus can operate in one of two modes, synchronous or asynchronous. 
Synchronous operation means that the memory bus operates at the same base 
frequency as the front-side bus. The synchronous memory bus is the simplest 
architecture to manipulate, though it may not be best for maximizing overclocking 
potential. Asynchronous operation allows the memory bus to function at a different 
rate than the front-side bus. Asynchronous designs can be based on incremental 

frequency changes related to the front-side bus frequency or entirely on independent 
rates. 
Many motherboards are able to operate in either synchronous or asynchronous 
memory access modes. The ability to change the front-side bus frequency depends 
on the memory access mode in use. Quality memory, capable of stable operation at 
extended frequencies, is preferred. As expected, different platforms react differently 
to memory overclocking. 
Old designs using 30- or 72-pin single inline memory modules (SIMMs), like fast-
page or extended data out (EDO) memory, tend to become unstable at relatively low 
operating speeds during overclocking. The older 30-pin designs can rarely scale 
beyond 40 MHz, while 72-pin designs generally reach their maximum around 83 
MHz. The need for asynchronous bus operation with such architectures became 
evident as processor-to-chipset rates began to outpace memory capabilities. 
 
Figure 4-6: RAMBUS memory example  
Asynchronous memory operation became even more necessary with the adoption of 
SDRAM, DDR RAM, and RAMBUS memory technologies. Early PC-66 memory 
modules were, at best, suspect for overclocking. Later fabrication techniques allowed 
successful scaling to higher operating speeds, up to 166+ MHz with the PC-166 
modules. Asynchronous operation does insert longer latencies in the chipset-to-
memory pipeline; however, the benefits of greater bandwidth commonly outweigh 
such penalties. For this reason most non-Intel-based motherboards allow users to 
raise or lower the memory bus speed in relation to the front-side bus speed. 
 
Figure 4-7: Common bus rates  
The PCI Bus 
The PCI bus speed is derived from the front-side bus speed. The PCI 2.x 
specification defines 33 MHz as the default bus frequency, though most of today's 

better components can scale to 40 MHz and beyond. In most systems, the PCI bus 
speed is a fraction of the front-side bus speed. For example, the Pentium IIIe uses a 
100-MHz front-side bus. A 1/3 factor is introduced into the PCI timing process to 
produce the default 33-MHz PCI bus speed. 
Certain crossover points in PCI to front-side bus ratios can create stability problems. 
The most common risky frequencies are those approaching 83 and 124 MHz for the 
front-side bus. Due to a ½ divider limit at the 83-MHz range, the PCI rate is extended 
to 41.5 MHz, well beyond its 33-MHz default specification. The 124-MHz front-side 
bus rate leads to a similar scenario, as the 1/3 divider forces a 41.3-MHz PCI rate. 
Some motherboard designs allow users to refine the divider value, but this feature is 
not common in production-level boards. 
PCI components with the highest risk of failure at 40+ MHz are storage drives, 
especially early-model IDE drives. SCSI drives do not usually exhibit this problem 
due to their more exacting specifications. Stability issues can often be resolved by 
lowering the drive-transfer signaling speed by one level. This results in lower 
bandwidth, though the performance gains realized through overclocking the 
processor or the front-side bus may negate any loss. Benchmarking utilities are 
needed to ascertain performance differences. 
The AGP Bus 
The AGP bus is similarly limited during front-side bus overclocking. Problems again 
arise at 83 and 124 MHz for nearly all chipset designs. Some motherboard 
architectures also suffer instability or high failure rates at 100+ MHz due to limitations 
in early AGP bus implementations. For example, Intel's popular BX chipset can 
support proper 133 MHz front-side bus operation for all system buses except the 
AGP. The BX features only 1/1 and 2/3 AGP divider functions, and thus a 133-MHz 
front-side bus rate leads to a problematic 88.6-MHz AGP rate. 
 
Figure 4-8: AGP bus configuration  
Many of the latest AGP graphics accelerators can operate effectively at extended 
levels, often up to 90 MHz. For maximum stability, it may be necessary to lower AGP 

transfer speeds by one level (that is, 4x to 2x) or to disable AGP side-band 
addressing. Those with older AGP video cards or motherboard-level integrated 
graphics chipsets need to analyze stability closely through long-term testing. Even if 
an AGP card seems stable, additional frequency loads can damage the graphics 
accelerator over time. Failure may come after several weeks of operation or 
problems may never surface. AGP overclocking is a gamble; it requires extreme 
care, especially when it introduces problematic front-side bus rates into the graphics 
pipeline. 
USB or IEEE 1394 Firewire connections do not usually suffer under front-side bus 
overclocking. These well-designed implementations can handle the extended 
operating frequencies involved. Older buses, like ISA, can be problematic. Systems 
with peripherals based on such architecture would likely see greater benefit from 
upgrading than from overclocking. 
Stability Through Voltage Increase 
Achieving stability at extended operating speeds often requires increasing voltage 
levels, and sustaining faster processor speeds can demand a greater core voltage. 
Similarly, faster chipset operating speeds can often be sustained through a bump in 
input/output voltage. Several of the latest DDR memory-based motherboards also 
allow manipulation of memory bus voltage levels. This feature was originally 
implemented to preserve compatibility with early DDR modules, but the ability to 
change memory voltage levels has led to significant improvements in stability. 
Overclocking enthusiasts have exploited the potential for maximizing operating 
frequencies in this way. 
 
Figure 4-9: Voltage monitoring  
Any increases in voltage levels are potentially hazardous. Most current .18- and .25-
micron processor core architectures can operate within a 10 percent variance from 
the default specification, but added stresses require extra measures to protect long-
term system stability. Cooling plays an integral role in the voltage manipulation 
process. 

Any increases in voltage levels produce additional heat in the core circuitry. While all 
circuits can cross certain thermal thresholds, additional cooling is often required to 
prevent damage from temperature variations. Processor coolers, heat transfer 
compounds, case fans, and case design can all affect the cooling capabilities of a 
system. Further discussion of choices in these areas can be found in Chapter 8 
dedicated to cooling technologies. 
A phenomenon called electron migration can lead to system failure as a result of 
voltage increases. Electron migration results when moving electrons are displaced 
across integrated circuit trace routes. As fabrication technologies improve, die size 
becomes critical in determining maximum voltage tolerances. Smaller die sizes 
produce narrower trace routes, thus reducing the processor's ability to cope with the 
stresses of electron migration. As the circuits get smaller, voltage-level tolerances are 
lowered exponentially. Chapters 6, 7, and 8, detail system-specific information, 
including information about maximum voltage levels. 
Chapter 5: Cooling 
Heatsink Cooling 
All electronic circuits discharge heat generated by the movement of electrons. As 
operating frequencies increase, thermal loads go up (assuming die sizes and 
fabrication techniques remain constant). Given these facts, a successful overclocker 
must pay attention to cooling systems and sometimes devise external solutions 
dedicated to dissipating heat and regulating the processor's temperature. 
 
Figure 5-1: Forced-air heatsink cooler  
Most common thermal regulation solutions are built around the concept of forced-air 
cooling. The standard processor cooler includes a massive metal heatsink and a high 
revolutions-per-minute (RPM) fan to dissipate heat through convection. Forced-air 
coolers represent the most cost-effective solution for the widest range of system 
platforms; the parts are simple in design and readily available. Many solutions are 
possible, but a heatsink cooler is still the best choice for most overclocking scenarios. 
Size, density, shape, and material influence a heatsink's ability to dissipate heat. The 
best coolers available are often fabricated entirely of copper, with its excellent 
thermal transfer properties. Copper is also the most expensive option, due to high 

procurement and manufacturing costs. Aluminum is the most widely used heatsink 
material. It provides acceptable thermal conductivity at a relatively low cost. At the 
least expensive end of the heatsink spectrum is cast iron. Iron is a poor thermal 
conductor, and these coolers should be avoided. 
 
Figure 5-2: All-copper heatsink  
Many of today's high-quality heatsink coolers combine two or more metals to 
maximize thermal conductivity while minimizing cost. The most cost-effective designs 
use copper as the core material (due to its superior thermal efficiency) and aluminum 
for the radiating fins (due to its stress-handling properties). This combination provides 
a good cooling system with improved ruggedness. Copper is not as rigid as 
aluminum, so you must exercise great care when handling and installing copper 
coolers. 
Cooling fan efficiency is directly proportional to size, RPM, and blade design. The 
most common fans are 60 millimeters across, with average turning rates in the range 
of 4500 to 6000 RPM. Fans that operate at high speeds move more air for their size 
than those with low RPM, though high-speed fans also create more noise. For 
example, 60-millimeter high-speed fans exceeding 7000 RPM are available for 
midrange coolers, but prove too noisy for most users. 
 
Figure 5-3: Cooling fan  
Large fans 70 to 90 millimeters in size usually move more air than small ones 
(assuming that the RPM is the same). An adapter mechanism is often required to 
take advantage of a large fan, however, since most heatsink designs are built around 
a 60-millimeter fan. 

Heatsink Lapping 
One popular way to achieve maximum thermal transfer is by lapping the heatsink's 
base contact surface. The term lapping describes the process of sanding the 
heatsink-to-processor contact surface to eliminate microscopic air pockets caused by 
machining or extruding in the heatsink fabrication process. In addition, external 
factors such as rough handling or poor shipping practices can lead to scratches in the 
contact surface. By smoothing out the surface of the heatsink, you can maximize the 
surface area that will be in contact with the processor. Even the smallest imperfection 
can create the opportunity for an air pocket to interfere with contact. This will mean a 
loss in cooling efficiency, because air is a poor thermal conductor. 
The process of lapping can be tedious, especially with poorly machined heatsink 
coolers. The base surface must be sanded with fine-grit sandpaper to obtain a 
mirrorlike finish and eliminate as many imperfections as possible. Disassemble the 
fan cooler from the heatsink before you begin lapping to prevent damage to the fan 
or electrical connections during the procedure. Clean the heatsink thoroughly to 
remove any deposits or filings introduced during the lapping process. Alcohol is the 
best cleaning solution and it won't damage finishes on the heatsink surface. 
The best way to begin lapping a heatsink is to start with a low-grit paper (400 to 600), 
then slowly progress to higher grades until you reach the desired results, usually at 
the 1200- to 1600-grit level. 
The most accurate method for sanding is to move the heatsink's base contact 
surface across the sandpaper in an alternating circular motion, with the paper firmly 
affixed to a perfectly flat surface. A small piece of extruded glass, such as a 
windowpane or mirror, works well as the flat surface. Glass will not scratch the 
heatsink surface if you make an error. Regular scotch tape or even a mild spray 
adhesive works best for attaching the sandpaper to the glass. Lapping requires great 
patience. Some heatsinks can require up to an hour of fine sanding before the 
desired surface consistency is reached. The procedure is described below. 
1. With the sandpaper firmly attached to the glass, move the heatsink across the 
paper in a figure-eight motion. 
2. Apply even pressure throughout the length of the motion to guard against 
introducing deformed flat spots or upraised regions. 
3. Alternate the pattern of movement at regular intervals. 
4. Polish and clean the heatsink once its base is sanded to a uniform finish. 
Cleaning with alcohol will preserve any finishes applied to the surface. 
5. Apply a quality metal polish evenly and buff it as specified on the package. A 
rotary tool with a cloth-polishing wheel operating at a low speed works well for 
many materials. 
6. Once the heatsink is polished, clean it with alcohol again. As with air gaps 
caused by scratches, polishing materials left on the surface reduce thermal 
conductivity. 
A properly lapped heatsink will result in a processor that runs cooler and with more 
stability, thus improving your likelihood of achieving overclocking success. 

Heat Transfer Compounds 
Applying a thermal interface material between the processor core and the heatsink 
surface will optimize heat transfer, even with a perfectly flat cooler that has 
undergone the lapping process. Most coolers included with preconfigured OEM 
systems feature a rubbery synthetic thermal pad in between the heatsink and the 
processor. Several aftermarket retail coolers also use this thermal pad because it is 
less expensive than the better solutions. 
Thermal paste is preferable to a thermal pad. Remove any existing heatsink pad 
before you apply the paste. Removal of the rubbery substance should be attempted 
with a plastic scraper only. The edge of an old plastic credit card usually does the 
trick, as the card offers a good combination of flexibility and rigidity. Harder scraping 
implements, such as a razor blade, might scratch the heatsink's base contact 
surface, no matter how careful you are. Alcohol will remove any remaining deposits. 
 
Figure 5-4: Thermal paste  
Thermal paste is the preferred thermal interface material because this thin liquidlike 
substance works well to fill small voids between the processor and heatsink surfaces. 
Silicon-based and zinc-oxide-based pastes are the most commonly available 
materials, offering good heat transfer at low cost. Silver-bearing pastes, such as 
Arctic Silver™ (http://www.arcticsilver.com), are rapidly emerging as the best choice 
for overclocking because they are efficient for the widest range of processors. 
Good-quality silver paste can offer thermal conductivity upwards of 9 watts per meter 
Kelvin, compared to 0.7 watts per meter Kelvin for traditional pastes. Silver has two 
negative properties. It can become electrically conductive under extreme pressure, 
such as that between the processor and heatsink. While this is not normally a 
concern, you must take great care when applying the paste. Silver-based pastes also 
cost two or three times as much as standard thermal paste products. Considering 
that only a small amount of paste is needed for each cooler installation, the cost 
factor is not a serious barrier. 
Application of the thermal paste is a relatively straightforward process, assuming you 
observe a few simple guidelines: 
1. The paste should be applied to the processor core, not the heatsink's base, in 
a fresh installation. 

2. Apply only enough paste to barely obscure the color of the processor core. A 
thick layer of paste acts as a thermal insulator instead of a thermal capacitor. 
The paste should be spread as evenly as possible to ensure proper surface 
contact. 
3. Use an edge of plastic or other synthetic material to apply the paste; oils found 
in human skin can break down or disrupt the polymers in thermal paste. 
These instructions can be disregarded if the heatsink comes with the paste already 
applied. 
Case Cooling 
Proper case cooling is essential for maximizing the efficiency of the processor cooler. 
The average cooler fan ranges from 80 to 120 millimeters in size. As with processor 
cooler fans, large-diameter case fans allow slow blade rotation speeds for low sound-
to-noise ratios. Due to increased power current demands, only standard 4-pin Molex 
pass-through adapters should power large case fans. The common three-wire fan 
header connectors found on most motherboards cannot supply enough amperage to 
power most case fan designs. Simple 4-wire to 3-wire adapters are available, at low 
cost, for case fans with three-prong connecters. 
 
Figure 5-5: ATX power supply  
Many modern power supply units are moving to a two-fan design to ensure adequate 
removal of high-temperature ambient air from both the power transformer and 
internal case devices. At least one case fan is recommended in addition to any power 
supply fans already in place. The additional case fan should be mounted to take in 
air, since most ATX-format power supply fans are mounted to exhaust air from the 
case. 
The goal is to maintain a balance of exhaust air to intake air for consistent flow 
throughout the case interior. Most cases include predesignated mounting points for 
fans to enable the best possible airflow regulation. The most common mounting point 
on a tower is the bottom front side of the case. This placement allows cool air to 
circulate directly through the devices located in the expansion slots area. 

 
Figure 5-6: Proper fan placement  
Air filtration is another concern when installing any additional case cooling fans. Dust 
deposits that accumulate on system devices can become a serious problem, even in 
the cleanest operating environments. Microscopic dust particles quickly accumulate 
on surfaces due to increased airflow inside the case. Basic filtering solutions work 
best in most scenarios. A piece of low-density foam, sandwiched between two coarse 
mesh layers and secured between the fan and mounting surface, offers excellent 
filtration for all but the tiniest of dust particles. The foam filter should be installed in 
front of the fan's air intake side for maximum efficacy, though either side should work. 
Increased noise from multiple case fans can be a real concern, especially for users in 
a small office or home setting. The best trick to reduce fan noise is to eliminate or 
dampen vibrations caused by the fans’ rotation, which are transferred to the case 
chassis. A simple rubber washer, installed between each fan and case mount point, 
usually provides enough cushioning. A thin layer of silicon or nonadhesive RTV 
sealant can be applied along the fans’ edges if you are concerned about possible air 
leaks in true sealed-case architectures. 
Additional cooling components are available to boost the effectiveness of case 
cooling designs. Slot coolers can be installed in an expansion slot to exhaust hot air 
from warm cards, such as the powerful AGP video cards. Bay coolers can be 
installed to regulate hard-drive temperatures. The intake-style varieties will often 
direct airflow onto internal system components. Nidec coolers are a type of squirrel-
cage fan that moves air through an internal slotted wheel. Nidec coolers can move a 
large amount of air for their low profile. These coolers are best for directing air into 
the case, and can be secured easily to nearly any internal surface with screws or 
even double-faced adhesive tape. 
Alternative Cooling Technologies 
Alternative cooling systems (not based on forced-air technologies) are available, 
though the associated costs are prohibitive for most enthusiasts. The best of these 
systems can cool to subzero temperatures, at which electrical circuits can operate 
quite efficiently. The latest experiments in super-cooling techniques involving liquid 
helium or nitrogen have revealed unlimited overclocking possibilities. 

The predominant concern with subzero cooling is condensation due to the difference 
between processor temperature and air temperature. Various solutions have been 
adopted over the years, but most have failed to prove viable. Enthusiasts look toward 
silicon sealants, Styrofoam blocks, or rubber barriers to seal the processor socket 
region from outside humidity. These tricks work well for the short term, but tend to 
break down or fail during long-term use. 
The best condensation-blocking solutions are usually the most expensive. Some 
high-end manufacturers have literally submerged the whole processor, motherboard 
and all, into a nonconductive liquid to isolate vital system components from variability 
in air temperature or humidity. Others have opted for a complex processor-to-
motherboard socket connector that uses a custom interface to seal the processor 
completely. While either method works efficiently, implementing such designs can be 
expensive. 
Boot-time problems are also a significant concern. Most technologies lack a real-time 
response, so the cooling device must reach a certain temperature before the 
computing system can be booted into operation. Professional products use timing 
devices and a complex series of electrical relays to shorten the wait. Enthusiasts 
must often develop homegrown techniques to accomplish the same goal. 
Responding to the demand for simplified installation and use of alternative cooling 
technologies, commercial retailers are beginning to stock a number of helpful 
devices. 
Peltier Cooling 
Peltier thermoelectric devices are gaining popularity due to their low cost, though 
many users do not anticipate the secondary costs involved. A Peltier circuit is a thin 
ceramiclike disk that acts like a heat pump once an electrical current has been 
applied across its substrate. A nontechnical explanation is that one side of the Peltier 
disk becomes cooler while the other side becomes warmer. 
 
Figure 5-7: Peltier diagram  
Cooling the warm side enhances the temperature variance gradient, increasing the 
circuit's thermal efficiency. This warm-side cooling is usually accomplished by means 
of a forced-air heatsink, though some use water or vapor-phase cooling to further 
increase the thermal load coefficient between the warm and cool sides of a Peltier 

system. A properly designed system can often cool even the hottest of today's 
processors to near zero temperatures. 
Peltier devices require substantial amperage loads to operate at peak efficiency. 
Average 300-watt power supply units found in today's better computers cannot deal 
with the demands of a quality Peltier that is 72 watts or higher. An upgrade to a 
server-grade unit that is 400 watts or higher or adding a second power supply is often 
required. Wiring an external 12- to 13.8-volt power supply to the Peltier circuit is 
simple enough, but a relay circuit may be needed to initialize the Peltier at boot time. 
Vapor-Phase Cooling 
Vapor-phase cooling is active refrigeration technology, similar to the processes 
involved in heat pumps or air conditioners. A gaseous substance, like freon, is 
compressed, condensed, and forced through an exchanger device to provide a 
cooling effect. Vapor-phase coolers are specialized systems, usually tailored to the 
requirements of a specific computing system. 
 
Figure 5-8: KyroTech architecture  
Kryotech (http://www.kryotech.com) is a popular manufacturer of vaporphase 
refrigerated computing systems. The company provides both pre-configured systems 
and custom cooling solutions for later system integration. Another popular product is 
the VapoChill cooler. The VapoChill (http://www.vapochill.com) is a highly coveted 
aftermarket cooling solution for overclockers. Though its price was previously very 
high, the VapoChill's North America price was reduced to $469 in October 2002 for 
their standard edition. The VapoChill is capable of cooling an overclocked processor 
to less than zero degrees centigrade. 
Liquid Cooling 
Liquid cooling was once the most popular alternative cooling solution, though the 
efficiency of today's forced-air systems has decreased demand. In liquid coolers a 
pump circulates coolant through a holding tank or radiator element and then 
throughout the system. Fans cool the radiator for maximum thermal efficiency. 
Liquid is denser than air and therefore offers greater thermal transference. Adding 
other cooling technologies, such as a Peltier circuit or vapor-phase system, can 

further extend the thermal dissipation efficiency of a liquid cooling technique. These 
options can be introduced, as required, at either the processor or radiator stage of 
the process. 
 
Figure 5-9: Liquid cooler architecture  
Many enthusiasts build their own custom liquid cooling systems, but the decreasing 
cost of aftermarket products tends to encourage purchase over construction. Many 
quality systems now cost less than $200, making the expenditure of effort and money 
for a home-built system seem pointless. Moreover, the efficiency of forced-air coolers 
can reach or even exceed that of most generic liquid coolers. High-end forced-air 
solutions can cost more than $100, but that is only half the cost of a quality liquid 
cooler. 
 
Figure 5-10: SwiftTech liquid cooler  
Submersion Cooling 
Submersion cooling is rapidly gaining favor in hardcore overclocking circles. 
Submersion implies literally sinking the bulk of a computing system directly into a 
liquid substance. The liquid can then be chilled to subzero temperatures and with it 

the computer. The primary advantage of this solution is that no condensation can 
form on sensitive electronic components. Submersion is a straightforward process: 
just dip the motherboard into a vat or reservoir of nonconducting liquid. However, you 
must avoid submerging any drives or power supply units, as these devices will fail, 
causing system damage. 
Submersion cooling is expensive. Fluorinert liquid from the Electronics Manufacturing 
Division of 3M is the most attractive submersion cooling fluid. However, the cost of 
acquiring it can be staggering, especially because permits are required to purchase 
and handle it. Just a few gallons of this material can cost several thousand dollars. 
(And Fluorinert can evaporate, necessitating the design of a cooling vat system, 
which prevents evaporation of the liquid, along with your money.) 
Enthusiasts have tried other liquids, like pure alcohol, but results vary wildly. Alcohol 
should never be used, as this material has a very low flash point. The goal is to cool 
the computer, not set it on fire, or worse, cause it to explode. One alternative is pure 
mineral oil. Pure is the key concept, as most bulk mineral oils on retail shelves have 
added water and possibly scenting agents. The presence of either impurity will cause 
the mineral oil to conduct electricity. 
Chapter 6: Intel Overclocking 
Pentium II Background 
The Pentium II processor was Intel's first commercial P6 (also called 686 or 80686) 
core architecture offered to the general public. The P6 has internal RISC architecture 
and a CISC-RISC translator. Its design is based on the earlier, moderately 
successful, Pentium Pro processor. The most significant extension to the original 
design was the introduction of MMX (multimedia extensions) instruction support. 
Updates included the introduction of a slot interconnect interface, an integrated 512 
KB Level 2 (L2) cache memory mounted directly on the slot circuit board, and various 
refinements for better cooling and heat dissipation. 
The most controversial feature introduced in the Pentium II is full clock-multiplier 
locking, which severely limits overclocking potential. The earliest Pentium II chips 
lacked this locked design, but Intel integrated the needed circuitry within a few 
months. The locked multiplier forced enthusiasts to adopt front-side bus manipulation 
as a means of overclocking the Pentium II. The disadvantage of this approach is that 
any changes to the front-side bus speed lead to the subsequent overclocking of 
nearly all other system and subsystem components, ranging from memory to 
peripheral component interconnect (PCI) devices and accelerated graphics port 
(AGP) video cards. 
The first Pentium II chips were manufactured with .28-micron circuit pathways. They 
require a core voltage of 2.8 volts and generate tremendous heat. These factors 
place intense demands on the power supply and motherboard voltage regulators; 
therefore, any increase above 3.0 core volts means that a heavy-duty cooling system 
must first be installed. 

The extreme temperatures produced by .28-micron chips, combined with limited bus 
frequencies in the popular Intel LX motherboard chipset, lowered overclocking 
potential. The LX chipset was designed for 66 MHz front-side bus (FSB) operation; 
the maximum unofficial supported frequency is 83 MHz. This frequency can be useful 
for lower multiplier chips, such as the Pentium II 266 (83 □ 4.0 = ~333 MHz), but the 
danger of damaging system components becomes significant when other system bus 
rates change substantially. 
The Intel BX chipset became the most popular motherboard choice after the release 
of 100-MHz front-side bus Pentium II models. Other 100-MHz chipsets, such as VIA's 
Apollo Pro133, debuted shortly thereafter. These new designs offered improved 
overclock flexibility, for both 66- and 100-MHz chip owners. The BX and Pro133 both 
ventured front-side bus support up to 133 MHz. Some companies extended the 
unofficial specifications to 166 MHz and beyond. The potential for overclocking 
became clearer as the new 100-MHz Pentium II models incorporated a much cooler 
and more efficient .25-micron circuit design. The ability to scale successfully above 
400 MHz brought the Pentium II to the attention of the overclocking community. 
When the .25-micron Pentium II was released, the primary concern became the bus 
limitations inherent in Intel's popular BX chipset. The BX design could effectively 
scale to 133 MHz while maintaining the proper FSB-to-PCI ratio, but the AGP bus 
suffered from a 2/3 divider. It would be overclocked to approximately 88.6 MHz, 
leading to a high failure rate for most early AGP video cards. (PCI video solutions 
were unaffected.) Competing chipsets from VIA, SIS, and ALI bypassed this limitation 
by adding a ½ AGP divider, though the early revision of these boards offered other 
minor compatibility and performance problems compared to Intel's architecture. 
Front-side bus speeds near 124 MHz create a problem analogous to the 83-MHz 
issue. The standard divider of 1/3 generates a PCI bus frequency of approximately 
41.3 MHz, thus threatening the stability of various PCI devices, especially hard 
drives. Some retail motherboards, designed specifically for overclocking, offered the 
ability to adjust the PCI divider manually at these "problem" frequency ranges. For 
example, with a ¼ divider at 124 MHz, the PCI bus reverts to ~31 MHz, a "safe" 
value, close to the default PCI v2.x specification of 33 MHz. 
Restrictions on the processor heatsink's size and orientation also come into play, due 
to the Slot 1 processor-to-motherboard interface. The heatsink extends parallel to the 
surface of the motherboard, which imposes a size limit, as the heatsink surface must 
clear not only the socket, but all other motherboard components as well. Worse yet, 
many manufacturers have placed the processor slot close enough to the memory 
slots to block some of them. This factor clearly influences the size and type of 
heatsink you can use with the Pentium II. 
Intel's standard cooling solution proves adequate for default operation, but this small 
heatsink often fails to deliver the dissipation needed to sustain successful 
overclocking at extended operating speeds. A more efficient aftermarket cooling 
solution is needed for any real return. The size of any replacement cooler should be 
considered carefully. As mentioned, some motherboards simply do not offer enough 
space for the larger coolers. 

Pentium II Klamath Overclocking 
 
 
Table 6-1: Pentium II Klamath Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Klamath 
  
Performance Rating 233 MHz 
  
Generation Sixth: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 0.5× Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 3.5× – 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .28 micron, 203 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 7.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 2.8 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 23 – 28 watts 
  
Maximum Power 34.8 – 43 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology
OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 FPU = 80 bit 
  
 MMX = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 2 × ALU/MMX 
  
 1 × Pipelined FPU 
  
Maximum Execution Rate 5 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Maximum Memory 
Support Physical = 64 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support 2-way SMP via APIC 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 512 KB Unified 
  
Read Buffer 4 × 32 Byte 
  
Write Buffer 32 Byte 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 32 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 512 Entry 4-way 

Table 6-1: Pentium II Klamath Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Klamath 
Prediction
  
RSB Branch Prediction 4 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX 
Pentium II Klamath 233 
 
 
Table 6-2: Pentium II Klamath 233 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Klamath 
  
Performance Rating 233 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 3.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .28 micron, 203 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 7.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 2.8 volts 
  
Power Consumption 23 watts 
  
Maximum Power 34.8 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-3: Pentium II Klamath 233 Overclocking  
Pentium II Klamath 
Model Rating 233 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C Up to 4.0× 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 75 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 266 – 300 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 300 – 333 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
3.0 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 

Table 6-3: Pentium II Klamath 233 Overclocking  
Pentium II Klamath 
Model Rating 233 MHz 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 72° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium II 233 is Intel's first entry in the series. As you might expect, 
overclocking potential for this processor is limited. The majority of the P2 233 chips in 
circulation are not multiplier locked. The lack of multiplier locking with the P2 233 is 
helpful, as most of early Slot I motherboards lack support for frontside bus speeds 
above 66 MHz. Overclocking can therefore be accomplished by changing the clock 
multiplier alone. 
The simplest way to overclock the Pentium II 233 is to increase the core multiplier 
value from the default of 3.5× to 4.0×, and thus achieve 266 MHz. Higher speeds 
may be possible with some configurations, but limitations in the 0.5× cache 
architecture will maximize returns at 337.5 MHz (83-MHz front-side bus × 4.5 
multiplier). The external Level 2 cache chips found with the P2 233 often fail at 
speeds above 166 MHz. Some users may be tempted to disable the L2 cache to 
reach higher core speeds, but removing this important buffer will result in serious 
performance losses, outweighing any benefits. 
Pentium II Klamath 266 
 
 
Table 6-4: Pentium II Klamath 266 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Klamath 
  
Performance Rating 266 MHz 
  
Generation Sixth: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 0.5× Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .28 micron, 203 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 7.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 2.8 volts 
  
Power Consumption 25 watts 
  
Maximum Power 38.2 watts 

 
 
 
Table 6-5: Pentium II Klamath 266 Overclocking  
Pentium II Klamath 
Model Rating 266 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C Up to 4.5× 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 75 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 300 – 333 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 333 – 350 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
3.0 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 73° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium II Klamath 266 offers overclocking capabilities similar to those of the 
233. As the family's second generation, the 266 offers overclocking potential upwards 
of 350 MHz. Any additional gains are probably attributable to variations in the Level 2 
cache memory chips. Intel used various brands and types of these chips in its 
Klamath series. 
Pentium II Klamath 300 
 
 
Table 6-6: Pentium II Klamath 300 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Klamath 
  
Performance Rating 300 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.8 volts 
  
Power Consumption 28 watts 

Table 6-6: Pentium II Klamath 300 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Klamath 
  
Maximum Power 43.0 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-7: Pentium II Klamath 300 Overclocking  
Pentium II Klamath 
Model Rating 300 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support
Potentially Unlocked 
Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C Up to 4.5× 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 75 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 333 – 350 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 350 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
3.0 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 75° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium II 300 MHz offers moderate overclocking potential for those lucky 
enough to possess a model that is not multiplier locked. Reports have varied over the 
years since this Klamath model was introduced, but it appears that some units did 
ship with multiplier-locked cores. Overclocking potential for locked Klamath 300-MHz 
processors will be limited; increasing the front-side bus beyond 75 MHz is nearly 
impossible. A front-side bus speed of 83 MHz will result in a core rate of 
approximately 374 MHz (83 MHz □ 4.5), a speed often beyond the capability of the 
.28-micron Klamath core. 
Owners of unlocked Pentium II Klamath 300 processors may benefit if an 83 MHz 
front-side bus speed is supported by the system's motherboard. Increasing the front-
side bus rate to 83 MHz, while decreasing the processor multiplier value to 4.0×, 
often yields a stable 333 MHz. The increase in frontside bus speed will boost 
performance significantly: memory and PCI bus rates will also be overclocked. The 
half-speed Level 2 cache architecture of the P2 limits bandwidth between the 

processor and memory subsystems. Therefore, additional bandwidth obtained by 
overclocking the front-side bus can greatly improve memory performance. 
Pentium II Deschutes Overclocking 
 
 
Table 6-8: Pentium II Deschutes Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Deschutes 
  
Performance Rating 300 – 450 MHz 
  
Generation Sixth: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 0.5× Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 – 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 3.5× – 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .25 micron, 118 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 7.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 11 – 24 watts 
  
Maximum Power 16.8 – 36.4 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology
OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 FPU = 80 bit 
  
 MMX = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 2 × ALU/MMX 
  
 1 × Pipelined FPU 
  
Maximum Execution Rate 5 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Maximum Memory 
Support Physical = 64 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support 2-way SMP via APIC 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 512 KB Unified 
  
Read Buffer 4 × 32 Byte 
  
Write Buffer 32 Byte 

Table 6-8: Pentium II Deschutes Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Deschutes 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 32 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction 512 Entry 4-way 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 4 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX 
Pentium II Deschutes 266 
 
 
Table 6-9: Pentium II Deschutes 266 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Deschutes 
  
Performance Rating 266 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 11 watts 
  
Maximum Power 16.8 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-10: Pentium II Deschutes 266 Overclocking  
Pentium II Deschutes 
Model Rating 266 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 83 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 333 – 350 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 400 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 

Table 6-10: Pentium II Deschutes 266 Overclocking  
Pentium II Deschutes 
Model Rating 266 MHz 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 65° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The improved .25-micron Deschutes core arrived for the Pentium II family at the 266-
MHz production point. The Deschutes revision offers significantly improved 
overclocking potential compared to its older Klamath sibling. At 266 MHz, the 
Deschutes requires substantially less maximum power demand than its Klamath 
counterpart. Voltage demand is reduced to 2.0 volts, while wattage draw is up to 50% 
more efficient than previous P2 models. 
The Deschutes revision officially introduced full multiplier locking into the majority of 
Pentium II processors shipped to retail markets. Lack of user-definable multiplier 
support is a roadblock to overclocking; however, Deschutes’ .03-micron core die-size 
reduction, along with its improved motherboard chipset technology, can boost 
overclocking potential. Motherboards offering 100+-MHz front-side bus speed 
appeared along with this updated Pentium II processor. 
Overclocking the Pentium II Deschutes 266 falls in the 350-MHz range for most 
samples. For those with older motherboards, a front-side bus rate of 83 MHz yields a 
core operating speed near 333 MHz. Systems featuring 100-MHz-capable 
motherboards can reach 400 MHz (100-MHz front-side bus × 4.0 multiplier) for a few 
select 266-MHz models. Core voltage rates must rise to 2.2 volts to reach such 
levels. Good cooling is a must for overclocking this processor; its maximum core 
rating is 65° Celsius. 
Pentium II Deschutes 300 
 
 
Table 6-11: Pentium II Deschutes 300 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Deschutes 
  
Performance Rating 300 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 12 watts 
  
Maximum Power 18.7 watts 
 

 
 
Table 6-12: Pentium II Deschutes 300 Overclocking  
Pentium II Deschutes 
Model Rating 300 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 83 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 338 – 374 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 450 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 65° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium II Deschutes 300 MHz offers great potential for those with 100-MHz 
front-side-bus-capable motherboards. The 4.5× multiplier of this processor can 
overclock to a phenomenal 450 MHz under the right conditions. In any case, 374 
MHz should be possible for systems featuring older 83-MHz-capable motherboards. 
Successful 450-MHz operation requires substantial cooling. A voltage increase to 2.2 
volts (from the core default of 2.0 volts) is needed to attain a stable overclock. A 65° 
Celsius temperature limitation was imposed by the early Deschutes revisions; thus 
proper thermal regulation is a dominant concern when pushing core speeds beyond 
the 400-MHz level. Using radical cooling technologies, like Peltier or forced liquid, in 
conjunction with increased core voltage levels can produce overclocks of more than 
500 MHz for Pentium II Deschutes 300-MHz processors featuring quality Level 2 
cache memory. 
Pentium II Deschutes 333 
 
 
Table 6-13: Pentium II Deschutes 333 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Deschutes 
  
Performance Rating 333 MHz 

Table 6-13: Pentium II Deschutes 333 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Deschutes 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 14 watts 
  
Maximum Power 20.6 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-14: Pentium II Deschutes 333 Overclocking  
Pentium II Deschutes 
Model Rating 333 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 83 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 375 – 415 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 450 – 500 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 65° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium II Deschutes 333 MHz is the last of the 66-MHz front-side bus Pentium 
II processors. With a 5.0× multiplier, the P2 333 is well suited for overclocking 
upwards of 500 MHz, with the installation of a quality aftermarket cooling solution. 
Peltier-based cooling presents a good alternative to traditional forced-air heatsink 
cooling under these conditions. 

Systems with older motherboards are generally assured a stable overclock to 375 
MHz using the 75-MHz front-side bus rate. The Level 2 cache chips employed in the 
P2 333-MHz series are often capable of 200+ MHz; thus overclocking beyond 400 
MHz is generally successful. Those attempting overclocks upwards of 500 MHz 
should implement a cooling solution for the Level 2 cache chips in order to ensure 
stable operation. Some quality Slot 1 coolers feature a special base designed to 
contact both the processor core and cache SRAM chips to optimize thermal 
regulation. 
Pentium II Deschutes 350 
 
 
Table 6-15: Pentium II Deschutes 350 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Deschutes 
  
Performance Rating 350 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 3.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 20 watts 
  
Maximum Power 29.5 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-16: Pentium II Deschutes 350 Overclocking  
Pentium II Deschutes 
Model Rating 350 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 112 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 392 – 434 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 450 – 500 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 75° Celsius 

 
Strategy 
The Pentium II 350 MHz was the first 100-Hz front-side-bus-compatible processor in 
the Deschutes processor family. Featuring a 3.5× multiplier, the P3 350 is a good 
candidate for front-side bus overclocking up to 124 MHz, resulting in a core operating 
speed of 434 MHz. While cooling remains an important concern, the P2 350 offers an 
improved maximum thermal rating of 75° Celsius. 
Remember, take care with system motherboards featuring the popular Intel BX 
chipset, as this controller lacks support for the highly desirable ½ AGP bus divider. 
Systems featuring PCI video cards should be fine, though systems with AGP 
graphics accelerators may suffer instability at front-side bus rates exceeding 112 
MHz. The majority of Intel-compatible chipsets from ALI, SIS, and VIA do not have 
this limitation, as they support the ½ AGP divider at extended bus frequencies. 
Pentium II Deschutes 400 
 
 
Table 6-17: Pentium II Deschutes 400 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Deschutes 
  
Performance Rating 400 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 22 watts 
  
Maximum Power 32.7 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-18: Pentium II Deschutes 400 Overclocking  
Pentium II Deschutes 
Model Rating 400 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 112 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 448 – 496 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 500 – 532 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 

Table 6-18: Pentium II Deschutes 400 Overclocking  
Pentium II Deschutes 
Model Rating 400 MHz 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 75° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium II Deschutes 400 MHz offers moderate overclocking potential. Most 
systems featuring this processor reach their potential around 500 MHz, with good 
cooling. Those users hoping to reach the 133-MHz front-side bus speed in order to 
attain 532-MHz operation will likely fail unless extreme cooling is implemented. The 
.25-micron core die size, combined with the external cache of the Pentium II 
processor, limits overclocking to the 500 to 550 MHz range for most P2 400 units. 
Successful overclocking with the P2 400 will most likely require activating the 112-
MHz front-side bus speed. 
Pentium II Deschutes 450 
 
 
Table 6-19: Pentium II Deschutes 450 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium II Deschutes 
  
Performance Rating 450 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 24 watts 
  
Maximum Power 36.4 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-20: Pentium II Deschutes 450 Overclocking  
Pentium II Deschutes 
Model Rating 450 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 112 MHz 

Table 6-20: Pentium II Deschutes 450 Overclocking  
Pentium II Deschutes 
Model Rating 450 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 500 – 550 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 550 – 575 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium II 450 MHz is the last of the Deschutes line and closes the Pentium II 
family as a whole. This 4.5× multiplier processor offers little more overclocking 
potential than its 400 MHz sibling; the average overclock is 504 MHz using the 112-
MHz front-side bus speed. Some rare models may reach upwards of 550 MHz, but 
nearly all P2 450 chips will fail to boot at the 600-MHz level. 
Note the lower maximum temperature rating of 70° Celsius for the P2 450, down from 
75° for the P2 400. Cooling is a serious concern when overclocking this processor, 
especially at operating speeds exceeding 500 MHz. The Intel retail heatsink cooler 
will prove inadequate for any serious attempts; owners should closely examine their 
system's cooling capabilities before proceeding with overclocking. 
Celeron Background 
The Celeron processor was originally introduced as a budget variant of the Pentium 
II, though many overclocking enthusiasts quickly discovered its hidden potential. The 
.25-micron Celeron is designed for 66-MHz front-side bus operation. The first Celeron 
models lacked an L2 cache, which means that any increase in clock speeds would 
affect performance results. The Celeron is available in both 370-pin PGA socket and 
Slot 1 motherboard interfaces for the broadest range of compatibility. 
Of more interest is the Celeron A series. At 100-MHz front-side bus speeds, the 128-
KB full-speed on-die L2 cache often allowed this revision to perform better than the 
more expensive Pentium II with its half-speed 512-KB off-die L2 cache. The average 
overclock for these Celeron A models extends 50 MHz, and often extends well 
beyond 200 MHz for some highly desired models. 

The Celeron 300 produces the best results due to its low 4.5× multiplier. The most 
common overclock for this chip is between 450 and 500 MHz with decent cooling and 
a minimal increase in core voltage. Overclocking the lower range of Celeron speed 
grades, under more extreme cooling and voltage implementations, can yield results 
in the 550 to 650 MHz range for most users. Performance results slowly diminish at 
higher multiplier levels due to the comparative loss in front-side bus speeds, but most 
Celeron A series processors can reach 500 to 600 MHz with moderate effort. 
Celeron Covington Overclocking 
 
 
Table 6-21: Celeron Covington Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Covington 
  
Performance Rating 266 – 300 MHz 
  
Generation Sixth: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed N/A 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.0 – 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Die Size .25 micron, 118 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 7.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption Slot 1 = 11 – 12 watts 
  
 PPGA = 11 – 12 watts 
 
Maximum Power Slot 1 = 16.6 – 18.4 watts 
  
 PPGA = 15.6 – 17.5 Watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology
OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 FPU = 80 bit 
  
 MMX = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 2 × ALU/MMX 
  
 1 × Pipelined FPU 
  
Maximum Execution Rate 5 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Maximum Memory 
Support Physical = 64 Gigabyte 

Table 6-21: Celeron Covington Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Covington 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support 2-way SMP via APIC 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 2 Cache N/A 
  
Read Buffer 4 × 32 Byte 
  
Write Buffer 32 Byte 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 32 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction 512 Entry 4-way 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 4 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX 
Celeron Covington 266 
 
 
Table 6-22: Celeron Covington 266 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Covington 
  
Performance Rating 266 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption Slot 1 = 11 watts 
  
 PPGA = 11 watts 
  
Maximum Power Slot 1 = 16.6 watts 
  
 PPGA = 15.6 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-23: Celeron Covington 266 Overclocking  
Celeron Covington 
Model Rating 266 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 

Table 6-23: Celeron Covington 266 Overclocking  
Celeron Covington 
Model Rating 266 MHz 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 100 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 300 – 333 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 400+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
 Globalwin CAK-38 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Covington series in the Intel Celeron family debuted at 266 MHz. The Covington 
lacks a Level 2 cache memory, and thus it was marketed as an entry-level processor. 
The Covington also introduced the 370-pin socket PPGA format (PGA 370) in hopes 
of lowering production costs. Being a socketed processor, the Celeron does not 
require the expensive Slot 1 interface board as does the Pentium II. A traditional Slot 
1 design was retained to ensure legacy support among Intel's OEM partners. 
The internal core matches the Pentium II, so this chip retains the powerful processing 
capabilities of its larger brother. All but the earliest Celeron models feature locked 
multipliers. Front-side bus overclocking offers the best performance return for the 
Covington: the increase in memory bandwidth can compensate, to some extent, for 
the absence of an L2 cache. 
The Celeron Covington generally offers better overclocking potential than the 
Pentium II. The lack of a Level 2 cache eliminates the possibility of cache memory 
chips failing due to extended overclocking attempts. The Celeron C266 offers great 
potential for front-side bus overclocking at 100 MHz, yielding a 400-MHz core 
operating speed. Systems with motherboards lacking 100-MHz support will be limited 
to 333 MHz, though any increase in front-side bus speed will improve the Covington's 
performance. 
The Intel retail series heatsink cooler should prove acceptable for moderate 
overclocking in the 300 to 333 MHz range. All Covington models up to 433 MHz 

feature a maximum thermal rating of 85° Celsius; thus, extra cooling is only required 
when overclocking is above 400 MHz. 
Celeron Covington 300 
 
 
Table 6-24: Celeron Covington 300 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Covington 
  
Performance Rating 300 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption Slot 1 = 12 watts 
  
 PPGA = 12 watts 
  
Maximum Power Slot 1 = 18.4 watts 
  
 PPGA = 17.5 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-25: Celeron Covington 300 Overclocking  
Celeron Covington 
Model Rating 300 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 100 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 338 – 374 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 450+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
 Globalwin CAK-38 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 

Table 6-25: Celeron Covington 300 Overclocking  
Celeron Covington 
Model Rating 300 MHz 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron Covington 300 MHz offers great potential for systems featuring 100-
MHz front-side-bus-capable motherboards. The C300 features a 4.5× multiplier that 
corresponds well to the 100 MHz-bus speed, yielding 450-MHz overclocking. Most 
systems will require an increase in core voltage levels to 2.2 volts in order to maintain 
stability at 450 MHz and beyond. A small percentage of Celeron C300 processors 
have been known to attain operating speeds in excess of 500 MHz, though only by 
risking dangerous core voltage increases, which are often mitigated by alternative 
cooling methods, such as Peltier or forced liquid. 
Celeron Mendocino Overclocking 
 
 
Table 6-26: Celeron Mendocino Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Performance Rating 300 – 533 MHz 
  
Generation Sixth: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5 – 8.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Die Size .25 micron, 154 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 19 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 12 – 19 watts 
  
Maximum Power 18.4 – 28.3 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology
OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 FPU = 80 bit 
  
 MMX = 64 bit 

Table 6-26: Celeron Mendocino Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Execution Units 2 × ALU/MMX 
  
 1 × Pipelined FPU 
  
Maximum Execution Rate 5 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Maximum Memory 
Support Physical = 64 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support 2-way SMP via APIC 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 128 KB Unified 
  
Read Buffer 4 × 32 Byte 
  
Write Buffer 32 Byte 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 32 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction 512 Entry 4-way 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 4 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX 
Celeron Mendocino 300 
 
 
Table 6-27: Celeron Mendocino 300 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Performance Rating 300 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 12 watts 
  
Maximum Power 18.4 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-28: Celeron Mendocino 300 Overclocking  

Celeron Mendocino 
Model Rating 300 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 100 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 338 – 374 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 450+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
 Thermalright SK6 
  
 Globalwin CAK-38 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron Mendocino introduced a 128-KB Level 2 cache embedded directly in the 
processor core. The earlier cacheless Celeron Covington series could not compete in 
desktop application performance, even for the entry-level market. The addition of the 
Level 2 cache boosted the performance of nearly all software running on the Celeron 
Mendocino. 
This performance increase actually bumped the Mendocino into a competitive 
position against Intel's own flagship desktop processor, the Pentium II Deschutes. 
While featuring only one-quarter the Level 2 cache of the P2, the Celeron 
Mendocino, with its full-speed cache architecture, offered nearly equivalent 
performance. Intel quickly transitioned the Pentium II to a 100-MHz front-side bus 
speed, leaving the Celeron dependant on the older 66-MHz standard. This generated 
a marketable performance difference between the two processor families. 
The overclocking community quickly took notice of the performance potential of the 
new Celeron A series. By overclocking the front-side bus to 100 MHz, users could 
make the inexpensive Celeron A perform within a few percentage points of the costly 
Pentium II in nearly all benchmark tests. The embedded cache architecture also 
removed the limitation of external cache memory chips, thus allowing the internal P2-
derived core to excel. 
The Celeron 300A offers an 80+% success rate when overclocking to 450 MHz with 
a 100-MHz front-side bus. Many chips will require an increase in core voltage to 2.2 

volts to maintain stability, but a small percentage of the best chips can scale beyond 
450 MHz without voltage or cooling modifications. As usual, any increase in voltage 
levels will require the addition of a cooling system, though the retail Intel heatsink 
should be adequate for overclocking in the 338 to 374 MHz ranges. 
Celeron Mendocino 333 
 
 
Table 6-29: Celeron Mendocino 333 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Performance Rating 333 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 14 watts 
  
Maximum Power 20.2 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-30: Celeron Mendocino 333 Overclocking  
Celeron Mendocino 
Model Rating 333 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 100 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 375 – 415 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 450 – 500+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
 Thermalright SK6 
  
 Globalwin CAK-38 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Celeron 333A is able to scale overclocking speeds upwards of 500 MHz, with 
little more than a quality aftermarket cooler and a slight 0.1 to 0.2-volt bump in the 
core voltage rating. Otherwise, the Celeron 333A resembles the 300A in most 
aspects. For those with 100-MHz-capable motherboards, the 333A offers great 
overclocking potential and minimal effort. Overclocks in the 375 or 415 MHz range 
often require nothing more than increasing the front-side bus rate to 75 or 83 MHz, 
respectively. 
Celeron Mendocino 366 
 
 
Table 6-31: Celeron Mendocino 366 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Performance Rating 366 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 14 watts 
  
Maximum Power 22.2 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-32: Celeron Mendocino 366 Overclocking  
Celeron Mendocino 
Model Rating 366 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 100 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 413 – 457 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 550 + MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
 Thermalright SK6 
  
 Globalwin CAK-38 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 2.2 volts with Heatsink 

Table 6-32: Celeron Mendocino 366 Overclocking  
Celeron Mendocino 
Model Rating 366 MHz 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron 366A is perhaps the most popular Mendocino processor model for 
overclocking enthusiasts. This chip features a 5.5× multiplier that responds well to 
100-MHz front-side bus overclocking, yielding an impressive 550-MHz core operating 
speed. With this third model in the Mendocino family, Intel had nearly perfected the 
Celeron core for high-frequency operation in hopes of extending the Celeron line 
beyond 500 MHz. 
The Celeron 366A is so well crafted that many units can scale easily beyond 600 
MHz with the help of a quality cooling solution. The 366A attracted the attention of 
many professional users, as this chip was often used to build overclockable dual 
processor systems. According to most surveys, more than 90% of all Celeron 366A 
units can attain a stable overclock to 550 MHz with minimal intervention. 
Celeron Mendocino 400 
 
 
Table 6-33: Celeron Mendocino 400 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Performance Rating 400 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 15 watts 
  
Maximum Power 23.4 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-34: Celeron Mendocino 400 Overclocking  
Celeron Mendocino 
Model Rating 400 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 

Table 6-34: Celeron Mendocino 400 Overclocking  
Celeron Mendocino 
Model Rating 400 MHz 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 100 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 450 – 498 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 600 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
 Thermalright SK6 
  
 Globalwin CAK-38 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron 400A is the last of the highly overclockable processors in the Mendocino 
family. The 400A operates with a 6× multiplier; thus overclocking the 100-MHz front-
side bus speed yields a core operational speed of 600 MHz. A .25-micron design, the 
Celeron A cannot scale successfully beyond 550 or 600 MHz without using radical 
cooling technologies. 
The majority of Celeron 400A processors will reach their maximum overclocked 
speed near 500 MHz. Only a small number of these chips will ever be stable at 600 
MHz. Those who successfully overclock to this extended frequency will need to 
monitor core temperatures closely, as the .25-micron core of the Celeron A can reach 
damaging thermal loads in seconds. Quality forced-air heatsink coolers should prove 
adequate, but overclocking beyond 500 MHz with the retail Intel cooler should not be 
attempted. 
Celeron Mendocino 433 
 
 
Table 6-35: Celeron Mendocino 433 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Performance Rating 433 MHz 

Table 6-35: Celeron Mendocino 433 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 16 watts 
  
Maximum Power 24.6 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-36: Celeron Mendocino 433 Overclocking  
Celeron Mendocino 
Model Rating 433 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 83 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 488 – 540 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 550 – 600 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
 Thermalright SK6 
  
 Globalwin CAK-38 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron 433A allows little headroom for successful scaling beyond 540 MHz. Its 
6.5× core multiplier will limit successful overclocks near 500 MHz with traditional 
heatsink cooling. Considering the lack of effective frequency scaling, the retail Intel 
heatsink should prove more than adequate for overclocking at speeds approaching 
500 MHz. Otherwise, the Celeron 433A offers only moderate overclocking returns, 
because the 100-MHz front-side bus speed cannot be realized with this processor. 

Celeron Mendocino 466 
 
 
Table 6-37: Celeron Mendocino 466 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Performance Rating 466 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 17 watts 
  
Maximum Power 25.6 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-38: Celeron Mendocino 466 Overclocking  
Celeron Mendocino 
Model Rating 466 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 75 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 525 – 550 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 581 – 600 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
 Thermalright SK6 
  
 Globalwin CAK-38 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron 466A offers limited overclocking support. The internal 7.0× core 
multiplier, combined with an aging .25-micron core design, max out at 525 MHz (75-

MHz front-side bus) for most of these chips. Even reaching an 83-MHz front-side bus 
speed will prove difficult, as the 466A model carries a maximum thermal rating of 70° 
Celsius. Any increase in the core voltage rate will require an aftermarket cooling 
solution. 
Celeron Mendocino 500 
 
 
Table 6-39: Celeron Mendocino 500 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Performance Rating 500 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin PPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 18 watts 
  
Maximum Power 27 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-40: Celeron Mendocino 500 Overclocking  
Celeron Mendocino 
Model Rating 500 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 75 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 563 – 575 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 600 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
 Thermalright SK6 
  
 Globalwin CAK-38 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Celeron 500A is a minimal overclocking model in most configurations. The 7.5× 
multiplier restricts successful overclocking to a 75-MHz front-side bus speed. In 
addition, a poor thermal rating for the 25-micron core will void most overclocking 
attempts beyond 550 MHz. 
Celeron Mendocino 533 
 
 
Table 6-41: Celeron Mendocino 533 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron Mendocino 
  
Performance Rating 533 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.0× 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 19 watts 
  
Maximum Power 28.3 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-42: Celeron Mendocino 533 Overclocking  
Celeron Mendocino 
Model Rating 533 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 66 – 75 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 550 – 575 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 600 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VEK 16 
  
 Vantec PIID-4535H 
  
 Thermalright SK6 
  
 Globalwin CAK-38 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler STEP-UP-53X2 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Mendocino 533-MHz model is the final generation in the .25-micron Celeron 
family. Featuring an 8.0× multiplier, this processor is not well suited to overclocking. 
A few 533A units may reach 600 MHz with a 75-MHz front-side bus, but attempts at 
higher returns will usually result in a processor unable to boot the system. 
Considering this limitation, the retail Intel heatsink should prove efficient enough for 
stable operation at 600 MHz if proper case cooling is applied. 
Pentium III Katmai Background 
The Pentium III Katmai represents an evolutionary step for the Pentium II design. The 
design includes the SSE multimedia instruction set, which differentiates Katmai from 
its earlier cousins. Increased efficiency in Intel's design allowed the Katmai to scale 
up to 600 MHz; thus the demand for these chips was quite high during the early 
stages of Intel's P3 marketing initiative. 
The most promising Katmai overclock lies in the Pentium III 450-MHz processor. A 
100-MHz front-side bus chip with a 4.5× multiplier, this processor was well suited to 
the 133+-MHz front-side bus capabilities of many popular motherboards. Overclocks 
to 600 MHz are usually stable with only a slight increase in the core voltage and the 
use of a quality cooling solution. 
Early overclocking returns were so positive that Intel quickly introduced a Pentium III 
600b MHz Katmai. The b identifier signifies 133-MHz front-side bus support. Even so, 
do not expect much overclocking potential beyond 600 MHz with the Katmai cooled 
by traditional forced-air techniques. The Katmai was Intel's last processor to be built 
atop the .25-micron fabrication process, which limits MHz scalability. 
Pentium III Katmai Overclocking 
 
 
Table 6-43: Pentium III Katmai Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Katmai 
  
Performance Rating 600 MHz 
  
Generation Sixth: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 0.5× Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 – 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5× – 6.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .25 micron, 128mm2  
  
Transistor Count ~ 9.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 2.00 − 2.05 volts 

Table 6-43: Pentium III Katmai Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Katmai 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 17 – 23 watts 
  
Maximum Power 25.3 – 34.5 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology
OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 FPU = 80 bit 
  
 MMX = 64 bit 
  
 SSE = 128 bit 
  
Execution Units 2 × ALU/MMX/SSE 
  
 1 × Pipelined FPU 
  
Maximum Execution Rate 5 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Maximum Memory 
Support Physical = 64 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support 2-way SMP via APIC 
 
Level 1 Code Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 512 KB Unified 
  
Read Buffer 4 × 32 Byte 
  
Write Buffer 32 Byte 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 32 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction 512 Entry 4-way 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 4 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, SSE 
Pentium III Katmai 450 
 
 
Table 6-44: Pentium III Katmai 450 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Katmai 
  
Performance Rating 450 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 

Table 6-44: Pentium III Katmai 450 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Katmai 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 17 watts 
  
Maximum Power 25.3 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-45: Pentium III Katmai 450 Overclocking  
Pentium III Katmai 
Model Rating 450 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 112 – 124 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 504 – 558 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 600+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VES20 
  
 Alpha P3125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler Swiftech MC1000 
  
 PC-10a Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80 – 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Katmai 450 MHz introduced the new Pentium III core. This chip is solid for 
overclocking due to its highly refined .25-micron core, coupled with a low 4.5× 
multiplier and 100-MHz front-side bus support. The Katmai shares many attributes 
with its Pentium II sibling, though the higher-quality cache memory chips allow the 
Katmai 450 to scale up to 600 MHz efficiently, given sufficient cooling. 
The 4.5× multiplier is well suited for 124-MHz front-side bus overclocking, yielding a 
respectable 558 MHz. A small number of these chips will reach 600 MHz with quality 
cooling, but be prepared to bump the core voltage to 2.2 volts for stability. The 

Katmai does demand power; alternative cooling methods based on Peltier or liquid 
technologies are desirable. 
Pentium III Katmai 500 
 
 
Table 6-46: Pentium III Katmai 500 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Katmai 
  
Performance Rating 500 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 voltage 
  
Power Consumption 19 watts 
  
Maximum Power 28 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-47: Pentium III Katmai 500 Overclocking  
Pentium III Katmai 
Model Rating 500 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 112 – 124 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 560 – 600 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 600+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VES20 
  
 Alpha P3125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler Swiftech MC1000 
  
 PC-10a Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80 – 85° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
Overclocking the Pentium III Katmai 500 MHz works best with the 112-MHz front-side 
bus rate. Unlike the Katmai 450, this model is not suitable for 133-MHz bus 
overclocking due to its higher 5.0× internal multiplier. Most Katmai 500 processors 
will reach maximum overclocking potential around 600 MHz, though many units will 
never see returns beyond the 560-MHz level. 
Pentium III Katmai 550 
 
 
Table 6-48: Pentium III Katmai 550 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Katmai 
  
Performance Rating 550 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.5× 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 21 watts 
  
Maximum Power 30.8 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-49: Pentium III Katmai 550 Overclocking  
Pentium III Katmai 
Model Rating 550 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Up to 112 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 575 – 616 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 650 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VES20 
  
 Alpha P3125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler Swiftech MC1000 
  
 PC-10a Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80 – 85° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Katmai 550-MHz processor also offers minimal overclocking potential due to its 
5.5× internal multiplier. Most Katmai 550 models will reach their maximum 
overclocking rate around 575 MHz, just beyond the default core rate of this chip. 
Accordingly, the retail Intel heatsink cooler should prove adequate for overclocking 
this processor. 
Pentium III Katmai 600 
 
 
Table 6-50: Pentium III Katmai 600 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Katmai 
  
Performance Rating 600 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 23 watts 
  
Maximum Power 34.5 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-51: Pentium III Katmai 600 Overclocking  
Pentium III Katmai 
Model Rating 600 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 105 – 112 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 630 – 672 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 700 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VES20 
  
 Alpha P3125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler Swiftech MC1000 
  
 PC-10a Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80 – 85° Celsius 

 
Strategy 
The Pentium III 600 brought an end to the 100-MHz front-side-bus-compatible Katmai 
series of processors. The final model in this series, the Katmai 600, lacks 
overclocking potential beyond the 112-MHz front-side bus rate, leading to a 
theoretical maximum near 672 MHz. Earlier Katmai models offer better performance; 
lower ranges of the Katmai series can often overclock to a speedier 133-MHz front-
side bus rate. 
Pentium III Katmai 533B 
 
 
Table 6-52: Pentium III Katmai 533B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Katmai 
  
Performance Rating 533 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.0 volts 
  
Power Consumption 20 watts 
  
Maximum Power 29.7 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-53: Pentium III Katmai 533B Overclocking  
Pentium III Katmai 
Model Rating 533 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential ~ 560 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 600+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VES20 
  
 Alpha P3125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler Swiftech MC1000 
  
 PC-10a Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 

Table 6-53: Pentium III Katmai 533B Overclocking  
Pentium III Katmai 
Model Rating 533 MHz 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80 – 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Katmai 600 finished the 100-MHz front-side bus series. Taking a cue from the 
overclocking community, Intel slid the Katmai to a 133-MHz front-side bus rating. This 
new series is marked by the addition of a B modifier to each model's speed rating. 
Still suffering from the .25-micron core design, the Katmai 533B provides modest 
overclocking potential. Perhaps worse than the processor's core limitation is the lack 
of support for extended front-side bus speeds in the popular 133-MHz-capable Slot 1 
boards. After VIA introduced its Apollo Pro133A chipset, support for motherboard 
rates beyond 133 MHz began to appear in the mainstream markets. Intel released its 
own i815 and i820 chipsets and the latter of these offered RAMBUS memory support. 
Most Katmai 533B chips can successfully overclock to 560 MHz. The retail Intel 
heatsink should be adequate; a core voltage increase of 0.1 volts is usually all that is 
required. Any increase in the front-side bus rate can offer significant performance 
returns through increased memory bandwidth when the memory subsystem is 
operating at or above the processor bus rate. The popular VIA Pro133A chipset 
introduced support for down-clocking memory, using asynchronous signaling. 
Benchmarking will measure the performance gains, assuming memory down-clocking 
is employed to attain a higher front-side bus speed. 
Pentium III Katmai 600B 
 
 
Table 6-54: Pentium III Katmai 450 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Katmai 
  
Performance Rating 600 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 2.05 volts 
  
Power Consumption 23 watts 
  
Maximum Power 34.5 watts 
 
 
 

Table 6-55: Pentium III Katmai 450 Overclocking  
Pentium III Katmai 
Model Rating 600 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C ~ 140 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 630 – 650 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 675+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Globalwin VES20 
  
 Alpha P3125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler Swiftech MC1000 
  
 PC-10a Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.2 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80 – 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium III Katmai 600B offers overclocking potential similar to its 533-MHz 
counterpart. Notice the increase to 2.05 volts for the core voltage rating compared to 
2.0 volts for older Katmai models. Intel must have recognized the limitations of its 
.25-micron fabrication process. A 0.05 volt increase appears minimal, but the reality 
is that Intel needed the bump in voltage to sustain its sales model at this higher 
frequency. 
The Katmai 600B marked the end of a generation. It was the last .25-micron 
processor offered by Intel's desktop computing division. Overclocking this model 
proves difficult beyond 650 MHz; many chips never reach beyond the factory default 
of 600 MHz at a 2.05 volts core. Due to a peak power demand of 34.5 watts, the 
Katmai 600B will require massive cooling if overclocking returns exceeding 650 MHz 
are to be attained. Peltier cooling is a popular solution for this model, but the costs 
can be prohibitive given the small potential performance gains. 
Pentium III Coppermine Background 
After noting the limits of its .25-micron fabrication process, Intel shifted to a new .18-
micron core for the Pentium III Coppermine. Intel also made its Level 2 cache internal 
to the core die, thus improving performance compared to the Katmai's external cache 
architecture. The "Coppermine" name created confusion, however, and many users 
upgraded to this architecture believing that its internal circuitry featured a copper 

interconnect design. In truth, the Coppermine still used the aluminum standard. Even 
so, upon its release the Coppermine became the best overclocking option available. 
The desktop Coppermine is available in two distinct forms. Overclocking techniques 
remained consistent for the Slot 1 interface (a long, skinny card-edge socket) for 
Coppermine. The newer model, featuring a 370-pin FCPGA socket (a flat, square 
socket), extended overclocking potential by allowing the use of vertical heatsink 
coolers for greater thermal dissipation and efficiency. Combined with a new .18-
micron core and lower operating voltage, the Coppermine allows overclocks in the 
hundreds of MHz, some even exceeding default operating frequencies by more than 
50%! 
Those possessing type eb processors will have less headroom for overclocking. The 
133-MHz front-side bus of this series, combined with motherboard chipset limitations, 
prevents achieving higher speeds. A higher multiplier value is desirable in this series, 
especially for those interested in overclocking to 1+ GHz for maximum performance. 
The most promising models are in the e series. These chips feature a base 100-MHz 
front-side bus design. The lower multiplier ranges (5.5× to 7.5×) offer overclocking 
returns of 200 to 300 MHz, requiring only a slight bump in core voltage levels and the 
addition of an aftermarket cooler. Even the retail cooler provided by Intel can often 
provide satisfactory cooling for overclocking by 100 to 150 MHz. 
Pentium III Coppermine Overclocking 
 
 
Table 6-56: Pentium III Coppermine Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 500 – 1133 MHz 
  
Generation Sixth: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 – 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.0× – 8.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron 
  
Core Size by Stepping A2 = 106 mm2  
  
 B0 = 104 mm2  
  
 CO = 90 mm2  
  
 D0 = 95 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 28.1 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 – 1.75 volts 

Table 6-56: Pentium III Coppermine Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 11 – 22 watts 
  
Maximum Power 16 – 33 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology
OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 FPU = 80 bit 
  
 MMX = 64 bit 
  
 SSE = 128 bit 
  
Execution Units 2 × ALU/MMX/SSE 
  
 1 × Pipelined FPU 
  
Maximum Execution Rate 5 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Maximum Memory 
Support Physical = 64 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support 2-way SMP via APIC 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 256 KB Unified 
  
Read Buffer 4 × 32 Byte 
  
Write Buffer 32 Byte 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 32 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
 
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction 512 Entry 4-way 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 4 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, SSE 
Pentium III Coppermine 500E 
 
 
Table 6-57: Pentium III Coppermine 500E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 500 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 

Table 6-57: Pentium III Coppermine 500E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 11 watts 
  
Maximum Power 16 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-58: Pentium III Coppermine 500E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 500 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 124 – 133 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 620 – 665 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 700+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The E series Pentium III Coppermine offers great overclocking potential for systems 
featuring chips with low multiplier values. Being a 100-MHz front-side-compatible 
processor, the 500E is a superb candidate for overclocking to 665 MHz, with its 5× 
internal multiplier, via a jump to the 133-MHz front-side bus rate. Relatively low 
wattage demands, combined with a high thermal tolerance, often allow overclocking 
of this processor using the retail Intel heatsink cooler. Systems offering 133 MHz 

motherboard bus support require little user intervention because core voltage values 
increase only 5 to 10%. 
Pentium III Coppermine 550E 
 
 
Table 6-59: Pentium III Coppermine 550E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 550 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 12 watts 
  
Maximum Power 17.6 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-60: Pentium III Coppermine 550E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 550 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 124 – 133 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 682 – 732 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 800+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Pentium III Coppermine 550E MHz processor offers superb overclocking 
potential. The vast majority of these processors can overclock upwards of 700 MHz 
with no additional cooling or increase in core voltage. Factoring in a high thermal 
tolerance rating and a low failure rate, the 550E represented Intel's first quality 
overclocking solution since the original Celeron series. For hardcore overclockers, 
the P3 550E offers immense possibilities; a significant number of processors of this 
type can scale toward 900 MHz, assuming that quality cooling is properly applied. 
Pentium III Coppermine 600E 
 
 
Table 6-61: Pentium III Coppermine 600E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 600 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 13 watts 
  
Maximum Power 19.8 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-62: Pentium III Coppermine 600E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 600 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 124 – 133 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 744 – 798 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 800+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 

Table 6-62: Pentium III Coppermine 600E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 600 MHz 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
While not as popular as its 550 MHz counterpart, the Pentium III Coppermine 600E 
does offer a respectable overclocking return. Most 600E chips can effectively scale to 
frequencies above 750 MHz with nothing more than a modest increase in the 
motherboard front-side bus speed. A slight increase in core voltage will often net a 
positive overclocking return beyond 800 MHz, using only the retail Intel heatsink. 
Pentium III Coppermine 650E 
 
 
Table 6-63: Pentium III Coppermine 650E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 650 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 14 watts 
  
Maximum Power 21.5 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-64: Pentium III Coppermine 650E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 650 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 112 – 124 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 728 – 806 MHz 

Table 6-64: Pentium III Coppermine 650E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 650 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 850+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium III 650E represents a good option for systems with motherboards 
lacking official 133-MHz front-side bus support. Even when operating with the limited 
Intel BX chipset, the 650E can offer easy scalability to 800 MHz with only a moderate 
increase in core voltage rates. The comparatively high 6.5× internal multiplier of this 
processor presents real potential for scaling up to 865 MHz with boards supporting 
the 133-MHz front-side bus rate. Considering the increased electrical demand of the 
650E, additional cooling will usually be required when increasing core voltage values 
beyond a marginal 5% threshold. 
Pentium III Coppermine 700E 
 
 
Table 6-65: Pentium III Coppermine 700E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 700 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 15 watts 

Table 6-65: Pentium III Coppermine 700E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Maximum Power 23.1 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-66: Pentium III Coppermine 700E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 700 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 112 – 120 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 784 – 840 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 850 – 900+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Given increasing multiplier values in the E series of Coppermine processors, the P3 
700E represents the point at which 133-MHz front-side bus overclocking will prove 
limited for most system configurations. A 931-MHz core frequency can be attained 
from such an overclock, but be prepared to upgrade to a quality aftermarket forced-
air heatsink cooler in order to maintain stability. The cooler bundled with most 700E 
models is insufficient for overclocking at 900+ MHz. It cannot cope with increased 
temperatures at the 1.85 core voltage level. 
Pentium III Coppermine 750E 
 
 
Table 6-67: Pentium III Coppermine 750E Specifications  

Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 750 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 16 watts 
  
Maximum Power 24.7 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-68: Pentium III Coppermine 750E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 750 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 112 – 115 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 840 – 863 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 900+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium III Coppermine 750E MHz processor offers marginal scalability, due to 
its relatively high 7.0× internal multiplier. Overclocking via the 133-MHz front-side bus 
rate will prove limited in most tweaking scenarios. The resulting 1000 MHz clock rate 
will often fail, assuming that the processor does boot at all, due to the massive 
increase in core voltage required to sustain such an overclock. A quality Peltier 

cooler, or something equally powerful, is definitely required if you hope to push the 
performance envelope. 
Pentium III Coppermine 800E 
 
 
Table 6-69: Pentium III Coppermine 800E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 800 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 18 watts 
  
Maximum Power 26.4 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-70: Pentium III Coppermine 800E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 800 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 112 – 115 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 896 – 920 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 950+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The 800E MHz model of the Pentium III Coppermine series lacks the overclocking 
potential of its siblings. Attempts to reach the 133-MHz front-side bus rate will 
generally fail. Only the rare processor will offer scalability to the 1064-MHz range. 
Even then, expect to use the largest heatsink or Peltier cooler to properly dissipate 
the excessive thermal loads produced with core voltages approaching 1.85 volts. 
Pentium III Coppermine 850E 
 
 
Table 6-71: Pentium III Coppermine 850E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 850 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 18 watts 
  
Maximum Power 26.7 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-72: Pentium III Coppermine 850E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 850 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 105 – 112 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 893 – 952 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 975 – 1000+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 

Table 6-72: Pentium III Coppermine 850E Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 850 MHz 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium III 850E MHz is best suited for moderate overclocking via the 112 MHz 
front-side bus rate. The resulting 952 MHz core operating speed is generally in the 
range of the 850E's overclocking capabilities. Attempts at higher frequency ranges 
approaching 1000 MHz will be difficult, even for the best system configurations. The 
increased efficiency offered by a Peltier or liquid cooling solution will be important if 
you hope to push your 850E system into the 1 GHz arena. 
Pentium III Coppermine 533EB 
 
 
Table 6-73: Pentium III Coppermine 533EB Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 533 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 9 watts 
  
Maximum Power 17.5 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-74: Pentium III Coppermine 533EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 533 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 560 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 600 MHz 

Table 6-74: Pentium III Coppermine 533EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 533 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
In stark contrast to the E series of Coppermine processors, the 133-MHz frontside 
bus Pentium III EB offers poor overclocking potential. The internal multiplier value of 
the processor decreases in the series. Even the best Pentium III motherboards 
commonly lack the ability for stable operation beyond the 150-MHz front-side bus 
speed. Some boards claim support exceeding 166 MHz, though this is more a selling 
feature than a practical solution for Pentium III overclocking. 
Even at the 140-MHz front-side bus speed, the 533EB allows processor overclocking 
to only 560 MHz. Even under the best conditions, the 533EB will prove troublesome 
at core operating speeds exceeding 600 MHz. Cooling and voltage will be minimal 
concerns. The motherboard will present a greater challenge than will the processor. 
Pentium III Coppermine 600EB 
 
 
Table 6-75: Pentium III Coppermine 600EB Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 600 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 

Table 6-75: Pentium III Coppermine 600EB Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Power Consumption 11 watts 
  
Maximum Power 19.8 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-76: Pentium III Coppermine 600EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 600 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 630 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 675 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Overclocking potential of the Pentium III EB series improves as core multiplier values 
increase, though most 600EB systems will never realize returns beyond 675 MHz. 
The lower-spectrum EB models bar successful overclocking, even at modest 
frequency ranges. Both the 533EB and the 600EB are poor choices for overclocking 
enthusiasts. 
Pentium III Coppermine 667EB 
 
 
Table 6-77: Pentium III Coppermine 667EB Specifications  

Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 667 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 15 watts 
  
Maximum Power 22 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-78: Pentium III Coppermine 667EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 667 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 700 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 750 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Assuming overclocking via a 150-MHz front-side bus rate, a significant portion of 
Pentium III 667EB chips can effectively scale to 750 MHz. Otherwise, expect 
overclocking returns under 700 MHz, as this chip still suffers from a low multiplier. 
One note of interest is the change in Intel's model designation scheme to avoid any 

public relations fallout from marketing a 666 processor (the biblical "number of the 
beast"). 
Pentium III Coppermine 733EB 
 
 
Table 6-79: Pentium III Coppermine 733EB Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 733 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 16 watts 
  
Maximum Power 24.1 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-80: Pentium III Coppermine 733EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 733 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 700 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 825 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Pentium III 733EB MHz is the first EB series processor to feature an internal 
multiplier value capable of sustaining overclocked operation beyond the 800-MHz 
range. As with previous EB processors, cooling and voltage levels will require little 
user intervention for most configurations. The Pentium III core is well suited to 
maximize overclocking potential for this model. Even so, a 5.5× multiplier limits its 
appeal in the overclocking community. 
Pentium III Coppermine 800EB 
 
 
Table 6-81: Pentium III Coppermine 800EB Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 800 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 18 watts 
  
Maximum Power 24.5 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-82: Pentium III Coppermine 800EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 800 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 850 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 900+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 

Table 6-82: Pentium III Coppermine 800EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 800 MHz 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium III 800EB MHz processor marks a shift in the EB series toward 
overclocking potential. Designed atop a 6.0× core multiplier, the 800EB is a good 
candidate for overclocking at 900 MHz and beyond. Unlike its earlier siblings, it 
requires a moderate increase in core voltage for successful operation beyond 900 
MHz. Install an aftermarket cooling system to maintain stability. 
Pentium III Coppermine 866EB 
 
 
Table 6-83: Pentium III Coppermine 866EB Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 866 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 18 watts 
  
Maximum Power 26.9 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-84: Pentium III Coppermine 866EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 866 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 910 – 975 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1000+ MHz 

Table 6-84: Pentium III Coppermine 866EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 866 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Equipped with its 6.5× multiplier, the Pentium III Coppermine 866EB MHz is a 
contender for successful 1000+-MHz overclocking when paired with a quality 
motherboard. The 866EB demands a serious supply of wattage, so overclocking will 
require a massive forced-air heatsink cooler. The retail Intel heatsink will offer a 
minimal return at best; most configurations will reach 910 MHz before the system 
fails to boot. 
Pentium III Coppermine 933EB 
 
 
Table 6-85: Pentium III Coppermine 933EB Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 933 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 19 watts 
  
Maximum Power 27.5 watts 
 
 
 

Table 6-86: Pentium III Coppermine 933EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 933 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 980 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1000+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.75 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 60 – 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium III 933EB MHz processor is available in two different models, each 
featuring a slightly different core design. The earliest 933EB chips reach a maximum 
thermal load of 60° Celsius before core failure, while some later models can scale 
upwards to the 70 to 75° range due to improved core stepping. Older models will be 
of the 0686h family, while the latest chips show a 068Ah designator. All the models 
produce serious thermal loads that require massive cooling for any overclocking 
potential beyond 1000 MHz. 
Pentium III Coppermine 1000EB 
 
 
Table 6-87: Pentium III Coppermine 1000EB Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 1000 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 

Table 6-87: Pentium III Coppermine 1000EB Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 – 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 20 watts 
  
Maximum Power 29.8 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-88: Pentium III Coppermine 1000EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 1000 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1050 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1100+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 60 – 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
As with the 933EB, the Pentium III 1000EB MHz processor shipped in several 
architectural configurations during its lifespan. The earliest chips featured a maximum 
thermal load of 60° Celsius, while later processors were rated at 70°. Voltage ratings 
also varied across different revisions of the processor; units shipped at the 1.65, 1.7, 
and 1.75 volt levels. The .18-micron Pentium III design was nearing the end of its 
viability with the 1000EB. As a result, overclocking the 1000EB beyond 1100 MHz will 
prove difficult. 

Pentium III Coppermine 1130EB 
 
 
Table 6-89: Pentium III Coppermine 1130EB Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium III Coppermine 
  
Performance Rating 1130 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
 242-Pin Slot 1 Cartridge 
  
Core Voltage 1.65 volts 
  
Power Consumption 25 watts 
  
Maximum Power 37.5 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-90: Pentium III Coppermine 1130EB Overclocking  
Pentium III 
Coppermine 
Model Rating 1130 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C Minimal 
  
Typical O/C Potential Minimal 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 1200 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
 Globalwin VOS32 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
 MC1000 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Pentium III Coppermine 1130EB actually appeared, disappeared, and then 
reappeared in limited qualities during its ill-fated lifespan. Some of the earliest 
versions suffered stability and compatibility problems, resulting in suspended 
production. After a long delay, the 1130EB experienced a short renaissance before 
Intel released its next flagship production, the Pentium 4. 
Issues surrounding the P3 1130EB likely resulted from its enormous peak power 
demand—37.5 watts at full load (almost 8 watts more than its 1000EB sibling). The 
1130EB requires serious cooling to dissipate such a thermal load; overclocking is 
limited to a few MHz for most configurations. Increasing the core voltage to 1.85 volts 
should only be attempted with an active cooling solution, such as a Peltier-based 
heatsink or radical vapor-phase technology. 
Celeron II Background 
The .18-micron Celeron II is basically the Pentium III Coppermine upgrade to the 
Celeron marketing Strategy. Most users simply discard the II designation; even Intel 
marketing refers to this processor simply as Celeron. The Level 2 cache is scaled 
back to 128 KB, though all other Pentium III features are supported. The newer 
FCPGA socket format is also carried over, as is the 100-MHz bus speed for upper 
frequency ranges of the product line. Overclocking returns parallel those of the 
Coppermine family, with higher-end chips approaching their limits at 800 to 1100 
MHz. 
Celeron II Overclocking 
 
 
Table 6-91: Celeron II Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 533 – 1300+ MHz 
  
Generation Sixth: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 – 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.0× – 13.0+x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron 
  
Core Size by Stepping A2 = 106 mm2  
  
 B0 = 104 mm2  
  
 CO = 90 mm2  
  
 D0 = 95 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 28.1 Million Total 
  
 ½ Cache Disabled 

Table 6-91: Celeron II Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 9 – 22 watts 
  
Maximum Power 14 – 33 watts 
Architectural Design 
Core Technology OOO and Speculative 
  
 Execution RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 FPU = 80 bit 
  
 MMX = 64 bit 
  
 SSE = 128 bit 
  
Execution Units 2 × ALU/MMX/SSE 
  
 1 × Pipelined FPU 
  
Maximum Execution Rate 5 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
 
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Maximum Memory Support Physical = 64 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support 2-way SMP via APIC 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 128 KB Unified 
  
Read Buffer 4 × 32 Byte 
  
Write Buffer 32 Byte 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 32 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch Prediction 512 Entry 4-way 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 4 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, SSE 
 
Celeron II 533 
 
 
Table 6-92: Celeron II 533 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 533 MHz 

Table 6-92: Celeron II 533 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 9 watts 
  
Maximum Power 14 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-93: Celeron II 533 Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 533 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 83 – 100 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 664 – 800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 800+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron II 533-MHz processor can be confused with its older Celeron 533 
counterpart due to the similarity in model name. However, the newer .18-micron 
Celeron II 533-MHz processor offers overclocking potential unparalleled by any 
model in the original Celeron family. Most chips from this particular speed grade will 
overclock easily upwards of 700 MHz, with no changes in voltage or cooling 
requirements. The best chips can scale beyond 800 MHz. 
Celeron II 566 
 

 
Table 6-94: Celeron II 566 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 566 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 10 watts 
  
Maximum Power 14.9 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-95: Celeron II 566 Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 566 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 83 – 100 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 706 – 850 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 900+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron II 566 is a popular choice among overclockers due to its 8.5× internal 
multiplier. With a 100-MHz front-side bus rate, this chip offers an appealing overclock 
to 850 MHz with little effort outside the addition of a good-quality heatsink cooler. 
Some users have reported overclocking returns beyond 900 MHz with active Peltier 
or liquid cooling, thus rivaling the performance of the best Pentium III Coppermine 
models. 

Celeron II 600 
 
 
Table 6-96: Celeron II 600 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 600 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 9.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 12 watts 
  
Maximum Power 19.6 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-97: Celeron II 600 Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 600 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 83 – 100 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 747 – 900 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 900 – 950 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
A successful overclocker, the Celeron II 600-MHz processor never quite reached the 
acclaim awarded to its 566-MHz counterpart. The slightly higher 9.0× internal 
multiplier can prove limiting for chips not capable of sustaining 900-MHz. Many 
popular motherboards lack front-side bus speeds between 83 and 100 MHz; thus 
overclocking enthusiasts are shut down at 747 MHz. 

Celeron II 633 
 
 
Table 6-98: Celeron II 633 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 633 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 9.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 13 watts 
  
Maximum Power 20.2 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-99: Celeron II 633 Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 633 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 83 – 100 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 789 – 950 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 950 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 82° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron II 633-MHz processor carries the same faults as its 600-MHz sibling. 
While a small percentage of these units can successfully operate at 100 MHz, many 
users are forced into operating at 789 MHz due to the 83 MHz front-side bus 
limitation. Also note the lower thermal threshold for this chip: Intel decreased the 
maximum core temperature fail rate to 82° Celsius, compared to 90° Celsius for the 

earlier Celeron II models. Overclocking the 633 will require improved cooling to 
achieve significant returns. 
Celeron II 667 
 
 
Table 6-100: Celeron II 667 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 667 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 10.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 14 watts 
  
Maximum Power 21.1 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-101: Celeron II 667 Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 667 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 75 – 83 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 750 – 830 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 850 – 950 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 82° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron II 667 shares the naming quirk of its Pentium III counterpart. Once 
again, Intel avoided marketing a processor numbered 666. Sadly, the C2 667 also 

brought an end to successful 100-MHz front-side motherboard overclocking, due to 
its high 10.0× multiplier. Average overclocking for this unit falls in the 750 to 850 MHz 
range. 
Celeron II 700 
 
 
Table 6-102: Celeron II 700 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 700 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 10.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 12 watts 
  
Maximum Power 21.9 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-103: Celeron II 700 Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 700 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 75 – 83 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 788 – 872 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 900+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.5 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Celeron II 700-MHz processor brought a definitive end to 100-MHz frontside bus 
overclocking. Only a few rare units of this speed grade can successfully operate at 
1050 MHz, due to the 10.5× multiplier. Also note the ever-decreasing maximum core 
temperature rating of this speed grade compared to earlier Celeron II models. Any 
overclocking of this processor will usually require the addition of an aftermarket 
cooling solution. At a minimum, real-time active thermal monitoring is recommended 
for overclocking attempts. 
Celeron II 733 
 
 
Table 6-104: Celeron II 733 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 733 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 11.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 15 watts 
  
Maximum Power 22.8 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-105: Celeron II 733 Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 733 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 75 – 83 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 825 – 913 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 950 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 

Table 6-105: Celeron II 733 Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 733 MHz 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron II 733 is the last truly overclockable 66-MHz bus-based processor in the 
family. Even the best models in this speed grade will reach their maximum 
overclocking potential around 950 MHz without the addition of nontraditional cooling 
technologies. This model signaled the end of overclocking attempts beyond the 83-
MHz front-side bus rate for this family. 
Celeron II 766 
 
 
Table 6-106: Celeron II 766 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 766 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 11.50× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 16 watts 
  
Maximum Power 23.6 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-107: Celeron II 766 Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 766 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 70 – 75 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 805 – 863 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 950 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 

Table 6-107: Celeron II 766 Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 766 MHz 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Overclocking with the Celeron II 766 will be limited beyond the 75-MHz frontside bus 
rate. Some rare samples may reach 83 MHz, but the success rate for such 
overclocks is extremely low compared to those on lower-clocked Celeron II models. 
The C2 766 is not a good choice for overclocking enthusiasts, due to its debilitating 
11.5× multiplier. 
Celeron II 800E 
 
 
Table 6-108: Celeron II 800E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 800 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 16 watts 
  
Maximum Power 24.5 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-109: Celeron II 800E Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 766 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 105 – 112 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 840 – 896 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 950+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 

Table 6-109: Celeron II 800E Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 766 MHz 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 82° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron II 800 marked the debut of the E series designation in the C2 family. As 
with the Pentium III Coppermine, any unit bearing the E modifier is a 100-MHz front-
side-bus-compatible processor. Overclocking these chips is moderately successful; 
most samples offer returns similar to their P3E counterparts. Note the increase in 
maximum core thermal ratings, a clear indication of Intel's introduction of new core 
stepping for the C2 architecture. 
Celeron II 850E 
 
 
Table 6-110: Celeron II 850E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 850 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 17 watts 
  
Maximum Power 25.7 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-111: Celeron II 850E Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 850 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 

Table 6-111: Celeron II 850E Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 850 MHz 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 105 – 112 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 893 – 952 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1000+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85 ° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Due to its 8.5× internal multiplier, the Celeron II 850 MHz processor is a great 
candidate for overclocking via the 112-MHz front-side bus. Given the improved 
thermal efficiency of the C2E core, the 850E can offer scalability beyond 1000 MHz 
for many configurations. 
Celeron II 900E 
 
 
Table 6-112: Celeron II 900E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 900 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 66 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 9.5× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 18 watts 
  
Maximum Power 26.7 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-113: Celeron II 900E Overclocking  
Celeron II 
Model Rating 900 MHz 

Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 105 – 112 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 945 – 1008 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1025 – 1100 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Celeron II 900E offers modest overclocking potential in the 945 to 1008 MHz 
range. At this point in its evolution, this processor family was limited to its .18-micron 
core architecture. Most configurations featuring this processor will reach a maximum 
overclock of around 1050 MHz. Only two additional speed grades were released after 
the 900E, as Intel moved rapidly to new core architecture. 
Celeron II 1000E 
 
 
Table 6-114: Celeron II 1000E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 1000 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 10.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 20 watts 
  
Maximum Power 29 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-115: Celeron II 1000E Overclocking  

Celeron II 
Model Rating 1000 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 105 – 110 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1050 – 1100 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1100+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The specifications of the Celeron II 1000E indicate a decrease in maximum core 
temperature ratings. Accordingly, overclocking this processor will prove limited 
beyond 1100 MHz. Worse yet, most chips from this speed grade will fail to operate 
successfully at speeds beyond 1050 MHz, only a 5% increase for the risk. 
Celeron II 1100E 
 
 
Table 6-116: Celeron II 1100E Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Celeron II 
  
Performance Rating 1100 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 11.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA Socket 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 22 watts 
  
Maximum Power 33 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-117: Celeron II 1100E Overclocking  

Celeron II 
Model Rating 1100 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 105 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1133 – 1155 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1175 – 1200 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers Swiftech MCX370 
  
 Alpha PAL8045 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler MCX370 Peltier 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
At 1100 MHz the Celeron II family came to an end. The 1100E model offers minimal 
overclocking return for most configurations, though a few underground reports have 
indicated marginal scalability beyond 1200 MHz with high core voltages and the 
application of quality cooling. However, most Celeron II 1100E systems will fail to 
boot around 1150 MHz, due to limitations built in by the .18-micron fabrication. 
Pentium III/Celeron Tualatin Background 
The Tualatin was a stopgap in Intel's midrange product line. This rather unusual 
processor appeared after the release of the Pentium 4 flagship product series. The 
Tualatin built on the Coppermine design by introducing a streamlined .13-micron core 
architecture and adding a hardware data prefetch mechanism to maximize efficient 
instructions per clock. Intel also chose to adapt its socket interface with the Tualatin 
by introducing a new socket standard called FCPGA2, which is incompatible with the 
huge number of traditional Socket 370 FCPGA motherboards still in use around the 
world. While the different socket standards may start to get a bit confusing, you 
should simply keep in mind which socket type you have on your motherboard and 
which processors work with that particular socket type, rather than trying to 
understand why Intel chose to complicate our lives with so many socket standards. 
The latest 1.2+-GHz Celeron features a core-die reduction to .13 micron, plus a 
migration to Intel's new FCPGA2 socket format. Its base design closely resembles 
the Tualatin, though the feature set has been scaled back to a 128-KB Level 2 cache, 
100-MHz front-side bus support, and no advanced hardware data prefetch 
mechanism. This new breed of Celeron T series chips offers overclocking results 

similar to the Tualatin chips. Most will reach 1400+ MHz with good cooling and a 
minor bump in core voltage. 
Pentium III Tualatin Overclocking 
While the Tualatin requires a new socket format, it represents the most overclockable 
Pentium III design to date. Many users report overclocks upwards of 2 GHz with 
radical cooling. Traditional forced-air heatsink cooling techniques usually peak 
between 1400 and 1600 MHz. Unlike previous designs, the new .13-micron 
architecture is not tolerant of changes in core voltages. Take great care when 
pushing the safety limit of 10% beyond default specifications. 
 
 
Table 6-118: Pentium III Tualatin Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Talatin 
  
Performance Rating 1130 – 1260+ MHz 
  
Generation Sixth: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 – 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.5× – 13+x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370-Pin FCPGA2 Socket 
  
Core Die Size .13 micron 
  
Core Size by Stepping 80 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 256 KB = 28.1 Million 
  
 512 KB = 44 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.45 – 1.475 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 15 – 21 watts 
  
Maximum Power 12.8 – 31.2 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology
OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 FPU = 80 bit 
  
 MMX = 64 bit 
  
 SSE = 128 bit 
  
Execution Units 2 × ALU/MMX/SSE 
  
 1 × Pipelined FPU 
  
Maximum Execution Rate 5 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 

Table 6-118: Pentium III Tualatin Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Talatin 
  
Maximum Memory 
Support Physical = 64 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support 2-way SMP via APIC 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 16 KB 4-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 256 – 512 KB Unified 
  
Read Buffer 4 × 32 Byte 
  
Write Buffer 32 Byte 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 32 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction 512 Entry 4-way 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 4 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, SSE 
Disassembling Slot 1 Processors 
1. You must disassemble the factory-installed casing in order to install 
aftermarket cooling devices in Slot 1 processors. The case is secured in place 
with four interlocking pins. Begin by laying the processor on its side, with the 
thermal plate facing up. Eight pins will be visible, but only the four pins near 
the outer edge of the casing require manipulation. 
2. Insert a flathead screwdriver into the region between the thermal plate and the 
casing's edge. You may wish to cover the head of the screwdriver with a thin 
cloth to avoid scratching the case. Simply rotate the screwdriver until you hear 
a clicking sound. This click signifies release of the upper pins. Use the same 
method for removing the two lower pins, but take care not to insert the 
screwdriver tip too far into the processor assembly, as this could damage the 
internal circuit board. 
3. You must also disassemble the inner thermal plate once the casing has been 
removed. First flip the processor over so that the thermal plate is facing away. 
A series of small teeth embedded in a spring system, secured against four 
interconnecting pins, holds the thermal plate in position. Using a small punch 
or jeweler's screwdriver, carefully apply pressure around the toothed regions 
until the catches bend away. 
4. The processing unit can now be removed from the casing by gently lifting the 
printed circuit board away from the four interconnecting pins. Installation of the 
aftermarket heatsink, waterblock, or Peltier cooler varies according to model, 
though most coolers are secured by plastic strips or other simple mounting 
techniques. The best solutions use dual heatsinks for each side of the printed 

circuit board. Mounting screws secure the cooler to the circuit board by 
applying pressure from both sides of the processing unit. 
Take care to note the shape of the Intel thermal plate, as some Pentium II models 
feature a specialized plate designed to contact both the processor core and the 
cache memory chips. If a comparable heatsink design is not available, installing a 
shim between the chips and heatsink can achieve the cooling needed for proper 
operation. Alternatively, a fan can be mounted to blow across the cache chips. 
Socket to Slot Converters 
Socket 370 to Slot 1 "Slotket" converter cards offer a popular upgrade path to move 
from older Slot 1-based systems to the latest Socket 370-based Pentium III 
Coppermine and Celeron II processors. The best of these Slotket cards offer great 
overclocking support. Many models allow users to configure the values for core 
voltage and front-side bus speeds directly on the Slotket card itself, assuming the 
motherboard supports custom values. 
 
Figure 6-1: I will Slotket II  
The Slot 1 interface uses certain pins for automatic configuration of frontside bus and 
voltage levels. A Slot 1 motherboard equipped with a quality Slotket converter (Abit or 
Iwill recommended) and a highly overclockable Pentium III Coppermine processor 
can offer superb overclocking potential. A Slotket also allows installation of 370-pin 
socket cooling solutions, thus increasing the efficiency of the thermal exchange while 
decreasing overall user effort. 
Hacking the Slot 1 Interface 
Using the same techniques discussed for a Slotket converter card, a true Slot 1 
processor can be modified by altering the electrical states of various pins along the 
printed circuit board interface's connection to the motherboard. Blocking electrical 
inputs on certain pins can facilitate overclocking for motherboards with limited 
configuration support. 
Many methods have been developed for the isolation of pins from an electrical 
connector. The most extreme process involves actually severing the pin with a sharp 
razor blade. This action is irreversible without intricate knowledge of advanced 
soldering techniques. The simplest process is to use dielectric paint to insulate the 

pin. The risk is that these paints can be abrasive to the motherboard connector and 
may decompose under extended thermal load. 
The best solution comes in the form of Teflon electrical tape. The basic idea is to 
prevent the pin from making an electrical connection to the motherboard by covering 
it with the Teflon tape. A standard 2-millimeter-thick tape possesses dielectric 
properties upwards of 8000 volts, thus ensuring no electron migration across the 
insulating material. Teflon is also extremely resilient. It can withstand great 
temperatures and stress loads. The tape can easily be cut with a razor blade to fit 
across the desired pin(s). Take care to ensure that the tape covers the entire lower 
region of the pin, with no overlapping onto surrounding pin or circuit junctions. 
The most popular hardware hack is found with pin B21. When you isolate this pin, a 
Slot 1 processor designed for 66-MHz front-side bus operation can be forced to 
identify itself to the motherboard as a 100-MHz bus chip. Remember that locked 
chips will implement the same multiplier, regardless of the front-side bus rate; thus 
any bus speed increases will overclock the core processing unit. Systems featuring 
unlocked chips can implement a lower multiplier, if overclocking the processor core is 
not desired, while retaining the performance advantage of the 100-MHz bus speed. 
Pin B21 can be located by placing the processor on its side, with the longest row of 
connecting pins oriented to the right-hand side. The position of pin B21 can now be 
found by counting 21 pins from the right-hand side of the processor. 
 
Figure 6-2: Slot 1 processor (back side, bottom right) pin B21, covered  
Core voltage modifications are also possible for most Slot 1 models. Again, this 
assumes that the system's motherboard actually supports the values assigned after 
the pins are modified. A motherboard without proper voltage support might give 
erroneous voltage values, thus damaging the processor core circuitry. Any voltage 
hacking techniques require extreme care and patience. 
Covering pins A121, A119, and B119 will set the core voltage to 2.2 volts for .25-
micron processor models. Be careful to examine all connection points closely with a 
magnifying glass before proceeding to install the processor. If the junction point at 
A119 allows any connection, the chip will be autodetected as requiring a core voltage 
of 2.6 volts, a level that will destroy nearly all .25-micron Intel processors. 

Newer .18-micron Slot 1 models can be modified to 1.85 volts using a similar 
technique. Only pin A119 needs to be covered to force the autodetection of 1.85 volts 
for the core processor voltage. Any increases in core voltage values can lead to 
processor failure due to increased thermal loads, so be sure to install a cooling 
system capable of dissipating the increased temperatures caused by these 
techniques. 
Pentium 4 Willamette Background 
With the P6 core reaching its final days of mass production, Intel ushered in the 
redesigned Pentium 4 as its new midrange flagship product. The Pentium 4 is an 
entirely new core built atop technologies never before implemented for an ×86 class 
processor, such as a double-speed integer execution unit, SSE2 streaming 
multimedia instructions, and a trace cache architecture. These new features yielded 
the highest performance processor available for most multimedia applications. 
Despite these advanced technologies, the Pentium 4 platform has its shortcomings, 
due to its extremely long pipeline. The older Pentium 3 and AMD Athlon designs 
achieve better results for the broadest range of applications, at least as measured in 
per-MHz efficiency. The Pentium 4 must run at 2 GHz before it can outperform its 
competitors; even then, the difference is negligible for most desktop applications and 
games. 
Considering this lack of per-MHz effectiveness, overclocking the Pentium 4 will help 
maximize performance. As with previous Intel designs, the P4 is multiplier locked. 
Worse, the Willamette is fabricated through a .18-micron process, which does not 
respond well to overclocking at the default core voltage. A 10% core voltage 
increase, combined with a massive cooling unit, can usually offer improvements in 
the 200 to 400 MHz range. 
Actual performance returns across a variety of applications and benchmarks also 
need to be examined when overclocking the Pentium 4. Intel introduced a clock-
throttling mechanism that can effectively power down segments of the processor's 
core during times of intense thermal load. This new feature is engineered to ensure 
stability for OEM systems that lack quality cooling configurations, though it can 
adversely affect overclocking performance for systems with inadequate cooling 
properties. 
It should be noted that the Pentium 4 uses the 100-MHz Quad Data Rate bus, or 
QDR, which results in a 400-MHz FSB speed. 
Pentium 4 Willamette Overclocking 
 
 
Table 6-119: Pentium 4 Willamette Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 
  
Performance Rating 1300 – 2000 MHz 

Table 6-119: Pentium 4 Willamette Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 
  
Generation Seventh: 80786 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 MHz (4 * 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 13.0× – 20.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 423-Pin PGA 
  
 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron 
  
Core Size by Stepping 217 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 42 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.7 – 1.75 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 51.8 – 75.3 watts 
  
Maximum Power 71 – 100 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology
OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 FPU = 80 bit 
  
 MMX = 64 bit 
  
 SSE/SSE2 = 128 bit 
  
Maximum Execution Rate 6 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Maximum Memory 
Support Physical = 64 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Level 2 Cache 256 KB Unified 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 256 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction 4,096 Entry 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 16 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, SSE, SSE2 
Pentium 4 Willamette 1300 
 
 

Table 6-120: Pentium 4 Willamette 1300 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 
  
Performance Rating 1300 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 13.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 423-Pin PGA 
  
 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.7 – 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 51.6 watts 
  
Maximum Power 74 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-121: Pentium 4 Willamette 1300 Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 1300 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 440 – 460 QDR 
  
 (110 – 115 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1430 – 1495 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1500 – 1600 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Zalman CNPS-5000 
  
 Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 80° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Willamette 1300-MHz processor marked Intel's entry-level push into the Pentium 
4 marketing campaign. One of the first P4-derived chips available to consumers, the 
P4 1300 lacks the performance to compete with older Pentium III and Athlon designs. 
As a result, this chip realized only marginal success with overclocking; many units 
failed to overclock successfully past 1500 MHz in testing with prerelease P3 1300 
processors. 

Pentium 4 Willamette 1400 
 
 
Table 6-122: Pentium 4 Willamette 1400 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 
  
Performance Rating 1400 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 14.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 423-Pin PGA 
  
 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.7 – 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 55.3 watts 
  
Maximum Power 74 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-123: Pentium 4 Willamette 1400 Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 1400 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 440 – 480 QDR 
  
 (110 – 120 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1540 – 1680 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1700 – 1800 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Zalman CNPS-5000 
  
 Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.1 volts with Extreme 
Cooling 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage 3.5 volts with Chipset Cooler
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium 4 1400-MHz processor suffered a fate similar to its 1300-MHz sibling in 
the overclocking community. Again, Intel failed to deliver significant performance 
gains over existing Pentium III and Athlon models in most consumer-oriented 
software performance testing. Overclocking returns did improve, but the imposed 

thermal limitation of 70° Celsius mandates installation of a quality cooling solution for 
those seeking returns in excess of 1700 MHz. 
Pentium 4 Willamette 1500 
 
 
Table 6-124: Pentium 4 Willamette 1500 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 
  
Performance Rating 1500 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 15.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 423-Pin PGA 
  
 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.7 – 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 57.9 watts 
  
Maximum Power 79 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-125: Pentium 4 Willamette 1500 Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 1500 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 440 – 480 QDR 
  
 (110 – 120 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1650 – 1800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2000+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Zalman CNPS-5000 
  
 Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.1 volts with Extreme 
Cooling 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage 3.5 volts with Chipset Cooler
  
Maximum Core Temperature 72° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Willamette 1500 MHz was the best-selling Intel processor in the early months of 
the P4 marketing initiative, due to its impressive performance-to-price ratio. Most 

units in this speed grade can attain stable overclocks exceeding 1700 MHz with 
installation of a decent heatsink cooler and a slight core voltage increase. As the P4 
1500 design imposes a relatively low thermal limit of 72° Celsius, any attempts at 
overclocking beyond 1900 MHz should include high-quality forced-air heatsink 
cooling. 
Pentium 4 Willamette 1600 
 
 
Table 6-126: Pentium 4 Willamette 1600 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 
  
Performance Rating 1600 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 16.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 423-Pin PGA 
  
 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.7 – 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 61 watts 
  
Maximum Power 83 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-127: Pentium 4 Willamette 1600 Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 1600 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 440 – 480 QDR 
  
 (110 – 120 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1760 – 1920 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2100+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Zalman CNPS-5000 
  
 Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.1 volts with Extreme 
Cooling 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage 3.5 volts with Chipset Cooler
  
Maximum Core Temperature 75° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Pentium 4 Willamette 1600-MHz processor offers great overclocking potential 
with minimal concern for system instability. Nearly all P4 1600 models can reach 
1900 MHz straight from the retail box, without any significant increases in core 
voltage rates. However, cooling becomes a dominant concern beyond 2000 MHz, as 
this chip features a maximum core temperature threshold of 75° Celsius. 
Pentium 4 Willamette 1700 
 
 
Table 6-128: Pentium 4 Willamette 1700 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 
  
Performance Rating 1700 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 17.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 423-Pin PGA 
  
 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.7 – 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 64 watts 
  
Maximum Power 87 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-129: Pentium 4 Willamette 1700 Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 1700 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 440 – 480 QDR 
  
 (110 – 120 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1870 – 2040 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2100+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Zalman CNPS-5000 
  
 Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.1 volts with Extreme 
Cooling 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage 3.5 volts with Chipset Cooler
  
Maximum Core Temperature 76° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Pentium 4 Willamette 1700-MHz processor is well respected in the overclocking 
community. The internal 17× multiplier is well suited to operation with processor 
speeds in excess of 120 MHz (480 QDR). Given a quality cooling solution, most P4 
1700 units should scale up to 2100 MHz with minimal fuss and no major concerns. 
Pentium 4 Willamette 1800 
 
 
Table 6-130: Pentium 4 Willamette 1800 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 
  
Performance Rating 1800 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 18.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 423-Pin PGA 
  
 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.7 – 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 66.7 watts 
  
Maximum Power 88 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-131: Pentium 4 Willamette 1800 Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 1800 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 440 – 460 QDR 
  
 (110 – 115 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1980 – 2070 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2100+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Zalman CNPS-5000 
  
 Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.1 volts with Extreme 
Cooling 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage 3.5 volts with Chipset Cooler
  
Maximum Core Temperature 77° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Pentium 4 Willamette 1800-MHz processor offers a good balance in its 18× core-
to-processor bus multiplier ratio. Overclocking returns approaching 2100 MHz should 
be realized with minimal effort. However, the P4 1800 represents a transition phase 
in the Willamette architecture for overclocking enthusiasts; models featuring higher 
multipliers will offer less performance return, due to restrictions in processor bus 
speeds. The P4 1800 displays evidence of this shift when speed grades of the 
Willamette design are closely compared. 
Pentium 4 Willamette 1900 
 
 
Table 6-132: Pentium 4 Willamette 1900 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 
  
Performance Rating 1900 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 19.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 423-Pin PGA 
  
 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.7 – 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 72.8 watts 
  
Maximum Power 92 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-133: Pentium 4 Willamette 1900 Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 1900 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 440 – 460 QDR 
  
 (110 – 115 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 2090 – 2185 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2200+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Zalman CNPS-5000 
  
 Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.1 volts with Extreme 
Cooling 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage 3.5 volts with Chipset Cooler

Table 6-133: Pentium 4 Willamette 1900 Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 1900 MHz 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 73° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium 4 Willamette 1900-MHz processor will offer moderate scalability 
upwards to the 2100 to 2200 MHz range for most system configurations. The .18-
micron design of this chip stifles successful overclocking beyond 2200 MHz, 
regardless of the cooling or voltage levels involved. 
Pentium 4 Willamette 2000 
 
 
Table 6-134: Pentium 4 Willamette 2000 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Willamette 
  
Performance Rating 2000 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 20.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 423-Pin PGA 
  
 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.70 – 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 71.8 Watts 
  
Maximum Power 96 Watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-135: Pentium 4 Willamette 2000 Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 2000 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 420 – 440 QDR 
  
 (105 – 110 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 2100 – 2200 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2200+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Zalman CNPS-5000 
  
 Swiftech MCX-478 

Table 6-135: Pentium 4 Willamette 2000 Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 2000 MHz 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
2.1 volts with Extreme 
Cooling 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage 3.5 volts with Chipset Cooler
  
Maximum Core Temperature 74° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium 4 Willamette family of processors saw its supposedly final incarnation 
with the release of the P4 2000. This chip offers marginal overclocking capabilities, 
with most users realizing maximum return in the 2100 to 2200 MHz range. Improved 
cooling or increases in core voltage will do little to push the Willamette any further; 
the .18-micron design hinders overclocking beyond 2200 MHz for most traditional 
system configurations. 
Pentium 4 Northwood Background 
The Pentium 4 Northwood is the latest commercial offering in the P4 architecture for 
desktop users. The Northwood extends the base Willamette architecture by adding a 
256-KB Level 2 cache, bringing the total to an impressive 512 KB. Design 
enhancements include a .13-micron core fabrication process. This smaller die size, 
combined with additional production revisions, allows the Pentium 4 Northwood to 
attain impressive overclocking results compared to its Willamette siblings. 
Overclocking potential for the P4 Northwood can extend above 500 to 800 MHz with 
traditional forced-air heatsink cooling and a minimal increase in core voltage levels. 
Those willing to undertake extreme cooling measures will witness the greatest 
returns. Recent liquid gas cooling experiments have yielded short-term overclocking 
results above the 4-GHz range for the latest Northwood revisions. Otherwise, less 
radical Peltier or vapor-phase cooling technologies should allow operation near the 3-
GHz level for most higherclocked Northwood models. 
Intel demonstrated an impressive 3.5-GHz Pentium 4 system in 2001, thus revealing 
the potential for real P4 overclocking. 
Pentium 4 Northwood Overclocking 
 
 
Table 6-136: Pentium 4 Northwood Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Northwood 
  
Performance Rating 1600 – 3000+ MHz 
  
Generation Seventh: 80786 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 

Table 6-136: Pentium 4 Northwood Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Northwood 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 1.0× Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 MHz (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 16.0× – 13.0+x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Die Size .13 micron 
  
Core Size by Stepping 131 – 146 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 55 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.50 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Level 2 Cache Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 52.4 – 57.8 watts 
  
Maximum Power 66 – 74 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology
OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 FPU = 80 bit 
  
 MMX = 64 bit 
  
 SSE/SSE2 = 128 bit 
  
Maximum Execution Rate 6 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Maximum Memory 
Support Physical = 64 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Level 2 Cache 512 KB Unified 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 256 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction 4,096 Entry 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 16 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, SSE, SSE2 
Pentium 4 Northwood 1600A 
 
 
Table 6-137: Pentium 4 Northwood 1600A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Northwood 

Table 6-137: Pentium 4 Northwood 1600A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Northwood 
  
Performance Rating 1600 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 16.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 478 Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.5v 
  
Power Consumption 38.7 watts 
  
Maximum Power 49 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-138: Pentium 4 Northwood 1600A Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Northwood 
Model Rating 2000 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical FSB O/C 532–600 QDR 
  
 (133–150 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 2128–2400 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2800+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.75v with Extreme 
Cooling 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage 3.5v with Chipset Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 66° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The P4 1600A offers incredible overclocking potential due to its highly refined .13-
micron copper core fabrication process. Most units can attain stable operation at 
2400 MHz (that's an 800-MHz overclock) with nothing more than an increase in bus 
speed, though you may need to increase to 1.60v or 1.65v for improved stability. The 
P4 1600A is one of the most often overclocked processors out there. With a 
whopping 275 entries in the Overclockers.com CPU database, the P4 1600A is often 
compared to the old Celeron 300A for its overclocking potential to price ratio. 
Pentium 4 Northwood 1800A 
 

 
Table 6-139: Pentium 4 Northwood 1800A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Northwood 
  
Performance Rating 1800 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 18.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.5v 
  
Power Consumption 41.6 watts 
  
Maximum Power 54 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-140: Pentium 4 Northwood 1800A Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Willamette 
Model Rating 1800 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 532 QDR 
  
 (133 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 2400 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2800+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.75v with Extreme 
Cooling 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage 3.5v with Chipset Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 67° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The P4 1800A tends to be less popular than the 1600A (157 overclocking 
submissions at Overclockers.com, for comparison sake) since it is slightly more 
expensive than the 1600A without offering many additional advantages. Stock 
cooling and the default 1.50v voltage will likely get you to 2400 MHz with a 133-MHz 
bus speed, though once again you may need 1.60v or 1.65v to improve stability. 
There is one advantage that the 1800A offers over the 1600A: you can run at 2400 
MHz with a lower 133-MHz bus rather than a 150-MHz bus, thanks to the 18.0× 
multiplier on the 1800A. 

Pentium 4 Northwood 2000A 
 
 
Table 6-141: Pentium 4 Northwood 2000A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Northwood 
  
Performance Rating 2000 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 20.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 52.4 watts 
  
Maximum Power 66 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-142: Pentium 4 Northwood 2000A Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Northwood 
Model Rating 2000 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 440 – 480 QDR 
  
 (110 – 120 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 2200 – 2400 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2400+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.75 volts with Extreme 
Cooling 
   
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 68° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The P4 2000A features a 20.0× multiplier, once again enabling a higher core 
operating speed with a lower front side bus. That's good if you're trying to push the 
core speed to the max, without stressing subsystems that are driven by the FSB, but 
it may offer lower overall system performance as compared to using a slightly higher 
FSB and a slightly lower processor core operating speed. If you're aiming for 2400 
MHz, the 1600A or 1800A will therefore yield greater overall performance due to their 

higher FSBs, along with comparable stability, depending on voltage, cooling, and 
your particular processor sample. 
Pentium 4 Northwood 2200A 
 
 
Table 6-143: Pentium 4 Northwood 2200A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Northwood 
  
Performance Rating 2200 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 22.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 55.1 watts 
  
Maximum Power 71 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-144: Pentium 4 Northwood 2200A Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Northwood 
Model Rating 2200 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 423 – 440 QDR 
  
 (105 – 110 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 2310 – 2420 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2500+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage
3.5 volts with Chipset 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 69° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Pentium 4 Northwood 2200 processor extends good overclocking balance by 
means of its 22.0× multiplier-to-processor bus ratio. Many chips in this speed grade 
can effectively scale past 2500 MHz with a minimal increase in core voltage levels. 
Otherwise, nearly all P4 2200A processors should attain a stable overclock near the 

2400-MHz frequency level with little more than a quick adjustment to the 
motherboard's processor bus speed. 
Pentium 4 Northwood 2400A 
 
 
Table 6-145: Pentium 4 Northwood 2400A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name Intel Pentium 4 Northwood 
  
Performance Rating 2400 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 400 QDR (4 × 100 MHz) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 24.0× 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 478-Pin PGA 
  
Core Voltage 1.5 volts 
  
Power Consumption 55.1 watts 
  
Maximum Power 74 watts 
 
 
 
Table 6-146: Pentium 4 Northwood 2400A Overclocking  
Pentium 4 Northwood 
Model Rating 2400 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Locked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C N/A 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 420 – 440 QDR 
  
 (105 – 110 MHz) 
  
Typical O/C Potential 2520 – 2640 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2700+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers Swiftech MCX-478 
  
Maximum Core Voltage
1.75 volts with Extreme 
Cooling 
  
Maximum I/O Voltage 3.5 volts with Chipset Cooler
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
In terms of raw MHz scalability, the Pentium 4 Northwood 2400-MHz processor 
represents the pinnacle of current overclocking potential. Early reports with the chip 
have indicated overclocking returns in the 2700 to 2800 MHz range, with standard 
forced-air heatsink cooling. Subzero active cooling technologies have produced 

yields exceeding 3000 MHz with this impressive processor. The .13-micron P4 core 
is in its infancy, so expect future designs to offer scalability approaching 4000 MHz in 
real-world configurations. 
Pentium 4 Northwood "B" 
In mid-2002, Intel released a 133 MHz FSB (533 QDR) version of the Pentium 4 
Northwood, designated as "B." It is available in speeds ranging from 2.26 GHz to 
2.80+ GHz. If you have no interest in overclocking (which may make reading this 
book somewhat counterproductive), the Northwood "B" is an attractive chip given its 
ability to offer higher overall system performance due to its higher FSB. But for 
overclocking, the Northwood "B" offers a lower price to performance ratio than the 
cheaper Northwood "A," and is therefore not recommended for overclockers. 
Pentium Xeon Series 
The Xeon series of Pentium processors is the server and workstation variant of the 
Intel line. Most models can be overclocked using techniques similar to the ones that 
work with their desktop cousins, though motherboard manufacturers do not always 
support the options required for success. Xeon parts are designed for maximum 
stability and reliability, which minimizes the need for multiplier or bus manipulation 
beyond the standard autodetect routines. 
All Pentium II and many Pentium III Xeon chips are based on Intel's Slot 2 processor-
to-motherboard interconnect. The comparative advantages of the Slot 2 Xeon over 
the Slot 1 desktop offerings include better support for multiple processor 
configurations and the presence of massive Level 2 caches for increased symmetric 
multiprocessing performance. Most Slot 2 motherboards are designed to 
accommodate only the Intel retail heatsink cooler; problems can be caused by the 
introduction of aftermarket cooling solutions. Some Slot 1 coolers can be used, as 
long as modifications are made so that components mounted near the motherboard-
to-processor interface can clear properly. 
Later Pentium III Xeon chips adopted the 370-pin FCPGA socket interface for 
compatibility across the widest range of motherboard designs. In single- or dual-
processor systems, these chips exhibit the same overclocking characteristics as the 
standard Pentium III Coppermine. Demand for Pentium III Xeons in the desktop 
sector is minimal. The majority of PC users are not willing to pay more to obtain the 
extended reliability and stability these chips can offer. 
The Pentium 4 Xeon is Intel's current flagship ×86 processor, though its high price, 
combined with the need to pair it with a costly motherboard design, does little to 
attract the overclocking crowd. Symmetric multithreading (SMT), recently added in 
2+-GHz models, allows the P4 Xeon to emulate a dual-core processor, thus 
maximizing performance in multithreaded operating systems like Windows XP 
Professional. Even so, overclocking potential is generally considered to be limited, 
due to Intel's rigorous design specifications for its i860 motherboard chipset. Such 
specifications ensure maximum reliability for critical applications, but also limit 
flexibility for enthusiasts. 

Chapter 7: AMD Overclocking 
AMD Background 
AMD is one of the longest-lived manufacturers of x86 computing technology. The 
company's market share increased rapidly after the release of its K5 core 
architecture. Some iterations of AMD designs were almost indistinguishable from the 
products of Intel or Cyrix. In the early days, nearly all x86 products resembled each 
other closely, as manufacturers worked to establish a common PC standard. The 
success of AMD's current Athlon platform shows that the company has learned to 
harness the power of market diversification that began with the original K5. 
With the K5 series, AMD first diverged from its competitors in design, engineering, 
and production. The K5 contained one of the most efficient integer execution units 
ever made, though its lack of a full-pipelined floating-point unit essentially relegated 
K5 architecture to the budget realm. Gaming and multimedia interests drove the high-
end market toward performance platforms, like Intel's redesigned Pentium processor, 
and away from architectures like the K5, which was closely related to the 486 design. 
The AMD K5 compared favorably to the Pentium running a wide range of desktop 
applications. While the underpowered floating-point unit raised questions, 
performance was still acceptable for most users of the day. The real stumbling block 
for the K5 was not its engineering as much as the way it was sold to consumers. 
AMD used integer benchmarking results compared to the Pentium to name, rate, and 
market each model in the K5 series. The choice to compare benchmark numbers 
instead of clock frequencies caused some analysts to accuse AMD of deception. 
While the K5 could outperform the Pentium "clock for clock" in integer applications, 
multimedia programs lagged. Many vendors decided to market the K5 under its 
operating frequency, while retaining the performance rating (PR) number for general 
comparisons. 
The K6 was an evolutionary step for AMD. It offered minimal core improvements over 
the K5. The main architectural differences included MMX (multimedia) instruction set 
enhancements and adaptations to the core that supported a split-voltage interface to 
maintain motherboard compatibility with Intel's Pentium MMX. AMD's marketing 
strategy for the K6 was, however, dramatically different than it had been for the K5. 
AMD chose to develop, market, and name the K6 processors by their operating 
frequencies, dropping the questionable PR-naming convention. Further core 
refinements, combined with additional MMX improvements, brought the K6 series a 
loyal following in the budget market segments. Intel retained the lead in multimedia 
performance. The rather dismal floating-point unit persisted in the K6 processors, 
limiting AMD to the entry-level realm. 
Eventually, AMD recognized the need for an architecture revision and a new 
multimedia solution, especially after Intel released the powerful Pentium II platform. 
While the K6 could compete with the Pentium MMX, it could not compete with the P2 
core architecture. 

Lacking the resources to develop a completely new platform, AMD looked toward a 
new multimedia instruction set to compete with Intel's superior floating-point 
execution. The company adopted a streaming multimedia instruction set for its new 
K6-2. The K6-2 introduced key upgrades to the K6 design. The 3DNow! instruction 
set extended the floating-point capabilities of the K6, and an increase to 100 MHz in 
front-side bus speed improved memory and subsystem performance. The core die 
size also decreased to .25 micron, allowing the K6-2 to scale toward 550 MHz. 
3DNow! was a forward-looking technology developed along the same lines as Intel's 
MMX instruction set. MMX allows for more efficient processing of integer 
mathematical computations; 3DNow! allows efficient combination of multiple floating-
point operations in specialized instructions. 3DNow! also required many software 
optimizations at the programming code level, so AMD moved quickly to acquire and 
maintain development contracts. 
When running properly optimized software applications using 3DNow! technology, 
instead of pure floating-point mathematics, the K6-2 could compete and even 
surpass the Intel architecture's performance. Game and hardware driver developers 
quickly adopted the new standard, and the K6-2 infiltrated all desktop markets. Even 
without 3DNow!, the K6-2 offered adequate floating-point performance through sheer 
increases in MHz (compared to the K5). Given low retail prices and compatibility with 
existing Socket 7 motherboards, the K6-2 rapidly emerged as the first real competitor 
to Intel's Pentium II and Celeron product lines. 
Once the K6-2 found acceptance in the desktop market, AMD saw the need to 
develop a workstation and server-grade processor. The primary limitation of the K6-2 
is memory bandwidth performance, but AMD could do little about motherboard 
chipset design. Manufacturers like VIA and SIS had failed to improve memory 
bandwidth or latency since the inception of Socket 7. ALI did improve the architecture 
related to memory access, but its chipsets suffered compatibility and stability 
problems when used with the newly popular AGP graphics accelerators. 
AMD recognized the deficiency in bandwidth and opted for a solution at the 
processor level. The K6-2 implements a one-tier internal cache memory buffer, with 
the second-level buffer surface mounted on the motherboard. The Level 2 cache is 
accessed at the front-side bus rate because the chipset handles the transactions. 
AMD's K6-3 took a page from Intel's playbook by introducing a Level 2 cache 
embedded inside the processor core. This internal L2 operates at the same rate as 
the core, increasing the cache memory latency and bandwidth exponentially 
compared to the K6-2. The cache memory mounted on the motherboard became a 
third-tier cache acting as an intermediary between the fast processor and slow 
system memory. 
The K6-3 was marketed primarily as a server. Its new three-level cache architecture 
encouraged integer performance exceeding that of Intel's Pentium II at similar core 
clock rates. Curiously, the K6-3 450 could often exceed the integer performance of 
the more expensive Pentium III 450. Server environments have little need for floating-
point multimedia performance; thus the K6-3 captured a significant slice of the 

higher-end processor market due to its superb performance and low-cost 
implementation. AMD could finally compete with Intel at all levels of the x86 market. 
The plus series (marked with the + symbol) of K6 processors was a stopgap to 
maintain market visibility for AMD in the mobile computing segment. Both the K6-2 
and K6-3 product lines featured a plus series variation. Core die size was reduced to 
.18 micron, which improved thermal efficiency. Architectural improvements include 
AMD's new 3DNow! DSP standards. The K6-3+ core remained basically the same, 
while the K6-2+ was upgraded to include an on-die 128 KB Level 2 cache memory 
architecture. 
AMD Athlon Architecture 
AMD recognized the need for a new architecture upon the release of Intel's Pentium 
III platform. The K6-2 had remained the mainstay for AMD throughout the reign of the 
Pentium II, but it could not rise to P3 standards. Instead of developing another K6-
based revision, AMD undertook the arduous task of engineering a completely new 
design. Upon its release, the Athlon (K7) rapidly became the new choice for 
performance computing. The Athlon product series performs by raw power, featuring 
parallel execution for improved efficiency. 
The transition to a new motherboard bus architecture paved the way for the Athlon's 
impressive success. The K7 interface is based on Digital Equipment Corporation's 
Alpha EV6 architecture. The Alpha processor is actually a 64-bit reduced instruction 
set computer (RISC), while the Athlon is a traditional 32-bit x86 offering. Using an off-
the-shelf motherboard allowed AMD to concentrate its engineering efforts on the 
processor core itself. The resulting K7 Athlon core still lies at the heart of AMD's 
desktop computers, despite revisions to integrate on-die cache and extension set 
improvements. 
The EV6 motherboard architecture eliminates the standard front-side bus approach 
by separating each relevant system bus. Buses are still interlinked through a base 
timing configuration for deriving transfer rates. The processor bus operates in a 
double-data-rate (DDR) mode that transfers information on both the rising and falling 
edges of the clock signal. Other buses can operate as usual, though the latest Athlon 
architectural revisions have expanded the DDR signaling technique to the memory 
bus. DDR timing rates can be confusing. Remember that the base frequency is 
simply one-half the effective MHz frequency. For current Athlon systems 200, 266, 
and 66 MHz effective frequencies yield base frequencies of 100, 133, and 33 MHz, 
respectively. 
Athlon K7 
The first K7 Athlon design uses a Slot A motherboard interface that resembles Intel's 
Slot 1 standard. Slot A Athlons feature a custom casing. This must be removed 
before installing aftermarket cooling solutions or overclocking boards. Front-side and 
voltage adjustments are possible from the motherboard, but AMD did implement a 
physically locked multiplier determined by the configuration of certain resistors found 
on the backside of the processor circuit board. These resistors can by modified to set 

multiplier values, but overclockers needed a better way to manipulate the multiplier 
given the amount of experimentation required to realize overclocking potential. 
Enthusiasts soon realized that the electrical connector found along the topside of the 
processor board was actually connected to the same circuitry as the backside 
resistor array. A specialized circuit board can be connected to the electrical interface 
and used to manipulate the multiplier value. These aftermarket boards are commonly 
called Gold Finger Devices (or GFDs). Several manufacturers have produced GFD 
designs using dials, switches, and jumpers. Regardless of their configuration, all GFD 
products operate by the same practical method. Some GFDs even include support 
for processor voltage manipulation, for those possessing the soldering skills needed 
to install this extra option. 
Some overclocking-friendly Slot A motherboards allow configuration of the cache 
divider from the BIOS Setup interface, but this is not the norm for consumer-grade 
models. Many GFDs also include the capability to alter the Level 2 cache divider rate. 
The Athlon derives its L2 cache operational frequency through a fractional process, 
as the comparatively slow cache memory is mounted on the processor's printed 
circuit board. The cache memory is incapable of sustaining operation at the 
processor's core rate, thus AMD was forced into a frequency-scaling paradigm for the 
Slot A Athlon K7. 
Cache rates can be defined at several intervals from 1/4 to 1/2 the processor's core 
rate. Decreasing the fractional rate often allows for greater processor overclocking, 
though the performance impact could actually be negative. The bandwidth-hungry 
Athlon core requires a consistent supply of information from the L2 cache to sustain 
optimal operation. Any decrease in the cache rate lowers bandwidth and increases 
latency, stalling the processor at higher operating speeds. The only way to measure 
performance impact is through benchmark testing. 
Processor-to-chipset bus overclocking of the Athlon K7 is only minimally effective. 
Most Slot A motherboards contain early revision chipsets, which commonly fail at 
operation rates beyond 112 MHz (224 DDR). Increasing the motherboard's 
input/output voltage from 3.3 to 3.5 volts may offer additional returns, but increased 
cooling of the Northbridge chipset will likely be required. The addition of a 50 to 60 
millimeter fan often works well, as many motherboards already have a heatsink 
cooler. Some Slot A boards reach speeds above 124 MHz when properly cooled. 
Athlon K7 Overclocking 
 
 
Table 7-1: Athlon K7 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K7 
  
Performance Rating 500 – 700 MHz 
  
Generation Seventh: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
L1 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
L2 Cache Speed Fraction of Core Rate 

Table 7-1: Athlon K7 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K7 
  
 1/2.0x, 1/2.5x, 1/3.0x 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.0x – 7.0+x (14x maximum) 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .25 micron, 184 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
L2 Cache Voltage 2.8 volts – 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 38 – 45 watts 
  
Maximum Power 42 – 50 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 Floating-Point = 80 bit 
  
 MM = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 3 × IEU 
  
 3 × AGU 
  
 3 × FP 
  
Data Bus Width 64 (+8) bit 
  
Max Memory Support Physical = 16 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support SMP via EV6 Bus 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 512 KB Inclusive 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 16 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction
2048 Entry 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 12 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, 3DNow!, Extended 3DNow! 
Athlon K7 500 
 
 
Table 7-2: Athlon K7 500 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K7 

 
  
Performance Rating 500 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .25 micron, 184 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 38 watts 
  
Maximum Power 42 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-3: Athlon K7 500 Overclocking  
Athlon K7 
Model Rating 500 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 5.5 – 7.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 600 – 650 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 700 – 750 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
AMD entered the high-performance computing marketplace, a segment traditionally 
controlled by Intel, with the Athlon K7 500 processor. Built by a .25-micron fabrication 
process, the original K7 offers only modest overclocking scalability compared to later 
designs. Maximum scalability for the entire K7 series falls in the 750 to 850 MHz 
range, with the occasional unit offering slightly improved potential with extreme 
cooling. 

The K7's power demand always attracts attention. Though it runs at 500 MHz, this 
unit demands 42 watts at peak operation. Cooling is thus a big concern. The factory 
heatsink is well designed, but any attempts at overclocking should include the use of 
a quality aftermarket forced-air heatsink. Average scalability for this speed grade falls 
in the 600 to 650 MHz range. 
Athlon K7 550 
 
 
Table 7-4: Athlon K7 550 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K7 
 
  
Performance Rating 550 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .25 micron, 184 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 41 watts 
  
Maximum Power 46 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-5: Athlon K7 550 Overclocking  
Athlon K7 
Model Rating 550 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 6.0 – 7.5x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 600 – 700 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 750 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC15 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The K7 550 MHz processor further extends the power threshold with a 46-watt peak 
power demand. As with any K7 chip, cooling is a concern. A quality aftermarket 
cooler should be installed before you attempt any overclocking beyond 50 MHz, 
especially when you are bumping core voltages beyond 1.8 volts. Average 
overclocking for the K7 500 is in the 600 to 700 MHz range. 
Athlon K7 600 
 
 
Table 7-6: Athlon K7 600 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K7 
 
  
Performance Rating 600 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .25 micron, 184 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 45 watts 
  
Maximum Power 50 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-7: Athlon K7 600 Overclocking  
Athlon K7 
Model Rating 600 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 6.5 – 7.5x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 650 – 700 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 750 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 

Table 7-7: Athlon K7 600 Overclocking  
Athlon K7 
Model Rating 600 MHz 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The K7 600 begins to show the limitations inherent in a .25-micron processor. The 
peak power demands jump to 50 watts, which is incredibly high for a 600-MHz 
processor, especially when compared to 34.5 watts for the Intel Pentium III 600 MHz, 
also a .25-micron based product. Scalability starts to decrease compared to earlier 
Athlon units, as the K7 600 reaches maximum potential around 700 to 750 MHz. 
Athlon K7 650 
 
 
Table 7-7: Athlon K7 650 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K7 
 
  
Performance Rating 650 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .25 micron, 184 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 48 watts 
  
Maximum Power 54 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-8: Athlon K7 650 Overclocking  
Athlon K7 
Model Rating 650 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 7.0 – 7.5x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 700 – 750 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 750+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 

Table 7-8: Athlon K7 650 Overclocking  
Athlon K7 
Model Rating 650 MHz 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon K7 650 MHz processor starts the downslide in effective per-MHz 
overclocking. Expect maximum returns in the 700 to 750 MHz range, even when 
applying maximum core voltage and the best heatsink cooler. The .25-micron core 
architecture was nearing its maximum potential for the Athlon when the K7 650 was 
produced. AMD introduced only one more speed grade before shifting to the .18-
micron core fabrication process. 
Athlon K7 700 
 
 
Table 7-9: Athlon K7 700 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K7 
 
  
Performance Rating 700 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .25 micron, 184 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 38 watts 
  
Maximum Power 42 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-10: Athlon K7 700 Overclocking  
Athlon K7 
Model Rating 700 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 

Table 7-10: Athlon K7 700 Overclocking  
Athlon K7 
Model Rating 700 MHz 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 7.5x – 8.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 750 – 800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 800 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Oddly enough, the Athlon K7 700 MHz requires slightly less wattage than its 650-
MHz counterpart. The revision of the core allowed for slightly improved scalability, 
with overclocking returns approaching 800 MHz for many units. While not overly 
impressive in per-MHz scalability, the K7 700 does represent the highest possible 
overclock (850+ MHz potential) of any .25-micron processor ever manufactured. 
Athlon K75 Background 
AMD required a new idea as Intel rapidly moved its Pentium III architecture to a .18-
micron fabrication process. The solution arrived in the form of the Athlon K75 
processor. While nearly identical to the original Athlon, the K75 extended operating 
frequencies by implementing .18-micron core trace routes. While higher clock ratings 
are possible, K75 models remain functionally identical to the first-generation Athlon 
processors. 
 
 
Table 7-11: Athlon K75 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
  
Performance Rating 550 – 1000 MHz 
  
Generation Seventh: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
L1 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
L2 Cache Speed Fraction of Core Rate 

Table 7-11: Athlon K75 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
  
 1/2.0x, 1/2.5x, 1/3.0x 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.5x – 10.0+x (14x maximum) 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
L2 Cache Voltage 2.8 – 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 28 – 60 watts 
  
Maximum Power 31 – 65 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 Floating-Point = 80 bit 
  
 MM = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 3 × IEU 
  
 3 × AGU 
  
 3 × FP 
  
Max Execution Rate 5 Micro-Ops per Cycle 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Max Memory Support Physical = 16 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support SMP via EV6 Bus 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 512 KB Inclusive 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 16 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction
2048 Entry 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 12 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, 3DNow!, Extended 3DNow! 
Athlon K75 550 
 
 
Table 7-12: Athlon K75 550 Specifications  

Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Performance Rating 550 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 28 watts 
  
Maximum Power 31 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-13: Athlon K75 550 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 550 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 6.5x – 7.5+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 650 – 750 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 750 – 800 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon K75 550 fairs better than its original K7 counterpart. The newly 
redesigned .18-micron core requires less than 60% of the wattage demanded by the 
.25-micron design. Overclocking potential is similarly affected, with potential returns 
up to 800 MHz for the best chips. Note that the K75 retains a relatively low 
70°Celsius maximum core temperature; thus cooling remains an important concern. 
The factory heatsink should prove adequate for an additional 50 to 100 MHz, but will 
fail to provide the cooling needed for stability at higher overclocking ranges. 

Athlon K75 600 
 
 
Table 7-14: Athlon K75 600 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Performance Rating 600 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 30 watts 
  
Maximum Power 34 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-15: Athlon K75 600 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 600 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 6.5x – 8.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 700 – 800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 800+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The K75 600 MHz processor proves the effective scalability of the .18-micron 
process. The power demands are only a few percent above those for the K7 550. 

This is an excellent chip to overclock, and you can expect overclocking returns 
approaching 800 MHz. 
Athlon K75 650 
 
 
Table 7-16: Athlon K75 650 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Performance Rating 650 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 32 watts 
  
Maximum Power 46 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-17: Athlon K75 650 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 650 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 7.5x – 8.5x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 700 – 800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 850+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Athlon K75 650-MHz processor offers an attractive solution for overclocking 
beyond 800 MHz. Most units from this K75 speed grade offer effective scalability to 
200 MHz beyond factory settings, when using an external GFD overclocking device 
to manipulate the internal processor multiplier values. The Level 2 cache divider may 
also require adjustment for reaching 800 MHz and beyond, so a quality GFD can 
make the difference with this processor. 
Athlon K75 700 
 
 
Table 7-18: Athlon K75 700 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Performance Rating 700 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 34 watts 
  
Maximum Power 39 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-19: Athlon K75 700 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 700 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 7.5x – 8.5x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 750 – 850 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~ 900 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 

Table 7-19: Athlon K75 700 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 700 MHz 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The K75 700-MHz processor represents the first good chance of scaling to 900 MHz 
with the Athlon architecture. This processor offers an opportunity for overclocking, but 
only with the introduction of a good forced-air heatsink cooler. Nominal returns with 
factory cooling are often in the 750 to 800 MHz range, with the best units scaling 
beyond 900 MHz, given a quality aftermarket cooler. 
Athlon K75 750 
 
 
Table 7-20: Athlon K75 750 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K7 
 
  
Performance Rating 750 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 35 watts 
  
Maximum Power 40 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-21: Athlon K75 750 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 750 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 8.0x – 9.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 800 – 900 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 950 MHz 
Overclocking 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 

Table 7-21: Athlon K75 750 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 750 MHz 
Tolerances 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon K75 750 offers a decent possibility of reaching upwards of 1000 MHz with 
the use of Peltier or liquid-based cooling technologies. Traditional cooling can net 
returns exceeding 900 MHz with little effort beyond the installation of a replacement 
forced-air heatsink. Operating temperatures need to be monitored closely at speeds 
approaching 1 GHz. Even the efficient .18-micron Athlon core can produce high 
thermal loads at this level. 
Athlon K75 800 
 
 
Table 7-22: Athlon K75 800 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Performance Rating 800 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 43 watts 
  
Maximum Power 48 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-23: Athlon K75 800 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 800 MHz 

Table 7-23: Athlon K75 800 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 800 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 8.5x – 9.5x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 850 – 950 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1000+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Notice the major change in wattage requirements for the K75 800 at default settings 
compared to its 750 MHz sibling. With a peak power demand of 48 watts, this 
processor can produce extreme heat at its factory set speed. Accordingly, a quality 
heatsink should be installed before attempting an overclock. Expect returns in the 
900 to 1000 MHz range with traditional forced-air heatsink coolers. 
Athlon K75 850 
 
 
Table 7-24: Athlon K75 850 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Performance Rating 850 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 45 watts 
  
Maximum Power 50 watts 

 
 
 
Table 7-25: Athlon K75 850 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 850 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 9.0x – 10.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 900 – 1000 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1000+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon K75 850-MHz processor represents the turning point in this series toward 
per-MHz overclocking scalability. Returns diminish at speeds beyond this range, with 
most peaking in the 1000 to 1100 MHz range. Wattage requirements also increase 
for each additional speed grade; thus cooling is a dominant concern for these higher-
end chips. Expect returns upwards of 1000 MHz. 
Athlon K75 900 
 
 
Table 7-26: Athlon K75 900 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Performance Rating 900 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 9.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 

Table 7-26: Athlon K75 900 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 53 watts 
  
Maximum Power 60 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-27: Athlon K75 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 900 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 9.5x – 10.0+x 
  
Typical front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 950 – 1000 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1000+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Per-MHz overclocking returns quickly recede as the K75 core approaches the 
gigahertz level. The Athlon K75 900 proves this rule, as most units from this speed 
grade will peak around 1000 MHz. Overclocking returns can scale upwards to the 
1050 to 1000 MHz range for those willing to undertake more radical cooling 
procedures. 
Athlon K75 950 
 
 
Table 7-28: Athlon K75 950 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Performance Rating 950 MHz 

Table 7-28: Athlon K75 950 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 9.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 55 watts 
  
Maximum Power 62 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-29: Athlon K75 950 Overclocking  
Athlon K75 
Model Rating 950 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 10.0x – 10.5x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1000 – 1050 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1050+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon K75 950-MHz processor typifies the tradeoffs inherent at the upper limits 
of the K75 core. Overclocking potential usually falls in the 1000 to 1050 MHz range 
with traditional cooling. Radical cooling and heavy tweaking can sometimes yield 
more than 1100 MHz, but the costs involved in reaching such a goal are often 
prohibitive. 

Athlon K75 1000 
 
 
Table 7-30: Athlon K75 1000 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon K75 
 
  
Performance Rating 500 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 10.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 22 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 60 watts 
  
Maximum Power 65 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-31: Athlon K75 1000 Overclocking  
Athlon K7 
Model Rating 1000 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier via 
  
 External GFD 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 10.5x – 11.0+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 108+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1050 – 1100 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1100+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Coolers GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon K75 series comes to an end at 1000 MHz. Impressive in raw 
performance, this processor has only mild overclocking potential. Most units will 
reach 1100 MHz with quality cooling, but only a small percentage of chips will ever 

approach 1200 MHz. Note that this chip requires 65 watts at its default speed, so 
only the best heatsink cooler should be considered for overclocking. 
Athlon Thunderbird 
Realizing scalability beyond 1000 MHz would be problematic, AMD opted to integrate 
the Level 2 cache memory in the processor core for the Athlon Thunderbird. Actual 
memory size was halved to 256 kilobytes, but the internal cache operates at the core 
frequency rate. The increase in bandwidth and decrease in latency improved 
performance dramatically compared to the old Athlon K7. 
The Thunderbird also represented AMD's first socket-type processor-to-motherboard 
interface since the K6. The move toward a socket interconnect ended the Athlon's 
original Slot A interface, though a few Slot A Thunderbirds did enter the market 
before the standard was completely abandoned. The Socket A format was welcomed 
by overclocking enthusiasts, because it ended the need to disassemble slot 
processors to add boards or coolers. 
The Athlon Thunderbird and its successors have become the processors of choice 
for most overclocking enthusiasts. The Socket A interface allows easy installation of 
large forced-air heatsink coolers. The Thunderbird also heralded a batch of 
overclocking-friendly motherboard designs once unavailable to AMD supporters. 
Most importantly, GFDs were replaced by jumpers, dipswitches, and BIOS settings. 
Unlocking the Athlon Thunderbird 
The Thunderbird architecture is an overclocking paradise for those with a 
motherboard that supports multiplier configuration. The Athlon remains an unlocked 
processor, though AMD has tried to lock its Socket A chips. Most of today's 
Thunderbird processors ship with no multiplier locking mechanism, while many of the 
earlier models require a modest amount of work to bypass the AMD locking 
technique. 
Unlocking Thunderbird chips of the Socket A variety requires reconnecting a series of 
trace routes along the topside of the processor substrate. These tiny bridge 
connections were severed by a laser, which locked the multiplier. Luckily, AMD has 
stopped making such cuts because the company feared increasing processor failure 
rates due to the heat and stress associated with the lasercutting process. 

 
Figure 7-1: Athlon Thunderbird L1 bridge circuit  
Reconnecting the L1 trace routes is a relatively minor operation. The routes must be 
connected using a conductive transfer medium. Some vendors, such as 
HighspeedPC.com, offer a specialized adhesive tape with tiny metal strips already 
embedded at the required connection points. This may offer the simplest solution. 
Another quick fix is simply to redraw the bridge connections with a regular number-2 
pencil. Each point of the circuit must be connected to the point directly across from it, 
creating a series of parallel lines. Lead pencils should be avoided. A standard 
wooden pencil with a finely sharpened tip works best. Sharpen the lead with 
sandpaper first to insure accuracy. Some hardcore enthusiasts may opt to use a 
silver-fluid compound instead, but be warned this often creates a permanent 
connection. The pencil trick is preferred because the marks can easily be erased if 
something goes wrong during the unlocking procedure. 
Each of the L1 circuit pathways must be connected using a straight-line approach. 
Take great care to ensure that each pencil mark connects the intended circuit points 
with no overlapping of any lines. An overlapped line can cause a short circuit and 
consequent unusual results or even processor failure. Examine each pencil line, once 
it is drawn, under a magnifying glass. 
Successful pencil modification allows unrestricted multiplier manipulation. Partial or 
no success is common on the first try. A less-than-perfect redrawing usually results in 
allowable multiplier manipulation in the .5 to 1x range. Erasing and redrawing the 
lines can fix such problems. 
Once unlocked, the Thunderbird offers standard multiplier options from 5 to 12.5x, in 
.5x increments. Some motherboards allow 13x and possibly 13.5 to 14x multipliers, 
though these cause problems for most Thunderbird models. AMD does produce a 
14x Thunderbird, but the multiplier is configured internally through the regular 
autodetection routine. 

The Athlon Thunderbird fares much better for processor-to-chipset bus overclocking 
compared to its older Slot 1 K7 sibling. Most early Socket A chipsets can successfully 
reach the 115 to 120 MHz range (230 to 240 DDR). The latest generation offers 
scalability to 166 MHz and beyond. Most manufacturers now equip their Athlon 
motherboards with active chipset cooling, as thermal regulation is necessary to 
maintain stability when overclocking. 
Another excellent way to maximize performance of 100-MHz Thunderbird models is 
to lower the internal multiplier, and then raise the processor bus to 133 MHz. The 
Athlon is a bandwidth-intensive design that can benefit from processor bus 
overclocking. All the latest chipsets from ALI, SIS, and VIA allow 133-MHz processor 
bus support. 
Athlon Thunderbird Overclocking 
 
 
Table 7-32: Athlon Thunderbird Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
  
Performance Rating 650 – 1400 MHz 
  
Generation Seventh: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
L1 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
L2 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.0x – 14.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 102 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage Socket A = 1.75 volts 
  
 Slot A = 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 32.4 – 65 watts 
  
Maximum Power 36.1 – 72 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 Floating-Point = 80 bit 
  
 MM = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 3 × IEU 
  
 3 × AGU 
  
 3 × FP 
  
Data Bus Width 64 (+8) bit 
  
Max Memory Support Physical = 16 Gigabyte 

Table 7-32: Athlon Thunderbird Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support SMP via EV6 Bus 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 256 KB Inclusive 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 16 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction
2048 Entry 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 12 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, 3DNow!, Extended 3DNow! 
Athlon Thunderbird 650 
 
 
Table 7-33: Athlon Thunderbird 650 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 650 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage Socket A = 1.75 volts 
  
 Slot A = 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 32.4 watts 
  
Maximum Power 36.1 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-34: Athlon Thunderbird 650 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 650 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 7.5x – 8.0x 

Table 7-34: Athlon Thunderbird 650 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 650 MHz 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 750 – 800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 850+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
 GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
 Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature Socket A = 90° Celsius 
  
 Slot A = 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Thunderbird specifications reveal clear advantages to the Socket A interface. 
The Socket A format can withstand an additional 20° Celsius compared to the same 
Thunderbird Slot A processor. The Slot A Thunderbird does hold a slight advantage 
in voltage efficiency, but 1.6 volts were required by AMD to support existing slot-type 
motherboards. 
The Athlon Thunderbird 650-MHz processor is a relative oddity in the industry, as 
only a small number escaped AMD fabrication facilities. AMD produced two variants 
of the Socket A version of this chip: one at 1.7 volts and another at 1.75 volts. 
Demand for this speed grade was small, as AMD already offered more powerful K75 
Slot A designs. Those who possess this early revision Thunderbird processor can 
expect overclocking returns up to 800 MHz under good cooling conditions. 
Athlon Thunderbird 700 
 
 
Table 7-35: Athlon Thunderbird 700 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 700 MHz 

Table 7-35: Athlon Thunderbird 700 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage Socket A = 1.75 volts 
  
 Slot A = 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 34.4 watts 
  
Maximum Power 38.3 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-36: Athlon Thunderbird 700 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 700 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 7.5x – 8.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 750 – 800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 850+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
 GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
 Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature Socket A = 90° Celsius 
  
 Slot A = 70° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 700 shares much in common with its 650-MHz sibling. This 
processor was available in limited quantities, and this speed grade was never 
officially launched by AMD. Overclocking returns are in line with expectations for the 
Thunderbird 650. 
Athlon Thunderbird 750 
 
 
Table 7-37: Athlon Thunderbird 750 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 750 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage Socket A = 1.75 volts 
  
 Slot A = 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 36.3 watts 
  
Maximum Power 40.4 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-38: Athlon Thunderbird 750 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 750 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 8.5x – 9.0+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 800 – 900 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 900+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
 GlobalWin VOS-32 

Table 7-38: Athlon Thunderbird 750 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 750 MHz 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
 Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature Socket A = 90° Celsius 
  
 Slot A = 70° Celsius 
  
 Gd 
 
Strategy 
750 MHz marks the first official entry in the Athlon Thunderbird series of processors. 
The Thunderbird 750 also represents a great overclocking choice, as this processor 
can scale beyond 900 MHz with little effort. A small percentage of the Socket A 
version of this processor can even offer scalability toward 1 gigahertz with good 
cooling. 
Athlon Thunderbird 800 
 
 
Table 7-39: Athlon Thunderbird 800 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 800 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage Socket A = 1.75 volts 
  
 Slot A = 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 38.3 watts 
  
Maximum Power 42.6 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-40: Athlon Thunderbird 800 Overclocking  

Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 800 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 8.5x – 9.5x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 850 – 950 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1000+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
 GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
 Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature Socket A = 90° Celsius 
  
 Slot A = 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 800-MHz processor offers a real chance of attaining a 
successful overclock to 1000 MHz. This is especially true for the Socket A version, as 
it features much-improved thermal efficiency compared to its Slot-A counterpart. In 
any case, most Thunderbird 800 chips can scale past 900 MHz with little difficulty. 
Athlon Thunderbird 850 
 
 
Table 7-41: Athlon Thunderbird 850 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 850 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 

Table 7-41: Athlon Thunderbird 850 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage Socket A = 1.75 volts 
  
 Slot A = 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 40.2 watts 
  
Maximum Power 44.8 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-42: Athlon Thunderbird 850 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 850 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 9.0x – 10.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 900 – 1000 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1000+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
 GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
 Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature Socket A = 90° Celsius 
  
 Slot A = 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 850-MHz processor provides a good chance of reaching one 
gigahertz with little more than the use of a good heatsink cooler. As expected, the 
Socket-A version offers the best overclocking potential. For comparison, the Slot-A 
version should be capable of reaching 950 MHz, often cooled with the factory-
installed heatsink. 

Athlon Thunderbird 900 
 
 
Table 7-43: Athlon Thunderbird 900 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 900 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 9.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage Socket A = 1.75 volts 
  
 Slot A = 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 44.6 watts 
  
Maximum Power 49.7 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-44: Athlon Thunderbird 900 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 900 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 9.5x – 10.5x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 950 – 1050 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1050+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
 GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
 Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature Socket A = 90° Celsius 

Table 7-44: Athlon Thunderbird 900 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 900 MHz 
  
 Slot A = 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 900-MHz processor almost guarantees 1000 MHz for most 
configurations. Many chips in this speed grade can scale effectively to the gigahertz 
level, but most reach their limit around 1100 MHz without extreme cooling. 
Athlon Thunderbird 950 
 
 
Table 7-45: Athlon Thunderbird 950 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 950 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 9.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage Socket A = 1.75 volts 
  
 Slot A = 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 46.7 watts 
  
Maximum Power 52 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-46: Athlon Thunderbird 950 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 950 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 10.0x – 11.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1000 – 1100 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1100+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 

Table 7-46: Athlon Thunderbird 950 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 950 MHz 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
 GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
 Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature Socket A = 90° Celsius 
  
 Slot A = 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 950-MHz processor offers mild overclocking potential. Nearly 
all chips from this speed grade can reach 1000 MHz with no additional voltage and 
cooling required. On a less positive note, the Thunderbird 950 offers minimal 
overclocking headroom in per-MHz analysis. This model was the last model in its 
particular revision. 
Athlon Thunderbird 1000 
 
 
Table 7-47: Athlon Thunderbird 1000 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 1000 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 6.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage Socket A = 1.75 volts 
  
 Slot A = 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 48.7 watts 
  
Maximum Power 54.3 watts 

 
 
 
Table 7-48: Athlon Thunderbird 1000 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 1000 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 11.0x – 12.5x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1100 – 1250 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1250+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
 GlobalWin VOS-32 
  
 Alpha P7125 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
 Swifttech MC1501 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature Socket A = 90° Celsius 
  
 Slot A = 70° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 1000-MHz processor ushered in a new core revision with 
greater overclocking potential than previous models. A large percentage of the 
Socket-A version of this chip can effectively scale past 1200 MHz with the addition of 
a quality heatsink cooler. A smaller number has reached toward 1400 MHz with 
extreme cooling. The Thunderbird 1000 is also the last Slot A Athlon to be released. 
Athlon Thunderbird 1100 
 
 
Table 7-49: Athlon Thunderbird 1100 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 1100 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 

Table 7-49: Athlon Thunderbird 1100 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Multiplier Ratio 11.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
 242-Pin Slot A Cartridge 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 49.5 watts 
  
Maximum Power 55.1 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-50: Athlon Thunderbird 1100 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 1100 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 12.0 – 14.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1200 – 1300 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1300+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 1100-MHz processor offers significant scalability, especially 
given the fact that it introduces a new thermal rating of 95° Celsius. Most models 
from this speed grade offer overclocking potential beyond 1250 MHz. Some rare 
models are known to reach 1400 MHz, but only after the implementation of quality 
cooling. 

Athlon Thunderbird 1200 
 
 
Table 7-51: Athlon Thunderbird 1200 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 1200 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 12.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 59 watts 
  
Maximum Power 66 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-52: Athlon Thunderbird 1200 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 1200 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 13.0 – 14.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1300 – 1400 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1400+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 1200 remains a popular choice for overclocking enthusiasts, 
mainly due to its widespread availability. This chip offers excellent opportunities. A 

small number of units scale toward 1500 MHz when paired with a chipset offering 
133-MHz processor bus compatibility. Most chips from this speed grade peak around 
1400 MHz, whatever the chipset or overclocking method. 
Athlon Thunderbird 1300 
 
 
Table 7-53: Athlon Thunderbird 1300 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 1300 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 13.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 61 watts 
  
Maximum Power 68 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-54: Athlon Thunderbird 1300 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 1300 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 13.5x – 14.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1350 – 1400 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1400+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 95° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
While not quite as popular as its 1200 MHz sibling, the Athlon Thunderbird 1300 MHz 
processor does offer a near guarantee of 1400 MHz. Most models will reach this level 
with nothing more than the factory AMD heatsink cooler and a modest bump in core 
voltage. As with the 1200, motherboards offering 133-MHz processor bus support will 
perform best when overclocked. 
Athlon Thunderbird 1400 
 
 
Table 7-55: Athlon Thunderbird 1400 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird 
 
  
Performance Rating 1400 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 14.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 65 watts 
  
Maximum Power 72 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-56: Athlon Thunderbird 1400 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 1400 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 14.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 103 – 115+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1450 – 1550 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1550+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 

Table 7-56: Athlon Thunderbird 1400 Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
Model Rating 1400 MHz 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 1400-MHz processor is a rarity in OEM markets. Enthusiasts 
with 100-MHz processor bus systems have upgraded to this model, the last 100-MHz 
Thunderbird produced. Most chips of this speed grade are distributed in the retail 
market segment. Average overclocking returns are in the 1500 to 1550 MHz range, 
with the occasional model surpassing 1600 MHz when combined with a later-
generation motherboard chipset. 
Athlon Thunderbird B Overclocking 
 
 
Table 7-57: Athlon Thunderbird B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird B 
  
Performance Rating 1000 – 1400 MHz 
  
Generation Seventh: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
L1 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
L2 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.5x – 10.5x (14x Max) 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 49 – 65 watts 
  
Maximum Power 54 – 72 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 Floating-Point = 80 bit 
  
 MM = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 3 × IEU 
  
 3 × AGU 
  
 3 × FP 

Table 7-57: Athlon Thunderbird B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird B 
  
Data Bus Width 64 (+8) bit 
  
Max Memory Support Physical = 16 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support SMP via EV6 Bus 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 256 KB Exclusive 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 16 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction
2048 Entry 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 12 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, 3DNow!, Extended 3DNow! 
 
Athlon Thunderbird 1000B 
 
 
Table 7-58: Athlon Thunderbird 1000B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird B 
 
  
Performance Rating 1000 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 49 watts 
  
Maximum Power 54 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-59: Athlon Thunderbird 1000B Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
B 
Model Rating 1000 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 

Table 7-59: Athlon Thunderbird 1000B Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
B 
Model Rating 1000 MHz 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 8.5x – 10x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1200 – 1300 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1300+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 1000B-MHz processor promises moderate overclocking 
success. Most models from this speed grade can scale well beyond 1200 MHz with 
the factory heatsink. Better cooling can yield results exceeding 1300 MHz. Be careful 
when monitoring temperatures: the Thunderbird 1000B retains the 90° Celsius rating 
of its earlier cousins. 
Athlon Thunderbird 1130B 
 
 
Table 7-60: Athlon Thunderbird 1130B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird B 
 
  
Performance Rating 1130 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 8.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 56 watts 

Table 7-60: Athlon Thunderbird 1130B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird B 
 
  
Maximum Power 63 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-61: Athlon Thunderbird 1130B Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
B 
Model Rating 1130 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 9.0x – 10.0+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1200 – 1333 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1400+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 1130B-MHz processor expanded the design by means of a 
core revision, including a higher thermal rating to 95° Celsius. Average overclocking 
returns for this model tend to reach above 1300 MHz with factory cooling. Quality 
cooling can extend the potential to 1400 MHz and beyond, though only a small 
portion of this grade will realize such a level of return. 
Athlon Thunderbird 1200B 
 
 
Table 7-62: Athlon Thunderbird 1200B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird B 
 
  
Performance Rating 1200 MHz 

Table 7-62: Athlon Thunderbird 1200B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird B 
 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 9.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 59 watts 
  
Maximum Power 66 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-63: Athlon Thunderbird 1200B Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
B 
Model Rating 1200 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 10.0x – 11.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1333 – 1400 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1500+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 1200B offers essentially the same potential as its 100-MHz 
processor bus counterpart. The average overclocking return extends to 1400 MHz 
with traditional cooling. Massive heatsink cooling may yield results in the 1500 to 
1600 MHz range, but this is not common. 

Athlon Thunderbird 1333B 
 
 
Table 7-64: Athlon Thunderbird 1333B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird B 
 
  
Performance Rating 1333 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 10.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 63 watts 
  
Maximum Power 70 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-65: Athlon Thunderbird 1333B Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
B 
Model Rating 1333 MHz 
Overclocking Potential 
Multiplier Lock Support Unlocked Multiplier 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 10.5x – 11.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1400 – 1500 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1500+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 95° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Athlon Thunderbird 1333B offers essentially the same overclocking potential as 
its 1200-MHz sibling. As with every processor, the Thunderbird displays a maximum 
point of return, above which it will begin to offer less and less. Expect results in the 
1400 to 1500 MHz range. Additional scalability is possible with extreme cooling 
techniques, but most units reach their limits around 1600 MHz. 
Athlon Thunderbird 1400B 
 
 
Table 7-66: Athlon Thunderbird 1400B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thunderbird B 
 
  
Performance Rating 1400 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 10.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 120 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 65 watts 
  
Maximum Power 72 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-67: Athlon Thunderbird 1400B Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
B 
Model Rating 1400 MHz 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 11.5x – 12.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150+ MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1530 – 1600 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential ~1600+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 

Table 7-67: Athlon Thunderbird 1400B Overclocking  
Athlon Thunderbird 
B 
Model Rating 1400 MHz 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon 1400B closes the Thunderbird family. At a default frequency of 1400 
MHz, this processor is near the maximum potential for the Thunderbird core. 
Overclocking scales to 1600 MHz; extreme cooling has netted returns above 1700 
MHz for a small number of chips when they are used in a configuration that is 
optimized for overclocking. 
Athlon Duron Spitfire Background 
The Duron stands as the official AMD entry into budget-class computing. Though it 
competes directly with the Intel Celeron II in price, the Duron often beats even the 
Pentium III in popular benchmark tests. The Duron's processing core architecture is 
the same as the Thunderbird's, but AMD limits the Duron's on-die Level 2 cache to 
64 KB (compared to the Thunderbird's 256 KB). 
The performance impact of the smaller cache size is minimal for most popular 
desktop applications. The difference only arises in professional applications or for 
server environments, systems in which large amounts of data move between the 
processor and memory. In these situations the Thunderbird's additional cache 
memory boosts performance significantly. 
Duron Spitfire Overclocking 
The Duron Spitfire offers essentially the same overclocking potential as the Athlon 
Thunderbird at equivalent clock ratings. The only appreciable difference is improved 
power efficiency for the Duron, about 80 to 90% better than the Thunderbird. The 
difference is derived from a smaller transistor count due to the smaller Level 2 cache 
of the Duron architecture. Accordingly, the Spitfire requires a marginally lower 1.60 
core voltage. 
All other concerns are the same for both processors. The maximum thermal rating of 
90° Celsius applies to all Duron Spitfire processors. The maximum "safe" core 
voltage of the Duron Spitfire is 1.85 volts, the same as that for the Thunderbird. Each 
chip is nearly identical to its Thunderbird counterpart in both average and peak 
overclocking potential. 
 
 
Table 7-68: Athlon Duron Spitfire Specifications  

Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Duron Spitfire 
  
Performance Rating 550 – 950 MHz 
  
Generation Seventh: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
L1 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
L2 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 5.5x – 9.5x (14.0x Max) 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 100 mm 
  
Transistor Count 25 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.6 volts 
  
Power Consumption 18.9 – 37.2 watts 
  
Maximum Power 21.1 – 41.5 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 Floating-Point = 80 bit 
  
 MM = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 3 × IEU 
  
 3 × AGU 
  
 3 × FP 
  
Data Bus Width 64 (+8) bit 
  
Max Memory Support Physical = 16 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support SMP via EV6 Bus 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 64 KB Exclusive 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 16 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction
2048 Entry 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 12 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, 3DNow!, Extended 3DNow! 
Athlon Palomino/MP/XP 
The Athlon Palomino represented the first major redesign of the Athlon core since the 
introduction of the Socket A processor-to-motherboard interface. The most significant 
new feature is a hardware data pre-fetch mechanism in the execution pipeline. This 

pre-fetch circuitry allows the Palomino to speculate and buffer certain data packets, 
increasing per MHz efficiency and performance compared to the Thunderbird. 
AMD also introduced a new streaming multimedia instruction set with the Palomino 
architecture. 3DNow! Professional offers all the functions in previous 3DNow! 
instruction sets, but expands the base set to include binary compatibility with the Intel 
SSE specification. Because it can process both standards, the Athlon Palomino 
proves a formidable market competitor. 
As expected with any core revision, AMD further refined the Athlon core to improve 
power efficiency. Core voltage remains consistent with the Thunderbird, but power 
consumption rates are improved by an average of 5 to 15%. Thermal generation 
loads have decreased accordingly. Maximum thermal ratings vary within the 90 to 
95° Celsius range. 
The first Palomino core processor arrived in the form of the Athlon MP. The MP 
stands for multiprocessing. This processor will operate in symmetric multiprocessing 
configurations. Oddly enough, nearly all Socket A AMD processors support SMP. 
The difference is that AMD tests and certifies its MP processors for stability. The 
Athlon MP usually commands a higher price due to this additional testing. 
The Palomino architecture debuted in the consumer market under the designation 
Athlon XP. The term XP is derived from the marketing of this processor as the Athlon 
eXPerience. However, many enthusiasts believe AMD planned to correlate the 
naming of its chip with the release of Windows XP. Whatever the reason, the Athlon 
XP reigns as AMD's flagship consumer chip. 
The most controversial aspect of the Athlon Palomino is the way it has been 
marketed. Labeled by comparative speed grades instead of raw MHz ratings, the 
Palomino's model numbers are reminiscent of those in the older K5 series. 
Some speculate that these performance-rating values are somehow correlated to the 
performance of the Intel Pentium 4 models. In reality, the PR numbers compare the 
performance of the Athlon XP and the Athlon Thunderbird on a perMHz basis. Only 
the 1000MP and 1200MP processors in the Palomino series feature true MHz counts 
in their naming conventions. 
Unlocking the Athlon Palomino 
AMD introduced a new wrinkle in multiplier locking with the Athlon Palomino. The 
primary way to unlock this chip remains the same as for the Athlon Thunderbird: 
simply reconnect the L1 trace-route circuitry. This process is difficult to apply to the 
Palomino, however, because the design features a ceramic base, containing small 
pits, which short to a grounded gold foil between the connection points of the L1 
circuit range. 

 
Figure 7-2: Athlon Palomino L1 bridge circuit  
Common sense dictates that these grounded pits be filled to allow connection of the 
L1 circuitry. Simply drawing a connection line with a pencil will not work. Even without 
the holes, a pencil would be ineffective: the Palomino requires a low-impedance 
connection between the L1 bridges to communicate the unlocking directive. 
Conductive paint, intended for use in the repair of printed circuit boards, will connect 
the L1 bridges. This paint can be purchased from most electronics retailers. It can 
even be found in window defroster repair kits. A small amount goes a long way, so 
use conductive paint sparingly. 
The Palomino needs additional hardware hacking to fill the holes between the L1 
interconnects. Various methods have been used. Some enthusiasts have developed 
painstaking procedures for applying glues and epoxies, for example. Silicon thermal 
paste, available and inexpensive, works just as well for most configurations. Just 
apply the paste to the pits, then use a tiny, flat plastic scraper or pencil eraser to 
remove any excess paste that protrudes above the ceramic surface. You can also 
buy an XP unlocking kit that includes a cleaning agent, a non-conductive gap filler, 
conductive grease, an applicator, a magnifying glass, tape, and instructions, from 
HighspeedPC.com. 
With the voids properly filled, the Palomino can be unlocked. Using a narrow needle 
or pin, draw connections between each L1 circuit bridge with conductive paint. As in 
the Thunderbird pencil trick, avoid overlapping any lines. Be patient and accomplish 
this procedure correctly the first time. You can try again, but removing the conductive 
paint is tedious. Some overclockers have taken it off with isopropyl alcohol or a pencil 
eraser. Neither method is easy. 
Athlon Palomino/MP/XP Overclocking 
 
 
Table 7-69: Athlon Palomino/MP/XP Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino/MP/XP 

  
Performance Rating 1000 – 1730 MHz 
  
Generation Seventh: 80686 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
L1 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
L2 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.5x – 13.0x (14.0+x Max) 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 128 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 41.3 – 64.3 watts 
  
Maximum Power 46.1 – 72 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology OOO and Speculative Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 Floating-Point = 80 bit 
  
 MM = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 3 × IEU 
  
 3 × AGU 
  
 3 × FP 
  
Data Bus Width 64 (+8) bit 
  
Max Memory Support Physical = 16 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support SMP via EV6 Bus 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 256 KB Exclusive 
  
Hardware Date Pre-fetch Supported 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 16 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction
2048 Entry 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 12 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, 3DNow!, Extended 3DNow!, 
  
 3DNow! Professional (SSE) 
Athlon Palomino 1000 
 
 

Table 7-70: Athlon Palomino 1000 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
Performance Rating 1000 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 7.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 128 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption MP = 41.3 watts 
  
Maximum Power MP = 46.1 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-71: Athlon Palomino 1000 Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating 1000 MHz 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 9.0x – 10.5+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1200 – 1400 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1400+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon Palomino is represented at 1000 MHz by the Athlon MP processor. This 
is an early-generation design, which debuted prior to the introduction of AMD's 
performance rating designations. Effective overclocking scalability of this unit often 
falls in the 1200 to 1400 MHz realm, though a few rare samples have been know to 
exceed 1400 MHz under extreme cooling conditions. 

Athlon Palomino 1200 
 
 
Table 7-72: Athlon Palomino 1200 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
Performance Rating 1200 MHz 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 9.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 128 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption MP = 49.1 watts 
  
Maximum Power MP = 54.7 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-73: Athlon Palomino 1200 Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating 1200 MHz 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 10.0x – 11.0+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1333 – 1530 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1550+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon MP 1200 has much in common with its 1000-MHz counterpart. It too 
arrived before the performance-rating marketing initiative, and also reigned in as the 
premier choice in Athlon multiprocessing environments for several months. By 

offering decent power efficiency, this processor can often scale beyond 1500 MHz in 
dedicated overclocking configurations. 
Athlon Palomino 1333 (XP/MP 1500+) 
 
 
Table 7-74: Athlon Palomino 1333 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
Performance Rating Real = 1333 MHz 
  
 XP/MP = 1500+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 10.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 128 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 53.8 watts 
  
Maximum Power 60 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-75: Athlon Palomino 1333 Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating Real = 1333 MHz 
  
 XP/MP = 1500+  
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 10.5x – 11.5+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1450 – 1500 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1500 – 1600+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature XP = 90° Celsius 
  
 MP = 95° Celsius 

 
Strategy 
The dreaded comparative performance ratings debuted with the release of the 
Palomino at 1333 MHz. Both the Athlon XP and MP designs at this speed grade 
carry the marketing designation 1500+. This model name describes the overclocking 
potential of this processor quite accurately. Many units from this speed grade can 
scale beyond 1500 MHz when paired with an effective heatsink cooler. 
Athlon Palomino 1400 (XP/MP 1600+) 
 
 
Table 7-76: Athlon Palomino 1400 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
Performance Rating Real = 1400 MHz 
  
 XP/MP = 1600+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 10.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 128 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 56.3 watts 
  
Maximum Power 62.8 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-77: Athlon Palomino Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating Real = 1400 MHz 
  
 XP/MP = 1600+  
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 11.0x – 12.0+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1500 – 1600 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1600+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 

Table 7-77: Athlon Palomino Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating Real = 1400 MHz 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature XP = 90° Celsius 
  
 MP = 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Palomino 1400-MHz core is marketed under the 1600+ designation for both the 
Athlon MP and XP series of processors. Overclocking falls in line with expectations; 
this core is capable of operation exceeding 1600 MHz. While the factory-supplied 
heatsink can often push this processor an additional 50 to 100 MHz, a quality 
aftermarket cooler should always be installed when pushing beyond 1600 MHz, 
especially if any increase in core voltage is required. 
Athlon Palomino 1466 (XP 1700+) 
 
 
Table 7-78: Athlon Palomino 1466 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
Performance Rating Real = 1466 MHz 
  
 XP = 1700+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 11.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 128 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 57.4 watts 
  
Maximum Power 64 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-79: Athlon Palomino 1466 Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating Real = 1466 MHz 
  
 XP = 1700+  

Table 7-79: Athlon Palomino 1466 Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating Real = 1466 MHz 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 11.5x – 12.5+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1550 – 1650 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1650+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon XP 1700+ is based on a 1466-MHz Palomino core. Oddly enough, AMD 
has never officially released an MP 1700+ processor, skipping this speed grade in its 
production schedule. Despite the marketing glitch, this processor offers decent 
overclocking potential. Most 1466-MHz units are scalable beyond 1600 MHz with 
quality cooling and a slight bump in core voltage. 
Athlon Palomino 1533 (XP 1800+) 
 
 
Table 7-80: Athlon Palomino 1533 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
Performance Rating Real = 1533 MHz 
  
 XP = 1800+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 11.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 128 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 59.2 watts 

Table 7-80: Athlon Palomino 1533 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
Maximum Power 66 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-81: Athlon Palomino 1533 Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating Real = 1533 MHz 
  
 XP/MP = 1800+  
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 12.0x – 13.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1600 – 1700 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1700+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature XP = 90° Celsius 
  
 MP = 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Just as quickly as the Athlon MP dropped out for the Palomino 1446-MHz core, it 
reappeared as the Athlon 1800+, with the 1553-MHz iteration of the MP and XP 
families. The overclocking limits of the .18-micron Athlon architecture are evident with 
the Athlon 1800+. Most units from this speed grade see overclocking returns in the 
1600 to 1700 MHz range with traditional cooling techniques. 
Athlon Palomino 1600 (XP/MP 1900+) 
 
 
Table 7-82: Athlon Palomino 1600 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
Performance Rating Real = 1600 MHz 

Table 7-82: Athlon Palomino 1600 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
 XP/MP = 1900+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 12.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 128 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 60.7 watts 
  
Maximum Power 68 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-83: Athlon Palomino 1600 Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating Real = 1600 MHz XP/MP = 
1900+ 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 12.xx – 13.0+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1650 – 1750 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1750+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature XP = 90° Celsius 
  
 MP = 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Both the Athlon MP and XP 1900+ are built on a 1600-MHz Palomino processing 
core. The Athlon 1900+ offers modest scalability. Most units post overclocking 
returns approaching, and sometimes exceeding, 1700 MHz. Cooling is a definite 

concern when pushing into that frequency range. Use only a quality cooler when 
increasing the core voltage. 
Athlon Palomino 1667 (XP/MP 2000+) 
 
 
Table 7-84: Athlon Palomino 1667 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
Performance Rating Real = 1667 MHz 
  
 XP/MP = 2000+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 12.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 128 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 62.5 watts 
  
Maximum Power 70 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-85: Athlon Palomino 1667 Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating Real = 1667 MHz XP/MP = 
2000+ 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 13.0x – 13.5+x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1700 – 1800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1800+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature XP = 90° Celsius 
  
 MP = 95° Celsius 

 
Strategy 
The Athlon 2000+ is a popular choice in computing communities. This processor 
ushered AMDs into the 2 gigahertz arena—at least in marketing theory. This chip is 
built atop a 1667-MHz Palomino processing core. Expect overclocking returns around 
1800 MHz for the better chips in this grade. Take note of the 1667-MHz rating. It 
appears that AMD avoided the whole "666" issue the same way Intel did. 
Athlon Palomino 1733 (XP/MP 2100+) 
 
 
Table 7-86: Athlon Palomino 1733 Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Palomino
  
Performance Rating Real = 1733 MHz 
  
 XP/MP = 2100+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 13.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 128 mm 
  
Transistor Count 37.5 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 64.3 watts 
  
Maximum Power 72 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-87: Athlon Palomino 1733 Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating Real = 1733 MHz XP/MP = 
2100+ 
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 13.5x – 14.0x 
  
Typical Front-side Bus O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1750 – 1850 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1900+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 

Table 7-87: Athlon Palomino 1733 Overclocking  
Athlon Palomino 
Model Rating Real = 1733 MHz XP/MP = 
2100+ 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature XP = 90° Celsius 
  
 MP = 95° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon XP 2100+ offers marginal overclocking returns in the 1800 to 1900 MHz 
range for the majority of configurations. A dedicated overclocking system designed 
around cooling can achieve 2000 MHz, but this is not common. 
Duron Morgan Background 
The AMD Morgan core architecture is a Palomino-derived extension to the Duron 
series of budget-oriented microprocessors. Upgrades include 3DNow! Professional, 
hardware data pre-fetching, and various core improvements for better regulation of 
both thermal and power consumption rates. The scaledback cache architecture 
comes over from the Spitfire, as the Morgan still features 64 KB to the Palomino's 
256 KB. The addition of a hardware data pre-fetch mechanism works well to offset 
the Morgan's cache deficiency. This latest-model Duron can boast performance 
exceeding that of the supposedly more powerful Athlon Thunderbird. The Morgan is 
expected to be the last Duron core marketed by AMD. The impressive Athlon 
Thoroughbred will soon relegate the XP to entry-level systems. 
 
 
Table 7-88: Duron Morgan Specifications  
Processor 
Family 
Model Name AMD Duron Morgan 
  
Performance Rating 1000 – 1300 MHz 
  
Generation Seventh: 80686 IA-32 
Operational 
Rates 
L1 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
L2 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 MHz (200 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 9.0x – 13.0x (14.0x Max) 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462-Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .18 micron, 106 mm 

Table 7-88: Duron Morgan Specifications  
Processor 
Family 
Model Name AMD Duron Morgan 
  
Transistor Count 25.2 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.75 volts 
  
Power Consumption 39.2 – 42.7 watts 
  
Maximum Power 55.2 – 60 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology OOO and Speculative Execution RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 Floating-Point = 80 bit 
  
 MM = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 3 × IEU 
  
 3 × AGU 
  
 3 × FP 
  
Data Bus Width 64 (+8) bit 
  
Max Memory Support Physical = 16 Gigabyte 
Virtual = 64 
Terabyte 
   
  
Multi-Processor 
Support
SMP via EV6 Bus 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 64 KB 2-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 64 KB Exclusive 
  
Hardware Date Pre-
fetch
Supported 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 16 Byte 
  
Static Branch 
Prediction
Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction
2048 Entry 
  
RSB Branch 
Prediction
12 Entry 
  
Floating-Point 
Processor
Integrated 
  
Multimedia 
Extensions
MMX, 3DNow!, Extended 3DNow!, 3DNow! 
Professional (SSE) 
 
 
 
Table 7-89: Duron Morgan Overclocking  

Duron Morgan 
Model Rating 1000 – 1300 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1300 – 1400+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink 
Coolers
Thermalright SK-6 
  
 Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.85 volts with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Duron Morgan processor offers an overclocking opportunity for most 
configurations. Many Duron Morgan processors are able to exceed 1300 MHz with 
quality forced-air heatsink cooling. Some of the higher speed processors in the series 
have been known to overclock past 1400 MHz with relative ease. This Palomino-
derived processor displays great thermal and electrical efficiency. 
Athlon Thoroughbred 
The Athlon Thoroughbred is AMD's successor to the Palomino. Featuring a smaller 
0.13 micron core, the Thoroughbred is a cooler running processor than the Palomino 
and it has other physical improvements. It debuted with an XP 2200+ version, though 
AMD later backtracked, releasing several slower processors in the Thoroughbred 
core as well. 
Like the Palomino, the Thoroughbreds below the XP 2400+ are clock multiplier 
locked. The L1 bridges must be reconnected to allow multiplier changes. You can 
freely change the multiplier of XP 2400+ and newer Thoroughbreds using KT400 
based motherboards without any processor alteration. 
The Thoroughbred is currently available in two model revisions: Revision A and 
Revision B. The Revision A models (at speeds of XP 1700+ to XP 2200+, or 1.47 
GHz to 1.80 GHz) are not all that impressive in their overclocking ability, though the 
lower speed models such as the XP 1700+ do offer better potential than the higher 
speed models. The entire speed range of the Revision B models is improved and 
their overclocking potential is significant. Having learned from the Revision A model, 
AMD implemented a few physical improvements for the Revision B model, such as 
additional transistors and an additional metal layer within the processor to optimize its 
electrical properties and increase its maximum clock speed potential. 

If you own (or plan to purchase) an Athlon XP 2400+ or faster, you can be assured 
that it is a Revision B type since those processors were never manufactured as the 
Revision A type. Otherwise, if you own or plan to buy anywhere from an Athlon XP 
1800+ to an XP 2200+, the only way to tell the difference between a Revision A and 
Revision B Thoroughbred is by knowing the CPUID of the processor, though some 
retailers may specifically sell Revision B processors, so be sure to look for a "B" 
designation. 
Revision A processors are known by their CPUID of 680, and Revision B by their 
CPUID of 681. Revision B Thoroughbreds are definitely better overclockers, with a 
potential upwards of 2.4 GHz, and lower speed Revision B models are recommended 
(such as the 1800+ XP, Rev. B), since they have a bigger potential than the higher 
speed models that are already operating near their maximums. 
Note that as of November 2002, the Thoroughbred became available in a 166MHz 
DDR (333MHz) FSB variety. The new 166MHz variant offers more bandwidth and 
extra future expandability as processor speeds increase, though you could 
accomplish the same thing by increasing the FSB of a proc. 
Athlon Thoroughbred 1467 Rev. A (XP 1700+) 
 
 
Table 7-90: Athlon Thoroughbred 1467 Rev. A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thoroughbred, Rev. A 
 
  
Performance Rating Real = 1467 MHz 
  
 XP/MP = 1700+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 11.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462 Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .13-micron, 80mm2  
  
Transistor Count 37.2 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.50v 
  
Power Consumption 44.9 watts 
  
Maximum Power 49.4 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-91: Athlon Thoroughbred 1467 Rev. A Overclocking  
Athlon Thoroughbred 
Model Rating Real = 1467 MHz 
  
 XP = 1700+  
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 12.0x – 13.0x 
  
Typical FSB O/C 145 – 150 MHz 

Table 7-91: Athlon Thoroughbred 1467 Rev. A Overclocking  
Athlon Thoroughbred 
Model Rating Real = 1467 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1600 – 1667 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1733+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Thermalright SK-6 
  
Coolers Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.80v with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The slowest Thoroughbred available, the Athlon XP 1700+ offers good overclocking 
capabilities and is popular due to its low cost and good quality, despite it being 
available in the "A" revision only. Some users have reported overclocks as high as 
2000 MHz with extreme cooling and extreme voltages of 2.0v+, but that voltage level 
is not recommended and you will more realistically see around 1700 MHz with 1.7v. 
Athlon Thoroughbred 1533 Rev. A (XP 1800+) 
 
 
Table 7-92: Athlon Thoroughbred 1533 Rev. A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thoroughbred, Rev. A 
 
  
Performance Rating Real = 1533 MHz 
  
 XP = 1800+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 11.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462 Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .13-micron, 80mm2  
  
Transistor Count 37.2 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.50v 
  
Power Consumption 46.3 watts 
  
Maximum Power 51.0 watts 
 
 

 
Table 7-93: Athlon Thoroughbred 1533 Rev. A Overclocking  
Athlon Thoroughbred 
Model Rating Real = 1533 MHz 
  
XP = 1800+   
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 12.0x – 13.5x 
  
Typical FSB O/C 145 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1600 – 1800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1862 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Thermalright SK-6 
  
Cooleres Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.80v with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon XP 1800+ offers slightly better results than the Thoroughbred 1467, as 
you are likely to see around 1800 MHz with this processor, using approximately 
1.75v, or 1700 MHz with a less aggressive voltage and cooling. 
Athlon Thoroughbred 1600 Rev. A (XP 1900+) 
 
 
Table 7-94: Athlon Thoroughbred 1600 Rev. A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thoroughbred, Rev. A 
 
  
Performance Rating Real = 1600 MHz 
  
 XP = 1900+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 12.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462 Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .13-micron, 80mm2  
  
Transistor Count 37.2 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.50v 
  
Power Consumption 47.7 watts 

Table 7-94: Athlon Thoroughbred 1600 Rev. A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thoroughbred, Rev. A 
 
  
Maximum Power 52.5 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-95: Athlon Thoroughbred 1600 Rev. A Overclocking  
Athlon Thoroughbred 
Model Rating Real = 1600 MHz 
  
 XP = 1900+  
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 12.5x – 13.5x 
  
Typical FSB O/C 140 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1662 – 1795 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1862 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Thermalright SK-6 
  
Coolers Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.80v with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Athlon XP 1900+ offers decent overclocking potential, but real world results may 
be on the low end, closer to 1700 MHz, than the high end, such as 1800+ MHz, 
without major voltage increases and extreme cooling. 
Athlon Thoroughbred 1667 Rev. A (XP 2000+) 
 
 
Table 7-96: Athlon Thoroughbred 1667 Rev. A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thoroughbred, Rev. A 
 
  
Performance Rating Real = 1667 MHz 
  
 XP = 2000+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 12.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462 Pin Socket A 

Table 7-96: Athlon Thoroughbred 1667 Rev. A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thoroughbred, Rev. A 
 
  
Core Die Size .13-micron, 80mm2  
  
Transistor Count 37.2 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.60v-1.65v 
  
Power Consumption 54.7 watts 
  
Maximum Power 60.3 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-97: Athlon Thoroughbred 1667 Rev. A Overclocking  
Athlon Thoroughbred 
Model Rating Real = 1667 MHz 
  
 XP = 2000+  
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 13.0x – 14.0x 
  
Typical FSB O/C 136 – 144 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1700 – 1800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1862+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Thermalright SK-6 
  
Coolers Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.80v with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The XP 2000+ is marginally overclockable by about 100 MHz, which is decent in 
case you already own one, but don't go out and buy one of these processors, as 
there are other models with better price to performance ratios than this one. Some 
users have reported overclocks up to 1900+ MHz but this is not typical, and better 
results have been obtained using processors with the "AGOIA" stepping than without. 
Athlon Thoroughbred 1733 Rev. A (XP 2100+) 
 
 
Table 7-98: Athlon Thoroughbred 1733 Rev. A Specifications  

Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thoroughbred, Rev. A 
 
  
Performance Rating Real = 1733 MHz 
  
 XP = 2100+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 13.0x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462 Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .13-micron, 80mm2  
  
Transistor Count 37.2 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.60v 
  
Power Consumption 56.4 watts 
  
Maximum Power 62.1 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-99: Athlon Thoroughbred 1733 Rev. A Overclocking  
Athlon Thoroughbred 
Model Rating Real = 1733 MHz 
  
 XP = 2100+  
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 12.0x – 13.0x 
  
Typical FSB O/C 145 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1750 – 1800 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1850+ MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Thermalright SK-6 
  
Coolers Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.80v with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 90° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Overclocking returns begin to diminish at this speed level and this processor is 
therefore not recommended for overclockers. Cheaper, slower rated Throughbreds 
have a higher performance to price ratio than the XP 2100+. 
Athlon Thoroughbred 1800 Rev. A (XP 2200+) 
 

 
Table 7-100: Athlon Thoroughbred 1800 Rev. A Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thoroughbred, Rev. A 
 
  
Performance Rating Real = 1800 MHz 
  
 XP = 2200+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 13.5x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462 Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .13-micron, 80mm2  
  
Transistor Count 37.2 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.65v 
  
Power Consumption 61.7 watts 
  
Maximum Power 67.9 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-101: Athlon Thoroughbred 1800 Rev. A Overclocking  
Athlon Thoroughbred 
Model Rating Real = 1800 MHz 
  
 XP = 2200+  
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 12.0x – 13.0x 
  
Typical FSB O/C 145 – 150 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 1825 – 1850 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 1900 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Thermalright SK-6 
  
Coolers Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.80v with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
The Revision A core is pushed to its limits with the XP 2200+, and overclocking 
returns are therefore not impressive. This processor's Maximum Core Temperature 
also decreased by 5° Celsius over the other speed grades in the Thoroughbred 
Revision A class, making heat tolerance a bigger factor. 

Athlon Thoroughbred 2000 Rev. B (XP 2400+) 
 
 
Table 7-102: Athlon Thoroughbred 2000 Rev. B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thoroughbred, Rev. B 
 
  
Performance Rating Real = 2000 MHz 
  
 XP = 2400+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 15x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462 Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .13-micron, 84mm2  
  
Transistor Count 37.6 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.65v 
  
Power Consumption 62 watts 
  
Maximum Power 68.3 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-103: Athlon Thoroughbred 2000 Rev. B Overclocking  
Athlon Thoroughbred 
Model Rating Real = 2000 MHz 
  
 XP = 2400+  
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 16.5x – 17.5x 
  
Typical FSB O/C 145 – 155 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 2200 – 2327 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2450 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Thermalright SK-6 
  
Coolers Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active 
Cooler
Swifttech MCX370 
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.80v with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 

Strategy 
The Athlon XP 2400+ offers a good price/performance ratio and is a favorite amongst 
Thoroughbred overclocking enthusiasts. Extreme cooling will get you to 2400 MHz 
(though HardOCP.com, for instance, did achieve 2500 MHz with the Thermalright 
SLK-800 and a very aggressive 1.95v, and they also achieved 2400 MHz with 
average cooling), but 2200MHz or so is more likely with standard to moderate 
cooling. The XP 2400+ is the first Thoroughbred to be L1 factory unlocked, and you 
can therefore adjust the multiplier freely if you have a KT400 based motherboard. 
Athlon Thoroughbred 2133 Rev. B (XP 2600+) 
 
 
Table 7-104: Athlon Thoroughbred 2133 Rev. B Specifications  
Processor Family 
Model Name AMD Athlon Thoroughbred, Rev. B 
 
  
Performance Rating Real = 2133 MHz 
  
 XP = 2600+ 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 133 MHz (266 DDR) 
  
Multiplier Ratio 16x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 462 Pin Socket A 
  
Core Die Size .13-micron, 84mm2  
  
Transistor Count 37.6 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage 1.65v 
  
Power Consumption 62 watts 
  
Maximum Power 68.3 watts 
 
 
 
Table 7-105: Athlon Thoroughbred 2133 Rev. B Overclocking  
Athlon Thoroughbred 
Model Rating Real = 2133 MHz 
  
 XP = 2600+  
  
Typical Multiplier O/C 16.5x – 17.5x 
  
Typical FSB O/C 145 – 155 MHz 
  
Typical O/C Potential 2200 – 2350 MHz 
  
Maximum O/C Potential 2450 MHz 
Overclocking 
Tolerances 
Recommended Cooling Type Forced-Air Heatsink 
  
Recommended Heatsink Thermalright SK-6 
  
Coolers Alpha PAL-8045 
  
 TaiSol CGK742092 
  
Recommended Peltier Active Swifttech MCX370 

Table 7-105: Athlon Thoroughbred 2133 Rev. B Overclocking  
Athlon Thoroughbred 
Model Rating Real = 2133 MHz 
Cooler
  
Maximum Core Voltage 1.80v with Heatsink 
Cooler 
  
Maximum Core Temperature 85° Celsius 
 
Strategy 
Like the XP 2400+, the XP 2600+ is L1 factory unlocked, and the multiplier can be 
freely changed with KT400 based motherboards. This processor is reasonably 
comparable to the XP 2400+, though you may be able to overclock the XP 2600+ by 
the same speed increase as the XP 2400+ while using a lower voltage with the XP 
2600+. 
Chapter 8: VIA/CYRIX Overclocking 
One Chip, Many Names 
VIA Technologies, a Taiwan-based computing giant, acquired the aging Cyrix 
processing platform in June 1999. In the same time-frame, the company bought 
rights to the Centaur WinChip architecture, allowing it to enter the processor design 
business. While VIA is now actively developing processing platforms, it still relies on 
outside resources to produce its models. 
Many computer users have never heard of a VIA processor. This lack of visibility can 
best be attributed to poor marketing, though the quality of the processors has also 
been in question. The original VIA Cyrix III processor never shipped to market; its 
architecture simply could not compete with similarly priced offerings from Intel and 
AMD. 
In acquiring Centaur, VIA moved to redesign its failed chip. The Centaur design team 
had posted moderate success with WinChip; VIA was hoping to leverage that 
success into a viable processor design. The VIA Cyrix III, called Samuel, was derived 
from Centaur; it shared little technology with any earlier Cyrix design. The Samuel 
was underpowered, but it did establish VIA's presence in the microprocessor market. 

 
Figure 8-1: The VIA C3 processor  
The current VIA processing platform is called C3, a name derived from Cyrix III but 
shortened to neutralize the stigma associated with earlier Cyrix models. The VIA C3 
is essentially a fifth-generation 80586 core architecture, with extensions for 
compatibility with MMX and 3DNow! instruction sets. 3DNow! support is a real 
blessing, as the base floating-point unit of the C3 leaves much to be desired. The C3 
fairs slightly better in desktop applications; it usually performs within a few 
percentage points of the popular Intel Celeron II for most integer-based calculations. 
Comparing the C3 against the AMD Duron is pointless; the entry-level Duron often 
outperforms even the powerful Pentium III. 
 
 
Table 8-1: VIA C3 Specifications  
Processor Family  
Model Name VIA C3  
  
Performance Rating 733 – 933+ MHz 
  
Generation Fifth: 80586 IA-32 
Operational Rates 
Level 1 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
Level 2 Cache Speed 1.0x Core Rate 
  
Front-side Bus Speed 100 – 133 MHz 
  
Multiplier Ratio 4.5x – 8.0+x 
Physical Design 
Interface Packing 370 Pin Socket 
  
Core Die Size .15 micron, 52 mm2  
  
 .13 micron, 52 mm2  
  
Transistor Count 15.8 Million 
  
Voltage Interface Split Core and I/O 
  
Core Voltage .15 micron: 1.6 volts 
  
 .13 micron: 1.35 volts 
  
I/O Voltage 3.3 volts 
  
Power Consumption 6.8 – 10.6 watts 
  
Maximum Power 9.6 – 17.7 watts 
Architectural 
Design 
Core Technology In-order and Pipelined Execution 
RISC 
  
Register Support Integer = 32 bit 
  
 Floating-Point = 80 bit 

Table 8-1: VIA C3 Specifications  
Processor Family  
Model Name VIA C3  
  
 MM = 64 bit 
  
Execution Units 1x Integer 
  
 1x FPU (1/2 Speed) 
  
Data Bus Width 64 bit 
  
Max Memory Support Physical = 4 Gigabyte 
  
 Virtual = 64 Terabyte 
  
Multi-Processor Support Not Supported 
  
Level 1 Code Cache 64 KB 4-way 
  
Level 1 Data Cache 64 KB 4-way 
  
Level 2 Cache 64 KB Exclusive 
  
Pre-fetch Queue 3x 16 Byte 
  
Static Branch Prediction Supported 
  
Dynamic Branch 
Prediction
128 Entry 
  
RSB Branch Prediction 16 Entry 
  
Floating-Point Processor Integrated 
  
Multimedia Extensions MMX, 3DNow! 
VIA C3 Overclocking 
The VIA C3 processor's specifications suggest great overclocking opportunities. The 
C3 boasts a small core die size and extremely low thermal loads, even at its highest 
frequency ratings. It is compatible with the widest variety of popular socket-370 
motherboards, plus it offers a decent execution pipeline. Sadly, though, the C3 
remains a modest overclocking option for most configurations. 
The C3’s overclocking potential is highest with lower processor-speed grades. Users 
may find that the chip responds unfavorably to front-side bus overclocking. Most C3 
chips are multiplier unlocked, however, and can scale to an additional 100 MHz. 
Overclocks can peak at 950 to 1000 MHz for the best .13-micron processors. 
Multiplier adjustments can be performed directly within Windows using H.Oda's 
popular WCPUID freeware testing application, which can be obtained at 
http://www.h-oda.com. 
Proper voltage can be a serious concern for the C3. Unlike competing designs from 
Intel, the C3 is not well suited for large increases in core voltage rates. The fastest 
.13-micron models are designed for 1.35 core volts; pushing these units beyond 1.4 
volts is discouraged because it seriously increases potential for core failure. Earlier 
.15-micron units typically operate at .16 volts, though it is not wise to attempt more 
than 1.7 to 1.75 volts when overclocking them. 
Expensive cooling solutions are not really necessary when overclocking the VIA C3. 
This chip accommodates thermal generation loads unparalleled by anything other 
than the mobile processor families from Intel. However, junking the passive heatsink 

cooler that many companies ship with the C3 is a good idea. This cheap heatsink can 
barely pass for a decent socket-7 cooler, it is not a cooler for the overclocking 
enthusiast. Any quality socket-370 forced-air heatsink should work well for 
overclocking the C3. 
Chapter 9: Benchmark Testing 
Testing Methodology 
Benchmark testing is essential in evaluating performance gains or losses from 
overclocking. Two types of benchmarking techniques are available: synthetic and real 
world. Synthetic benchmarks use a series of performance-testing algorithms and 
enable you to compare your system's results with results generated from other 
systems, across all platforms. Synthetic benchmark results for a single system are 
not useful; they must be compared to results obtained on other systems. Real-world 
benchmarks test actual performance for common operating scenarios, in real time. 
Results are often measured in frames per second or operations per second. 
Benchmark results can provide a foundation for determining the best combination of 
multiplier and bus overclocking techniques. Increasing system bus rates, while 
decreasing or maintaining processor multiplier settings, may produce better 
performance than raising multiplier values alone. A thorough benchmarking process 
can help you analyze the various impacts on performance and stability introduced by 
overclocking. 
It is important to establish baseline performance numbers on your system before you 
do any overclocking, so that you can make before-and-after comparisons. 
Overclocking does not always improve computing results; sometimes it brings 
negligible gains or even declines in performance. Before-and-after comparisons will 
help you determine whether or not your overclocking efforts have succeeded and if 
further adjustments are necessary. 
System stability is often affected by overclocking, so it is valuable to determine what 
impact your efforts have had on stability without having to experience failures (that is, 
system hang-ups and crashes) in your real-world applications. Benchmarking apps 
involve strenuous system tests that exceed the level of CPU power and resources 
required by typical applications in everyday use. During such tests, a system can be 
pushed to its limits. If the system fails, it is probably either overclocked beyond its 
capabilities or in need of additional tweaks. Increasing CPU voltage, improving the 
cooling, or reducing bus speed while increasing the CPU multiplier may yield better 
results. 
A few simple steps will ensure that your system is properly configured for 
benchmarking. 
1. Your desktop display resolution should always be set to the same value for 
each pass or test run of a given application. A resolution of 1024 x 768 pixels 
with 16-bit color is recommended for consistency and comparable results. 

2. All hard disks in your system should be thoroughly defragmented before 
testing to ensure maximum bandwidth, low access latencies, and a consistent 
data flow among each of the system components and the drive array. 
3. Finally, all components (video, chipset, etc.) should be installed using the 
latest software drivers from each hardware manufacturer. 
SiSoft Sandra 
SiSoft Sandra is one of the most widely used synthetic benchmarking applications. 
Sandra offers performance testing for many subsystems and components. It also 
provides detailed analyses of system performance, capabilities, and stability. 
Overclockers will appreciate Sandra's dedicated tests designed for specific areas, 
such as processor, memory, and drive systems. These tests will help determine the 
best combination of settings for memory bus rates, front-side bus rates, and 
processor multiplier values. 
Sandra's processor testing is broken down into two benchmarking modules. The 
primary processor-testing module provides instructions-per-second ratings for both 
integer and floating-point math operations. The multimedia module tests any 
enhanced streaming instruction capabilities the processor may offer, including Intel's 
SSE2 or AMD's 3DNow!. While synthetic processor testing may not represent real-
world performance, it is a good place to start in identifying changes that result from 
overclocking. 
 
Figure 9-1: Sandra processor benchmark  
The Sandra memory module lets you benchmark the available bandwidth between 
the memory and processor buses via the chipset bus. The results are displayed in 
megabytes per second for both integer and floating-point operations. Increases in 
front-side bus and memory bus rates offer greater bandwidth improvements than 
multiplier-only overclocking. 

The Sandra file system benchmark provides both stability and performance testing. 
Front-side bus overclocking can produce higher drive bandwidth, with less read/write 
latency, through consequent overclocking of the PCI bus transfer rate. Stability can 
be evaluated by way of multiple-loop drive testing (i.e., running the test multiple 
times) to verify that data integrity is maintained during operation at extended PCI bus 
frequencies. 
 
Figure 9-2: Sandra memory bandwidth benchmark  
 
Figure 9-3: Sandra file system benchmark 
MadOnion 3DMark 
MadOnion is the publisher of several popular synthetic benchmark applications. Its 
3DMark series analyzes system performance at both the processor and subsystem 

levels. Though it was originally designed to evaluate 3D video performance, the 
stress 3DMark places on the processor, chipset, and memory buses allows 3DMark 
to effectively benchmark of overall system performance. 
3DMark2000 can test the effectiveness of the processor alone. It separates the video 
card's advanced 3D functions from the rendering pipeline in order to isolate the 
processor's performance independent of the video card. Be sure to disable any 
hardware transform-and-lighting (T&L) operations when configuring the test 
environment, so that the processor-related tests rely totally on software rendering 
routines. The 3DMark2000 also offers a looping demo mode that can be used to test 
system stability over time. In the SE version, internal rendering pipelines have been 
updated to support Microsoft's DirectX 8.1 D3D hardware acceleration routines. 
 
Figure 9-4: 3DMark2001 testing  
 
 
 
 
Ziff Davis WinBench 99 
Ziff Davis, the popular content publishing and hardware testing corporation, provides 
WinBench 99, version 2.0, as a free download. All WinBench testing routines are 
performed through 32-bit operations, with benchmarks designed to stress and 
evaluate graphics, video, and disk performance. The numbers generated by Graphics 
WinMark tests are based on comparative normalized scores, while the Disk WinMark 
scores represent actual drive transfer rates in thousands of bytes per second. Test 
results can be saved for later system-to-system comparisons or to analyze 
performance changes induced by various overclocking settings compared to your 
system's baseline performance. 

 
Figure 9-5: WinBench 99 comparison tables  
Real-world Testing: 3D Games 
Complex 3D games can test real-world performance by measuring rendering rates in 
frames per second. ID Software's Quake 3 remains the dominant choice for such 
testing, even though its rendering engine is aging. Other popular games, like Unreal 
Tournament, Aquanox, and any other game with a frames-per-second benchmark 
capability, should prove equally acceptable. DirectX and OpenGL games lack internal 
testing functions, but they can still be benchmarked using the FRAPS performance 
measurement utility (http://www.fraps.com). 
 
Figure 9-6: Quake 3 time demo results  
Quake 3 frames-per-second testing is performed via the console command line 
interface. 
1. Press the tilde (~) key while the game is running. This will invoke the interface. 
2. At the command line, type timedemo 1 and press the ENTER key. 
3. Close the console interface by pressing the tilde key (~) a second time. 
4. Perform frames-per-second testing by selecting either available demo via the 
main menu. The average rates will be returned to the console interface when 
the demo is completed. 
5. Record the values for later analysis. 

6. Return the game to the original timedemo 0 state via the console interface to 
re-establish normal play. 
Real-world Testing: Applications 
Many multimedia applications can be used for real-world performance testing. 
Encoding sample video clips with Microsoft Windows Media Encoder, VirtualDub, or 
Adobe Premiere can be a very effective comparative test, as long as each encoding 
pass is accomplished under the same system configuration. Each of these 
applications can return values that indicate the amount of time elapsed during 
encoding. Similar operations can also measure the time required to apply transforms 
or filters to graphics in applications such as GIMP or Adobe Photoshop. 
 
Figure 9-7: VirtualDub video compression  
Chapter 10: Troubleshooting 
Troubleshooting Overview 
The need for system troubleshooting arises when an overclocking attempt is not 
successful. In the world of overclocking, the word successful is subjectively defined. 
Success, or lack thereof, is usually measured by whether or not the system boots 
and whether or not it remains stable over time. Symptoms of system instability 
include software applications that freeze, crash (with or without an error message), or 
otherwise produce unexpected and unwelcome results. Some users are content with 
a system that crashes once a day. Others require complete system stability for weeks 
at a time before they are satisfied. Whatever "success" means to you, it is possible to 
turn overclocking failures into successes by understanding what went wrong and 
taking the right steps to correct problems. 

Overclocking can create system stability problems that would not occur at default 
settings. Deviations from normal (or default) temperatures, voltages, and operating 
frequencies of various system components can lead to instability, or even failure, 
after prolonged operation. To correct such problems, or to fix a system that will not 
boot after an overclocking attempt, it may be necessary to restore the system to its 
default configuration, or at least to a more stable configuration. Ways to do this 
include clearing the computer's CMOS data via a motherboard jumper, changing 
motherboard dipswitches or jumpers back to defaults, or reflashing the BIOS to force 
default settings. The risk of device failure is minimal if you exercise care and patience 
during overclocking. System instability is the larger concern. Nevertheless, failure or 
damage to hardware is a possibility. Troubleshooting can shed light on the causes of 
instability and help you get the kinks out of any overclocking attempt. 
Proper Cooling and Thermal Monitoring 
The main cause of system instability or damage that arises from overclocking is poor 
cooling, because increased operating speeds produce higher thermal loads. The 
excess heat must be adequately dissipated, usually by means of a heatsink 
combined with a forced-air fan cooler. To know whether or not your system is being 
cooled sufficiently, you must monitor its operating temperatures. 
Most quality motherboards permit onboard temperature monitoring through a variety 
of sensors mounted in strategic locations. The most valuable sensor point is 
underneath the base of the processor inside the socket interface (if there is one) or 
adjacent to the processor on slot-interface boards. Some architectures offer an 
additional layer of security by embedding a thermal sensing circuit in the processor's 
die substrate layers. A chipset or third-party circuit then actively monitors the 
hardware, passing temperatures and other relevant data to the CMOS for analysis 
and display on the BIOS Setup's user interface. Software applications can also 
extract temperature data from the sensor circuitry and move it directly to the 
operating system for real-time monitoring. 
Most motherboards that offer thermal monitoring also support user-defined 
temperature limits to safeguard against damage to the processor and other 
components. Suggested maximums vary with processor designs. Exceeding 
temperature limits may trigger a warning or cause the system to shut down. Although 
stability problems can occur, even at low temperatures, you should avoid exceeding 
60° Celsius when overclocking any current generation processor. 
Maximum recommended operating temperatures for a variety of processors can be 
found in Chapters 5 and 6. Just as you should establish a performance baseline 
when benchmarking your system, you should also establish a processor or system 
case temperature baseline before overclocking. Of course, you can be quite 
confident that processor and system case temperatures will increase when your 
processor is overclocked. Instability will not necessarily follow increased temperature, 
but it is important to know where your system started out. Such knowledge will make 
troubleshooting easier down the road. 
Overclocking tends to be a trial-and-error process. The more data you can gather 
about your system, the better. If an overclocking attempt is successful, in the sense 

that the system remains stable, you can record the processor's temperature during 
that attempt. If you later overclock your processor to a higher speed, and that 
produces instability, you'll know what temperature to seek via improved cooling to 
improve stability. 
Processor Voltage 
An increase in processor speed sometimes requires an increase in processor voltage 
to improve stability or to make a system boot at all. Unfortunately, increasing voltage 
is perhaps the most dangerous aspect of overclocking. Next to excessive 
temperatures, it is the quickest way to kill your processor. Increasing the voltage 
improves a processor's ability to operate at higher speeds, but take care: increase 
voltage levels by tiny increments and monitor every aspect of system operation—
temperature, performance, and stability—after each increase. High voltage means a 
greater likelihood of electromigration, which can destroy a processor's circuit 
pathways. Although rare, electromigration is impossible to measure or predict. Unless 
your processor is expendable, the best rule of thumb is to deviate from the 
processor's default voltage as little as possible. Slight changes in voltage are usually 
well tolerated, whereas large changes are more troublesome. As with all overclocking 
attempts, quality cooling should be in place before you raise processor voltage. 
Processor Voltage 
An increase in processor speed sometimes requires an increase in processor voltage 
to improve stability or to make a system boot at all. Unfortunately, increasing voltage 
is perhaps the most dangerous aspect of overclocking. Next to excessive 
temperatures, it is the quickest way to kill your processor. Increasing the voltage 
improves a processor's ability to operate at higher speeds, but take care: increase 
voltage levels by tiny increments and monitor every aspect of system operation—
temperature, performance, and stability—after each increase. High voltage means a 
greater likelihood of electromigration, which can destroy a processor's circuit 
pathways. Although rare, electromigration is impossible to measure or predict. Unless 
your processor is expendable, the best rule of thumb is to deviate from the 
processor's default voltage as little as possible. Slight changes in voltage are usually 
well tolerated, whereas large changes are more troublesome. As with all overclocking 
attempts, quality cooling should be in place before you raise processor voltage. 
Bus Overclocking: Drives 
Increased stress on system components, due to overclocking via the front-side bus, 
often generates instability. Components built with low-quality manufacturing or design 
standards are most likely to suffer, though even the best components have limits. 
Hard drives, video cards, and memory are the most susceptible to instability 
introduced by overclocking. 
Overclocking the front-side bus affects the operating speeds of all system buses, as 
discussed in Chapter 4. Each bus rate is affected differently, according to the front-
side bus speed. The exact deviation in operating speed depends on the chipset 
being used with each motherboard's specific design. In general, all system bus 
speeds increase as front-side bus rates increase, although most x86 architectures 

employ multiplier division to derive bus speeds. Devices attached to each of the 
various buses must be able to sustain operation at extended speeds introduced 
through the overclocking process. 
Drive arrays are the most susceptible to problems in an overclocked system. Loss of 
data integrity is a real concern. PCI bus speeds that exceed the normal specification 
of 33 MHz can cause problems, especially above 40 MHz. Drives based on the IDE 
standard are most likely to suffer data corruption, while SCSI-based devices are less 
worrisome. 
Decreasing the drive controller's transfer rates through the BIOS Setup interface will 
often prevent data corruption problems. You'll have to experiment to find optimum 
stability, but most drive problems cease when the controller's transfer rate is lowered 
by one or two levels. For example, ATA/66 DMA 4 could be taken down to ATA/33 
DMA 2. While you can lower drive transfer rates without devastating performance, 
you should never disable direct memory access (DMA) transfers in current 
generation systems. DMA bypasses the processor during data transfers; this 
valuable feature should be enabled at all times. 
Examine any changes in performance that result when drive transfer rates are 
lowered. System performance could be degraded due to decreases in drive data 
throughput. Bandwidth gained through overclocking the bus rate may be negated by 
reduced signaling rates. You must maintain a balance between maximum operating 
frequency and available bandwidth. A quality benchmarking utility, such as SiSoft 
Sandra, will help you assess drive bandwidth as you make overclocking decisions. 
Bus Overclocking: Graphics Accelerators 
Graphics accelerators can be very susceptible to bus overclocking, especially the 
older generations of AGP video cards. Based on a 66-MHz PCI bus design, AGP 
cards store graphical texture data in the system's main memory. This improves 3D 
rendering by speeding up access to more graphical information than can be stored in 
the video card's onboard memory. Subsequent revisions have extended the AGP 
standard to include an advanced data signaling technique, which transfers 
information at up to eight times the rate of the original specification. 
The latest generation of video cards can usually sustain AGP speeds approaching 90 
MHz, though earlier models often fail above 75 MHz. Lowering the effective data 
transfer rate can neutralize the stress of extended speeds. AGP 4x cards must often 
be lowered to 2x for successful operation. In addition, disabling side-band transfers 
and fast-write capabilities can limit the effects of bus overclocking on stability in the 
AGP subsystem. AGP bus configuration can usually be altered from within a 
system's BIOS interface, though some video cards feature onboard jumpers. 
Most games and other 3D applications will see only mild performance losses from 
lowered transfer rates or disabled advanced AGP. The latest graphics accelerators 
feature 64 to128 megabytes of onboard memory, so the need to perform texturing 
operations in the system's main memory is reduced. Even the most advanced 3D 
games rarely demand more than 32 MB of graphics memory at display resolutions 
below 1024 x 768. Computer-aided design applications suffer the worst performance 

degradation, but professionals who use such software rarely resort to overclocking. 
They prize data integrity and system stability, and tend to obtain speed by upgrading 
rather than tweaking their systems. 
Bus Overclocking: Memory 
The memory subsystem is often the first to lose stability during front-side bus 
overclocking. The quality of the memory itself is important in determining 
overclocking potential. Generic memory types should be avoided, as the memory 
chip manufacturer often has no control over the production processes used in 
building generic components. Small manufacturers purchase memory chips from 
brand-name corporations and mount them on low-quality printed circuit boards. 
These boards often fail quality testing at overclocked speeds because they are 
designed to meet minimum quality standards. 
Quality memory modules undergo production and testing within the same 
manufacturing environment. Large manufacturers, such as Micron's Crucial 
Technology retail sales division, offer superior quality testing. Each Crucial memory 
module must meet the same stringent standards as Micron's OEM modules. This 
high degree of vigilance usually produces an excellent chip. 
Some vendors take advantage of the confusion surrounding memory quality. For 
example, Micron provides memory chips for sale to other manufacturers for assembly 
on a generic printed circuit board. Some vendors receive the generic memory, then 
attempt to sell it as a brand-name product because each individual chip is tagged 
with Micron's manufacturing and model codes. Users expect a quality product, but 
instead they receive a generic part that may not meet Micron quality assurance 
standards. Purchasing memory directly from large-scale manufacturers is the best 
way to avoid low-quality components though some smaller manufacturers do have 
good testing procedures and warranties. 
Type and performance ratings are the two most important things to consider when 
evaluating whether or not a memory module is suitable for an overclocked 
configuration. Better-quality PC-133 SDRAM and PC-2100 DDR memory modules 
can operate up to 33 MHz beyond their factory ratings with good stability. The high-
frequency RAMBUS designs can often go 100 MHz beyond their rated speed. Older 
fast-page and extended data-out technologies are not as scalable, with overclocking 
potential less than 33 MHz. As with processors, the maximum overclocked speed 
depends on a number of design, production, and testing factors. 
You may need to tweak memory timing values when overclocking the memory bus. 
Most motherboards allow memory timing rates to be defined in the BIOS Setup 
interface. While you must use trial and error to determine the best timing pattern, 
setting CAS (column address strobe) latency can be a valuable overclocking tool. 
CAS latency determines the rate for memory read, write, and move operations. 
Most quality memory will feature a CAS latency of 2 for SDRAM, or up to 2.5 for DDR 
memory modules. Adjusting this value to 3 will often enable memory modules that 
would otherwise fail at overclocked bus rates to operate without any problems. As 
latency increases, bandwidth decreases. However, performance loss is negligible 

because subsequent overclocking of the memory bus can deliver more available 
bandwidth to offset latency. Benchmark testing is required to determine the proper 
relationships among timing, latency, and operating frequencies. 
Many motherboards, especially those featuring non-Intel chipsets, give users the 
ability to specify custom bus rates correlated to the front-side bus. This can prove 
invaluable when overclocking the front-side bus. Most chipsets feature a fixed 
multiplier range for PCI, AGP, and other interconnect bus operations, but many 
chipsets skew the memory bus rate through an additive or subtractive process. The 
skew value is often derived from the rate of the PCI bus, which is 33 MHz at default 
clock operation. 
Manipulating the memory bus is an important aspect of overclocking. Let's look at the 
Intel Pentium III e series, for example. This processor operates with a 100-MHz front-
side bus. Many non-Intel motherboards allow the memory bus to be offset from the 
front-side bus by 33 MHz. Thus, a high-performance PC-133 SDRAM in 
asynchronous mode can replace the original synchronous default. The P3e 
processor can be overclocked to a front-side bus rate of 133 MHz. If the user already 
has PC-133 memory, the memory bus can be configured for synchronous operation. 
However, with low-quality PC-100 memory, the user could opt to use an 
asynchronous 100 MHz memory bus (133 MHz minus 33 MHz), thus improving 
stability while allowing the processor to be overclocked to the 133-MHz front-side 
rate. 
The P3e system is only one example. Most chipsets support the skewing of memory 
bus rates, not only for overclocking but also to improve performance in other ways. In 
the P3e with PC-100 SDRAM example, assume a user wants to upgrade to PC-166 
technology. After changing out the old memory, he or she can use the additive 
asynchronous mode to maximize memory bandwidth. This process allows the front-
side bus to retain its 133-MHz overclocked rate, while the memory bus is skewed to 
achieve 166 MHz. 
Sadly, most Intel chipsets do not allow skewing the memory bus though 
asynchronous operation, though nearly all non-Intel chipsets do. Remember that 
lowering operating speeds for system buses, especially the memory bus, may also 
reduce performance, even when the processor or front-side bus is overclocked. 
Resetting the BIOS 
Unresponsive or unstable systems can often be rescued by resetting the firmware 
BIOS to its default configuration. The BIOS is based around a CMOS memory that 
stores system configuration data on an EEPROM (electrically erasable 
programmable read-only memory) flash memory module. The method for resetting 
the BIOS to default values differs with the motherboard model, but the basic premise 
remains the same. The electrical supply to the EEPROM, from the motherboard's 
onboard battery, must either be removed or shorted to clear the stored memory. 
Most motherboards feature a CMOS clear jumper, while others require the user to 
hold a key during boot to reset BIOS values. If specific instructions are not available, 
simply removing the CMOS battery for 15 minutes can reset most motherboards. If 

that isn't successful, shorting the positive-to-negative posts of the battery interface 
socket with a wire jumper or paper clip may speed up erasure. 
If the battery is soldered to the motherboard, it may be possible to drain it by 
attaching a resistor, with impedance under 100 ohms, between the positive and 
negative battery poles. Be careful, though: if the motherboard doesn't support battery 
recharging, this will render the system useless. A new battery will have to be 
soldered in place of the drained one. 
Flash updating of the system BIOS can often restore the default configuration. The 
command to force such an update option varies by vendor, but most boards featuring 
popular Award or AMI BIOS routines can be forced to reinstate original CMOS values 
with a flash and reboot. Upgrading the BIOS can also prove beneficial, as the latest 
code usually includes compatibility and performance updates. 
All user-defined settings are lost once the configuration is reset to factory defaults. 
Retain a hard-copy version of all BIOS, jumper, and dipswitch settings, as configured 
when the system is operating in a stable manner. The task of writing down each 
setting can be tedious, but this extra work ensures your ability to restore the system if 
it should fail. If you lack a backup list, most motherboard user manuals recommend 
BIOS settings for common configurations, and most BIOS Setup interfaces contain a 
Restore to BIOS Defaults option. Reset all motherboard jumpers and dipswitches to 
their default or recommended values before booting a reset system. 
Hardware Failure and Warranties 
Device failure is a significant concern. As noted several times throughout this text, 
only quality components should be used in an overclocked system. If your system is 
factory built, you may not have the best components, but you can still take care to 
cool and configure your system properly. Remember that overclocking can void 
product warranties. Multiplier overclocking voids processor warranties, while front-
side bus overclocking voids agreements for nearly all system components. Trying to 
get product replacements or refunds for damages incurred during overclocking is 
unethical if not illegal. Deceitful tactics increase hardware costs for everyone and 
have compelled some companies to implement anti-overclocking technologies. 
Chapter 11: Final Thoughts 
Overclocking Examined 
While this book covers most of what you are likely to face when overclocking, the 
techniques involved can change as new computing architectures appear and 
technology evolves. Thankfully, the x86 architecture itself imposes some restrictions, 
which will allow the information here to be used across a wide range of both current 
and future systems. While each new design introduces additional performance 
features, overclocking concepts remain relatively similar for all x86 platforms. 
Overclocking grows out of qualities inherent in the manufacturing of integrated circuit 
products. Manufacturers choose to market microprocessors at various speed grades, 

effectively holding back any given processor from its maximum potential. In turn, 
overclocking enthusiasts opt to push their systems as far as they can. They do this 
either because they want to extend the useful life of an existing system or because 
they want to purchase a slower rated and thus cheaper system and get more 
performance from it. The process of overclocking can also be addictive: some people 
thrive on the challenge of attaining maximum performance for the least amount of 
money. 
The premise of overclocking is that it is possible to improve computing performance, 
either by raising the operating frequency of the primary processor-to-system bus on 
the motherboard or by remapping the internal clock multiplier of the processor. The 
methods involved may be different for each specific processor across the wide range 
of products offered by Intel, AMD, and VIA. The original idea remains the same for all 
platforms, but its application can vary wildly for each of the popular architectures. 
Many secondary factors play key roles in reaching and maintaining peak operating 
speeds for an overclocked system. Proper thermal regulation, through the 
implementation of active and passive cooling technologies, builds the foundation for 
success. Problems can arise, however, even with the best configurations, so 
troubleshooting will almost certainly be necessary. Once overclocking has been 
attempted, benchmarking enables enthusiasts to analyze stability problems and 
measure positive performance returns. 
Your Motherboard Won't Let You Overclock? 
If your motherboard doesn't support enough (or any) FSB settings or multiplier 
changes, fear not. Most motherboard manufacturers provide BIOS upgrades that 
may add new features and BIOS Setup options. Also be sure to try third-party 
software options such as SoftFSB (discussed in the Appendix) to alter front-side bus 
speeds from within Windows. Finally, replacing your motherboard in order to gain 
more overclocking options is a viable choice, and can be done for as little as $50. If 
you do buy a new motherboard, be sure that it supports all of your existing hardware. 
Now You Know How, But Should You Do It? 
Overclocking appeals to a wide variety of PC users, but it is not for everyone. If you 
are easily frustrated by problems with your PC, troubleshooting is an annoyance for 
you, or you frequently rely on others to help resolve issues with your PC, 
overclocking can only complicate your life. But if you enjoy (or at least tolerate) 
troubleshooting and tweaking, and the idea of getting a faster system for practically 
no extra money sounds pretty slick, consider overclocking as a viable means to an 
end. It might even become a hobby. 
You should begin your experimentation on an extra PC, rather than on your main 
system. Even if you don't maintain the only copy of a Fortune 100 company's 
financial records on your main box, you probably don't want to lose data or deal with 
the frustration of not having a functional and reliable main PC when you need it. 
Remember, back up everything! 

What to Do with the Extra Performance 
You will undoubtedly be happy with quicker application response times or higher 
frame rates in games, but why let the extra performance go to waste when you're not 
using your PC? Distributed computing projects are popular as a way to solve 
complex or CPU-intensive problems using the power of PCs around the world. 
Projects to find cures for cancer, crack encryption, unlock the secrets of our genetic 
code, and identify drugs to fight anthrax and smallpox, are just a few of the 
distributed computing projects out there. What makes these projects irresistible is the 
fact that they track your PC's number-crunching power and total contribution to the 
overall effort, so you can see how your PC, or group of PCs, stacks up against 
others. 
Performance junkies can even join teams of users running the same distributed 
computing effort, combining their forces and engaging in friendly competition against 
other teams. The teams work toward achieving the project's goal and earn bragging 
rights as a bonus. Learn about six popular distributed computing projects, which can 
put your new higher-performing PC to work when you're not using it, at 
http://www.techimo.com/teams.html. 
Be warned, however: because distributed computing projects keep your CPU running 
at 100% effort around the clock, stability problems are more likely to surface. That 
can be a good thing if you want to find problems and eliminate them, but it can also 
be annoying if you're happy with your PC's new level of performance and you don't 
intend to do any further tweaking. 
Smart Shopping 
Whether you have decided to buy slower hardware and overclock it, or bite the bullet 
and pay for speed up front, it's always worthwhile to find good deals and reliable 
retailers. Although local shops might have decent sales from time to time, on the 
whole, online shopping will provide the best prices on hardware components. 
A site called ResellerRatings (http://www.resellerratings.com), which is owned and 
maintained by the author of this book, lets you search thousands of online retailers to 
find the best hardware prices, and then browse customer reviews of retailers to 
protect you from poor service. Some other price search engines have company 
ratings as well, but those sites are in the business of providing price searches, not 
company ratings, and they do not go the extra mile to ensure the integrity and 
authenticity of the customer reviews of companies to nearly the same degree as 
ResellerRatings. If you use other price search sites such as iBuyer.net 
(http://www.ibuyer.net), PriceWatch (http://www.pricewatch.com), PriceGrabber 
(http://www.pricegrabber.com), or CostUpdate (http://www.costupdate.com) to 
compare results, be sure to use ResellerRatings.com to evaluate unfamiliar retailers. 
Once you have made a purchase, help other shoppers by leaving your feedback on 
the site as well. 
BizRate (http://www.bizrate.com) is another site that features ratings and reviews of 
online retailers. However, BizRate only features 450 or so computer hardware 

retailers. It is also unclear to this author as to what steps BizRate takes to prevent 
fraudulent evaluations. Still, the site offers one more resource for your arsenal, 
especially when coupled with ResellerRatings and various other price search sites. 
The AnandTech "Hot Deals" forum, accessible at http://forums.anandtech.com, is 
another way to find good prices online. As its name implies, this forum is filled with 
the latest online hardware deals. 
Although I do not advocate that you buy from one retailer or another, and that you 
make full use of price search sites and ResellerRatings before you buy, NewEgg 
(http://www.newegg.com) has a user reviews feature on its site that you may find 
useful. It enables customers to submit reviews and ratings for various products, 
which are helpful when deciding which products to buy. Often, users comment about 
the overclockability of a motherboard or other product, as well. 
Exclusion of Liability 
Overclocking should prove a positive experience for PC enthusiasts. However, 
problems can arise when you deviate from the processor manufacturer's original 
specifications. Overclocking voids product warranties, so take great care at all stages 
of the process. Monitor an overclocked system carefully, even if it appears to be 
stable and functioning properly. 
Overclocking is the entire responsibility of the user who actually implements the 
techniques and information offered in this text and its supplementary resources. 
Manufacturers offering product warranties for components within an overclocked 
system are not responsible for any damages suffered, regardless of whether product 
failure or damage is either directly or indirectly associated with overclocking. Invoking 
warranties or agreements for components in an overclocked system is an ethical 
issue. Common sense and law require the user to assume all liability for any part, 
hardware or software, used in conjunction with overclocking. 
All parties involved in the development, production, or sale of this text disclaim any 
and all liability for problems that may result from the knowledge you gain from The 
Book of Overclocking. 
Beware: It's Addictive 
Once we have achieved a goal in life, it never seems to be enough, so we adopt a 
greater goal. The same is true for overclocking. Once you become adept at it, you 
may find yourself perpetually tweaking your PC, always seeking the smallest 
performance increase, temperature reduction, or improvement in stability. What 
started as a desire to save a few bucks and keep from upgrading can turn into a 
pricey, time-consuming, endless pursuit. Your dollars can disappear into cooling 
components and case modifications. And you may find yourself spending too many 
hours on the web discussing the search for maximum performance. 
Not to worry, though, you're in good company. Sites like techimo.com 
(http://www.techimo.com), HardOCP.com (http://www.hardocp.com), 
Overclockers.com (http://www.overclockers.com) and AnandTech.com 

(http://forums.anandtech.com) provide support for your new habit, and can help all 
skill levels with the overclocking process. These community-oriented sites allow a 
free exchange of ideas about computing on any topic—from daily operations to 
troubleshooting to overclocking and beyond. Answers to your tough overclocking 
questions are never more than a mouse click away. 
Appendix: Frequently Asked Questions 
Overview 
Q:   What is overclocking? 
A:   Overclocking is the process of operating computer hardware at speeds in excess 
of their manufacturers’ ratings. 
Q:   Can I overclock my OEM system? 
A: 
  
With the advent of software utilities like SoftFSB, the answer is "possibly." Most 
OEM systems from the largest manufacturers (Dell, Gateway, Compaq, etc.) 
cannot sustain a serious overclock. It is possible to obtain a few extra MHz. 
Q:   What about overclocking my notebook? 
A: 
  
We do not recommend overclocking for portable computers. Most notebook 
systems cannot accommodate extra cooling. Even if overclocking were possible, 
most notebook cases are not designed to dissipate the amount of heat it would 
generate. 
Q:   I run important applications on my system on a regular basis and I cannot 
tolerate system crashes or data loss. Should I overclock my system? 
A: 
  
No. When system stability and data integrity are of utmost concern, don’t 
overclock. Overclocking is best suited for gamers, who want realistic and smooth 
play; and speed fanatics, who want bragging rights on having the fastest, 
cheapest system around. 
Q:   Will overclocking damage my processor or void my warranty? 
A: 
  
If you are conscientious enough to observe proper thermal regulation and abide 
by voltage limits, overclocking is unlikely to damage your processor. It can 
sometimes shorten the lifespan of a processor, though most chips will become 
obsolete long before they burn out. But yes, overclocking will void your CPU 
warranty, and possibly other component warranties as well. 
Q: 
  
I have seen advertisements for retailers that sell overclocked CPUs. Are they 
legitimate, and is there an advantage to buying one rather than overclocking my 
own? 
A: 
  
Some retailers sell legitimate CPU, motherboard, and memory combos, which 
come preoverclocked and pretested for less money than you would spend on an 
analogous system at the manufacturer-rated speed. Buying such a combination 
could save you some guesswork, as not all processors in any given class can 
overclock successfully. Some retailers guarantee that these overclocked 
systems will run; others do not. Ask questions, and know what you are buying. 
Beware of retailers who sell processor/motherboard combos in an overclocked 
state without advertising them as being overclocked. These are instances of 
fraud, which should be reported to the appropriate processor manufacturer. 
Q:   Why is my overclocked system unstable? 
A:   This is a complex question. Many factors can create system instabilities. 
Common causes include:  

Core Voltage. Increasing voltage can help stabilize an overclocked processor, 
but remember that additional cooling will likely be required to offset the extra 
heat that is generated. 
Cooling. Proper thermal regulation is key to maintaining a stable overclocked 
system. Use a quality processor cooler, combined with an efficient case fan 
layout. One trick for diagnosing potential thermal problems is to use a cooling 
spray (found at most electronics vendors for under $10) to directly lower the 
temperature of specific components, while you operate the system at maximum 
CPU load. If stability improves when you are cooling a particular component, that 
component likely needs better cooling. 
Memory. Poor quality memory is one of the leading causes of overclocking 
instability. When overclocking, use only quality memory from trusted 
manufacturers, not generic modules from unknown vendors. Increasing CAS 
latency, or decreasing certain memory timings, is sometimes required to stabilize 
the memory subsystem when overclocking. Benchmark testing can help you 
evaluate any performance differences that result from changing the various 
settings. 
Buses. Both the PCI and AGP bus standards are built around strict operating 
specifications. Try to maintain bus rates as close to their default values (PCI = 
33 MHz, AGP = 66 MHz) as possible. An AGP bus is more forgiving when 
overclocked than a PCI, but decreasing AGP transfer rates may be required to 
achieve stability. Similarly, hard drives attached to the PCI bus may require 
lowered transfer rates to ensure data integrity when overclocking via the front-
side bus. 
Power Supply. Overclocking requires more wattage than the default settings 
require. While most power supplies can easily sustain moderate overclocking, 
some systems will require a power supply upgrade to maintain stability. Intel- or 
AMD-approved units with a rating of at least 300 watts are recommended. Brand 
name power supplies are often preferred over generic power supplies, as brand 
name units may prove more reliable and have power output voltages that more 
closely meet the required motherboard voltage specifications. 
Firmware/BIOS. Be sure to update the BIOS firmware and hardware drivers for 
all components. Most manufacturers release updates at regular intervals, so 
checking the appropriate websites and online file archives for updates is 
required. 
Q:   Is my processor running hot? 
A: 
  
The temperature limits listed in Chapters 5 and 6 indicate failure points, not 
maximum stable operating temperatures. Processors should never exceed 60° 
Celsius. The best cooling systems will keep temperatures well below 50° for 
most configurations. 
Q:   What can I do for a hot processor? 
A: 
  
1. Apply a thin layer of thermal paste between the heatsink and processor core. 
2. Verify that there is adequate airflow in the system and make sure the fans are 

moving air in the right direction. 
3. Check for proper heatsink-to-processor alignment, as some models can slip 
during shipping. 
4. And finally, install a quality processor cooling solution for better thermal 
dissipation. 
Q:   What if my processor does not overclock as expected? 
A: 
  
Not all chips will overclock the same. This fact is a byproduct of integrated circuit 
manufacturing techniques. Most individual examples of a specific processor 
model might overclock to a certain range, but that does not mean your specific 
processor is guaranteed to reach the same speeds. 
Q:   How do I "burn in" my processor? 
A: 
  
The need to burn in a processor is an old overclocking myth. A processor has no 
mechanical friction, only a type of electrical friction. Electrons will flow through a 
processor core the same way, regardless of the duration of that flow. 
Glossary 
AGP  
Acronym for accelerated graphics port, a bus interconnect standard designed 
by Intel for the high-speed transfer of graphics data and the storage of 3D 
texture data within a system’s primary RAM. Most current 2D and 3D graphics 
accelerators are designed for the AGP bus standard. 
AMD  
Advanced Micro Devices is the second largest personal computer 
microprocessor manufacturer, with models covering nearly all market 
segments in the computing industry. AMD is currently Intel’s strongest 
competitor. Their rivalry helps ensure lower CPU prices across the board. 
Athlon  
A 32-bit microprocessor architecture manufactured by Advanced Micro 
Devices. The high-performance Athlon is marketed as direct competition to 
Intel’s Pentium III and Pentium 4 architectures. Both the Pentium and the 
Athlon lines have undergone multiple revisions since their original release. 
Bandwidth  
A measurement of the amount of information processed or transferred within a 
given timeframe, usually measured in megabytes per second. Bandwidth is 
synonymous with throughput. 
Benchmark  
A test designed to measure the performance of either hardware or software 
components. 
Binary  
A mathematics system composed of ones and zeros that is the basis of 
modern computing technologies. 
Bus  
A collection of wires designed to transmit data across various components 
within a computing platform. The front-side bus connects the processor, 
memory, and chipset computing components. The back-side bus connects the 
front-side bus to expansion peripherals, such as drives or graphics 
accelerators. 
Cache  

A specialized type of memory designed to store data temporarily so it can be 
accessed quickly during buffering operations. Cache is generally designed 
around static random access memory (SRAM) and, unlike similar dynamic 
random access technologies, it does not require continuous refresh updates. 
Capacitance  
A measurement of the ratio of electrical charge transferred across two 
conductors, or the amount of charge an isolated conductor can effectively 
store. 
CFM  
Cubic feet per minute, a measure of a fan’s ability to move air. The higher the 
CFM rating, the more volume of air can be moved in any given time and the 
cooler your system will be. Note that higher CFM generally means greater 
noise. 
Chipset  
A combination of integrated circuit devices designed to route, control, and 
transfer information across various operating buses found in today’s systems. 
Common designs incorporate two distinct but interconnected hubs: the 
Northbridge and Southbridge controllers. 
Circuit  
A configuration of electrically or magnetically connected components or 
devices. 
Clock Speed  
A measurement of how many times an integrated circuit can change its 
operating state within a given timeframe, usually measured in megahertz, or 
millions of cycles per second. 
Convection  
A process of thermal dissipation using a liquid or gas medium to transfer heat 
away from a given substance to another region or medium. 
Cyrix  
Cyrixoriginally existed as an independent manufacturer of Intelcompatible 
microprocessors, but this smaller corporation was acquired by VIA 
Technologies in 1999. The Cyrix product name is often associated with the 
latest processors offered by VIA, though these newer architectures share little 
in common with the older Cyrix platforms. 
Die Size  
A measurement of the width of internal pathways within an integrated circuit 
device, usually measured in nanometers. 
DDR SDRAM  
Acronym for double data rate synchronous dynamic random access memory. 
DDR memory technologies employ a signaling technique capable of 
transferring data along both the rising and falling edges of each clock cycle, 
thus offering a theoretical 2x improvement in memory bandwidth over 
conventional SDRAM. 
FSB  
An acronym for front-side bus. The FSB connects the processor to the 
memory and other components in a PC. 
GHz  
An acronym for gigahertz, or one billion cycles per second. One GHz is equal 
to 1000 MHz. See MHz. 
Integrated Circuit  

An electronic device composed of multiple transistor circuits, originally 
developed by Texas Instruments and Fairchild Semiconductor in the 1950s. 
Intel  
The world’s largest developer and manufacturer of personal computer 
microprocessors. Intel maintains the dominant market share across all 
platforms, and is often considered to be the leading authority in 
microprocessor design. 
ISA  
An aging bus standard that is rapidly disappearing in today’s computing 
platforms. ISA offers minimal bandwidth and is best suited for low bandwidth 
devices, such as modems or sound cards. 
Latency  
The amount of time that elapses for a process to take place, or the time delay 
involved with one component waiting for another to finish a process. 
Memory  
A device designed to store data. Primary storage is composed of a series of 
integrated circuits that hold data short term (while a PC is in operation). 
Secondary storage is composed of physical disks (hard drive, CD-ROM, etc.) 
and similar devices designed for the long-term archiving of information. 
MHz  
An acronym for megahertz. One MHz is equal to one million Hertz, or cycles 
per second. Processor clock speeds are measured in megahertz, but don’t be 
fooled: there are many other factors that determine a processor’s performance 
than the MHz speed alone. 
Microprocessor  
A logical controlling integrated circuit chip composed of multiple transistor 
pathways, generally based on a silicon substrate with aluminum or copper 
circuit interconnects. Same as processor or central processing unit (CPU). 
Multiplier  
An internal value that correlates the front-side bus speed to the operating 
speed of the microprocessor. Example: Pentium III 800e = 100 MHz FSB x 8 
Multiplier. 
Multiplier Lock  
Implemented by processor manufacturers to prevent users or dishonest 
retailers from overclocking processors through changes in the CPU multiplier 
setting. 
Nanometer  
One billionth of a meter. 
Overclock  
To operate a microprocessor at speeds beyond its original equipment 
manufacturer (OEM) rating. 
Pentium  
A 32-bit microprocessor architecture manufactured by the Intel Corporation. 
The Pentium series has undergone multiple revisions and redesigns over the 
years, so the name is more a marketing trademark than an architecture 
designation. 
PCI  
Acronym for peripheral component interconnect, a bus standard developed by 
Intel to be scalable to 66 MHz and 64 bits. Most current-generation personal 
computing architectures employ a 33 MHz, 32-bit PCI bus standard. 

RDRAM  
Acronym for rambus dynamic random access memory. Rambus memory is 
designed for extreme operating speeds up to and exceeding 800 MHz. It offers 
a substantial bandwidth advantage over original SDRAM technologies. 
SDRAM  
Acronym for synchronous dynamic random access memory. SDRAM is 
designed for high-speed operation, and thus provides consistent data flow 
between the processor and memory buses. 
Transistor  
A semiconductor device designed to archive or amplify signals, thus creating a 
logic storage and manipulation circuit. The original transistor was developed 
by Bell Labs in 1947. 
Voltage  
A measurement of a circuit’s electromotive force or potential difference. 
Wattage  
A measurement of power required for the operation of a circuit. 
Overclocking Software 
Hmonitor  
(http://www.hmonitor.com) is a real-time hardware monitoring application for 
systems featuring thermal and fan-speed sensors. Hmonitor allows for active 
monitoring. It can also alert users to potential problems associated with 
excessive heat generated through overclocking. 
SoftFSB  
(http://www.voodoofiles.com/250) is an advanced application designed to 
interface with the front-side bus clock controller from within Windows. SoftFSB 
is a valuable tool for obtaining maximized overclocking of today’s most popular 
platforms. 
WCPUID  
(http://www.h-oda.com) is a freeware application developed to analyze and 
display detailed information for current-generation processors and chipsets. 
WCPUZ  
(http://www.cpuid.com) is a freeware application that can provide information 
about most current processors. Categories of information include the following: 
processor name, vendor, core stepping, packaging, core voltage, internal 
clocks, external clocks, overclock detection, processing features, cache 
architecture, and other motherboard information. 
Benchmark Software 
MadOnion 3DMark  
(http://www.madonion.com) is the most popular 3D graphics benchmark 
available today. 3DMark offers effective system testing in both traditional and 
overclocked environments. The 3DMark 2000 v1.1 is designed for DirectX 7 
graphics accelerators, while the 3DMark 2001 is best suited for DirectX 8.1-
compatible video cards. 
SiSoftware SANDRA  
(http://www.sisoftware.co.uk) offers effective benchmarking and diagnosis for 
a multitude of system components. SANDRA is available in multiple versions, 
though the freeware edition offers all the benchmarking modules required to 
analyze overclocking performance returns and system stability. 

Ziff Davis WinBench  
(http://www.etestinglabs.com) is a popular benchmark suite designed to test 
the graphics, video, and disk subsystems under all versions of the Windows 
operating system. The latest version was released in July 2001, but the highly 
optimized WinBench99 still provides a superior testing interface compared to 
competing applications. 
Diagnostic Software 
Motherboard Monitor  
(http://mbm.livewiredev.com) is a popular Windows system tray utility that will 
display information from your motherboard’s sensor chip. Details such as fan 
speeds, processor and motherboard temperatures, and voltage, are displayed 
to the user. It is a good way to monitor your system and improve your 
tweaking and troubleshooting capabilities. 
TuffTEST #1  
(http://www.tufftest.com/OnlineResources) offers great diagnostic capabilities. 
It will help you assess any potential stability problems incurred through 
overclocking. TuffTEST builds a self-booting disk that requires no external 
operating system. As a result, this highly effective testing suite can be 
deployed across all ranges of x86 computing systems. 
Helpful Resources 
TechIMO  
(http://www.techimo.com) is the premier online community in which to discuss 
all aspects of computing technology. TechIMO consists of an informative 
group of 60,000+ users who are capable of answering even the most 
challenging of troubleshooting or overclocking questions. 
Sandpile  
(http://www.sandpile.org) is an extensive resource for those interested in the 
technical aspects of nearly any x86 computing platform. Sandpile is updated 
regularly to ensure that it contains the best-quality information. 
Ace's Hardware  
(http://www.aceshardware.com) offers a superb mix of both professional and 
enthusiast computing information. Common topics include the presentation 
and discussion of new computing technology. 
Google  
(http://www.google.com) is hands down the best search engine on the web. 
Those who operate other search engines spend their days trying to figure out 
how to be as good as Google. Google also acquired Deja news, the Usenet 
newsgroup archiving service, and they archive new newsgroup postings as 
well. Whenever you have a question, go to Google, click on the Groups tab, 
and search. You will very likely find threads discussing and solving your 
question. 
HardOCP.com's  
(http://www.hardocp.com) Kyle Bennett tells it like it is. Read no nonsense 
reviews of the latest hardware, get timely news and references to performance 
and overclocking related articles from all around the web, and participate in 
active discussion forums. 
Overclockers.com  

(http://www.overclockers.com) features timely overclocking related hardware 
reviews and a great overclocking survey database where users submit their 
own overclocking results. Use the overclocking database to see how well your 
CPU type/speed has been overclocked by other users. 
AnandTech.com  
(http://www.anandtech.com) features the very latest hardware reviews. The 
message board (http://forums.anandtech.com) has many useful forums, with 
the Hot Deals forum being this author’s favorite. 
TechTV's "The ScreenSavers"  
(http://www.thescreensavers.com) is a live daily television show hosted by Leo 
Laporte and Patrick Norton, that covers hardware, overclocking, and various 
technology subjects. The show is a lot of fun and is highly recommended for 
overclocking enthusiasts. It is broadcast live from San Francisco every 
weekday at 4pm Pacific Time, on DirectTV Channel 354, Dish Network 
Channel 191, and a wide variety of cable networks. 
Cooling and Overclocking Specialty Retailers 
Be sure to research these retailers at ResellerRatings.com before you buy: 
1COOLPC  
(http://www.1coolpc.com) offers fans for all CPU types, rounded cables, water 
cooling kits, lights and window mods, thermal compound, video card coolers. 
PCMods  
(http://www.pcmods.com) offers cases and case accessories, fans and fan 
accessories, lights and window mod kits, control and monitoring devices, hard 
drive coolers, noise reduction and sound absorption products. 
Highspeed PC  
(http://www.highspeedpc.com) offers water cooling kits, quiet power supplies, 
Athlon XP multiplier unlocking kit, high performance fans, pre-tested high-
speed DDR memory, case windows, lights and LCD mods. 
3DCOOL  
(http://www.3dcool.com) offers CPU, laptop, and monitor (display) coolers, 
chipset fans, hard drive fans, RAM fans, silent fans, cases (clear and 
aluminum), temperature monitors, round cables. 
Xoxide Modifications  
(http://www.xoxide.com) offers water cooled cases, water cooling kits, water 
cooling accessories, case lighting, CPU coolers, case fans, standard and 
modified cases. 
 

