
2

The Fiber-Optic Gyroscope
Second Edition
For a listing of recent titles in the
Artech House Applied Photonics Series,
turn to the back of this book.
The Fiber-Optic Gyroscope
Second Edition
Hervé C. Lefèvre
3

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN-13: 978-1-60807-695-6
Cover design by John Gomes
© 2014 Artech House
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this
book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have
been appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this
information. Use of a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity 
of any trademark or service mark.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
To Sophie, Charlotte, and Elliot
4

“Eppur si muove!”—Galileo Galilei
Chambre Mentale #79
Photograph by Marc Le Mené, 2000
Contents
Preface to the Second Edition
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
CHAPTER 2
5

Principle of the Fiber-Optic Gyroscope
2.1 Sagnac Effect
2.1.1 A History of Optics from Aether to Relativity
2.1.2 Sagnac Effect in a Vacuum
2.1.3 Sagnac Effect in a Medium
2.2 Active and Passive Ring Resonators
2.2.1 Ring-Laser Gyroscope (RLG)
2.2.2 Resonant Fiber-Optic Gyroscope (R-FOG)
2.3 Passive Fiber-Ring Interferometer
2.3.1 Principle of the Interferometric Fiber-Optic Gyroscope (I-FOG)
2.3.2 Theoretical Sensitivity of the I-FOG
2.3.3 Noise, Drift, and Scale Factor
2.3.4 Evaluation of Noise and Drift by Allan Variance (or Allan
Deviation)
2.3.5 Bandwidth
References
CHAPTER 3
Reciprocity of a Fiber Ring Interferometer
3.1 Principle of Reciprocity
3.1.1 Single-Mode Reciprocity of Wave Propagation
3.1.2 Reciprocal Behavior of a Beam Splitter
3.2 Minimum Configuration of a Ring Fiber Interferometer
3.2.1 Reciprocal Configuration
3.2.2 Reciprocal Biasing Modulation-Demodulation
3.2.3 Proper (or Eigen) Frequency
3.3 Reciprocity with All-Guided Schemes
3.3.1 Evanescent-Field Coupler (or X-Coupler or Four-Port Coupler)
3.3.2 Y-Junction
3.3.3 All-Fiber Approach
3.3.4 Hybrid Architectures with Integrated Optics: Y-Coupler
Configuration
3.4 Problem of Polarization Reciprocity
3.4.1 Rejection Requirement with Ordinary Single-Mode Fiber
3.4.2 Use of Polarization-Maintaining (PM) Fiber
3.4.3 Use of Depolarizer
3.4.4 Use of an Unpolarized Source
References
6

CHAPTER 4
Backreflection and Backscattering
4.1 Problem of Backreflection
4.1.1 Reduction of Backreflection with Slant Interfaces
4.1.2 Influence of Source Coherence
4.2 Problem of Backscattering
4.2.1 Coherent Backscattering
4.2.2 Use of a Broadband Source
4.2.3 Evaluation of the Residual Rayleigh Backscattering Noise
References
CHAPTER 5
Analysis of Polarization Nonreciprocities with Broadband Source
and High-Birefringence Polarization-Maintaining Fiber
5.1 Depolarization Effect in High-Birefringence Polarization-Maintaining
Fibers
5.2 Analysis of Polarization Nonreciprocities in a Fiber Gyroscope Using
an All-Polarization-Maintaining Waveguide Configuration
5.2.1 Intensity-Type Effects
5.2.2 Comment About Length of Depolarization Ld Versus Length of
Polarization Correlation Lpc
5.2.3 Amplitude-Type Effects
5.3 Use of a Depolarizer
5.4 Testing with Optical Coherence Domain Polarimetry (OCDP)
5.4.1 OCDP Based on Path-Matched White-Light Interferometry
5.4.2 OCDP Using Optical Spectrum Analysis
References
CHAPTER 6
Time Transience-Related Nonreciprocal Effects
6.1 Effect of Temperature Transience: The Shupe Effect
6.2 Symmetrical Windings
6.3 Stress-Induced T-Dot Effect
6.4 Basics of Heat Diffusion and Temporal Signature of the Shupe and T-
Dot Effects
6.5 Effect of Acoustic Noise and Vibration
References
CHAPTER 7
7

Truly Nonreciprocal Effects
7.1 Magneto-Optic Faraday Effect
7.2 Transverse Magneto-Optic Effect
7.3 Nonlinear Kerr Effect
References
CHAPTER 8
Scale Factor Linearity and Accuracy
8.1 Problem of Scale Factor Linearity and Accuracy
8.2 Closed-Loop Operation Methods to Linearize the Scale Factor
8.2.1 Use of a Frequency Shift
8.2.2 Use of an Analog Phase Ramp (or Serrodyne Modulation)
8.2.3 Use of a Digital Phase Ramp
8.2.4 All-Digital Closed-Loop Processing Method
8.2.5 Control of the Gain of the Modulation Chain with Four-State
Modulation
8.2.6 Potential Spurious Lock-In (or Deadband) Effect
8.3 Scale Factor Accuracy
8.3.1 Problem of Scale Factor Accuracy
8.3.2 Wavelength Dependence of an Interferometer Response with a
Broadband Source
8.3.3 Effect of Phase Modulation
8.3.4 Wavelength Control Schemes
8.3.5 Mean Wavelength Change with a Parasitic Interferometer or
Polarimeter
References
CHAPTER 9
Recapitulation of the Optimal Operating Conditions and
Technologies of the I-FOG
9.1 Optimal Operating Conditions
9.2 Broadband Source
9.2.1 Superluminescent Diode
9.2.2 Rare-Earth Doped Fiber ASE Sources
9.2.3 Excess RIN Compensation Techniques
9.3 Sensing Coil
9.4 The Heart of the Interferometer
9.5 Detector and Processing Electronics
8

References
CHAPTER 10
Alternative Approaches for the I-FOG
10.1 Alternative Optical Configurations
10.2 Alternative Signal Processing Schemes
10.2.1 Open-Loop Scheme with Use of Multiple Harmonics
10.2.2 Second Harmonic Feedback
10.2.3 Gated Phase Modulation Feedback
10.2.4 Heterodyne and Pseudo-Heterodyne Schemes
10.2.5 Beat Detection with Phase Ramp Feedback
10.2.6 Dual-Phase Ramp Feedback
10.3 Extended Dynamic Range with Multiple Wavelength Source
References
CHAPTER 11
Resonant Fiber-Optic Gyroscope (R-FOG)
11.1 Principle of Operation of an All-Fiber Ring Cavity
11.2 Signal Processing Method
11.3 Reciprocity of a Ring Fiber Cavity
11.3.1 Introduction
11.3.2 Basic Reciprocity Within the Ring Resonator
11.3.3 Excitation and Detection of Resonances in a Ring Resonator
11.4 Other Parasitic Effects in the R-FOG
Acknowledgments
References
CHAPTER 12
Conclusions
12.1 The State of Development and Expectations in 1993
12.2 The Present State of the Art, Two Decades Later
12.2.1 FOG Versus RLG
12.2.2 FOG Manufacturers
12.3 Trends for the Future and Concluding Remarks
References
APPENDIX A
Fundamentals of Optics for the Fiber Gyroscope
A.1 Basic Parameters of an Optical Wave: Wavelength, Frequency, and
9

Power
A.2 Spontaneous Emission, Stimulated Emission, and Related Noises
A.2.1 Fundamental Photon Noise
A.2.2 Spontaneous Emission and Excess Relative Intensity Noise
(Excess RIN)
A.2.3 Resonant Stimulated Emission in a Laser Source
A.2.4 Amplified Spontaneous Emission (ASE)
A.3 Propagation Equation in a Vacuum
A.4 State of Polarization of an Optical Wave
A.5 Propagation in a Dielectric Medium
A.5.1 Index of Refraction
A.5.2 Chromatic Dispersion, Group Velocity, and Group Velocity
Dispersion
A.5.3 E and B, or E and H?
A.6 Dielectric Interface
A.6.1 Refraction, Partial Reflection, and Total Internal Reflection
A.6.2 Dielectric Waveguidance
A.7 Geometrical Optics
A.7.1 Rays and Phase Wavefronts
A.7.2 Plane Mirror and Beam Splitter
A.7.3 Lenses
A.8 Interferences
A.8.1 Principle of Two-Wave Interferometry
A.8.2 Most Common Two-Wave Interferometers: Michelson and
Mach-Zehnder Interferometers, Young Double-Slit
A.8.3 Channeled Spectral Response of a Two-Wave Interferometer
A.9 Multiple-Wave Interferences
A.9.1 Fabry-Perot Interferometer
A.9.2 Ring Resonant Cavity
A.9.3 Multilayer Dielectric Mirror and Bragg Reflector
A.9.4 Bulk-Optic Diffraction Grating
A.10 Diffraction
A.10.1 Fresnel Diffraction and Fraunhofer Diffraction
A.10.2 Knife-Edge Fresnel Diffraction
A.11 Gaussian Beam
A.12 Coherence
A.12.1 Basics of Coherence
A.12.2 Mathematical Derivation of Temporal Coherence
10

A.12.3 The Concept of a Wave Train
A.12.4 The Case of an Asymmetrical Spectrum
A.12.5 The Case of Propagation in a Dispersive Medium
A.13 Birefringence
A.13.1 Birefringence Index Difference
A.13.2 Change of Polarization with Birefringence
A.13.3 Interference with Birefringence
A.14 Optical Spectrum Analysis
Reference
Selected Bibliography
APPENDIX B
Fundamentals of Fiber Optics for the Fiber Gyroscope
B.1 Main Characteristics of a Single-Mode Optical Fiber
B.1.1 Attenuation of a Silica Fiber
B.1.2 Gaussian Profile of the Fundamental Mode
B.1.3 Beat Length and h Parameter of a PM Fiber
B.1.4 Protective Coating
B.1.5 Temperature Dependence of Propagation in a PM Fiber
B.2 Discrete Modal Guidance in a Step-Index Fiber
B.3 Guidance in a Single-Mode (SM) Fiber
B.3.1 Amplitude Distribution of the Fundamental LP01 Mode
B.3.2 Equivalent Index neq and Phase Velocity vϕ of the Fundamental
LP01 Mode
B.3.3 Group Index ng of the Fundamental LP01 Mode
B.3.4 Case of a Parabolic Index Profile
B.3.5 Modes of a Few-Mode Fiber
B.4 Coupling in a Single-Mode Fiber and Its Loss Mechanisms
B.4.1 Free-Space Coupling
B.4.2 Misalignment Coupling Losses
B.4.3 Mode-Diameter Mismatch Loss of LP01 Mode
B.4.4 Mode Size Mismatch Loss of LP11 and LP21 Modes
B.5 Birefringence in a Single-Mode Fiber
B.5.1 Shape-Induced Linear Birefringence
B.5.2 Stress-Induced Linear and Circular Birefringence
B.5.3 Combination of Linear and Circular Birefringence Effects
B.6 Polarization-Maintaining (PM) Fibers
B.6.1 Principle of Conservation of Polarization
11

B.6.2 Residual Polarization Crossed-Coupling
B.6.3 Depolarization of Crossed-Coupling with a Broadband Source
B.6.4 Polarization Mode Dispersion (PMD)
B.6.5 Polarizing (PZ) Fiber
B.7 All-Fiber Components
B.7.1 Evanescent-Field Coupler and Wavelength Multiplexer
B.7.2 Piezoelectric Phase Modulator
B.7.3 Polarization Controller
B.7.4 Lyot Depolarizer
B.7.5 Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG)
B.8 Pigtailed Bulk-Optic Components
B.8.1 General Principle
B.8.2 Optical Isolator
B.8.3 Optical Circulator
B.9 Rare-Earth-Doped Amplifying Fiber
B.10 Microstructured Optical Fiber (MOF)
B.11 Nonlinear Effects in Optical Fibers
Selected Bibliography
APPENDIX C
Fundamentals of Integrated Optics for the Fibergyroscope
C.1 Principle and Basic Functions of LiNbO3 Integrated Optics
C.1.1 Channel Waveguide
C.1.2 Coupling Between an Optical Fiber and an Integrated-Optic
Waveguide
C.1.3 Fundamental Mode Profile and Equivalence with an LP11 Fiber
Mode
C.1.4 Mismatch Coupling Attenuation Between a Fiber and a
Waveguide
C.1.5 Low-Driving-Voltage Phase Modulator
C.1.6 Beam Splitting
C.1.7 Polarization Rejection and Birefringence-Induced Depolarization
C.2 Ti-Indiffused LiNbO3 Integrated Optics
C.2.1 Ti-Indiffused Channel Waveguide
C.2.2 Phase Modulation and Metallic-Overlay Polarizer with Ti-
Indiffused Waveguide
C.3 Proton-Exchanged LiNbO3 Integrated Optics
C.3.1 Single-Polarization Propagation
12

C.3.2 Phase Modulation in Proton-Exchanged Waveguide
C.3.3 Theoretical Polarization Rejection of a Proton-Exchanged
LiNbO3 Circuit
C.3.4 Practical Polarization Rejection of Proton-Exchanged LiNbO3
Circuit
C.3.5 Improved Polarization Rejection with Absorbing Grooves
C.3.6 Spurious Intensity Modulation
Selected Bibliography
APPENDIX D
Electromagnetic Theory of the Relativistic Sagnac Effect
D.1 Special Relativity and Electromagnetism
D.2 Electromagnetism in a Rotating Frame
D.3 Case of a Rotating Toroidal Dielectric Waveguide
Selected Bibliography
APPENDIX E
Basics of Inertial Navigation
E.1 Introduction
E.2 Inertial Sensors
E.2.1 Accelerometers (Acceleration Sensors)
E.2.2 Gyroscopes (Rotation Rate Sensors)
E.2.3 Classification of the Inertial Sensor Performance
E.3 Navigation Computation
E.3.1 A Bit of Geodesy
E.3.2 Reference Frames
E.3.3 Orientation, Velocity, and Position Computation
E.3.4 Altitude Computation
E.4 Attitude and Heading Initialization
E.4.1 Attitude Initialization
E.4.2 Heading Initialization with Gyrocompassing
E.5 Velocity and Position Initialization
E.6 Orders of Magnitude to Remember
Selected Bibliography
List of Abbreviations
List of Symbols
About the Author
13

Preface to the First Edition
Fifteen years of research and development have established the potential
of the fiber-optic gyroscope, which is now considered a privileged
technology for future applications of inertial guidance and control. Its
“solid-state” configuration brings crucial advantages over previous
approaches using spinning wheels or gas ring lasers.
Interest in the fiber-optic gyroscope is growing rapidly in many
companies around the world. Development, production, and system
engineers are now getting involved, in addition to the scientific and
technological communities that have conducted the research. Therefore,
this a good time to present a detailed description of the analysis thas has
been carried out to achieve a practical device. Despite the relative
simplicity of the final scheme, the fiber-optic gyro is a sophisticated
instrument with many subtle error sources which must be understood and
controlled. The subject requires a multidisciplinary approach involving
physics guided optics, opto-electronic technology, signal processing theory,
and electronic design. The variety of topics involved is a good example of
a thorough system analysis, and the study of the fiber gyro would be a
very formative theoretical and experimental program for graduate students
in fiber optics and opto-electronics.
To help the reader, I have included detailed appendixes that provide
information on optics, single-mode fiber optics, and integrated optics
necessary for understanding the fiber gyro, and the vocabulary for
communicating with opto-electronic component designers. For the
newcomer to the field, this material will help him or her avoid having to go
through general text books to find specific basics. However, based on my
own experience preparing these basics, the appendixes could also be a
useful review for those already involved in the subject area. I have also
tried (except in Appendix 4) to avoid as much cumbersome mathematical
calculations and formulae as possible. The many figures act as visual aids
to simplify the explanations and help the reader grasp the important ideas
dictating the design rules.
Because this is a single-author book, the analysis may be slightly
influenced by my personal views. However, I have chosen to share with
the reader the results of my fifteen years of experience, and I have clearly
14

indicated my preferences instead of giving a strictly impartial description,
which would have resulted in a dreariness this subject does not deserve.
This book is based on research experience that has been shared with
scientists who, like me, have been fascinated by the technical serendipity
of the device. I owe a very special tribute to H.J. Arditty of Photonetics
for our continuous fruitful collaboration. My postdoctoral scholarship at
Stanford University was an essential experience, marked by the profound
influence of Professor H.J. Shaw. I would also like to acknowledge the
crucial contributions of M. Papuchon and G. Pircher of Thomson-CSF,
R.A. Bergh, now with Fibernetics, and Ph. Martin and Ph. Graindorge of
Photonetics. It is important to recall that this research has been carried out
with very open exchanges within the international scientific community,
which may be one reason for its success. Finally, the efficiency of C.
Hervé was essential in the preparation of the manuscript.
Hervé C. Lefèvre
Paris, France
March 1992
Preface to the Second Edition
Two decades after the first edition of this book in the early 1990s, it
seemed timely to prepare a revised version. If the basic design rules of the
fiber-optic gyroscope (often abbreviated FOG) have remained unchanged,
the technology has matured, and the expectations presented in the first
edition have been largely exceeded. Navigation-grade bias stability
(0.01°/hour) was seen as the goal, when today strategic grade looks
accessible with a bias better than 0.0001°/hour. The technical serendipity
of the fibergyro, which was outlined early on, is clearly confirmed.
This revised edition is enlarged by 50%, and about 300 figures ease the
understanding of this multidisciplinary system.
I would like to recall the very special tribute I owe to Hervé J. Arditty,
the president of iXCore (the parent company of iXBlue), for our
continuous fruitful collaboration and the profound influence of the late
Professor H. John Shaw during my postdoctoral scholarship at Stanford
University in the early 1980s.
15

I would like also to outline the crucial contribution of Thierry Gaiffe,
who led the development of iXSea, the origin of iXBlue, during the 2000s.
This revised edition is the result of the scientific interaction with my
R&D colleagues of the Inertial Division and the Photonic Division of
iXBlue: Benoît Cadier, Cédric Moluçon, Eric Ducloux, Frédéric Guattari,
Henri Porte, Jean-Jacques Bonnefois, Jérôme Hauden, Joachin Honthaas,
Maxime Rattier, Pascal Simonpiétri, Pham Van Doug, Robert Blondeau,
Sébastien Ferrand, Thierry Robin, and Thomas Villedieu.
Finally, I wish to thank Glen Sanders, of Honeywell, who revised
Chapter 11, and Yves Paturel, of iXBlue, who prepared the new Appendix
E. The efficiency of Chantal Allano was also essential for the preparation
of the revised manuscript.
Hervé C. Lefèvre
Paris, France
September 2014
16

CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The laws of mechanics show that an observer kept locked up inside a
black box in uniform linear translation has no way to know his or her
movement. However, it is possible to detect an acceleration or a rotation.
Precise measurements may be performed with mechanical accelerometers
and gyroscopes. This is the basis of inertial guidance and navigation.
Knowing the initial orientation and position of the vehicle, the
(mathematic) 
integration 
of 
the 
acceleration 
and 
rotation 
rate
measurements yields the attitude and the trajectory of the vehicle. Such
inertial techniques are completely autonomous and need no external
reference: they do not suffer from any shadow effect nor jamming. For
nearly a century, they have been a key technology in aeronautics, naval,
terrestrial, and space systems for civilian and military applications.
In 1913, Sagnac [1, 2] demonstrated experimentally that it is also
possible to detect rotation with respect to inertial space with an optical
system that has no moving part. He used a ring interferometer and showed
that 
rotation 
induces 
a 
phase 
difference 
between 
the 
two
counterpropagating paths. However, the original setup was far from a
practical rotation rate sensor, because of its very limited sensitivity. In
1925, Michelson and Gale [3] were able to measure Earth rotation with a
gigantic ring interferometer of almost 2 km in perimeter to increase the
sensitivity, but the Sagnac effect has remained a rarely observed physic
curiosity for many decades, because it was not possible to get usable
performance from a reasonably compact device.
This possibility of getting a gyroscope without moving parts to replace
the spinning wheel mechanical gyro was indeed very attractive, and in
1962 Rosenthal proposed to enhance the sensitivity with a ring laser cavity
[4] where the counterpropagating waves recirculate many times along the
closed resonant path instead of once in the original Sagnac interferometer,
and this was first demonstrated by Macek and Davis [5] in 1963. Entering
the market in the early 1980s [6, 7], ring laser gyro (RLG) technology has
reached its full maturity and is nowadays the dominant gyroscope
technology for inertial guidance and navigation.
17

However, because of the huge technological effort devoted to the
development of low-loss optical fibers and solid-state semiconductor light
sources and detectors for telecommunication applications, it has become
possible to use a multiturn optical-fiber coil instead of a ring laser to
enhance the Sagnac effect by multiple recirculation. Proposed early in
1967 by Pircher and Hepner [8] and demonstrated experimentally by Vali
and Shorthill in 1976 [9], the fiber-optic gyroscope (FOG) has since
attracted a lot interest because it provides unique advantages due to its
solid-state configuration.
The first decade of research and development generated 770
publications devoted to the subject [10], and the most significant
contributions were compiled in a single SPIE “Milestone” volume in 1989
[11], which is very convenient when working in this field. The proceedings
of the four “anniversary” conferences [12–15] and two special conference
sessions [16, 17] specifically dedicated to the subject are also a good
indication of the progress of the technology over nearly 40 years.
A critical step was passed in the early 1990s when several companies
started industrial production [14]. At that stage, it seemed useful to present
a thorough analysis of the results of the R&D phase with the first edition
of this book in 1993, which emphasized the concepts that had emerged as
the preferred solutions. The main applications were foreseen in the
medium accuracy range (bias drift from 0.1°/h to 10°/h), but there were
also expectations to become a significant contender in the high-accuracy
navigation-grade domain (bias drift below 0.01°/h) despite the fact that the
RLG was, and still is, a tough competitor.
Today, two decades later, one may say that expectations have been
fulfilled and even exceeded. Nearly 500,000 FOG axes have been
produced, taking an estimated 40% share of the tactical-grade market
(1°/h to 10°/h), versus 30% for the RLG; about 30% of the intermediate-
grade market (0.01°/h to 1°/h), versus 50% for the RLG; and entering,
with about a 20% share, the high-accuracy navigation-grade market
(0.001°/h to 0.01°/h) where the RLG is still clearly dominant with 65%.
However, the FOG and the RLG have only a small share (less than 10%)
of the industrial-grade market (10°/h to 100°/h) where they face the
rapidly developing microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology
that offers high compactness and very low cost.
Over the years, the specifications of the fiber-gyro have continuously
improved, and they even get to strategic-grade performance (<0.001°/h)
18

that is barely reachable for RLG technology. To the question of whether
the fiber-optic gyroscope is actually better than the ring-laser gyroscope
[18], the answer is yes. The dream of a strap-down navigation system
getting to a performance of a nautical mile per month with an FOG bias
stability of 10-5°/h becomes accessible [19].
These progresses have been made possible by an important engineering
effort over the years, but also because the fiber-gyro has continued to take
advantage of the progress of optical-fiber communications. As one
example, the erbium-doped fiber ASE source which is a quasi-ideal source
for the FOG, is derived from the erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA)
that revolutionized optical-fiber communications in the 1990s [20] and is
produced in huge quantities. Pump laser diode, isolators, and even fusion
splicers would not have been developed just for the FOG.
This revised edition does incorporate the new developments over these
last two decades, but also tries to further simplify the presentation. For
example, Appendix A on the fundamentals of optics does not start at once
with Maxwell’s equations anymore, but with a section presenting the basic
parameters of an optical wave: wavelength, frequency, and power.
Appendix B on the fundamentals of fiber-optics begins now with a section
summarizing the main characteristics of a single-mode fiber and not with
overlap integrals or the concept of eigenvectors in a multimode fiber.
Chapter 2 describes the general principle of optical gyros (RLG, R-
FOG, and I-FOG) that are all based on a recirculating Sagnac effect and
have similar theoretical performance. Some historical background of this
Sagnac effect has been added and shows the important contribution of von
Laue to clarify what should be called the Sagnac-Laue effect. It also
explained the Fresnel-Fizeau drag effect that limits the bias performance of
the laser gyro. It is why the fiber gyro has the potential to surpass it by
one to two orders of magnitude. Finally, a new section describes Allan
variance, which is used to test bias noise and drift of inertial sensors.
Chapter 3 analyzes the fundamental concept of single-mode reciprocity
and how it is implemented in a fiber gyro. The importance of the
reciprocal biasing modulation-demodulation scheme at the proper (or
eigen) frequency of the sensing coil acting as a delay-line filter is outlined,
as well as the difficult requirement on the rejection of the polarizer.
Chapter 4 deals with the first noise sources that were encountered,
backreflection and backscattering, and shows the importance of a
broadband source that eliminates these parasitic effects because of its low
19

temporal coherence.
Chapter 5 details the difficult question of reciprocity for the polarization
modes, and the way it is solved is by combining conservation of
polarization with PM (polarization maintaining) fiber and depolarization
brought by the birefringence of components (PM fiber and integrated-optic
circuit) and the low temporal coherence of broadband sources. It also
describes optical coherence domain polarimetry (OCDP), which was used
very early to understand this problem of polarization nonreciprocity and
can be performed easily today with the new tools of optical spectrum
analysis developed for the telecom industry.
Chapter 6 presents the parasitic effect a fiber gyro may face with
temperature transience: the famous Shupe effect often used as a critic of
FOG technology by its competitors. It is outlined that rather than a strict
Shupe effect that is actually small, temperature-transience error is related
to temperature-induced stresses in the coil. However, it can be reduced
and modeled to get to strategic-grade performance (better than 0.001°/h),
even if it is clearly the last challenge to solve to obtain an ultimate
performance that no other technology could surpass.
Chapter 7 analyzes the magneto-optic Faraday effect and the nonlinear
Kerr effect, which yield true nonreciprocities similar to the Sagnac effect.
A section has been added about an additional transverse magneto-optic
effect about 10 times smaller than the Faraday effect, which has a
longitudinal dependence.
Chapter 8 is concerned with the crucial problem of scale factor linearity
and accuracy, which is preferably solved with closed-loop processing using
digital phase-ramp feedback. A new section describes a four-state
modulation yielding an efficient control of the gain of the feedback
modulation chain. The delicate problem of mean wavelength control is
also emphasized.
Chapter 9 recapitulates the optimal operating conditions and
technologies for the I-FOG and I did not resist adding photographs of early
breadboards and prototypes to remember where we are coming from. A
new section treats compensation techniques of the excess relative intensity
noise (RIN) inherent in the broadband light source used to reduce bias
noise and drift.
Chapter 10 briefly discusses the alternative approaches that have been
proposed.
Chapter 11 details the advancement of R&D of the competing resonant
20

approach, the R-FOG, where a passive resonant ring cavity is used instead
of the two-wave interferometer of the I-FOG. This chapter was revised by
my long-term colleague and friend, Dr. Glen Sanders from Honeywell,
who is one of the world-class experts in this domain.
Finally, Chapter 12 concludes with the present state of the art and
future trends for the FOG, motivating at the least.
Appendixes A, B, and C detail the fundamentals of optics, fiber optics,
and integrated optics that are important to understand the design rules of
the fiber gyro. They have been enlarged by almost 100% in this revised
edition, based on my own experience about what was missing while
training new young scientists starting to work on the subject. They include
also information about components or functions that were not mature, not
to say unknown, two decades ago: rare-earth-doped amplifying fiber, fiber
Bragg grating, isolator, circulator, and microstructured fiber.
Appendix D on the electromagnetic theory of the relativistic Sagnac
effect has not changed from the earlier edition and confirms that the
Sagnac effect is a pure temporal delay independent of matter, which is
actually very important.
Appendix E, prepared by Dr. Yves Paturel, my colleague at iXBlue,
presents the basics of inertial guidance and navigation techniques, to
understand how a gyro is used in practical applications: attitude and
heading reference systems (AHRS), gyrocompassing, and inertial
navigation systems (INS).
References
[1] Sagnac, G., “L’éther lumineux démontré par l’effet du vent relatif d’éther dans un
interféromètre en rotation uniforme,” Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Sciences,
Vol. 95, 1913, pp. 708–710.
[2] Sagnac, G., “Sur la preuve de la réalité de l’éther lumineux par l’expérience de
l’interférographe tournant,” Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, Vol. 95,
1913, pp. 1410–1413.
[3] Michelson, A. A., and H. G. Gale, “The effect of the Earth’s rotation on the velocity of
light” Journal of Astrophysics, Vol. 61, 1925, p. 401.
[4] Rosenthal, A. H., “Regenerative Circulatory Multiple Beam Interferometry for the
Study of Light Propagation Effects,” J.O.S.A., Vol. 52, 1962, pp. 1143–1148.
[5] Macek, W. M., and D. T. M. Davis, “Rotation-Rate Sensing with Travelling-Wave Ring
Lasers,” Applied Physics Letters, Vol. 2, 1963, pp. 67–68.
[6] Ezekiel, S., and G. E. Knausenberger, (eds.), “Laser Inertial Rotation Sensors,” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 157, 1978.
21

[7] Chow, W. W., et al., “The Ring Laser Gyro,” Review of Modern Physics, Vol. 57, 1985,
p. 61.
[8] Pircher, G., and G. Hepner, “Perfectionnements aux dispositifs du type gyromètre
interféromètrique à laser,” French patent 1.563.720, 1967.
[9] Vali, V., and R. W. Shorthill, “Fiber Ring Interferometer,” Applied Optics, Vol. 15, 1976,
pp. 1099–1100.
[10] Smith, R. B., “Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes 1991: A Bibliography of Published Literature,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 464–503.
[11] Smith, R. B., (ed.), “Selected Papers on Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes,” SPIE Milestone
Series, Vol. MS8, 1989.
[12] Ezekiel, S., and H. J. Arditty, (eds.), “Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensors and Related
Technologies,” Proceedings of the First International Conference, Springer Series
in Optical Sciences, Vol. 32, 1981.
[13] Udd, E., (ed.), “Fiber Optic Gyros: 10th Anniversary Conference,” SPIE Proceedings,
Vol. 719, 1986.
[14] Ezekiel, S., and E. Udd, (eds.), “Fiber Optic Gyros: 15th Anniversary Conference,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991.
[15] Udd, E., H. C. Lefèvre, and K. Hotate, eds., “Fiber Optic Gyros: 20th Anniversary
Conference,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 2837, 1996.
[16] Sanders, G., chair, “Fiber Optic Gyros: 30th Anniversary Symposium,” Proceedings of
OFS 18 Conference, Sessions MA-MC and MD, Cancun, Mexico, 2006.
[17] Sanders, G., chair, “Fiber Optic Gyros: 35th Anniversary Workshop,” SPIE
Proceedings OFS 22 Conference, Beijing, China, Vol. 8421, 2012.
[18] Lefèvre, H. C., ‘The Fiber-Optic Gyroscope: Actually Better Than the Ring-Laser
Gyroscope?” Fiber Optic Gyros 35th Anniversary Workshop, OFS 22 Conference,
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 8421, Paper 842104, 2012.
[19] Paturel, Y., et al., “One Nautical Mile per Month FOG-Based Strapdown Inertial
Navigation System: A Dream Already within Reach ?” ISSN 2013 Conference, Saint
Petersburg, Gyroscopy and Navigation, Vol. 5, No. 1, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[20] Desurvire, E., Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifier, New York: Wiley-Interscience, 2002.
Introduction
Introduction
22

CHAPTER 2
Principle of the Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope
2.1 Sagnac Effect
2.1.1 A History of Optics from Aether to Relativity
If Huygens proposed in the seventeenth century a wave theory of light,
Newton imposed his views of a corpuscular theory in the early eighteenth
century. It is only in the early nineteenth century that Young’s double-slit
experiment reopened the wave theory, knowing that it was not easily
admitted; you did not contradict Newton. It required the exceptional
quality of the theoretical and experimental work of Fresnel to convince the
physicist community.
However, for the minds of that time, a wave needed some kind of
propagation medium, as for acoustic waves. It was called “luminiferous
aether,” and light was seen as propagating at a constant velocity c with
respect to this fixed aether.
Even when Maxwell showed in 1864 the electromagnetic nature of light
wave, Aether was not questioned. It required the famous Michelson and
Morley experiment in 1887 to have a clear demonstration that the concept
of aether should be revised, and this yielded, in 1905, the special theory of
relativity, when, based on earlier theoretical works of Lorentz, Poincaré,
Planck, and Minkowsky, Einstein abandoned the concept of aether and
stated that light is propagating at the same velocity c in any inertial frame
of reference in linear translation, despite its own velocity.
This revolutionary conceptual leap was very difficult to admit, and
Sagnac’s experiment, the base of present optical gyroscopes, was actually
performed to demonstrate that aether did exist as clearly stated in the title
of his publication, “The Luminiferous Aether Demonstrated by the Effect
of the Relative Wind of Aether in an Interferometer in Uniform Rotation”
[1, 2].
As it will be detailed later, Sagnac’s experiment, which takes place in a
vacuum (actually in air, but it can be considered as in a vacuum), can be
23

either explained by the relativity theory or by the classical aether theory,
and does not allow one to demonstrate which theory is right or wrong. It
was explained clearly by von Laue in 1911 [3], two years before Sagnac’s
publication, and Sagnac effect should perhaps be renamed as the Sagnac-
Laue effect.
Another important point of the aether theory was the hypothesis made
by Fresnel in 1818 of the drag of aether by matter that was demonstrated
experimentally by Fizeau in 1851 [4]. The velocity v of a wave that
propagates in a medium of index n that moves at a speed vm is not c/n
anymore but:
 (2.1)
This Fresnel-Fizeau drag effect was explained by von Laue in 1907 [5]
as resulting from the law of addition of speeds of special relativity:
 (2.2)
where v1 is the speed of a mobile in a frame moving at v2 with respect to
the rest frame, and v is the speed of this mobile in this rest frame. One
sees that (2.2) yields (2.1) to the first order, considering v1 = c/n, v2 =
vm, and vm << c. The Fresnel-Fizeau drag effect is actually a relativistic
effect.
We shall see later that the Sagnac effect does not depend on the index
of refraction of the propagation medium as it was stated by von Laue [6]
as early as in 1920, and as it is clearly experienced in a fiber gyroscope.
If the Sagnac effect in a vacuum can be explained by the aether theory,
the Sagnac effect in a medium is related to Fresnel-Fizeau drag effect and
is then also a relativistic effect.
2.1.2 Sagnac Effect in a Vacuum
The fiber-optic gyroscope (FOG) is based on the Sagnac effect, which
produces a phase difference ∆ΦR proportional to the rotation rate Ω in a
ring interferometer [1, 2]. Sagnac’s original setup was composed of a
collimated source and a beam-splitting plate to separate the input beam
into two waves that propagate in opposite directions along a closed path
24

defined by mirrors (Figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1 The original Sagnac setup [1, 2] of a ring interferometer to demonstrate
sensitivity to rotation rate (S stands for surface, which means “area” in French).
A pattern of straight interference fringes was obtained with a slight
misalignment of one mirror as explained in Section A.8.2, and a lateral
shift of the fringe pattern was observed as the whole system was rotated.
This fringe shift corresponds to an additional phase difference ∆ΦR
between the two counterpropagating waves, depending on the area A
enclosed by the path and the angular frequency ω:
 (2.3)
Following von Laue (Figure 2.2) [3], this can be explained by
considering a regular polygonal path M0M1 … MN–1M0. At rest, both
opposite paths are equal, but, in rotation around the center, the co-rotating
path is increased to M0M1′K MN–1′MN′ and the counter-rotating path is
decreased to M0M1″K MN–1″MN″ (Figure 2.3). As a matter of fact, for an
observer in the inertial rest frame of reference, the points Mi move on a
circle of radius R, and light propagates along polygon sides Mi′Mi+1′ or Mi
″Mi+1″ instead of MiMi+1.
25

Figure 2.2 Explanation of the Sagnac effect in the von Laue publication of 1911 [3].
Figure 2.3 Path change in a ring interferometer with a regular polygonal path: (a) at
rest; (b) co-rotating path; and (c) counter-rotating path.
In particular, the first side of the co-rotating polygonal path becomes
M0M1′ (Figure 2.4). Using 2θ to represent the angle M0OM1, δθ to
represent the angle M0OM1′, LM to represent the length M0M1, and δLM
to represent the path length increase M0M1′ − M0M1, there are:
 (2.4)
26

Figure 2.4 Geometrical analysis of the Sagnac effect along one side of a polygonal
path.
This angle δθ is, to the first order, the angle of rotation during the
propagation between M0 and M1:
 (2.5)
and since LM = 2Rsinθ, and the area of the triangle M0OM1 is At =
(Rsinθ)(Rcosθ), this yields:
 (2.6)
The phenomenon is observed in the rest frame, where light propagates
always at velocity c; therefore, the path increase δLM corresponds to an
increase δt+ of the propagation time:
 (2.7)
There is this same increase for each side of the polygon and the
opposite variation δt– = −δt+ in the counter-rotating direction. The
difference ∆tR of propagation time between the two opposite closed paths
in a vacuum is then:
 (2.8)
where ∑At is the sum of all the triangular areas (i.e., the whole enclosed
area A). Measured in an interferometer, this time difference yields the
phase difference:
 (2.9)
where ω is the angular frequency of the wave. It can be shown that this
result is very general and can be extended to any axis of rotation and to
any closed path, even if they are not contained in a plane, using the scalar
product A ⋅ Ω:
27

 (2.10)
 (2.11)
where Ω is the rotation rate vector and A is the equivalent area vector of
the closed path defined in terms of the line integral:
 (2.12)
where r is the radial coordinate vector. The Sagnac effect appears as the
flux of the rotation vector Ω through the closed path of the equivalent area
vector A.
To get a simple understanding of the Sagnac effect, it is possible to
consider the case of an “ideal” circular path [7, 8], which would be the
limit of a polygonal path with an infinite number of sides. At rest, light
entering the system is divided into two counterpropagating waves which
return in phase after having traveled at the same velocity c along the same
path in opposite directions [Figure 2.5(a)].
Figure 2.5 Sagnac effect in a vacuum considering an “ideal” circular path: (a) system
at rest; and (b) system rotating.
Now, when the interferometer is rotating, an observer at rest in the
inertial frame of reference sees the light entering the interferometer at
point M [Figure 2.5(b)] and still traveling with the same vacuum velocity c
in opposite directions; however, during the transit time tv through the loop,
the beam splitter has moved to M′, and our observer sees that the co-
rotating wave has had to propagate over a path longer than one turn, while
the counter-rotating one has had to propagate over less than one turn. This
path difference 2∆lv can be measured by interferometric means.
This explanation is straightforward, but we must not forget the
28

fundamental point: this is observed in the inertial frame but still observed
in the rotating frame, because both events (returns of the co-rotating and
counter-rotating waves onto the beamsplitter) take place at the same point,
and the principle of causality can be applied: if two events take place at the
same point in space, their difference of time of occurrence is conserved
(to the first order in v/c) in any frame of reference. It is actually interesting
to compare the Sagnac effect with the well-known problem of relativistic
kinematics, which explains that simultaneity of events is not an absolute
notion.
Let us consider a system composed of a source S placed at equal
distance from two mirrors M1 and M2 [Figure 2.6(a)]. Light is emitted by
the source in opposite directions, and, after reflection, both waves return
to the source at the same time. Now, if the system moves laterally [Figure
2.6(b)], an observer in the “laboratory” frame will observe the light hitting
first the mirror, M1, moving toward the incoming wave, and then the other
mirror, M2. The delay between both events is essentially the same as the
Sagnac delay, replacing the circumference of the circular path by the
distance between the source and the mirrors, and the tangential speed due
to rotation by the translation speed. However, in the case of translation,
both events take place at two different points, and the principle of
causality cannot be applied. An observer in the co-moving system frame
has to wait for both returns of the light to the source that will, to the
observer, occur at the same time. Then this observer can only deduce that,
in his or her moving frame of reference, light hit both mirrors at the same
time. Note that the source is also moving for the observer in the laboratory
frame, and he or she sees that the light returns from both ways at the
same time. This is consistent with what was previously said, because the
returns on the source are two events taking place at the same point, and if
they are simultaneous, this is observed in any frame of reference.
Figure 2.6 Problem of synchronization in relativistic kinematics: (a) system at rest;
and (b) system in uniform linear translation.
Note that the Sagnac effect can alternatively be interpreted as a double
Doppler effect on the beamsplitter. Instead of the temporal approach we
29

detailed above, this can be analyzed spatially, considering the system
“frozen” at a given instant (Figure 2.7). The observer in the laboratory
frame measures one wave transmitted twice and keeping the same
wavelength, while the opposite wave is reflected twice on the moving
splitter, resulting in a Doppler shift ∆λD of wavelength along the circular
path and a second opposite shift at the output, resulting in a return to the
original wavelength. The temporal approach considers two waves that
propagate at the same velocity along different paths; this spatial approach
considers two waves along the same path but with different wavelengths.
These two explanations are equivalent, but care must be taken not to use
both at the same time.
Figure 2.7 Sagnac effect interpreted as a double Doppler effect: (a) system at rest;
and (b) system rotating.
2.1.3 Sagnac Effect in a Medium
Now if light propagates in a medium, as in the case of the fiber-optic
gyroscope, it can be demonstrated that the Sagnac phase difference
remains unchanged [6–9]. Considering again a circular path for simplicity,
at rest, both waves propagate at the same velocity v = c/n, where n is the
index of the medium, and return on the beam splitter after the same time
tm = 2πR/v = 2πnR/c = n ⋅ tv. When the interferometer is rotating, the
beam splitter moves along a length ∆lm = RΩtm during the propagation
time tm (Figure 2.8).
30

Figure 2.8 Sagnac effect in a medium: (a) case of a vacuum; and (b) case of a co-
rotating medium.
This length ∆lm is n times longer than ∆lv, but, in this case, the light
velocity is no longer the same in both directions. Indeed, this experiment is
observed in the inertial frame of reference and a Fresnel-Fizeau drag
occurs because of the motion of the co-rotating medium. It depends on the
relative directions of light propagation and medium motion. In the fixed
laboratory frame, the velocities vcr of the co-rotating wave and vccr of the
counter-rotating wave are, respectively:
 (2.13)
where αF is the Fizeau drag coefficient and RΩ is the tangential speed of
the medium. The difference of propagation time becomes:
∆tRm = ∆tRn2 (1 − αF) (2.14)
where ∆tR would be the value in a vacuum. Since αF = 1 − n–2, the
Fresnel-Fizeau drag compensates for the effect of the index n, and there is:
∆tm = ∆tv
This perfect compensation is not fortuitous as it may look in this
analysis. A rigorous approach [7, 10, 11] (detailed in Appendix D) has to
consider the laws of electromagnetism in a rotating frame and solve the
propagation equation in this frame. Such an analysis shows without any
ambiguity that the Sagnac effect is a pure temporal delay that does not
depend on the medium or on wave guidance if an optical fiber is used.
Note that it is necessary to be careful because the value of the Fresnel-
31

Fizeau drag coefficient is often given as:
 (2.15)
As a matter of fact, in the original Fizeau experiment [4], the light
velocity v is first measured with the medium at rest, and:
 (2.16)
where ω0 is the light angular frequency in the laboratory frame. When the
medium is moving in the laboratory frame at a speed vm, the light velocity
becomes:
 (2.17)
There is a dispersion term 
 because the frequency “seen” by the
medium in its proper frame of reference is not ω0 anymore, but a
frequency ωp, which is shifted because of a Doppler effect:
 (2.18)
However, the pure Fresnel-Fizeau effect is actually:
 (2.19)
where ωp is the light frequency “seen” by the medium. In the case of the
Sagnac interferometer, the light frequency has the same ωp value for both
counterpropagating waves in the rotating frame, where the medium is at
rest and one has to use [8]:
 (2.20)
32

2.2 Active and Passive Ring Resonators
2.2.1 Ring-Laser Gyroscope (RLG)
The Sagnac effect is very small; the original experiment required a high
rotation rate to demonstrate the phenomenon. Assuming an enclosed area
as large as 1 m2, a rate as high as 2π rad/s, and a wavelength of 1 μm, the
phase difference is only 0.5 rad, that is, about one-tenth of a fringe. The
effect has to be greatly enhanced to make a practical rotation sensor with
good sensitivity and compactness.
In the early 1960s, it was proposed to use a ring laser cavity to increase
the Sagnac effect, because the light recirculates many times around the
resonant cavity [12, 13]. This technology reached maturity in the 1980s
[14, 15], and the ring-laser gyroscope (or RLG or laser gyro) has brought
major improvements of performance and reliability to inertial navigation
systems. It is the dominant technology today, especially in aeronautics.
In an ordinary laser, the emission wavelength is an integral submultiple
of the Fabry-Perot cavity round-trip length (see Section A.9.1). It is
possible to make a ring cavity working on this principle of optical
resonance (see Section A.9.2) (Figure 2.9). The cavity has mirrors with a
quasi-total reflectivity and one output mirror with a small transmissivity.
The two counterpropagating beams are emitted through the output mirror.
At rest, the emitted frequencies (or wavelengths) are equal, since the
cavity length is the same in both directions. When it is rotated, there is a
small difference of cavity lengths because of the Sagnac effect, which
yields a frequency difference between both output beams:
 (2.21)
where A is the area enclosed by the ring cavity, P is the perimeter, and λ is
the wavelength at rest.
33

Figure 2.9 Ring laser cavity.
This frequency difference is measured by combining the two output
beams to get interferences. Since the beams have different frequencies,
their phase difference varies as:
∆ϕ = 2π∆fRt (2.22)
and the interference intensity I is modulated at the beat frequency ∆fR:
I = I1[1 + cos(2π∆fRt)] (2.23)
The counting of the beats gives the angle of rotation, since ∆fR is
proportional to the rotation rate Ω. The angle value corresponding to one
modulation period is called the angular increment θinc, with:
 (2.24)
Most high-performance laser gyros have a triangular cavity with a
perimeter of about 20 to 30 cm (Honeywell and Sagem). There are also
square cavities and in particular an interesting “octohedral” design
integrating three orthogonal square cavities with only six mirrors (Kearfott
and Thales). They operate at a wavelength of 633 nm with a helium-neon
(HeNe) amplifying medium. We have:
θinc ≈ 10–5 rad ≈ 2 arcsec
A rotation of 1°/h (i.e., 1 arcsec/s) gives a beat frequency of 0.5 Hz.
The effect can be understood very simply by considering an “ideal”
34

circular cavity. Both counterpropagating beams create a standing wave
with a space of λ/2 between nodes (Figure 2.10). When the gyro is
rotating, the standing wave remains at rest in inertial space, but the
detector rotates and gives one count each time it is passing a length of λ/2.
Therefore, the angular increment θinc is simply:
 (2.25)
where R is the radius of the cavity, which is consistent with the general
formula
θinc = λP/4A,
since in this case P = 2πR and A = πR2.
Figure 2.10 Simple case of an ideal circular cavity.
The well-known problem of the laser-gyro is the phenomenon of mode
lock-in between the counterpropagating beams. These are oscillators with
a very high resonance frequency (in the range of 500 THz) and a very
small frequency difference. As with any resonance effect (mechanical and
electrical), if there is some weak coupling between both oscillators, they
become locked together and oscillate at the same frequency, creating a
dead zone at low rotation rate. The main source of coupling is the
backscattering of the mirrors. An intense technological effort was required
to improve the quality of the reflective coating using multidielectric layer
technology (Section A.9.3). However, even with very low scattering
mirrors, there is still a dead zone (typically hundreds of degrees per hour)
much wider than the potential sensitivity of the device, but this is solved
with a very efficient technique of mechanical dither that vibrates the gyro
35

at a rate outside of the dead zone. Present dithered laser gyros have very
good performance (bias stability better than 10–2°/h and scale factor
accuracy of 1 ppm over a dynamic range of ±400°/s); but it remains a
complex technology, with a limited lifetime because of the wearing-out of
the discharge electrodes that excite the amplifying HeNe plasma, and with
some reliability problems because of leakage of helium.
In addition, the He-Ne laser-gyro faces long-term drift of its bias: the
electrical discharge creates an ionic flow, and because of the Fresnel-
Fizeau drag effect that we just saw [4], this matter flow yields a velocity
difference between counterpropagating waves as outlined by Aronowitz
[16]. It is only on the order of 10–15 in terms of relative velocity value,
but it creates a spurious effect equivalent to about a rate of 1°/h. It is
counterbalanced by using a common cathode and two symmetrical anodes
(Figure 2.11), but this balancing cannot be perfect and there is a residual
bias instability on the order of few thousandths of a degree per hour.
Figure 2.11 Symmetrical electrical discharges to balance Fresnel-Fizeau drag effect
due to ionic flow.
One could think: Why not use a solid-state laser to avoid this drag effect
of the He-Ne plasma? After all, since the early 1960s when the He-Ne
laser-gyro was invented, numerous kinds of lasers have been developed,
but there is a key problem in laser behavior: mode competition. In
principle, a CW ring laser should not work because both directions have
36

the same lasing conditions and they “compete,” that is, it is unstable.
He-Ne ring lasers work because of a very subtle effect: with the flow,
the moving amplifying ions see different frequencies for both opposite
directions because of Doppler effect, and the use of 20Ne and 22Ne
isotopes with shifted-frequency gain curves allows one to get two
“superimposed” lasers: one isotope amplifying one direction and the other
one amplifying the opposite one, which avoids mode competition. This is
magic, but within the limit of the bias drift induced by the Fresnel-Fizeau
drag.
2.2.2 Resonant Fiber-Optic Gyroscope (R-FOG)
To avoid the problems of lock-in and Fresnel-Fizeau drag, the use of a
passive ring cavity instead of an active system was proposed [7], an
external source being fed in both directions into the cavity. As already seen
with the laser-gyro, such a cavity is very similar to a Fabry-Perot
interferometer (Figure 2.12), with resonance frequencies or wavelengths
that are transmitted when the cavity length is equal to a multiple number
of wavelengths. When the cavity is rotated, the Sagnac effect yields a
difference ∆fR between the resonance frequencies of the opposite
directions. This difference has the same value as the one in the laser gyro:
 (2.26)
The width of the resonance is given by the finesse F and the free
spectral range (FSR), just as for Fabry-Perot cavities (see Section A.9.1).
The rotation sensitivity is amplified by half the finesse, as it corresponds
approximately to the number of recirculations in the ring cavity.
Figure 2.12 Similarity between a Fabry-Perot cavity and a ring cavity (R is the
reflectivity of the mirrors): (a) Fabry-Perot cavity; and (b) counterpropagating
37

resonant paths in a ring cavity.
This passive approach in a bulk form does not bring significant
advantages over the active device. However, the use of a single-mode
fiber permits increasing the sensitivity further with a multiturn coil [18].
The frequency difference is still:
 (2.27)
where D is the diameter of the coil and n is the index of refraction. This
frequency difference does not depend on the number of fiber turns, but
increasing the number of turns (N) increases the length of the cavity and
then reduces its free spectral range, which decreases the absolute width of
the resonance for a given finesse F. Compared to the original Sagnac
interferometer, the potential improvement is the product of half the finesse
F by the number N of turns.
An analysis of this resonant fiber-optic gyroscope, often abbreviated R-
FOG, will be provided in Chapter 11. This approach faces a very difficult
problem: to fully exploit the system, a very narrow source spectrum is
required, and the related large coherence length induces various sources of
noise that degrade the performance.
2.3 Passive Fiber-Ring Interferometer
2.3.1 Principle of the Interferometric Fiber-Optic Gyroscope (I-FOG)
As the Sagnac effect is proportional to the flux of the rotation rate vector
Ω, it can be enhanced with a multiturn path, just as the flux of a B field is
enhanced in a multiturn inductance coil. With a low-loss single-mode fiber,
the enhancement can be made so large that it does not require the use of a
resonant cavity, and a two-wave ring interferometer with a multiturn fiber
coil may provide adequate sensitivity, as proposed very early by Pircher
and Hepner [19], and demonstrated experimentally by Vali and Shorthill in
1976 [20] (Figure 2.13).
38

Figure 2.13 Two-wave ring interferometer: (a) bulk form with an enclosed area A;
and (b) enhanced sensitivity with a multiturn fiber coil that has an enclosed area N ⋅
A.
The Sagnac phase difference is still ∆ϕR = 4ωAΩ/c2, but now the actual
area Â is N-fold the area of a single loop. It is often expressed as:
 (2.28)
where λ is the wavelength in a vacuum, D is the coil diameter, L = NπD is
the fiber coil length, A = πD2/4 is the area of a single fiber loop, and N is
the number of loops.
A constant rate yields a constant phase difference. The response is
(co)sinusoidal, just as for any two-wave interferometer (see Section
A.8.1), with an interference power given by:
 (2.29)
There is an unambiguous range of phase measurement of ±π rad
around zero which corresponds to an unambiguous operating range of
±Ωπ for the rotation rate (Figure 2.14):
Figure 2.14 Response of an interferometric fiber-optic gyroscope.
39

 (2.30)
Let us give some orders of magnitude. A very high-sensitivity fiber-gyro
could have a coil length L up to 10 km and a coil diameter D up to 30 cm
(i.e., an area of N ⋅ A = 750 m2). With a wavelength of 1,550 nm, this
yields:
Ωπ = 0.0775 rad/s = 4.4 deg/s
A phase difference of a micro-radian being a good order of magnitude
of sensitivity, this corresponds to a rate of Ωμ of:
A high-sensitivity fiber-gyro uses typically L = 1 km and D = 10 cm
(i.e., an area N ⋅ A = 25 m2). At 1,550 nm, it yields:
Ωπ = 130 deg/s and Ωμ = 0.15 deg/h
For medium grade applications, a fiber-gyro would have a short coil
length of 100 m and a small coil diameter of 3 cm (i.e., an area N ⋅ A =
0.75 m2) and it is usually operated at 850 nm. It yields:
Ωπ = 2400 deg/s and Ωμ = 2.8 deg/h
This geometrical flexibility is a very important advantage of the FOG
technology, because, as we shall see, the same basic components and the
same assembly techniques may be used for various devices without a
complete redesign. By simply scaling up or down the effective area of the
fiber coil, the actual sensitivity may be shifted and tuned to the need of the
application.
In practice, the I-FOG works over a few fringes about zero path
difference, and thus does not require the use of a very narrow spectrum
source, contrary to the case of the resonant fiber gyroscope (R-FOG). As
we shall see, this is a fundamental advantage, since many parasitic effects
are greatly reduced with the low temporal coherence obtained with a
broad-spectrum source. Furthermore, a fiber ring interferometer behaves
like a vacuum interferometer despite propagation in a medium. The
Sagnac phase difference ∆ϕR may be expressed with an equivalent
40

geometrical path length difference ∆LR without any dispersion effect that
could be encountered with a broad spectrum:
 (2.31)
The power P(∆LR) of the interfering wave is:
 (2.32)
where C(∆LR) is the coherence function of the source (this problem of
temporal coherence in interferometers is detailed in Section A.12).
2.3.2 Theoretical Sensitivity of the I-FOG
As in any passive optical system, the theoretical sensitivity of the I-FOG is
limited by the photon shot noise. Assuming a phase bias of π/2 rad to
operate the interferometer at the inflection point of the cosine response for
maximum sensitivity, the detected power is:
 (2.33)
As detailed in Section A.2.1, an optical beam may be regarded as a
stream of photons, which behaves statistically like any ensemble of
uncorrelated discrete particles. Any flow Ṅ = dN/dt yields a random
counting with a standard deviation 
 of Ṅ following:
 (2.34)
where ∆fd is the counting bandwidth (i.e., the inverse of the duration of
the counting). For photons with an energy h ⋅ f = hc/λ (where h = 6.63 ×
10–34 J⋅s is the Planck constant), the optical power P and its standard
deviation σPh follow:
 (2.35)
This can also be expressed in power spectral density (PSD with Hz–1
as the unit) of relative noise:
41

The theoretical relative photon noise is 10–14/Hz (i.e., −140 dB/Hz) in
PSD value, or 
 in σ value, for P = 25 μW at 1,550 nm or P = 46
μW at 850 nm.
Now the flow of photons Ṅp is converted by the detector into a primary
current of electrons Ṅe, which is also shot-noise limited. The detector
quantum efficiency η = Ṅe /Ṅp must be as close as possible to 1 to limit
the degradation of the theoretical photon noise. A perfect detector would
have a responsivity of 0.68 A/W at 850 nm, and 1.2 A/W at 1,550 nm.
Practical semiconductor PIN diodes have a responsivity of 0.55 A/W at
850 nm and 1 A/W at 1,550 nm, which yields a slight increase by a factor 
 of the actual detected photon noise. A σ value of 
 is obtained in practice for 50 μW at 850 nm and 30 μW at 1,550
nm. On a π/2 bias, the signal slope is unity with respect to the phase
difference, and such a relative photon noise of 
 yields a noise of
the measured phase difference of 
.
Present technology gives a typical returning bias power of 1 to 100 μW,
as seen in Table 2.1.
Comparing this result with the Ωμ values, which range, as we have
seen, between 0.01°/h and 1°/h, it can be seen that the fiber-gyro
technology has a very good theoretical sensitivity, which has motivated an
important R&D effort around the world over the past 35 years.
Note that the wavelength has a little influence on the theoretical
sensitivity (if, of course, it is within a transparency window of the fiber).
For the same coil dimension and the same returning power, the Sagnac
phase difference is inversely proportional to the wavelength and the signal-
to-noise ratio is proportional to the square root of the wavelength,
because, as the wavelength increases, the photon energy decreases,
increasing their number for a given power. Any of the usual transparency
windows (i.e., 850, 1,060, 1,300, and 1,550 nm) of silica fibers have been
used. Today, I-FOGs use 850 nm for medium-grade performance with a
coil length of few hundreds of meters and 1,550 nm for high-grade with a
coil of 1 km or more.
Note that for a given fiber attenuation per unit length α (in decibels per
kilometer), it is possible to define an optimal fiber length Lop. For a given
42

diameter, the Sagnac phase difference increases proportionally to the
length L, but the power decreases as 10–αL/10, which accordingly reduces
the signal-to-noise ratio of phase detection to (10–αL/10)1/2 = 10–αL/20.
Table 2.1 Photon Noise as a Function of Power
Anticipated
Bias 
Power
Photon Noise Equivalent Phase
Difference at 850 nm
Photon Noise Equivalent Phase Difference
at 1,550 nm
1 μW
0.7
0. 6
10 μW
0.22
0.18
100 μW
0.07
0.06
The optimal length is defined by:
 (2.36)
where f(L) is a function defined by:
f(L) = L ⋅ 10–αL/20 (2.37)
which yields:
where Lop is in kilometers and α is in decibels per kilometer (see Table
2.2).
Table 2.2 Optimal Length as a Function of Wavelength
850 nm 1,300 nm 1,550 nm
α
3 dB/km1 dB/km 0.5 dB/km
Lop 3 km
8 km
17 km
This optimal length is much longer than what is used in practice,
because this would significantly reduce the unambiguous dynamic range
±Ωπ, and the coil volume would become too large to fit within reasonable
overall dimensions. With coil lengths ranging between 100m to a few
kilometers, the I-FOG has adequate performance for most applications,
but, as we can see, it still remains possible to improve sensitivity if there
are relaxed size and dynamic range constraints for some specific
applications.
43

Note also that operation around the π/2 radian bias point yields the
highest sensitivity, and the theoretical photon noise has been calculated for
this value. However, the optimal performance is obtained for the best
signal-to-noise ratio, which is not a priori to this π/2 bias.
Let us consider a perfectly contrasted interferometer. The response is a
raised cosine. The sensitivity at a given phase bias ϕb is proportional to the
slope (i.e., the derivative sinϕb of the raised cosine (1 + cosϕb)), but the
theoretical photon noise is proportional to the square root of the bias
power (i.e., 
). Thus, the theoretical signal-to-noise
ratio, which is proportional to the ratio between the sensitivity and the
noise, follows (Figure 2.15):
 (2.38)
Therefore, the theoretical signal-to-noise ratio is optimal for ϕb = π rad
(i.e., on a black fringe) and not for ϕb = π/2 rad, where it is 
 times
lower [21].
In practice, it is not desirable to operate very close to the black fringe,
because of the thermal noise of the detector, but this shows that the bias
point may be chosen between 3π/4 and typically 7π/8 with a slight
improvement of the theoretical signal-to-noise ratio.
To conclude, theory shows that there is the same theoretical noise limit
for all the optical gyros, RLG, R-FOG, and I-FOG when they have the
same equivalent enclosed area, that is, the area of the cavity time the Q of
this cavity (typically 104) for the RLG, the area of a single fiber loop time
the number of loops and the finesse for the R-FOG, and the area of a
single fiber loop time the number of loops (about 103 to more than 104
depending on performance range) for the I-FOG.
However, the mechanical dithering of RLGs degrades their theoretical
noise by at least one order of magnitude [16], and, as seen in Chapter 11,
R-FOG is sensitive to coherence related noises. On the contrary, the I-
FOG can get very close to its theoretical photon noise, which makes
possible noise level tenfold to a hundredfold lower than the ones of RLG
or R-FOG.
44

Figure 2.15 Optimal signal-to-noise ratio as a function of the phase bias ϕb with (a)
the actual optical power; (b) the photon noise; (c) the sensitivity; and (d) the signal-
to-noise ratio (the vertical coordinates are normalized).
2.3.3 Noise, Drift, and Scale Factor
The output signal at rest (called also the signal bias, but it should not be
confused the π/2 phase bias seen in the previous section) of a fiber gyro is
a random function that is the sum of a white noise (with the theoretical
limit of the photon shot noise) and a slowly varying function to take into
account the long-term drift of the mean value. The white noise can be
expressed in terms of the standard deviation σΩ(f) of equivalent rotation
rate per square root of bandwidth of detection (i.e., degrees per hour per
square root of hertz or (°/h)/
 Equivalent noise power spectral density
could be used instead, by taking the square of the standard deviation (i.e.,
(°/h)2/Hz). However, the habit in the world of inertial navigation is to use
the angular random walk (ARW) performance in °/
 which has the same
dimension as the standard deviation, but with l (°/h)/
 is equal to 1/60°/
Angular random walk must not be confused with the drift, which
evaluates the boundaries of the long-term variations of the mean value of
the output signal (Figure 2.16). Bias drift is usually expressed in degrees
per hour. In the fiber gyro, the noise limit is the detection noise, which
depends mainly on the amount of returning optical power; but the drift,
which can be theoretically null, corresponds to a residual lack of
reciprocity, which we will analyze.
Noise and drift are different requirements which depend on applications.
45

Low bias noise is important for fast response stabilization and control, but,
for navigation, low bias drift is a more fundamental parameter. The
rotation rate signal is mathematically integrated to get the change in angular
orientation, and this process of integration produces an averaging of the
white noise which renders the effect of the drift predominant in the long
term.
Figure 2.16 Example of bias variation with noise and long-term drift.
Another very important characteristic of a gyro is the scale factor.
Compared to other sensors, a gyroscope needs a much better accuracy
over a much wider dynamic range: the important measurement is the
integrated rotation angle, and any past error degrades future information. It
is important to have low noise and low drift to measure a very low rate,
but it is also important to have an accurate measurement of high rates (i.e.,
an accurate scale factor). The required performance depends on the kind
of trajectory, and it is precisely defined by complex system analysis and
modeling, but most applications are usually classified into five grades (see
Section E.2.3), as seen in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3 Performance of the Various Gyro Grades
Angular Random 
Walk (White Noise)
Bias Drift 
(σ Value)
Scale Factor 
Accuracy (σ Value)
Rate grade
>0.5°/
10°/h to 1,000°/h0.1% to 1%
Tactical grade
0.5° to 0.05°/
1°/h to 10°/h
100 to 1,000 ppm
Intermediate grade0.05° to 0.005°/
0.01°/h to 1°/h
10 to 100 ppm
Inertial grade
<0.005°/
<0.01°/h
5 ppm
Strategic grade
<0.0003°/
<0.001°/h
1 ppm
As stated in the first edition of this book 20 years ago, fiber-gyro
46

technology was first seen as particularly suitable for tactical-grade
applications. Inertial-grade performance was seen as possible, but difficult
because of the competition with the laser gyro, which had reached a very
strong position in this market segment.
Today, the situation has greatly evolved, and the fiber gyro did get a
very strong position in tactical-grade applications, but also in intermediate
and navigation grades, especially for marine and space applications. It is
also viewed as able to reach the ultimate high end of the strategic grade
(bias stability as low as 10-5°/h) [22], while the performance of the laser
gyro remains limited to the inertial grade (bias stability of 10−3°/h).
2.3.4 Evaluation of Noise and Drift by Allan Variance (or Allan
Deviation)
The basic limit of a measurement instrument is its white noise: the term
“white” is used, because as white light has a uniform light spectral density,
the power spectral density (PSD) of this white noise is also uniform. As
we saw, the PSDΩ of a gyro is expressed in terms of (°/h)2/Hz, and is
also used the square root of this value 
 the root-mean-square (rms)
value, also called the σ value, expressed in term of 
However a practical device experiences other sources of random
variation. Allan variance is used to calculate these variations [23]. It was
first proposed in the 1960s to evaluate the long-term stability of atomic
clocks [24].
The random measurement signal of a gyro is Ω(t), and can be averaged
over a time τ, yielding a series of averaged values 
 The Allan
variance, AVAR (τ), is defined as half the mean value of the square of the
difference between two successive averaged values 
Is also used its square root, called the Allan deviation, ADEV(τ):
Note that Allan deviation is very often called Allan variance, even if,
strictly speaking, it is its square root.
The Allan deviation of a white noise is, in logarithmic scale, a straight
47

line with a −1/2 slope as a function of the averaging time τ. The power
spectral density of the measured rotation rate Ω is:
there is:
AVAR(τ) = PSDΩ/τ
and
because the samples Ωk+1 and Ωk are not correlated:
< Ωk ⋅ Ωk+1 > = 0
and then:
⟨(Ωk+1 − Ωk2)⟩ = ⟨Ωk2+1 + Ωk + 2Ωk Ωk+1⟩
⟨(Ωk+1 − Ωk)2⟩ = 2⟨(Ωk − ⟨Ωk⟩)2⟩
⟨(Ωk+1 − Ωk)2⟩ = 2PSDΩ/τ
The numerical value of the Allan deviation expressed in degrees per
hour for τ = 1 hour is the numerical value of the corresponding ARW
expressed in °/
 The white noise in (°/h)/
 is the value of the Allan
deviation for τ = 1 second (Figure 2.17).
Now, when there is not a pure white noise, the Allan deviation does not
follow this −1/2 slope decay (Figure 2.18).
The actual curve (Figure 2.19) is decomposed with:
The −1/2 slope of the theoretical white noise (ARW), with a unit
in °/
A flattening, called simply bias drift, but also flicker or 1/f noise,
with a unit in degrees per hour and the time corresponding to the
minimum of Allan deviation called the correlation time;
A +1/2 slope increase, called a rate random walk (RRW), with a
unit in °/h3/2;
48

A +1 slope increase, called a rate ramp, with a unit in °/h2.
Figure 2.17 Example of Allan deviation of a white noise of 0.06 (°/h)/
corresponding to an ARW of 10−3°/
.
There is also a quantization error with a +1 slope at short averaging
time. Note that sometimes the term quantization “noise” is used, but
actually quantization is not random and then “error” is more appropriate.
49

Figure 2.18 Example of Allan deviations: (a) case of a white noise signal (100 seconds of
integration time) and its −1/2 slope Allan deviation (ARW = 0.005°/
) (b) case of a long-
term drift with a flattening and an increase of Allan deviation on the long term. The bias
drift is 0.022°/h and the correlation time is 200 seconds.
The fact that the numerical value of ARW in °/
 is the numerical value
of the corresponding Allan deviation in degrees per hour for τ = 1 hour
can be generalized to all the modes of Allan deviation: quantization error in
degrees, bias drift in degrees per hour, RRW in °/h3/2, and rate ramp in
°/h2 (Figure 2.20).
Figure 2.19 Modes of Allan deviation.
50

Figure 2.20 Example of numerical values of the various modes of Allan deviation,
looking at their corresponding deviation values for τ = 1 hour.
As we shall see, FOG technology allows one to get pure white noise
(ARW) without quantization error, bias drift, RRW, or rate ramp over
weeks of integration time.
2.3.5 Bandwidth
The minimum response time of the interferometric fiber gyroscope is the
transit time through the fiber coil (i.e., 1 μs for a length of about 200m).
This yields a very high theoretical bandwidth of several hundreds of
kilohertz. As will be seen later, signal processing techniques have to be
used, which reduces the bandwidth, but in practice frequency ranges of
several kilohertz are reached, which is a very significant improvement over
previous technologies.
It is important to note that the rate signal is averaged over the transit
time. Therefore, signal sampling with this periodicity does not yield any
loss of information for the integrated angle of rotation [25], and
subsequent averaging does yield the exact averaged rate. Some proposed
signal processing techniques use signal gating and sampling with a longer
periodicity (see Section 10.2), and it is important to be aware that may
yield error if the frequency band of the rate signal is too high, as the
variation of the rate during the gating is not taken into account.
As pointed out [26], the interferometric fiber gyro is usually viewed as a
51

rate gyro; that is, the basic measurement is a rotation rate signal. However,
considered only over the transit time through the fiber coil, the rate is
averaged and the fiber gyro may be viewed in this case as a rate
integrating gyro; that is, the basic measurement is an angle of rotation, as,
mathematically, an average is equivalent to an integration.
References
[1] Sagnac, G., “L’éther lumineux démontré par l’effet du vent relatif d’éther dans un
interféromètre en rotation uniforme,” Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Sciences,
Vol. 95, 1913, pp. 708–710.
[2] Sagnac, G., “Sur la preuve de la réalité de l’éther lumineux par l’expérience de
l’interférographe tournant,” Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, Vol. 95,
1913, pp. 1410–1413.
[3] von Laue, M., “Über einen Versuch zur Optik der bewegten Körper,” Münchener
Sitzungsberichte, 1911, pp. 405–411.
[4] Fizeau, H., “Sur les hypothèses relatives à l’éther lumineux, et sur une expérience qui
parait démontrer que le mouvement des corps change la vitesse avec laquelle la lumière
se propage dans leur intérieur,” Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, Vol. 33,
1851, pp. 349–355.
[5] von Laue, M., “Die Mitführung des Lichtes durch bewegte Körper nach dem
Relativitätsprinzip,” Annalen der Physik, Vol. 328, No. 10, 1907, pp. 989–990.
[6] von Laue, M., “Zum Verzuch von F. Harress,” Annalen der Physik, 1920, pp. 448–463.
[7] Post, E. J., “Sagnac Effect,” Review of Modern Physics, Vol. 39, 1967, pp. 475–494.
[8] Arditty, H. J., and H. C. Lefèvre, “Sagnac Effect in Fiber Gyroscopes,” Optics Letters,
Vol. 6, 1981, pp. 401–403.
[9] Leeb, W. R., G. Schiffner, and E. Scheiterer, “Optical Fiber Gyroscopes: Sagnac or
Fizeau Effect,” Applied Optics, Vol. 18, 1979, pp. 1293–1295.
[10] Post, E. J., “Interferometric Path-Length Changes Due to Motion,” J.O.S.A., Vol. 62,
1972, pp. 234–239.
[11] Arditty, H. J., and H. C. Lefèvre, “Theoretical Basis of Sagnac Effect in Fiber
Gyroscopes,” Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensors, Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol.
32, 1982, pp. 44–51.
[12] Rosenthal, A. H., “Regerative Circulatory Multiple Beam Interferometry for the Study
of Light Propagation Effects,” J.O.S.A., Vol. 52, 1962, pp. 1143–1148.
[13] Macek, W. M., and D. T. M. Davis, “Rotation Rate Sensing with Travelling-Wave Ring
Lasers,” Applied Physics Letters, Vol. 2, 1963, pp. 67–68.
[14] Ezekiel, S., and G. E. Knausenberger, (eds.), “Laser Inertial Rotation Sensors,” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 157, 1978.
[15] Chow, W. W., et al., “The Ring Laser Gyro,” Review of Modern Physics, Vol. 57,
1985, p. 61.
[16] Aronowitz, F., “Fundamentals of the Ring Laser Gyro,” Optical Gyros and Their
Applications, RTO AGARDograph, Vol. 339, 1999, pp. 3-1 to 3-45.
52

[17] Ezekiel, S., and S. R. Balsamo, “Passive Ring Resonator Laser Gyroscope,” Applied
Physics Letters, Vol. 30, 1977, pp. 478–480.
[18] Meyer, R. E., et al., “Passive Fiber-Optic Ring Resonator for Rotation Sensing,”
Optics Letters, Vol. 8, 1983, pp. 644–646.
[19] Pircher, G., and G. Hepner, “Perfectionnements aux dispositifs du type gyromètre
interférométrique à laser,” French patent 1.563.720, 1967.
[20] Vali, V., and R. W. Shorthill, “Fiber Ring Interferometer,” Applied Optics, Vol. 15,
1976, pp. 1099–1100.
[21] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Integrated Optics: A Practical Solution for the Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 101–112.
[22] Lefèvre, H. C., “The Fiber-Optic Gyroscope: Challenges to Become the Ultimate
Rotation-Sensing Technology,” OFT, Vol. 19, 2013, pp. 828–832.
[23] “Format Guide and Test Procedure for Single-Axis Interferometric Fiber Optic Gyros,”
IEEE Standard Specification 952, 1997.
[24] Allan, D., “Statistics of Atomic Frequency Standards,” Proceedings of IEEE, Vol. 54,
1966, pp. 221–230.
[25] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Double Closed-Loop Hybrid Fiber Gyroscope Using Digital
Phase Ramp,” Proceedings of OFS 3/’85, OSA/IEEE, San Diego, postdeadline paper
7, 1985.
[26] Fidric, B., et al., “A Rate Integrating Fiber Optic Gyro: From the Theoretical Concept
to System Mechanization,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 437–448.
53

CHAPTER 3
Reciprocity of a Fiber Ring
Interferometer
3.1 Principle of Reciprocity
3.1.1 Single-Mode Reciprocity of Wave Propagation
As we have seen, the theoretical noise of a fiber ring interferometer is, in
practice, on the order of few tenths of 
. Through integration,
phase differences of 10–8 to 10–9 rad should be measurable while the
absolute phase accumulated by the wave along 100m to 10 km of fiber is
109 to 1011 rad. The sensitivity limit is 18 to 20 orders of magnitude
below the actual propagation path when the temperature dependence is
already as high as 10–5/°C, as seen in Section B.1.5. Such a performance
could look unrealistic, but the fundamental principle of reciprocity of light
propagation in a linear medium is the key to the solution of this problem.
As a matter of fact, in a linear medium, the propagation equation of the
wave amplitude A is (see Section A.3):
 (3.1)
Looking for harmonic solutions, A(x, y, z, t) = As(x, y, z)eiωt, where As
depends only on the spatial coordinates and ω is the angular frequency,
the propagation equation is reduced to:
 (3.2)
Therefore, any solution A(x, y, z, t) = As(x, y, z)eiωt has a perfectly
reciprocal solution A′(x, y, z, t) = As(x, y, z)e–iωt, as the reduced
propagation equation depends on the square ω2 = (−ω)2. Physically, this
mathematical change of sign for ω corresponds to a propagation in the
opposite direction with exactly the same propagation delay and the same
54

attenuation of the phase front. In free space, difficult alignments are
required to excite both reciprocal opposite solutions, and it is never perfect
(except when phase-conjuguate mirrors are used [1]). However, if the
system is single-mode (i.e., “single-solution”), alignments are only needed
to optimize the throughput power, but once it is coupled, both opposite
waves are automatically reciprocal. The single-mode waveguide filters the
exact part of both opposite input waves corresponding to the same unique
propagating solution.
The Sagnac effect is a very small first-order effect (in DΩ/c), which
should be buried in the changes of the zero order, the absolute phase
accumulated in the propagation, but single-mode reciprocity provides
perfect common-mode rejection and will permit the nulling out of this zero
order and its variations almost perfectly, yielding a sensitive measurement
of the rotation-induced nonreciprocal phase difference.
Figure 3.1 Reciprocity of a bulk-optic ring interferometer.
An RLG works also because of reciprocity: a resonant laser cavity has
also modes like a waveguide, and an RLG is a single-longitudinal/single-
transverse mode laser.
3.1.2 Reciprocal Behavior of a Beam Splitter
Reciprocity of counterpropagation is fundamental, but it is also important
to understand the behavior of a beam splitter. Considering a simple ring
interferometer in bulk optics (Figure 3.1), the two waves returning through
the common input-output port are in phase because they have propagated
along the same path, but also because they have both experienced one
reflection and one transmission on the beam splitter.
Assuming a 50-50 (or 3 dB) separation, the intensity of these returning
waves is Iin/4, if Iin is the input intensity. Because they interfere in phase
(i.e., ∆ϕ = 0), the intensity Iint of the total interfering wave is equal to the
input intensity Iin:
55

 (3.3)
and in the absence of a nonreciprocal effect, a ring interferometer with a
50-50 beam splitting behaves like a mirror. Therefore, because of
conservation of energy, the intensity at the second output port (the free
port) of the ring interferometer must be zero. As stated early on by Sagnac
in his original publications [2, 3], there is always a black fringe at the free
port, independent of the exact nature of the 3-dB splitter. This implies that
the waves have a π-radian phase difference at this port. As their
propagation paths are identical, this difference is due to a basic phase shift
between the reflected and transmitted waves on the beam splitter.
This basic phase difference may be viewed directly, considering a
symmetrical system with two input waves which arrive in phase on an
ideal symmetrical splitter with zero thickness (Figure 3.2). Because of
symmetry, the power of both interference waves must be equal, which
implies that the split waves that interfere are in phase quadrature at both
output ports. Because there is no difference of path length, this phase shift
must be a basic π/2 difference between the reflected and the transmitted
waves. As this π/2 difference is experienced twice at the free port of the
ring interferometer, a π difference is yielded at the output.
It is interesting to compare this effect with the Huygens’ principle,
which states that the propagation of a wave may be analyzed with virtual
sources that re-emit spherical waves from the phase front. It is well known
that to restore the exact phase of the pursuant wave front, a π/2 phase
shift must be added to the virtually re-emitted spherical waves. With an
actual reflection from a splitter, matter is re-emitting real waves without
this −π/2 phase shift; therefore, reflection has a phase quadrature with
respect to transmission.
Figure 3.2 Intrinsic phase shift on a beam splitter.
56

It is interesting to note that Fizeau used actually a ring interferometer in
his experiment of 1851 [4] to demonstrate the drag effect of matter.
Reading his publication, one sees that he clearly understood the
importance of reciprocity.
Finally, we just saw that a ring interferometer with a 50-50 splitter is a
perfect mirror, but it can make a partial reflector with a non-50-50 splitter.
For example, a 15-85 ratio yields about 50% reflection in the common
port and 50% in the free port. This can be used to extract light from a
laser cavity as described for example [5] (Figure 3.3).
Figure 3.3 Tunable laser using a ring interferometer to extract light from the middle of a
laser cavity with a unique output port, according to [5].
3.2 Minimum Configuration of a Ring Fiber Interferometer
3.2.1 Reciprocal Configuration
The first experimental demonstration of a fiber gyro [6] showed that a
simple fiber ring interferometer is not perfectly reciprocal. Complementary
interference fringes were observed at both ports of the interferometer,
depending on the alignments of the fiber ends (Figure 3.4). At the input, a
parallel Gaussian laser beam is split and focused on both fiber ends which
filter the unique propagation mode, and, at the output, the beams are
recombined to interfere. A small change in the alignments does not
strongly modify the input power coupling, but it has a significant effect on
57

the matching of both output phase fronts, modifying the fringe pattern and
consequently producing a high parasitic variation of the measured phase
difference.
All these problems could have been a severe limitation to high
performance, but can be solved very simply with a reciprocal
configuration proposed independently by Ulrich [7] and by Arditty et al.
[8]. It is sufficient to feed light into the interferometer through a truly
single-mode waveguide and look at the returning interference wave, which
is filtered through this same waveguide in the opposite direction (Figure
3.5). In this case, the alignments are needed solely to optimize the
throughput power (and its related signal-to-noise ratio), which requires
difficult but nevertheless reasonable mechanical tolerances (see Section
B.4). It is now ensured that both returning waves have propagated along
exactly the same path in the opposite direction and that they interfere
perfectly in phase when the system is at rest. This simple modification has
made both opposite paths identical, zero rotation giving zero phase
difference. This common input-output port is often called the reciprocal
port, and the other free port is often called the nonreciprocal port, or the
fourth port.
Figure 3.4 Free-space interference pattern in a fiber-ring interferometer.
A reciprocal operation of the fiber gyro does not require a continuous
single-mode propagation, but merely a single-mode filter at the common
input-output port. A reasonable amount of power must remain in the
primary mode to get some light through the output filter, but any
undesirable signals are perfectly eliminated. For example, assuming that
90% of the light remains in the primary mode, there is only a slight
decrease by a factor of 
 in the theoretical signal-to-noise ratio, whereas
the rejected 10% may carry a spurious signal equivalent to a phase
difference as high as 0.1 radian (i.e., at least six orders of magnitude above
the theoretical sensitivity).
58

Spatially, a short length (about 1m) of single-mode fiber can be
considered as a perfect filter, but there is also a need for polarization
filtering [7–9], because a single-spatial-mode fiber is actually a dual-
polarization-mode fiber and the fiber birefringence may yield a spurious
phase difference (see Section B.5). However, a polarizer rejection is
limited in practice, and we will explain further how this important problem
may be solved with a compromise among polarization filtering,
polarization conservation, and statistical depolarization. In addition to the
coil splitter, the complete reciprocal configuration needs a second splitter
(a source splitter) to tap off part of the interference wave returning
through the filtered input-output port of the ring interferometer. This gives
an intrinsic 6-dB attenuation, 50% of the useful light being lost at the input
and at the output, but it is a very moderate drawback compared to the
crucial improvement brought about by reciprocity. Note that the returning
power is maximum when both splitters are 50-50 (or 3 dB), but this value
does not have to be very precise. For example, with a 60-40 splitter, the
transmission of the returning power is 24% instead of 25% with 50-50.
Figure 3.5 Reciprocal configuration of a fiber-ring interferometer (a circulator may be
used instead of the source splitter).
To avoid this 6-dB attenuation, one can use a circulator (see Section
B.8.3). Such a component was not available 20 years ago, but it is now
quite common because of its use in telecommunications.
Note that reciprocity is a much more powerful principle than this simple
case of single-mode reciprocity. Considering a multimode filter at the
common input-output port, it is possible to show that light entering in any
mode Mi and leaving the interferometer through this same mode Mi does
not carry any spurious phase difference. This result is simply the
generalization of the single-mode case.
However, general linear network theory [10] shows that there is also a
reciprocity phenomenon on the crossed terms. Light entering in any mode
59

Mi and leaving through another mode Mj because of parasitic couplings is
carrying a spurious phase difference signal ∆ϕij, but light entering in Mj
and leaving through Mi is carrying exactly the opposite phase difference:
∆ϕji = −∆ϕij
Therefore, if Mi and Mj have equal power at the input and equal
attenuation in the system, both detected signals cancel out the spurious
term due to ∆ϕij.
This applies to spatial modes with multimode fibers [11], but also to
polarization modes with an unpolarized source [12] as analyzed by Pavlath
and Shaw.
This point is a clear advantage of erbium ASE sources that are naturally
unpolarized (see Section B.9).
3.2.2 Reciprocal Biasing Modulation-Demodulation
The reciprocal configuration provides an interference signal of the Sagnac
effect with perfect contrast, as the phases and the amplitudes of both
counterpropagating waves are perfectly equal at rest. The optical power
response is then a raised cosine function, P(∆ϕR) = P0/2 [1 + cos∆ϕR],
of the rotation-induced phase difference ∆ϕR, which is maximum at zero.
To get high sensitivity, this signal must be biased about an operating point
with a nonzero response slope:
 (3.4)
where ϕb is the phase bias. However, ϕb must be as stable as the
anticipated sensitivity, that is, significantly better than 0.1 μrad. For
example, the use of the nonreciprocal Faraday effect (explained in Section
7.1), controlled with an electrical current, was proposed [13], but this
would require a control of the biasing current with an accuracy better than
1 ppm.
60

Figure 3.6 Generation of the biasing phase modulation using the delay through the
fiber coil.
The problem of drift of the phase bias is completely overcome with the
use of a reciprocal phase modulator placed at one end of the coil that acts
as a delay line (Figure 3.6) as proposed very early by Martin and Winkler
[14]. Because of reciprocity, both interfering waves carry exactly the same
phase modulation ϕm(t), but shifted in time. The delay is equal to the
difference ∆τg of group transit time (see Section A.5) between the long
and short paths that connect the modulator and the splitter. This yields a
biasing modulation ∆ϕm(t) of the phase difference:
∆ϕm(t) = ϕm(t) − ϕm(t − ∆τg) (3.5)
and the interference signal becomes:
 (3.6)
This technique may be implemented with a square-wave modulation ϕm
= ±(ϕb/2), where the half-period is equal to ∆τg. This corresponds to the
proper or eigenfrequency fp of the coil, fp = 1/2∆τg, and the product, coil
length × proper frequency, is about 100 kHz ⋅ km with silica fibers. This
yields a biasing modulation ∆ϕm = ±ϕb. At rest, both modulation states
give the same signal (Figure 3.7):
61

Figure 3.7 Square-wave biasing modulation.
P(0,−ϕb) = P(0,ϕb) = P0/2(1 + cosϕb) (3.7)
but in rotation:
P(∆ϕR, ϕb) = P0/2[1 + cos(∆ϕR + ϕb)] 
P(∆ϕR, −ϕb) = P0/2[1 + cos(∆ϕR − ϕb)] (3.8)
and the difference between both states becomes:
∆P(∆ϕR, ϕb) = P0/2[cos(∆ϕR − ϕb) − cos(∆ϕR + ϕb)] (3.9)
∆P(∆ϕR, ϕb) = P0sinϕbsin∆ϕR (3.10)
This biased signal ∆P is measured by demodulating the detector signal
with a lock-in amplifier, and the maximum sensitivity is obtained for ϕb =
π/2, where sinϕb = 1.
This modulation-demodulation technique is now widely accepted as the
optimal biasing technique, because it yields a sine response (derivative of
the unmodulated cosine response) with a very stable bias (Figure 3.8). The
power dependence P0 and the phase bias dependence sinϕb are
multiplicative, and therefore have no influence on the bias stability. The
use of a reciprocal phase modulator is fundamental, as it yields a
modulation of the phase difference perfectly centered around zero. For
any square-wave modulation 
 the modulation of the phase
62

difference is always ∆ϕm(t) = ±ϕb = ±(ϕm1 − ϕm2).
Figure 3.8 Unmodulated response and demodulated biased signal of a fiber-ring
interferometer. The dotted curves show a change of power.
This reciprocal biasing technique may be alternatively implemented with
a (co)sine modulation ∆ϕm(t) = ϕb ⋅ cos(2πfmt) [7, 8], which does not
require a phase modulator with a flat frequency response. The detected
signal may be decomposed in harmonic components of the modulation
frequency fm:
P(∆ϕR) = P0/2[1 + cos(∆ϕR + ϕbcos(2πfmt))] (3.11)
P(∆ϕR) = P0/2[1 + cos(∆ϕR)cos(ϕbcos2πfmt)) 
−sin(∆ϕR)sin(ϕbcos(2πfmt))] (3.12)
Using the Jn Bessel function expansion, this becomes:
P(∆ϕR) = P0/2 + P0/2cos(∆ϕR)[J0(ϕb) + 2J2(ϕb)cos(4πfmt) + …] 
+ P0sin(∆ϕR)[2J1(ϕb)sin(2πfmt) + 2J3(ϕb)sin(6πfmt) + …](3.13)
The even harmonics are still proportional to cos(∆ϕR) as the unbiased
response, but the odd harmonics and particularly the fundamental
frequency are proportional to sinϕR. With a synchronous demodulation,
this yields a biased signal:
P1(∆ϕR) = P0J1(ϕb)sin(∆ϕR) (3.14)
The maximum sensitivity is now obtained for ϕb ≈ 1.8 rad (instead of
π/2 ≈ 1.5 with square wave) and J1(1.8) = 0.53. At rest, the detector
signal is mainly composed of the second harmonic component, but, in
rotation, it appears to be an unbalanced modulation that contains a signal
63

at the fundamental frequency fm (Figure 3.9). (Note that we call first
harmonic the fundamental frequency and second harmonic the double of
fundamental frequency.)
3.2.3 Proper (or Eigen) Frequency
For a sinusoidal phase modulation ϕm = ϕm0sin(2πfmt) applied on both
counterpropagating waves, the modulation of the phase difference is:
Figure 3.9 Sine-wave biasing modulation: (a) at rest and (b) in rotation.
∆ϕm(t) = ϕm0[sin(2πfmt) − sin(2πfm(t − ∆τg))] (3.15)
and after applying trigonometric identities:
 (3.16)
64

The ring interferometer behaves like a perfect delay line filter with a
sinusoidal transfer function 2sin(πϕm ⋅ ∆τg) that is maximum (in absolute
value) at the proper (or eigen) frequency fp [defined previously as fp =
1/(2∆τg)] and its odd harmonics, and that is null at dc and all the even
harmonics (Figure 3.10).
Figure 3.10 Normalized transfer function of the modulation of the phase difference.
From this result, it seems that the choice of the operating frequency is
not critical, but spurious nonlinearity or amplitude modulation in the phase
modulation may degrade the quality of the bias [15]. The use of an
additional modulation to detect the maximum of a response curve is
actually very common, but an accuracy of a few tenths of percent of the
width is usually sufficient. In a fiber gyro, we are looking for less than 10–
8, and potential parasitic effects must be evaluated more carefully.
A basic point deserves to be repeated: because the interference signal is
an autocorrelation function, the response is perfectly symmetrical about
zero, even with an asymmetrical spectrum (see Appendix A).
Now, a first cause of spurious bias is the nonlinearity of the phase
modulator or of the electronic generator. A pure (co)sine modulation
centered about zero yields only even harmonics in the modulated
interferometer response, and the demodulated response at the fundamental
(and also odd harmonic) frequency is perfectly zero. However, if there is a
spurious even harmonic content due to a nonlinear response of the
modulation chain, additional odd frequency components are generated in
the response that are seen as a nonzero bias in the demodulation. This can
be easily seen in Figure 3.11, which shows that a second-harmonic content
yields an unbalanced modulation, as with an offset, due to rotation. In this
worst case, the second harmonic content must be less than 160 dB
(electrical) to limit the bias below 10–8 rad. This effect also depends on
65

the respective phase of the main fundamental-frequency modulation and
on the spurious even harmonic.
A bias offset is not a priori detrimental to the gyro performance if it is
stable, but in practice it is susceptible to drift, particularly with changing
environmental conditions. As will be seen throughout this analysis, the best
way to suppress the drift is, after all, to suppress the offset. In the case of
a nonlinear modulator response, a simple solution is to operate the system
at the proper (also called eigen) frequency [15] (or its odd harmonics), and
any spurious even harmonics of the modulation ϕm(t) will be nulled out in
the phase difference ∆ϕm(t) because, as we saw, the interferometer
behaves as a delay line filter. Note that since this modulation propagates
on a very high-frequency carrier, the optical wave, there is no dispersion
for these subcarrier harmonic components, which all propagate at the
same group velocity, and the notch filtering is perfectly periodic.
Figure 3.11 Biasing modulation imbalance: (a) with a constant offset and (b) with an
additional second-harmonic modulation. (The solid curve in each graph is the sum of
the two dashed curves.)
With a square-wave modulation, a nonlinear phase modulation response
is not harmful, since ϕm takes only two values, ϕm1 and ϕm2, and the
modulation of the phase difference ∆ϕm = ±(ϕm1 − ϕm2) is always
balanced around zero. If the modulation frequency fm is not equal to the
proper frequency fp, the modulation of the phase difference takes four
values (Figure 3.12):
66

Figure 3.12 Square-wave biasing modulation with (a) fm < fp and (b) fm > fp.
 (3.17)
but it is still balanced about zero without any demodulated bias offset.
However, a spurious offset may arise with an asymmetry of the duty
cycle of the square-wave modulation [16]:
67

 (3.18)
where Tm is the period of the modulation. At the proper frequency (where
the period Tm = 2 ⋅ ∆τg), the phase difference ∆ϕm(t) takes four values
(Figure 3.13):
Figure 3.13 Modulated phase difference with an asymmetrical duty cycle of the
square wave.
 (3.19)
When the gyro is at rest, the output signal is composed of spikes of
equal width ∈ ⋅ ∆τg, but when the modulation frequency fm is not equal
to fp, one spike width is reduced while the other one is enlarged (Figure
3.14), which yields a very strong parasitic signal at the modulation
frequency, and thus a spurious offset on the demodulated signal. This is
actually a very sensitive way to measure the proper frequency [16].
However, the duty cycle of a square wave cannot be made perfectly equal
to 50-50 (particularly because rise time and fall time are usually not equal
in electronics), and it yields a spurious bias which depends on the
modulation frequency and goes through zero at the proper frequency. As
this proper frequency depends on temperature (about 10–5/°C) because of
the thermal dependence of the index of refraction, and therefore of the
transit time, this spurious bias offset is not stable. To eliminate this defect,
68

an electronic gate has to be used to suppress the spikes that carry the
spurious effect of an imperfect 50-50 duty cycle.
Figure 3.14 Effect of an asymmetrical square-wave modulation.
This problem makes the use of square-wave modulation more delicate
than that of sine-wave modulation, but, as will be seen later, closed-loop
digital processing techniques that use square-wave biasing are so
advantageous that this additional complexity is a reasonable drawback.
A last parasitic effect is due to residual intensity modulation in the phase
modulator and may be detected as a spurious signal at the fundamental
frequency [15]. This modulation is also reciprocal and is seen equally by
both counterpropagating waves, but the interference signal is derived from
the difference of the wave phases, whereas the intensities are added. For
intensity modulation, the system also behaves as a delay line filter, but in
this case it rejects the proper frequency and its odd harmonics. For
intensity modulation, the transfer function is 2cos(πfm ⋅ ∆τg); therefore,
operation at the proper frequency (or at an odd harmonic) also eliminates
the effect of residual intensity modulation. Note that this is strictly valid
only at rest, where the rotation-induced phase difference is zero. While
rotating, intensity modulation may yield some parasitic effects even at fp,
which modifies the scale factor [17].
To summarize, the use of a truly single-mode filter at the common
input-output port of the interferometer renders a fiber ring interferometer
69

sensitive only to nonreciprocal effects as the Sagnac effect. Furthermore, a
modulation-demodulation at the proper or eigenfrequency of the coil (or
one of its odd harmonics) provides a biased signal that does not degrade
the original perfection of the system. These two simple conditions,
combined in the minimum configuration [18], make high performance
possible despite the various defects of the components.
As is discussed in Section A.5.2, phase modulation propagates at the
group velocity vg as any modulation and not at the phase velocity vϕ,
with:
 (3.20)
where ne is the equivalent index of the mode, which depends mostly on
the material but also on the guidance characteristics. When a broad
spectrum is used, it is possible to consider that the modulation propagates
at the group velocity of the mean wavelength and that there is a temporal
spreading ∆τs of the modulation waveform, because vg(λ) is not constant
over the spectrum width ∆λ when the second-order derivative d2ω/dk2 or
d2ne/dλ2, called the propagation dispersion, is not zero:
 (3.21)
This value is often given with ∆τs/(∆λ ⋅ L) in ps ⋅ nm–1 ⋅ km–1. The
silica material dispersion is given in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1 Group Velocity Dispersion in Silica as a Function of Wavelength
λ (in nm)
850
1,060 1,300 1,550
(in ps ⋅ nm–1 ⋅ km)
−100 −30
≈0
+20
This effect is very important in telecommunication applications where
modulation frequency reaches the gigahertz range with propagation along
kilometers of fiber, but it is negligible in the fiber gyro case.
The modulation period is preferably the double of the group transit time
∆τg through the coil, and because ∆τg the temporal spreading ∆τs is also
proportional to the coil length, the ratio ∆τs/∆τg is independent of the coil
70

length. At 850 nm, where dispersion has the highest value, and with a
spectrum width as broad as 50 nm, this ratio is only 0.1%. In the case of
square-wave modulation, this induces finite rise and fall times, but this
does not influence the performance of the fiber gyro.
3.3 Reciprocity with All-Guided Schemes
3.3.1 Evanescent-Field Coupler (or X-Coupler or Four-Port Coupler)
To avoid the difficulties of the coupling stability of free-space waves into
single-mode fibers, it is desirable to use an all-guided scheme that
improves ruggedness. This requires the duplication in a guided form of the
various functions required in the interferometer. In particular, an
evanescent-field coupler may replace the 3-dB splitter. The principle of
such couplers, also called X-coupler or four-port coupler, is usually
explained with the coupling overlap of the evanescent tail of a waveguide’s
fundamental mode with a second adjacent waveguide (see Section B.7.1).
These couplers may be realized in an all-fiber form, but also on an
integrated optic substrate (see Appendix C.1.6).
Figure 3.15 Decomposition of the input light with the modes of a two-waveguide
coupling structure.
However, to understand its reciprocity behavior, it is interesting to use
an alternative explanation proposed by Youngquist et al. [19]. Two parallel
single-mode waveguides may be regarded as a two-mode waveguide.
When light is fed into one input port, it excites the fundamental
symmetrical mode of the coupler and the second-order antisymmetrical
mode (Figure 3.15). The lobes of the modes are in phase in the input
71

lighted waveguide and π (or 180°) out of phase in the other waveguide
without light. As the two modes propagate with different velocities, their
phase difference varies linearly, and the amplitude in each waveguide can
be evaluated using a phasor diagram (Figure 3.16).
Figure 3.16 Propagation of the modes in a two-waveguide coupling structure with a
phasor diagram for light propagating in each waveguide.
At the half-coupling length, there is a 50-50 splitting: both modes are in
phase quadrature, and the modulus of the wave amplitude is the same in
both waveguides. At the coupling length Lcp, light has been completely
transferred into the second waveguide. Because the wave amplitudes in
both waveguides are the two diagonals of the rhombus describing the
vector sum of the mode amplitudes, they are always perpendicular, which
means that the coupled wave always has a phase quadrature with respect
to the transmitted wave.
The use of an evanescent-field coupler in a fiber-ring interferometer
(Figure 3.17) seems very advantageous, as there is no fringe pattern in
free space and the free port could be exactly complementary to the
reciprocal port, with a stable π-radian phase difference, getting twice the
π/2 shift of the coupler.
72

Figure 3.17 All-fiber ring interferometer with a 3-dB coupler.
This could allow the use of the more complex minimum configuration to
be avoided. However, as will be shown later, polarization still has to be
filtered at the same reciprocal input-output port, and, furthermore, the
phase shift of the coupled wave in the coupler is not perfectly equal to π/2
in practice. As a matter of fact, there is always a residual differential loss
between the symmetrical and antisymmetrical modes of the coupler
regarded as a two-mode waveguide. The ideal rhombus of the phasor
diagram is transformed into an ordinary parallelogram with unequal sides,
where the diagonals are not perpendicular anymore (Figure 3.18) [19].
Figure 3.18 Phasor diagram of the transmitted and coupled waves of a coupler: (a)
lossless coupler and (b) differential loss.
This yields a spurious phase difference at the free port of a ring
interferometer. With a very low-loss coupler, this effect is small, but it
remains significant compared to the very small bias change (less than 1
μrad, which corresponds to less than 10–6 in differential loss), which is
sought to get high performance. Therefore, even with an evanescent-field
four-port coupler, a reciprocal configuration has to be used to get a low
bias drift.
3.3.2 Y-Junction
As we have seen, only three ports are actually useful in an all-guided ring
interferometer, so evanescent field couplers can be replaced by Y-
junctions. In an all-fiber form, evanescent-field four-port X-couplers are
easier to fabricate than three-port Y-couplers; however, with integrated
73

optics (see Appendix C), which, as will be seen, is a crucial technology in
implementing high-performance signal processing schemes, Y-junctions are
preferred because of their simplicity and stability.
The Y-junction, also called a branching waveguide, was proposed early
on [20] as a very useful integrated optic component. It is composed of a
base single-mode waveguide connected to two single-mode branch
waveguides (Figure 3.19). This is fabricated very simply with a Y-mask,
and symmetry ensures 3-dB splitting for any wavelength, while
evanescent-field couplers require careful control of the diffusion process to
get the adequate coupling ratio and are wavelength dependent. The
principle of direct operation is simple: light that propagates in the single-
mode base waveguide is split equally into the two symmetrical single-mode
branch waveguides, which diverge with a very small angle (typically 1°) to
minimize the loss. The behavior of the reverse operation [21, 22] is not as
straightforward to explain, but as 50% of the base waveguide light is
coupled into each branch waveguide, reciprocity arguments show that the
same percentage has to be coupled from one branching waveguide into the
base waveguide in the opposite direction.
Figure 3.19 Integrated optic Y-junction.
This can be better understood by considering an all-guided Mach-
Zehnder interferometer composed of two Y-junctions [Figure 3.20(a)].
Light is split at the first junction, and with two equal optical paths the two
waves are recombined in phase at the second junction. This is equivalent
to a bulk Mach-Zehnder interferometer [Figure 3.20(b)], in which the two
waves interfere in phase at one port and there is no light at the other port
because of destructive interference. Now, if there is an additional π-rad
phase difference between the two paths, they are recombined into a two-
lobe second-order antisymmetrical mode that radiates into the substrate
because it cannot be guided into the single-mode base waveguide of the
74

output junction (Figure 3.21). This is equivalent to what happens in a bulk
Mach-Zehnder, in which the induced phase difference switches the output
light at the fourth port of the output splitter. A Y-junction is a four-port
device, as is any 3-dB splitter, but in this case there are three guided ports
and the fourth port is an antisymmetrical wave radiated into the substrate.
Figure 3.20 Mach-Zehnder interferometer with equal paths: (a) with two Y-junctions
and (b) in a bulk form.
Figure 3.21 Mach-Zehnder interferometer with π rad phase difference: (a) with two
Y-junctions and (b) in a bulk form.
The reverse operation can be understood by regarding the pair of
branch waveguides as a two-mode waveguide, similar to the case of an
evanescent-field coupler. Coupling light into one of the branches can be
interpreted as the superposition of the fundamental symmetrical mode and
the second-order antisymmetrical mode. Both modes are in phase in the
lighted waveguide, while they are π rad (or 180°) out of phase in the other
one, which is not lighted (Figure 3.22). At the junction, the symmetrical
75

mode that carries 50% of the optical power can be coupled to the base
single-mode waveguide, while the antisymmetrical mode above the cutoff
is radiated into the substrate.
Figure 3.22 Reverse operation of a Y-junction: (a) principle and (b) photograph of
the output face of the circuit with the guided single mode and the radiated
antisymmetrical wave.
This radiated antisymmetrical mode experiences a Lloyd mirror effect
similar to what happens for the nonguided TM mode of a proton-
exchanged LiNbO3 circuit, which can be considered as an antisymmetrical
LP11 mode with a virtual lobe 180° out of phase (see Section C.3.3).
With this effect, it can be considered as a four-lobe LP21 mode (see
76

Section B.3.5) with a double antisymmetry, which is preserved while it
diffracts. It yields two real lobes into the substrate and two virtual lobes
imaged 180° out of phase by the top surface of the circuit (Figure 3.23).
The full width at the maximum 2w1′ = θD1 ⋅ L is at the output facet
typically 300 to 400 μm for a length L of the base branch equal to 10 mm.
Figure 3.23 Radiated fourth port of a Y-junction considered as a four-lobe LP21
mode with two real lobes and two virtual lobes.
Because, as we have seen, the gyro architecture requires the use of only
three ports, the Y-junction is perfectly adequate. It naturally yields a
reciprocal configuration because the base waveguide is used as the
common input-output port, and the nonreciprocal free port is lost in the
substrate (Figure 3.24). It is the optimal technological solution because it is
much more stable and much easier to fabricate than an evanescent-field
coupler in integrated optics. Such couplers are used for fast switching, but
the simplicity of Y-junction makes it optimal for permanent 50-50 splitting.
Figure 3.24 Reciprocal configuration with a Y-junction and its single-mode fiber lead.
3.3.3 All-Fiber Approach
The all-fiber approach first appeared as the ideal technological choice for
the fiber gyro because of the very low loss of the components, which
provides a very good signal-to-noise ratio, due to the high returning power
[15, 23]. The all-fiber architecture (Figure 3.25) makes use of a first coil
coupler to split and recombine the interfering wave and of a second source
coupler to send the signal coming back through the common input-output
port onto a detector. The polarization is filtered at this reciprocal port with
an all-fiber polarizer, which was originally made with a birefringent crystal
77

facing a fiber polished laterally to extract one polarization by prism
outcoupling of the evanescent tail of the mode [24]. Present all-fiber
systems now prefer a polarizing (PZ) fiber [25], which works on the
differential curvature loss that occurs under special conditions between
polarizations in stress-induced high-birefringence PM fibers (see Section
B.6.5). If the early brass-boards were using ordinary single-mode (SM)
fiber with in-line polarization controllers, in particular λ/4 and λ/2 loops
[26] (see Section B.7.3), this constraint is now avoided with the
availability of polarization maintaining (PM) fibers (see Section B.6).
Figure 3.25 All-fiber reciprocal configuration according to [15] (from Stanford
University).
The main limitation of this approach is the phase modulator. The only
practical technique is to wind a fiber around a piezoelectric tube (or disk)
[27] (see Section B.7.2), which modifies the fiber length by controlling the
tube diameter with a driving voltage. This method is perfectly adequate for
the biasing modulation-demodulation, but obtaining an accurate scale
factor requires the use of more sophisticated signal processing techniques.
Numerous publications have described processing schemes that are
compatible with piezoelectric modulators (see Section 10.2), but by far the
highest scale factor performance is obtained with phase-ramp closed-loop
techniques (see Section 8.2), which require a broad modulation band,
while piezoelectric modulators experience narrow mechanical resonances.
An all-fiber approach yields very good bias performance and navigation
grade ARW was already obtained in the early 1980s at Stanford University
78

[23], but the scale factor accuracy is limited in practice to about 1,000
ppm.
3.3.4 Hybrid Architectures with Integrated Optics: Y-Coupler
Configuration
Integrated optics, particularly on a lithium niobate (LiNbO3) substrate (see
Appendix C), was recognized early on by Papuchon and Puech [28] as a
very promising technology for the fiber-optic gyroscope, because a single
multifunction circuit could be used to implement all the functions needed
to make the device work, thus yielding a very simple, all-guided
configuration with a sensing fiber coil connected to an integrated-optic
circuit. However, the decisive advantage of integrated optics over the all-
fiber approach is its phase modulator with a flat response over a large
bandwidth, which permits the use of efficient signal-processing techniques
that yield high performance over the whole potential dynamic range of the
fiber gyro.
It is possible to use an all-fiber approach and limit the use of integrated
optics to a phase modulator on a straight waveguide, but this technology
provides the useful advantage of permitting the integration of several other
functions onto a single circuit, which improves the compactness and
reduces the connections. Nevertheless, the pursuit of maximum integration
is perhaps a technological challenge, but it is not a goal in itself, and an
optimal hybrid compromise had to be found to take advantage of this
possibility of integration without degrading the performance.
As we have already seen, the splitter-combiner of an interferometer can
be realized very simply with a Y-junction, and the use of two junctions
connected by their base branch [20] has been proposed. However, this
double-Y configuration (Figure 3.26) led to disappointing performances
because of the limited rejection of the common base waveguide that acts
as the spatial filter to ensure reciprocity [29]. The input light is split in the
first source junction, and half the power remains in the base branch to be
split again in the second coil junction. The rest of the input power forms
an antisymmetrical mode that is radiated from the first junction, because it
is above cutoff, but it is partially recoupled in the second junction, which
acts as a receiving antenna, because it may again guide this antisymmetric
diverging wave (Figure 3.26).
79

Figure 3.26 Double-Y configuration.
This recoupling is very small, but the parasitic waves added in the two
output branches of the coil junction are π (or 180°) out of phase because
of the antisymmetry of the diverging wave. The total wave amplitude in
each branch is the sum of the main amplitude term Am and the additional
parasitic term As coming from the spurious recoupling. Considering a
phasor diagram (Figure 3.27), it can be seen that the phase of total
amplitude At or At′ in each branch is modified and that it also yields a
spurious phase difference ∆ϕe between both branches while it should be
zero with a perfect rejection.
Figure 3.27 Limitation of single-mode rejection in a double-Y-junction.
The maximum phase error is proportional to the amplitude ratio:
∆ϕe ≤ 2As/Am (3.22)
To limit this error below 10–8 rad, the rejection should be better than
80

166 dB. In practice, a common base branch of 10 to 20 mm yields a
rejection limited to about 60 to 70 dB, and therefore a phase bias offset as
high as several 10–4 rad [26]. As we have already seen, an offset is not,
strictly speaking, detrimental, but in practice it is susceptible to drift. In
this case, the actual phase error ∆ϕe depends on the phase difference
∆ϕms between the main amplitude Am, which has been continuously
guided, and the spurious term As, which has propagated freely between
both junctions:
∆ϕe = 2(As/Am)sin∆ϕms (3.23)
(It is maximum for ∆ϕms = π/2, where As is perpendicular to Am, and
it is zero for ∆ϕms = 0 or π, where As is parallel to Am.) The phase
difference ∆ϕms is related to the path difference ∆nms ⋅ Lbb, where the
difference of relative index ∆nms may be estimated as half the index step
of the waveguide (i.e., a few 10–3). With 10 mm of common base-branch
length Lbb, this path difference is a few tens of micrometers (i.e., a few
tens of wavelengths), and this changes with temperature, which induces
drift.
This double-Y configuration looked at first like a very tempting solution,
but it is actually showing that the search for maximal integration may
encounter drastic performance limitations. At this stage, one may choose
to improve the technology by implementing filtering devices about the
central common base waveguide or by using evanescent-field couplers,
which avoids the radiating fourth port of Y-junctions; but this increases
drastically the complexity of the process and of its control.
The optimal compromise between integration and performance is
obtained with the Y-coupler configuration [30–32], where the coil splitter
is an integrated optic Y-junction and the source splitter is an all-fiber 3-dB
coupler (Figure 3.28). The spatial filtering required for reciprocity is
simply obtained with the fiber lead connected on the base waveguide of
the Y-junction, and the 3-dB coupler is used to extract 50% of the
returning power with low additional loss and send it onto a detector. Phase
modulators are fabricated on both branches of the Y-junction. It is possible
to use one modulator for the biasing modulation and the other one for the
feedback modulation required with closed-loop processing techniques, but
it is preferable to connect both modulators in a push-pull configuration.
81

The voltage is applied between the central electrodes and both external
electrodes, which automatically drives the two modulators with opposite
polarity (Figure 3.29).
This doubles the efficiency, but, above all, this eliminates the second-
order nonlinearity of the response of each single modulator, which is very
useful to get a good scale-factor linearity with closed-loop schemes.
Note that if a single-mode 3-dB coupler is commonly used for the tap
function, it is not strictly required. The light returning through the input
fiber lead of the Y-junction has already interfered, and the signal is carried
by the intensity modulation. Therefore, the coupler may be replaced with
a 3-dB tap, which has a single-mode output port and may be easier to
fabricate than a coupler [31].
Figure 3.28 Y-coupler configuration with a 3-dB coupler as the source splitter.
This Y-coupler configuration has been widely accepted since the 1990s
[32] as the optimal technological compromise for high-performance fiber
gyroscopes that have to use integrated optic phase modulators to get a
good scale factor with closed-loop processing schemes.
Figure 3.29 Push-pull connection of two integrated optic phase modulators: (a) x-cut
82

and y-propagating LiNbO3 circuit and (b) z-cut and y-propagating LiNbO3 circuit.
The preferred integrated optic technology is LiNbO3 (see Appendix C),
which yields very efficient phase modulation. The waveguides were first
fabricated with titanium indiffusion, and a polarizer was realized with a
metallic overlay that absorbs the TM mode, but today proton exchange
[33] is the privileged alternative, as it yields single-polarization guidance
that provides a very high polarization rejection. This point is very
important, as we shall see, for getting good bias stability.
The optimal multifunction gyro circuit (Figure 3.30) has typical
dimensions of 1 mm in thickness, a few millimeters in width, and 15 to 20
mm in length at 850 nm and 30 to 40 mm in length at 1,550 nm.
Figure 3.30 The multifunction integrated-optic circuit (MIOC) for the fiber-gyro; Y-
junction with single-polarization proton-exchange waveguides and a pair of push-pull
electrodes. The substrate has a parallelogram shape to avoid backreflection.
It is composed of a Y-junction with a separation of 200 to 400 μm
between the two branches to connect the two fiber coil ends. Push-pull
phase modulators are fabricated on the branches, and polarization
rejection is directly obtained with proton exchange. Finally, as will be
shown later, the gyro circuit has a parallelogram shape to avoid
backreflection at the interfaces between the circuit and the fibers [32].
3.4 Problem of Polarization Reciprocity
3.4.1 Rejection Requirement with Ordinary Single-Mode Fiber
A single-mode fiber has actually two polarization-modes. With an ordinary
fiber these two modes are almost degenerate, but there is a residual
birefringence that modifies the state of polarization as the light propagates.
In a ring interferometer, at a given position, both counterpropagating
waves have a different state of polarization and therefore do not see
exactly the same index of refraction, because of birefringence, which
yields a spurious phase difference at the output. Applying the general
83

linear network theory, it is possible to show that if a polarizer is placed at
the input and at the output of a fiber, the phase of the waves transmitted in
opposite directions are then perfectly equalized [10]. To take into account
the birefringence of the splitter combiner of the ring interferometer, a
single polarizer has to be placed at the common reciprocal port [7–10]:
light is filtered at the input, and the two waves that are coming back
through this same polarizer at the output are perfectly in phase. Some
polarization control is necessary, as in the worst case, light may come back
in the crossed state, yielding signal fading.
However, the rejection of a practical polarizer is not infinite, and there
remains a residual phase difference between both counterpropagating
waves. It was shown by Kintner [34] that with ordinary single-mode fibers
the bias error is limited by the amplitude rejection ratio ∈ of the polarizer
and not by its intensity ratio ∈2: a maximum phase measurement error of
10–8 rad would then require a rejection on the order of 160 dB and not 80
dB, as might at first be hoped.
As a matter of fact, the input amplitude A is filtered by the polarizer at
the input, and its parallel component A1 is transmitted while its crossed
component A2 is attenuated (Figure 3.31). The primary component A1 is
split and propagates in opposite directions along the ring interferometer
and yields at the output two waves having, respectively, an amplitude
component A11 and A11′ in the transmitted state of the polarizer, and a
component A12 and A12′ in the crossed state:
The two primary components A11 and A11′, which are in the
same state at the output as A1 at the input, interfere in phase (in
absence of rotation) and with the same modulus A11 = 
A11′
because of reciprocity.
The two secondary components A12 and A12′ that have been
coupled in the crossed mode have the same modulus (A12 =
A12′ ) but they have a spurious phase difference ∆ϕ12 since the
waves have not followed exactly the same path in opposite
direction.
Similarly, the input crossed component A2 yields two amplitude
84

components A22 and A22′ in the same crossed state and two components
A21 and A21′, which correspond to light that has been coupled back in the
transmitted state:
The two components A22 and A22′ are also in phase because of
reciprocity, but because they are attenuated twice (at the input and
at the output), these terms may be ignored.
The two secondary components A21 and A21′ also have the same
modulus, but they also interfere with a spurious phase difference
∆ϕ21, which is equal to −∆ϕ12 because of reciprocity of crossed
coupling (see Section 3.2.1).
Figure 3.31 Polarization coupling in a ring interferometer (for clarity the Aij′
amplitudes are not shown).
These two parasitic couples, (A12, A12′) and (A21, A21′), behave very
differently. The first couple, (A12, A12′), is cross-polarized with respect to
the main couple, (A11, A11′), and their intensities are simply added.
Because the main interference signal is 2A112sin∆ϕR and the spurious
signal is 2∈2A122sin(∆ϕR + ∆ϕ12), a phase error ∆ϕe is yielded in the
total signal:
∆ϕe < ∈2 ρcr (3.24)
where ρcr = A122/A112 is the polarization intensity cross-coupling in the
ring interferometer. This error term is reduced by the intensity rejection
ratio ∈2 of the polarizer.
However, the second couple, (A21, A21′), has the same state of
85

polarization as the main couple, (A11, A11′), and there is interference
between (A11 + A21) and (A11′ + A21′) instead of between A11 and A11′.
A phasor diagram (Figure 3.32) shows that it yields a phase error ∆ϕe′
bound by:
 (3.25)
Note that its exact value depends on ∆ϕ21, but also on the phase
difference between the primary components, (A11, A11′), and the spurious
components, (A21, A21′).
It is also possible to consider that the main interference wave, A11 +
A11′ 2, serves as a local oscillator for the coherent detection (see Section
A.8.1) of the spurious signal, A21 + A21′ 2 [34]. Using ρm = A22/A12 to
represent the intensity polarization ratio at the input, we have 
 and:
 (3.26)
This second error term is reduced only by the amplitude rejection ratio
∈ instead of ∈2 in the first case, which makes a big difference, as ∈ is
much smaller than unity.
The first error term, ∆ϕe, is often classified as an intensity-type error,
while the second one, ∆ϕe′, is classified as an amplitude-type error. Both
effects may be further decreased with polarization control to optimize the
polarization alignment at the input and at the output, which reduces ρin
and ρr; however, this improvement is limited, as it is difficult to limit their
value below 10–2 in the long term.
86

Figure 3.32 Phasor diagram of the nonreciprocity induced by A21 and A21′.
3.4.2 Use of Polarization-Maintaining (PM) Fiber
In addition to the problem of lack of polarization rejection, the use of
ordinary fiber requires polarization control to avoid signal fading, which
increases the complexity and the overall dimensions of the system. The
development of high-quality polarization-maintaining (PM) fibers (see
Section B.6) was an important step toward a compact and practical
device. Single-polarization or polarizing (PZ) fibers would be even better
in theory, but they have to be used with great care to get good rejection
and avoid bending loss at the same time, which does not make them very
practical, except for making an all-fiber polarizer at the common input-
output port.
Nevertheless, the conservation of polarization in polarization-
maintaining fibers used in coils or with in-line components is typically in
the 20-dB range, that is, the intensity ratio ρin and ρr are still on the order
of 10–2, which does not relax very much the requirement on polarization
rejection. To limit the phase error to 10–7 rad, this requires a polarizer
rejection of about 100 dB, which is still much too high to be readily
achieved in practice. However, polarization-maintaining fibers are
birefringent in principle: the two states of polarization propagate with a
slightly different velocity, and when a broadband source is used, as seen in
Section B.6.3 the spurious crossed-state waves are losing their coherence
with the main primary signal, which brings a major reduction of the actual
phase error signal, even with a medium rejection of the polarizer. This
applies mainly to the amplitude-type error, since it is coming from a
coherent detection process, but also to the intensity-type term through
averaging effects.
As already stated, a broadband source is very advantageous in an
interferometric fiber gyroscope, and its influence on birefringence-induced
phase error is crucial for good performance. This very important point will
be discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
3.4.3 Use of Depolarizer
If a polarization-maintaining fiber is obviously the optimal technical choice,
its potential for very significant cost reduction with mass production is not
fully accepted by the entire community of fiber gyro developers, and some
87

teams still prefer to use an ordinary fiber. The problem of signal fading is
solved with the use of Lyot depolarizers [35, 36] (see Section B.7.4),
which yield a random state of polarization that is evenly distributed over
all the possible states. When it is filtered by a polarizer, half the power is
always transmitted, independent of the effect of the propagation along a
fiber.
A first depolarizer has to be used at the input before the polarizer and a
second one in the coil. There is no more signal fading, but 50% of the
power is lost through the polarizer at the input and again at the output,
which induces an additional loss of 6 dB. This degrades the signal-to-noise
ratio that depends on the returning power, but there is another important
drawback: this does not take full advantage of the relaxation of the
requirement for the polarizer rejection brought by polarization-maintaining
fiber. The comparison between both approaches will be presented in
Chapter 5.
3.4.4 Use of an Unpolarized Source
An unpolarized source has a completely random state of polarization. It is
possible to consider it the combination of two incoherent sources with
orthogonal states of polarization. With a fiber gyro we can use the same
analysis as in Section 3.4.1, but now the two components A1 and A2 are
incoherent. At the output, there is no more coherent detection of the
spurious term, (A21, A21′), coming from A2 with (A11, A11′), coming
from A1, which was serving as a local oscillator. This (A21, A21′) term still
yields its own intensity-type effect, as does the term, (A12, A12′);
however, we have seen that the two spurious phase differences are
opposite, ∆ϕ12 = −∆ϕ21, and as their power is balanced because each
parasitic wave passes once through the polarizer [at the input for (A21,
A21′) and at the output for (A12, A12′)], the two effects complement each
other, which cancels out the total error signal.
In theory, this could even avoid the use of a polarizer as analyzed by
Pavlath and Shaw [12], but this requires that the light remains perfectly
unpolarized, which implies that there is no differential loss (PDL for
polarization dependent loss) in the propagation or in the components. As
stated earlier, in the general multimode case, it is easier in practice to
eliminate the crossed polarization with a rejection of 10–x than to ensure
88

that the differential loss is smaller than 10–x, particularly in components.
In any case, the effect of an unpolarized source and that of the polarizer
are cumulative, and this applies to any scheme, particularly to the use of
polarization-maintaining fiber coil. A real source has a certain degree of
polarization P defined with the respective intensities of its polarized
components. For example, a super-luminescent diode (SLD), which is a
very popular broadband source for the fiber gyro, emits partially
unpolarized light, with the most powerful polarization being parallel to the
junction. It can be regarded as the sum of two incoherent sources with a
power P// for the parallel polarization and P⊥ for the perpendicular
polarization. In a gyro, it must be regarded as the sum of a perfectly
unpolarized source of intensity 2P⊥ and of a perfectly polarized source of
intensity P// - P⊥ (Figure 3.33), the degree of polarization being:
 (3.27)
The perfectly polarized component of power P// - P⊥ has to be
analyzed according to the previous explanation of Section 3.4.1, while the
perfectly unpolarized component of intensity 2P⊥ does not yield any
spurious birefringence-induced phase error. This shows that an
unpolarized source is very advantageous for reducing the phase error
caused by a lack of polarization rejection, although it has the drawback of
an additional 3 dB of loss because half the power is attenuated through the
polarizer at the input.
Figure 3.33 Decomposition of a partially unpolarized source.
It also simplifies the system, because the fiber pigtail and the source
coupler that send the light to the polarizer of the ring interferometer do not
have to preserve polarization, because unpolarized light remains
unpolarized when it propagates in ordinary single-mode fiber.
As we see in Sections A.2.4 and B.9, unpolarization is one of the key
advantages of erbium ASE source derived from erbium amplifiers
(EDFAs) of telecoms.
89

References
[1] Graindorge, P., et al., “Forced Reciprocity Using Phase Conjugation,” Fiber-Optic
Rotation Sensors, Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol. 32, 1982, pp. 368–374.
[2] Sagnac, G., “L’éther lumineux démontré par l’effet du vent relatif d’éther dans un
interféromètre en rotation uniforme,” Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Sciences,
Vol. 95, 1913, pp. 708–710.
[3] Sagnac, G., “Sur la preuve de la réalité de l’éther lumineux par l’expérience de
l’interférographe tournant,” Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, Vol. 95,
1913, pp. 1410–1413.
[4] Fizeau, H., “Sur les hypothèses relatives à l’éther lumineux, et sur une expérience qui
parait démontrer que le mouvement des corps change la vitesse avec laquelle la lumière
se propage dans leur intérieur,” Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Sciences, Vol. 33,
1851, pp. 349–355.
[5] Lefèvre, H., “Wavelength Tuneable Laser Source,” U.S. Patent # 6,519,269 B1, 2003.
[6] Vali, V., and R. W. Shorthill, “Fiber Ring Interferometer,” Applied Optics, Vol. 15, 1976,
pp. 1099–1100.
[7] Ulrich, R., “Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensing with Low Drift,” Optics Letters, Vol. 5, 1980,
pp. 173–175.
[8] Arditty, H., M. Papuchon, and C. Puech, “Ring Interferometer Device and Its
Application to the Detection of Non-Reciprocal Effects,” U.S. Patent # 4,480,915,
Foreign Application Priority of December 1979, 1984.
[9] Ulrich, R., and M. Johnson, “Fiber-Ring Interferometer: Polarization Analysis,” Optics
Letters, Vol. 4, 1979, pp. 152–154.
[10] Ulrich, R., “Polarization and Depolarization in the Fiber-Optic Gyroscope,” Fiber-
Optic Rotation Sensors, Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol. 32, 1982, pp. 52–77.
[11] Pavlath, G. A., and H. J. Shaw, “Multimode Fiber Gyroscope,” Fiber-Optic Rotation
Sensors, Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol. 32, 1982, pp. 364–367.
[12] Pavlath, G. A., and H. J. Shaw, “Birefringence and Polarization Effects in Fiber
Gyroscopes,” Applied Optics, Vol. 21, 1982, pp. 1752–1757.
[13] Davis, W. C., W. L. Pondrom, and D. E. Thompson, “Fiberoptic Gyro Using Magneto-
Optic Phase-Nulling Feedback,” Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensors, Springer Series in
Optical Sciences, Vol. 32, 1982, pp. 308–315.
[14] Martin, J. M., and J. T. Winkler, “Fiber-Optic Laser Gyro Signal Detection and
Processing Technique,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 139, 1978, pp. 98–102.
[15] Bergh, R. A., H. C. Lefèvre, and H. J. Shaw, “All-Single-Mode Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope with Long-Term Stability,” Optics Letters, Vol. 6, 1981, pp. 502–504.
[16] Lefèvre, H. C., “Comments About Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol.
838, 1987, pp. 86–97.
[17] Kiesel, E., “Impact of Modulation Induced Signal Instabilities on Fiber-Gyro
Performances,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 838, 1987, pp. 129–139.
[18] Ezekiel, S., and H. J. Arditty, “Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensors,” Fiber-Optic Rotation
Sensors, Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol. 32, 1982, pp. 2–26.
[19] Youngquist, R. C., L. F. Stokes, and H. J. Shaw, “Effects of Normal Mode Loss in
Dielectric Waveguide Directional Couplers and Interferometers,” Journal of Quantum
90

Electronics, Vol. QE 19, 1983, pp. 1888–1896.
[20] Yajima, H., “Dielectric Thin-Film Optical Branching Waveguide,” Applied Physics
Letters, Vol. 22, 1973, pp. 647–649.
[21] Arditty, H. J., M. Papuchon, and C. Puech, “Reciprocity Properties of a Branching
Waveguide,” Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensors, Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol.
32, 1982, pp. 102–110.
[22] Izutzu, M., Y. Nakai, and T. Sueta, “Operating Mechanism of the Single-Mode Optical
Waveguide Y Junction,” Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp. 136–138.
[23] Lefèvre, H. C., R. A. Bergh, and H. J. Shaw, “All-Fiber Gyroscope with Inertial-
Navigation Short-Term Sensitivity,” Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp. 454–456.
[24] Bergh, R. A., H. C. Lefèvre, and H. J. Shaw, “Single-Mode Fiber-Optic Polarizer,”
Optics Letters, Vol. 5, 1980, pp. 479–481.
[25] Varnham, M.P., D. N. Payne, and E. J. Tarbox, “Coiled Birefringent Fiber Polarizer,”
Optics Letters, Vol. 9, 1984, pp. 306–308.
[26] Lefèvre, H. C., “Single-Mode Fibre Fractional Wave Devices and Polarization
Controllers,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 16, 1980, pp. 778–780.
[27] Davies, D. E. N., and S. A. Kingsley, “Method of Phase Modulating Signals in Optical
Fibres: Application to Optical Telemetry Systems,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 10, 1974,
pp. 21–22.
[28] Papuchon, M., and C. Puech, “Integrated Optics: A Possible Solution for the Fiber
Gyroscope,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 157, 1978, pp. 218–222.
[29] Arditty, H. J., et al., “Integrated-Optic Fiber Gyroscope: Progresses Towards a
Tactical Application,” Proceedings of OFS 2’84, Stuttgard, VDE Verlag, 1984, pp.
321–325.
[30] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Progress in Optical Fiber Gyroscopes Using Integrated Optics,”
AGARD-NATO Proceedings, Vol. CCP-383, 1985, pp. 9A1–9A13.
[31] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Integrated Optics: A Practical Solution for the Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 101–112.
[32] “Fiber Optic Gyros: 15th Anniversary Conference,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585,
1991.
[33] Suchosky, P. G., T. K. Findakly, and F. L. Leonberger, “LiNbO3 Integrated Optical
Components for Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 993, 1988, pp. 240–
243.
[34] Kintner, E. C., “Polarization Control in Optical-Fiber Gyroscopes,” Optics Letters, Vol.
6, 1981, pp. 154–156.
[35] Fredricks, R. J., and R. Ulrich, “Phase-Error Bounds of Fibre Gyro with Imperfect
Polarizer/Depolarizer,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 20, 1984, pp. 330–332.
[36] Böhm, K., et al., “Low-Drift Fibre Gyro Using a Superluminescent Diode,”
Electronics Letters, Vol. 17, 1981, pp. 352–353.
91

CHAPTER 4
Backreflection and Backscattering
4.1 Problem of Backreflection
4.1.1 Reduction of Backreflection with Slant Interfaces
Reciprocity applies only to transmitted waves, and in the early days of
fiber gyro research, the first problem encountered was the 4% Fresnel
backreflection (see Section A.6.1) at the air-silica interface of the fiber coil
ends, which superimposes a parasitic Michelson interferometer. This was
solved by polishing the ends at a sufficient slant angle to avoid backward
reflection and aligning them according to refraction laws so as not to
degrade the throughput coupling, as analyzed by Arditty et al. [1] (Figure
4.1).
Figure 4.1 Suppression of backreflection at the fiber ends with a slant angle.
Antireflection coating cannot provide a low enough level of
backreflected light. With an all-fiber approach, this problem of index
mismatch is avoided, but this method is still used at the interface between
silica fiber and the LiNbO3 integrated optic circuit [2] (Figure 4.2), which
has been found to be the optimal technological approach, as seen earlier.
92

Figure 4.2 Suppression of backreflection between a fiber and an integrated optic
waveguide.
To evaluate the reduction of backreflection as a function of the slant
angle, it is necessary to consider that it is equivalent to the coupling
between the real waveguide and its virtual mirror image through the
interface plane (Figure 4.3).
Figure 4.3 Estimation of the backreflection with an image fiber.
The throughput coupling loss Γθ between two identical waveguides with
an angular misalignment θm is analyzed in Section B.4.2, assuming that
the mode is pseudo-Gaussian.
It yields:
 (4.1)
where θD′ is the full divergence angle at 1/e2 in power of the mode in an
index-matched medium:
θD′ = θD/n 
θD ≈ 1.5 NA (4.2)
and where θD is the divergence in a vacuum, n is the medium index, and
93

NA is the fiber numerical aperture. Because θm is twice the slant angle θs,
the additional loss of backreflection may be estimated as:
 (4.3)
The almost standard slant angle of the integrated optic circuit is 10°,
which implies that the slant angle of the fiber is 15° (i.e., 0.26 rad), to
align both waveguides according to refraction law:
nSiO2sin15° = nLiNbO3sin10° (4.4)
with nSiO2 ≈ 1.45 and nLiNbO3 ≈ 2.2. Single-mode fibers used in the
fiber gyro have a typical numerical aperture NA = 0.17; therefore, the
attenuation Γbr of the backreflection is:
Γbr = ΓF + Γθ (15°) (4.5)
With 4% between LiNbO3 and SiO2, the Fresnel backreflection ΓF is
14 dB, and computing Γθ it is found that Γbr (15°) = 165 dB.
However, the validity of the pseudo-Gaussian approximation of the
mode shape is lost in the tails, and the formula of Γθ applies only for small
angular misalignments. Furthermore, spurious scattering at the interface
increases the backreflection, but, in practice, the standard 10°/15°
combination at the integrated optic interface is perfectly adequate to
reduce the backreflection below 80 to 90 dB without decreasing the
throughput coupling, compared to the case of perpendicular interfaces.
4.1.2 Influence of Source Coherence
Assuming two backreflection points at the ends of the fiber coil (Figure
4.4), this actually yields six waves at the output of the ring interferometer:
94

Figure 4.4 Explanation of phase error induced by two backreflections.
The two primary transmitted reciprocal counterpropagating waves
that have exactly the same amplitude A and A′ (same modulus and
same phase);
Two waves backreflected at the inputs with different amplitudes
A1 and A1′;
Two waves backreflected at the outputs with different amplitudes
A2 and A2′.
If these waves are coherent, there is interference at the output between
(A + A1′ + A2′) and (A′ + A1 + A2) instead of only A and A′. Using once
again a phasor diagram, it is shown that the phase difference error may
depend on the amplitude ratio between the primary waves and the
backreflected waves. Limiting this error below 10–8 rad would require an
attenuation of at least 160 dB of the backreflected waves.
The path difference between the primary waves and these spurious
backreflections is considerable, because it corresponds to the whole optical
length of the coil (i.e., hundreds of meters to kilometers), and most
sources are not coherent enough. In practice, there is a superposition of
three independent interferometers:
The main Sagnac interferometer with A and A′;
Two spurious Michelson interferometers with, respectively, (A1,
A1′) and (A2, A2′)
The spurious Michelson signals are simply added in optical intensity to
the Sagnac signal, instead of amplitude, and an attenuation of 80 dB is
then good enough to get 10–8 rad instead of 160 dB.
Furthermore, if a source of particularly short coherence length is used, it
becomes possible to reduce the contrast of these parasitic Michelson
interferometers by unbalancing their arms. In particular, it is advantageous
to get the slant angle of the integrated optic interface with a parallelogram
substrate shape [3]. With a typical separation of 200 μm between the
branch waveguides of the Y-junction and a slant angle of 10°, the optical
path length unbalance ∆Lunb of the spurious Michelson interferometer is
(Figure 4.5):
95

∆Lunb = 2nLiNbO3 200 μm tan 10° = 150 μm (4.6)
while the decoherence length Ldc of broadband sources like
superluminescent diodes is on the order of 30 to 50 µm.
Figure 4.5 Unbalancing of the parasitic Michelson interferometers with a
parallelogram-shaped circuit.
An erbium ASE source at 1,550 nm has a longer decoherence length
(typically 200 μm) and it is then useful to increase the separation between
the branch waveguides or the slant angle.
This analysis of backreflection is a good example of the way parasitic
effects related to coherence are suppressed in an interferometric fiber
gyro, which involves three steps:
1. The spurious waves have to be reduced as much as possible with
a reasonably simple technological approach. The slant interface is
a good solution in the case of backreflection.
2. The coherence between the primary waves and the spurious
waves has to be destroyed to avoid direct coherent detection that
is very harmful.
3. Some further improvements may be obtained if the coherence
between the spurious waves is also destroyed.
4.2 Problem of Backscattering
4.2.1 Coherent Backscattering
Propagation in a material suffers various kinds of scattering processes. In a
fiber, the light that is scattered inside the numerical aperture of the fiber
remains guided in the forward and backward directions. In a fiber gyro,
problems arise with Rayleigh backscattering, which preserves the same
optical frequency as the throughput wave and can be considered as a
randomly distributed backreflection. The backscattered power in a single-
mode fiber is typically 10–7/m at 1,550 nm yielding typically 40 dB of
96

backscattering light for a 1-km coil. With a CW coherent source, this may
yield a spurious phase difference error as high as 10–2 rad because of the
coherent detection process, with the primary waves acting as a local
oscillator as analyzed by Cutler et al. [4]. Furthermore, because the path
differences are not stable, this phase error fluctuates inducing noise. To
reduce this effect, it was proposed that additional frequency modulation
[5] or phase modulation [6, 7] be used to displace this noise outside of the
detection bandwidth.
4.2.2 Use of a Broadband Source
This reduction may be obtained much more efficiently with an adequate
source. It was first proposed to use a pulsed source: in that case, only the
light backscattered from the middle of the coil (within the pulse length Lp)
will interfere with the primary pulses (Figure 4.6) [4]. However, a
broadband source of a short coherence length yields a similar reduction [6,
7], considering that the pulses are replaced by wave trains. All these
spurious signals arise from parasitic interferometers with various path
differences, and, as detailed in Section A.12.3, the interference contrast is
proportional to the autocorrelation function of the source, which is the
Fourier transform of the power (or intensity) spectrum. A pulse has an
amplitude spectrum with all the frequency components in phase, while an
incoherent broadband source has an amplitude spectrum with all the
frequency components in a random phase, but the phase information is
lost in the autocorrelation process involved in the interferences and both
pulsed and incoherent sources reduce the contrast of the spurious
interferometers because of their narrow autocorrelation function.
Figure 4.6 Limitation of coherent backscattering with a pulsed source.
However, a broadband source is more advantageous, because its
autocorrelation width, called in optics its coherence length, is much
narrower in practice (20 to 200 μm) than that of a pulse. An equivalent
pulse duration should be in the range of 0.1 to 1 picosecond. Furthermore,
97

for the same mean power, a pulse has a much higher peak power, which
induces nonlinearities, as will be seen later in Section 7.3.
4.2.3 Evaluation of the Residual Rayleigh Backscattering Noise
Rayleigh scattering is caused by dipolar antenna radiation of the material
atomic bindings excited by the incoming wave. It has a λ–4 dependence in
wavelength (it is why the sky is blue), and there is a cumulative effect only
in fluids or amorphous glasses that have a random structure. Inversely,
with an ordered crystal matrix, the various scattered waves would interfere
destructively except in the forward direction.
In a fiber, part of the scattered light remains guided in the forward and
backward directions. The forward scattering is reciprocal and does not
yield any spurious effect in the fiber gyro. On the contrary, the backward
scattering behaves like a randomly distributed backreflection. With a
Rayleigh scattering attenuation αR and considering a source with a
coherence length Lc, the coherent backscattered power Pcb coming from
the middle of the coil is:
 (4.7)
where Pm is the intensity of the main wave and S is the recapture factor,
which may be grossly approximated as the ratio of the acceptance solid
angle of the fiber, about equal to NA2, to a full solid angle of 4π steradian.
In practice, S is about 10–3.
Taking practical numerical values αR = 2 dB/km (for λ = 850 nm) and
Lc = 20 μm, giving:
which still yields an amplitude ratio:
 (4.8)
Assuming two main counterpropagating amplitudes Am and Am′, there
are interferences between (Am + Acb′) and (Am′ + Acb) at the output. It
98

seems at first that the phase error could be as high as 6 × 10–6 rad, even
with a coherence length as small as 20 μm. However, this is not taking into
account the benefit brought by the biasing modulation at the proper
frequency [8] and the fact that the phase difference between Am and Acb′
is correlated with the one between Am′ and Acb [9].
As a matter of fact, when the phase modulator is operated at the proper
frequency fp of the coil, a wave backscattered from the middle of the coil
experiences the phase modulation twice, but with a half-period delay
which cancels out the total modulation (Figure 4.7). Furthermore, the main
interference wave resulting from Am + Am′ is modulated in intensity but is
not modulated in phase; therefore, the coherent detection process between
(Am + Am′) as the local oscillator and Acb and Acb′ remains at low
frequencies and does not yield any spurious signal in the demodulation at
fp [8].
Figure 4.7 Effect of a phase modulator on the waves backscattered in the middle of
the coil.
Some benefit also comes from the correlation between the phases of
both backscattered waves. Let us consider a scattering point: if the phase
accumulated in the propagation by the main primary waves is ϕp, the
phases ϕcb and ϕcb′ due to the propagation of the two waves
backscattered at a given point, are such as:
 (4.9)
and therefore the phase differences due to propagation between the main
and backscattered waves are opposite:
 (4.10)
99

However, the scattering process adds a π/2 phase lag on each spurious
wave, and the actual phase differences are [9]:
 (4.11)
Using again a phasor diagram (Figure 4.8), it can be seen that if only the
propagation is taken into account, the phase errors carried in each
direction are opposite, and therefore the error on the phase difference
would be doubled. However, with the additional π/2 phase lag, the phase
errors ϕe and ϕe′ are actually:
Figure 4.8 Phasor diagram of the main primary amplitudes Am and Am′, and the
amplitudes Acb and Acb′ backscattered in the middle of the coil: (a) effect of
propagation and (b) additional effect of the π/2 phase lag.
 (4.12)
100

 (4.13)
As sinϕcb′ = sin(−π − ∆ϕch) = sin∆ϕcb, both phase errors become
equal when the moduli Acb′  and Acb are equal. Because on the
beamsplitter one backscattered wave is transmitted twice while the other is
reflected (or coupled) twice, these moduli are equal when the splitter is
precisely 50-50 (assuming that the loss is symmetrical in the coil), which
eliminates the effect of Rayleigh backscatter.
To summarize, the low coherence length of the broadband source
preferably used in an interferometric fiber gyro decreases considerably the
Rayleigh backscattering noise, and a further reduction is obtained with a
biasing modulation at the proper frequency and with a precise 50-50
separation in the coil splitter. Other reduction techniques remain possible if
a longer coherence length is used [10], but they are difficult to reduce to
practice.
In any case, the reduction of Rayleigh backscattering noise is reasonably
demanding in terms of short coherence length, compared to other effects,
and a multimode laser diode is sufficient to get low noise. This spurious
effect does not require a coherence length as short as that of a
superluminescent diode or an erbium ASE source (see Section 9.2).
References
[1] Arditty, H. J., et al., “Re-Entrant Fiber-Optic Approach to Rotation Sensing,” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 157, No. 2978, pp. 138–148.
[2] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Progress in Optical Fiber Gyroscopes Using Integrated Optics,”
AGARD-NATO Proceedings, Vol. CPP-383, 1985, pp. 9A1–9A13.
[3] Lefèvre, H. C., “Comments About Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol.
838, 1987, pp. 86–97.
[4] Cutler, C. C., S. A. Newton, and H. J. Shaw, “Limitation of Rotating Sensing by
Scattering,” Optics Letters, Vol. 5, 1980, pp. 488–490.
[5] Davis, J. L., and S. Ezekiel, “Closed-Loop, Low-Noise Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensor,”
Optics Letters, Vol. 6, 1981, pp. 505–507.
[6] Böhm, K., et al., “Low-Noise Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensing,” Optics Letters, Vol. 6,
1981, pp. 64–66.
[7] Bergh, R. A., H. C. Lefèvre, and H. J. Shaw, “All-Single-Mode Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope,” Optics Letters, Vol. 6, 1981, pp. 198–200.
[8] Lefèvre, H. C., R. A. Bergh, and H. J. Shaw, “All-Fiber Gyroscope with Inertial-
Navigation Short-Term Sensitivity,” Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp. 454–456.
101

[9] Takada, K., “Calculation of Rayleigh Backscattering Noise in Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes,”
J.O.S.A., Vol. A2, 1985, pp. 872–877.
[10] Mackintosh, J. M., and B. Culshaw, “Analysis and Observation of Coupling Ratio
Dependence of Rayleigh Backscattering Noise in a Fiber-Optic Gyroscope,” Journal
of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 7, 1989, pp. 1323–1328.
102

CHAPTER 5
Analysis of Polarization
Nonreciprocities with Broadband
Source and High-Birefringence
Polarization-Maintaining Fiber
5.1 Depolarization Effect in High-Birefringence Polarization-
Maintaining Fibers
The principle of polarization maintaining (PM) fibers (see Section B.6) is
to create a strong birefringence that splits the polarization-mode
degeneracy of ordinary single-mode fiber. When light is coupled in one
principal (or eigen) polarization state, it will remain mostly in this input
state, as the induced birefringence is much higher than the spurious defects
and yields phase mismatch.
The behavior of polarization-maintaining fibers may be described with
two orthogonal principal polarization modes and random coupling points,
which transfer a small amount of light from one mode to the other. The
mean rate of power transfer is called the h-parameter of the fiber as
analyzed by Kaminow [1], “h” standing for holding, with:
dP⟘/dL = h ⋅ P// (5.1)
where P// is the power of the primary input polarization mode and dP⟘ is
the power transferred in crossed mode over the elementary length dL. One
calls the polarization extinction ratio (PER):
A typical value of h is 10–5 m–1 (a polarization conservation of 20 dB
over 1 km).
The most popular polarization-maintaining fibers used in a fiber gyro are
103

based on linear birefringence induced by an additional stressing structure in
the cladding. They conserve a linear state of polarization when this state is
coupled at the input along one principal axis of fiber birefringence.
In a fiber gyro, this polarization conservation maintains most of the
power in the primary reciprocal wave, avoiding signal fading. Only a small
part is transferred in the crossed nonreciprocal wave, and, in addition,
when a broadband source is used, it gets depolarized because it propagates
at a different velocity compared to the main mode, as outlined by
Rashleigh et al. [2]. The propagation of a broad-spectrum wave may be
analyzed by considering that it is composed of wave trains with a length
equal to the decoherence length Ldc. As described in Section A.12, the
coherence function is a bell-shaped function without strict width boundary.
The definition of the coherence length varies depending on publications. In
this book, we use the classical Born and Wolf definition for the coherence
length Lc [3], which is actually an rms half-width or half-width at 1σ: this
is the length that preserves a good interference contrast. We prefer to call
the decoherence length Ldc, the other usual definition based on the simple
formula λ2/∆λFWHM, where ∆λFWHM is the full width at the half-
maximum of the source intensity spectrum. Ldc is actually a half-width at
about 4σ: this is the length that reduces the contrast down to a few
percentages. Note that some authors are using a third definition for a
Gaussian coherence function: the half-width at 1/e, which is actually a
half-width at 2σ.
When there is a crossed-polarization coupling point, the main and
crossed wave trains happen to lose their overlap (there is a phase
mismatch) because of their velocity difference (Figure 5.1), which yields
statistical decorrelation between both crossed polarizations, called
depolarization.
104

Figure 5.1 Propagation of a wave train in high-birebringence fiber.
This is obtained after a propagation length, called the depolarization
length Ld [2], and that is defined with:
Ld/Ldc = 1/∆nb = Λ/λ (5.2)
where ∆nb is the birefringence index difference and Λ is the fiber
birefringence beat length.
As explained in Section B.6.3, this simple formula applies only if the
birefringence index difference ∆nb is wavelength-independent, which is
the case with stress-induced birefringence fiber commonly used in the
fiber gyro. In the most general case, dispersion has to be taken into
account and there is Ld/Ldc = 1/[∆nb + ω(d(∆nb)/dω)] [2], which can be
simply expressed with the difference of the group index ∆nbg instead of
the phase index ∆nb:
Ld/Ldc = 1/∆nbg
For example, an SLD at 850 nm has a typical spectrum width
∆λFWHM of 20 nm, which gives a decoherence length:
Ldc = 35 μm
and a typical ∆nb value is 5 × 10–4; therefore, the depolarization length
is:
Ld = 7 cm
An erbium-doped-fiber ASE source at 1,550 nm has a spectral width of
105

about 15 nm, yielding:
Ldc = 150 μm and Ld = 30 cm
However, this depolarization is not completely equivalent to a naturally
unpolarized light. Unpolarized light remains perfectly unpolarized
independently of the birefringence of the propagation medium (if the
attenuation is not polarization-dependent): two orthogonal polarizations are
always statistically decorrelated. With depolarization of a broad spectrum
with a birefringent propagation, a good correlation may be restored by
compensating for the delay. For example, if, after a propagation in a
birefringent medium, light propagates along the same length of birefringent
medium, but the principal axes have been rotated by 90°, both polarization
modes propagate half the way in the fast mode and half the way in the
slow mode: they are depolarized in the middle, but they get polarized again
at the end, as the first delay is compensated for by the second one.
The whole analysis of the polarization problem in the fiber gyro aims at
avoiding such compensation to take full advantage of this depolarization
effect which drastically reduces nonreciprocities.
5.2 Analysis of Polarization Nonreciprocities in a Fiber
Gyroscope Using an All-Polarization-Maintaining
Waveguide Configuration
5.2.1 Intensity-Type Effects
Let us first consider a ring interferometer using a polarization-maintaining
fiber or waveguide with a perfect input; that is, the state of polarization of
the light source is maintained at the input in the same mode, mode 1, and,
in particular, is aligned on the transmission mode of the polarizer. When
there is one polarization coupling point M in the coil, the input wave train
of the broadband source yields at the output two primary wave trains that
are still in mode 1 and that are perfectly in phase because of reciprocity.
There are also two coupled wave trains in mode 2 that have propagated
along different paths [Figure 5.2(a)]. This should induce a phase
difference, but because of their short coherence length, they do not
overlap and these spurious interferences lose their contrast as analyzed by
Burns and Moeller [4] (except for a coupling in the middle of the coil,
which may be disregarded for the moment).
If there are two coupling points M and M′ placed at about the same
106

distance from the splitter [Figure 5.2(b)], the cross-coupled wave trains
overlap and interfere [5, 6]. This is similar to the problem of
backreflection, in which one reflecting point is not harmful but two
symmetrical reflection points yield a spurious Michelson interferometer.
There are actually six wave trains:
Figure 5.2 Propagation of a wave train in a polarization-preserving ring
interferometer: (a) with one crossed-coupling point M; and (b) with two symmetrical
crossed-coupling points M and M′.
Two primary reciprocal wave trains with the same phase
accumulated in the propagation along the length L of the coil:
where β1 = 2π ⋅ n1/λ is the propagation constant of mode 1.
Two secondary wave trains that have propagated in mode 1
between the splitter and the coupling points and that have been
coupled in mode 2 for the rest of the propagation. Their respective
phases are:
107

ϕ122 = β1LM + β2(LMM′ + LM′) (5.3)
 (5.4)
where β2 is the propagation constant of mode 2, LM is the length between
the splitter and M, LMM′ is the length between M and M′, and LM′ is the
length between the splitter and M′.
Two other secondary wave trains that have propagated in mode 1
between the splitter and the coupling points and also between the
two coupling points, and that have been coupled in mode 2
between the coupling points and the splitter at the output. Their
respective phases are:
ϕ112 = β1(LM + LMM′) + β2LM′ (5.5)
 (5.6)
Both pairs of secondary wave trains have the same spurious phase
difference:
∆ϕs = (β1 − β2)(LM + LM′) (5.7)
Note that the propagation between the two coupling points does not
yield any nonreciprocal phase difference. The nonreciprocity is only
related to the difference in accumulated birefringence (β1 − β2)(LM − LM
′) between the splitter and both symmetrical coupling points.
These two pairs of coherent wave trains are in the crossed mode 2 at
the output and are attenuated by the polarizer. The phase error signal is
therefore coming from an intensity-type effect, and it is reduced by the
intensity rejection ratio of the polarizer:
 (5.8)
where ρM and ρM′ are the intensity crossed-coupling ratio at M and M′.
As ∆ϕs may vary over 2π, the mean value of this phase error is zero, and
its rms deviation is:
 (5.9)
108

Note that there are additional wave trains that have experienced a
crossed coupling twice, at the input and at the output. They come back in
the same mode 1 and have the same phase because of reciprocity:
 (5.10)
When there are several pairs of symmetrical coupling points, each pair
creates two parasitic interference waves, and because these waves are not
coherent with each other, the spurious intensity signals are simply added.
It is possible to evaluate the effect of a fiber coil with a simple model
[6]. The random coupling along the coil may be regarded as created by a
discrete coupling point Mi for each depolarization length Ld (Figure 5.3),
with an intensity coupling h ⋅ Ld. With a coil length L, there are N = L/Ld
coupling points and N/2 pairs of symmetrical points. Each pair generates
two pairs of secondary wave trains (in each direction) that yield the same
phase-bias error; therefore,
∆ϕei = 2∈2[hLdsin∆ϕsi] (5.11)
as hLd is the intensity ratio between the main wave trains and the
secondary cross-coupled wave trains. The phase differences ∆ϕsi are
randomly spread over 2π and the total effect is the summation of
independent random variables ∆ϕei, which are centered about zero.
Therefore, the mean value of the total phase error ∆ϕe is also zero and the
square of its rms deviation is equal to the sum of the square of the rms
deviations of each variable:
 (5.12)
We have 
 because the mean value of sin2∆ϕsi is 1/2;
therefore,
Because L = N ⋅ Ld, and:
109

where h ⋅ L is the total coupling of polarization along the coil. The rms
deviation of the birefringence phase error of a fiber coil is not proportional
to the polarization coupling ratio h ⋅ L in the coil, as might at first be
thought. It is reduced proportionally to the square root of the number N of
depolarization lengths along the coil [6].
For example, with a typical depolarization length of 10 cm, N is equal to
104 in a 1-km coil. Because the conservation is typically 20 dB/km, there
are 104 couping points of 60 dB that yield before filtering by the polarizer
a total phase error (rms value) of only 10–4 rad, not 10–2 rad. A polarizer
of 40 dB of rejection is good enough to reduce this intensity type bias
error below 10–8 rad. This 40-dB value must be compared with the 160
dB that would be required without polarization conservation and
depolarization effect.
Figure 5.3 Simple model of pairs of symmetrical discrete crossed-coupling points Mi
and Mi′ for each depolarization length Ld
This result applies only to couplings that are continuously distributed
along the fiber coil, the random coupling being regarded as a stationary
stochastic process. However, in practice, the main limiting factor is not the
coil itself but the localized couplings at the two ends of the coil. As a
matter of fact, in the previous example, the effect of the fiber coil is
equivalent to a pair of symmetrical points with 40 dB of polarization cross-
coupling, even if the total conservation of the coil is only 20 dB. To
preserve this benefit, it is desirable to control the polarization cross-
couplings of the coil ends at better than this 40-dB value.
With an all-fiber configuration, problems arise with the polarization
conservation of the coil coupler that is typically in the 20- to 30-dB range.
There are other parasitic couplings at the splices between the coupler leads
and the coil ends, but it is possible to unbalance the lengths of both
coupler leads. If their dissymmetry is larger than the depolarization length
(i.e., typically 10 cm), the coherence between these spurious waves is
suppressed.
110

With an integrated optic circuit, the polarization coupling at the splitter
(with a Y-junction in particular) is negligible, as the strong birefringence of
LiNbO3 provides excellent polarization conservation. Parasitic couplings
come from the coil ends butt-coupled on the circuit. A 40-dB coupling is
only a 0.5° misalignment of the principal axes; however, in practice, it is
difficult to have a rugged connection of a fiber without inducing stress that
yields locally an additional birefringence and thus a residual polarization
cross-coupling typically equal to 20–25 dB. The depolarization length in
LiNbO3 is much shorter than in a fiber (about 0.7 to 2 mm instead of 10
to 30 cm, as the birefringence index difference is 7 × 10–2 instead of 5 ×
10–4), but it is still too long to get a sufficient imbalance between both
branches of the Y-junction. Typical values are a branch separation of 200
μm and a slant angle of 10° for the parallelogram-shape circuit; that is, an
imbalance of only 200 μm × tan10° = 35 μm compared to a depolarization
length of 0.7 to 2 mm.
This shows that it is very important to accurately control the magnitude
and the position of the various localized polarization cross-couplings, even
if they seem buried in the total system cross-coupling.
5.2.2 Comment About Length of Depolarization Ld Versus Length of
Polarization Correlation Lpc
As is explained in Section A.12, the contrast or visibility of interference
fringes is equal to the autocorrelation function γc of the centered
spectrum. Most problems are usually analyzed, independently of the exact
bell shape of the function, with a half-width of the function called the
coherence time τc or the corresponding coherence length Lc = cτc. As
outlined in Section 5.1, their exact definition is not always precisely
defined and it deserves to be recalled more accurately.
The classical definition [3] is similar to normalized quadratic averaging,
using γc as a probability distribution:
 (5.13)
where ∆Lop is the optical path length difference. The coherence length is
thus the rms half-width of γc or its half-width at 1σ, σ being the standard
111

deviation. This definition is the most significant in classical interferometry,
because the problem is usually to define the length that preserves a good
interference contrast.
As we have already seen, the length that suppresses the contrast is also
very important: it may be called the decoherence length Ldc. Because, in
theory, 
the 
bell-shaped 
autocorrelation 
function 
reaches 
zero
asymptotically at infinity, it should be infinite, but, in practice, a half-width
at 4σ is significant. This decoherence length Ldc is defined simply as:
 (5.14)
where  is the mean wavelength of the broad spectrum and ∆λFWHM is
its full width at half maximum. For this distance, the interference contrast
is reduced to few percentages.
When wave trains are used to analyze the effect, it has to be considered
that Ldc is their full width, as the full width of the autocorrelation of a
pulse is double the full width of this pulse.
Applying these concepts to the problem of depolarization in a
birefringent medium, it seems more suitable to relate the depolarization
length Ld to the decoherence length Ldc, with Ld = Ldc/∆nb. In particular,
to ensure that two crossed-polarization coupling points do not yield any
spurious signal, their imbalance has to be equal or larger than Ld with this
last definition. If Lc/∆nb is used, the signal is still 80% of the perfectly
contrasted case. It seems more suitable to call Lc/∆nb the length of
polarization correlation Lpc, with:
Lpc = Ld /4
This is the length of propagation in the birefringent medium, which
preserves a good degree of polarization (i.e., a good statistical correlation
between both orthogonal polarization components).
The case of random coupling along the coil is more delicate. In Section
5.2.1 we considered the number N of depolarization lengths Ld along the
fiber, which yields a safe evaluation of the upper limit of the phase error.
However, we may want to reach a more precise quantification of the
effect, and, in particular, to define the actual half-width that has to be
112

used. In any case, if Lpc happens to be more suitable than Ld, this
multiplies by four the number of averaged elements, which gives a phase
error that is only 
 times lower than previously found.
It is possible to use a refined model by dividing the fiber coil in
elementary length segments Le that are shorter than the depolarization
length Ld but that remain longer than the autocorrelation width of the
stochastic crossed-coupling process in the fiber, which is assumed to be
very short (Figure 5.4). Taking two symmetrical elementary segments,
they yield a phase-bias error:
Figure 5.4 Refined model with elementary segments Le.
∆ϕeii = 2∈2hLesin∆ϕsii (5.15)
The factor of 2 takes into account the input and output crossed-
couplings, and h ⋅ Le is the intensity crossed-coupling ratio along Le.
However, an elementary segment i yields a spurious signal with its
symmetrical segment i, but also with the other segments j, which are
around this symmetrical segment. Compared to the symmetrical case, the
error is reduced proportionately to the autocorrelation function γc of the
source:
∆ϕeij = 2∈2hLeγcijsin∆ϕsij (5.16)
where γcij is the value of γc for the actual path difference between the
two slightly unbalanced segments. Similar to the analysis of Section 5.2.1,
the total phase error ∆ϕe is a random variable that is the sum of the
independent variables ∆ϕij. Because ∆ϕsij are uniformly spread over 2π,
they are all centered about a zero mean value, and the square of the rms
deviation of ∆ϕe is the sum of the square of the rms deviation of all these
independent variables:
113

 (5.17)
For a given element i, we first have to sum over j. As a matter of fact,
the various ∆ϕeij are independent, as Le is assumed to be longer than the
autocorrelation width of the stochastic cross-coupling process in the fiber,
and:
 (5.18)
Replacing discrete summation with an integral summation, we have:
 (5.19)
We have to introduce a new length of polarization correlation Lpc′ with:
 (5.20)
and:
 (5.21)
We have now to sum over i (i.e., the L/2Le segments over half the coil),
and:
 (5.22)
Compared to the analysis of Section 5.2.1, Lpc′ replaces Ld. In the
particular case of a Gaussian autocorrelation, Lpc′ may be computed
easily, as 
 and 
 It is found that:
 (5.23)
This refined analysis shows that the length Lpc′ that yields the exact
number of averaged elements along the coil has an intermediate value
between the depolarization length Ld and the length of polarization
correlation Lpc, but in any case the phase bias error induced by a fiber coil
114

with a stationary random cross-coupling remains very similar to the simple
analysis of Section 5.2.1.
5.2.3 Amplitude-Type Effects
As described in Section 3.4.1, the main source of birefringence
nonreciprocity with ordinary fiber is caused by an amplitude-type effect
where light that is misaligned at the input with respect to the transmission
mode of the polarizer is coupled back in the main mode at the output. It
carries a nonreciprocal phase error, but also interferes with the primary
waves, which yields an amplification of the spurious error term with a
coherent detection process [7].
The use of birefringent fiber for the coil and also for the couplers and
the fiber pigtail of the source suppresses this effect. As a matter of fact,
the primary waves always remain in the same fast (or slow) mode, and
light that is misaligned at the input accumulates some path difference with
respect to the primary waves in the birefringent input lead of the ring
interferometer. When it is cross-coupled in the coil, it cannot compensate
for this previous path difference. The birefringence of the input fiber lead
and the one of the base branch of the Y junction destroy the correlation
between the primary input wave that has a polarization aligned with the
polarizer and the crossed input wave: this suppresses (to the first order)
the amplitude-type effect [6, 8].
However, if there is no birefringence in the input lead, it is found that
cross-coupling in the first depolarization length of the coil yields an
amplitude-type effect, since the crossed wave remains coherent with the
primary wave in this case [4, 9]. Even if the coupling is typically only 60
dB along a depolarization length, this would require a rejection of 60 dB,
assuming an input misalignment of 20 dB, to limit the amplitude-type
phase error below 10–7 rad.
It is seen that the birefringence of the input lead is as important as that
of the coil to get full advantage of the depolarization effect. The need of a
birefringent input lead makes integrated optics very desirable because of
the strong natural birefringence of LiNbO3 [6]. It is necessary to be
careful to use the same fast (or slow) mode in the circuit and in the fiber
to avoid path compensation that could restore correlation between the
crossed-polarization modes.
This simple analysis assumes that the primary waves are composed of a
115

single wave train that propagates in front of all the parasitic wave trains if
the fast mode is used, or behind if the slow mode is used, avoiding any
coherent detection. A real system is actually more complex because
multiple crossed couplings have to be taken into account. The primary
reciprocal waves are composed of a first main wave train, but there are
also additional smaller wave trains coming from an even number of
crossed-couplings along the system. They do not carry any birefringence-
induced phase error, but, contrary to the main primary wave trains, they
may be coherent with a spurious signal and serve as a local oscillator [6].
This effect is much smaller than if it was the first main wave train, but it
should be addressed when the best performance is looked for.
The amount of even multiple crossed-couplings can be easily measured
taking the spectrum of the polarized light exiting the gyro and calculating
by Fourier transform its coherence function. Figure 5.5(a) displays a
typical bell-shaped input spectrum with its coherence function in
logarithmic scale, and one sees a very fast decrease. Now Figure 5.5(b)
displays the spectrum of this same light but after propagation through the
PM fiber coil of the gyro and filtering by the polarizer. One sees a noisy
spectrum and the calculated coherence function yields a plateau instead of
the fast decrease in the case of the bell-shaped input light.
116

Figure 5.5 Spectrum and related coherence function: (a) input light and (b) output light
with spectral noise and a plateau of the coherence function due to even multiple crossed
couplings.
This plateau has a typical elevation of 3 × 10−3 and its length
corresponds to the maximum delay between the two orthogonal
polarizations going through the coil. With ∆nb = 5 × 10–4, it is 50 cm for
a coil length of 1 km.
The residual phase bias defect due to polarization nonreciprocities can
be evaluated as the product of:
The amplitude rejection ratio ∈ of the polarizer;
The amplitude polarization coupling coefficient 
 of the localized
connections between the fiber coil and the integrated optic circuit;
The elevation of the coherence plateau Cplateau due to the
multiple even cross couplings in the coil;
The degree of polarization Dp of the unpolarized source
transmitted through components which have a residual PDL
(polarization dependent loss) or PDC (polarization coupling), as
described in Section 3.4.4.
Typically 
 Cplateau = 3 × 10–3, and Dp = 3 × 10–2
117

(PDL or PDC of 0.3 dB); then it requires a polarization rejection:
∈ = 10–2, that is 40 dB
for a bias defect of 10–7 rad needed for medium-grade performance.
However, the required rejection is ∈ = 10–4, that is, 80 dB for a bias
defect of 10–9 rad needed for very high performance.
In practice, a careful analysis has to be performed of the amount of
crossed-coupling at the various defect points (source pigtailing, fiber
splices, coupler, integrated optic circuit pigtailing), the birefringence delay
between these points, and the actual coherence of the source to ensure
that any second-order amplitude-type error is sufficiently reduced by the
polarizer.
Note that it is possible to further improve the decorrelation effect of the
birefringence of the input lead with an additional modulation of this
birefringence as proposed by Carrara et al. [10]. It can be performed with
a phase modulator on the base branch of the Y junction of the MIOC.
However, such a method increases the complexity of the device, and the
present polarizer performance allows a very low phase error to be
obtained without this additional modulator.
5.3 Use of a Depolarizer
Polarization-maintaining fiber is the optimal technical choice for high
performance, but it remains possible to use standard nonpolarization-
maintaining fiber without polarization control and without getting signal
fading if a Lyot-type depolarizer is inserted into the system [11]. Such a
depolarizer is based on the loss of polarization correlation with propagation
of a broadband source in a birefringent medium (see Section B.7.4). This
is similar to the depolarization of parasitic crossed waves that we saw in
Section 5.2, but it is now done on purpose. As a matter of fact, when a
linearly polarized broadband source is aligned at 45° of the principal axes
of the birefringent medium, the input wave train is split evenly along both
axes and that, at the output, the two wave trains do not overlap if the path
is longer than the depolarization length Ld. To get depolarization with any
input state of polarization, a Lyot depolarizer is actually composed of a
first birefringent medium with a length LL and an index difference ∆nb,
118

and a second one rotated by 45° and with a length 2LL twice as large. The
wave train is first split unevenly as a function of the input state of
polarization, and each secondary wave train is split again, but now evenly,
along the rotated axis of the second birefringent medium. At the output,
the four wave trains do not overlap, and there is the same decorrelated
power along each axis (Figure 5.6) if LL is larger than Ld. When such a
depolarized light is sent through an ordinary fiber, it remains depolarized if
the residual fiber birefringence (particularly bending-induced birefringence,
described in Section B.5.2) does not compensate for the delay given by
the depolarizer. Such depolarizers may be fabricated with short lengths of
high-birefringence polarization-maintaining fiber or with integrated optic
waveguides that have a natural crystal birefringence.
A first depolarizer has to be used between the source and the polarizer
and a second one has to be used in the coil, but the immediate drawback
of this approach is an additional loss of 3 dB at the input through the
polarizer, and a second loss at the output. Furthermore, depolarization is
not perfect, especially when it is obtained with fibers that always have
residual spurious cross-coupling, and extreme care must be taken to avoid
path compensation that could restore the contrast of amplitude-type error
signals.
In practice, the use of depolarizers does not yield results that are as
good as with polarization-maintaining fibers. Its main benefit is in terms of
the cost of the fiber coil, but, for the whole system, the cost saving is not
obvious because of the increased complexity brought by the additional
depolarizers.
Figure 5.6 Principles of a Lyot depolarizer.
119

5.4 Testing with Optical Coherence Domain Polarimetry
(OCDP)
5.4.1 OCDP Based on Path-Matched White-Light Interferometry
This analysis of polarization nonreciprocities with polarization-maintaining
fibers or with depolarizers has shown the importance of depolarization
effects brought about by birefringence when a low temporal coherence
source is used. However, the location and the magnitude of the various
cross-coupling points have to be determined precisely, even if they seem
buried in the background cross-coupling of the system, to evaluate the
residual bias error.
The usual polarization measurement techniques cannot differentiate a
series of defects, but this problem has been solved by applying techniques
of path-matched white-light interferometry [12–14]. By analogy with the
well-known method of optical time domain reflectometry (OTDR) [15]
used to test the attenuation of ordinary fibers and its coherence domain
counterpart, or OCDR [16], this technique was called the optical
coherence domain polarimetry (OCDP).
The principle of path-matched white-light interferometry is based on the
use of a broadband source (white light being historically the first one
available) in an unbalanced interferometer. When the path imbalance is
much longer than the coherence length, the interference contrast vanishes
(see Section A.12). Considering wave trains, the path difference
suppresses their overlap at the output (Figure 5.7). However, passing
through a second readout interferometer that has the same path imbalance,
the interference contrast is restored to one-half, because among the four
output wave trains, two overlap, as they have both propagated along one
short path and one long path in each interferometer.
Figure 5.7 Principle of white-light interferometry: propagation of a wave train in a pair
of path-matched interferometers.
Now if one splitter in the first interferometer has a very low power-
120

splitting ratio (∈2 and 1 − ∈2 with ∈2 << 1/2), the contrast of the
restored interference is twice ∈, the amplitude ratio, and not ∈2, the
intensity ratio (Figure 5.8). The powerful wave train serves actually as a
local oscillator for the coherent detection process (see Section A.8.1) of
the low-power wave train. For example, a splitting ratio of 60 dB thus
yields a contrast of 2 × 10–3 and not 10–6.
A polarization cross-coupling point in a high-birefringence fiber is
equivalent to this weak coupling. The main wave train propagates along
the primary mode, and the cross-coupled wave train propagates along the
other, the fast mode being equivalent to the short path and the slow mode
being equivalent to the long path. An output polarizer aligned at 45° of the
principal axes of the birefringent fiber is equivalent to the 3-dB recombiner
(Figure 5.9). Using a readout interferometer, particularly a Michelson
interferometer, the birefringence path imbalance in the fiber may be
compensated for, yielding a contrast recovery equal to twice the amplitude
ratio of the polarization cross-coupling, which makes this method of
OCDP very sensitive. When several coupling points are located in series
along the fiber, they can be measured separately by scanning one mirror of
the Michelson interferometer.
Figure 5.8 White-light interferometry with a very low-power splitting ratio ∈2 of one
splitter: the restored interference contrast is the splitting ratio ∈ in amplitude.
The path difference ∆Lr in the readout interferometer gives the distance
Lf between the point that is analyzed and the fiber end:
∆Lr = ∆nbLf (5.24)
where ∆nb is the birefringence group index difference of the fiber. The
spatial resolution is equal to the depolarization length Ld, which is about
10 to 30 cm in a PM fiber, but, as we have already seen, it is only 0.7 to 2
mm in a LiNbO3 integrated optic circuit.
This technique was first proposed to test the spatial distribution of the
121

random coupling along the fiber [12], which is very useful, since it is
important to control the degradation of the polarization conservation of the
coil by the winding process, and in particular to check that it is not due to
a few localized cross-coupling points. However, the main interest of this
technique is the in situ control of the in-line components, like couplers,
and of the connections [13, 14], particularly the fiber connections on the
integrated optic circuit, which, as we have seen, are crucial for limiting the
bias error, as they are symmetrical with respect to the splitter. It may also
be applied to the test of depolarizers.
Figure 5.9 Principle of optical coherence domain polarimetry (OCDP): the restored
interference contrast is the coupling ratio ∈ in amplitude.
This OCDP testing is perfectly adapted to the case of the fiber gyro,
because it measures spurious polarization defects in exactly the same way
as they induce phase error in a ring interferometer. As an example, it can
be used for nondestructive control of the fiber pigtail alignment of a
packaged superluminescent diode, despite its low degree of polarization. A
partially polarized source is usually considered to be the superposition of
two orthogonal, incoherent polarizations, but when tested by white-light
interferometry, it should actually be considered to be the superposition of a
perfectly unpolarized source and a perfectly linearly polarized source
(Figure 3.33). For example, with a 4-to-l power ratio between the two
axes, the superluminescent diode is actually the superposition of a
perfectly unpolarized source with two-fifths of the power and a perfectly
polarized source with three-fifths of the power. The unpolarized
component does not give any contrast recovery in the readout
interferometer in the same way that unpolarized light eliminates
birefringence bias error in a fiber gyro (see Section 3.4.4), while the
122

polarized component behaves like an ordinary polarized source: a
misalignment of the principal axes of the pigtail produces a polarization
coupling that can be measured with the value of the contrast that is
recovered when the path difference of the readout interferometer
compensates for the birefringence of the fiber pigtail. Notice that the
Michelson interferometer used in this setup is also a suitable system for
precisely measuring the coherence function of the broadband source and,
in particular, for evaluating its residual multimode laser structure [17]
(Figure 5.10).
Figure 5.10 Measurement of the effect of the residual multimode laser structure of a
superluminescent diode with its coherence function (log scale).
Another very interesting feature of this method is the measurement of
polarizer rejection [13]. On entering a linearly polarized wave train at 45°
of the principal axes of an integrated optic polarizer on a birefringent
substrate, there are, at the output, a main transmitted wave train and a
secondary wave train attenuated by the polarizer (Figure 5.11). An output
polarizer at 45° recombines both wave trains in the same polarization
state, and a readout interferometer yields a measurement of the amplitude
extinction ratio of the integrated optic polarizer. Note that a high rejection
of the input and output polarizers of the setup is not required. The
additional polarizers are used only to split the input light into the two
modes of the polarizer under test and to recombine them at the output.
123

Figure 5.11 Propagation of a wave train in an integrated-optic polarizer fabricated on
a birefringent substrate (case of a fast transmitted TE mode, as with x-cut y-
propagating LiNbO3 circuit).
It is even possible to differentiate the rejection and the cross-coupling of
the fiber connections when the circuit is pigtailed: polarized light has to be
entered at 45° of the axes of the input birefringent fiber lead of the IO
circuit, and a polarizer has to be placed at 45° of the axes of the output
lead. The polarizer rejection is measured with a readout imbalance that
corresponds to the total birefringence of the two leads and the circuit,
while the cross-coupling at each connection is measured with an imbalance
that relates to the birefringence of the corresponding lead (Figure 5.12).
This also applies to all-fiber polarizers such as coiled polarizers.
Figure 5.12 OCDP testing of a pigtailed integrated-optic polarizer with: (1) the path
difference of the wave train corresponding to the first crossed coupling; (2) the path
difference of the wave train corresponding to the second crossed coupling; and (3)
the path difference corresponding to the wave train attenuated by the IO polarizer (it
is assumed that the IO polarizer transmits the fast TE mode).
Finally, this technique can be extended to spatial modes and, in
particular, to test the quality of spatial filtering in the short length of single-
mode fiber used at the input-output port of the ring interferometer [13].
124

Light coupled in the fiber propagates in the fundamental LP01 mode, but
if the fiber is not perfectly single-mode, there is also some light in the
higher-order LP11 mode. As with polarization modes, there is a velocity
difference and the main LP01 wave train does not overlap in time with the
attenuated LP11 wave train at the output. They must be recombined and
sent into a readout interferometer to measure the amplitude extinction ratio
of the spurious LP11 mode. It can be clearly observed with optical
coherence domain reflectometry (OCDR) [18] that path-matched white-
light interferometry equalizes group transit time difference and not that of
phase transit time. The discrepancy is negligible with stress-induced
birefringence, but it may be very different with spatial modes where there
are dispersion effects.
OCDP testing does provide a very powerful tool for controlling and
understanding the various problems of polarization and birefringence. It
allows one to optimize the compromise among polarization rejection,
polarization couplings, and depolarization, and to get a very low bias error
despite the limited performance of the components. In the early days of
fiber gyros, intensity coupling ratios were measured when testing the
selectivity of components and assembling the system, while the spurious
signals were dependent on amplitude ratios because of the high coherence
of the laser source. Broadband sources and OCDP testing put the problem
back in the right perspective: amplitude coupling ratios are measured (and
localized) during mounting, which means high sensitivity for test and
control, while the spurious effects are now dependent on intensity ratios,
which means reduced parasitic signals in the final setup.
Note finally that OCDR techniques, which are, as we have seen, very
similar to OCDP, is a very useful tool to accurately evaluate residual
backreflections at splices and connections between fiber and integrated
optic circuit.
Known under the name optical coherence tomography (OCT) [19],
OCDR techniques are, by the way, well developed in medicine.
5.4.2 OCDP Using Optical Spectrum Analysis
This technique of OCDP was first based on path-matched interferometry
and has yielded several commercially available dedicated instruments [17].
However, a path-matched interferometer is actually a scanning
interferometer which the base of Fourier-transform spectroscopy (see
125

Section A.14).
In Fourier-transform spectroscopy, one measures the full coherence
function of the tested light and through Fourier transform (see Section
A.12 on coherence), the spectrum is retrieved. Conversely, a classical
optical spectrum analyzer (OSA), grating-based in particular, measures the
spectrum and through (inverse) Fourier transform the coherence function
is retrieved.
Because an OSA is now a very common multipurpose test instrument
with the development of wavelength domain multiplexing (WDM)
telecoms, it is tempting to use it for OCDP instead of a dedicated
unipurpose test instrument.
Both approaches are theoretically equivalent but they have some
practical differences. An OSA has a limited spectral resolution, typically
∆λr = 0.01 nm, and then can test coupling only within an optical distance
λ2/∆λr (i.e., 250 mm). For testing couplings in a PM fiber with ∆nb = 5 ×
10–4, it corresponds to a length limited to λ2/∆λr ⋅ ∆nb (i.e., 500m).
In terms of sensitivity, an OSA is limited by excess RIN because it
filters a very narrow broad spectrum. It requires usually an averaging of
many scans to get a low noise, and because the interference pattern, which
is looked for, varies in temperature, it is not stable enough to get full
advantage of this averaging. In practice, a dedicated instrument allows one
to measure contrast down to 10–4 to 3 × 10–5 (i.e., coupling or rejection
of −80 to −90 dB), while an OSA is limited to 10–3 to 3 × 10–4 (i.e., −60
to −70 dB).
As seen in Section A.14, there is a last spectrum analysis technique,
now available because of WDM telecoms, the tunable laser. It has a very
narrow line width and then a much higher spectral resolution than an OSA.
In addition, the probe laser line has no excess RIN as a broadband source
filtered in an OSA, as seen in Section A.2.
References
[1] Kaminow, I. P., “Polarization in Optical Fibers,” IEEE Journal of Quantum
Electronics, Vol. QE-17, 1981, pp. 15–21.
[2] Rashleigh, S. C., et al., “Polarization Holding in Birefringent Single-Mode Fibers,”
Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp. 40–42.
[3] Born, M., and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, New York: Pergamon Press, 1975.
126

[4] Burns, W. K., and R. P. Moeller, “Polarizer Requirements for Fiber Gyroscopes with
High-Birefringence Fiber and Broad-Band Source,” Journal of Lightwave
Technology, Vol. LT2, 1984, pp. 430–435.
[5] Arditty, H. J., et al., “Integrated-Optic Fiber Gyroscope, Progresses Towards a Tactical
Application,” Proceedings of OFS 2’84, Stuttgart, VDE-Verlag, 1984, pp. 321–325.
[6] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Progress in Optical Fiber Gyroscopes Using Integrated Optics,”
Proceedings of AGARD-NATO, Vol. CPP-383, 1985, pp. 9A1–9A13.
[7] Fredricks, R. J., and R. Ulrich, “Phase-Error Bounds of Fibre Gyro with Imperfect
Polariser/Depolarizer,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 20, 1984, pp. 330–332.
[8] Jones, E., and J. W. Parker, “Bias Reduction by Polarization Dispersion in the Fibre-
Optic Gyroscope,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 22, 1986, pp. 54–56.
[9] Burns, W. K., “Phase-Error Bounds of Fiber Gyro with Polarization-Holding Fiber,”
Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. LT4, 1986, pp. 8–14.
[10] Carrara, S. L. A., B. Y. Kim, and H. J. Shaw, “Bias Drift Reduction in Polarization-
Maintaining Fiber Gyroscope,” Optics Letters, Vol. 12, 1984, pp. 214–216.
[11] Böhm, K., et al., “Low-Drift Gyro Using a Superluminescent Diode,” Electronics
Letters, Vol. 17, 1981, pp. 352–353.
[12] Takada, K., J. Noda, and K. Okamoto, “Measurement of Spatial Distribution of Mode
Coupling in Birefringent Polarization-Maintaining Fiber with New Detection Scheme,”
Optics Letters, Vol. 11, 1986, pp. 680–682.
[13] Lefèvre, H. C., “Comments About the Fiber-Optic Gyroscope,” SPIE Proceedings,
Vol. 838, 1987, pp. 86–97.
[14] Takada, K., K. Chida, and J. Noda, “Precise Method for Angular Alignment of
Birefringent Fiber Based on an Interferometric Technique,” Applied Optics, Vol. 26,
1987, pp. 2979–2987.
[15] Barnoski, M. K., and M. S. Jensen, “Fiber Waveguides, a Novel Technique for
Investigating Attenuation Characteristics,” Applied Optics, Vol. 15, 1976, pp. 2112–
2115.
[16] Youngquist, R. C., S. Carr, and D. E. N. Davies “Optical Coherence Domain
Reflectometry: A New Evaluation Technique,” Optics Letters, Vol. 12, 1987, pp. 158–
160.
[17] Martin, P., G. Le Boudec, and H. C. Lefèvre, “Test Apparatus of Distributed
Polarization Coupling in Fiber Gyro Coils Using White Light Interferometry,” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991.
[18] Kohlhaas, A., C. Frömchen, and E. Brinkmeyer, “High-Resolution OCDR for Testing
Integrated-Optical Waveguides: Dispersion-Corrupted Experimental Data Corrected by
a Numerical Algorithm,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 9, 1991, pp. 1493–
1502.
[19] Fercher, A. F., K. Mengedoht, and W. Werner, “Eye-Length Measurement by
Interferometry with Partially Coherent Light,” Optics Letters, Vol. 13, 1988, pp. 186–
188.
5.2 Analysis of Polarization Nonreciprocities in a Fiber Gyroscope
5.2 Analysis of Polarization Nonreciprocities in a Fiber Gyroscope
5.2 Analysis of Polarization Nonreciprocities in a Fiber Gyroscope
5.2 Analysis of Polarization Nonreciprocities in a Fiber Gyroscope
127

5.2 Analysis of Polarization Nonreciprocities in a Fiber Gyroscope
128

CHAPTER 6
Time Transience-Related
Nonreciprocal Effects
6.1 Effect of Temperature Transience: The Shupe Effect
Because of reciprocity, the two counterpropagating paths are equalized in
a ring interferometer, but this is strictly valid only if the system is time-
invariant. We have already seen (Section 3.2.2) that biasing phase
modulation can be generated with a reciprocal modulator placed at one
end of the coil acting as a delay line, which provides a filtering behavior
with a sinusoidal transfer function: sin[(π/2)⋅(f/fp)]. This also applies to
parasitic phase shifts generated by the environment, particularly with
nonuniform temperature change as analyzed very early by Shupe [1]. The
two interfering waves do not see the perturbation at exactly the same time,
unless it is applied in the middle of the coil.
Considering that the phase perturbation has low frequencies compared
to the proper frequency of the coil, the gyro behaves like a dc rejection
filter with the usual 6 dB per octave roll-off and differentiation properties
(Figure 6.1): the phase error is proportional to the temporal derivative of
the temperature, which may be very harmful, particularly during the
warm-up.
Figure 6.1 Transfer function for phase perturbation about dc.
An elementary fiber segment of elementary curvilinear coordinate δz,
129

accumulates a phase:
 (6.1)
With a temperature change dT, this accumulated phase has a variation:
 (6.2)
where the temperature dependence of the index of silica dn/dT is 8.5 ×
10–6/°C, and the thermal expansion coefficient αSiO2 is 0.5 × 10–6/°C as
seen in Section B.1.5.
To simplify equations, we may define a coefficient αT of thermal
dependence of the accumulated phase:
 (6.3)
which is about 9 × 10–6/°C, and:
 (6.4)
At the coordinate z, the time delay ∆t(z) between both interfering waves is
(Figure 6.2):
 (6.5)
where L is the coil length. It is zero in the middle of the coil where z =
L/2, and maximum at the end where z = 0.
Figure 6.2 Effect of an asymmetrical perturbation.
If the temperature varies at a rate dT/dt, it yields an elementary phase
difference error δϕe in the ring interferometer:
130

 (6.6)
and then:
 (6.7)
This elementary phase error δϕe is proportional to the temporal
derivative of temperature, dT/dt, often written Ṫ (T dot). Taking, for
example, a coil of 200m composed of 40 layers of 50 turns, and assuming
that the first external layer is heated solely at a moderate rate of 0.01°C/s,
a phase error as high as 5 × 10–6 rad is yielded.
Note that a constant rate Ṫ generates a phase ramp which, as will be
seen in Chapter 8, is used as a feedback in the signal processing technique
to linearize the scale factor of a fiber gyro.
These elementary phase errors have to be summed over the fiber coil
length L, and the good way to do it is to consider pairs of symmetrical
elementary segments at the coordinates z and (L − z) (Figure 6.3). For
such a pair, the phase error generated in the interferometer is:
δϕep(z) = δϕe(z) + δϕe (L − z) (6.8)
which yields:
 (6.9)
since
L − 2(L − z) = −(L − 2z)
This result is very important as it shows that, actually, the Shupe effect
does not depend on T dot but on the difference between the temporal
derivatives of the temperature at z and at (L − z): it is a delta T-dot effect.
This has a first implication because the difference of the derivatives of
two functions is the derivative of the difference between these two
functions:
 (6.10)
The elementary rotation rate error δΩe induced by the pair of
131

symmetrical elementary segments δz at z and L − z is proportional to
d(T(z) − T(L − z))/dT. In inertial navigation the rate is integrated to yield
the accumulated angle of rotation. Because in a temperature change, the
temperature difference between z and L − z is zero before the change and
back to zero at the end, the Shupe effect does not yield an error on the
accumulated angle that is calculated by integration, even if it induces a
transient error on the rate measurement; the average rate error is nulled
out.
Figure 6.3 Effect of a symmetrical pair of asymmetrical temperature changes Ṫ (z)
and Ṫ (L − z).
6.2 Symmetrical Windings
Equations (6.8) and (6.9) show that if the same temperature change Ṫ is
experienced by symmetrical segments at equal distance from the middle of
the coil, the effect is canceled out, as δϕe(z) becomes opposite to δϕe(L −
z). This compensation is obtained with a symmetrical winding as analyzed
by Shupe [l]: the fiber is wound from the middle, and by alternating layers
coming from each half-coil length, this places symmetrical segments in
proximity [Figure 6.4(a)].
132

Figure 6.4 Section view of symmetrical windings (one-half coil length is represented
by + and the other is represented by −): (a) dipolar and (b) quadrupolar.
Compared to ordinary winding, this dipolar winding reduces the Shupe
effect by a factor approximately equal to the number of layers [2]. An
even better compensation, approximately equal to the square of the
number of layers, is obtained with a quadrupolar winding proposed by
Frigo [2] [Figure 6.4(b)]. With a pair of symmetrical layers in a dipolar
winding, a radial heat propagation always first reaches the layer of the
same half-coil length, which yields a residual transient sensitivity. With the
quadrupolar winding, the layer order is reversed from pair to pair, which
further improves the compensation. To obtain the best results, the number
of layers must be a multiple of four and all the layers must have the same
number of turns. Some additional benefit is also obtained by thermally
insulating the coil to slow down its rate of temperature change.
133

6.3 Stress-Induced T-Dot Effect
In practice, the Shupe effect is almost not experienced in a fiber gyro with
a quadrupolar winding as the variation of the difference of temperature,
the delta T dot, is very small between the two adjacent layers of the
symmetrical points and also because of its thermal inertia the packaging
slows down the temperature change, which yields a good temperature
uniformity in the coil. However, (6.9), which describes the Shupe effect, is
incomplete. It assumes that the coefficient αT of thermal dependence of
the accumulated phase is the same for the two elementary segments of a
pair of symmetrical points, which is not at all the case because of
nonuniform temperature-induced stresses in the coil that change the actual
index dependence dn/dT as well as the actual thermal expansion αSiO2.
This was described quite early by Cordova and Swabian [3] and analyzed
in more details recently by Mohr and Schadt [4].
For a pair of symmetrical elementary elements δz at positions z and L −
z, instead of (6.9) of a pure Shupe effect, the elementary phase error
δϕep(z) induced in the interferometer is actually:
 (6.11)
which can be approximated by:
 (6.12)
The first term ⟨αT⟩ ⋅ ∆Ṫ, where ⟨αT⟩ = (αT(z) + αT(L − z)/2 is the
mean thermal dependence of the phase at z and L − z, is the pure Shupe
effect, while the second term ∆αT ⋅ ⟨Ṫ⟩, where ⟨Ṫ⟩ = (Ṫ(z) + Ṫ(L − z))/2 is
the mean temperature derivative, is the effect of temperature-dependent
stresses which induces a difference ∆αT(z) = αT(z) − αT(L − z) of the
temperature dependence of the phase between the position at z and the
symmetrical one at (L − z).
To summarize, the elementary phase error created by a symmetrical
pair of elementary segments δz is the sum:
δϕep(z) ≃ δϕSh(z) + δϕTdot(z) (6.13)
with the pure Shupe effect:
134

 (6.14)
which depends on the delta T dot, (∆Ṫ), and the effect of the temperature-
induced nonuniformity of the stress in the coil, which depends on the
mean T dot, (⟨Ṫ⟩):
 (6.15)
In practice, this T-dot effect δϕTdot is much larger than the pure Shupe
effect δϕSh, which depends on the delta T dot. This T-dot dependence is
actually good news as it can be modeled much more easily than the ∆T
dot.
Knowing αT(z) along the whole fiber coil requires a good understanding
of the complex composite structure of the coil composed of the silica fiber,
its polymer coating and the supporting frame of the coil with usually a
potting material [4].
Symmetrical windings like the quadrupolar winding are also very
efficient because the elementary segments of a symmetrical pair are close
to each other, which drastically reduces ∆αT(z) = αT(z) − αT(L − z).
Finally, the two effects, Shupe and T dot, have a difference in temporal
signature as outlined by Mohr and Schadt [4]. To understand it, we are
going to recall the basics of heat propagation, which is actually a process
of diffusion.
6.4 Basics of Heat Diffusion and Temporal Signature of the
Shupe and T-Dot Effects
There are three different mechanisms of heat transfer: conduction,
convection, and radiation. In a fiber gyro, one can consider, at least in the
first approximation, that the main process is conduction. Heat steady-state
transfer, that is, the power flow through a material, is well known. If there
is a difference of temperature ∆T across a material, the heat power flow Q
is the ratio of this temperature difference ∆T and the thermal resistance
RT:
 (6.16)
135

Like the intensity I of an electrical current is the ratio between the
voltage difference ∆V and the electrical resistance R:
 (6.17)
The unit of thermal resistance is K/W (kelvin per watt). Similarly to the
electrical resistivity of a material, there is a thermal conductivity K in W/K
⋅ m. A homogeneous material of section S (in m2) and length L (in m) has
a thermal resistance:
 (6.18)
The general differential law is given by Fourier’s law between the heat
flow vector q and the gradient vector of the temperature:
q = −K grad T = −K ∇ T (6.19)
Conductivity is the parameter involved in a steady state process like the
insulation of a house where you want to know how many watts are lost as
a function of the outside temperature.
Now, for a homogeneous medium with no internal heat generation, the
differential equation of heat transfer is:
 (6.20)
where D is the diffusivity of the material that is related to the conductivity
K by:
 (6.21)
where ρ is the density of the material and C is its specific heat.
Note that (6.20) has some similarity with a wave propagation equation
like (see Section A.3):
 (6.22)
In both case there is a Laplacian operator ∇2 of the spatial coordinates,
but in a wave propagation equation there is a second-order time derivative
with the square of the wave velocity v, while in the process of heat
136

diffusion, there is only a first-order time derivative with the diffusivity D
that may look like a velocity but actually, there is a big difference: its
dimension is length to the square by time and not length by time as for a
velocity. Typical values of diffusivity are on the order of:
1,000 mm2/s for diamond;
100 mm2/s for aluminum;
10 mm2/s for titanium;
1 mm2/s for silica;
0.1 mm2/s for polymers.
The differential equation (6.20) of heat diffusion is not easy to solve,
but one can get a good understanding of this process of diffusion with the
response to a step function in temperature in a semi-infinite medium [5].
The mathematical result involves the error function, erf(x), drawn in
Figure 6.5:
Figure 6.5 Error function erf(x).
 (6.23)
If the original temperature T0 is raised to T1 at the time t = 0, the
temperature T(z, t) at a distance z in a material of diffusivity D is:
 (6.24)
Figure 6.6 displays the normalized temperature change (T(z, t) −
T0)/(T1 − T0) with a logarithmic abscissa for a normalized time t/τc,
137

where τc = z2/D is the characteristic time.
Figure 6.6 Time response to a temperature step T1 − T0 at a distance z with a
characteristic time τc = z2/D.
One sees that the temperature does not change over a duration τc/16, as
erf
 = erf 2 ≈ 1, and then increases to get to about (T1 + T0)/2
at τc, as erf
 = erf (0.5) ≈ 0.5
The characteristic time follows a square law as a function of the
distance z, and it is possible to show that with a diffusion through several
media in series, the resulting total characteristic time τct is:
 (6.25)
where τci = zi2/Di is the characteristic time of medium i, which has a
diffusivity Di and a thickness zi. In particular, two media in series with the
same characteristic time τc1 and τc2 yields:
τct = 4τc1 = 4τc2 (6.26)
and when τc2 << τc1:
 (6.27)
Following this simple model and considering that the navigation system
housing has a characteristic time τc1 typically equal to 60 minutes
138

(because of its thermal inertia) and the coil has a characteristic time
typically equal to τc2 = 0.5 minute, a fiber element in contact with the
housing follows the characteristic time τc1 while an element far in the coil
follows T′(t) with a characteristic time τct = 
 ≈ 1.2 τc1. The
two temporal changes of temperature T(t) and T′(t) are displayed in Figure
6.7 with their difference ∆T(t).
Figure 6.7 Temporal variations of the temperatures T(t) and T′(t) (solid lines) and of
their temperature difference ∆T(t) (dotted line).
Nothing happens until τc/16 and then temperatures T(t) and T′(t) start to
rise to get to half of T1 − T0 around τc. The temperature difference ∆T(t)
= T(t) − T′(t) behaves quite differently: it gets to a plateau around τc/2 and
then slowly decays.
This difference of behavior is outlined with the time derivatives. The
delta T dot (∆Ṫ) that drives the Shupe effect returns very fast to zero
around τc/2, and then becomes negative and slowly returns to zero again
(Figure 6.8). The T dot (Ṫ) that drives the T dot effect due to nonuniform
temperature-dependent stresses also rises quickly, but its decay is much
slower and its value remains always positive (Figure 6.9). The maximum
of Ṫ is about (T1 − T0) /τc and happens at a time of about τc/6. In
practice, the transience effect does follow the temporal signature of the T
dot, showing that the main effect is not the Shupe effect but the effect of
temperature-dependent stresses.
139

Figure 6.8 Normalized temperature difference and its normalized time derivative
delta T dot.
This analysis was carried out considering a step function in temperature
in a semi-infinite medium. One has seen that the temperature rise is very
slow above τc (Figure 6.6). At a time t = 10τc only 83% of the
temperature step is reached, and it requires t = 1,000τc to reach 100%. In
practice this rise is much faster, as the temperature step function is applied
all around the coil. Figure 6.10 displays a typical temperature variation in
this case of excitation. One sees that 100% of the temperature step is
reached much faster than in the case of the semi-infinite medium.
However, the behaviors are very similar between 0 and τc/2 when the
maximum of the Shupe effect and the T-dot effect take place.
Figure 6.9 Normalized temperature and its normalized time derivative T dot with a
maximum of about (T1 − T0)/τc.
140

Figure 6.10 Temperature rise in a semi-infinite medium (dotted line) and in a
practical coil surrounded by its housing (solid line).
6.5 Effect of Acoustic Noise and Vibration
Acoustic noise and vibrations are also a potential source of parasitic effects
related to transient phenomena. Fiber optics are actually used to make
very sensitive hydrophones, with acoustic pressure yielding phase change
through the photoelastic effect [6]; but with the ring configuration of the
interferometric fiber gyro, the absolute effect is greatly reduced, since as
we saw in Section 6.1, there is a dc rejection filtering with 6 dB per octave
roll-off.
In any case, a perturbation at a given frequency may yield a spurious
effect only at this frequency and its harmonics: it does not affect the mean
bias offset and does not reduce the sensitivity to rotation if the spurious
phase variation remains in the linear range of the sine response, which is
always the case in practice. Therefore, it is necessary to consider only
perturbations within the detection bandwidth of the system (i.e., a few
kilohertz). In this frequency range, the acoustic wavelength in the fiber is
equal to several meters (sound velocity is 7 km/s in silica), which makes
the perturbation quasi-uniform over the coil dimension: symmetrical fiber
segments experience the same phase modulation, which makes the residual
effect negligible. This applies to external perturbations and to the proper
fluctuations due to phonons, which are about 1 
 for a kilometer-
long single pass at the absolute temperature of 300K, but compensated for
at low frequencies in the ring interferometer [7].
Vibrations are a more severe problem, and an adequate potting has to be
used to ensure a good coil ruggedness. An adequate mechanical design is
141

also required to avoid specific mechanical resonances within the system,
but this is eased because of the solid-state configuration of the fiber gyro.
References
[1] Schupe, D. M., “Thermally Induced Nonreciprocity in the Fiber-Optic Interferometer,”
Applied Optics, Vol. 9, 1980, pp. 654–655.
[2] Frigo, N. J., “Compensation of Linear Sources of Non-Reciprocity in Sagnac
Interferometers,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 412, 1983, pp. 268–271.
[3] Cordova, F., and G. M. Swabian, “Potted fiber optic gyro sensor coil for stringent
vibration and thermal environments,” U.S. Patent 5,546,482, 1996.
[4] Mohr, F., and F. Schadt, “Error Signal Formation in FOGs Through Thermal and
Elastooptical Environment Influences on the Sensing Coil,” ISS Conference, Karlsruhe,
2011.
[5] Crank, J., The Mathematics of Diffusion, Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon Press, 1975.
[6] Yurek, A. M., “Status of Fiber-Optic Acoustic Sensing,” Proceedings of 8th Optical
Fiber Sensors Conference, Monterey, 1992, pp. 338–341.
[7] Logozinskii, V. N., “Fluctuations of the Phase Shift Between Opposite Waves in a Fiber
Ring Interferometer,” Soviet Journal of Quantum Electronics, Vol. 11, 1981, pp. 536–
538.
142

CHAPTER 7
Truly Nonreciprocal Effects
7.1 Magneto-Optic Faraday Effect
Even in a perfectly reciprocal system, the Sagnac phase shift is not the
only effect to be truly nonreciprocal. In particular, due to the magneto-
optic Faraday effect, a longitudinal magnetic field B modifies the phase of
a circularly polarized wave by an amount determined by the Verdet
coefficient V of the medium. The sign of this phase shift depends on the
left- or right-handed character of the circular polarization and also on the
relative direction of the field and light propagation vectors. It is well
known that, as seen in optical isolators (Section B.8.2), this phase shift
may manifest itself as a circular birefringence with a change θF in the
orientation of a linearly polarized light [Figure 7.1(a)], resulting from the
opposite phase shifts of its copropagating left- and right-handed circularly
polarized components: θF = V ⋅ B ⋅ L, where V is the Verdet constant of
the medium and L is its length. It may also be detected as a phase
difference ∆ϕF in a ring fiber interferometer where identical circularly
polarized waves counterpropagate around the coil [Figure 7.1(b)]. As seen
in Section A.13.2, this phase difference is the double of the angle of
Faraday rotation θF, and then:
Figure 7.1 Faraday effect: (a) rotation of a linear polarization and (b) phase
143

difference between two counterpropagating circular polarizations.
∆ϕF = 2V ⋅ B ⋅ L (7.1)
At first, it seems that the total Faraday effect along a given path is
proportional to the line integral of the magnetic field vector B along this
path. For a closed path, the result should be different from zero according
to the Ampere law only if the path encloses an electrical current. A toroidal
closed path configuration has been used to demonstrate an electrical
current fiber sensor [1], but a fiber-optic gyroscope should not be sensitive
to environmental magnetic fields, because of the absence of traversing
electrical current. However, this is actually true only if the same state of
polarization is preserved along the fiber. The Faraday phase shift
accumulated along an elementary length vector dz is:
dϕF = αp(z) ⋅ V ⋅ B ⋅ dz (7.2)
where αp(z) is a coefficient that depends on the state of polarization. It is
equal to zero for linear polarization and to ±1 for circular polarizations. It
has an intermediate value for elliptical polarization. The total phase
difference ∆ϕF between both counterpropagating waves is represented by
the relationship:
∆ϕF = 2∫closed pathαp(z) ⋅ V ⋅ B ⋅ dz (7.3)
which may be different from zero even if the line integral ∫B ⋅ dz is equal
to zero, because αp(z) is not constant. This is due to polarization changes
along the fiber arising from residual birefringence [2–4]. A configuration
using bending-induced birefringence to enhance sensitivity to an external
magnetic field and make a magnetometer with a ring interferometer has
even been demonstrated [5].
As described in Figure 7.2, a λ/4 loop transforms the input linear
polarization (LP) in a right-handed (RH) circular polarization, and a λ/2
loop transforms this right-handed polarization in a left-handed (LH)
polarization. As the direction of propagation and the direction of rotation
of the circular polarization have been inverted, the Faraday phase shift is
accumulated.
144

Figure 7.2 Configuration of a ring interferometer sensitive to magnetic field
according to [5].
Assuming that the influence of the earth’s magnetic field Bearth were
integrated constructively along the whole fiber length L, the maximum
nonreciprocal phase difference would be:
∆ϕFmax = 2 ⋅ V ⋅ Bearth ⋅ L (7.4)
The Verdet constant V has a λ–2 wavelength dependence and is equal
for silica to 2 rad T–1m–1 (i.e., 0.2 rad G–1km–1) at 850 nm, and 0.6 rad
T–1m–1(i.e., 0.06 rad G–1km–1) at 1,550 nm. Since Bearth is typically
0.5G (or 50 microtesla), ∆ϕFmax would be as high as 0.2 rad, at 850 nm
and 0.06 rad at 1,550 nm with a 1-km coil length. Experimentally, it was
observed [2–4] that there is a compensation factor of about 103 in a
gyroscope using an ordinary fiber, which yields a measurement error
equivalent to approximately the earth rotation rate (i.e., 15°/h).
Notice that the Faraday effect is also given in scientific textbooks as a
function of the H field. Because in diamagnetic material like silica, B and
H are proportional and the relative magnetic permeability is very close to
unity, the unit change of the Verdet constant V is obtained by multiplying
its B-value by μ0 = 4π × 10–7 Hm–1 (or T ⋅ A–1 ⋅ m); that is, the H-
value of V is 2.5 × 10–6 rad A–1 for a wavelength of 850 nm and 0.75 ×
10–6 rad A–1 at 1,550 nm.
The use of polarization-maintaining fiber, which has been seen to be
very helpful to reduce birefringence-induced nonreciprocities, should
suppress the magnetic dependence, as a linear polarization does not get
Faraday phase shift. However, in practice, the residual Faraday phase
error is on the order of 1 to 10 μrad for 1G (100 μT). As analyzed by
Hotate and Tabe [6], the effect is not completely nulled out because of the
residual rotation of the birefringence axes of practical PM fibers. As
discussed in Section B.6.1, their preforms experience very high stress,
which tends to give a helicoidal shape to the stressing rods, and stress-
145

induced high-birefringence fibers used to preserve polarization are drawn
with a slowly changing orientation of their principal axes [7].
Figure 7.3 Poincaré sphere describing the stable elliptical states of polarization in a
high-birefringence fiber with rotated principal axes.
When the principal axes of a linear-birefringence fiber are rotated, the
eigen polarization modes do not have a perfectly linear state of
polarization. This can be viewed simply by considering a Poincaré sphere
(see Section B.5.3) defined with respect to a rest reference frame that
rotates with the principal axes at the twist rate tw (in radians per meter). In
this rest frame, the linear birefringence is represented with a stable
equatorial vector ∆βl, but there is an additional circular birefringence
vector ∆βc aligned along the polar axis to take into account the change of
frame of reference (Figure 7.3). The magnitude of ∆βc is equal to tw, but
it corresponds to the opposite direction of rotation. The total birefringence
∆βt is obtained simply with the vectorial sum ∆βt + ∆βc. The magnitude
∆βc is much smaller than ∆βl, otherwise the polarization would not be
preserved at all; therefore, the two stable orthogonal states of polarization
are slightly elliptical to correspond to the intersection of ∆βt with the
Poincaré sphere. Going back to the laboratory frame, the two states
preserve the same constant ellipticity, but their minor and major axes
follow the rotation of the principal axes of the birefringence of the fiber.
The linear polarization of the PM fiber is dragged by the twist of the
birefringence axes and becomes slightly elliptical.
Note that the two stable elliptical states have opposite ellipticity.
In a ring interferometer using such a linear polarization maintaining
fiber, it is possible to consider that a magnetic field has a negligible
146

dependence on the state of polarization that is the same in both opposite
directions. However, it modifies the phase of the counterpropagating
waves as a function of the coefficient αp equal to the ellipticity of the
state; that is, the ratio ∆βc/∆βl = −t/∆βl. The accumulated Faraday phase
difference is therefore:
 (7.5)
Assuming a circular coil of radius R, this yields:
 (7.6)
where θB is the angle of the B field with respect to the reference axes.
This formula is equivalent to a synchronous demodulation of the twist rate
tw(z) at a frequency (2πR)–1 and with an integration time L.
The residual magnetic dependence is therefore coming from the spatial
frequency components of tw(z) equal to the inverse of a turn perimeter
2πR within a bandwidth equal to the inverse of the total length of the coil.
Assuming that tw(z) is a random function with a constant power density,
the usual result of detection of a white noise with a lock-in amplifier may
be applied.
It is difficult to evaluate directly this power density, but it is possible to
predict the effect of a length increase of a known fiber: it is similar to a
random walk process, and the magnetic dependence of the phase error
should increase as the square root of the length (which is equivalent to an
integration time). However, the phase error should be independent of the
coil diameter and the turn perimeter if the noise power density of the
parasitic twist is uniform (i.e., frequency-independent). A good order of
magnitude of the practical phase error induced by the earth’s magnetic
field (i.e., 0.5 G or 50 μT) is 0.5 to 5 
 (at λ = 850 nm),
depending on the quality of the fiber. Because the Sagnac sensitivity is
proportional to the length and the diameter of the coil, the equivalent
rotation rate error due to an external magnetic field should decrease
proportionally to the coil diameter and to the square root of its length.
This phase error is coming from a random process, the parasitic twist
rate of the high-birefringence fiber; but for a given gyro coil, this rate is
147

stable over time, and the magnetic dependence does not yield long-term
drift or noise if the gyro keeps the same orientation with respect to the
magnetic field. The gyro has an axis and a coefficient of magnetic
sensitivity that are stable and can be modeled to compensate for the
predictable bias offset. This sensitive axis lies approximately in the plane
of the coil, because the Faraday effect is nulled out for a magnetic field
orthogonal to the direction of propagation. In practice, there is an
additional axial dependence about tenfold smaller than the in-plane
dependence.
Note that this magnetic dependence can be reduced by connecting the
PM coil fiber at 45° of the polarization axis of the MIOC. Both eigen
polarization modes are used and, because they have opposite ellipticity
because of orthogonality, they have also opposite Faraday dependence that
cancels it out. However, this creates two strong polarization coupling
points and could generate bias if the polarizer is not good enough (as seen
in Chapter 5).
If the application requires a low magnetic dependence, it is possible to
get a further improvement of about two orders of magnitude by shielding
the sensing coil with a high permeability material such as μ-metal. For the
highest-grade applications, a double shielding eliminates the sensitivity.
Note that all other gyro technologies, RLG or mechanical, have also a
magnetic dependence with the same order of magnitude, and it is also
solved with μ-metal shielding.
Because of the λ–2 dependence of the Faraday effect, one could think
that the use of a long wavelength (1,300 nm or 1,550 nm) should reduce
the phase error by a factor of 3 or 4, but the linear birefringence of a PM
fiber being inversely proportional to the wavelength increases the
polarization ellipticity for a given twist, and in practice the magnetic
dependence keeps the same order of magnitude of 1 to 10 
Note that PM solid-core microstructured fiber based on shape
birefringence (see Section B.10) has less random twist and then a
magnetic dependence about ten times lower than the one of classical PM
fibers based on a stress structure [8]. A hollow-core fiber would be even
more interesting, as only few percentages of the light propagate in silica
where Faraday effect occurs but, as seen in Section B.10, they have still
significant attenuation, at least as of today.
As we have seen, polarization-maintaining fibers provide a better
reduction of Faraday nonreciprocity than ordinary fibers. However, it was
148

shown that if an additional depolarizer is placed between the polarizer and
the coil coupler in addition to the coil depolarizer, the Faraday
nonreciprocity is also greatly reduced, even with an ordinary fiber coil [9].
7.2 Transverse Magneto-Optic Effect
As analyzed by Logozinskii [9], in addition to the Faraday effect, which
depends on the magnetic field component parallel to the fiber, there is also
a smaller but significant magnetic dependence which is orthogonal to the
fiber. It is due to the fact that the fundamental LP01 mode of a single-
mode fiber has a small longitudinal component in addition to its main
transverse component; it is actually a hybrid HE11 mode as seen in
Section B.2. The effect of this small longitudinal component is generally
negligible excepted in few cases. We show in Section B.5.2 that this
longitudinal component explains the circular birefringence created by
elastically twisting a fiber, and it is also the reason of this transverse
magnetic dependence. The derivation of [9] concludes that this magnetic
dependence is parallel to the coil axis and requires a polarization
orthogonal to this coil axis. It yields a nonreciprocal phase difference
∆ϕB⊥ proportional to the number N of turns with:
At 1,550 nm where the Verdet constant V = 6 × 10–5 rad ⋅ G–1 ⋅ m–1,
it yields:
Considering a gyro with a coil of 1 km over a diameter of 10 cm (i.e.
3,200 turns), it yields a dependence of 2.5 μrad/G.
In practice the PM axes rotate because of twisting along the coil and this
transverse magneto-optic effect is reduced to one-half as there is no
transverse magnetic effect if the polarization is parallel to the coil axis.
This yields about 1 μrad/G for a coil of 3,000 turns.
7.3 Nonlinear Kerr Effect
Another important case of truly nonreciprocal effect may arise due to the
149

nonlinear optical Kerr effect as analyzed by Ezekiel et al. [11]. Reciprocity
is indeed based on the linearity of propagation equation (see Section 3.1),
but an imbalance in the power levels of the counterpropagating waves can
produce a small nonreciprocal phase difference because of propagation
nonlinearity induced by the high optical power density in the very small
silica fiber core. Slow variations in the splitting ratio of the power divider
feeding the sensing coil may therefore translate directly into bias drift.
Experimentally, a power difference of 1 μW (e.g., arising from 10–3
splitting imbalance of a 1-mW source) gives a nonreciprocal index
difference as small as 10–15, but when integrated along a kilometer of
fiber, this produces a phase difference of a few 10–5 rad, at least three
orders of magnitude above the theoretical sensitivity limit. It could be
reduced by simply reducing the power in the fiber, but this would increase
the relative influence of detection noise.
The Kerr-induced rotation-rate error results in fact from a complex
four-wave mixing process and not simply from an intensity self-
dependence of the propagation constant of each counterpropagating wave.
It depends also on the intensity of the opposite wave [11, 12]. In a linear
medium, the electric polarization vector P is defined as (see Section
A.5.1):
P = χe∈0E (7.7)
but when the wave has a high energy density (i.e., a large E field), an
additional nonlinear term depending on the third-order susceptibility 
and the scalar square E2 of the electric field has to be taken into account
and P becomes:
 (7.8)
The relative dielectric permittivity ∈r = 1 + χe is changed to:
 (7.9)
and the actual index of refraction 
 has an additional nonlinearity
term δnNL:
150

 (7.10)
In a ring interferometer where two fields E1 and E2 propagate in
opposite directions, two polarization vectors P1 and P2 have to be
considered for each propagation direction. The former relationship
between the P and E vectors of a single wave applies, but now each
counterpropagating wave cannot be considered independently. The total
polarization vector P1 + P2 has to be related to the total field E1 + E2,
and therefore:
 (7.11)
A potential source of nonreciprocity comes from the E1 + E22 term,
which represents the intensity of the standing wave resulting from the
interference between both counterpropagating fields E1 and E2.
Assuming continuous monochromatic waves with the same linear state
of polarization and the same frequency ω and opposite propagation
constant β and −β we have:
 (7.12)
where z is the spatial longitudinal coordinate along the fiber coil. As 
 this yields:
 (7.13)
The first two terms of this relationship depend both on the sum of the
field squares (i.e., intensities) of the two waves and therefore yield the
same nonlinear index change for E1 and E2 in each opposite direction.
However, the two last terms induce a nonreciprocity, as:
151

 (7.14)
and similarly:
 (7.15)
The effect of the terms at a spatial frequency of 3β or −3β is averaged
out in the propagation, but the two other terms at β and −β are phase-
matched and yield a constant susceptibility change as the waves propagate.
Each polarization vector is actually:
 (7.16)
This gives a different nonlinear change of the index of refraction for
each opposite direction:
 (7.17)
and a nonreciprocal index difference:
 (7.18)
Assuming a uniform power distribution over the core area and a
diameter of about 5 μm, this Kerr-induced index difference may be
evaluated from the value of χe(3) in silica as a function of the power
difference ∆P (proportional to E22 − E12) between both direction as [10]:
∆nK/∆P ≈ 2 × 10–15μW–1 (7.19)
This difference is very small, but as the Sagnac effect, it is integrated
152

along the whole length L of the fiber coil and gives rise to a significant
phase difference ∆ϕK. For a wavelength of 0.633 μm [10]:
∆ϕK/L ⋅ ∆P ≈ 2 × 10–5 rad ⋅ μW–1 ⋅ km–1 (7.20)
This analysis shows that the Kerr effect nonreciprocity results solely
from the formation of a nonlinear index grating, due to the interference
between the two counterpropagating waves within the fiber, which yields a
standing wave. As stated early on in [13], if the contrast of this standing
wave is washed out by some process, then nonreciprocity should
decrease. This important point explains why the use of a broadband
source with a short coherence length greatly reduces the Kerr
nonreciprocity: the standing wave is contrasted only over a distance equal
to the coherence length Lc in the middle of the fiber coil (Figure 7.4), and
therefore the effect of the nonreciprocal index difference is integrated only
along Lc and not along the whole fiber length L.
Figure 7.4 Contrasted standing wave in the middle of the fiber coil.
The cancellation of the Kerr nonreciprocity with a broadband source
was originally explained independently with the statistics of the light
intensity fluctuation by Bergh et al. [13] and Petermann [14]. As a matter
of fact, this original explanation considered the case of an intensity-
modulated wave, which yields a nonlinear index perturbation that depends
on time t and position z in the fiber:
 (7.21)
An important feature of these equations, as we have already seen, is
that the cross-effect of the power of one wave is twice its self-effect. The
use a square-wave intensity modulation of a monochromatic source was
first proposed to reduce the Kerr nonreciprocity by Bergh et al. [15]. In
this case, the cross-effect is present only when both counterpropagating
intensities are coincident (Figure 7.5) (i.e., half the time), while the self-
153

effect is present all the time.
Figure 7.5 Square-wave intensity modulation of the counterpropagating waves to
reduce Kerr-induced nonreciprocity.
Therefore, the factor of 2 of the cross-effect is reduced to an averaged
value of unity, which effectively cancels out the nonreciprocity, as the
mean phase perturbation becomes identical in both directions.
Such a kind of compensation is not restricted to square waves, and it
applies if the mean value <I> of the modulated intensity is equal to its
standard deviation 
 [13, 14], which can be also written
as:
2 <I>2 = <I2> (7.22)
By virtue of the central limit theorem, a polarized broadband
spontaneous source has a random intensity with an exponential probability
distribution:
 (7.23)
and this fulfills the requirement 2 <I>2 = <I2>, which ensures the absence
of Kerr-induced nonreciprocity.
In addition, as we saw in Section A.2.4, this statistic of random intensity
fluctuation of a spontaneous (also called “thermal”) source is preserved in
the process of amplified spontaneous emission (ASE).
However, this explanation gives the misleading feeling that the reduction
of Kerr effect nonreciprocity with a broadband source that happens to
have the adequate statistics is only very fortunate. However, following
Bergh [16], the direct analysis of the nonlinear process shows clearly that
it is related to an interference phenomenon of the standing wave and that a
low-coherence source reduces the parasitic effect in the same way that is
154

already very beneficial with backreflection, backscattering, or polarization
nonreciprocities, which also depend on parasitic interference phenomena.
However, the similarity in terms of coherence between this nonlinear
effect and the other coherence-related linear effects is limited to the use of
broadband source with continuous light emission that destroys the contrast
of the standing wave, but ensures that both counterpropagating intensities
are permanent in the fiber. A very short pulse can also limit the coherent
effect of backreflection, backscattering, and polarization nonreciprocities,
but for the nonlinearity problem each counterpropagating pulse would
experience mostly the self-effect, which would yield a nonreciprocity with
a power imbalance. Furthermore, for the same mean power the
nonlinearity would be further increased, because it depends on the peak
power, which is much higher in the case of a pulse.
References
[1] Arditty, H. J., et al., “Current Sensor Using State-of-the-Art Fiber-Optic Interferometric
Techniques,” Proceedings of IOOC, Paper WL3, 1981.
[2] Böhm, K., K. Petermann, and E. Weidel, “Sensitivity of a Fiber-Gyroscope to
Environmental Magnetic Fields,” Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp. 180–182.
[3] Schiffner, G., B. Nottbeck, and G. Schröner, “Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensor: Analysis of
Effects Limiting Sensitivity and Accuracy,” Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol.
32, 1982, pp. 266–274.
[4] Bergh, R. A., H. C. Lefèvre, and H. J. Shaw, “All Single-Mode Fiber Optic
Gyroscope,” Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol. 32, 1982, pp. 252–255.
[5] Bergh, R. A., H. C. Lefèvre, and H. J. Shaw, “Geometrical Fiber Configuration for
Isolators and Magnetometers,” Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol. 32, 1982, pp.
400–405.
[6] Hotate, K., and K. Tabe, “Drift of an Optical Fiber Gyroscope Caused by the Faraday
Effect: Influence of the Earth’s Magnetic Field,” Applied Optics, Vol. 25, 1986, pp.
1086–1092.
[7] Marrone, M. J., et al., “Internal Rotation of the Birefringence Axes in Polarization-
Holding Fibers,” Optics Letters, Vol. 12, 1987, pp. 60–62.
[8] Li, J., et al., “Design and Validation of Photonic Crystal Fiber for Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope,” ISS 2013, Karlsruhe, 2013, pp. 5.1–5.12.
[9] Logozinskii, V. N., “Magnetically Induced Non-Faraday Nonreciprocity in a Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope,” Journal of Communications Technology and Electronics, Vol. 51, No.
7, 2006, pp. 836–840.
[10] Blake, J., “Magnetic Field Sensitivity of Depolarized Fiber Optic Gyros,” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 1367, 1990, pp. 81–86.
[11] Ezekiel, S., J. L. Davis, and R. W. Hellwarth, “Intensity Dependent Nonreciprocal
Phase Shift in a Fiberoptic Gyroscope,” Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol. 32,
155

1982, pp. 332–336.
[12] Kaplan, A. E., and P. Meystre, “Large Enhancement of the Sagnac Effect in a
Nonlinear Ring Resonator and Related Effects,” Springer Series in Optical Sciences,
Vol. 32, 1982, pp. 375–385.
[13] Bergh, R. A., et al., “Source Statistics and the Kerr Effect in Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes,”
Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp. 563–565.
[14] Petermann, K., “Intensity-Dependent Nonreciprocal Phase Shift in Fiber-Optic
Gyroscopes for Light Sources with Low Coherence,” Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp.
623–625.
[15] Bergh, R. A., H. C. Lefèvre, and H. J. Shaw, “Compensation of the Optical Kerr
Effect in Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes,” Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp. 282–284.
[16] Bergh, R. A., “All-Fiber Gyroscope,” in Optical Fiber Rotation Sensing, Burns, W.
K., (ed.), New York: Academic Press, Chapter 5, 1994, pp. 137–170.
156

CHAPTER 8
Scale Factor Linearity and
Accuracy
8.1 Problem of Scale Factor Linearity and Accuracy
The modulation-demodulation detection scheme described in Section 3.2.2
provides a very good bias, as it preserves the reciprocity of the ring
interferometer. However, if a high-performance gyroscope must have a
stable and low-noise bias, it also requires good accuracy over the whole
dynamic range and not only about zero. The measurement of interest is
the integrated angle of rotation and not simply the rate. Any past error will
affect the future information. This constraint implies the need for an
accurate measurement at any rate (i.e., an accurate scale factor).
Furthermore, the intrinsic response of an interferometer is sinusoidal,
while the desired rate signal of a gyroscope should be linear.
This problem is solved with a closed-loop (or phase-nulling) signal
processing approach as proposed independently by Davis and Ezekiel [1]
and Cahill and Udd [2]. The demodulated biased signal (or open-loop
signal) is used as an error signal that is fed back into the system to
generate an additional feedback phase difference ∆ϕFB that is opposite to
the rotation-induced phase difference ∆ϕR (Figure 8.1). The total phase
difference ∆ϕT = ∆ϕR + ∆ϕFB is servo-controlled on zero, which
provides good sensitivity, as the system is always operated about a high-
slope point. With such a closed-loop scheme, the new measurement signal
is the value of ∆ϕFB. This yields a linear response with good stability, as
this feedback value ∆ϕFB is independent of the returning optical power
and of the gain of the detection chain. The measured value of the rotation
rate becomes:
157

Figure 8.1 Principle of closed-loop operation of an interferometric fiber gyro with a
feedback phase difference ∆ϕFB.
 (8.1)
A closed-loop operation provides a stable and linear measurement of the
optical phase difference in the interferometer; however, the accuracy of
the scale factor of the rotation rate measurement also depends on the
stability of the mean  and on the geometrical stability of the area of the
coil.
We are going to detail the closed-loop operation methods to provide high
scale-factor linearity as well as the approaches to ensure in addition high
scale-factor accuracy with coil area and wavelength control.
8.2 Closed-Loop Operation Methods to Linearize the Scale
Factor
8.2.1 Use of a Frequency Shift
The first proposed arrangements of closed-loop operation used a
frequency shift generated with acousto-optic modulators (AOM), also
called Bragg cells [1, 2]. The Sagnac effect may be interpreted actually as
a Doppler effect on the coil beam splitter (as seen in Section 2.1.1).
Therefore, a frequency shifter placed at the beginning of the coil may null
out the Doppler shift of the Sagnac effect. The absolute phase ϕabs
accumulated in the propagation is:
 (8.2)
where f is the temporal frequency of the wave. Then a feedback
frequency shift ∆fFB generates a feedback phase difference ∆ϕFB:
158

 (8.3)
The new measurement is now ∆fFB, which is linearly dependent on the
rotation rate Ω:
 (8.4)
To get high sensitivity, the error signal is obtained with an additional
phase modulator and the usual modulation-demodulation scheme of the
open-loop scheme [3].
However, to cover the whole dynamic range, this feedback frequency
shift ∆fFB has to vary around zero between plus and minus several
hundreds of kilohertz. Because AOMs work only at a high center
frequency (typically 50 to 100 MHz) with a relative bandwidth of several
percentages, this requires the use of two cells to generate the feedback
frequency shift ∆fFB by difference. They can be placed in opposition at
one end of the coil, the first cell generating an upshift and the second one
generating a downshift [Figure 8.2(a)], or they can be placed at both ends
of the coil with the same shift sign [Figure 8.2(b)]. One is operated at a
constant center frequency fc, yielding a constant wavelength shift ∆λc,
and the other is operated at a controlled frequency fc + ∆fFB, yielding a
wavelength shift ∆λc + ∆λFB. When the gyro is at rest, the feedback
frequency shift ∆fFB should ideally be zero, but the intrinsic single-mode
reciprocity has been destroyed [4]. Considering first the symmetrical case
[Figure 8.2(b)], the source emits a wavelength λ, but the actual
wavelength of the counterpropagating waves is:
159

Figure 8.2 Closed-loop scheme with two acousto-optic frequency modulators (AOM):
(a) modulators in series and (b) modulators at both ends of the coil.
λ between the splitter and the modulators at the input;
λ + ∆λc between both modulators;
λ + 2∆λc between the modulators and the splitter at the output.
Both counterpropagating waves preserve the same wavelength λ + ∆λc
between both modulators, but they have a difference of 2∆λc between the
splitter and the modulators. This wavelength difference between the
opposite waves yields a nonreciprocal phase difference ∆ϕ1 when they
propagate between the splitter and the first modulator, and another
nonreciprocal phase difference ∆ϕ2 with an opposite sign between the
splitter and the second modulator. When the distances between the splitter
and each modulator are perfectly equal, the total nonreciprocal phase
difference ∆ϕ1 + ∆ϕ2 is nulled out, but a small imbalance ∆LAOM in the
exact symmetry of the two modulators yields a residual phase error:
 (8.5)
With a typical center frequency fc of 100 MHz, this nonreciprocal phase
error is as high as 2 μrad/μm.
When the two modulators are placed in opposition at one end of the coil
160

[Figure 8.2(a)], a similar result is obtained where ∆LAOM is now the
distance between both modulators. There is the same problem of stability,
but there is also a constant bias offset related to the averaged value of
∆LAOM.
Several solutions have been proposed to improve the mechanical
stability of this assembly, including a double Bragg cell in which both
frequency shifters are combined in the same component [5] and an
integrated optic implementation [6], but this closed-loop approach with
acousto-optic frequency shifters is complex technologically and the power
consumption is relatively high. Furthermore, even with an improved
stability, these approaches do not respect reciprocity. Note that this
sensitivity to modulator imbalance has been proposed as a sensing method
to detect any effect that affects this imbalance [7].
8.2.2 Use of an Analog Phase Ramp (or Serrodyne Modulation)
This stability problem of the pair acousto-optic frequency shifters is
completely overcome by the use of a linear phase ramp first proposed by
Arditty et al. [8]. A frequency is the derivative of a phase, and a phase
ramp modulation ϕPR(t) = ϕ̇t (where ϕ̇ is the time derivative, i.e., the
slope) that is applied with a phase modulator instead of a frequency shifter
is equivalent to a frequency shift ∆f = ϕ̇/2π:
 (8.6)
Such a processing scheme, also called serrodyne modulation, allows one
to work positively or negatively about zero, depending on the sign of the
ramp slope, thereby eliminating the former need of a high center
frequency, which has been shown to destroy the intrinsic reciprocity of the
ring interferometer. However, the ramp cannot be infinite, and, in practice,
a sawtooth modulation form has to be used with a very fast flyback at the
reset (Figure 8.3). This requires a phase modulator with a flat efficiency
over a large bandwidth, which is one of the main technical advantages of
integrated optics (see Appendix C).
The effect on a gyro can be viewed directly by considering the group
delay difference ∆τg between the long and short paths that connect the
phase modulator and the splitter. Like the case of the biasing modulation
(see Section 3.2.2), the same phase ramp feedback modulation ϕPR(t) is
161

applied on the two opposite waves, but because of the delay ∆τg, this
generates a feedback phase difference ∆ϕPR(t) with:
∆ϕPR(t) = ϕPR(t) − ϕPR(t − ∆τg) (8.7)
∆ϕPR(t) is equal to ϕ̇ ⋅ ∆τg during the ramp and to ϕ̇ ⋅ ∆τg − ϕRS
during a time ∆τg after the flyback. The value ϕRS is the height of the
phase reset. This reset induces an error unless ϕRS is equal to 2π rad (or a
multiple of 2π), the period of the interferometer response [8–12].
Figure 8.3 Analog sawtooth phase ramp modulation ϕPR and induced feedback
phase difference ∆ϕPR.
Let us assume that when the processing loop is closed, the slope ϕ̇ is
adjusted to compensate for the rotation-induced phase difference ∆ϕR and
that the total phase difference ∆ϕT is nulled out:
∆ϕT = ∆ϕR + ∆ϕPR = 0 (8.8)
that is:
∆ϕR = −ϕ̇ ⋅ ∆τg (8.9)
After the reset, ∆ϕT becomes equal to ϕRS instead of zero. Assuming,
for simplicity, a biased sine response of the interferometer (Figure 8.4), the
signal is zero when ∆ϕT = 0, but becomes sin∆ϕRS during the time ∆τg
after each reset. The gating out of this spurious signal has been proposed
[9], but it has been shown that this is actually a very convenient error
signal for checking the phase modulator efficiency with a second feedback
loop activated at each reset [8, 10].
162

Figure 8.4 Effect of the reset of the phase ramp.
With such a second processing loop, the reset is precisely controlled on
2π rad, and therefore the counting of the positive and negative resets
provides an accurate measurement of the angle of rotation. The slope ϕ̇ is
proportional to the rate Ω, as ∆ϕR = −ϕ̇∆τg:
 (8.10)
Because ∆τg = n ⋅ L/c, we have:
 (8.11)
Each reset corresponds precisely to 2π rad, and also to an angular
increment θinc, defined by:
 (8.12)
where T is the period of the sawtooth modulation, and as 
 for
any slope, we have:
 (8.13)
This incremental value is independent of the coil length L, but it is
inversely proportional to the coil diameter D. For a wavelength λ = 850
nm, the product θinc ⋅ D is equal to 255 arcsec ⋅ mm, and for a
163

wavelength λ = 1,550 nm, it is 465 arcsec ⋅ mm. Note that the frequency
of these 2π increments is the same as the one obtained with the direct
frequency shift feedback and as the one naturally generated in a laser gyro
(see Section 2.2.1).
An important feature of this phase ramp processing technique is that the
control of the 2π reset does not have to be very accurate, as it has only a
third-order dependence on the actual scale factor accuracy as outlined by
Kay [10]. To understand this result, let us consider Figure 8.5 in that,
starting from an ideal phase ramp, there is a small decreasing ∈m in the
gain of the modulation chain. The actual modulation ϕPRa is related to the
ideal modulation ϕPRi by:
Figure 8.5 Effect of a change of the ideal gain of the modulation chain.
ϕPRa = (1 − ∈m)ϕPRi (8.14)
the actual induced difference ϕPRa is:
∆ϕPRa = (1 − ∈m)∆ϕPRi (8.15)
The actual phase ramp undercompensates for the rotation rate-induced
phase difference ∆ϕR and the total actual phase difference ∆ϕTa becomes:
∆ϕTa = ∆ϕR + ∆ϕPRa = ∈m∆ϕR (8.16)
However, if the ramp slope is decreased, the reset height is also
164

decreased with the same coefficient ∈m, and during a time ∆τg after the
reset, the actual phase ramp overcompensates ∆ϕR:
∆ϕTa = 2π − ∈m(2π − ∆ϕR) (8.17)
Therefore, over a full period T of the sawtooth modulation, and
assuming a biased sine response of the open-loop error signal, the signal is:
sin[∈m∆ϕR] during T − ∆τg (8.18)
−sin[∈m(2π − ∆ϕR)] during ∆τg
If these phase errors are small, the sine response may be linearized
(ignoring third-order terms) and the mean signal becomes:
 (8.19)
As:
∆ϕR = −ϕ̇∆τg (8.20)
 (8.21)
∆ϕR ⋅ T = 2π∆τg (8.22)
the mean error signal ⟨S⟩ remains equal to zero independently of the
exact value of the reset, if ∈m is small enough to keep the operating
points in the linear parts of the sine response.
This analog phase ramp feedback scheme looks very attractive, but it
requires a very short and stable flyback time to yield high-scale factor
stability and linearity [10, 12]. Typically, a stability of 10 ppm requires a
flyback time of less than 1% of the transit time through the coil (i.e., less
than a few tens of nanoseconds).
8.2.3 Use of a Digital Phase Ramp
This problem of analog phase ramp flyback is very simply solved with a
digital approach proposed by Arditty et al. [4, 13, 14]. Instead of a
continuous ramp, the digital phase ramp generates phase steps ϕS with a
duration equal to the delay ∆τg through the coil. The induced phase
difference ∆ϕFB is then constant and equal to the step value ϕS. These
phase steps and the resets can be synchronized with the square-wave
165

biasing modulation, which is preferably operated at the proper frequency
(see Sections 3.2.2 and 3.2.3), that is, the half-period is equal to this same
transit time ∆τg (Figure 8.6). The amplitude ϕS of the phase step is set by
the phase-nulling feedback loop to be opposite to the rotation-induced
phase difference ∆ϕR:
ϕs = −∆ϕR (8.23)
and this value ϕS of the phase step provides a linearized readout of the
phase difference induced by the rotation rate.
Figure 8.6 Digital phase ramp with steps and resets synchronized with the square-
wave biasing modulation.
The real magic of the digital phase ramp technique is the fact that the
use of digital logic and a D/A (digital/analog) converter naturally yields an
adequate synchronized reset with the automatic overflow of the converter
for any value of the step, thus making implementation of this powerful
technique very simple (Figure 8.7). A digital register contains the digital
value Ds of the phase step with a dynamic range that can be very high
(more than 25 bits), and a digital integrator generates the digital value DR
of the staircase ramp. The analog driving voltage of the phase modulator is
produced with a D/A converter and a buffer amplifier. With N bits, they
transform a digital number D into an analog voltage over a dynamic range
between zero and (2N − 1)VLSB, where VLSB is the driving voltage
corresponding to the least significant bit (LSB). When DR becomes higher
than (2N − 1), the automatic overflow yields a voltage equal to (DR −
2N)VLSB. If the gain of the modulation chain is adjusted such that:
166

2NVLSB = 2Vπ (8.24)
where Vπ is the voltage that generates a π-rad phase shift, as detailed in
Appendix C. The overflow automatically generates a reset that is
equivalent to the 2π reset of the analog ramp and does not produce any
scale-factor error.
Figure 8.7 Generation of the digital phase ramp.
Note that this automatic overflow may be used with the sole ramp, but
also with the digital sum of the ramp and the square-wave modulation
(Figure 8.8). This allows the use of a push-pull connection of the two
modulators of the Y-junction, which reduces their effective nonlinearity
(see Section 3.3.4). With the analog approach, the electronic circuitry that
generates the sawtooth modulation is so delicate that it is preferable to
apply this feedback modulation on one modulator and apply the biasing
modulation on the second modulator with an independent circuit, which
makes the setup more complicated.
167

Figure 8.8 D/A overflow when the phase ramp and the phase modulation are added
digitally.
The resets, as the steps, are synchronized with the clock time ∆τg. This
eases the control of the exact 2π value of 2NVLSB with a second
feedback loop that is activated at each flyback and is not disturbed by the
transients of the square-wave biasing modulation, as it is also synchronized
with ∆τg.
Let us take, for example, the case of a rotation-induced phase
difference ∆ϕR equal to −4π/5 rad (Figure 8.9). With an analog ramp, the
resets are equal to 2π and have a periodicity of 2.5 ⋅ ∆τg, and then they
overlap with the biasing modulation that has a periodicity of 2 ⋅ ∆τg.
However, with the digital phase ramp, the step value is 4π/5 rad and the
first reset waits for the third clock time ∆τg while the second reset
happens only after 2 ⋅ ∆τg. These resets are no longer periodic, but they
are now synchronized with the clock time ∆τg and the biasing modulation.
168

Figure 8.9 Nulling phase ramp for a rotation-induced phase difference of −4π/5 rad:
(a) analog case and (b) digital case.
Note that, strictly speaking, the resets of the digital ramp are not equal
to 2π. This value 2π is the difference between the value of where the next
step would go if the number of bits were not limited and the value of
where it is actually going because of the overflow.
Another very important point is that the digital phase ramp does not
require a large number of bits for the D/A converter, though the actual
dynamic range between 2π rad and a resolution of 10–8 rad is as high as
30 bits. With an N-bit converter, the least significant phase step ϕLSB is:
 (8.25)
The exact value of the required phase step ϕS is contained within:
mϕLSB ≤ ϕs < (m + 1)ϕLSB
where m is an integer smaller than 2N. The value ϕS is stored in the rate
register, which must have a large enough number of bits, but only the N
most significant bits of the ramp are used in the D/A to drive the phase
modulator. Instead of a series of identical steps, the D/A converter
generates a ramp composed of m′ steps m ⋅ ϕLSB, which
169

undercompensates for the rotation, and m″ steps (m + 1)ϕLSB, which
overcompensates for the rotation. On average, the feedback phase
difference < ∆ϕFB > is such as:
 (8.26)
that is, m′ and m″ are such as:
 (8.27)
This phase step averaging yields the same averaging of the actual
interference signal if the maximum instantaneous error (i.e., ϕLSB)
remains in the linear part of the sine response. With 10 bits, for example,
ϕLSB is equal to 2π/210 = 6 × 10–3 rad, which corresponds to a rate as
high as several thousands of degrees per hour; but the residual nonlinearity
of the sine response, (ϕLSB − sinϕLSB)/ϕLSB ≈ ϕLSB2/6, remains below
10 ppm. The averaging also applies if ϕs is smaller than ϕLSB: there is no
dead zone. For example, if ϕs = [1/(m′ + 1)]ϕLSB, there will be no step
during m′ clock times and just one step during one clock time (Figure
8.10).
Another averaging process is also very useful for relaxing the
requirement of linearity of the D/A converter. A converter defect generates
a phase error, and the value of the phase ramp ϕsj after j steps may be
different from jϕs; but on average the feedback phase difference is over m
steps:
 (8.28)
The only condition is that the linearity error of the converter remains in
the linear part of the interferometer sine response. The usual specification
of D/A converters is a linearity error of less than one LSB; therefore, the
previous condition about ϕLSB applies also for this second averaging
process. In a practical device, drift down to 10-4°/h can be reached with
170

ϕLSB corresponding to 10°/h: five orders of magnitude.
Figure 8.10 Actual phase ramp when the required phase step ϕs is smaller than
ϕLSB (case where ϕs = ϕLSB/4).
Besides these very useful relaxed constraints on the characteristics of
the converter, the digital phase ramp technique also has several basic
advantages over its analog counterpart. The true rate measurement is the
digital value Ds of the phase step ϕs, which is stored in a register of the
digital logics. The clock time driving the electronics has to be
approximately matched to the transit time ∆τg through the coil, to limit the
width of the transient pulses, but the step value is not directly related to
∆τg. When ∆τg is changing, this slightly modifies the width of the
transient spikes that are gated out, but the value of the feedback step ϕs
remains unchanged. This is a clear advantage over the analog approach, in
which ∆τg is part of the scale factor through the value of the index n. With
the digital ramp and a stable electronic clock, the scale factor has only the
basic dependence of the Sagnac effect on the geometrical area of the coil
(i.e., a temperature coefficient of 10–6/°C with silica), instead of an index
dependence, which has a temperature coefficient of 8.5 × 10–6/°C.
Furthermore, the usual readout of these analog ramping techniques is
the count of the 2π resets, which yields, as we have already seen, an
angular increment value θinc = nλ/D. With the digital approach, in which
the rate is stored in a register, it is easy to generate any submultiple value
171

of θinc without waiting for the 2π resets and particularly θinc/2N′ using N′
bits in parallel for the output. This is very important for stabilization and
pointing applications where very small increments are required.
It is even possible to tailor the value of the increment to avoid any
quantization error within the measurement bandwidth. Assuming, for
example, a typical noise of 
 (i.e., a random
walk of 1
 = 0.03
), the increment may be adjusted to
0.03 arcsec, while θinc is on the order of few arcseconds to avoid any
quantization error within a 1-kHz bandwidth.
The value of the rate is stored in a digital register and can be used
directly with a parallel interface, but this would require a very large
number of bits. The I-FOG is intrinsically a rate gyroscope. To generate
2π-increments or subincrements with a logic integration of the rate value
simplifies the interface and yields a rate-integrating gyroscope; but the
difference between a rate device and a rate integrating device is simply a
matter of signal processing logic and interface protocol and is not a basic
difference.
Note that the digital phase ramp approach allows the dynamic range to
be easily extended to several fringes. The phase step value is stored in a
register that may correspond to more than ±π rad, and the overflow of the
D/A converter automatically limits the range of actual phase modulation to
less than 2π.
This analysis demonstrates that the digital phase ramp technique is a
highly efficient closed-loop method for linearizing the scale factor of an
interferometric fiber gyroscope. It has fundamental advantages and does
not require stringent performance for the electronic components.
8.2.4 All-Digital Closed-Loop Processing Method
The first implementation of the digital phase ramp technique used an
analog demodulator to get the sinusoidal rate signal that serves as the
feedback error signal of closed-loop processing (Figure 8.11) [4, 13, 14].
However, such a method is difficult to implement over 160 dB of dynamic
range of an operating FOG because of the intrinsic offset drift of the
analog demodulation circuit and of the A/D (analog/digital) converter that
digitizes the integrated error signal. Typical variations are on the order of
10-4 to 10-5/°C of the output voltage range. Compensation and modeling
of this thermal drift are possible, but they increase the complexity of the
172

electronics, yielding higher cost and lower reliability.
Figure 8.11 Original implementation of digital phase ramp feedback with an analog
demodulation.
This problem can be completely overcome with an all-digital closed-
loop approach proposed by Arditty et al. [15, 16]. The value of the
modulated output signal is converted directly into digital form at each half-
period, and the converter value of the second half-period is simply
subtracted digitally from that of the first half-period. Such a digital
demodulation is a calculation and then is intrinsically free of any source of
electronic long-term drift. In particular, drift of the analog input offset of
the A/D converter is canceled out by the subtraction of the odd and even
samples with the demodulation. However, one might think that an A/D
converter with a very large number of bits is required to limit the dead
zone of the LSB: 180 dB of dynamic range is equivalent to 30 bits, as we
have already seen. Fortunately, this crude analysis is not true. Because the
sampling frequency is typically in the megahertz range, the bandwidth of
the analog output signal is quite large, and thus a great deal of white noise
is present (Figure 8.12). Signal-processing theory shows that sampling the
analog signal with an LSB just smaller than the σ value of the noise is
sufficient. Thus, digital integration yields the same noise reduction as with
analog filtering, without any dead zone or spurious offset.
This can be simply understood with a hand-waving argument, by
considering an analog signal with a noise extending over a range of several
bits of the quantization circuit (Figure 8.13). If the mean value of the
analog signal is zero, there will be as many digital samples above zero as
there are below. If the mean value is slightly positive, although the
variation is much smaller than the LSB, it is still possible to measure it
173

because, on average, there will be slightly more digital samples above zero
than below. There is no degradation of the mean signal if the σ value of
the noise is bigger than the LSB.
Figure 8.12 Actual signal with its noise.
In practice, the noise is typically 
 or, in relative optical
power value, 
 With an analog bandwidth of 1 MHz, the σ
value of the noise becomes 3 × 10-4 of the π/2 biasing power; that is, 12
bits are enough to convert the analog signal over the entire dynamic range
of power variation, without any dead zone. The use of a digital integrator
yields the same noise reduction as lowpass analog filtering, but without
any electronic source of long-term drift.
Figure 8.13 Digital quantization of an analog signal with an additional noise.
This digital demodulation scheme is naturally compatible with digital
feedback schemes such as the digital phase ramp. This makes it even
more efficient, because the error signal is servo-controlled to zero. With its
noise extending over ±4σ, it is spread only over 3 bits, and this avoids the
174

effect of A/D converter nonlinearity which is directly translated into scale-
factor nonlinearity when digital demodulation is used with an open-loop
scheme [17]. All-digital closed-loop processing yields a simple
implementation that will be particularly adequate for integration. The
functions are:
Optical detection;
Analog gating of the transient pulses and filtering;
A/D conversion of the gyro signal;
Digital logic driven with a common clock;
D/A conversion of the feedback phase modulation.
The entire logic circuitry may be implemented on a single logic circuit.
Its functional schematics are (Figure 8.14):
Subtraction of odd and even samples to demodulate the error
signal;
Digital integration of this demodulated error signal;
Storage of the rotation rate value in a register;
Second integration of the rate value to generate the digital ramp;
Digital addition of the square-wave biasing modulation.
Figure 8.14 Functional schematics of the logic circuit used in the all-digital closed-
loop approach.
This all-digital approach may also be used for the second feedback loop
which controls the gain of the phase modulation chain as proposed by
175

Arditty and al. [15], particularly with the 2π reset. The second error signal
is obtained by comparing the digital value of the sampled detector signal
just before and just after the reset. A digital integrator is also used to close
this second loop, and a second D/A converter controls the reference
voltage of the first D/A that generates the ramp or the gain of the buffer
amplifier (Figure 8.15). This second D/A converter operates about dc to
compensate for the long-term drift of the phase modulator response, but
there is no stringent requirement of quantization error for this converter
either. As we have already seen for the analog ramp (Section 8.2.2), the
scale factor error induced by an imperfect 2π reset is only a third-order
effect. This also applies to the digital ramp, but with the additional
advantage of avoiding the requirement of a very fast flyback, as the
transients are synchronized and can be gated out [16]. A control of the 2π
reset within 1,000 ppm (i.e., 10 bits) is sufficient to ensure a linearity
better than 10 ppm.
Figure 8.15 Functional schematics of the all-digital approach with a second feedback
loop for the control of the modulation amplitude.
It is possible to directly view the reason why the digital ramp technique
tolerates many defects (such as imperfect 2π reset control, quantization,
nonlinearity of the electronic drive, nonlinearity of the phase modulator
response) without degrading the scale factor performance. The actual
phase ramp ϕPRa is the sum of an ideal phase ramp ϕPRi and a defect
ϕPRd. The induced phase difference is:
176

∆ϕPRa = ∆ϕPRi + ∆ϕPRd (8.29)
As with any phase modulation, the defect ∆ϕPRd of the phase
difference is given by the delay ∆τg through the coil:
∆ϕPRd = ϕPRd(t) − ϕPRd(t − ∆τg) (8.30)
As the mean value of a difference is the difference of the mean values,
the mean defect < ∆ϕPRd > is:
< ∆ϕPRd > = < ϕPRd(t) > − < ϕPRd(t − ∆τg) > (8.31)
Over a phase ramp period, mean values < ϕPRd(t) > and < ϕPRd(t −
∆τg) > are perfectly equal because of reciprocity; therefore:
< ∆ϕPRd > = 0 (8.32)
If the defect ∆ϕPRd of the phase difference remains in the linear part of
the biased sine response of the interferometer, the mean error of the
interference signal is also averaged out to zero as ∆ϕPRd. This applies to
most defects except imperfect transients that yield instantaneous errors
much larger than this linear range, but with the digital ramp they can be
synchronously gated out.
This simple result stating that the averaged error is zero is absolutely
fundamental and explains why digital phase ramp feedback yields scale
factor linearity in the parts per million range despite defects in the
electronic chain and the response of the MIOC phase modulator that are
much higher.
In summary, the all-digital closed-loop processing method brings a drift-
free high-linearity phase measurement without requiring a large number of
bits for the various converters, because the quantization errors as well as
the component defects are canceled out through averaging processes.
While reciprocity is a fundamental concept of creating a good optical
system, the all-digital closed-loop approach is just as important from the
signal processing standpoint: it also allows a perfect device to be created
from imperfect components. It does appear to be the ideal processing
technique for the interferometric fiber-optic gyroscope, combining
performance, simplicity, and the potential for optimal circuit integration.
177

8.2.5 Control of the Gain of the Modulation Chain with Four-State
Modulation
As just seen, the gain of the modulation chain driving the phase ramp can
be controlled with its 2π resets. However, the frequency of these resets
depends on the rotation rate and the stability of this gain-control feedback
loop is therefore delicate.
This can be overcome with the four-state modulation [18]. Instead of
the two-state biasing modulation described in Section 3.2.2 where the
phase difference of the ring interferometer is modulated between +ϕb and
−ϕb, the biasing modulation uses four states ϕb, aϕb, −ϕb, and −aϕb,
where the coefficient a is such as ϕb + aϕb = 2π. This is obtained with a
four-state phase shift modulation in the phase modulator of +ϕb/2,
+aϕb/2, −ϕb/2, and −aϕb/2 with a duration ∆τg/2 for each state, instead
of +ϕb/2, and −ϕb/2 with a duration ∆τg (∆τg is the difference of group
transit time between the long and short paths that connect the modulator
and the splitter as seen in Section 3.2.2).
At rest, the four modulation states yield the same signal (Figure 8.16):
Figure 8.16 Four-state modulation at rest (ϕb = 3π/4, aϕb = 5π/4, a = 5/3, in this
example).
178

P(0, −ϕb) = P(0, ϕb) = P(0, aϕb) = P(0, −aϕb) = P0/2(1 + cosϕb) = P0/2(1
+ cosaϕb) (8.33)
Since
cosϕb = cosaϕb (8.34)
when
ϕb = 2π − aϕb (8.35)
and in rotation, there are:
P(∆ϕR, ϕb) = P0/2[1 + cos(∆ϕR + ϕb)]
P(∆ϕR, aϕb) = P0/2[1 + cos(∆ϕR + aϕb)] (8.36)
P(∆ϕR, −ϕb) = P0/2[1 + cos(∆ϕR − ϕb)]
P(∆ϕR, −aϕb) = P0/2[1 + cos(∆ϕR − aϕb)]
Both states ϕb and −aϕb yield the same value as well as both states
−ϕb and aϕb, and the difference between these two pairs of states yields
the same signal as with a two-state modulation [see (3.10)]:
179

Figure 8.17 Four-state modulation with a rate signal at the proper frequency fp =
1/(2 ∆τg) (with ∆ϕR = π/8 in this example).
∆P(∆ϕR, ϕb) = P0sinϕbsin∆ϕb (8.37)
As one can see on Figure 8.17, the modulated rotation signal does keep
a frequency equal to the proper (or eigen) frequency, fp = 1/2 ⋅ ∆τg,
which as seen in Section 3.2.3 is key for best performance.
Now, when the gain of the modulation chain is increased by (1 + α), the
four states become (1 + α) ⋅ ϕb, (1 + α) ⋅ aϕb, −(1 + α) ⋅ ϕb, and −(1 +
α) ⋅ aϕb. As seen in Figure 8.18, it yields an error signal at 2 ⋅ fp, twice the
proper frequency. This Vπ signal can be demodulated independently of
the rotation signal that is at fp and used as an error signal to control the
amplitude of the biasing modulation. The Vπ control loop works at the
constant high frequency 2 ⋅ fp, contrarily to the one of the 2π resets of the
phase ramp which depends on the rotation rate.
Since the phase ramp is generated through the same modulation chain
(digital register, D/A converter, analog amplifier, and integrated-optics
phase modulator), as the biasing modulation, its amplitude is calibrated, as
well as its 2π resets.
180

The simple way to generated this four-state biasing modulation, is to
have a first two-state square-wave modulation ±π at fp and a second two-
state square-wave modulation ±((a − 1)/(a + 1))π in quadrature. In the
case of a = 5/3 where the four-states of ∆ϕm(t) are 3π/4, 5π/4, −3π/4,
and −5π/4, it yields a first modulation ±π and a second modulation ±π/4
in quadrature. It is obtained with a biasing phase shift ϕm(t) of ±π/2 and
±π/8 in quadrature generated in the phase modulator. The digital phase
ramp is then added with its 2π resets. The total amplitude of the phase
shift modulation ϕm(t) is 2π + 5π/4 < 4π.
Figure 8.18 Four-state modulation with a change (1 + α) of the gain of the
modulation chain (a = 5/3 and α = 1/6 in this example). The Vπ signal is at 2 × fp = 1/
∆τg, twice the proper frequency.
With an N-bit D/A converter which has a dynamical range of (2N − 1)
VLSB, where VLSB is the voltage generated by the 0th bit (least
significant) bit, there are:
A 0 − π square-wave phase shift modulation generated by a digital
modulation of the (N − 2)th bit, yielding 2N−2 VLSB;
181

A 0 − ϕb′ square-wave modulation generated by the digital value
of ϕb′((N − 4)th bit for ϕb′ = π/4), yielding 2N-4VLSB;
A phase ramp with 2π resets generated by the reset of the (N −
1)th bit.
8.2.6 Potential Spurious Lock-In (or Deadband) Effect
We saw with the laser gyro (Section 2.2.1) that there is a problem of lock-
in at low rates which yields a deadband (or dead zone) about zero.
As a fiber gyro being a passive interferometer and not an active
resonator, it was expected that it should not face it. This is actually true
with an open-loop design, but a closed-loop operation may yield such a
lock-in problem (Figure 8.19) as seen for example in [19, 20].
It is due to any parasitic effect that yields an error bias signal Se(ϕPR)
that varies with the phase ramp ϕPR. When the ramp gets to a value ϕPR0
such as Se(ϕPR0) is opposite to the rate signal SR, the total signal ST = SR
+ Se(ϕPR0) becomes zero and then the feedback loop does not need to
generate any ramping anymore, so the closed-loop output signal becomes
blocked on zero.
There are many potential sources of lock-in: electronic coupling,
Michelson interferometer due to residual coherent back-reflections at the
interfaces between the MIOC and the coil fiber ends, lack of polarization
filtering, or improper biasing modulation frequency.
Figure 8.19 Transfer functions for an ideal fiber gyro (solid line) and for a fiber gyro
with deadband (dashed line), due to lock-in effect.
Such ramp-dependent parasitic signals may be evaluated using an open-
loop scheme and adding a constant ramp. Each kind of defect yields a
182

specific temporal signature over the reset ramp period. For example, the
Michelson interferometer gets twice the phase ramp modulation and is
then scanned over 4π radian for a 2π phase ramp: it yields two periods of
a sinus over one period of the reset ramp.
It is possible to find many patents and articles that treat modulation
techniques to reduce such lock-in effects (see, for example, [21] and its
references), but with careful electronic and optical design, all these effects
can be sufficiently reduced to avoid any problem of lock-in without
additional modulation. Deadband should not be viewed as a limit to high-
performance fiber gyroscopes.
8.3 Scale Factor Accuracy
8.3.1 Problem of Scale Factor Accuracy
Assuming one has achieved a perfect measurement of the Sagnac phase
difference ∆ϕR with the phase-nulling closed-loop scheme, the scale factor
remains, as we have seen, related to the area of the coil and to the
wavelength of the source. The coil area A should have a variation of a part
per million per degree Celsius considering silica thermal expansion: it is 0.5
ppm/°C and the relative variation of the area of the circle is the double of
one of its perimeters. In practice, there is an additional length increase due
to the expansion of the polymer coating that puts the fiber under tensile
stress as seen in Section B.1.5. The total relative length change is typically
4 to 5 ppm/°C for an 80 μm fiber with a coating diameter of 160 μm. It
yields a thermal dependence of the area:
This requires modeling for high-grade applications.
Wavelength stability is more difficult to solve. For example,
semiconductor diode sources, which are popular sources for medium
accuracy FOGs, have a typical wavelength drift of about 400 ppm/°C with
temperature and of about 40 ppm/mA with driving current, even without
taking into account additional factors such as aging or the feedback effect
of the light returning to the source. Temperature control of the source and
a stabilized driver are sufficient for a medium accuracy in the 100-ppm
range.
Erbium-fiber ASE sources (see Section A.2.9) have a much better
183

stability, but high-performance applications require a direct wavelength
control to be able to reach the parts per million range.
8.3.2 Wavelength Dependence of an Interferometer Response with a
Broadband Source
A first fundamental question is to precisely define the effective wavelength
involved in the scale factor when the broadband source needed for high
performance has a relative spectrum width of several percentages, which
is several orders of magnitude larger than the parts per million stability that
is looked for. As explained in Section 2.3.1, the rotation-induced phase
difference ∆ϕR may be expressed with an equivalent path length
difference ∆LR that is perfectly wavelength-independent:
 (8.38)
with
 (8.39)
The intrinsic unbiased interference response is:
 (8.40)
where C(∆LR) is the coherence function of the source (see Section
A.12.1) as measured in a scanning interferometer in a vacuum like a
Michelson interferometer, and where λcent is the central wavelength of the
spectrum. However, this simple result applies only if the spectrum is
symmetrical with respect to the optical spatial frequency σ (i.e., the
inverse of the wavelength λ), with the central frequency corresponding to
the maximum power. In practice, gyro source spectra have a significant
asymmetry, and, as discussed in Section A.12.4, the unbiased interference
response is, in the most general case:
 (8.41)
where γce is the coherence function of the even component of the
asymmetrical spectrum and  is the mean wavelength. Compared to the
simple symmetrical case, there is an additional term γco(∆LR)sin(2π∆LR/
184

λ), which takes into account the odd component of the spectrum. When
the gyro is operated on the central fringe, as it is usually the case, this
additional term is negligible in practice; however, if it is operated on a
wider dynamic range, a shift of the actual mean wavelength is yielded as
the phase difference increases, as the zero crossings of the variable term
of the interferometer response are not precisely periodic anymore.
This can be seen directly by regarding the interferometer as a filter with
a transmission T(λ or σ), depending on the wavelength λ (or the spatial
frequency σ) for a given path difference ∆LR:
 (8.42)
A broad power spectrum P(σ) yields the integrated response:
 (8.43)
For the zero crossing points of the variable cosine part of the response,
the mean frequency  is such that the product of P(σ) with cos[2π∆LR(σ
− ) has a null integral (Figure 8.20). If the spectrum is symmetrical (in
terms of frequency), the problem is simple and the mean value is the
central value, but when it is asymmetrical, it is more complex and depends
on the fringe order. In particular, the mean value  is not equal to the
value σmax, which corresponds to the maximum intensity. A linear mean,
defined with the product of the spectrum with a linear function instead of
a sine (Figure 8.21), is a good approximation for gyros working around the
zero order between ±π rad [22]. This linear mean is actually equivalent to
a center of gravity.
Figure 8.20 Interferometric definition of the mean spatial frequency  of a broad
spectrum.
185

8.3.3 Effect of Phase Modulation
So far, we have considered the unbiased response of the interferometer;
however, as we have already seen, an I-FOG has to be operated with a
biasing phase modulation and a phase-nulling feedback. Therefore, the
wavelength dependence of the modulators may also have to be taken into
account.
In the open-loop case, the demodulated biased response at a given
wavelength is always a sine independent of the modulation depth;
therefore, even with the wavelength dependence of the phase modulator,
the total response with a broad spectrum is also a perfect sine. The
amplitude of this open-loop response depends slightly on the spectrum,
but, in practice, other sources of scale factor error are much more
important.
Figure 8.21 Definition of the linear mean of an asymmetrical broad spectrum.
With the phase-nulling scheme using Bragg modulators (see Section
8.2.1), there is a feedback frequency shift ∆fFB, which is wavelength-
independent; therefore, the scale factor has the same spectrum
dependence as in the unbiased case. With analog or digital phase ramps
(see Sections 8.2.2 and 8.2.3), the problem is slightly more delicate. A
phase modulator based on the elasto-optic effect as a piezoelectric
modulator, or on the electro-optic Pockels effect as in integrated optics, is
actually a path-difference modulator. A given driving voltage Vd yields a
given path-difference that is, to first order, wavelength-independent. The
modulation is mainly due to an index change, which is almost wavelength-
independent. This yields, for a given voltage ramp or step, a feedback
phase difference ∆ϕPR inversely proportional to the wavelength:
186

 (8.44)
where ∆LPR is the equivalent path length difference induced by the ramp.
Therefore, a rotation also yielding a path difference effect leads to a phase
difference:
 (8.45)
Both phase differences ∆ϕR and ∆ϕPR have the same wavelength
dependence, and phase ramp feedback should be globally wavelength-
independent: for any wavelength, the driving voltage yields the same
feedback path length difference ∆LPR, which compensates for the
rotation-induced path-length difference ∆LR, which is also wavelength
independent. However, this would be true only if the effect of the reset is
gated out. In this case, other causes of drift of the modulator efficiency or
of the gain of the driving electronics (temperature in particular) would then
become predominant. We have seen (Section 8.2.2) that a small change of
the gain of the phase modulation chain has only a third-order effect on the
scale factor accuracy when the reset is close to 2π and when the signal
after the reset is taken into account. A wavelength change is equivalent to
a gain change, as ∆ϕFB = 2π∆LFB/λ. Therefore, a wavelength change
does not modify the mean effect of the feedback ramp while it modifies
the rotation-induced phase difference ∆ϕR to the first order. Then the
basic wavelength dependence of the Sagnac effect is retrieved with the
phase ramp feedback when the effect of the reset is not gated out. Despite
this drawback, a controlled 2π reset or a four-state modulation are
preferable, since the wavelength may be controlled independently, while
other sources of modulation efficiency drift (gain of the electronic chain or
LiNbO3 modulator response) are very difficult to control. For example the
thermal dependence of the Vπ of a LiNbO3 phase modulator is as high as
−800 ppm/°C.
8.3.4 Wavelength Control Schemes
Among the problems to be solved to get a high-performance fiber gyro,
wavelength control was the last one to be addressed, and publications on
this subject are not very numerous compared to the total literature on the
187

FOG. No definitive answer has yet been given to this problem, in contrast
to the problems of optical architecture with reciprocity, those of the
various parasitic noises and drifts with a broadband source or those of the
signal processing scheme with biasing modulation and phase nulling
feedback. This is also more of an engineering problem, the solutions of
which are usually kept confidential, rather than a basic theoretical analysis
that may be published. Nevertheless, some design concepts have been
described that directly control the linear mean value involved in the scale
factor of the gyro.
In addition to temperature control or modeling of the source spectrum,
the simplest approach is using a narrow optical filter in front of the
detector at the output. Because each emission wavelength has independent
behavior, this approach is equivalent to using a source with a spectrum
equal to the product of the emission spectrum and the transmission of the
filter. Assuming that the reference filter has a stable transmission, the
stability of the actual spectrum is improved by a factor equal to the square
of the ratio ρf between the widths of the source spectrum and of the filter
response (Figure 8.22). Interference filter, for example, may be as narrow
as 5 nm, while superluminescent diodes have a typical width of 15 nm,
that is, ρf ≈ 3. This would yield a tenfold improvement in actual mean
wavelength stability. However, there is the drawback of a detected power
reduced by a factor equal to ρf, but this degrades the theoretical signal-to-
noise ratio only by 
With an erbium-doped fiber source, it is possible to avoid this power
reduction by replacing the broadband mirror of a double-path ASE source
(Section B.9) by a wavelength selective mirror [23] and in particular a
fiber Bragg grating (see Section B.7.5).
Figure 8.22 Filtering of an unstable broad spectrum with a narrower reference filter.
Some other approaches control the wavelength with the light tapped out
at the input by the source splitter. A proposed scheme is to use a
188

miniaturized grating spectrometer to spread the source spectrum spatially
[24]. Two detectors connected with an opposite polarity directly provide
the linear mean of the wavelength because they have an additional
triangular mask that simulates the product by a linear function.
The use of an additional narrow reference source was also proposed
[25] to stabilize the path difference ∆Lcont of a control interferometer on
an integral number m of the reference wavelength λref, and to adjust the
broad spectrum to have the path difference of the stabilized interferometer
equal to another integral number m′ of the mean wavelength 
 of the
broadband source:
 (8.46)
This method is very accurate with a laboratory setup, but it is difficult
to make a compact control device for practical applications. However, it is
possible to get a similar interferometric control of the source mean
wavelength with a reference wavelength using the wavelength dependence
of LiNbO3 modulators [26], which was described in Section 8.3.3. In
particular the Vπ error signal of the four-state modulation explained in
Section 8.2.5 is a very sensitive signal of mean wavelength drift. It can
detect a change as small as 0.1 ppm.
In any case, all of these schemes require a stable reference: a stable
reference filter, a stable reference wavelength, or a stable reference
spectrometer. A stability of 1 ppm in real operation is a difficult but
reasonable engineering goal.
Another interesting possibility is to use the propagation dispersion in
fibers. The group transit time τg through the coil has a wavelength
dependence (see Section 3.2.3 and Appendix A), and this transit time
variation may be detected with an accurate measurement of the proper (or
eigen) frequency fp of the coil using a square wave modulation with an
asymmetrical duty cycle [22] (see Section 3.2.3). However, such a
technique does not work at 1.3 μm where silica shows zero dispersion,
and it also requires the use of a reference filter to differentiate the transit
time variation due to wavelength from the strong temperature dependence.
A similar transit time dependence may be obtained with the frequency
shifting feedback scheme [27]; but, as we have seen, this approach does
not provide very good performance because it destroys the reciprocity of
the interferometer (see Section 8.2.1).
189

8.3.5 Mean Wavelength Change with a Parasitic Interferometer or
Polarimeter
The mean wavelength involved in the gyro scale factor is the mean
wavelength of the light actually detected at the output of the interferometer
and not the mean wavelength of the broadband source entering the
interferometer.
In Section A.8.3, it is shown that an interferometer or a polarimeter has
a channeled spectral response; therefore, any spurious interferometer or
polarimeter in the gyro setup modifies the output spectrum and its mean
wavelength.
A typical example is the spurious polarimeter between a polarized SLD
and the polarizing MIOC connected with a PM fiber. There is always a
parasitic polarization crossed coupling at a fiber end because of the stress
induced by its holder. It is typically −20 dB and, at best, −30 dB.
Therefore, the polarized SLD light is partially coupled in the crossed
polarization mode of its PM pigtail. This light is eliminated by the
polarizing MIOC but some of it is coupled back in the main transmitted
polarization mode at the second fiber end connected to the MIOC, and it
interferes with the high-power wave that is always propagated in the main
polarization mode. It yields a channeled spectral transmission:
 (8.47)
where σ is the spatial frequency (σ = 1/λ) and ρM and ρM′ are the
crossed polarization coupling coefficients in intensity at the fiber ends, that
is, 0.01 for −20 dB and 0.001 for −30 dB.
As it is shown in Section A.8.3, the contrast 
 of the
interferometric channeled response is the amplitude ratio 
 and not
the intensity ratio. Even with two couplings of −30 dB, that is, −60 dB for
the spurious wave, the contrast C remains 2 × 10–3, and with −20-dB
couplings, it is as high as 2 × 10–2.
190

Figure 8.23 Mean frequency (or wavelength) change 
 with a spurious
channeled polarimeter, in the case when FWHM = FSR/2 (dotted lines for the source
spectrum and the channeled spectral transmission, solid line for the resulting
spectrum) general case with a contrast C case where C = 1 and then 
.
When the free spectral range (FSR) of this spurious polarimeter is much
larger or much smaller than the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of
the source spectrum, it does not modify the mean wavelength/frequency
but there is an important effect when:
FWHM ≈ FSR/2 (8.48)
This case is described in Figure 8.23(a), with a maximum 1 + C of T(σ)
191

at 
 and a minimum 1 − C at 
 The original source
spectrum is modified, yielding a maximum variation 
 of the mean
spatial frequency  that can be calculated to be approximatively:
 (8.49)
It yields a maximum relative scale factor error:
 (8.50)
This result is simply shown in Figure 8.23(b) describing the case where
the interferometer contrast C is 1: the mean frequency shift 
 is then
∆σFWHM/4. Note that this case of C = 1 is realized with a Lyot
depolarizer, as seen in Section B.7.4.
With a temperature change, the FSR varies, which yields a shift of the
channeled transmission as seen in Section A.8.3. When the mean
wavelength 
 is on a maximum or a minimum of T(σ), there is no
wavelength error because of symmetry, but with this shift, the mean
frequency oscillates between 
Care must be taken to avoid this worst-case condition not to get fringes
on the scale factor that can be as high as several hundreds of parts per
million.
With a typical SLD at 850 nm with an FWHM of 20 nm, this worst
case corresponds then to a FSR of 40 nm, in wavelength, that is, a path
unbalance ∆Lop0 = λ2/∆λFSR according to Appendix A that is 18 μm.
This correspond to a length L of 36 mm of a PM fiber with a birefringence
index ∆nb = 5 × 10-4, as ∆Lop0 = L ⋅ ∆nb.
As seen in Figure 8.24 that displays the residual mean frequency error 
 as a function of the ratio FSR/FWHM with a maximum for FSR = 3
FWHM, one has to ensure that FSR < FWHM/5 to avoid defect. It
corresponds to a PM fiber length of 36 cm in the previous example.
192

Figure 8.24 Mean spatial frequency error 
 as a function of the ratio FSR/FWHM
in logarithmic scale. C is the contrast of the spurious polarimeter (or interferometer).
References
[1] Davis, J. L., and S. Ezekiel, “Techniques for Shot-Noise-Limited Inertial Rotation
Measurement Using a Multi-Turn Fiber Sagnac Interferometer,” SPIE Proceedings,
Vol. 157, 1978, pp. 131–136.
[2] Cahill, R. F., and E. Udd, “Phase-Nulling Fiber-Optic Laser Gyro,” Optics Letters, Vol.
4, 1979, pp. 93–95.
[3] Davis, J. L., and S. Ezekiel, “Closed-Loop, Low-Noise Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensor,”
Optics Letters, Vol. 6, 1982, pp. 505–507.
[4] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Integrated Optics: A Practical Solution for the Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 101–112.
[5] Auch, W., “The Fiber-Optic Gyro—A Device for Laboratory Use Only?” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 28–34.
[6] Shimizu, H., R. Ishikawa, and R. Kaede, “Integrated-Optical Frequency Modulator for
Fiber-Optic Gyroscope,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 22, 1986, pp. 334–335.
[7] Michal, R. J., E. Udd, and J. P. Theriault, “Derivative Fiber-Sensors Based on Phase-
Nulling Optical Gyro Development,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 150–154.
[8] Arditty, H. J., C. Puech, and M. Papuchon, “Device for measuring a phase shift which
is not reciprocal produced in a ring interferometer,” U.S. Patent #5,056,919, Foreign
Application Priority of November 1980, 1991.
[9] Kim, B. Y., and H. J. Shaw, “Gated Phase-Modulation Approach to Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope with Linearized Scale Factor,” Optics Letters, Vol. 9, 1984, pp. 375–377.
[10] Kay, C. J., “Serrodyne Modulator in a Fibre-Optic Gyroscope,” IEE Proceedings,
Part J--Optoelectronics, Vol. 132, 1985, pp. 259–264.
[11] Elberg, A., and G. Schiffner, “Closed-Loop Fiber-Optic Gyroscope with a Sawtooth
Phase-Modulated Feedback,” Optics Letters, Vol. 10, 1985, pp. 300–302.
[12] Kurokawa, A., et al., “Evaluation of a Sawtooth Generator in a Closed-Loop Fiber-
Optic Gyroscope,” Proceedings of OFS 6/’89, Paris, Springer Proceedings in
Physics, Vol. 44, 1989, pp. 107–114.
[13] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Double Closed-Loop Hybrid Fiber Gyroscope Using Digital
Phase Ramp,” Proceedings of OFS 3/’85, San Diego, OSA/IEEE, Postdeadline
Paper 7, 1985.
193

[14] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Progress in Optical Fiber Gyroscopes Using Integrated Optics,”
AGARD-NATO Proceedings, Vol. CPP-383, 1985, pp. 9A1–9A3.
[15] Arditty, H. J., et al., “Fiber-Optic Gyroscope with All-Digital Processing,”
Proceedings of OFS 6/’89, Paris, Springer-Verlag Proceedings in Physics, Vol. 44,
1989, pp. 131–136.
[16] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “High Dynamic Range Fiber Gyro with All-Digital Processing,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1367, 1990, pp. 72–80.
[17] Auch, W., M. Oswald, and D. Ruppert, “Product Development of a Fiber-Optic Rate
Gyro,” Proceedings of Symposium Gyro Technology, DGON, Stuttgart, 1987, pp.
3.0–3.19.
[18] Lefèvre, H. C., and P. Martin, “Optical-fiber measuring device gyrometer, central
navigation and satisfying systems,” U.S. Patent #5,141,316, 1992.
[19] Buschelberger, J., and M. Kemmler, “Closed Loop Fiber Gyro Triad,” Fiber-Optic
Gyros: 15th Anniversary Conference, SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 89–
97.
[20] Pavlath, G. A., “Closed-Loop Fiber Optic Gyros,” Fiber-Optic Gyros: 20th
Anniversary Conference, SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 2837, 1996, pp. 46–60.
[21] Egorov, D. A., et al., “Study of Dead Zones of Fiber-Optic Gyros,” Gyroscopy and
Navigation, Vol. 2, No. 4, 2011, pp. 197–207.
[22] Lefèvre, H.C., “Comments About the Fiber-Optic Gyroscope,” SPIE Proceedings,
Vol. 838, 1987, pp. 86–97.
[23] Gaiffe, T., et al., “Light source with stabilized broadband and associated optical filter
gyroscope,” U.S. Patent #5,894,488, 1999.
[24] Schuma, R. F., and K. M. Killian, “Superluminescent Diode (SLD) Wavelength Control
in High-Performance Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp.
192–193.
[25] Chou, H., and S. Ezekiel, “Wavelength Stabilization of Broadband Semi-Conductor
Light Sources,” Optics Letters, Vol. 10, 1985, pp. 612–614.
[26] Lefèvre, H., and P. Martin, “Optical fiber measuring device using phase difference,”
U.S. Patent #5,337,142, 1994.
[27] Udd, E., and R. F. Cahill, “From Conception to the Field: Fiber-Optic Gyro
Development at McDonnell-Douglas,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 17–23.
194

CHAPTER 9
Recapitulation of the Optimal
Operating Conditions and
Technologies of the I-FOG
9.1 Optimal Operating Conditions
The interferometric fiber-optic gyroscope (I-FOG) is a ring interferometer
that uses a multiturn fiber coil to enhance the Sagnac effect induced by
rotation with respect to inertial space. This yields a difference ∆tR of
propagation time between the two counterpropagating waves that is
proportional to the rotation rate Ω and the area A of the sensing coil (see
Chapter 2):
 (9.1)
It is measured as a phase difference ∆ϕR is the interferometer:
∆ϕR = ω ⋅ ∆tR (9.2)
∆ϕR = 2π ⋅ f ⋅ ∆tR (9.3)
 (9.4)
where ω is the angular frequency, f is the temporal frequency, and λ is the
wavelength of the source of the interferometer. This result is usually given
as:
 (9.5)
where L is the length of the coil and D is its diameter.
The sensitivity of an I-FOG may be tuned with the size of the coil as
summarized in Table 9.1, where A is the total area of the sensing coil.
195

The optimal operating conditions can be summarized as follows:
Use a single-mode reciprocal configuration with a truly single-
mode filter (single spatial mode and single polarization) at the
common input-output port of the interferometer. This ensures that
the paths of both opposite waves are perfectly equalized and that
only truly nonreciprocal effects as rotation yield a phase difference
(see Chapter 3).
Table 9.1 Accuracy Versus Coil Size
D
L
A = LD/4
Medium accuracy
3 cm
100m 0.75 m2
High accuracy
10 cm 1 km
25 m2
Ultra-high accuracy 30 cm 10 km 750 m2
Use a modulation-demodulation biasing scheme with a reciprocal
phase modulator at the end of the fiber coil. The interferometer
behaves like a delay line filter because of the transit time through
the coil, which yields a high sensitivity operation point without
degrading the reciprocity. Best performance is obtained at the
proper (or eigen) frequency fp that matches the half-period of the
modulation to the coil transit time. The product fp × L is about
100 kHz ⋅ km. The combination of this processing scheme with a
reciprocal configuration yields the minimum configuration (see
Section 3.2).
Use a broadband optical source to take advantage of its short
coherence length. This destroys the interference contrast of the
various parasitic waves generated in the system by backreflection
and backscattering (see Chapter 4), or polarization cross-coupling
(see Chapter 5). It also suppresses the effect of Kerr nonlinearity,
which is also related to an interference phenomenon (see Section
7.3).
Use polarization-maintaining (PM) fibers that provide a very
beneficial depolarization effect on the crossed-polarized waves
because of their intrinsic birefringence and of the low coherence of
the broadband source (see Chapter 5). This relaxes the constraint
of the ultra-high polarizer rejection. The accurate analysis of these
polarization problems is obtained with optical coherence domain
196

polarimetry 
(OCDP), 
based 
on 
path-matched 
white-light
differential interferometry or spectrum analysis (see Section 5.4).
These PM fibers also reduce the influence of the nonreciprocal
magneto-optic effects (see Sections 7.1 and 7.2).
Use a symmetrical winding (quadrupolar in particular) to reduce
sensitivity to temperature transients (see Section 6.2).
Use a closed-loop processing scheme applying a phase-nulling
feedback to linearize the Sagnac phase measurement ∆ϕR. Among
the possible techniques, the all-digital closed-loop approach
provides fundamental advantages. It combines a digital phase
ramp feedback, which yields very good scale factor linearity over
the whole dynamic range because of averaging effects, a second
servo-loop for gain control, and a digital demodulation, which is
intrinsically free of any source of electronic bias drift (see Section
8.2). Such a digital phase ramp technique requires a wideband
phase modulator.
Use wavelength control to stabilize, measure, or model the source
mean wavelength and get an accurate scale factor of the rotation
rate measurement (see Section 8.3).
Figure 9.1 summarizes the optimal architecture that combines a Y-
coupler configuration, using a multifunction integrated-optic circuit, with
all-digital closed-loop processing electronics generating a staircase digital
phase ramp.
Figure 9.1 Optimal architecture of the I-FOG with a Y-coupler configuration and an
all-digital closed-loop processing scheme.
197

It is composed of:
A broadband source: superluminescent semiconductor diode
(SLD) for medium performance and Er-doped fiber ASE source
for high performance.
A multifunction integrated-optic circuit (MIOC) based on proton
exchange in LiNbO3 and composed of a Y-junction and a pair of
phase modulators. Very good polarization filtering is ensured by
the 
single-polarization 
propagation 
in 
proton-exchanged
waveguides, and LiNbO3 phase modulators do have the wide
band required by the phase ramp.
A polarization-maintaining (PM) fiber coil with a quadrupolar
winding.
A source coupler (or circulator) to send the returning light to a
detector.
A detector that converts the optical power returning from the
interferometer into an electrical signal.
An analog-digital (A/D) convertor that samples this signal.
A processing logic that generates the rotation rate measurement.
A digital-analog (D/A) convertor that drives the phase modulators
with the biasing modulation and the phase-ramp feedback
modulation.
Figures 9.2(a, b) are photographs of the first fiber-gyro using the Y-
coupler configuration and the digital phase ramp in the mid-1980s.
Figure 9.2 Photographs of an early prototype (1985) of Thomson-CSF (now Thales)
Central Research Laboratory, using an SLD at 850 nm: (a) close view showing the
MIOC and the coupler of the Y-coupler configuration and (b) test setup with the
198

phase-ramp trace on the oscilloscope.
9.2 Broadband Source
9.2.1 Superluminescent Diode
The first laboratory experiments in the late 1970s were performed with
He-Ne gas lasers (Figure 9.3), which were the only available sources that
could be efficiently coupled into a single-mode fiber, as their Gaussian
emission mode is matched to the pseudo-Gaussian fundamental mode of
the fiber (see Section B.4.1).
In the early 1980s, the development of semiconductor emitting diodes,
particularly for telecommunications, made these compact solid-state light
sources working with a low driving voltage the ideal choice for practical
devices. These diodes are mainly two kinds: surface light emitting diodes
(LEDs) and laser diodes (LDs) [1]. They use III-V semiconductor
junctions, AlGaAs-GaAs for a wavelength in the 800- to 850-nm range, or
InGaAsP-InP for the 1,300 and 1,550-nm ranges.
Figure 9.3 Early breadboard of a fiber gyro, in the late 1970s, from Thomson-CSF
(now Thales) Central Research Laboratory, using an He-Ne laser as the source.
As seen in Section A.2, these two sources were not optimal for gyro
applications: LEDs based on spontaneous emission have an adequate
spectrum width, but they cannot be coupled efficiently into a single-mode
199

fiber, because the emission area is large (50 to 100 μm in diameter)
compared to the fiber core; LDs may be coupled efficiently because the
wave, generated in a narrow stripe (a few micrometers) by stimulated
emission, is spatially coherent, but the spectrum is composed of the
narrow emission peaks of the modes of the Fabry-Perot laser cavity. To
get simultaneously a good spatial coherence and a low temporal
coherence, laser diodes have to be modified to make superluminescent (or
superradiant) diodes, abbreviated SLDs (or SRDs). The lasing effect is
suppressed by decreasing the reflectivity of the mirror facets with an
antireflection coating at the emission output and an absorbing region at the
other diode end (Figure 9.4) [2–6]. The use of an angled stripe [7], which
works on a similar principle as the angled edge of the integrated circuit,
has also been demonstrated (see Section 4.1.1).
Figure 9.4 Superluminescent diode with a rear absorbing region.
The gain of a semiconductor diode is very high, and even without cavity
feedback, the output power may be almost as high as that of a laser. Along
a single pass, the first spontaneous emission photons are amplified by
stimulated emission, and the output wave has a spatial coherence similar to
that of a laser, because it is also generated in a narrow stripe, yielding an
efficient coupling into a single-mode fiber. However, the multimode laser
structure of the spectrum is greatly reduced, and SLDs behave like quasi-
broadband sources. At 850 nm, the full width at half maximum (FWHM)
of the spectrum is on the order of 20 nm.
Practical devices, which are typically 300 to 500 μm long, are
hermetically packaged in a rugged casing with a fiber pigtail soldered in
front of the emission window of the diode. The typical coupled power is
200

few milliwatts (the coupling efficiency is 10% to 20%) for a driving
current of 50 to 150 mA. A polarization-maintaining fiber may be used for
pigtailing with adequate orientation of its birefringence axes. SLDs are
partially polarized, with 70% to 80% of the power in the horizontal
polarization parallel to the junction.
The main problem of SLDs is their poor spectrum stability: the mean
wavelength has a drift of about 400 ppm/°C with temperature and 40
ppm/mA with driving current. A temperature control with a Peltier element
and a stable driver yield stability in the range of 100 ppm; but higher
performance requires a direct wavelength control.
9.2.2 Rare-Earth Doped Fiber ASE Sources
To overcome the problem of SLD wavelength stability, work was devoted
in the early 1990s to the development of alternative broadband sources
based on rare-earth doped fiber [8]. As with SLDs, rare-earth doping
provides a very high amplification gain, and high-power broadband
emission may be obtained over a single pass with amplified spontaneous
emission (ASE) without requiring a cavity feedback (see Section A.2.4).
These wideband fiber sources were first called super-fluorescent fiber
sources, but today the term ASE is mainly used. Super-radiance, super-
luminescence, super-fluorescence, and ASE are actually similar [9].
Rare-earth energy levels are much more stable than those of
semiconductors and greatly improve the wavelength stability. They can be
pumped with compact high-power laser diodes. Two dopants are
particularly efficient: neodymium (Nd), with an emission around 1,060 nm
and a pump of 800 nm [8, 10], and erbium (Er), with an emission around
1,550 nm and a pump of 980 nm or 1,480 nm [11, 12]. Only erbium is
used today because it takes advantage of the huge industrial development
of the erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) that has revolutionized
telecommunications since the 1990s.
These Er-fiber ASE sources are almost ideal for high-performance fiber
gyroscopes, however, the subject is not straightforward, and to obtain a
very good wavelength stability depends on various parameters, particularly
pump wavelength, pump power, and light feedback [13].
Several features of these erbium sources must be pointed out:
Their emitted light is unpolarized, which is very beneficial for
reducing polarization nonreciprocities (see Section 3.4.4). It allows
201

one also to use the ordinary (non-PM) single-mode fiber for the
source coupler.
Their output power may be very high (up to a few hundreds of
milliwatts) and is naturally matched to single-mode fiber, which is
useful for getting low photon noise or sharing a single source for
three gyro axes.
Their spectrum is very asymmetrical (Figure 9.5) and care must
be taken to carefully evaluate the mean wavelength (see Sections
8.3.2 and A.12.4).
Figure 9.5 Asymmetrical spectrum of an erbium-doped fiber ASE source
extending from 1.52 to 1.57 μm. The mean wavelength is 1.54 μm.
Their spectrum width is narrower that the one of an SLD, and the
decoherence function is reduced to 0.03 for Ldc = 350 μm (Figure
9.6).
This narrow width also creates a significant excess RIN. This
problem is addressed next, as well as the ways to compensate for
it.
Figure 9.6 Coherence function of an erbium ASE source with logarithmic scales.
The decoherence length Ldc = 350 μm.
9.2.3 Excess RIN Compensation Techniques
As discussed in Section A.2.2, a spontaneous emission source suffers from
202

excess relative intensity noise (excess RIN, or simply RIN), and an ASE
source (see Section A.2.4) keeps the excess RIN of its seed spontaneous
emission.
Theory shows that the power spectral density (PSDRIN) of the excess
relative intensity noise is simply the inverse of the spectrum temporal
frequency width ∆fFWHM:
PSDRIN ≈ 1/∆fFWHM (9.6)
For an SLD with a mean wavelength λ = 850 nm and ∆λFWHM-SLD
= 20 nm, the frequency width is ∆fFWHM-SLD = c ⋅ ∆λFWHM-SLD/λ2
= 8 THz, and then:
PSDRIN-SLD = 1.25 × 10–13/Hz (i.e. −129 dB/Hz) (9.7)
As seen in Section A.2.1, this value of excess RIN corresponds to the
theoretical photon noise of a power of 4 μW, which is in practice the
returning power of a fiber gyro using such an SLD.
For an erbium-fiber ASE source, the spectrum is very asymmetrical, but
it may be possible to define an equivalent RIN width ∆λFWHM-Er = 20
nm, yielding ∆fFWHM-Er = 2.5 THz, and then:
PSDRIN-Er = 4 × 10–13/Hz (i.e. −124 dB/Hz) (9.8)
This is significantly higher than the one of an SLD, and in addition an
erbium source provides much more power. Then the related photon noise
is in the range of −140 dB/Hz, that is, 40 times lower than the PSD of the
RIN and six times in terms of relative σ values (the square-root of the
PSD).
It can be even worse (−120 dB/Hz), when an internal spectral filtering
of the erbium source is performed to ensure a good wavelength stability
and get a high scale-factor accuracy as discussed in Section 8.3.4.
However, excess RIN is not a fundamental noise like photon noise:
when a light beam is split, the photon noises of both outputs are
uncorrelated, but their RINs are identical. It is possible to compensate for
the RIN by measuring it with a reference and subtracting it from the signal
as proposed by Moeller and Burns [15].
There is also a very simple method of RIN reduction by operating the
203

gyro at a bias point close to a black fringe, that is, a phase bias close to π
instead of π/2 [16]. The sensitivity is proportional to the slope of the
raised cosine response curve, that is, sinϕb (where ϕb is the phase bias)
while the excess RIN is proportional to the actual power on bias (i.e., the
response (1 + cosϕb)). Working, for example, at a 0.9π bias instead of
π/2, the sensitivity is reduced by a factor of sin(0.9 × π)/sin(π/2) = 0.3,
while intensity noise experiences a reduction six times higher, since [1 +
cos(0.9 × π)]/[1 + cos(π/2)] = 0.05. Furthermore, as seen in Section
2.3.2, this slightly improves the theoretical signal-to-photon-noise ratio.
Such a technique of reduction of excess RIN allows in practice to get
very close to the theoretical photon noise and to obtain a phase noise
about 
 It yields an angular random performance (ARW)
performance as good as 7 × 10–5°/
 with a coil of 3 km over a diameter
of 170 mm [17].
9.3 Sensing Coil
As explained previously, the best performances are obtained with a sensing
coil made of stress-induced high-birefringence polarization-maintaining
fiber. An elliptical core PM fiber (see Section B.5.1) has a higher
attenuation and a lower polarization conservation, and is rarely used.
Furthermore, a symmetrical quadrupolar winding reduces the effect of
temperature transience. As detailed in Sections 6.1 to 6.4, the pure Shupe
effect and the T-dot effect are related to temperature-dependent stresses
induced in the coil, which requires a careful mechanical design of the
holding of the coil.
Some other practical specifications are also needed. In particular, high-
NA fiber with a highly doped core is suitable for avoiding bending loss in
very compact coils: with an NA of 0.16, coil diameter may be as small as
20 mm without additional attenuation.
Careful winding and adequate potting material are also important to
ensure good pointing accuracy: the sensitivity axis is parallel to the
equivalent area vector A defined by the line integral ∫(1/2)r × dr along the
fiber (see Section 2.1.1). To get the specified performance in a three-axis
unit, the axis stability, in radian, must be equal to that of the scale factor;
that is, for example, 10–5 rad is required with 10 ppm.
204

The fiber diameter should be as small as possible to limit the volume of
the coil. Gyro fibers have a typical cladding diameter of 80 μm instead of
the standard 125 μm of telecommunication fibers. The same applies to the
protective coating, which should be as thin as possible. However, it must
minimize microbending to avoid loss or degradation of the polarization
conservation, which actually limits its minimum thickness. The coil
characteristics must be conserved over the entire temperature range of the
operation: two-layer coatings with a soft inner layer have been developed
to solve this problem.
To avoid an increase of attenuation under radiation in military or space
applications, the use of long wavelengths (1,300 or 1,550 nm) is preferred.
In addition, single or even double μ-metal shieldings are required to
eliminate the residual magnetic dependence (see Section 7.1).
A last very important point is the fiber reliability. This problem is very
complex [18, 19], but the basic ideas may be outlined. The fiber surface
contains very small intrinsic flaws due to the basic structure of silica, and
larger extrinsic flaws due to dust or particles included in the fiber during
the drawing process. When the fiber is under tensile stress, the size of the
flaws is increased, which may eventually cause breakage of the fiber.
When wound in coils, the fiber is placed under tensile stress at the outside.
The related strain is equal to the ratio between the fiber diameter and the
coil diameter. To ensure a good reliability, the whole fiber length has to be
proof-tested at a high strain level (typically 0.5% to 2%, while ideal silica
may withstand strain up to 10%) for a few seconds to check that the
sample does not contain weak points that would otherwise induce
breakage. Based on the Weibull model of the weakest link in a chain, the
failure probability over the expected lifetime of the gyro may be evaluated
as a function of the proof-test level and of the fiber characteristics [18].
The quality of practical fibers ensures a very good reliability for coils in
the 10-cm range that experience a strain of about 0.1%. However, for
small coils (about 2 to 3 cm), high-strength fiber would have to be used to
achieve a very long lifetime. Note that proof-test level is also expressed in
terms of stress instead of strain, which are related by the Young modulus
of silica ESiO2 = 70 GPa in SI units; using pounds per square inch,
remember that 1% of strain corresponds to a stress of 100 kpsi. Another
useful order of magnitude is that 1% of strain is induced by a force of 10N
(1 kilo) for a 125-μm fiber, and 4N (400 grams) for an 80-μm fiber.
205

9.4 The Heart of the Interferometer
As described in previous chapters (particularly Chapter 3), the main
subject of concern has been the heart of the interferometer, composed of a
source beam splitter, a polarizer, a spatial single-mode filter, a coil beam
splitter, and phase modulators. Because bulk-optic components require
delicate alignments to couple light into single-mode fiber, research has
been focused on a rugged, all-guided approach, and the users of integrated
optics have had the advantage of getting wideband phase modulators.
Optimal simplicity is obtained with a hybrid approach: the Y-coupler
configuration (see Section 3.3.4) widely used since the 1990s [20]. A
multifunction integrated-optic circuit (MIOC) combines a Y-junction for
the coil splitter, wideband phase modulators, and preferably the polarizer,
while a coupler is used for the source splitter, with its lead acting as the
spatial filter on the common input-output port of the interferometer. This
source splitter can be replaced by a circulator (see Section B.8.3) to get
higher returning power and lower noise.
A very critical component is the polarizer, and a proton-exchanged
LiNbO3 circuit (see Section C.3) that guides only one state of polarization
is considered as the optimal approach [21], even if experimental results
[22] demonstrated that it is possible to get a rejection of 60 dB with a
metallic overlay on a Ti-indiffused waveguide. An in-line fiber polarizer
using a metallic overlay also [23] is another interesting alternative.
Remember that OCDP (see Section 5.4) is an essential technique for
evaluating accurately the rejection of the polarizing element, and the
amount of polarization crossed couplings.
9.5 Detector and Processing Electronics
Finally, it is necessary to be careful when choosing the detector so as not
to degrade the performance of the optical system, which would normally
be limited by photon shot noise (see Section 2.3.2). Semiconductor PIN
(Positive-Intrinsic-Negative) junction photodiodes are ideal because of
their very high quantum efficiency: the number of primary electrons
generated is very close to the number of input photons; the flow of
electrons has about the same fundamental shot noise as the theoretical
value for the flow of photons.
As seen in Section A.2.1, the relative power spectral density (PSD) of
the shot noise of an electrical current I:
206

 (9.9)
and the one of an optical power P is:
 (9.10)
where q is the charge of the electron, and hf is the energy of the photon.
Considering the flow of incoming photons 
 and the one of outgoing
electrons 
, it yields:
 (9.11)
 (9.12)
The quantum efficiency 
 is typically 80% yielding a responsibility
of 0.68 A/W at 850 nm and 1 A/W at 1,550 nm. It degrades the PSP by
20%, but it is only 10% for the root mean square value.
For 850 nm, a silicon (Si) photodiode has to be used, while indium
gallium arsenide (InGaAs) is optimal for 1,300 and 1,550 nm. Both
materials provide low dark current and short response time that would not
be the case with germanium in particular, and they can be considered as a
quasi-perfect detector.
However, an electrical current I cannot be measured directly; it has to
be converted into a voltage V with a load resistor Rload. This yields the
additional thermal noise of this load, with a voltage rms value:
 (9.13)
where k = 1.38 × 10–23 J ⋅ K–1 is the Boltzmann constant and Tabs is the
absolute temperature in Kelvin (i.e., about 300K).
If the load resistance Rload is increased, the conversion factor increases
linearly while the thermal noise increases only as the square root, which
improves the signal-to-thermal-noise ratio. However, the improvement is
limited by the saturation voltage or the gain-bandwidth product of the
amplifier which has to be used. This dictates the maximum load resistance
that may be used for the required bandwidth and with the actual detected
power. In practice, thermal noise of the detector is not the limiting factor.
As seen earlier, it is the excess RIN of the broadband source, but it can be
207

compensated for; high-performance fiber gyros have a noise close to their
theoretical photon shot noise: typically 0.1 to 0.3 
 in terms of
equivalent phase noise in the interferometer.
In early experiments when the returning power was low, photomultiplier
tubes and avalanche photodiodes were used. In both cases, there is a
direct amplification process of the photocurrent that reduces the relative
effect of the thermal noise of the load resistor, but it degrades the quantum
efficiency, which increases the actual relative shot noise.
With the progress of components in terms of attenuation, present
returning optical powers are high, and a PIN diode is the optimal choice.
Note in addition that the detection unit requires a very careful electronic
design to avoid ground loop and electromagnetic coupling problems. The
biasing modulation voltage is typically on the order of few volts and the
primary current in the detector is typically few tens of microamperes for
few tens of microwatts of returning optical power. To limit bias error due
to electronic coupling to below 10–8 rad, the coupled current at the
modulation frequency has to remain below 10–13 ampere, that is, about a
single electron per microsecond, which is typically the sampling time. This
problem of electromagnetic coupling applies also to the driving current of
an SLD; however, with an Er-source this constrain is relaxed since a
modulation of the pumping laser diode is filtered out in the process of
erbium amplification above a frequency of few kilohertz, while the biasing
modulation-demodulation is done at the proper frequency that is typically
100 kHz to 1 MHz.
For the digital processing electronics, we already saw in Sections 8.2.3
and 8.2.4 that the required number of bits of the A/D and D/A convertors
is limited because of averaging effects. In practice, 12 bits are sufficient
for medium-grade performance, and even ultra-high performance does not
require more than 16 bits.
The logic circuit can use Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC)
technology but Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) technology is
usually privileged because it significantly reduces development time and
cost.
208

Figure 9.7 Photograph of an I-FOG prototype of Photonetics (now iXBlue) in 1989.
One can see the MIOC, the source coupler, the sensing coil with its μ-metal shielding,
and the all-digital processing electronics using an FPGA circuit. This prototype used
an SLD at 850 nm and a 200m-long PM fiber coil with a mean diameter of 30 mm.
Figure 9.7 displays a photograph of the first gyro prototype combining
the Y-coupler optical configuration and an all-digital processing electronics
in 1989.
References
[1] Fukuda, M., Reliability and Degradation of Semiconductor Lasers and LEDs,
Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1991.
[2] Lee, T. P., C. A. Burrus, and B. I. Miller, “A Stripe-Geometry Double-Heterostructure
Amplified-Spontaneous Emission (Superluminescent) Diode,” IEEE Journal of
Quantum Electronics, Vol. QE-9, 1983, pp. 820–821.
[3] Wang, C. S., et al., “High Power Low Divergence Superradiant Diode,” Applied
Physics Letters, Vol. 41, 1982, pp. 587–589.
[4] Wang, C. S., et al., “High-Power Long-Life Superluminescent Diode,” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 203–207.
[5] Kwong, N. S. K., et al., “High Power, High Efficiency Window Buried Heterostructure
GaAlAs Superluminescent Diode with an Integrated Absorber,” Applied Physics
Letters, Vol. 151, 1987, pp. 1879–1881.
[6] Kwong, N. S. K., N. Bar-Chaim, and T. Chen, “High-Power 1.3 μm Superluminescent
Diode,” Applied Physics Letters, Vol. 54, 1989, pp. 298–300.
[7] Niesen, J., et al., “Recent Development in 0.83 μm Superluminescent Diodes at TRW,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 208–215.
[8] Liu, K., et al., “Superfluorescent Single-Mode Nd: Fiber Source at 1060 nm,”
Proceedings of OFS’88, New Orleans, LA, 1988, pp. FDD5-1–FDD5-4.
[9] Auzel, F., S. Hubert, and D. Meichenin, “Very Low Threshold CW Excitation of
209

Superfluorescence at 2.72 μm in Er3+,” Europhysics Letters, Vol. 7, 1988, pp. 459–
462.
[10] Fesler, K. A., et al., “Behavior of Broadband Fiber Sources in a Fiber Gyroscope,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1171, 1989, pp. 346–352.
[11] Morkel, P. R., “Erbium-Doped Fibre Superfluorescent Source for the Fibre
Gyroscope,” Proceedings of OFS’89, Paris, Springer Proceedings in Physics, Vol.
44, 1989, pp. 143–148.
[12] Wysocki, P. F., et al., “1.55 μm Broadband Fiber Sources Pumped Near 980 nm,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1373, 1990, pp. 66–77.
[13] Wysocki, P. F., et al., “Spectrum Thermal Stability of Nd- and Er-Doped Fiber
Sources,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1373, 1990, pp. 234–245.
[14] Morkel, P. R., R. I. Laming, and D. N. Payne, “Noise Characteristics of High-Power
Doped-Fibre Superluminescent Sources,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 26, 1990, pp. 96–98.
[15] Moeller, R. P., and W. K. Burns, “Low noise fiber gyroscope system which includes
excess noise subtraction,” U.S. Patent #5,331,404, 1994.
[16] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Integrated Optics: A Practical Solution for the Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 101–112.
[17] Paturel, Y., et al., “One Nautical Mile per Month FOG-Based Strapdown Navigation
System: A Dream Already Within Reach,” Inertial Sensors and Systems 2012,
Karlsruhe, paper 12, 2012.
[18] Miyajima, Y., “Studies on High-Tensile Proof Tests of Optical Fibers,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, Vol. 1, 1983, pp. 340–346.
[19] Kurkjian, C. R., J. T. Krause, and M. J. Matthewson, “Strength and Fatigue of Silica
Optical Fibers,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 7, 1989, pp. 1360–1370.
[20] Ezekiel, S., and E. Udd, (eds.), “Fiber Optic Gyro: 15th Anniversary Conference,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991.
[21] Suchosky, P. G., T. K. Findakly, and F. L. Leonberger, “LiNbO3 Integrated Optical
Components for Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 993, 1988, pp. 240–
243.
[22] Szafraniec, B., C. Laskoskie, and D. Ang, “High-Performance Ti-Indiffused LiNbO3
Multifunction Chip for Use in Fiber Optic Gyros,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991,
pp. 393–404.
[23] Johnstone, W., S. Carey, and B. Culshaw, “Developments in the Characterisation and
Performance of Optical Fibre Polarising Devices Using Thin Metal Films,” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 365–370.
[24] Dandridge, A., and H. F. Taylor, “Noise and Correlation Effects in GaAlAs Broadband
Sources,” IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 5, 1987, pp. 689–693.
210

CHAPTER 10
Alternative Approaches for the I-
FOG
10.1 Alternative Optical Configurations
The minimum configuration (see Section 3.2) using a single-mode filter at
the common input-output port of the ring interferometer and a phase
modulation-demodulation to bias the response is now almost universally
used. In the early days of gyro research, other schemes were proposed,
such as the use of an acousto-optic modulator to split or recombine both
counterpropagating waves [1, 2], or the use of a polarization splitter and a
quarter-wave plate to passively bias the signal [3]. These schemes are not
significantly simpler than the minimum configuration, and their
performances are limited, as they do not fully respect reciprocity.
Among these nonreciprocal approaches, one solution, the use of a [3 ×
3] coupler proposed by Sheem [4], is still pursued [5, 6] because of its
great simplicity. It does not yield a very good performance, but it is an
interesting scheme for a very low-cost fiber gyro. It is based on the
intrinsic phase shift induced in the evanescent wave coupling of a [3 × 3]
coupler.
Figure 10.1 Fiber gyro using a [3 × 3] coupler.
We have already seen indeed (Section 3.3.1) that a [2 × 2] coupler
yields a π/2 phase shift for the coupled wave. At the reciprocal port of the
interferometer, both waves have experienced the same coupling phase shift
and are in phase, while at the nonreciprocal port, one wave has
experienced twice this π/2 phase shift and the other one has experienced
none, which yields a π phase difference. In a [3 × 3] coupler, each
211

coupled wave experiences a 2π/3 phase shift, and by connecting the coil
on the two coupled output ports (Figure 10.1), both counterpropagating
waves experience the 2π/3 phase shift at the input, while, at the output,
one is transmitted and the other is coupled with a second 2π/3 phase shift.
Therefore, they interfere, in absence of rotation, with a 2π/3 phase
difference at one output free port of the interferometer and with a −2π/3
phase difference at the other free port. By taking the power difference
between these two ports, a sine biased signal is obtained, but with a very
simple electronic circuit.
Figure 10.2 A [3 × 3] coupler: (a) uniform excitation and (b) phasor diagram of output
amplitude.
It is possible to easily check that the phase shift has to be 2π/3. Let us
consider a symmetrical [3 × 3] coupler where all the ports are equivalent
[Figure 10.2(a)]. They can be made with a fused-tapered technique [6]
similar to the one used in a [2 × 2] coupler (see Section B.7.1). Assuming
that three waves are entering the coupler in phase and with the same input
power, because of symmetry, the power must be equal in the three ports
at the output. At each port there is interference between three waves with
the same modulus 
 of their amplitude (where Ain is the input
amplitude at the three ports). The transmitted wave does not experience
any phase shift, while both coupled waves have the same additional phase
shift. Considering a phasor diagram [Figure 10.2(b)], the output amplitude
Aout is the vectorial sum of a transmitted amplitude At and two coupled
amplitudes Ac and Ac′. The moduli of these three amplitudes are equal.
Simple geometrical rules of equilateral triangles show that if the phase shift
of Ac and Ac′ is 2π/3, the modulus 
 equals 
 (i.e., the
modulus 
 of each input wave).
This gyro configuration is very attractive in terms of simplicity, but it
faces the same problem as the use of the nonreciprocal free port of a [2 ×
212

2] coupler (see Section 3.3.1): the coupler loss induces a spurious phase
difference and there is a problem of polarization nonreciprocity, as a
polarizer cannot be used at the common input-output port. This last
situation is improved with the use of an unpolarized source (see Section
3.4.4) [5], but this approach remains limited to low-performance
applications.
10.2 Alternative Signal Processing Schemes
10.2.1 Open-Loop Scheme with Use of Multiple Harmonics
As we have already seen in Section 8.2, closed-loop schemes using phase
ramp feedback provide by far the best performance of scale factor, but
they require the use of wideband integrated optic phase modulators. The
all-fiber approach (see Section 3.3.3) yields very good sensitivity, but
wideband phase modulation has not been demonstrated in a practical all-
fiber form.
Numerous signal processing schemes compatible with an all-fiber
configuration avoid the use of integrated optics, even if they are not
preferred anymore. A first solution uses the usual modulation-
demodulation technique with a sine wave (see Section 3.2.2), but also
considers the various harmonic components of the detector signal [7, 8].
The first and other odd harmonics provide a biased sine signal of the
rotation-induced phase difference ∆ϕR, while the even harmonics provide
a cosine signal, and through calculation it is possible to recover the value
of ∆ϕR. Such an open-loop approach is limited in practice to a typical
scale factor accuracy of 0.1% to 1% because of the imperfect stability of
the gain of the modulation-demodulation chain.
10.2.2 Second Harmonic Feedback
An all-fiber gyro is not bound to an open-loop scheme. In particular, the
first proposed closed-loop scheme compatible with an all-fiber
piezoelectric phase modulator was the use of the second-harmonic
feedback [9, 10]. As seen in Section 3.2.3 and Figure 3.10, an additional
second-harmonic phase modulation yields an unbalanced biasing
modulation, which may be used to compensate for the rotation-induced
phase difference. Such an approach yields a nonlinear response, and
performances depend on the stability of the phase modulator, which is
difficult to control accurately.
213

10.2.3 Gated Phase Modulation Feedback
The gated phase modulation approach is conceptually derived from the
harmonic feedback scheme. We have already seen that any phase
modulation ϕm(t) yields a modulation ∆ϕm(t) of the phase difference, with
∆ϕm(t) = ϕm(t) − ϕm(t − ∆τg) (see Sections 3.2.2 and 8.2.2). Because
the mean value of a difference is the difference of the mean values, the
mean modulation < ∆ϕm > of the phase difference is:
⟨∆ϕm(t)⟩ = ⟨ϕm(t) − ϕm(t − ∆τg)⟩ = ⟨ϕm(t)⟩ − ⟨ϕm(t − ∆τg)⟩ (10.1)
and both mean values ⟨ϕm(t)⟩ and ⟨ϕm(t − ∆τg)⟩ are perfectly equal
because of reciprocity; therefore:
< ∆ϕm > = < ϕm > − < ϕm > = 0 (10.2)
This particularly applies to the case of the phase ramp (Section 8.2.2);
however, because of the reset, the amplitude of ∆ϕPR is then much larger
than the linear part of the sine response of the interferometer, and the
average of the detector signal is no longer equal to the null value of the
average modulation of the phase difference < ∆ϕPR >. When the
amplitude of ∆ϕm remains in this linear range, its mean feedback effect
should be zero as the mean value of the phase modulation. Harmonic
feedback is working because the demodulation at the fundamental
frequency takes into account only one half-period of the second harmonic
component. The opposite half-period is in quadrature with respect to the
demodulation at the fundamental frequency and can be considered as
“gated out” (Figure 10.3). Therefore, the mean effect of the gated second
harmonic modulation is not zero, even if its mean value does equal zero.
For a lower frequency of feedback modulation, an equivalent effect is
obtained with an actual electronic gating of the detector signal over one
half-period of feedback modulation [11]. This yields a nonlinear response
similar to the harmonic feedback case and with the same problem of
control of modulator stability.
It is possible to linearize the response with a combined phase
modulation feedback [12] using the sum of a low-frequency sine
modulation and a specific amount of its second harmonic component,
which flattens the feedback modulation during the time when the detector
is turned on (Figure 10.4).
214

Another principle of gated modulation feedback may also be
implemented with a high-frequency square-wave modulation when an
integrated-optic modulator is used [13]. This has the advantage of a linear
response without an accurate control of harmonic ratio, in contrast to the
previous case.
All these schemes suffer from the instability of the phase modulator
response. They do not have the equivalent of the 2π-reset of the phase
ramp (see Sections 8.2.2 and 8.2.3) to control it. Like the situations
discussed in Section 8.3.2, these methods are, in principle, wavelength-
independent, but the modulator response drift does not allow this fact to
be taken advantage of in practice.
Figure 10.3 Actual gating of one half-period of the second harmonic with
demodulation at the fundamental frequency.
10.2.4 Heterodyne and Pseudo-Heterodyne Schemes
Heterodyne techniques are commonly used in interferometry to avoid the
problem of the basic nonlinearity of the cosine response. A frequency
shifter is placed on one arm of the interferometer, which yields a beating
of the output signal, because two waves interfere with different
frequencies. The output signal becomes (see Appendix A)
 (10.3)
where ∆f is the frequency difference and ∆ϕ is the optical phase
difference induced by the path imbalance of the interferometer. This value
∆ϕ is then measured linearly with an electronic phase meter, which
compares the phase of the interference beating and the reference phase of
the modulation voltage of the frequency shifter.
215

Several schemes have been proposed to apply this technique to a ring
interferometer [2, 14, 15], but if a frequency shifter is used, both
counterpropagating paths must be separated to apply the shifting on only
one wave. This destroys reciprocity, and even if some common-mode
rejection may be used [14, 15], it does not provide a bias stability
comparable to the one obtained with a reciprocal configuration. Note that
the frequency shift feedback described in Section 8.2.1 is not a heterodyne
technique, despite the use of an acousto-optic frequency modulator: both
counterpropagating waves experience the frequency shift, and they
interfere with the same frequency without beating.
Figure 10.4 Combined phase modulation for gated feedback.
To avoid this problem of nonreciprocity induced by separating the
counterpropagating waves, the implementation of a heterodyne scheme
with an integrated optic phase modulator in a typical configuration (i.e.,
placed at one end of the fiber coil) was proposed [16]. A sawtooth
electrical generator is sent into an electrical integrator and the output
voltage is then applied to the phase modulator. As seen in Section 8.2.2 a
sawtooth modulation is equivalent to a frequency shift, and, as seen in
Section 6.1, the ring interferometer responds to phase modulation as a
differentiator. Therefore, the combination of frequency shifting,
integration, and differentiation results in a constant frequency shift
between both counterpropagating waves, and the optical phase in the
interferometer may be measured with an electronic phase meter, as in any
heterodyne scheme. However, the value of this frequency shift depends
216

on the amplitude of the sawtooth and on the gain of the electrical
integrator, which modifies the scale factor. This method requires hardware
comparable to that needed in phase ramp schemes (see Sections 8.2.2 and
8.2.3) without obtaining the same performance.
However, pseudo-heterodyne techniques have also been proposed [17,
18], which use an all-fiber piezoelectric phase modulator and are therefore
compatible with an all-fiber gyroscope. It is based on the use of a large
amplitude of phase modulation that scans several fringes. Contrary to the
usual demodulation technique (see Section 3.2.2), which compares the
value of the detector signal at the peaks of the phase modulation, the
pseudo-heterodyne technique analyzes the phase of the modulated
detector signal with a gating when the optical phase modulation has a high
slope. This yields the equivalent of a heterodyning frequency upshift for
the positive slope and a downshift for the negative slope, since the
frequency is the derivative of the phase. When the interferometer is
balanced, both beatings are symmetrical; but when there is an additional
optical phase difference, these two beatings are shifted in opposite
directions (Figure 10.5), and by comparing their phases, the value of the
optical phase difference can be retrieved. This technique requires careful
control of the amplitude of the phase modulation, which limits its
practicability.
10.2.5 Beat Detection with Phase Ramp Feedback
An alternative approach to the simple phase ramp feedback (see Section
8.2.2) was proposed [19] that uses additional couplers to superimpose a
Mach-Zehnder interferometer on the Sagnac interferometer. The phase
ramp used to null out the phase difference in the gyro generates an
interference beating in the Mach-Zehnder interferometer, and the counting
of the beats yields an incremental angular measurement of the rotation.
217

Figure 10.5 Principle of the pseudo-heterodyne scheme.
If it were possible to generate infinite ramps, this approach would be
interesting because the beats yield a direct calibration of the ramp slope.
However, the ramp modulation has to be reset because of the limited
range of driving voltage, and it requires control of the 2π-reset, as in the
case of the simple serrodyne scheme. Therefore, this approach has no real
advantage, particularly because it requires a much more complex
integrated optic circuit (Figure 10.6) [20].
Figure 10.6 Integrated optic circuit for beat detection.
10.2.6 Dual-Phase Ramp Feedback
Phase ramp feedback techniques require the use of integrated optics to get
the high modulator bandwidth required by the resets. However, an
218

alternative dual phase ramp feedback, using a triangular waveform instead
of a sawtooth, has been proposed by Bergh [21]. This approach, which
has no fast reset, is compatible with the all-fiber piezoelectric modulator.
At rest, the positive slope of the triangular wave form ϕPR(t) induces a
π rad phase difference ∆ϕPR while the negative slope induces a −π rad
phase difference [Figure 10.7(a)]. In rotation, the feedback loop keeps the
system locked on ±π, and it yields a difference of duration between the
positive and negative slopes [Figure 10.7(b)], which is proportional to the
rotation rate. This dual ramp technique may be also implemented in a
digital form.
This approach requires a larger phase modulation amplitude than the
more conventional phase ramp technique, but has some interest,
particularly since it is compatible with the all-fiber configuration of the
fiber gyroscope.
10.3 Extended Dynamic Range with Multiple Wavelength
Source
Most fiber gyros work over an unambiguous dynamic range of ±Ωπ,
which corresponds to a Sagnac phase difference of ±π rad (see Section
2.3.1). However, it is possible to work over several fringes, even with a
broadband source, because the contrast is preserved over the coherence
length that corresponds to many wavelengths, but there is an ambiguity.
For applications where the gyro is turned on while being in the
unambiguous range, it is possible to count the fringes that are passed and
to keep a valid measurement over an extended dynamic range.
Now, if several wavelengths are used, the phase measurement varies
with the wavelength, and it is possible to recognize the fringe order, which
increases the true unambiguous dynamic range [22].
219

Figure 10.7 Dual phase ramp: (a) at rest and (b) in rotation.
References
[1] Udd, E., and R. F. Cahill, “Compact Fiber-Optic Gyro,” Springer Series in Optical
Sciences, Vol. 32, 1982, pp. 189–194.
[2] Hotate, K., et al., “Rotation Detection by Optical Heterodyne Fiber Gyro with
Frequency Output,” Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp. 331–333.
[3] Jackson, D. A., A. D. Kersey, and A. C. Lewin, “Fibre Gyroscope with Passive
Quadrature Detection,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 20, 1984, pp. 399–401.
[4] Sheem, S. K., “Fiber-Optic Gyroscope with [3 × 3] Directional Coupler,” Applied
Physics Letters, Vol. 37, 1980, pp. 869–871.
[5] Burns, W. K., R. P. Moeller, and C. A. Villaruel, “Observation of Low Noise in a
Passive Fibre Gyroscope,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 18, 1982, pp. 648–650.
[6] Poisel, H., and G. F. Trommer, “Low Cost Fiber Optic Gyroscope,” SPIE Proceedings,
220

Vol. 1169, 1989, pp. 361–372.
[7] Böhm, K., et al., “Direct Rotation-Rate Detection with a Fibre-Optic Gyro by Using
Digital Data Processing,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 19, 1983, pp. 997–999.
[8] Frigo, N. J., “A Constant Accuracy, High Dynamic Range Fiber Optic Gyroscope,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 155–159.
[9] Kim, B. Y., et al., “Harmonic Feedback Approach to Fiber-Gyro Scale Factor
Stabilization,” Proceedings of OFS l/’83, IEE, London, Vol. 221, 1983, pp. 136–137.
[10] Kim, B. Y., et al., “Response of Fiber Gyros to Signals Introduced at the Second
Harmonic of the Bias Modulation Frequency,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 425, 1983, pp.
86–89.
[11] Kim, B. Y., and H. J. Shaw, “Gated Phase-Modulation Feedback Approach to Fiber-
Optic Gyroscope,” Optics Letters, Vol. 9, 1984, pp. 263–265.
[12] Kim, B. Y., and H. J. Shaw, “Gated Phase-Modulation Approach to Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope with Linearized Scale Factor,” Optics Letters, Vol. 9, 1984, pp. 375–377.
[13] Page, J. L., “Multiplexed Approach for the Fiber Optic Gyro Inertial Measurement
Unit,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1367, 1990, pp. 93–102.
[14] Culshaw, B., and I. P. Giles, “Frequency Modulated Heterodyne Optical Fiber Sagnac
Interferometer,” Journal of Quantum Electronics, Vol. QE-18, 1982, pp. 690–693.
[15] Ohtsuka, Y., “Optical Heterodyne Detection Schemes for Fiber-Optic Gyroscopes,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 954, 1988, pp. 617–624.
[16] Eberhard, D., and E. Voges, “Fiber Gyroscope with Phase-Modulated Single-Sideband
Detection,” Optics Letters, Vol. 9, 1984, pp. 22–24.
[17] Kersey, A. D., A. C. Lewin, and D. A. Jackson, “Pseudo-Heterodyne Detection
Scheme for the Fibre Gyroscope,” Electronic Letters, Vol. 20, 1984, pp. 368–370.
[18] Kim, B. Y., and H. J. Shaw, “Phase-Reading, All-Fiber-Optic Gyroscope,” Optics
Letters, Vol. 9, 1984, pp. 378–380.
[19] Goss, W. C., “Fiber Optic Gyro Development at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 113–121.
[20] Minford, W. J., et al., “Fiber Optic Gyroscope Using an Eight-Component LiNbO3
Integrated Optic Circuit,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1169, 1989, pp. 304–322.
[21] Bergh, R. A., “Dual-Ramp Closed-Loop Fiber-Optic Gyroscope,” SPIE Proceedings,
Vol. 1169, 1989, pp. 429–439.
[22] Kersey, A. D., A. Dandrige, and W. K. Burns, “Two-Wavelength Fibre Gyroscope
with Wide Dynamic Range,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 22, 1986, pp. 935–937.
221

CHAPTER 11
Resonant Fiber-Optic Gyroscope
(R-FOG)*
11.1 Principle of Operation of an All-Fiber Ring Cavity
As described in Section 2.2.2, the resonant fiber-optic gyroscope, or R-
FOG, uses a recirculating ring resonant cavity [1] to measure the Sagnac
effect and increase the shot noise limited sensitivity of the rotation
measurement. The fundamental photon shot-noise limited sensitivities of
the R-FOG and I-FOG can be represented by (11.1a) and (11.1b) for ease
of comparison. The photon shot noise limited sensitivity of the R-FOG is
approximately given by
 (11.1a)
 (11.1b)
where δΩ is the uncertainty in rotation rate caused by the presence of shot
noise, c and λo are the speed of light and wavelength in vacuum,
respectively, L and D are the length and diameter of the fiber coil,
respectively, and ηD and Nph are the quantum efficiency of the
photodetector and the number of detected photons per second,
respectively [1].
As seen in (11.1a) and (11.1b), the sensitivity of an R-FOG is
comparable to the sensitivity of an I-FOG that has a fiber length F/2 times
larger (where F is the finesse of the passive ring cavity). Thus, for a
finesse of 100, theoretically, the shot-noise-limited sensitivity of the
resonator is expected to be 50 times greater for the same coil length,
diameter, and optical power. Alternatively, the greater sensitivity afforded
222

by the cavity finesse could be traded for the use of F/2 less fiber to
achieve the same sensitivity as the I-FOG. This possibility of using a
shorter fiber length has looked attractive, but the serendipity of the two-
wave interferometer does not apply to the resonant approach, and the R-
FOG faces much more difficult technical challenges, particularly because it
requires the use of a very coherent light source, and the various parasitic
effects cannot be reduced as simply nor as efficiently as in the case of the
I-FOG, where a broadband low-coherence source is a very good solution
to these problems.
The principle of a ring cavity is very similar to that of a Fabry-Perot
cavity (see Section A.9.2). There is multiple beam interference between
the recirculating waves instead of the reflected waves. An all-single-mode-
fiber configuration uses low-loss fiber couplers instead of mirrors [2, 3].
Assuming a lossless propagation and two similar couplers (Figure 11.1),
the finesse F of the cavity is:
Figure 11.1 All-fiber ring cavity.
 (11.2)
where C is the identical low coupling ratio of the two couplers, which
replaces, in the formula, the low mirror transmissivity T of ordinary Fabry-
Perot interferometers. There is a periodic spectral response (in spatial
frequency σ, that is, inverse of wavelength λ). In particular, the
transmission response is:
 (11.3)
where nLr is the optical length of one circulation and the Airy coefficient
m is equal to 4(1 − C)/C2. There is a resonant effect, and the light is
223

transmitted when the optical length nLr of one round trip along the ring
cavity is equal to an integral number of wavelengths. Like the Fabry-Perot
cavities, the periodicity of the response is called the free spectral range
∆σfree = 1/nLr. It can be expressed in terms of temporal frequency ∆ffree
= c ⋅ ∆σfree = c/nLr or in terms of angular frequency ∆ωfree =
2π∆σfree = 2πc/nLr. The full width at half maximum of the narrow
transmission peaks is simply related to the free spectral range, with:
∆σFWHM = ∆σfree/F (11.4)
Assuming that the source frequency σ0 = 1/λ0 is matched on a
resonance peak of the cavity, the transmitted power varies as a function of
the rotation rate as:
 (11.5)
where ∆LR′(Ω) = LrDΩ/2c is the length change (in one direction) of the
cavity due to rotation. It is possible to define a free range ∆Ωfree [Figure
11.2(a)] in terms of rate with:
∆LR′(∆Ωfree) = λ0 (11.6)
that is,
 (11.7)
Therefore, the full width at half maximum ∆ΩFWHM of the rate
response is:
 (11.8)
The equivalent of ∆ΩFWHM for the two-wave interferometer is the
rate that corresponds to ±π/2 rad [Figure 11.1.2(b)]; that is, Ωπ, defined
in Section 2.3.1 as:
 (11.9)
224

Figure 11.2 Comparison between (a) resonator response (transmission port) and (b)
interferometer response (reciprocal port).
It can be seen that the resonance response curve (for one direction) is
equivalent to the response of a two-wave interferometer, which would
have a coil length L that is F/4 times larger than the length Lr of the ring
cavity. As will be seen later, the sensitivity is actually multiplied by two by
comparing the resonances between the opposite directions, which divides
the dynamic range by two.
Figure 11.3 Single-coupler fiber ring cavity.
It is also possible to use the reflection port (Figure 11.1), where the
notch response, a resonance dip, is complementary to the transmission
response composed of resonance peaks. It is important to remember that a
resonant cavity is perfectly contrasted if both mirrors (or couplers) have
the same transmissivity (or the same coupling) and if the cavity has no
loss. In practice, there is always a residual attenuation, but it is still
possible to get a perfect contrast for high finesse by using a single-coupler
ring with a coupler coupling ratio equal to the loss (Figure 11.3). This loss
is thus equivalent to a loss resulting from a coupling in a second coupler,
225

and the notch response is then perfectly contrasted. Note that such a
single-coupler cavity may be realized without any fiber splice along the
resonant path with the use of a high coupling ratio and low transmission in
the coupler [4] (Figure 11.4).
To analyze the resonance of the ring cavity, the source spectrum width
has to be narrower than the width of the response peaks. This corresponds
to a coherence length longer than the coil length multiplied by the finesse.
Therefore, the R-FOG requires a very long source coherence of a few
kilometers, as the coil length is typically a few tens of meters and the
finesse is on the order of 100. In terms of temporal frequency, this
corresponds to a very narrow line width, on the order of 10 to 100 kHz.
Figure 11.4 (a) Spliced and (b) unspliced single-coupler cavity.
11.2 Signal Processing Method
The principle of the signal processing method of the R-FOG has some
similarities to the case of the I-FOG. In a first step, a modulation-
demodulation scheme is used to get an open-loop biased signal that is a
derivative of the unmodulated response (Figure 11.5), and in a second step
this signal is used as the error signal of a closed-loop processing unit that
linearizes and stabilizes the scale factor [5, 6].
However, in contrast to the I-FOG, the response is not automatically
centered on an extremum for zero rotation rate. The source frequency and
the cavity length have first to be matched in resonance in one direction,
and the rotation is detected in the opposite direction, where the sensitivity
is then doubled. The dithering modulation required to get a biased
demodulated signal is performed by modulating the cavity length with a
phase modulator placed inside the cavity [5, 6], or by modulating, outside
the cavity, the input light frequency [7], or directly the source frequency,
particularly with the driving current of a semiconductor laser [8]. Note that
226

a sine modulation of the frequency may be obtained with a sine
modulation of a frequency shifter, but also with a sine modulation of a
phase modulator. We have already seen that a frequency is the derivative
of a phase, and a sine-modulated phase yields by differentiation a (co)sine
modulation of the frequency.
This biasing modulation-demodulation is not defect-free, in contrast to
that of the I-FOG, because it does not use the rejections of nonlinearities
and spurious intensity modulation brought by the use of the coil as a delay
line filter at the proper frequency (see Section 3.2.3). Furthermore, the
interferometer response is perfectly symmetrical because it is an
autocorrelation function, while the resonance peaks may carry some
dissymmetry, especially because of coupler loss [9]. Therefore, it is
important to make the processing systems of the two opposite directions
symmetrical to get a good common mode rejection of their defects.
Figure 11.5 Biasing modulation-demodulation of the resonant peak response.
The complete system is composed of a modulation of the cavity length
or of the light frequency. The two counterrotating signals are demodulated,
and one is used as an error signal to keep the system on the resonance
peak, while the opposite path is used as an error signal, which applies an
additional frequency shift through a closed-loop processing circuit (Figure
11.6). The value of this frequency shift is used as the rotation rate signal.
It corresponds to the difference ∆fR of resonance frequency, which is
induced by the rotation rate Ω between both counterrotating paths (see
Section 2.2.2):
227

Figure 11.6 Architecture of a resonant fiber-optic gyroscope.
∆fR = DΩ/(nλ) (11.10)
where D is the coil diameter, n the index of the fiber, and λ the source
wavelength. The frequency shifting required to close the two processing
loops was originally performed with bulk acousto-optic Bragg cells [5, 6],
but it can also be done with sawtooth serrodyne modulation (see Section
8.2.2) applied on integrated-optic phase modulators [10], which preserves
the ruggedness of an all-guided approach. Alternatively, it can be done by
using separate lasers in the two directions, provided the relative phase jitter
is sufficiently low [2]. It can be seen that if the R-FOG is using a shorter
fiber coil than the I-FOG, this advantage is counterbalanced by a higher
complexity, as the number of components (couplers and modulators) is
nearly doubled in comparison to the minimum configuration of the two-
wave ring interferometer. While the additional technical complexity of the
R-FOG system must be overcome, the advancement of highly integrated
photonic circuits may reduce the size and cost of the additional
components, making the R-FOG configuration more attractive.
However, note that, for the same sensitivity, the unambiguous dynamic
range of the R-FOG is larger than that of the I-FOG. Their sensitivities are
equivalent when ∆ΩFWHM is equal to Ωπ, but the range of the resonator
is ±∆Ωfree/2, which is F/2 wider than the interferometer range of ±Ωπ.
11.3 Reciprocity of a Ring Fiber Cavity
11.3.1 Introduction
228

Reciprocity has been seen to be a fundamental feature of the I-FOG (see
Chapter 3), and it is also possible to define a reciprocal configuration of an
R-FOG. In principle, a configuration using the reflection ports of the
cavity, with an in-line polarizer on the two single-mode fiber leads [11], as
shown in Figure 11.7, is reciprocal, provided that each input wave to the
resonator excites one and the same polarization state within the resonator.
With such a configuration, each couple of counterpropagating waves that
recirculates the same number of times along the cavity follows exactly the
same path, including the leads, in opposite directions: the two
counterpropagating waves accumulate exactly the same phase, and they
have exactly the same attenuation because of reciprocity. Because this is
valid for all the recirculating couples, the resonance responses of a cavity
using such a reciprocal configuration are perfectly identical in both of the
opposite directions.
Figure 11.7 Reciprocity of a ring cavity.
However, the practical R-FOG case generally consists of two
polarization states within the resonator [12, 13], that is, two polarization
eigenstates [14], that reproduce themselves with a certain loss and round-
trip phase shift, within the ring resonator. The objective is to launch light
by exciting the same polarization eigenstate in both directions and compare
the clockwise (cw) and counterclockwise (ccw) resonance frequencies to
derive a rotation measurement, as these states have the same resonance
frequency in a nonrotating frame. In practice, the two input waves will not
be perfectly aligned to excite, or couple all their energy into, a single
eigenstate within the resonator. This imperfection is not identical, in
general, for the cw and ccw input waves. Because of this, most
implementations similar to that of Figure 11.7 do not offer a guarantee of
perfect symmetry between counterrotating waves, or error-free operation.
In contrast, the reciprocal configuration of the I-FOG, the polarizer may
be imperfect, but both cw and ccw waves are equally aligned or
misaligned from the axes of the fiber in the coil, and both travel through
229

the same polarization filter prior to detection. The reason why cw and ccw
input wave polarization states for the R-FOG are not necessarily the same
is due to the existence polarization cross-coupling in each input path prior
to reaching the resonator. Hence, the input polarization states of the cw
and ccw waves may excite or may overlap with the desired polarization
eigenstate of the resonator to a different degree. As will be seen later, this
produces unequal resonance asymmetries for cw and ccw resonance dips
in the configuration using the reflection port. This problem can be
addressed by using the transmission ports of an all-fiber ring resonator
[12]. It is possible to consider that the second coupler is just tapping off a
small amount of the intensity of the light which resonates inside the cavity
and that parasitic phase shifts in the tapping coupler do not affect the
measurement of this intensity.
11.3.2 Basic Reciprocity Within the Ring Resonator
The preceding discussion prompts the question of whether the light
propagation within the resonator is inherently nonreciprocal, or if potential
nonreciprocity is due to unequal and imperfect excitation and detection of
the eigenstates of the resonator in the two directions. Figure 11.8 shows
one example of a fiber ring resonator to illustrate the concept of reciprocity
within the loop itself. We use the resonator configuration of similar to that
of Figure 11.1 with provisions for birefringent fiber, a couple of
polarization dependent loss points (representing polarizers, for example),
and a couple of polarization cross-coupling points. We assume the
resonator is not rotating.
Following Figure 11.8 and the Jones matrix formalism described in
Section A.10, we can represent the round trip propagation of light around
the ring in the cw direction, starting at point A as:
230

Figure 11.8 Fiber ring resonator with polarization crosstalk, birefringence, and
polarization dependent loss.
[Ecw]o = a0[M1][C1][M7][R3(θ3)][M6][P2][M5][R2(θ2)]
[M4][C2][M3][R1(−θ1)][P1][R1(θ1)][M2][Ecw]i (11.11)
In (11.11), the electric field starting at point A is given by the column
vector,
 (11.12)
the field at point A after round-trip traversal of the ring resonator is given
by the column vector,
 (11.13)
where the matrix [Hcw] represents the total loop transmission matrix in the
cw direction and the matrices Mj are the Jones representation for
propagation through a length lj of birefringent fiber, that is,
 (11.14)
where nx and ny are the indices of refraction of the principal axes of the
fiber. The matrices P1 and P2 represent polarization dependent loss
elements, such as polarizers with a transmission coefficient of unity for
one axis and a transmission coefficient of ε1 and ε2, respectively, for the
other axis. For the purpose of illustration P1 is assumed to be misaligned
from the principal axes of the fiber by an angle θ1 relative to the principal
axes of the fiber. The polarizer represented by P2 is assumed to be aligned
with the principle axes of the fiber. P1 and P2 are given by
 (11.15)
and
 (11.16)
231

R1(θ1) and R1(−θ1) represent, respectively, the rotation of axes into,
and out of, the frame of the principal axes of P1,
 (11.17)
Polarization cross-coupling points, possibly due to splice misalignments,
are represented by rotation matrices R2(θ2) and R3(θ3) given by
 (11.18)
The couplers of Figure 11.18 are represented in (11.9) by matrices C1
and C2 given by
 (11.19)
where C1 and C2 are the intensity coupling coefficients of couplers C1
and C2. The couplers are assumed to have polarization-independent
coupling ratios. The polarization independent roundtrip loss is represented
by the scalar constant a of (11.11).
By comparison, the roundtrip propagation of light within the resonator
in the ccw direction is represented as
[Eccw]o = a0[M2][R1(−θ1)][P1][R1(θ1)][M3][C2][M4][R2(−θ2)]
[M5][P2][M6][R3(−θ3)][M7][C1][M1][Eccw]i (11.20)
where the matrix [Hccw] represents the total loop transmission matrix in
the ccw direction and where the electric field starting at point A in the ccw
direction is given by the column vector
 (11.21)
where the field at point A after round-trip traversal of the ring resonator in
the ccw direction is given by the column vector
232

 (11.22)
Note that a cross-coupling angle of θ (electric field magnitude sinθ) for
cw propagation is represented as R(θ) and for ccw propagation by R(−θ)
= RT(θ) where the superscript T represents the matrix transpose. Because
the diagonal matrices at transposes of themselves, (11.20) can be rewritten
as
[Eccw] =
a0[M2]T[R1(θ1)]T[P1]T[R1(−θ1)]T[M3]T[C2]T[M4]T[R2(θ2)]T
[M5]T[P2]T[M6]T[R3(θ3)]T[M7]T[C1]T[M1]T[Eccw]i =
[Hcw]T[Eccw]i (11.23)
Hence,
[Hccw] = [Hcw]T (11.24)
It should be noted that (11.24) would not hold if there we true
nonreciprocal effects like rotation rate that would have to be added
explicitly to (11.11) and (11.20) to affect propagation in each direction
differently.
The significance of (11.24) can be understood by the following.
Because the resonant eigenstates of the resonator are those that reproduce
themselves around the resonator and constructively interfere, the
polarization eigenstates in the cw direction represented by column vectors
[e1]cw and [e2]cw and in the ccw directions by [e1]ccw and [e2]ccw must
satisfy the following characteristic equations
 (11.25)
 (11.26)
where λ1cw, λ2cw, λ1ccw, and λ2ccw are the eigenvalues representing the
round-trip phase shift and loss of each of the eigenstates,
233

 (11.27)
and
 (11.28)
where αjcw and αjccw are the round-trip loop transmission amplitude
coefficients that are the square root of one minus the intensity loss for
each eigenstate, respectively, and the ϕjcw and ϕjccw are the round-trip
phase shift for each eigenstate. The round-trip phase shift determines the
resonance frequency for each eigenstate.
Because the eigenvalues of a matrix are the same as the eigenvalues of
the transpose of a matrix, the two eigenstates in the cw direction have the
same eigenvalues as that of the ccw direction.
Hence, the resonance frequencies of the resonator of Figure 11.8 and
many similar ones satisfying (11.24) are the same, and thus, light
propagation in them is reciprocal for the same eigenstate. Note that Figure
11.8 is an arbitrary example for illustration purposes, and that (11.24) is
valid for other combinations of polarization rotations, polarizers,
birefringent elements, and couplers as represented in (11.14) through
(11.19).
11.3.3 Excitation and Detection of Resonances in a Ring Resonator
As discussed in the beginning of this section, the main problem of
reciprocity stems from the unequal excitation of the two polarization states
within a ring resonator, not from propagation of light in a single eigenstate
within the resonator. A reciprocal condition would be obtained if both cw
and ccw input waves only excited one, and the same state (those that have
the same eigenvalue). In general, light incident on the ring in the two
directions is imperfect, exciting, or overlapping with the desired eigenstate
for the most part, but to some degree with the unwanted eigenstate. This
degree of imperfection is not necessarily equal in the two directions. As a
result of exciting an unequal superposition of states, polarization and
birefringence behavior in the ring resonator can cause rotation-equivalent
errors in the R-FOG. Light that is detected in practice is a superposition of
light from two states, and the consequential effects of the undesired state
must be mitigated or minimized. Because single-mode fiber transmits two
polarization states with slightly different velocities, the ring resonator has
two polarization eigenstates (as discussed in the previous section) and
234

therefore two resonance frequencies in each direction. The resonance
frequencies correspond to propagation of light in these two polarization
modes [4, 12–14]. One way of viewing the polarization evolution around
the loop for a particular eigenstate is the following. Along one round trip,
from one point in the cavity back to the same point, each polarization
eigenstate evolves, depending on the birefringence and the PDL along the
path. As the light propagates along the resonator fiber, these two states
change as a function of the birefringence, but at a given point in the ring
they reproduce themselves; that is, each return to their original state after
one round trip at each point along the ring. In time, that eigenstate at any
given point may vary if the birefringence changes, but each of the two
eigenstates is defined by that path of polarization evolution that reproduces
itself around the ring. This condition is necessary to get resonance by
multiple beam interference of the various recirculating waves, as they must
be in the same state of polarization to be combined constructively.
Thus, for simplicity, the cavity has two sets of resonances
corresponding to its two polarization modes that propagate over one round
trip along different optical lengths, n1Lr and n2Lr, because of
birefringence. By reciprocity, as illustrated in the prior section, these two
sets are identical in optical path length and loss in both of the opposite
directions (when the system does not rotate). It seemed at first that an R-
FOG could work with ordinary single-mode fiber by using only the
resonance of one polarization mode [7]. However, a precise measurement
of the central resonance frequency cannot tolerate a small dissymmetry of
the peak or notch response. As discussed earlier, in principle, there is no
resonance asymmetry for either the resonance dip in reflection or the
resonance peak in transmission, provided that the light waves incident on
the cavity are perfectly matched to one single polarization eigenstate at the
entrance to the resonator. In practice, there is always some component of
the input light that is not aligned with the input state of the resonator. This
parasitic input light can cause resonance asymmetry in in two ways.
The first case of imperfect polarization alignment to consider is that in
which the parasitic light significantly excites the second (unwanted)
resonant eigenstate within the ring. In this case, the second resonance
frequency is sufficiently close enough the desired resonance frequency
that the excitation of the undesired resonance tail actually produces and
intensity variation across the main resonance signal. If the parasitic
component of polarization is the same for both input waves, the
235

asymmetry is identical in both of the opposite directions [11]. However, if
the parasitic input polarization component is not equal in both directions
the resonance asymmetry is not identical. This causes a bias when using
the resonance-detection signal processing technique described earlier.
Another problem with the use of single-mode fiber is that polarization
fading may occur for the resonance dips and peaks. It is not possible to
take advantage of depolarization effects, as in the case of I-FOG that
works with a broadband source (see Chapter 5). One method used to
avoid polarization fading and to reduce the influence of the crossed-mode
resonance, that is, make the polarization eigenstate inside the resonator
more stable (and easier to couple to), as well as the make the input light
polarization more stable, has been to use highly birefringent polarization
maintaining fiber [11, 15].
With polarization conservation using polarization maintaining fiber, most
of the optical power remains in one mode of the resonator, but there is still
some light in the crossed mode because parasitic polarization cross-
coupling occurs, particularly in the coupler. In this case, there is still a
small resonance dip in addition to the main signal. Furthermore, the
position of this parasitic dip shifts as a function of temperature with
respect to the resonance response of the main mode [15]. This yields an
unstable dissymmetry of the resonance peak (Figure 11.9).
Figure 11.9 Dissymmetry of the response induced by the crossed-polarization
response.
As a matter of fact, the resonances of the two polarization modes have
a periodicity equal to the free spectral ranges nsLr and nfLr, where ns and
nf are, respectively, the indexes of the slow mode and of the fast mode.
With stress-induced high-birefringence fibers, the index difference ns − nf
236

has a typical variation of 10–3/°C, and when a temperature change
induces a change of (ns − nf)Lr equal to the source wavelength λ, the
small parasitic dip shifts over the free spectral range of the main resonance
signal. With a resonator length of 10m and a birefringence beat length of 1
mm, this is obtained with a temperature change of only 0.1°C. Note that
polarization-maintaining fibers using an elliptical core have a much lower
temperature dependence (about 10–5/°C instead of 10–3/°C), but, in
practice, they are not often used because of a lower polarization
conservation.
To avoid this problem of resonance of the crossed polarization mode,
placing a polarizing element inside the cavity has been proposed [14].
Another, more subtle solution has been described [16, 17] and
demonstrated [12]. The resonator loop is still made of polarization-
maintaining fiber, but a splice with a 90° rotation of the principal axes of
the fiber is added inside the cavity (Figure 11.10).
Figure 11.10 Polarization-preserving cavity with a 90° rotation of the fiber principal
axes.
With this configuration, despite the two polarization modes of the fiber,
both the cavity modes experience equal time on each axis, thus eliminating
the mode-crossing issue discussed above. A complete cavity round trip is
now composed of propagation along the cavity in the fast mode and a
second propagation in the slow mode. The optical length of the cavity
becomes (nf + ns)Lr and the free spectral range becomes 1/(nf + ns)Lr.
This idea is similar to the Moebius ring, which has only one side, while a
tape 
has 
two 
sides 
[private 
conversation 
with 
W. 
Schröder,
Fachhochschule ​Offenburg, 1991].
This technique uses a maximal separation of resonance frequencies to
reduce the effect of the second resonance’s tail under the desired
resonance. Another way of greatly attenuating or virtually eliminating the
issue with excitation of the second polarization eigenstate and the
resonance crossing issue is to make the resonator with single-polarization
237

fiber [14]. This greatly increases the loss of the second polarization
eigenstate. Depending on the extinction ratio of the fiber, this greatly
attenuates the intensity of the second resonance line shape so that its tail
does not cause asymmetry in the region of the desired resonance line
shape. Historically, this fiber has been more difficult to use because of
bend sensitivity and loss; however, recent results have demonstrated a
resonator with sufficient finesse to demonstrate ARW performance below
0.008°/
, which was nearly shot-noise-limited for the modest detected
light levels in the setup [18].
The second issue with an imperfect polarization input state is due to the
electric field of the light rejected by the resonator, but mixes in the
detected signal, as was pointed out by Schröder et al. [11]. Consider R-
FOG configuration in which detection is implemented from the reflection
port of the resonator as shown in Figure 11.11.
Figure 11.11 Illustration of mixing of rejected light with signal light at reflection port
detector.
The main signal light is first passed through a polarizer of finite
extinction ratio, ε, and launched toward the resonator, denoted as Exi.
Prior to reaching the resonator, a small component of light, ka, is cross-
coupled from the x-axis to the y-axis at point a, given by
Eya = kaExi (11.29)
Assuming, in this case, that the resonator eigenstate at its input is x-
polarized, the y-polarized component of light reaching the resonator input
is reflected, that is, its energy is not coupled into the resonator. It then
238

proceeds towards the detector, first encountering another small degree of
cross-coupling kb back to the x-axis at point b, and then passes along the
transmission axis of a polarizer prior to being detected. The electric field of
this parasitic light can be then be represented by
Ex′= kakbeiθExi (11.30)
where the phase shift ϕ contains the common phase shift between the
parasitic light and the detected signal light as well as a differential phase
shift ∆ϕ between the two light waves due to a different polarization path
traveled in the input/output leads and the phase shift through resonance
experienced by the signal light, given by ∆ϕl and ∆ϕr, respectively. Figure
11.12(a) shows the shape of a symmetric resonance dip due to the signal
light Ex2 component only impinging upon the detector (ka = kb = 0).
Figure 11.12 (a) Resonance dip of the signal light. (b) Phase shift, ∆ϕr, of electric
field of signal light in region about resonance. (c) Interference term ∆I of signal light
with parasitic light. (d) Total detected resonance dip intensity with resonance
239

asymmetry.
The corresponding phase shift of the signal light, as the frequency is swept
through resonance, ∆ϕr, is shown in Figure 11.1(b), which assumes the
resonator reflected signal light changes by +π to −π as it crosses through
the resonance center.
The cross-polarized light represented by (11.29) does not have the same
phase response, as it is off-resonance. Assuming ka < 1, kb < 1, its
intensity at the photodetector can be neglected in comparison to the
interference term it produces with the signal light, denoted as ∆I, and
given by:
∆I = 2Ex
Ex′ cos(∆ϕl + ∆ϕr) (11.31)
Figure 11.12(c) shows the interference term of the detected intensity in
a region about resonance for the example of ∆ϕl = −π/2. When added
with the detected signal light intensity Ex2 the total line shape is
asymmetric, and shown in Figure 11.12(d). The shape of the asymmetry
will vary as ∆ϕl varies.
This error is a consequence of imperfect matching of the input light
energy into a single eigenstate and mixing the nonresonant light (or light
rejected by the resonator) with the signal light at the detector. This may be
reduced by minimizing the magnitude of mismatched light to the resonator
and by employing a second coupler to detect the resonances in
transmission [19], as is shown in Figure 11.1. In the latter case, parasitic
light that is rejected at the reflection port is not mixed with signal light
being detected in transmission. This type of transmission arrangement has
been demonstrated using single polarization fiber [18] in transmission
which addresses the problem of the intensity-type error of a second
resonance associated with PM fiber approaches.
11.4 Other Parasitic Effects in the R-FOG
In addition to these problems of reciprocity, the R-FOG faces various
parasitic effects similar to the ones encountered in the I-FOG. Solutions to
these problems are usually derived from what was proposed for the I-
FOG, except, as we have already seen, the fundamental drawback that a
broadband source cannot be used because an R-FOG requires a source
with a very long coherence length.
240

This makes Rayleigh backscattering and the Kerr effect severe obstacles
to high performance. The effect of Rayleigh backscattering may be
reduced by various techniques of phase or frequency modulation [5, 6, 20,
21] to avoid, in the detection band, spurious interference signals between
the primary waves and the backscattered waves, but this increases
significantly the complexity of the system. The problem of the nonlinear
Kerr effect is even worse, since the optical power stored in the cavity is
much higher than the input power, and for the same relative power
imbalance between both counterpropagating waves, an R-FOG has a Kerr
sensitivity enhanced by about one-third the finesse compared to an
equivalent I-FOG using a coherent source. Square-wave intensity
modulation techniques proposed for the I-FOG to reduce the Kerr
sensitivity (see Section 7.2) can also be used for the R-FOG [22], but the
precision of modulation required is very difficult to get and the Kerr effect
is still regarded as the main limitation to low drift for the R-FOG [23].
The other parasitic effects that are not related to coherence are not
significantly different between the R-FOG and the I-FOG. Transient
related effects (see Chapter 6) are reduced in the R-FOG [3], as the fiber
coil is shorter, but this problem is mitigated to a high degree in the I-FOG
with quadrupolar winding and adequate potting of the fiber coil. The
Faraday effect (see Section 7.1) also induces a rate error in the R-FOG if
the polarization-preserving fiber has a twist variation matched to the
perimeter of one turn [24]. While the R-FOG scale factor stability has the
same dependence on wavelength stability found in the I-FOG, the R-FOG
uses a monochromatic source. If the other issues attendant with the
monochromatic source can be adequately reduced, there are opportunities
for possibly greater wavelength stability. Because the R-FOG source is
spectrally a delta function, its interferometric wavelength is trivially
defined, whereas, in the I-FOG, variations in the shape of broadband
spectrum can cause a shift in the gyro’s effective operating wavelength.
Despite better shot-noise-limited theoretical performance the R-FOG
still faces the difficult technical problems [25], and published results do not
indicate performance levels close to those of the best I-FOGs to date.
Recently, considerable technical progress has been reported in the areas of
both angle random walk (ARW), and bias stability. In the ARW area,
greater understanding of the effect of laser frequency noise has been
reported [26, 27]. It was appreciated early, by Ezekiel and Balsamo [2]
that differential laser frequency noise could disrupt the signal to noise
241

performance of a passive resonator gyro, so a single laser was employed.
Moreover, differential frequency noise in the low-frequency range where
rotation rate is measured was recognized to be an issue. However, Ma et
al. [26] reported that frequency noise at frequencies well above the
rotation-rate detection band posed a limitation to performance.
Specifically, laser frequency noise at even harmonics of the modulation
frequency was translated to the low-frequency gyro output range via the
modulation and demodulation process. Sanders et al. [27] also recognized
that high frequency laser noise was an issue, and proposed a solution using
optical filtering and laser stabilization, which was recently demonstrated to
give an ARW of 0.008°/
 with a fiber coil length of 19m on an 11.5-cm
diameter spool. By using polarizing fiber for the ring to address
polarization errors, they reported a bias stability of 0.1°/hr (1σ) for a 2-
hour timeframe [28].
The reported performance of the R-FOG still remains well below that of
the I-FOG, and advancement of the R-FOG may rely on new
technologies. One emerging technology discussed in connection with its
benefits to the I-FOG in [29–30], hollow core optical fiber [31] (see
Section B.10), may have an even greater impact on R-FOGs [32] than I-
FOGs. The common benefits are a reduction of roughly six times in the
Shupe effect and roughly 250 times in the magneto-optic Faraday effect.
However, the impact of removal of glass in the light path promises to
reduce the Kerr effect in the R-FOG by over two orders of magnitude, an
effect that was already eliminated by the broadband source in the I-FOG.
Similarly, the threshold for stimulated Brillioun scattering (SBS) in the
fiber coil should be greatly increased, allowing very high power levels
within the sensing coil.
Hollow-core fiber ring resonators capable of being employed for an R-
FOG have been demonstrated [32–33]. In one method, to complete the
resonator loop, free space optical mirrors were used, in an arrangement
shown in Figure 11.13 instead of using fiber optic couplers of Figure 11.1.
Because the light traveling within the fiber is effectively in free space, low-
loss coupling between free space optics and the hollow core fiber were
demonstrated. The total loss attributed to free space to fiber coupling was
on the order of only 3%. The fiber length and loss were 0.9m and −20
dB/km, respectively. When combined with the other losses around the
ring, the finesse was 42, suitable for R-FOG application. Other means of
coupling and completing the loop have been proposed [34] and
242

demonstrated, as well as initial R-FOG demonstrations with them [33].
However, this fiber is in a relatively early stage of development and its
performance (e.g., loss or polarization) and cost need to approach that of
conventional fibers to take maximum advantage of this promising
development.
Note that, based on this principle of passive ring cavity, an even more
ambitious approach was pursued with an integrated-optic single-loop ring
cavity, which could have made possible the fabrication of a fully integrated
optical gyro by planar mass-duplication techniques [35–41], but the
technological challenges to be faced are very difficult, and this approach is
not presently believed to be competitive.
There has also been a proposal [42] to make an active fiber resonator
similar to a ring laser gyro, but in a fiber form, using amplification by
stimulated Brillouin scattering. Backscattering also induces lock-in around
zero rotation rate, but this novel subject requires more R&D to advance it
and evaluate its advantages.
Figure 11.13 Transmission ring resonator using hollow core fiber.
Acknowledgments
The author of this chapter wishes to acknowledge the work of Mr. Lee K.
243

Strandjord and Dr. Tiequn Qiu of Honeywell International for helpful
discussions regarding R-FOG performance considerations and error
mechanisms and for their insightful and expert review of this chapter.
References
[1] Ezekiel, S., and H. J. Arditty, “Fiber-Optic Rotation Sensors,” in Fiber-Optic Rotation
Sensors and Related Technologies, New York: Springer-Verlag, 1982, pp. 2–26.
[2] Ezekiel, S., and S. R. Balsamo, “Passive Ring Resonator Laser Gyroscope,” Applied
Physics Letters, Vol. 30, 1977, pp. 478–480.
[3] Schupe, D. M., “Fiber Resonator Gyroscope: Sensitivity and Thermal Non-Reciprocity,”
Applied Optics, Vol. 20, 1981, pp. 286–289.
[4] Stokes, L. F., M. Chodorow, and H. J. Shaw, “All Single-Mode Fiber Resonator,”
Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp. 288–290.
[5] Sanders, G. A., M. G. Prentiss, and S. Ezekiel, “Passive Ring Resonator Method for
Sensitive Inertial Rotation Measurements in Geophysics and Relativity,” Optics Letters,
Vol. 6, 1981, pp. 569–571.
[6] Meyer, R. E., et al., “Passive Fiber-Optic Ring Resonator for Rotation Sensing,” Optics
Letters, Vol. 8, 1983, pp. 644–646.
[7] Carroll, R., et al., “The Passive Resonator Fiber Optic Gyro and Comparison to the
Interferometer Fiber Gyro,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 169–177.
[8] Ohtsu, M., and S. Araki, “Using a 1.5 μm DFB InGaAsP Laser in a Passive Ring
Cavity-Type Fiber Gyroscope,” Applied Optics, Vol. 26, 1987, pp. 464–470.
[9] Youngquist, R. C., L. F. Stokes, and H. J. Shaw, “Effect of Normal Mode Loss in
Dielectric Waveguide Directional Couplers and Interferometers,” Journal of Quantum
Electronics, Vol. QE-19, 1983, pp. 1888–1896.
[10] Sanders, G. A., et al., “Resonator Fiber-Optic Gyro Using LiNbO3 Integrated Optics
at 1.5 μm,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 985, 1988, pp. 202–210.
[11] Schröder, W., et al., “Progress in Fiber Gyro Development for Attitude and Heading
Reference Systems,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 719, 1986, pp. 162–168.
[12] Strandjord, L. K., and G. A. Sanders, “Resonator Fiber Optic Gyro Employing a
Polarization-Rotating Resonator,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 163–172.
[13] Lamouroux, B. F., B. S. Prade, and A. G. Orszag, “Polarization Effects in Optical-
Fiber Ring Resonators,” Optics Letters, Vol. 7, 1982, pp. 391–393.
[14] Iwatsuki, K., K. Hotate, and M. Higashiguchi, “Eigenstate of Polarization in a Fiber
Ring Resonator and Its Effect in an Optical Passive Ring Resonator Gyro,” Applied
Optics, Vol. 25, 1986, pp. 2606–2612.
[15] Sanders, G. A., et al., “Evaluation of Polarization Maintaining Fiber Resonator for
Rotation Sensing Applications,” Proceedings of OFS 5, New Orleans, LA, 1988, pp.
409–412.
[16] Sanders, G. A., R. B. Smith, and G. F. Rouse, “Novel Polarization-Rotating Fiber
Resonator for Rotation Sensing Applications,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1169, 1989, pp.
373–381.
244

[17] Mouroulis, P., “Polarization Fading Effects in Polarization-Preserving Fiber Ring
Resonators,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1169, 1989, pp. 400–412.
[18] Strandjord, L. K., et al., “Resonator Fiber Optic Gyro Progress Including Observation
of Navigation Grade Angle Random Walk,” Proceedings of OFS-22, October 2012.
[19] Sanders, G. A., L. K. Strandjord, and T. Qiu, “Optical Resonator Gyro and Method for
Reducing Resonance Asymmetry Errors,” U.S. Patent 7522284.
[20] Iwatsuki, K., K. Hotate, and M. Higashiguchi, “Effect of Rayleigh Backscattering in
an Optical Passive Ring Resonator,” Applied Optics, Vol. 23, 1984, pp. 3916–3924.
[21] Hotate, K., K. Takiguchi, and A. Hirose, “Adjustment-Free Method to Eliminate the
Noise Induced by the Backscattering in an Optical Ring-Resonator Gyro,” IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters, Vol. 2, 1990, pp. 75–77.
[22] Iwatsuki, K., K. Hotate, and M. Higashiguchi, “Kerr Effect in an Optical Passive
Ring-Resonator Gyro,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. LT4, 1986, pp. 645–
651.
[23] Hotate, K., and K. Takiguchi, “Drift Reduction in an Optical Passive Ring-Resonator
Gyro,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 116–127.
[24] Hotate, K., and M. Murakami, “Drift of an Optical Passive Ring-Resonator Gyro
Caused by the Faraday Effect,” Proceedings of OFS 5, New Orleans, LA, 1988, pp.
405–408.
[25] Sanders, G. A., “Critical Review of Resonator Fiber Optic Gyroscope Technology,”
Proceedings of SPIE Conference Critical Reviews of Optical Science and
Technology, Vol. CR44, September 1992, pp. 133–159.
[26] Ma, H., et al., “Laser Frequency Noise Limited Sensitivity in a Resonator Optic
Gyroscope” 15th OptoElect. and Communication Conf. (OECC2010) Technical
Digest, Vol. 8P-70, 2010.
[27] Sanders, G. A., T. Qiu, and L. Strandjord, “Light-Phase-Noise Error Reducer,” U.S.
8,009,296 B2, 2011.
[28] Qiu, T., et al., “Performance of Resonator Fiber Optic Gyroscope Using External-
Cavity Laser Stabilization and Optical Filtering,” 23rd International Conference on
Fiber Optic Sensors (OFS23), Santander, Spain, SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 9157, Paper
#153, 2014.
[29] Kim, H. K., et al., “Fiber-Optic Gyroscope Using an Air-Core Photonic-Bandgap
Fiber,” Proceedings of the OFS-17, May 23–37, 2005.
[30] Dangui, V., et al., “Phase Sensitivity to Temperature of the Fundamental Mode in Air-
Guiding Photonic-Bandgap Fibers,” Opt. Express, Vol. 13, No. 18, 2005.
[31] Cregan, R. F., et al., “Single-Mode Photonic Band Gap Guidance in Air,” Science, Vol.
285, 1999, pp. 1537–1539.
[32] Sanders, G. A., L. K. Strandjord, and T. Qiu, “Hollow Core Fiber Optic Ring
Resonator for Rotation Sensing,” Proceedings of the 18th International Conference
on Optical Fiber Sensors, Cancun, Mexico, 2006.
[33] Terrel, M., M. Digonnet, and S. Fan, “Resonant Fiber Optic Gyroscope Using an Air-
Core Fiber,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 30, No. 7, April 2012.[35]
Haavisto, J., and G. A. Pajer, “Resonance Effects in Low-Loss Ring Waveguides,”
Optics Letters, Vol. 5, 1980, pp. 510–512.
[34] Stabley, J. S., et al., “System and method for fiber-based resonator coupling,” U.S.
245

Patent 7,802,928 B2, 2010.
[36] Walker, R. G., and C. D. W. Wilkinson, “Integrated Optical Ring Resonators Made by
Silver Ion-Exchange in Glass,” Applied Optics, Vol. 22, 1983, pp. 1029–1035.
[37] Honda, K., E. M. Garmire, and K. E. Wilson, “Characteristics of an Integrated Optics
Ring Resonator Fabricated in Glass,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 2, 1984,
pp. 714–719.
[38] Naumaan, A., and J. T. Boyd, “Ring Resonator Fabricated in Phosphosilicate Glass
Film Deposited by Chemical Vapor Deposition,” Journal of Lightwave Technology,
Vol. 4, 1986, pp. 1294–1303.
[39] Connors, J. M., and A. Mahapatra, “High Finesse Ring Resonators Made by Silver Ion
Exchange in Glass,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 5, 1987, pp. 1686–1689.
[40] Bismuth, J., et al., “Low-Loss Ring Resonators Fabricated from Silicon Based
Integrated Optics Technologies,” Electronics Letters, Vol. 27, 1991, pp. 722–723.
[41] Adar, R., et al., “Measurement of Very Low-Loss Silica on Silicon Waveguides with a
Ring Resonator,” Applied Physics Letters, Vol. 58, 1991, pp. 444–445.
[42] Smith, S. P., F. Zarinetchi, and S. Ezekiel, “Fiber Laser Gyros Based on Stimulated
Brillouin Scattering,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 302–308.
* This chapter was revised by Dr. Glen Sanders.
246

CHAPTER 12
Conclusions
12.1 The State of Development and Expectations in 1993
When the first edition of this book was published in 1993, the potential of
FOG technology was becoming ascertained, and results provided a good
prospect for future applications. The 15th Anniversary Conference on
Fiber Optic Gyros held in September 1991 [1] gave a very complete
update of the activity in the various companies, universities, and research
centers working on the subject around the world.
In terms of architecture, some general trends were outlined:
Most companies were using the Y-coupler configuration with a
closed-loop processing scheme based on phase modulation
feedback (usually phase ramp) applied on a multifunction
integrated-optic circuit: Honeywell [2], Litton (today Northrop
Grumman) [3], Smith Industries [4] in the United States, JAE [5],
Mitsubishi [6] in Japan, British Aerospace [7], Litef (today NG
Litef) [8], and Photonetics (today iXBlue) [9] in Europe. Alcatel-
SEL (today SAGEM) [10] in Germany developed early on a
product based on the Y-coupler configuration, but was still using
an open-loop approach.
The all-fiber open-loop approach was pursued by Honeywell for
its first products [11] and also by Hitachi [12] in Japan.
Instead of using separate single-axis gyros, there was a tendency
to make three-axis measurement units with the sharing of a single
source (Litton [today NG] [3] and Litef [today NG Litef] [8]) or
with the multiplexing of this source (Smith Industries [4]). These
tactical-grade inertial measurement units (IMU) were using, in
addition, MEMS silicon accelerometers.
Most companies were using polarization-maintaining fiber, except
Smith Industries [4], which preferred the depolarized approach
with an ordinary fiber coil.
The [3 × 3] coupler approach was pursued by MBB Deutsche
247

Aerospace [13] for very low-cost, low-performance applications.
The only companies that were still studying the resonant fiber gyro
were Honeywell [14] and British Aerospace [7].
The I-FOG technology was becoming mature, and a company like
Alcatel-SEL (today SAGEM) [10] had delivered a few hundred gyro
products of medium accuracy (10°/h range) over the past few years, and
other companies like Hitachi [12], Honeywell [14], and Litton (today NG)
[3] were starting production. I-FOG technology was going to be used first
for Attitude and Heading Reference Systems (AHRS) for aircraft, which
requires a gyro accuracy of 1 to 10°/h. Honeywell was selected to provide
a fiber gyro-based AHRS for the new regional airliner Dornier 328 and to
be part of the Secondary Attitude Air Data Reference Unit (SAARU) of
the new Boeing 777 [15]. This was a redundant backup system of the
primary flight control using laser gyros. Fiber-gyro-based AHRSs were
also going to be used for military applications. Smith Industries won a
C/AHRS (Magnetic Compass and AHRS) contract from the U.S. Air
Force for the development of a fiber gyro system that will retrofit many
previous mechanical reference systems [16]. The advantages outlined for
these contracts were lower cost and lower maintenance due to the solid-
state configuration of the I-FOG.
I-FOGs for such tactical-grade applications (i.e., 1 to 10°/h) typically
used 100m to 200m of fiber wound around a 30- to 60-mm diameter. The
best bias performance [3, 5, 6, 9, 14] was below 1°/h (i.e., a few tenths of
a microradian in terms of measured optical phase difference), with a
dynamic range of 500 to 1,500°/s and a scale factor accuracy better than
100 ppm. Higher performance was also pursued with larger fiber coils (0.5
to 2 km around 8- to 10-cm diameter). Bias stability in the inertial-grade
range (0.01°/h) had been demonstrated [2, 3, 5, 6]. Prototypes were then
ruggedized 
to 
withstand 
difficult 
environments, 
particularly 
the
temperature range of −55°C up to 90°C, and vibration of more than 10g
rms.
After 15 years of research and development, the fiber gyro started to be
recognized as a crucial technology for many applications of inertial
guidance and navigation. Its low-mass, solid-state configuration brings
unique technical advantages: reliability and lifetime, ability to withstand
shocks and vibration, high dynamic range, large bandwidth, nearly
instantaneous startup, and low power consumption. It was also understood
248

that its principle yields a very useful design versatility to optimize the
performance of a specific application by changing the length or the
diameter of the sensing coil while keeping the same opto-electronic
components and assembly techniques.
The main applications were foreseen in the medium accuracy range (0.1
to 10°/h) with compact units (30 to 50 mm in diameter): AHRS for
airplanes or helicopters, tactical guidance for missiles or smart
ammunitions, but also bore-hole survey, robotics, and even guidance
systems for automobiles. It was also seen as a very good candidate for
navigation systems aided by GPS (global positioning system). With the
progresses of the technology, it was foreseen as a significant competitor in
the high-performance navigation-grade (0.01°/h) domain, particularly in
space applications, where lifetime expectancy, low power consumption,
and low disturbance of the surrounding structure are fundamental
characteristics.
Based on a new technology using components that can be mass-
produced, the fiber gyro was expected to bring significant cost reduction,
which will further extend the field of inertial guidance techniques.
12.2 The Present State of the Art, Two Decades Later
12.2.1 FOG Versus RLG
Two decades later, these expectations have been fulfilled and even
exceeded. About 500,000 FOG axes have been produced from industrial-
rate-grade (10 to 100°/h) to inertial-grade performance (0.001 to 0.01°/h)
and even strategic-grade performance (better than 0.001°/h), taking
advantage of the design versatility brought by adapting the area of the coil
to the application over at least three orders of magnitude. RLG technology
is much more limited from this standpoint: a cavity perimeter longer than
30 cm makes it difficult for the laser gyro to operate with the required
single longitudinal mode (see Section A.9.1) and conversely the low He-
Ne gain limits the minimum perimeter to 5 to 10 cm. The RLG tuning
range that depends on the area (the square of the perimeter) is only one
order of magnitude.
Honeywell, for example, which is completely dominating the RLG
market with an estimated share of 75%, has only two main product
families: a high-performance inertial-grade line based on GG1320-axis
(0.003°/h bias, 
 5-ppm scale factor) using a zerodur block
249

and a 20-cm perimeter, and a tactical-grade line based on GG1308 axis
(1°/h bias, 
 300-ppm scale factor) using a low-cost BK7
block and a 8-cm perimeter.
However, if the expectations for the FOG have been even exceeded, the
RLG remains a very strong competitor. It is interesting to compare the
difference of attitude of the two clear leaders of the inertial domain with
respect to FOG technology. They share more than half the estimated
global IMU market of $1.75 billion [17], knowing that the gyro triad is
one-half to two-thirds of the cost of an IMU:
Honeywell, which controls more than one-third of this global IMU
market, dominates by far the RLG part (a 75% share). They made
the right technological choices in the development phase and built
a very efficient manufacturing tool that allowed them to drive the
RLG cost down, especially for their tactical-grade HG-1700 line
based on GG1308 axes (300,000 IMU manufactured). They have
an important R&D effort on FOG but they are not pushing FOG
products, except for the specific space market [18] where the
RLG is not adapted.
Northrop Grumman (with its subsidiary NG LITEF), has about
one-fifth of this IMU market, and was not very successful in the
RLG domain. They have pushed FOG technology where they are
the clear leader with 50% of the market. They have made a big
success in the tactical-grade market with the LN 200 IMU (30,000
produced since the early 1990s) as well as with the μ-FORS from
NG LITEF (60,000 axes produced). They are also entering
significantly the inertial-grade market with their LN-251 FOG-
based navigation systems (2,000 produced since 2001, including
their LN-270 land navigation version) [19].
What to conclude is then difficult, but there has been a drastic change
of view point over the last decade, and the fiber gyro is not seen anymore,
as limited to tactical-grade applications, but on the contrary, as the only
technology able to reach strategic-grade performance in a strap-down
configuration.
12.2.2 FOG Manufacturers
As just seen, the leader of the FOG market is Northrop Grumman (with its
250

subsidiary NG Litef) with products in the tactical, intermediate. and inertial
grades. They use the closed-loop configuration with a multifunction
integrated-optic circuit (MIOC).
Two other important manufacturers, KVH Industries in the United
States (with more than 50,000 axes delivered) and Fizoptika in Russia
(with 100,000 axes), use the open-loop all-fiber approach, which does not
perform as well as the closed-loop solution but is lower cost and sufficient
for industrial and tactical grades.
Serving these medium grade markets, there are also IAI Tamam in
Israel, Sagem Navigation in Germany, and Optolink in Russia. Honeywell,
as we saw, concentrates on the space market with inertial and even
strategic grade products. iXBlue (formerly iXSea, which was a spin-off of
Photonetics), my company in France, is focused on the high end of the
market (bias of 0.05°/h down to 0.0005°/h) and has delivered nearly 5,000
FOG-based inertial systems (AHRS, Gyrocompass, INS). Its MARINS
product is the only true strategic-grade strap-down INS on the market
(better than 1 nautical mile per day). iXBlue also cooperates with Astrium
for space products. Other manufacturers are L3 Communications and
Emcore in the United States, Autoflug in Germany, Hitachi, JAE and
Tokyo Keiki in Japan, Al Cielo in Israel, CASC China Aerospace and
FARCI in China, and Civitanavi in Italy.
12.3 Trends for the Future and Concluding Remarks
Some inertial markets are quite conservative (mechanical gyros are still
produced), but it is clear that the FOG will continue to increase its share
and become dominant in the high end, because of its unique qualities.
Now the future of FOG in the tactical-grade market may be more at
risk. It will depend on the performance that MEMS gyros will be able to
reach. Their bias stability is in the tens of degrees per hour today, but
progress is fast. Noise/ARW of few 
 and a minimum of Allan
deviation (see Section 2.3.4) better than 0.1°/h have been demonstrated.
However, MEMS gyros have an important rate random walk (RRW) and
rate ramp that start quite fast: the correlation time is several minutes only.
A MEMS gyro does not take advantage of reciprocity as optical gyros.
Technologically, the optimal design rules of the FOG have been clear
for years, but there is still some possible improvement with the new
concept of microstructured fibers (see Section B.10), in particular, the
251

hollow-core version [20]. Since light propagates mainly in the air, parasitic
effects related to silica are greatly reduced. This applies to Shupe and
stress-related T-dot effects (seen in Chapter 6) and magneto-optic and
Kerr effects (seen in Chapter 7). However, the attenuation of these
hollow-core fibers is still significant but progress is expected. A solid-core
microstructured fiber brings less improvement but has some interest [21].
Finally, to conclude, the fiber-optic gyroscope is a fascinating subject
for the physicist as well as for the signal processing specialist. The
serendipity of the device, which has brought simple solutions to problems
apparently complex, will continue to amaze. It is reasonable to expect to
measure a path difference of 10–10 micrometer after several kilometers of
propagation, a relative value close to 10–20.
This is perfectly summarized by the words of Anthony Lawrence about
the FOG in his book about Modern Inertial Technology [22]: “Nature is
rarely that cooperative.”
References
[1] Ezekiel, S., and E. Udd, (eds.), “Fiber Optic Gyros: 15th Anniversary Conference,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991.
[2] Liu, R. Y., T. F. El-Wailly, and R. C. Dankwort, “Test Results of Honeywell’s First
Generation 
High-Performance 
Interferometric 
Fiber-Optic 
Gyroscope,” 
SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 262–275.
[3] Pavlath, G. A., “Production of Fiber Gyros at Litton Guidance and Control Systems,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 2–6.
[4] Page, J. L., “Multiplexed Approach for the Fiber Optic Gyro Inertial Measurement
Unit,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1367, 1990, pp. 93–102.
[5] Sakuma, K., “Fiber-Optic Gyro Production at JAE,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585,
1991, pp. 8–16.
[6] Hayakawa, Y., and A. Kurokawa, “Fiber-Optic Gyro Production at Mitsubishi Precision
Co.,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 30–39.
[7] Malvern, A. R., “Progress Towards Fibre Optic Gyro Production” SPIE Proceedings,
Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 48–64.
[8] Böschelberger, H. J., and M. Kemmler, “Closed-Loop Fiber Optic Gyro Triad,” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 89–97.
[9] Lefèvre, H. C., et al., “Fiber Optic Gyro Productization at Photonetics,” SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 42–47.
[10] Auch, W., M. Oswald, and R, Regener, “Fiber Optic Gyro Production at Alcatel-SEL,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 65–79.
[11] Blake, J., et al., “Design and Test of a Production Open Loop All-Fiber Gyroscope,”
SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 1169, 1989, pp. 337–346.
252

[12] Kajoka, H., et al., “Fiber Optic Gyro Productization at Hitachi,” SPIE Proceedings,
Vol. 1585, 1991, pp. 17–29.
[13] Hartl, E., et al., “Low Cost Passive Fiber Optic Gyroscope,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol.
1585, 1991, pp. 405–416.
[14] Weed, G., et al., “Fiber Optic Gyro Productization at Honeywell, Inc.,” Fiber Optic
Gyro 15th Anniversary Conference, Paper 1585-01, SPIE, oral presentation only,
1991.
[15] Fiber Optics News, December 16, 1991, pp. 3–4.
[16] Military and Commercial Fiber Business, January 10, 1992, p. 3.
[17] www.yole.fr, announcement of the third update of the market report “Gyroscopes and
IMUs for Defense, Aerospace & Industrial,” 2012.
[18] Sanders, S., et al., “Fiber Optic Gyros in a High-Reliability Inertial Reference Unit for
Commercial Satellites, OFS 22nd SPIE Proceedings, Vol. 8421, paper 842106, 2012.
[19] Pavlath, G. A., “Fiber Optic Gyros: Past, Present, and Future,” OFS 22nd SPIE
Proceedings, Vol. 8421, paper 842102, 2012.
[20] Blin, S., et al., “Reduced Thermal Sensitivity of a Fiber-Optic Gyroscope Using an Air-
Core Photonic-Bandgap Fiber,” J.L.T., Vol. 25, No. 3, 2007, pp. 861–865.
[21] Li, J., et al., “Design and Validation of Photonic Crystal Fiber for Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope,” ISS 2013, Karlsruhe, 2013, pp. 5.1–5.12.
[22] Lawrence, A., Modern Inertial Technology: Navigation, Guidance, and Control,
2nd ed., New York: Springer-Verlag, 1998.
253

APPENDIX A
Fundamentals of Optics for the
Fiber Gyroscope
A.1 Basic Parameters of an Optical Wave: Wavelength,
Frequency, and Power
An optical wave is an electromagnetic wave like radio waves. The physical
measurand that is propagating is a mix of an electrical E field and a
magnetic B field which are orthogonal to the direction of propagation
(Figure A.1). The wave is said transverse and it yields the important
question of polarization and birefringence that will be detailed later. With
acoustic waves in a fluid, the physical measurand is a compression in the
direction of propagation: the wave is said longitudinal. Because the
physical measurand is along a unique direction, there is no question of
polarization or birefringence. Shear acoustic waves in a solid are, however,
transverse like optical waves.
As any wave, optical waves have a spatial period, the wavelength λ, and
a temporal period T, related by the velocity of propagation v, with:
v = λ/T (A.1)
is often used the temporal frequency f, the inverse of the period T, with:
f = 1/T (A.2)
and
v = λ ⋅ f (A.3)
and is also used the spatial frequency σ, the inverse of the wavelength λ,
with:
σ = 1/λ (A.4)
and
v = f/σ (A.5)
In a vacuum, it is well known that the velocity of an optical wave is the
254

speed of light:
c = 2.998 × 108 m/s ≃ 300,000 km/s (A.6)
A useful value is also
c ≃ 300 mm/ns (i.e., 1 foot per nanosecond) (A.7)
Optical measurements were done in the past only geometrically with
distances, and only the wavelength was used, with a visible range
extending from the infrared (IR) limit of 0.75 μm (or 750 nm) to the
ultraviolet (UV) limit of 0.4 μm (or 400 nm).
Figure A.1 Electromagnetic wave propagating along the z axis with E and B fields
orthogonal to the direction of propagation.
Today, the tendency is to utilize more often temporal frequencies with
the influence of optical communications. Some problems are simpler to
understand in the spatial domain but, for other ones, it is easier in the
temporal domain. A conversion Table A.1 with the visible and the most
current optical communication wavelengths in the near-IR range yields the
wavelength λ (in nanometers), the spatial frequency σ (in inverse
millimeters, mm–1), the temporal period T (in femtoseconds), and the
temporal frequency f (in terahertz).
Table A.1 Conversion Table
Near IR
Visible
Near UV
λ 1,500 nm
1,300 nm
850 nm
750 nm
600 nm
400 nm
300 nm
σ 667 mm–1 770 mm–1 1,176 mm–1 1,333 mm–1 1,667 mm–1 2,500 mm–1 3,333 mm–1
T 5 fs
4.35 fs
2.85 fs
2.5 fs
2 fs
1.33 fs
1 fs
F 200 THz
230 THz
350 THz
400 THz
500 THz
750 THz
1000 THz
255

Note an interesting coincidence with the two limits of the visible range
exchanging their values of wavelength λ in nanometers and temporal
frequency f in terahertz.
An important characteristic of an optical wave is that its frequency is so
high (hundreds of terahertz) that its amplitude cannot be measured directly
like it is with radio waves. One can measure only the mean power,
proportional to the square of the amplitude. It used the term quadratic, or
square-law, detection. The amplitude is, as we saw, a combined
electromagnetic field, but the power is mainly carried by the E field, and
the B field can be usually neglected. Today, the fastest detectors reach the
range of 100 GHz, but it is still more than three orders of magnitude below
the wave frequency. To retrieve the information of phase of the very high-
frequency optical wave, interferometry is used as will be seen later.
Table A.2 Correspondence Between Watts and dBm
1W
100 mW
10 mW
1 mW 100 μW
10 μW
1 μW
+30 dBm +20 dBm +10 dBm 0 dBm −10 dBm −20 dBm −30 dBm
Optical sources used in fiber optics have power in the range of tens to
hundreds of milliwatts. Powers are also expressed in decibels relative to 1
mW, noted dBm. Expressed in milliwatts, the power P of a wave of a
dBm is 10(a/10) mW and a = 10 log (P/1 mW), which yields the
correspondence as in Table A.2.
Decibels are also used for gain and attenuation. They are based on
logarithms that replace multiplication by addition and power by
multiplication. This is the opportunity to recall the beauty of logarithms as
stated by their inventor, John Napier, in the title of his publication,
“Mirifici logarithmorum canonis descriptio” (Description of the Marvelous
Canon of Logarithms). The decibels in Table A.3 are similar to Table A.2
for dBm.
Table A.3 Gain and Attenuation in Decibels
Gain
Attenuation
× 103
× 102
× 101
100 = 1× 10–1 × 10–2 × 10–3
+30 dB +20 dB 10 dB 0 dB
−10 dB −20 dB −30 dB
Now the value of 3 dB corresponds to a 1.998-fold power increase (i.e.,
twofold with a very good approximation), and the value of 5 dB
corresponds 
to 
 
(i.e., 
threefold 
with 
a 
reasonable
approximation).
256

Values in decibels can be deduced simply as shown in Table A.4.
Table A.4 Correspondence for 0 dB to 10 dB
Decibel Value Equal to
Multiplication Coefficient Equal to
0 dB
1
+1 dB
10 dB − 3 dB − 3 dB − 3 dB5/4 = 1.25
10/(2 × 2 × 2) = 10/8
+2 dB
3 dB − 1 dB
1.6
2/(5/4) = 8/5
+3 dB
2
+4 dB
10 dB − 3 dB − 3 dB
2.5
10/(2 × 2) = 10/4
+5 dB
+6 dB
3 dB + 3 dB
4
2 × 2
+7 dB
10 dB − 3 dB
5
10/2
+8 dB
5 dB + 3 dB
6
3 × 2
+9 dB
3 dB + 3 dB + 3 dB
8
2 × 2 × 2
+10 dB
10
Values in decibels can also be deduced for small values (see Table A.5).
Table A.5 Correspondence for +2 dB to -2 dB
Decibel Value Multiplication Coefficient Percentage
+2 dB
8/5 = 1.6
+60%
+1 dB
5/4 = 1.25
+25%
+0.5 dB
1/0.9 = 1.11
+11%
+0.1 dB
1.02
+2%
−0.1 dB
0.98
−2%
−0.5 dB
−10%
−1 dB
4/5 = 0.8
−20%
−2 dB
5/8 = 0.625
−37.5%
Now if light behaves clearly like a wave as observed in interferometers,
it also behaves like particles. This is the wave-particle duality. Quantum-
mechanic physicists talk also of wave-particle complementarity. With light
power detection, this is the particle nature of light which as to be taken
into account. A light beam is actually a flow of photons with an energy
equal to the product of the wave temporal frequency f by Planck constant
(h = 6.63 ⋅ 10–34 J ⋅ s). At 1,500 nm (i.e., 200 THz), it yields a photon
energy of 1.3 × 10−19 J. A power of 13 μW is actually a flow of 1014
photons per second.
Optical sources can be single wavelength/frequency and they are then
257

called monochromatic (i.e., single color). This is the case of the laser gyro
using helium-neon (He-Ne) that emits at 633 nm (about 500 THz) in red.
They can be also broadband or broad spectrum, and this is the case with
fiber-gyro sources. The first fiber gyros used semiconductor diode sources
emitting around 850 nm, but today erbium-doped-fiber sources emitting
around 1,550 nm are mainly utilized for high performance.
In a transparent medium, an optical wave is slowed down and
propagates at a velocity c/n, where n is the index of refraction. At 1,550
nm, silica (SiO2 glass), which is used for optical fiber, has an index of
around 1.45; lithium niobate (LiNbO3) crystal, which is used in an
integrated-optic circuit, has an extraordinary index of about 2.14;
semiconductors used in sources have an index as high as 3.5. Note that the
actual wavelength λm in a material is shorter than the wavelength λ in a
vacuum:
λm = λ/n (A.8)
However, the temporal frequency remains always the same. It is
summarized in Table A.6.
Table A.6 Wavelength as a Function of the Index of Refraction
Temporal Frequency
Wavelength 
in a Vacuum 
(n = 1)
Wavelength 
in Air 
(n = 1.0003)
Wavelength 
in Silica 
(n ≃ 1.45)
Wavelength 
in LiNbO3 
(n ≃ 2.14)
Wavelength 
in Semiconductor 
(n ≃ 3.5)
350 THz
850 nm
≃ 850 nm
585 nm
395 nm
240 nm
200 THz
1500 nm
≃ 1500 nm
1070 nm
700 nm
430 nm
A.2 Spontaneous Emission, Stimulated Emission, and
Related Noises
A.2.1 Fundamental Photon Noise
The fundamental noise of light is photon noise. It is applied to photons,
the classical shot noise of the measurement of the flow of uncorrelated
discrete particles that is found, in particular, with an electrical current
composed of a flow of discrete electrons. When a flow Ṅ = dN/dt of
uncorrelated particles is measured over a time tm, it yields a number of
detected particles:
N = Ṅ ⋅ tm (A.9)
258

with an uncertainty equal to 
As we already saw, an optical power of 13 μW corresponds to a flow of
1014 photons per second for a wavelength of 1,500 nm. With a
measurement time of 1 second (i.e., a detection frequency bandwidth ∆fd
of 1 Hz), the 1014 detected photons are measured with an uncertainty of 
 (i.e., a relative uncertainty of 10–7). To reduce this relative
uncertainty by one order of magnitude to 10–8, requires a flow of 1016
photons per second (i.e., 1.3 mW), two orders of magnitude in optical
power.
It is a Poisson distribution process, but when a very large number of
particles are detected, it approaches a normal Gaussian distribution. The
standard (or root-mean-square [rms]) deviation σṄ of this counting
follows:
 (A.10)
For an electrical current I, composed of discrete electrons of charge q, it
yields:
 (A.11)
For an optical power P, composed of discrete photons of energy h ⋅ f,
where f is the wave frequency equal to c/λ, it yields a photon noise:
 (A.12)
This can be also expressed in relative noise power spectral density PSD
(with Hz−1 as the unit):
 (A.13)
Note these PSD are constant in terms of frequency: shot noise and
photon noise are white noises. These PSD values are expressed as
10–x/Hz, or with decibels as (−10x) dB/Hz.
A.2.2 Spontaneous Emission and Excess Relative Intensity Noise
259

(Excess RIN)
Spontaneous emission is the most common process of emission, with
excited atoms or ions spontaneously emitting photons with an energy equal
to the difference between the excited level and the ground state. These
emitted photons are not correlated and spontaneous emission has a broad
spectrum. 
The 
various 
frequency 
components 
of 
this 
broad,
spontaneously emitted, spectrum have a random relative phase, and all
these frequency components beat randomly together. It yields random
power (or optical intensity) fluctuations called excess relative intensity
noise (excess RIN or RIN).
The emission frequency spectrum has a full width at half-maximum
∆fFWHM = 
 about the mean frequency  or mean wavelength
 As the power detection process is quadratic, it yields rectification and
then power measurement noise about dc over the frequency range
∆fFWHM. Theory shows that the power spectral density of this excess
RIN is simply the inverse of the spectrum frequency width ∆fFWHM:
PSDRIN = 1/∆fFWHM (A.14)
For example, at 1,500 nm/200 THz, a spectrum width of 0.5% (i.e., 7.5
nm/1 THz = 1012 Hz) has a RIN power spectral density simply equal to
PSDRIN = 1/1 THz = 1/1012 Hz = 10–12 Hz–1 (i.e., −120 dB/Hz), that
is, in terms of relative σ value:
 (A.15)
In fiber gyros, the returning power is in the range of tens of microwatt,
that is, the theoretical photon noise PSDPh is about 10–14/Hz, that is, 100
times smaller in power density and 10 times smaller in σ value than the
RIN. Reduction of the effect of excess RIN is an important point for high-
performance fiber gyros.
Table A.7 Photon Noise Power Density as a Function of Power
PSDPh
10−12/Hz 
(−120 dB/Hz)
10−14/Hz 
(−140 dB/Hz)
10−16/Hz 
(−160 dB/Hz)
(relative σ value)
for P at 1,500 nm 
260

(200 THz)
for P at 850 nm 
(350 THz)
0.46 μW (−33 dBm) 46 μW (−13 dBm) 4.6 mW (+7 dBm)
In addition, spontaneous emission sources have, by principle, no spatial
coherence since the various emission points of the extended source are
uncorrelated. This lack of spatial coherence makes their coupling to a
single-mode fiber inefficient.
A typical spontaneous emission source is a light emission diode (LED).
They can be coupled with a reasonable efficiency is a large-core
multimode fiber but the efficiency is very poor with a small-core single-
mode fiber.
For fiber gyros requiring broadband sources, but also efficient coupling
in a single-mode fiber, spontaneous emission sources are not adapted.
However, as we shall see later, amplified spontaneous emission (ASE)
sources provide, at the same time, the required broad spectrum of
spontaneous emission and an efficient coupling into single-mode fibers.
Finally, spontaneous emission sources are usually not polarized. They
can be considered as the sum of two uncorrelated sources with orthogonal
states of polarization and the same power.
A.2.3 Resonant Stimulated Emission in a Laser Source
In addition to spontaneous emission, excited atoms or ions of a source also
follow a process of stimulated emission. An incoming photon,
corresponding to the energy between excited and ground states, stimulates
the emission of a new photon that has the same phase, frequency,
polarization, and direction as the ones of this incoming photon. It yields a
direct optical amplification process. It is the basic of laser emission, laser
being the acronym of light amplification by stimulated emission of
radiation.
Actually, a laser is a resonator, and not, strictly speaking, an amplifier.
As any resonator in electronics or mechanics, a laser is an amplifier with a
feedback of its output to its input. When the product gain × feedback is
higher than 1 at a frequency, as any resonator, the laser resonates at this
specific frequency. The spontaneous photons act as a seed, and recirculate
through stimulated emission in the amplifying cavity.
A laser can be made single-frequency. A pure single-frequency (i.e.,
harmonic wave) has an amplitude:
261

A(t) = A0sin(2πft + ϕ0) (A.16)
It can be written as:
A(t) = A0sinϕ(t) (A.17)
where ϕ(t) is the phase which follows an affine function as a function of
time:
ϕ(t) = 2πft + ϕ0 (A.18)
The frequency f is proportional to the derivative of ϕ(t):
 (A.19)
An actual single-frequency laser wave has a residual frequency/phase
noise, yielding the line width, which can be very narrow; however, this
frequency/phase noise has no effect on the amplitude or its square, the
optical intensity or power. A single-frequency laser wave does not suffer
from the excess RIN mechanism of spontaneous sources, despite its very
narrow frequency band. In first approximation, it should be viewed as a
constant amplitude/power wave with chirp noise on frequency/phase.
The theoretical Schawlow-Townes line width is very small, in the
millihertz range, but in practice, lasers experience residual noise because of
thermal and mechanical fluctuations of the cavity. Line width depends on
the kind of laser. It is usually in the megahertz range but can go down to
the hertz range for the ultra-stable lasers.
These thermal and mechanical fluctuations yield also some intensity
noise, but laser PSDRIN is much smaller than the one of broadband
spontaneous emission sources. Laser RIN can be as small as −160 to
−170 dB/Hz (i.e., four to five orders of magnitude lower than the typical
−120 dB/Hz of fiber-gyro sources).
Laser sources are also spatially coherent and, then, can be coupled
efficiently into a single-mode fiber. They are also usually polarized.
They could appear as ideal sources for the fiber gyro because of their
low RIN and their high coupling efficiency to single-mode fibers, but they
lack the broad spectrum and the related low temporal coherence which is
key for high performance.
A.2.4 Amplified Spontaneous Emission (ASE)
262

As we saw, spontaneous emission sources have the required low temporal
coherence but they lack the high spatial coherence needed for efficient
coupling into a single-mode fiber. However, resonant stimulated emission
laser sources have the required high spatial coherence but they lack the
required low temporal coherence. The best of both worlds is found with
amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) sources.
An ASE source is a single-spatial-mode waveguide amplifier. Because of
waveguidance, broad spectrum spontaneous emission is partly guided in
the waveguide instead of being emitted in all directions as in free space.
This partly guided broadband spontaneous emission is then amplified by
stimulated emission. This amplification taking place in the waveguide
yields high power in a single spatial mode and, at the same time, preserves
the broad spectrum of the seed spontaneous emission.
ASE is an abbreviation from telecommunications, in particular from
erbium-doped (Er-doped) fiber amplifier (EDFA), which revolutionized
this domain in the 1990s. An EDFA without input signal is actually a very
efficient ASE source.
Before the invention of EDFA, fiber gyros used super-radiant diodes
(SRDs), super-luminescent diodes (SLDs), or edge-emitting light emitting
diodes (E-LEDs). They all are actually ASE sources based on
semiconductor waveguide amplification instead of rare-earth-doped-fiber
amplification, but they work on the same basic principle of seed guided
broad spectrum spontaneous emission, which is amplified by stimulated
emission in a single-spatial-mode guided optical amplifier.
Early work on rare-earth-doped ASE sources used the term “super-
fluorescent,” but “super” radiance, “super” luminescence, or “super”
fluorescence are all actually seed spontaneous emission amplified by
stimulated emission. Such ASE sources are quasi-ideal for the fiber gyro
because of their high power and low temporal coherence, but they keep
the excess RIN of the seed spontaneous emission.
However, as will be seen, excess RIN is not as fundamental a noise as
photon shot noise. When a photon-noise-limited wave is split, it yields two
photon-noise limited waves, but both noises are uncorrelated. As we saw,
excess RIN comes from the random intensity power beating between the
various frequency components of the broad spectrum. When a wave
limited by excess RIN is split, it yields two waves carrying the same excess
RIN. Then it is possible to use one port as a RIN reference and to subtract
it from the useful measurement of the other port.
263

Finally, like spontaneous emission sources, ASE sources may be
unpolarized. This is the case with Er-doped fiber sources. Such an
unpolarization is very useful, as we shall see, to reduce bias drift in a fiber
gyro.
A.3 Propagation Equation in a Vacuum
As already discussed, an optical wave in a vacuum is an electromagnetic
wave. Going to more mathematics, it is a solution of the differential
propagation equation, which is derived from Maxwell equations of
electromagnetism in a vacuum:
 (A.20)
 (A.21)
 (A.22)
 (A.23)
where the E vector is the electric field, the B vector is the magnetic field,
the j vector is the electric current density, ρ is the electric charge density,
∈0 is the dielectric permittivity of a vacuum (∈0 = 8.854 × 10–12 F⋅m–
1), and μ0 is the magnetic permeability of a vacuum (μ0 = 4π × 10–7
H⋅m–1).
Note that the equation of conservation of charge, ∇ ⋅ j + ∂ρ/∂t = div j =
∂ρ/∂t = 0, is included in Maxwell’s equations, since it can be deduced by
applying ∇ ⋅ ∇×= div ⋅ curl = 0 to the Maxwell-Ampere law M4.
Furthermore, equations M1 and M2 express that the E and B fields are
derived from an electromagnetic scalar potential V and an electromagnetic
vector potential A, with:
 (A.24)
 (A.25)
264

These equations use the divergence (div) and the curl (curl) operators
on a vector function U of the spatial coordinates, as well as the gradient
operator (grad) on a scalar function U. The notations are unified with the
vector differential operator ∇, the divergence being the scalar product ∇ ⋅
U, which gives a scalar function, the curl being the vector product ∇ × U,
which gives a vector function, and the gradient being the product of the
vector operator ∇ with a scalar U, which gives a vector function.
 (A.26)
Another operator, the Laplacian operator, is of importance in vector
analysis: it is a scalar differential operator equal to the scalar square of the
vector differential operator ∇. It is denoted by ∇2 and applied to a vector
function U, it gives a vector function ∇2U. In Cartesian coordinates:
 (A.27)
The propagation equation in a vacuum is deduced from ∇ × (∇ × U) =
∇(∇ ⋅ U) − ∇2U or curl ⋅ curl U = grad div U − ∇2U, which yields:
 (A.28)
A simple solution to this propagation equation is the monochromatic
(i.e., single-color, single-frequency, single-wavelength) sinusoidal plane
wave that can be expressed in Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z and time t)
(Figure A.1). The term “harmonic solution” is also used. For easing the
calculations, complex exponential notations are used, but it must be kept in
mind that the true field is only the real part.
E = Eoxei(ωt-k0z)
E = Eoyei(ωt-k0z) (A.29)
265

In these equations ω, which is called the angular frequency, and k0,
which is called the wave number in a vacuum, are used to simplify
notations. At a given position z, the electromagnetic field oscillates
sinusoidally with a temporal frequency ƒ, with ω = 2πf, and a temporal
period T = 1/f. At a given time t, the electromagnetic field has a sinusoidal
spatial distribution along the direction of propagation z, with a spatial
period λ, the wavelength in a vacuum, with k0 = 2π/λ. The inverse of the
wavelength λ is called the spatial frequency and is denoted σ = 1/λ.
The wave propagates at a velocity c in a vacuum, as it may be written
as:
 (A.30)
with c = ω/k0 = (∈0μ0)–1/2. Its measured value is c = 2.998 × 108 m ⋅
s–1 and:
c = λ/T = λ ⋅ f = f/σ (A.31)
An electromagnetic plane wave in a vacuum is a transverse wave where
the E and B field vectors are orthogonal to the direction of propagation.
The magnitudes E and B of these two fields are proportional, and their
ratio is equal to the light velocity:
 (A.32)
They oscillate in phase and are localized in two orthogonal planes. The
electromagnetic field has the same value at any point in a plane that is
perpendicular to the direction of propagation. Such planes are called the
planar wavefronts of the plane wave.
This constant ratio E/B = c implies that the effect of the electromagnetic
field of an electromagnetic wave on matter is due mostly to the electric
component. The electromagnetic force fEM applied on a particle of charge
q is the sum of an electric force fE and a magnetic force fM:
fEM = fE + fB
266

fE = qE
fM = q(vp × B) (A.33)
where vp is the speed of the particle. Because, in matter, vp << c, this
implies that fM << fE. Therefore, most problems of electromagnetic
waves are treated by considering only the electric field.
The electromagnetic spectrum extends from radio waves to X-rays and
gamma radiations. As we already saw, optical waves correspond to the
visible range (i.e., a vacuum wavelength between 400 and 750 nm) and to
the near-ultraviolet and near-infrared ranges. An important characteristic
of these optical waves is their very high frequency: for a vacuum
wavelength λ of 1 μm, the wave frequency ƒ is 300 THz (i.e., 300,000
GHz). No electronic system can follow such a fast vibration, and optical
detectors can only measure the mean power of the wave. It is not possible
to measure directly the E or B field of the wave.
The power flow across unit area (i.e., the power density) is called the
optical intensity Iopt of the wave and is proportional to the mean value of
the scalar square of the E field:
Iopt = c ⋅ ∈0 < E ⋅ E* > (A.34)
where E* is the complex conjugate of E, and the brackets < > denote
temporal averaging. Optical detectors are often called square-law or
quadratic detectors.
When the exact physical or vectorial nature of the optical wave is not
needed, the analysis of an optical scheme can be carried out with a scalar
quantity, the complex wave amplitude A:
A = A0ei(ωt–k0z) (A.35)
The wave power density, also called wave optical intensity, is the mean
value of the scalar square of the complex amplitude:
Iopt = < A ⋅ A* > = A02 (A.36)
A.4 State of Polarization of an Optical Wave
An optical wave in a vacuum is a wave denoted by TEM (transverse
267

electromagnetic), as the E and B fields are both in a plane 0xy orthogonal
to the direction of propagation 0z. At a given position 0 in space, a
possible solution of the electric field (Figure A.2) is:
Figure A.2 Linear polarization aligned along the x-axis or the y-axis for propagation
along the z-axis.
E = E0xeiωt (A.37)
Such a sinusoidal oscillation is said to be linearly polarized along the x-
axis. The E vector always remains parallel to E0x. Another possible
solution is:
E = E0yeiωt (A.38)
The wave is then linearly polarized along the perpendicular y-axis.
Figure A.3 Linear polarization aligned along any axis considered as the sum of two
orthogonal linear polarizations in phase.
The set of all the possible solutions is a two-dimensional linear space.
The general solution is a linear combination with complex coefficients:
E = (E0x + E0yei∆ϕ)eiωt (A.39)
where ∆ϕ is the phase difference between both orthogonal components
E0x and E0y.
When ∆ϕ is equal to 0 or π rad, the wave is linearly polarized along an
intermediate direction (Figure A.3), but generally the wave is elliptically
268

polarized. The extremity of the E vector follows an ellipse with the
frequency f = ω/2π (Figure A.4).
Figure A.4 Elliptical polarization considered as the sum of two orthogonal linear
polarizations with a phase difference ∆ϕ.
When two linear polarizations with the same amplitude are combined in
quadrature (i.e., with a phase shift of ±π/2 rad), a circular polarization
results (Figure A.5):
Figure A.5 Circular polarization considered as the sum of two orthogonal linear
polarizations in quadrature.
E = [E0x = E0ye±iπ/2]eiωt (A.40)
where the magnitudes of the E0x and E0y vectors are equal: E0x = E0y.
The tip of the E vector follows a circle. There are two states of circular
polarization which turn in opposite directions depending on the sign of the
±π/2 phase shift. They are called the right-handed and left-handed circular
states of polarization.
Because the set of polarization states is a two-dimensional linear space,
it can be analyzed with any orthonormal basis of eigenvectors. Two
perpendicular linear polarizations are a possible orthonormal basis, but the
two circular polarizations are also an orthonormal basis. An elliptical
polarization can be expressed with linear polarizations [Figure A.6(a)]:
269

Figure A.6 Decomposition of an elliptical polarization: (a) with two perpendicular
linear polarizations in quadrature and (b) with two opposite circular polarizations.
E = (E0L + E0seiπ/2)eiωt (A.41)
where E0L is the peak value of the field along the large axis, and E0s is
the peak value of the field along the small axis. However, it can also be
decomposed with circular polarizations [Figure A.6(b)]:
 (A.42)
where the magnitudes E of the various E vectors are given by:
 (A.43)
 (A.44)
with E0m > E0c, and where E0m is the magnitude of the rotating Em field
of the main circular component and E0c is the magnitude of the rotating
Ec field of the other crossed circular component, and there are:
E0L = E0m + E0c (A.45)
E0s = E0m − E0c (A.46)
Note that when the quality of a given state of polarization has to be
measured, the intensity/power ratio is usually measured between the
270

component in this given state of polarization and the component in the
orthogonal state of polarization.
With a linear state of polarization, a polarizer is used to select the main
polarization component, and it is rotated by 90° to select the crossed
orthogonal polarization. The ratio between both measured powers directly
gives the ratio between the power Pc of the crossed linear state and the
power Pm of the main linear state.
With a circular state of polarization, a polarizer is used to check that the
transmitted power remains equal to half the input power when the
polarizer is rotated. When the circular state is not perfect, a maximum
power Pmax is measured along the major axis of the polarization that is
not perfectly circular and a minimum power Pmin is measured along the
minor axis. Pmax is actually the power of the linear E0L component of the
elliptical polarization and is proportional to E0L2, while Pmin is the power
of E0s and is proportional to E0s2. The contrast of this variation is:
 (A.47)
and since E0L = E0m + E0c, E0s = E0m − E0c, and E0c/E0m << 1:
 (A.48)
where Pm is now the power of the main circular state and Pc is the power
of the crossed circular state. Then the contrast of this variation is
proportional to the ratio of the amplitudes (or fields) of both orthogonal
circular components, that is, the square root of the ratio of the powers.
If, for example, the ratio Pc/Pm = 1%, the contrast is as high as 20%.
This does not mean that this main circular state of polarization is not as
well preserved as the main linear state of polarization in the previous case.
In both cases, the intensity or power ratio is Pc/Pm and the amplitude or
field ratio is 
 but in the linear case the experiment yields a
power ratio measurement of the defect, while in the circular case the
experiment yields an amplitude ratio measurement, which is much more
sensitive.
271

A.5 Propagation in a Dielectric Medium
A.5.1 Index of Refraction
In a transparent dielectric medium, Maxwell equations can be averaged
spatially to eliminate the strong variations of the electromagnetic field
between the discrete charged particles of the material, and to be able to
consider a macroscopically continuous material. The first two Maxwell
equations M1 and M2 that are independent of the charge density ρ and the
current density j are preserved in the averaging:
(M1) ∇ ⋅ B = div B = 0 (A.49)
 (A.50)
For the last two Maxwell equations M3 and M4, the macroscopic effect
of the charges of the medium can be taken into account with an electric
polarization vector P and a magnetic polarization vector M. Note that
polarization has, in this case, a completely different meaning from the state
of polarization, it is the polarization vector of the medium, while the state
of polarization relates to the wave. A derived electric field D and a derived
magnetic field H may be defined as follows:
D = ∈0 E + P (A.51)
 (A.52)
The last two Maxwell equations become:
(M3) ∇ ⋅ D = div D = ρfree (A.53)
 (A.54)
where ρfree is the free charge density and jfree is the free current density
vector.
In an isotropic linear dielectric (i.e., nonconducting) medium, ρfree = 0,
jfree = 0, P is proportional to E, and M is proportional to B:
P = χe∈0E (A.55)
272

 (A.56)
where χe and χm are the dielectric and magnetic susceptibilities,
respectively. The D and H derived fields are also respectively proportional
to the E and B fields:
D = ∈r∈0E (A.57)
 (A.58)
where ∈r is the relative dielectric permittivity and μr is the relative
magnetic permeability. We have:
∈r = 1 + χe (A.59)
 (A.60)
Note that χe, χm, ∈r, and μr are dimensionless values.
The propagation equation in a dielectric medium becomes:
 (A.61)
The plane wave harmonic solution is:
E = E0xei(ωt–kmz)
B = B0yei(ωt–kmz) (A.62)
The wave velocity v = ω/km in a medium becomes:
v = (∈rμr∈0μ0)–1/2 = c(∈rμr)–1/2 (A.63)
The index of refraction n of the material being defined by the ratio
between the velocity in a vacuum and the velocity v in the medium, this
yields:
273

 (A.64)
Even if this may look obvious, as we already saw, it is important to
recall that when a lightwave propagates in a vacuum and in various media,
its temporal frequency f and its related angular frequency ω = 2πf remain
unchanged, but the actual wavelength λm and its inverse, the actual spatial
frequency σm, in the medium are not equal anymore to the values λ and σ
that the same wave would have in a vacuum. We have:
λm = λ/n (A.65)
σm = n ⋅ σ (A.66)
The wave number km in the medium is:
 (A.67)
where k0 is the wave number that the same wave would have in a
vacuum.
As it can be seen, the important characteristic of a light beam that
remains invariant is its temporal frequency, even if it is the habit to define
a wave with its wavelength in a vacuum because a length of 1 μm is a
quantity easier to grasp and to measure than a frequency of 300 THz (3 ×
1014 Hz) or a temporal period of 3 femtoseconds (3 × 10–15 s).
A.5.2 Chromatic Dispersion, Group Velocity, and Group Velocity
Dispersion
The relative dielectric permittivity ∈r depends on the frequency of the
wave and at optical wave frequencies, the relative magnetic permeability
μr is equal to unity. The index of refraction and the wave velocity then
depend only on ∈r and are frequency (or wavelength) dependent:
 (A.68)
Note that sometimes the term dielectric impermeability η is used for the
274

inverse of the dielectric permittivity ∈r with η = 1/∈r = 1/n2.
A material is composed of electric particles that are bound together with
electromagnetic forces. It can be considered as a complex set of elastic
mechanical oscillators. When the light frequency corresponds to a
resonance frequency of the material, mechanical resonances are induced
by the synchronized electromagnetic field of the wave, which is then
absorbed. In the transparent region, the light frequency does not
correspond to any resonance, but the oscillators vibrate and the
macroscopic effect described by ∈r depends on the respective value of
the light frequency and of the resonance frequencies of the material, which
yields a frequency dependence of ∈r and of the index n.
This effect is called chromatic dispersion, as its first well-known
application is the spatial decomposition of white light in prismatic colors.
White light is composed of all the visible wavelengths, and since the
angular deviation by a prism is proportional to the index n, the spectrum
becomes spread angularly as a function of n(f) (or n(λ)). This function n(f)
(or n(λ)) is given by the Sellmeir equation. Figure A.7 displays it for silica,
the base material of optical fiber.
Figure A.7 Index of silica versus wavelength.
Chromatic dispersion yields two other important phenomena. If the
optical wave is modulated in amplitude, frequency, or phase, the
modulated signal does not propagate at the velocity v = ω/km, often called
phase velocity, but at the group velocity vg:
The difference is proportional to the first-order derivative dn/dλ.
275

 (A.69)
Going to more mathematics, these formulae can be derived considering
that any nonmonochromatic wave is the integral summation of all its
frequency components. At a given spatial position, the wave amplitude
A(t) is:
 (A.70)
Its frequency components a(f) are defined inversely by Fourier
transform:
 (A.71)
Using the angular frequency ω instead of the temporal frequency f to
simplify equations by avoiding the 2π coefficient gives:
 (A.72)
When this wave propagates in a dispersive medium, each frequency
component propagates independently at its own velocity, and the total
wave amplitude A(t, z) propagates accordingly to:
 (A.73)
The propagation argument [ωt − km(ω)z] may be decomposed in the
sum of a mean term [ t − km( )z] that depends on the mean frequency 
and a variable term [∆ωt − ∆km(∆ω)z] where ∆ω = ω − 
 and
∆km(∆ω)z = km(ω) − km( ) The wave amplitude becomes:
 (A.74)
The second term has the same propagation argument as the one of a
monochromatic wave and represents the propagation of the carrier at a
velocity equal to the mean phase velocity v = km( ).The first term M(t,
z) is actually the modulation that propagates on the monochromatic carrier,
276

and:
 (A.75)
The modulation term M(t, z) is the integral summation of frequency
components ∆ω that propagate respectively at a velocity ∆ω/∆km(∆ω). If
this velocity is constant over the spectrum, ∆ω/∆km is equal to the first-
order derivative dω/dkm, and the second-order derivative d2ω/d2km is
zero. The modulation term M(t, z) propagates without any change at the
same velocity as the one of all its frequency components, the group
velocity vg = dω/dkm, because it can be written as:
 (A.76)
The value of vg is independent of the spectrum width, and this result is
very general. It applies for any kind of function M (i.e., amplitude, phase,
or frequency modulation signals), and it also applies if the spectrum is
broad because of the natural emission of the source.
Now if ∆ω/∆km is not constant over the spectrum (i.e., d2ω/d2km ≠
0), the modulation term M(t, z) propagates at the mean group velocity vg(
) = dω/dkm( ), and there is an additional second-order effect of signal
temporal spreading, which limits the transmission bandwidth. It is called
group velocity, or group delay, dispersion. The limitation induced by this
effect over the intrinsic spectrum broadening due to a signal modulation of
a monochromatic source is in practice negligible, but it has to be taken into
account when the natural emission spectrum of the source is not narrow
enough.
Let us give orders of magnitude to get a better understanding: the mean
light frequency is 300 THz (for a 1-μm wavelength), and the spectrum
broadening due to electronically controlled signal modulation is at
maximum several tens of gigahertz (i.e., at maximum, about 10–4 of the
central frequency), while the natural emission spectrum width of the
source may be as much as 10–3 to 5 × 10–2 of the central frequency (i.e.,
a width of 1 to 50 nm in wavelength). In this case, the modulation term
277

M(t, z) is a complex combination of the effect of a modulated signal S(t, z)
and a random term Mr(t, z) that takes into account the effect of the broad
emission spectrum of the source. One may consider that each emission
frequency ωe of the source carries the signal that propagates on this
frequency at the group velocity vg(ωe). The total signal is actually
decomposed in elementary signals that propagate at a different velocity,
comprised in ∆vg = vg[ e + (∆ωe/2)] − vg[ e − (∆ωe/2)], where e is
the mean frequency of the emission spectrum and ∆ωe is the width of the
emission spectrum. These velocity differences yield, over a propagation
length L, a temporal spreading ∆τs of the elementary signals:
 (A.77)
since the group propagation time is τg(ωe) = L/[vg(ωe)]. Expressed in
terms of index n and mean emission wavelength 
 (A.78)
where ∆λe is the width of the emission spectrum, in wavelength.
For example, for silica used in optical fibers, with 
∆τs/L ⋅ ∆λe = 100 ps/nm⋅km (A.79)
However, because the second-order derivative d2n/dλ2 = 0 around
1,300 nm in silica (Figure A.7), this wavelength is the optimal choice for
large-bandwidth 
telecommunications 
that 
require 
minimum 
signal
spreading. At 1,550 nm, the wavelength with the lowest attenuation, the
group velocity dispersion is 17 ps/nm⋅km.
Note that when d2n/dλ2 = 0, it is often said that there is no dispersion.
More precisely, it should be said that there is no group velocity dispersion.
The reason for this is that even with a second-order derivative d2n/dλ2 =
0, it may still be possible to get chromatic dispersion in a prism, because
this depends on the first-order derivative dn/dλ.
A.5.3 E and B, or E and H?
The basic electromagnetic field is the set of the electric E field and the
278

magnetic B field. Relativity shows that E and B are connected through
Lorentz transformation for moving frames of reference. The derived fields
D and H are only auxiliary fields that allow the effect of a medium to be
treated macroscopically. This is particularly seen in the electromagnetic
theory of the Sagnac effect detailed in Appendix D.
However, for historical reasons, many optics and radiowave textbooks
that are mostly devoted to motionless systems are considering H as the
basic magnetic field instead of B. The advantage of the (E, H) approach is
that it offers a good analogy with other wave phenomena. As a matter of
fact, it is usually possible in a wave to consider a first physical measurand
that is a potential and a second physical measurand that is a flow. An
argument to explain wave propagation is the consideration that a variation
of the potential induces a variation of the flow. Then this variation of the
flow induces a variation of the potential and so on. The power P of the
wave is the product potential by flow, and the impedance Z of the
propagation medium is the ratio potential over flow.
In electric circuits, the potential is the voltage V and the flow is the
intensity of the electric current i, and the power and the impedance are:
P = V ⋅ i
Z = V/i (A.80)
For acoustic waves, the potential is the variation of pressure ∆p, the
flow is the actual matter flow fmatter, and:
 (A.81)
With electromagnetic waves, the dimension of the E field is voltage ×
length–1 and the dimension of the H field is current × length–1. The
impedance Z is defined by:
 (A.82)
and has the same unit as V/i (i.e., the unit is the ohm (Ω)). In particular,
for waves in a vacuum, there is the impedance of a vacuum:
279

 (A.83)
It can be shown that in a medium with an index n, the impedance
becomes:
 (A.84)
and partial reflection on a dielectric interface may be interpreted as an
impedance mismatch. The E field would be the potential and the H field
would be the flow. Furthermore, the product potential by flow does have a
power significance, as it corresponds to the Poynting vector Π, which is
equal to the power flow per unit area. In a vacuum:
Π = μ0–1(E × B) (A.85)
Then
Π = E × H (A.86)
As we can see, this analogy using E as a potential and H as a flow has
some interest, but the general tendency nowadays in physics is to consider
the (E, B) couple as the basic electromagnetic field. The fact that the E/B
ratio of an electromagnetic wave in a vacuum is equal to the velocity of
light is, after all, a more fundamental result than the fact that the E/H ratio
has the same unit as the one of electrical resistance.
Furthermore, note that so far we have used four physical constants of
electromagnetism that are not independent:
∈0 is the dielectric permittivity of a vacuum.
μ0 is the magnetic permeability of a vacuum.
c is the light velocity in a vacuum.
Z0 is the impedance of a vacuum.
If relativistic arguments are predominant, then there are actually only
two basic physical constants:
∈0, because without motion of charges there is only an electric
field;
c, because it is the basic constant of relativity, which explains
280

transformation by motion.
As we have already seen, the magnetic B field is deduced from the
electric E field through the relativistic Lorentz transformation, which is
using c. Then μ0 should not be a basic constant: it should be deduced
from μ0 = 1/∈0c2, even if, for historical and practical reasons, μ0 is a
basic constant in the international unit system equal to 4π × 10-7 because
of the definition of the ampere. Similarly, Z0 is also a secondary physical
constant deduced from Z0 = 1/∈0c. Now, secondary does not mean that
it is not useful: historically, it was fundamental to verify that the measured
value of the light velocity c equals 
 with ∈0 and μ0 being defined
independently in electrostatic and magnetostatic experiments.
As an aside, it is interesting to note that if c is considered a fundamental
constant of physics, using (ct) as a temporal coordinate with the dimension
of a length and (cB) as a magnetic field with the dimension of an electric
field, Maxwell equations in a vacuum, and without charge or current,
appear very symmetric:
(M1) ∇ ⋅ (cB) = div (cB) = 0 (A.87)
 (A.88)
(M3) ∇ × E = div E = 0 (A.89)
 (A.90)
A.6 Dielectric Interface
A.6.1 Refraction, Partial Reflection, and Total Internal Reflection
The basic laws of reflection and refraction at an interface between two
dielectric media can be formulated very simply in geometrical optics
(Figure A.8):
The partially reflected and refracted rays lie in the plane of
incidence (i.e., the plane that is orthogonal to the interface and that
contains the incident ray).
281

The angle of partial reflection θ2′ is equal to the angle of incidence
θ2.
The angle of refraction θ1 is given by the Snell law:
n1 sinθ1 = n2 sinθ2 (A.91)
where n1 and n2 are the respective indexes of the dielectric media. Note
that these indexes are called indexes of refraction, as, historically, it is
refraction that was the first observed phenomenon. It is only later that it
was found out that the index is the ratio between light velocity in a
vacuum and light velocity in the medium.
These laws give the angular deviation of the rays, but the calculation of
the power splitting ratio at the interface, called Fresnel coefficients, require
a more complicated analysis that uses the boundary conditions of the
electromagnetic field at the interface.
Figure A.8 Reflected and refracted rays on a dielectric interface: (a) from low index
n2 to high index n1 and (b) from high index n1 to low index n2.
For normal incidence (i.e., θ1 = θ1′ = θ2 = 0), the power (or optical
intensity) ratio between the incident beam and the reflected beam, called
Fresnel reflectivity RF is:
 (A.92)
The power ratio between the refracted beam and the incident beam,
called transmissivity TF, is:
282

 (A.93)
It can be seen that:
In particular, at the interface between silica fiber (n1 = 1.45) and air (n2
= 1), RF = 0.04, and TF = 0.96.
Between silica and lithium niobate, as the relative index ratio 2.15/1.45
= 1.48 is similar to the one between air and silica, there are the same 4%
reflection at normal incidence.
Note that the transmissivity and the reflectivity have the same values in
both directions (i.e., when the incident beam is coming from the low index
medium or from the high index medium). This is a first case of the very
basic principle of reciprocity of light propagation.
Also note that, at this normal incidence, the phase of the wave is
unchanged by partial reflection on the low-index medium, but it
experiences a π phase shift in the partial reflection on the high-index
medium.
For other incidences, the result is more complicated and depends on the
state of polarization, which may be parallel to the plane of incidence, and
then denoted by the subscript // or p, or which may be perpendicular to
the plane of incidence, and then denoted by a subscript ⊥ or s (from the
German “senkrecht”). Several important results can be pointed out (Figure
A.9):
Figure A.9 Fresnel reflection coefficients for an index ratio of 1.45 for the s-
polarization and the p-polarization, in the low-index medium.
283

The reflectivity and the transmissivity remain about constant in a
cone of about 10° to 20° around normal incidence.
The reflectivity for an s-polarized wave increases monotonically
up to unity for a 90° incidence in the low index medium.
The reflectivity for a p-polarized wave decreases to zero for an
incidence angle called the Brewster angle, and then increases with
a π phase change up to unity.
At Brewster incidence, the reflected beam is perpendicular to the
refracted beam (Figure A.10):
n1 sinθ1B = n2 sinθ2B
θ1B =θ1B′ = 90° − θ2B (A.94)
and since sin(90° − θ) = cosθ
 (A.95)
Figure A.10 Brewster incidence.
Between silica (n1 = 1.45) and air (n2 ≈ 1), there are: θ1B = 34.6° and
θ2B = 55.4°.
There is also a critical refraction angle θc in the high n1 index medium,
for a 90° refraction angle in the low n2 index medium, for which the
reflectivity is 1 (Figure A.11):
284

Figure A.11 Total internal reflection on a dielectric interface with critical angle θc in
the high-index medium.
n2 sin90° = n1 sinθc (A.96)
and
 (A.97)
Between silica and air there is: θc = 43.6°.
If a beam coming from the high index medium has an incidence angle
larger than the critical angle θc, the light cannot be refracted anymore in
the low index medium and it is entirely reflected. This phenomenon is
known as total internal reflection (TIR), and it is the basis of dielectric
waveguidance.
By reciprocity of transmission, and conservation energy (RF + TF = 1)
seen from the high index medium, Fresnel reflection coefficients have the
same value as the ones for the corresponding refraction angle in the low-
index medium. Above the critical angle θc, the TIR domain, it becomes 1
(Figure A.12).
Figure A.12 Fresnel reflection coefficients for an index ratio of 1.45 for the s-
285

polarization and the p-polarization in the high-index medium.
In this TIR domain, the phase of the fully reflected wave follows a
complex variation from 0 phase shift at θc to a π phase shift for grazing
incidence (θ1 = 90°).
Note the difference of value between p and s polarizations in the
intermediate domain (Figure A.13).
Figure A.13 p and s phase shifts induced by total internal reflection (index of 1.45)
A.6.2 Dielectric Waveguidance
A light beam being coupled through the edge of a dielectric plate, it will
propagate inside the plate because its incidence on the interfaces yields
multiple total internal reflections (Figure A.14).
Figure A.14 Dielectric waveguide with its numerical aperture 
.
The sine of the maximum input angle θmax in a vacuum yielding total
internal reflection is called the numerical aperture (NA), defined by:
286

 (A.98)
This numerical aperture NA is the most important characteristic of a
waveguide.
The s (or ⊥) polarization, that is perpendicular to the plane of incidence,
is parallel to the interface between n1 and n2. The electrical E field
remains always orthogonal to the incidence plane and to the axis of the
waveguide. This s (or ⊥) polarization is often called TE for transverse
electric (Figure A.15):
Figure A.15 s or ⊥ or TE polarization, orthogonal to the waveguide axis.
However, the p or // polarization yields an additional longitudinal
component of the E field with respect to the waveguide axis. This
polarization is not perfectly transverse anymore, it is hybrid, and it could
have been called HE for hybrid electric. However, it is usually called TM
for transverse magnetic, since the magnetic B(or H) field is perpendicular
to the E field, and remains orthogonal to the axis of the waveguide (Figure
A.16).
Figure A.16 p or // or TM polarization: the E field has a longitudinal component but
the B field remains transverse.
A.7 Geometrical Optics
A.7.1 Rays and Phase Wavefronts
A lot of optical problems, particularly optical imaging, can be treated
without considering the wavelength that is very small macroscopically.
They use the laws of geometrical optics, which consider that the optical
energy propagates along light rays. In a plane wave, these rays are parallel
to the direction of propagation and perpendicular to the planar wavefronts
287

(also called phase fronts) [Figure A.17(a)]:
Another important solution of the propagation equation is the spherical
wave:
 (A.99)
where r is the radial coordinate and r0 is a normalization radius. The
wavefronts are concentric spheres. In geometrical optics, such a wave is
described with rays that are radii of the spherical wavefronts [Figure
A.17(b)].
Figure A.17 (a) Plane wave and (b) spherical wave.
Note that the amplitude of the wave has to decrease in 1/r, since the
conservation of energy requires that the optical intensity (the power
density equal to the square of the amplitude) decreases in 1/r2 as the
wavefront area increases in r2.
A.7.2 Plane Mirror and Beam Splitter
The plane mirror is the simplest and most commonly used optical imaging
component everybody is familiar with, but it is the opportunity to define
some vocabulary.
When a spherical diverging beam, coming from a real source object, is
reflected on a plane mirror, the analysis of the reflected wave is simply
done with a virtual image, that is symmetrical with respect to the
geometrical plane defined by the mirror [Figure A.18(a)]. Conversely an
inverse converging wave yields a virtual object, and a real symmetrical
reflected image.
288

Figure A.18 (a) Real object and virtual reflected image. (b) Virtual object and real
reflected image.
In an imaging instrument, the object is what there is without the
instrument, and the image is the transformation of the object by the
instrument. They are said to be real if light actually exists, and said to be
virtual if light does not really exist at this geometrical position.
The most common mirrors are metallic mirrors. A metal being
conductive, the incident E field generates electrical current that reemits the
reflected wave. An ideal metal with infinite conductivity would reflect
100% of the incoming power, but, in practice, the reflection is at best
99%.
With a very thin layer of metal, one gets a beam splitter with partial
reflection and partial transmission, which is called a half-silvered mirror.
Note that, contrary to metallic reflection, total internal reflection at a
dielectric interface is lossless; therefore, making low-loss dielectric
waveguides is possible.
A.7.3 Lenses
The divergence of spherical waves may be modified with lenses,
particularly convergent lenses. Rays are deviated by refraction on the
spherical faces of the lens. Lenses are defined by their focal length f and
when the distance d between the source point and the lens is equal to this
focal length f, the divergent spherical wave is transformed into a plane
wave (Figure A.19).
289

Figure A.19 Transformation of a divergent spherical wave into a plane wave by a
convergent lens of focal length f.
When the distance d is larger than f, the wave becomes convergent and
a real image of the source is refocused at a distance d′ (Figure A.20), with:
 (A.100)
Note this equation yields d = d′ when d = 2f. This is the 2f − 2f
configuration. Because of reciprocity, in the reverse operation the light
rays follow the same path in opposite direction.
Figure A.20 Transformation of a divergent spherical wave by a convergent lens into
a converging wave. Note the case in which d = d′ = 2f.
These convergent lenses have convex faces, and conversely it is
possible to make divergent lenses with concave faces.
Spherical mirrors behave like lenses with an index of −1. This minus
sign implies that concave mirrors are convergent, and convex mirrors are
divergent.
Simple lenses have spherical surfaces, which created aberrations. In
fiber optics, such lenses are used to collimate or focus divergent beams
getting out of fibers or waveguides, so coming from a single-point source.
Therefore, they do not face off-axis field aberration like microscope
objectives or camera lenses, which image extended objects.
One faces only spherical aberration and it is solved today very simply
with aspherical lenses. In addition, with simple geometrical considerations
290

of homothety, aberrations that are defined as wavefront defects with
respect to wavelength are reduced linearly when the focal length is
shortened.
Numerous fiber-optic components are actually millimeter-scale bulk-
optic benches, using such low-aberration, short-focal-length lenses to
collimate or focus beam exiting pigtail fibers (Figure A.21).
Figure A.21 Compact fiber-optic component using millimeter-scale optical bench and
short focal length lenses.
A.8 Interferences
A.8.1 Principle of Two-Wave Interferometry
As we have already seen, the frequency of optical waves is so high that it
is not possible to measure directly the modulated electromagnetic field,
particularly its phase. However, an indirect power or optical intensity
measurement is possible through the phenomenon of interferences. In an
interferometer, the input light wave is split, then propagates along two
different paths, and is recombined at the output. The total field of the
interference wave is the vectorial sum of the two fields that have
propagated along both paths:
E = E1 + E2
E1 = E10ei(ωt+ϕ1) (A.101)
E2 = E20ei(ωt+ϕ2)
where ϕ1 and ϕ2 are the respective phases of the fields E1 and E2.
These phases come from the delay accumulated in the propagation
along both geometrical paths L1 and L2 with:
 (A.102)
291

where λm1 and λm2 are the actual wavelengths in the media:
 (A.103)
where λ is the wavelength in a vacuum and n1 and n2 are the respective
indexes of refraction of the media.
It is often expressed as:
 (A.104)
where Lop1 = n1 ⋅ L1 and Lop2 = n2 ⋅ L2 are called the optical paths.
The accumulated phase is proportional to the number of wavelengths
along the path. One may use the actual wavelength in the medium and the
actual geometrical path, or alternatively the wavelength in a vacuum and
the optical path.
The optical intensity of the interference wave is proportional to the
temporal averaging of the scalar square of the field:
Iopt = c ⋅ ∈0 < E ⋅ E* > (A.105)
and since:
 (A.106)
The general formula of interferences is then:
 (A.107)
where I1 and I2 are the optical intensities (i.e., the power density) of the
interfering waves, and where ∆ϕ = ϕ1 − ϕ2 is their phase difference
induced by the difference ∆Lop between both optical paths n1L1 and
n2L2:
 (A.108)
In interferometers using single-mode fibers, the two waves having the
same power density distributions, one can use the total powers, with:
292

 (A.109)
There is a maximum power Pmax when both waves are in phase (∆ϕ =
2mπ, m being an integer); that is, the two field magnitudes are added:
 (A.110)
and
that is,
 (A.111)
and there is a minimum power Pmin when both waves are in phase
opposition (∆ϕ = (2m + 1)π); that is, the two field magnitudes are
subtracted:
 (A.112)
and
that is,
 (A.113)
Note that these results assume that both fields have the same state of
polarization. If they have orthogonal states of polarization, the
interferences are suppressed, as the scalar product E1 ⋅ E2* = E1* ⋅ E2 =
0.
Interferometry is a very sensitive method for measuring various
parameters, because the whole dynamic range of measurement between
Pmax and Pmin is scanned for a change of π in the phase difference,
which is induced by a change of λ/2 of the optical path difference (i.e., a
change of less than a micrometer).
Two cases are of particular interest:
1. P1 = P2; then [Figure A.22(a)]:
P(∆ϕ) = 2P1 (1 + cos∆ϕ) (A.114)
293

Figure A.22 Response of an interferometer: (a) perfect contrast; (b) low contrast with
a fringe visibility of 
.
The interference is said to be perfectly contrasted, as Pmin = 0 and the
contrast C or fringe visibility V is defined by:
 (A.115)
1. P1 >> P2; then [Figure A.22(b)]
 (A.116)
The contrast C or fringe visibility V is:
 (A.117)
with P(∆ϕ) = P1(1 + Vcos∆ϕ).
That is, the relative peak-to-peak relative variation of the interference
signal is:
It is proportional to the square root of the power ratio (i.e., the field or
amplitude ratio) and not the power or intensity ratio. For example, a power
ratio of 10–4 still yields a fringe visibility of 2 × 10–2.
It can be summarized by considering a high-power wave with a
294

normalized power and normalized amplitude of 1, interfering with a low-
power wave with a power ε2 and an amplitude ε. Their interference
yields:
(1 ± ε)2 ≈ 1 ± 2ε (A.118)
This effect is used in the coherent detection scheme, where a high-
power local oscillator of power PL interferes with a low-power signal PS.
Instead of measuring the low-power PS directly, one measures the
interference signal:
 (A.119)
The low-power signal PS is amplified by a coefficient 
 through
its interference with the high-power PL of the local oscillator.
A.8.2 Most Common Two-Wave Interferometers: Michelson and
Mach-Zehnder Interferometers, Young Double-Slit
Among the most well-known interferometers is the Michelson
interferometer (Figure A.23), in which the light is separated by a beam-
splitting plate, back-reflected on two mirrors, and recombined on the
beam-splitting plate. The scanning of one mirror along a distance d allows
the optical path difference ∆Lop to be changed.
When light propagates in a vacuum:
∆Lop = ∆L = 2d
Note that the general formula for interference, in which the power P
may be larger than the sum P1 + P2, does not violate the principle of
conservation of energy. The input power Pin is split in two waves of
respective intensities:
R Pin and T ⋅ Pin
where R is the splitter reflectivity and T is the splitter transmissivity, with R
+ T = 1. These two waves are split again when they come back on the
beam-splitter. At the free output port, there is interference between:
295

Figure A.23 Michelson interferometer with a scanning mirror.
R ⋅ T ⋅ Pin and R ⋅ T ⋅ Pin
and
Pfree = 2R ⋅ T ⋅ Pin + 2R ⋅ T ⋅ Pin cos∆ϕ (A.120)
At the common input-output port there is interference between:
R2Iin and T2Iin
and
Pcommon = R2Pin + T2Pin + 2R ⋅ T ⋅ Pin cos∆ϕ′ (A.121)
Because of conservation of energy, the two output ports must be
complementary:
Pfree + Pcommon = Pin (A.122)
with
Pfree = 2R ⋅ T ⋅ Iin + 2R ⋅ T ⋅ Iin cos∆ϕ
Pcommon = R2Pin + T2Pin + 2R ⋅ T ⋅ Iin cos∆ϕ′ (A.123)
Since
R2 + T2 + 2R ⋅ T = (R + T)2 = 1 (A.124)
this implies that ∆ϕ = ∆ϕ′ = π. This π difference is due to the intrinsic
π/2 phase shift induced by reflection. At the common input-output port,
both waves have experienced a transmission and a reflection and they both
carry this π/2 reflection phase shift, while at the free port one wave
experienced two reflections and carries a double π/2 phase shift and the
other one experienced two transmissions, without π/2 phase shift.
296

Note that the fringe visibility is always unity at the free port of a
Michelson interferometer where both interfering waves have the same
power, but that it depends on the balance of the splitter at the common
port.
This result of complementary outputs respecting the principle of
conservation of energy can be generalized to any lossless interferometer.
Another well-known interferometer is the Mach-Zehnder interferometer
(Figure A.24). Light is separated by a first beam-splitter, propagates along
two different paths, and is recombined on a second beam-splitter.
Figure A.24 Mach-Zehnder interferometer.
The above results for the Michelson and Mach-Zehnder interferometers
implies the ideal case where the various splitters and mirrors are perfectly
at 45° or 90° of the input waves. In practice, a slight angular misalignment
yields a spatial display of fringes (Figure A.25).
Figure A.25 Mach-Zender interferometer with angular misalignment of the output
splitter yielding fringes.
One can consider the planar wavefronts orthogonal to the rays (see
Figure A.26).
If there is an angle θ between the two wavefronts exiting the
interferometer output port, the phase difference varies spatially. The
periodicity i of the spatial fringes is λ/θ (Figure A.27).
297

Such a spatial display of interference fringes is also observed with
Young’s double-slit interferometer, which was actually, in 1803, the first
demonstration of the wave nature of light when, at that time, the
corpuscular theory of light was predominant in the physicist community.
Figure A.26 Interference fringes between tilted wavefronts.
Figure A.27 Young double-slit interferometer (distances and angle are magnified in
the circles).
Assuming a distance a between the two slits, waves coming from these
two slits are in phase in the direction perpendicular to the slit plane as well
as in any direction such that the angle θ is (Figure A.27) an integer
multiple of λ/a.
It yields a sinusoidal interference fringe pattern with a periodic fringe
spacing:
298

A.8.3 Channeled Spectral Response of a Two-Wave Interferometer
So far, we have considered an interferometer as a system that uses a
monochromatic source with a given wavelength λ0 (and a given spatial
frequency σ0 = 1/λ0) and that has a periodic response as a function of the
optical path length difference ∆Lop:
 (A.125)
It is very important to understand that an interferometer can be
alternatively considered as a wavelength (or frequency) filter. For a given
path difference ∆Lop0, the response as a function of the wavelength λ (or
the spatial frequency σ) is:
 (A.126)
Instead of spatial frequency σ and path difference ∆Lop, one can use
the temporal frequency f and the transit time difference ∆τ between both
arms of an unbalanced interferometer, and (A.126) becomes:
 (A.127)
The interference fringes appear like channels in the spectral response of
the interferometer (Figure A.28).
299

Figure A.28 Channeled spectral response of an unbalanced interferometer.
These channels have a period of ∆σFSR = 1/∆Lop0 in the spatial
frequency domain and a period of ∆fFSR = 1/∆τ in the temporal
frequency domain. These periods ∆σFSR or ∆fFSR are called the free
spectral range (FSR). For example, a path unbalance of 3 mm yields a
spatial FSR ∆σFSR = 0.3 mm−1. The transit time difference ∆τ being
0.01 ns, it yields a temporal FSR ∆fFSR = 100 GHz.
The ratio between the free spectral range and the optical frequency is
the inverse of the number of wavelengths in the path difference.
 (A.128)
For example, a path difference of ∆Lop = 3 mm is 2,000 wavelengths
of 1.5 μm, therefore the free spectral range is 1/2,000 of the
corresponding optical frequency of 200,000 GHz. The product ∆fFSR ⋅
∆Lop is equal to about 300 GHz.mm in a vacuum. In an interferometer
using silica fiber with an index of 1.45, it is about 200 GHz⋅mm (i.e., 200
kHz⋅km). Note this is the double of the relationship between the proper
frequency and the coil length of a fiber gyro.
Now, when there is a slight change of the interferometer unbalance, this
yields an inverse slight change of the free spectral range:
 (A.129)
Observed about the very high frequency of the optical wave, it is seen
300

mainly as a shift of the channeled response, like when one compresses an
accordion. Going back to the numerical example above, an increase of a
half wavelength (i.e., 0.75 μm) of the 3-mm path difference yields a
downshift of a half FSR (i.e., 0.167 mm−1 or 50 GHz) of the periodic
channeled spectral response.
Note that the free spectral range (FSR) may be expressed in terms of
wavelength with:
 (A.130)
However, in this wavelength domain, the FSR is not constant anymore
and it depends on λ.
As already seen, one has to remember that the contrast or fringe
visibility, is the amplitude ratio between the interfering waves and not their
intensity (power) ratio.
This problem of channeled spectral response of a low-visibility
unbalanced interferometer is key to understand the question of mean-
wavelength instability of a fiber gyro.
A.9 Multiple-Wave Interferences
A.9.1 Fabry-Perot Interferometer
The Michelson and Mach-Zehnder interferometers are, as well as Young
slits, two-wave interferometers with a raised cosine response. Some other
interferometers are multiple-wave interferometers, and their response is
also periodic, but not (co)sinusoidal anymore. They behave like resonators
with narrow response peaks. Such interferometric resonators are often
called optical cavities. Their behavior is not straightforward, and it is an
opportunity to detail the fundamental phenomenon of resonance, which
has numerous applications in optics.
A good example of such a multiple-wave interferometer is the Fabry-
Perot interferometer, which is composed of two parallel high-reflectivity
mirrors (Figure A.29). At first, it seems that the added reflectivities of both
mirrors should completely reflect the incident light, but there is a
resonance effect when the thickness d of the interferometer is equal to a
multiple number of half-wavelengths, and for specific resonance
wavelengths λr the light is fully transmitted.
301

This can be explained with the following arguments. Let us assume that
the reflectivity R of each mirror is 99%. When an input power Pin is sent
into the Fabry-Perot interferometer, 1% of Pin is transmitted inside the
cavity. On the second mirror, 0.01% of Pin is transmitted and 0.99%
remains trapped inside the cavity. This trapped light oscillates back and
forth, losing 1% of its own power at each reflection. At the output, there is
a series of transmitted waves with a respective intensity iti, which
exponentially decays from 0.01%, the value of the first transmitted wave.
These multiple waves interfere together, and for a resonance wavelength
λr they are all in phase. Thus, the amplitude At of the transmitted wave is
the sum of the interfering amplitude ati of all the transmitted waves and,
therefore, this is not the power that is the sum of the interfering powers.
Figure A.29 Fabry-Perot interferometer.
With mirrors with 1% of transmissivity, we can consider that at the
output there are 100 waves of power pt = 10–4 Pin, but of amplitude at =
10–2 Ain, since the amplitude is the square root of the power. The
constructive interferences of 100 waves having an amplitude equal to 10–2
Ain give a total transmitted amplitude At equal to the input amplitude Ain:
the specific resonance wavelengths are fully transmitted despite the two
high-reflectivity mirrors, since on resonance the amplitudes and not the
intensities of the interfering waves are added.
It is interesting to notice that, when the light is fully transmitted at
resonance, the power stored inside the cavity is 1/(1 − R) times higher
than the input/output power (Figure A.30). In a laser gyro where R =
302

0.9999, it yields a 104-fold in the cavity.
Figure A.30 Power Pout/(1 − R) stored in a Fabry-Perot interferometer at resonance.
Calculations show precisely that the transmitted power of a Fabry-Perot
interferometer is (Figure A.31):
Figure A.31 Transmission and reflection responses of a Fabry-Perot interferometer
as a function of the phase difference where R is the reflectivity of the mirrors (the
transmissivity T = 1 – R).
 (A.131)
where ∆ϕ = 2π∆Lop/λ is the phase shift induced by a complete path
∆Lop = 2d inside the cavity. The parameter m, called the Airy coefficient,
is defined by:
 (A.132)
Because of conservation of energy, the reflected power Pr and the
transmitted 
power 
Pt 
are 
complementary, 
as 
with 
two-wave
interferometers:
 (A.133)
303

As we have already seen, a two-wave interferometer may be considered
as a wavelength filter. For a multiple-wave Fabry-Perot interferometer, this
filtering property also exists and is, in fact, one of its main applications.
With a vacuum cavity and for a given thickness d0, the transmission
wavelength response is
 (A.134)
or, with respect to the spatial frequency σ = 1/λ,
 (A.135)
or, with respect to the temporal frequency f:
 (A.136)
where ∆τ is the transit time of a single pass.
A Fabry-Perot interferometer has a periodic frequency response like a
two-wave interferometer. The period is also called the free spectral range
(FSR). Note that this FSR of a cavity is equal to the FSR of a two-wave
interferometer which has a path unbalance equal to the path length of a
single pass in the cavity.
Figure A.32 Filtering transmission of a Fabry-Perot interferometer as a function of
spatial frequency σ (inverse of wavelength λ) and temporal frequency, f.
The filtering characteristic of a Fabry-Perot interferometer is given by
the full width at half maximum (FWHM) ∆σFWHM (or ∆fFWHM) of the
304

filtering transmitted peaks, and by the free spectral range (FSR) ∆σFSR =
1/(2d0) (or ∆fFSR = 1/∆τ) between two response peaks (Figure A.32).
The ratio ∆σFSR/∆σFWHM in spatial frequencies, or ∆fFSR/∆fFWHM in
temporal frequencies, depends only on the reflectivity of the mirror. It is
called the finesse F (finesse means “sharpness” in French) of the Fabry-
Perot cavity, and:
 (A.137)
For example, with R = 0.99 and T = 0.01, the finesse F is 300.
Filtering width and free spectral range may alternatively be given in
terms of wavelength, with:
 (A.138)
 (A.139)
but, as with two-wave interferometers, the wavelength response obtained
by inversing the frequency is not perfectly periodic anymore.
Note that a very important application of the Fabry-Perot interferometer
is its use as a resonant cavity to make a laser source with an amplifying
medium. In this particular case, it is called an active resonator instead of a
passive resonator for the basic device. The emission wavelengths λe of a
laser correspond to the transmission peaks of the passive cavity and then
are submultiples of the optical length ∆Lop = 2nd of the cavity (where n is
the index):
∆Lop = m ⋅ λe (m is an integer) (A.140)
If the gain curve is wide, the laser will have multiple longitudinal modes
since several wavelengths λe are emitted simultaneously with a spectral
difference equal to the FSR. If the gain curve is narrow and gets to the
free spectral range of the cavity, only one single frequency/wavelength is
emitted, and the laser is called a single-longitudinal mode. This is the case
of a laser gyro with a cavity length of 20 cm yielding ∆fFSR = 1.5 GHz
while the He-Ne gain curve has a width of 1 GHz.
305

A.9.2 Ring Resonant Cavity
A ring resonant cavity, active as it is the case with a ring-laser gyroscope,
or passive as it is the case with a resonant fiber-optic gyroscope (R-FOG),
is very similar to a Fabry-Perot interferometer.
Instead of oscillating back and forth between both Fabry-Perot mirrors,
light recirculates many times around the ring cavity.
As a Fabry-Perot interferometer, a ring resonant cavity has a finesse
and a free spectral range and the power stored in the cavity at resonance is
1 (1 − R) times the input-output power. In the case of laser gyro where R
can be as high as 99.99%, the power stored in the cavity is 104-fold the
output power.
A.9.3 Multilayer Dielectric Mirror and Bragg Reflector
It is well known that metals reflect light but with, at best, a loss of few
tenths of percent. To get ultra-high reflectivity, multilayer dielectric
coatings are used.
Like a Fabry-Perot interferometer, a multilayer dielectric mirror (Figure
A.33) is a resonant multiple-wave interferometer. Such a mirror is a stack
of alternate transparent glass layers of high index nh and low index nl with
the same optical thickness:
nhdh = nldl (A.141)
At each interface there is a low Fresnel power reflection RF = (nh −
nl)2/(nh + nl)2, but as with a Fabry-Perot, it is the various reflected
amplitudes that are summed and not the reflected powers (or optical
intensities).
Assuming, for example, nh = 1.6 and nl = 1.5, RF is only 0.1% in
power but 3% in amplitude. With about 30 alternate layers, these 3%
amplitude reflections sum up at resonance to 100%.
The reflected resonant wavelength λR is equal to the optical path back
and forth through a pair of alternate layers.
λR = ∆Lop = 2[nhdh + nldl] (A.142)
At first, one could think that resonance could also be obtained for the
path through a single layer:
306

λR = 2nhdh = 2nldl (A.143)
but Fresnel reflection coefficients show that there is a π phase shift in the
reflection at the interfaces between low index medium and high index
medium, which creates destructive interference with the reflections at the
high-low interfaces that do not experience this π phase shift.
Figure A.33 Multilayer dielectric mirror (k is an integer).
These resonant multilayer dielectric mirrors are often called Bragg
reflectors, because they work on the same principle as X-ray Bragg
reflections on a crystal lattice. Laser-gyro mirrors are made with this
technique. They reach a reflectivity as high as 99.99% with very low loss
(less than few 10–5).
A very similar principle is used in fiber Bragg gratings (FBG) (Figure
A.34). An ultraviolet lateral grid illumination of the core of the fiber
induces a permanent periodic index increase. It yields a sinusoidal variation
of the index, similar to the square-wave variation of the index of a
multilayer dielectric mirror. The reflected wavelength is then:
λR = 2 ⋅ nSiO2 ⋅ ΛBragg (A.144)
where nSiO2 is the index of silica (1.45) and ΛBragg is the period of the
grid illumination. For a reflected wavelength of 1,550 nm, the period Λ is
535 nm which is easy to obtain with UV illumination around 250 nm.
307

Figure A.34 Fiber Bragg grating (FBG): λR = 2 nSiO2 ΛBragg.
A mathematical analysis shows that the reflected spectrum is the Fourier
transform of the index modulation. This offers the flexibility to achieve
various spectral characteristics, with apodized and chirped gratings. Fiber
Bragg gratings are also used as reflectors for fiber lasers.
A.9.4 Bulk-Optic Diffraction Grating
A last case of multiple-wave interference is the bulk-optic diffraction
grating. First gratings were made with a transmissive grid. They can be
considered as multiple-slit interference. Instead of the sinusoidal
interference fringes of the Young double-slit interferometer, one gets
narrow interference fringes (Figure A.35), but the period i of these fringes
follows the same law as the one of Young double-slit interferometer:
 (A.145)
It is very similar to the case of a two-wave Michelson interferometer
and a multiwave Fabry-Perot interferometer, which have the same law for
free spectral range, but a sinusoidal interferometer response in the two-
wave case and periodic interference peaks in the multiple-wave case.
Now, since the fringe period is proportional to the wavelength λ, a
grating spreads a broad spectrum (see Figure A.36). There is a central
interference peak, called the zero-order of the grating, where all
wavelengths interfere in phase, but on other fringes in the higher grating
orders, wavelengths are spread.
308

Figure A.35 Transmissive diffraction grating with a peak response instead of a
sinusoidal response.
To increase the wavelength selectivity, one has to reduce the slit period
a and to increase the number of slits. It has actually a resonance effect as
in a Fabry-Perot interferometer.
Figure A.36 Spectrum spreading in a transmissive grating.
Gratings work also in the reflective mode, with very narrow grooves
and a metallic overlay. The zero-order corresponds to the residual specular
reflection and has to be made as small as possible. In addition, if the
groove period is small enough, there is only a first-order mode that avoids
losing power in the higher-order modes. The grating equation is derived
with simple geometry (Figure A.37) where θin is the input incidence angle
and θout(λ) is the output angle that depends on wavelength λ:
a[sin[θout(λ)] + sinθin] = λ (A.146)
The path difference between the reflections on two adjacent grooves
309

has to be equal to λ to get constructive interference.
Figure A.37 Reflective grating.
By differentiation of this equation, one gets:
 (A.147)
yielding:
 (A.148)
Note finally that the rainbow color spreading of white light with a
reflective grating is commonly observed with CDs and DVDs since the
recording is done with a spiral of small pits with a micrometer width that
acts as the grooves of a grating. However, it is not observed on a Blu-ray
disk because the pits are smaller than visible wavelengths.
A.10 Diffraction
A.10.1 Fresnel Diffraction and Fraunhofer Diffraction
Diffraction is a fundamental phenomenon related to the wave nature of
light propagation and showing the limit of geometrical ray optics. It is not
possible to isolate one ray in an optical wave. When light is selected by a
small filtering hole, it can be observed that it is diverging with a mean
angle θD, which increases as the hole size ah decreases (Figure A.38):
310

Figure A.38 Diffraction of a wave by a filtering hole.
 (A.149)
Diffraction has to be viewed as multiple interference between a
continuum of an infinite number of waves. It is explained by considering
that, according to Huygens’ principle, each point of the hole reemits a
spherical wave and that all these spherical waves interfere together. The
amplitude of the diffracted wave at a given point is the integral summation
of all the amplitudes of these waves that interfere.
Diffraction at a finite distance, known as Fresnel or near-field
diffraction, is very complicated mathematically, but diffraction at an
infinite distance (or in the focal plane of a lens that is making an image of
infinity), known as Fraunhofer or far-field diffraction, is much simpler to
solve. In a given direction θ, the waves interfere with a respective path
length difference (Figure A.39):
Figure A.39 Calculation of the Fraunhofer diffraction.
∆Lop = x ⋅ sinθ (A.150)
311

The total diffracted amplitude Ad in a direction θ is then:
 (A.151)
where Af is the amplitude of the spatially filtered wave.
Hence, the diffracted amplitude Ad(sinθ) is the Fourier transform of the
spatially filtered amplitude Af(x/λ). The relation θD = λ/ah corresponds to
the fact that the product of the widths of a pair of Fourier transforms is
constant.
This interferometric analysis of diffraction can be explained with the
following arguments: in a direction angle such as θ > θD = λ/ah, each
spherical wave emitted in the filtering hole has a corresponding wave with
a path difference of λ/2, and then both waves interfere destructively. Note
that diffraction is a phenomenon intrinsically related to the wavelength;
therefore, in a medium, the same effect occurs, but as a function of the
actual wavelength λm = λ/n in the medium.
In the case of a slit (i.e., a gate function), the amplitude diffraction
pattern is a sinc function (sin x/x) because of Fourier transform, and the
optical intensity pattern is a sinc squared function (Figure A.40) with
periodic zero values at angles equal to λ/ah and a width at half maximum
θFWHM ≃ λ/ah. A square hole has the same behavior but in two
dimensions.
Figure A.40 Fraunhofer diffraction by a slit: amplitude (dashed curve) and intensity
(solid curve).
For a circular hole of diameter d, the calculation involves Bessel
function instead of a sinc and yields an Airy pattern, with the first zero
being at 1.22 λ/d, that is, slightly larger than the corresponding λ/ah of slit
312

or square hole.
If strictly speaking, Fraunhofer diffraction takes place at an infinite
distance, it remains a good approximation above a distance of ah2/λ.
Below this value, one is in the Fresnel region (Figure A.41).
Figure A.41 Fresnel and Fraunhofer regions for diffraction, assuming a slit width
(ah) equal to N wavelengths (λ).
This can be summarized as a diffracting aperture with a size ah of N ⋅
λ, which yields a diverging Fraunhofer diffraction angle 1/N, and the limit
between the near-field Fresnel region and the far-field Fraunhofer region is
N2 ⋅ λ.
A.10.2 Knife-Edge Fresnel Diffraction
Because of the very small size of optical wavelengths, Fresnel diffraction
is rarely encountered in practice, besides diffraction by a knife edge. The
mathematics remain tedious, but the result can be shown graphically.
Instead of a clear-cut shadow that one might expect with ray propagation,
there are fringes in the geometric line-of-sight region and a semi-darkness
decay in the geometric shadow region (Figure A.42).
313

Figure A.42 Fresnel diffraction by a “knife” edge as a function of a normalized
abscissa 
X (X = 
.
At the theoretical limit between the two regions, the optical intensity is
reduced to 25%. The abscissa X is normalized by 
 where D is
the distance and λ is the wavelength, with 
These 25% can be understood simply: without the knife-edge, the
amplitude is the sum of two equal amplitudes coming from two
symmetrical half-spaces; with the knife-edge, there is only one, and the
amplitude is reduced to 1/2, yielding 25% for its square, the optical
intensity.
Note an unattended result: if far-field Fraunhofer diffraction follows a
linear dependence as a function of distance since it is related to an angle,
knife-edge Fresnel diffraction follows a square-root dependence. With λ =
1 μm and D = 2m, the normalized abscissa X is 1 for 1 mm, but it is a
square-root law dependence, and at a distance 100 times shorter (i.e., D =
20 mm), the normalized abscissa is 1 for 0.1 mm (i.e., only 10 times
smaller). We shall see that Fresnel diffraction by a knife edge has to be
taken into account with stray light in an integrated-optic circuit.
Note also that the decay is not very fast as can be seen on Figure A.43
with a logarithmic scale for transmission. For a normalized abscissa X =
−5, the transmission is still 2 × 10–3 (i.e., only −27 dB).
314

Figure A.43 Logarithmic scale of knife-edge diffraction with a normalized abscissa 
. Attenuation is –6 dB (0.25) on the geometric shadow, -20 dB (0.01) for –
2X, –2, and –27 dB (0.002) for –5X.
A.11 Gaussian Beam
The far-field Fraunhofer diffraction pattern is the Fourier transform of the
spatially filtered amplitude distribution; a Gaussian distribution is of
particular interest because the Gaussian function is invariant under Fourier
transform. Such Gaussian beams are generated in particularly in gas lasers
and, as will be seen, the mode of a single-mode fiber is quasi-Gaussian.
A Gaussian beam that propagates along the Oz axis has a Gaussian
radial amplitude distribution A(r) at z = 0 (Figure A.44):
 (A.152)
and an optical intensity distribution that is the square of the amplitude
distribution:
 (A.153)
The term w0, called the waist, is the radius at 1/e in amplitude and at
1/e2 in intensity since:
A(w0)/A0 = 1/e (A.154)
I(w0)/I0 = 1/e2
From the beam waist at z = 0, light is diffracted but keeps a Gaussian
amplitude distribution:
315

Figure A.44 Gaussian beam.
 (A.155)
with
 (A.156)
This formula may be simplified in two cases:
1. λz/πw02 << 1 (or z << πw02/λ), which is the domain of near-
field Fresnel diffraction, and w(z) is about constant w(z) ≈ w0,
and the phase front remains planar. This is the only case where
near-field Fresnel diffraction is simple.
2. λz/πw02 >> 1 (or z >> πw02/λ), which is the domain of
Fraunhofer far-field diffraction, and w(z) is proportional to z:
 (A.157)
The Gaussian beam diverges with a full angle θD at 1/e2 in intensity:
 (A.158)
 (A.159)
and it is found that:
316

 (A.160)
as stated before, if we consider that ah = 2w0 is about the width of the
aperture. The phase front becomes spherical and centered on the original
waist at z = 0.
To summarize a Gaussian beam with a full width 2w0 equal to N
wavelengths λ (Figure A.45):
Figure A.45 Approximate near-field parallelism and far-field divergence of a
Gaussian beam.
Below a distance of about N2λ, it keeps the same width Nλ and a
plane phase front.
Above this distance of about N2λ, it diverges with a full angle of
about 1/N, and a spherical phase front centered on the original
waist.
Gaussian beams are important in a single-mode optical fiber because the
fundamental mode can be approximated by a Gaussian profile, as will be
seen in Appendix B.
A.12 Coherence
A.12.1 Basics of Coherence
In the case of the ideal monochromatic plane wave, the phase of the wave
at a given point can be deduced from the phase at any other point:
The phase is the same at any point on the same phase front,
317

transverse to the direction of propagation. This perfect transverse
correlation is called spatial coherence.
The phase difference ∆ϕ between two different phase fronts can
be deduced from the distance d between both phase fronts, with
∆ϕ = 2πnd/λ. This perfect longitudinal correlation is called
temporal coherence.
In practice, this ideal case is not possible, and a wave has a limited
coherence. The complete theory of coherence is complicated and involves
the mathematical apparatus of stochastic processes. However, we are
going to analyze the problem of temporal coherence, which is very
important for the interferometric fiber-optic gyroscope. However, the fiber
gyro uses single-mode waveguide, and spatial coherence is automatically
ensured because all the points of a mode have a perfect phase correlation
in the transverse direction.
When a broad-spectrum source is sent into an interferometer, it is
observed that there is good interference contrast about a null path
difference, and as this path difference increases (in absolute value), the
fringe contrast (or fringe visibility) starts to decrease and finally vanishes
completely (Figure A.46). When the path difference increases both
interfering waves start to lose their correlation, and their phase difference
varies as a function of time, which averages out the cos∆ϕ term of the
formula of interferences.
The distance from which the fringe contrast starts to decrease is called
the coherence length and the distance from which this contrast vanishes is
called the decoherence length.
Figure A.46 Interference signal with a broad spectrum source.
One way to understand the phenomenon is to decompose the broad
spectrum into separate wavelengths. Each wavelength λi creates its own
318

interference pattern with a period λi. About zero path difference, all the
interference patterns coincide, but as the path difference increases, they
lose their coincidence because they have slightly different periods (Figure
A.47). Because some wavelengths are on a bright fringe and other ones
are on a dark fringe, on average, the total intensity becomes constant, and
the contrast disappears. The coherence length Lc and the decoherence
length Ldc are inversely proportional to the spectrum width ∆λ.
Another way to see this question is to consider the channeled spectral
response of an unbalanced interferometer (see Figure A.28). It is
equivalent to say that the path difference ∆Lop of the unbalanced
interferometer is longer than the coherence length Lc, or to say that the
free spectral range (FSR) of the channeled spectral response is smaller
than the broad spectrum width [full width at half maximum (FWHM)].
Figure A.47 Interference signals with different wavelengths.
The actual output spectrum is the product of the channeled response by
the original source spectrum (note that the two outputs are
complementary) (Figure A.48).
319

Figure A.48 Pair of complementary channeled spectra at the two outputs of an
unbalanced interferometer.
When the path length difference ∆Lop varies the channels of the
spectrum are translated laterally, and if the FSR is much smaller than the
spectrum width, the mean optical powers measured at both outputs of the
interferometer remain constant.
With 
a 
perfect 
single-frequency/single-wavelength 
source, 
the
interference power is:
P = P0[1 + cos(2π ⋅ ∆L/λ)] (A.161)
With a broad-spectrum source that has a mean wavelength , and a full
width at half-maximum ∆λFWHM, the interference power becomes:
P = P0[1 + C(∆L)cos(2π ⋅ ∆L/ )] (A.162)
Where the envelope C(∆L) giving the decreasing in fringe visibility is
called the coherence function. One calls the coherence length Lc, the
length that preserves a good fringe visibility:
C(Lc) ≈ 0.8 (A.163)
One can also define a decoherence length Ldc with:
 (A.164)
and above this distance, C(∆L) is greatly reduced. In the approximation of
320

a Gaussian-shape spectrum, C(L) is also Gaussian and C(Ldc) » 0.03
(Figure A.49).
Figure A.49 (a) Broad spectrum with a mean wavelength  and a width ∆λFWHM (b)
Corresponding coherence functionC(∆L) with a decoherence length 
.
Note finally, as we already saw, that in addition of spatial coherence and
temporal coherence, there is also a polarization coherence: actually two
waves cannot interfere if their states of polarization are orthogonal, and
these states have to be identical to get full contrast of their interferences.
A.12.2 Mathematical Derivation of Temporal Coherence
The exact result may be derived rigorously with Fourier transforms. Let us
consider the wave amplitude A(t), which varies as a function of time t at a
given spatial position. As we have already seen, the frequency components
a(f) of this amplitude A(t) may be defined by the Fourier transform:
 (A.165)
and, inversely, the wave amplitude A(t) is the integral summation of all its
frequency components:
 (A.166)
In general, the frequency components a(f) are complex and may be
written with a positive real modulus α(f) and a phase term eiϕ(f):
 (A.167)
When this wave is sent in an interferometer with two 50-50 (in
321

intensity) splitters, there are interferences between the wave A(t) and
itself, but they are shifted by a temporal delay τ, A(t − τ). Considering that
light propagates in a vacuum along both paths, the temporal delay τ is
related to the geometrical path difference ∆L by:
∆L = c ⋅ τ (A.168)
To respect energy conservation, each 50-50 splitter reduces the intensity
by 1/2 and the amplitude by 
 Therefore, after passing two splitters,
there are interferences between 2(A(t)) ⋅ A(t)/2 and (A(t − τ)/2). The
intensity I of the interference wave is:
 (A.169)
 (A.170)
 (A.171)
where the brackets < > denote temporal averaging. The term <A(t) ⋅ A*(t
− τ)> is proportional to the autocorrelation function Γ(τ) of the function
A(t), defined in signal processing theory as:
 (A.172)
Then the intensity I of the interferences is proportional to:
 (A.173)
The basic autocorrelation theorem, also called the Wiener-Khinchin
theorem, states: “if A(t) has the Fourier transform a(f), then its
autocorrelation function 
 has a real and positive
Fourier transform equal to the power spectral density a(f)2 = α2(f).”
Therefore:
 (A.174)
and, inversely:
322

 (A.175)
In practice, the power spectral density α2(f) is centered about a mean
frequency , and a centered spectrum αc2 may be defined by (Figure
A.50):
Figure A.50 Intensity spectrum as a function of temporal frequency f: (a) actual
spectrum α2(f) and (b) centered spectrum αc2(f).
 (A.176)
Then
 (A.177)
and
 (A.178)
where Γc(τ) is the inverse Fourier transform of the centered intensity
spectrum αc2(f).
If the spectrum α2(f) is symmetrical about the mean frequency 
 the
centered spectrum is an even real function and its inverse Fourier
transform Γc(τ) is also an even real function [i.e., Γc(τ) = −Γc(τ) and
Γc(τ) = Γc*(τ)]. Since:
 (A.179)
where Iin is the intensity of the input wave. The intensity I of the
323

interference wave is:
 (A.180)
It is possible to define a normalized centered autocorrelation function:
 (A.181)
where C(0) = 1 and 
 And finally:
 (A.182)
In terms of spatial coordinates, there is:
 (A.183)
where the path length difference ∆L = cτ and the mean wavelength 
Then, the effect of a broad spectrum is to yield a visibility decrease of
the cosinusoidal modulation of the interference fringes, with a decrease of
C(τ) as τ increases (or a decrease of C(∆L) as ∆L increases). The fringe
visibility V actually becomes:
V(τ) = C(τ) (A.184)
where C(τ), called the coherence function of the source, is the normalized
inverse Fourier transform of the centered intensity spectrum αc2 (Figure
A.51).
Figure A.51 Centered spectrum αc2(f) and coherence functionγc(τ) (assuming
Gaussian functions).
324

The half-width of the C(τ) function is called the coherence time τc of
the input wave A(t). This half-width is classically defined as the root-
mean-square (rms) half-width of C(τ), or half-width at 1σ [1]:
 (A.185)
When the centered intensity spectrum αc2(f) and its normalized Fourier
transform C(τ) are Gaussian, calculations are simple and give:
 (A.186)
since:
 (A.187)
and
 (A.188)
Then the coherence time τc is the time that yields (Figure A.44):
C(τ) = e–1/4 ≈ 0.8
Note that the half-width at 2σ (i.e., 2τc) is the half-width at 1/e, since
C(τc) = e–1 (A.189)
It is also possible to define an rms half-width of the intensity spectral
density α2(f):
 (A.190)
In the case where α2(f) is Gaussian, there is:
 (A.191)
and
 (A.192)
When 
 are a pair of Fourier transforms, the product of their
325

rms half-widths is 1. Therefore,
 (A.193)
This result has been derived exactly for the Gaussian spectrum, but it
remains approximately true for other spectrum shapes. The coherence
length Lc is defined by:
 (A.194)
and since 
 where ∆λ is the rms half-width of the spectrum in
wavelength:
 (A.195)
As we have seen, the coherence time τc and the coherence length Lc
correspond to the maximum temporal or spatial delay that preserves a
good fringe visibility:
V(τc or Lc) = C(τc or Lc) ≈ 0.8 (A.196)
As can be seen in coherent noise analysis in the fiber gyro, the time or
length above which the wave loses its coherence is more of interest. A
good definition of this decoherence time τdc is the inverse of the full width
at half maximum ∆fFWHM of the spectrum (Figure A.51):
The decoherence length Ldc is then:
 (A.197)
Since
Going back to the simple case of Gaussian functions, it is found that:
326

 (A.198)
and then:
C(τdc) = 0.03
which means that for τdc (or Ldc) the contrast has been reduced to 3%.
The coherence time τc is the half-width at 1σ, and the decoherence
time τdc defined by 1/∆fFWHM is actually the half-width at 3σ to 4σ (the
half-width at 1/e being the half-width at 2σ).
These results derived exactly for Gaussian functions may be
approximately extended to any bell-shaped spectrum. However, to solve
certain parasitic effects in the fiber gyro, it is necessary to know precisely
the whole coherence function of the source and not simply its half-width.
A.12.3 The Concept of a Wave Train
The very important result of this analysis is the fact that the
autocorrelation function and the fringe visibility depends on the Fourier
transform of the power spectral density a(f)2 = α2(f) and not on the
amplitude spectral density a = αeiϕ. As is usually stated, the process of
autocorrelation loses the information about the phase of the spectral
components of A(t).
This means that waves, with the same amplitude modulus α(f) but a
different phase ϕ(f) of their frequency components, yield the same fringe
visibility. In particular, a broad-spectrum source has frequency
components with a random phase, while a pulse with pure intensity
modulation has frequency components that have the same phase; but both
yield the same fringe visibility if they have the same power spectrum
α2(f). Very often, the temporal coherence behavior of a broad-spectrum
source is explained by considering wave trains of duration equal to the
decoherence time τdc and a length equal to the decoherence length Ldc.
They are actually image pulses with pure intensity modulation; but as the
phase is lost in the autocorrelation, they would yield the same interference
contrast as the broad-spectrum source. This allows one to analyze simply
the effect in the time domain, and, particularly when a wave train is sent in
327

an unbalanced interferometer, there are two wave trains at the output. If
the path imbalance ∆Lop is larger than the wave-train length Ldc, the two
output wave trains do not overlap and cannot interfere (Figure A.52).
Figure A.52 Propagation of a wave train in an interferometer with an imbalance of
∆Lop. When ∆Lop > Ldc, the two output wave trains do not overlap and then cannot
interfere.
A.12.4 The Case of an Asymmetrical Spectrum
These results are simple if the spectrum is symmetrical, which yields an
even-centered spectrum. When the spectrum is not symmetrical, as is the
case with the broadband sources used in the fiber gyro (superluminescent
diode or rare-earth doped fiber source), the analysis is more complicated.
The centered spectral density αc2 has to be decomposed in an even
density αce2(f) and a residual odd density αco2(f) (Figure A.53):
 (A.199)
The mean frequency 
 is of course defined as the frequency that
minimizes αco(f). The even component αce2(f) does yield through Fourier
transform an even and real autocorrelation function Γce(τ), but the
residual odd component αco2(f) yields through Fourier transform an odd
and purely imaginary autocorrelation function i ⋅ Γco(τ). The interferences
328

become:
 (A.200)
where Ce(τ) and Co(τ) have been accordingly normalized to:
 (A.201)
 (A.202)
wit
Γ(τ) = Γce(τ) + iΓco(τ) (A.203)
and
Γ(0) = Γce(0)
since, as an odd function:
Γco(0) = 0
Compared to the case of a symmetrical spectrum, there is an additional
term 
 that is an even function of τ, since it is the product of
two odd functions: Co and sine. Even with an asymmetrical spectrum, the
interference remains symmetrical with respect to zero. However, because
of this additional term, the zero crossings of the fringe modulation have
lost the periodicity of the cosine term for 
π/2, 3π/2, and so on. This
effect is usually negligible in an interferometric fiber gyro that works on
the central fringe about zero phase difference, but it may have to be taken
into account with certain spectrum stabilization schemes.
329

Figure A.53 Decomposition of an asymmetrical spectrum and related coherence
functions.
Note that this analysis has been carried out with respect to the
frequency spectrum, which has the same shape if we consider the
temporal frequency or the spatial frequency σ = f/c. In practice, the
spectrum is often given with respect to the wavelength λ, which is
inversely proportional to the frequencies, λ = 1/σ = c/f; and a symmetrical
frequency spectrum does not strictly give a symmetrical wavelength
spectrum (nor, inversely, a symmetrical wavelength spectrum does not
strictly give a symmetrical frequency spectrum), particularly with the large
relative width (a large percentage) of the broadband sources desired in
fiber-gyro applications (Figure A.54).
330

Figure A.54 Problem of spectrum symmetry: (a) case of symmetry with respect to
spatial frequency σ and (b) related asymmetry with respect to wavelength λ (inverse
of σ).
A.12.5 The Case of Propagation in a Dispersive Medium
This analysis has yielded the definition of the coherence time τc (and
decoherence time τdc), which is a characteristic of the source spectrum.
To observe this effect, an interferometer has been used in a vacuum,
where the temporal delay τ is related simply to the difference of
geometrical length L between both paths of this interferometer:
∆L = c ⋅ τ (A.204)
The spatial equivalent of the temporal quantities τc and τdc have been
defined as the coherence length Lc = c ⋅ τdc and the decoherence length
Ldc = cτdc, which are also a characteristic of the source.
Now when light propagates in a medium, the result is more complicated
because of dispersion effects. As we saw in Section A.3, the amplitude A
may be decomposed as the product of:
A monochromatic wave with an angular frequency equal to the
mean angular frequency 
 and that propagates at the phase
velocity v = /km( );
A modulation term M that propagates at the group velocity vg =
dω/dkm.
Temporally, there is:
 (A.205)
and taking into account spatial propagation, there is:
331

 (A.206)
It can be shown that the autocorrelation function of M is actually the
inverse Fourier transform of the centered spectrum αc:
< M(t)M*(t − τ) > = Γc(τ) (A.207)
Going back to the concept of a wave train, it can be shown that a wave
train is a sinusoidal wave modulated in amplitude with an envelope Mwt(t)
which has an autocorrelation function also equal to Γc(t). The wave train
amplitude is
 (A.208)
Now the following formula is still valid, as it has been derived only with
temporal coordinates:
 (A.209)
However, when light propagates in a medium, the simple relation ∆L =
c ⋅ τ is not valid anymore. The temporal delay τ does not correspond to
the same spatial delay for the autocorrelation terms γce and γco and for
the fringe terms cosine and sine. Then, in an interferometer with one path
in a medium 1 with a geometrical length L1 and the other path in a
medium 2 with a geometrical length L2, the actual temporal delay is
different in both cases. It is:
 for the autocorrelation terms γce and γco, since they are
derived from M(t), which propagates at the group velocity vg.
This delay is called the group temporal delay, denoted by τg. It is
also the propagation time of the envelope of a wave train.
 for the fringe terms, as they are derived from eiϖt, which
propagates at the phase velocity v. This delay is called the phase
temporal delay, denoted by τϕ, with c ⋅ τϕ = n1( )L1 − n2( )L2.
332

Therefore, in the most general case, the interference intensity is:
 (A.210)
In practice, material dispersion yields only a small difference between
τg and τϕ, but interferometric measurements are very sensitive, and this
may yield spurious effects. For example, this problem is avoided in
Michelson interferometers with an additional compensating plate, which
cancels out the effect of dispersion of the material supporting the 50-50
splitting coating.
In a fiber, τg may be significantly different from τϕ, as will be seen in
Appendix B; however, the Sagnac effect, which does not depend on
matter, is not sensitive to these dispersion effects.
A.13 Birefringence
A.13.1 Birefringence Index Difference
As we have seen, in an isotropic linear dielectric medium, the derived
electric field D is proportional to the electric field E:
D = ∈r∈0E (A.211)
Gas, liquids, and amorphous solids like glass, and in particular fused
silica, are isotropic because their structure is random and they do not have
any predominant axis of orientation. Conversely, crystals have an ordered
lattice with predominate axes, and the permittivity ∈r may depend on the
orientation of the field. They have three principal axes x, y, and z that are
orthogonal. The permittivity depends on the principal axes:
Dx = ∈rx∈0Ex
Dy = ∈ry∈0Ey (A.212)
Dz = ∈rz∈0Ez
Each value ∈ri corresponds to an index value 
 with i = x, y,
or z.
Crystals may be classified into three groups:
333

Crystals of the cubic system like diamond, for example, where nx
= ny = nz. They are optically isotropic and behave like amorphous
glasses.
Uniaxial crystals that have two ordinary axes with nx = ny = no,
and one extraordinary axis with nz = ne ≠ no. The birefringence
index difference, denoted ∆nb, is ∆nb = ne − no. The
birefringence is said to be positive when ∆nb > 0 (i.e., ne > no),
and negative when ne < no. The extraordinary z-axis is often
called the C-axis of the uniaxial crystal. Lithium niobate (LiNbO3)
used in integrated optics is such a uniaxial crystal, and has a
negative birefringence.
Biaxial crystals that have different indexes for each axis: nx ≠ ny ≠
nz ≠ nx.
The birefringence ∆nb of crystals is typically in the range of 0.01 to 0.1.
It is 0.07 in LiNbO3. We shall see that polarization-maintaining (PM)
fibers are birefringent, but their birefringence is smaller: ∆nb is around 5 ×
10–4.
When a wave is linearly polarized along a principal axis, it propagates
with an index of refraction 
 (with i = x, y, or z) that corresponds
to the axis of the electric E field, since, as we have seen, the effect of the
magnetic B field of the wave on matter is usually negligible. For example,
a wave that is linearly polarized along the x-axis and that propagates along
the y- or z-axis has a velocity c/nx.
Propagation along an intermediate direction is complicated, but
birefringence problems that we will have to analyze in fiber optics are
simpler because they are concerned only with propagation along one
principal axis and the polarization lies in the perpendicular plane of the two
other axes. The main effect of birefringence is to modify the state of
polarization during the propagation when the wave is not linearly polarized
along a principal axis.
A.13.2 Change of Polarization with Birefringence
Let us consider a birefringent plate with the x-axis and z-axis parallel to the
interface and the y-axis parallel to the direction of propagation (Figure
334

A.55). When an input state of polarization is sent through this plate, it will
be modified at the output. The input state Ein has to be decomposed along
the principal x-axis and z-axis of the plate:
 (A.213)
where ∆ϕin is the phase difference between both components at the input.
Each component E0x and E0z propagates without change of polarization.
At the output, the state of polarization becomes:
 (A.214)
The phase difference between both components is at the output:
 (A.215)
where d is the thickness of the plate and ∆nb = nz − nx.
Figure A.55 Change of polarization due to propagation in a birefringent medium.
The change of the state of polarization along propagation through the
plate is periodic. The phase difference increases linearly with respect to
the thickness d, and the input state of polarization is retrieved when the
accumulated phase difference is 2π rad. The spatial period of the change
335

is called the birefringence beat length Λ, with:
Two kinds of birefringent plates are particularly useful:
Half-wave plates where d = mΛ + Λ/2 and ϕout − ϕin = 2mπ + π
(m being integral);
Quarter-wave plates where d = mΛ + Λ/4 and ϕout − ϕin = 2mπ
+ π/2.
The effect of a half-wave plate is to generate an output state of
polarization symmetrical to the input state with respect to the principal
axes (Figure A.56).
Figure A.56 Change of polarization with a half-wave plate (Λ/2).
This symmetry reverses the direction of rotation of an elliptical or
circular state of polarization. Note that, strictly speaking, a half-wave plate
336

does not rotate a linear state of polarization, but symmetrizes it with
respect to the principal axes. However, the rotation of a half-wave plate
does rotate a linear state of polarization just as the rotation of a mirror
rotates an image.
The effect of a quarter-wave plate is to change the ellipticity of the state
of polarization. In particular, when the principal axes are parallel to the
axes of the ellipse, it yields a linear polarization. Inversely, a linear
polarization yields an elliptical polarization aligned along the principal axes
(Figure A.57). In the particular case of a linear polarization at 45° of the
principal axes, this yields a circular polarization.
Mathematically, this linear transformation of the state of polarization is a
product of matrixes, known as the Jones formalism. The state of
polarization can be represented by a 1 × 2 column matrix, and the effect
of the plate is a multiplication by a 2 × 2 square matrix. Decomposing the
polarization along the principal axes is actually the usual mathematical
decomposition along the eigen-axes of the 2 × 2 matrix, which yields a
diagonal matrix that becomes much easier to handle. The effect of the
birefringent plate can be written as:
[Eout] = [M] × [Ein] (A.216)
}where the column matrices [Eout] and [Ein] are called the Jones vectors:
 (A.217)
The mathematical interest of this matrix formalism is due to the fact that
the propagation through several plates can be calculated with a matrix
product:
[Eout] = [M] × [Ein] (A.218)
with
[M] = [Mm] × … × [M2] × [M1] (A.219)
Note that the phase delay created by birefringence is inversely
proportional to the wavelength, and therefore a change of polarization
through a birefringent medium may be modified by wavelength variation,
even with a stable medium.
337

Figure A.57 Change of polarization with a quarter-wave plate (Λ/4).
So far, we have described birefringent effects related to orthogonal
principal axes of a crystal, which is actually called linear birefringence.
There is also a phenomenon of circular birefringence, sometimes called
optical activity. With circular birefringence, the eigenstates of polarization
that propagates without change are the two circular states of polarization.
Then an input state of polarization has to be decomposed with its two
circular components. Each circular component propagates with its own
index of refraction, and their recombination yields the output state of
polarization. The effect of a circular birefringence with an index difference
∆nc is to rotate any input state of polarization with an angle θ (Figure
A.58) equal to half the phase difference change between both circular
components:
 (A.220)
 (A.221)
Note that the ellipticity of the state of polarization remains unchanged
by circular birefringence.
A.13.3 Interference with Birefringence
A birefringent crystal, placed between two polarizers, creates a polarimeter
338

that behaves like an interferometer (Figure A.59). The input wave is
polarized by the input polarizer, and can be decomposed into the states of
polarization corresponding to both orthogonal principal birefringence axes.
Each polarization propagates with its own index, which yields a phase
difference at the output. Both orthogonal output polarizations are then
projected on the axis of the output polarizer, often called analyzer, and
they interfere. The lower-index fast polarization is equivalent to the short
path of an interferometer, and the higher-index slow polarization is
equivalent to the long path. The output power follows the classical formula
of interference:
 (A.222)
but now with ∆Lop = ∆nb ⋅ d, where d is the thickness of the birefringent
plate.
Figure A.58 Change of polarization with circular birefringence.
The interference fringes are perfectly contrasted when the angle
between the polarizers and the birefringence axes is 45°, which is
equivalent to 50-50 splitter and combiner.
Decoherence effects also take place with a broadspectrum source when
the path difference ∆nb ⋅ d is larger than the decoherence length 
 the output wave is depolarized.
The depolarization length Ldp is also used with:
Ldp = Ldc/∆nb (A.223)
The wave gets depolarized when the crystal thickness d is larger than
Ldp.
339

A.14 Optical Spectrum Analysis
Spectral analysis is a key measurement in optics. The most common
measurement technique is the use of a bulk diffraction grating is a
monochromator (single-color) configuration. The huge market of
wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) telecommunication has yielded
the advent of performing optical spectrum analyzers (OSA), especially in
the 1,550-nm window. Resolution can be as good as 10 pico​meters (pm),
that is, less than 10-5 of the wavelength.
For fiber gyros, these OSAs are very useful to calculate the mean
wavelength of a broad spectrum, as well as its coherence function that is
its Fourier transform, as we already saw. Laser-line analysis requires
higher resolution and it is often performed with a scanning Fabry-Perot.
Spectrum analysis techniques are all based on interferometry, and it is
useful to understand that the theoretical resolution of a setup is, at best,
the inverse of the number of wavelengths in the difference between the
shortest and the longest paths, which is the setup. It is simply observed
with fiber Bragg grating: the grating period being about 0.5 μm, a 5-mm
grating (i.e. 104 periods), has at the best a relative wavelength selection
width of 10–4 (i.e., 0.15 nm at 1,550 nm).
Figure A.59 Perfectly contrasted polarimeter with input polarization and output
analyzer at 45° of the principal axes of the birefringent plate.
This argument about the number of wavelengths being the inverse of
the resolution explains the advantage of Fourier transform spectroscopy. It
makes use of a scanning Michelson interferometer, and the spectrum is
retrieved from the Fourier transform of the recorded interference pattern,
as we saw earlier. Because the scanned path unbalance can be very long
340

(meter range), it yields a very high resolution. Such a technique is used for
optical coherence-domain reflectometry (OCDR) and optical coherence
domain polarimetry (OCDP).
A last technique, now available because of WDM telecoms, is tunable-
laser spectroscopy. The resolution is then the line width of the tunable
laser, which is much narrower than the resolution of a passive
interferometric spectrometer. It can be as good as the megahertz range
(i.e., less than 10–8 of the analyzed frequency of 200 THz).
As we see, spectral resolution is usually given with length unit (nm,
pm…) when it is measured with interferometric techniques depending on
wavelength. A laser-line width is often measured with electrical signal
spectrum analysis of power beating, and it is expressed in temporal
frequency units, even if one could say 1.3-GHz resolution instead of 10
pm, or 0.007-pm line width instead of 1 MHz.
Reference
[1] Born, M., and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics, Oxford, U.K.: Pergamon Press, 1975.
Selected Bibliography
Bass, M., ed., Handbook of Optics, 3rd ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009.
Bracewell, R., The Fourier Transform and Its Applications, New York: McGraw-Hill,
1965.
Derickson, D., (ed.), Fiber-Optic Test and Measurement, Hewlett-Packard Professional
Books, 1998.
Feynman, R., Lectures on Physics, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1965.
Kogelnik, H., and T. Li, “Laser Beams and Resonators,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol.
54, 1966, pp. 1312–1329.
Refractiveindex.info.
341

APPENDIX B
Fundamentals of Fiber Optics for
the Fiber Gyroscope
B.1 Main Characteristics of a Single-Mode Optical Fiber
B.1.1 Attenuation of a Silica Fiber
An optical fiber is composed of a core with an index of refraction n1
slightly higher than n2, the one of its surrounding cladding (Figure B.1).
This yields propagation in the core because of total internal reflection
(TIR) at the core-cladding interface, as seen in Section A.6.2.
For low attenuation, the privileged fiber material is silica, the amorphous
(or glassy) structure of silicon dioxide (SiO2). Silicon dioxide has also a
crystal-lattice structure, quartz, and therefore the term “fused quartz” is
sometimes used for silica.
The attenuation is due to three main factors (Figure B.2):
Figure B.1 Optical fiber with its core of index n1 and its surrounding cladding of
index n2 < n1.
Rayleigh 
scattering 
loss 
due 
to 
dipolar 
radiation 
and
342

inhomogeneities in amorphous glass-like silica. This yields an
attenuation per unit length αR proportional to λ–4.
Infrared absorption tail of silica that limits the very low attenuation
range to below 1,700 nm. At a 2-μm wavelength, attenuation
reaches 10 dB/km, and silica fibers remain useable on short
distance but above 2 μm it increases drastically.
Effect of OH impurities that bring residual water absorption peaks
at 1,390, 1,240, and 950 nm.
With this attenuation, there are three transmission windows that are
commonly used:
Wavelength of 850 nm, with an attenuation around 2 dB/km. It is
used for medium-accuracy fiber gyros where the sensing coil
length is few hundreds of meters.
Wavelength of 1,300 nm, with an attenuation going down to 0.4
dB/km. It is used in telecommunications, but rarely for fiber gyro.
Wavelength of 1,550 nm, with an attenuation going down to 0.2
dB/km. It is used for high-accuracy fiber gyros where the sensing
coil length can go up to several kilometers. It takes advantage of
erbium-doped fiber source. Such a source is derived from erbium-
doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) that revolutionized optical-fiber
communication in the 1990s.
Note that there is also a neodymium YAG window around 1,060 nm
with an attenuation of 1 dB/km, but it is not used very often.
343

Figure B.2 Attenuation of a silica fiber (log scale).
B.1.2 Gaussian Profile of the Fundamental Mode
As for any dielectric waveguide (see Section A.6.2), the important
parameter of an optical fiber is its numerical aperture (NA) defined as:
A single-mode (SM) fiber carries only one mode, the fundamental
mode, for a wavelength higher than the cutoff wavelength λc of the
second-order mode. It is related to NA by:
λc = 2.6 a NA
where a is the core radius.
Figure B.3 Pseudo-Gaussian profile of the fundamental mode of a single-mode fiber
(dotted line for normalized power density (P) and solid line for normalized amplitude
(A)).
This fundamental mode has a quasi-Gaussian transverse power density,
and the formalism of free-space Gaussian beam (see Section A.11) is used
with a waist wo, the radius at 1/e2 in optical power density (or optical
intensity), that is, at 1/e in amplitude (with e = 2.72) (Figure B.3). Is also
used the mode field diameter (MFD) with MFD = 2wo.
The fundamental mode has theoretically no cutoff, but the practical
range of use of a single-mode fiber is from λc to about 1.5λc where the
mode starts to widen very fast, which makes the fiber very lossy with
bending. In this practical range of use, the mode diameter/radius is about
linear as a function of the wavelength λ:
344

This yields:
It is interesting to notice that in this practical single-mode regime (λc < λ
< 1.5λc) the mode size depends only on the wavelength λ and the
numerical aperture NA, and not on the core radius/diameter.
At the output of the single-mode fiber, this pseudo-Gaussian mode
follows the usual diffraction law of free-space Gaussian beam (see Section
A.11), with a full divergence angle θD at 1/e2 in power density (1/e in
amplitude):
Since in the practical range of use of a single-mode fiber (λc < λ <
1.5λc) the MFD is proportional to λ, diffraction yields a constant
divergence angle which depends only on the numerical aperture NA
(Figure B.4). With MFD ≈ 0.84λ/NA, it yields:
θD ≈ 1.5 NA
If the mode diffracts in a medium of index n instead of a vacuum, this
angle θD is reduced to θD′:
θD′ ≈ 1.5 NA/n
Now, placing this single-mode fiber output at the focal point of a
convergent lens yields a collimated Gaussian beam with a beam diameter
2w at 1/e2 in power:
2w = θD ⋅ f
where f is the focal length of the lens.
Standard telecom fiber, the ITU Standard G-652, has a pure silica
cladding with n2 = 1.444 at 1,550 nm. The core is said to be doped with
germanium (Ge). It might be more adequate to say that it is a mixture of
GeO2 glass (germania) with an index of 1.59 at 1,550 nm and SiO2 glass
(silica) with an index of 1.444, knowing that a glass should be viewed as
345

an infinitely viscous liquid; and liquids are mixed, not doped. With few
percents of GeO2, the core index is raised by ∆n = n1 − n2 = 0.005,
yielding a numerical aperture NA = 0.12. Standard G-652 fiber has a core
diameter of 8 μm, yielding a cutoff wavelength λc = 1,250 nm and an
MFD of 11 μm at 1,550 nm.
Figure B.4 Diverging far-field output beam of a single-mode fiber, with a full
divergence angle θD = 1.5 NA, and a collimated beam with a diameter 2w = θD ⋅ f.
Gyro coil fibers have a higher NA that improves guidance and avoids
bending loss. This requires a higher percentage of GeO2 in the core, which
slightly increases attenuation. Respective parameters are compiled in Table
B.1.
Table B.1 Main Characteristics of Telecom and Gyro Fibers
∆n
NA
Core 
diameter
MFD at 
1,550 nm θD
Attenuation 
at 1,550 nm
Telecom fiber
0.0050.12 8 μm
11 μm
0.18 rad 0.2 dB/km
Gyro coil fiber 0.01 0.17 6 μm
8 μm
0.25 rad 0.5 to 1 dB/km
B.1.3 Beat Length and h Parameter of a PM Fiber
A single-mode fiber is a single-spatial-mode fiber, but it is a two-mode
fiber in terms of polarization. There is a residual birefringence and the two
orthogonal states of polarization have a residual difference of propagation
velocity.
The fiber-gyro uses fibers that preserve the same state of polarization.
They are usually called polarization-maintaining (PM) fibers, but are
sometimes called polarization-holding or polarization-preserving fibers.
Linear polarization maintenance is obtained by creating a strong linear
birefringence with a stress structure. There is a stress-induced
birefringence index difference and the effect is often expressed in terms of
346

beat length L, the fiber length that yields one wavelength of path
difference between both (slow and fast) polarization modes (see Section
A.13.2):
A typical value for ∆nb is 5 × 10–4, i.e. 1/2,000 (remember that n1 −
n2 ≈ 10–2), which yields a beat length of Λ equal to 2,000 wavelengths λ
(see Table B.2).
Fiber birefringence yields polarization maintenance but there is a
residual crossed-polarization coupling that grows linearly in power as a
function of length. It is expressed in term of h-parameter, h standing for
holding. The typical value for h-parameter is 3 to 1 × 10–5/m, sometimes
expressed as a polarization extinction ratio (PER) of 15 to 20 dB over 1
km.
Table B.2 Beat Length Λ as a Function of Wavelength λ
λ 633 nm
850 nm 1,300 nm 1,550 nm
Λ 1.25 mm 1.7 mm 2.6 mm
3 mm
B.1.4 Protective Coating
A silica fiber is mechanically protected with a two-layer plastic polymer
coating: a soft inner primary coating to limit the transmission of external
stress, and a harder outer secondary coating to ease handling of the fiber
(Figure B.5). A typical coating diameter is 250 μm for telecom fiber with a
125-μm cladding diameter. Now, to limit the volume of sensing coils, the
gyro fiber has a typical cladding diameter of 80 μm with a coating
diameter of 170 μm. These polymer coatings have an index of refraction
higher than the one for the cladding. This allows spurious light in the
cladding to leak in the coating and to be then attenuated, since coatings
have attenuation in the range of 1 dB/cm.
347

Figure B.5 Fiber with its two-layer coating.
B.1.5 Temperature Dependence of Propagation in a PM Fiber
Temperature dependence of the various parameters of a fiber is obviously
of importance for practical applications. For silica index nSiO2, there are
values are seen in Table B.3.
Table B.3 Thermal Dependence of Silica Index
nSiO2 dnSiO2/dT
At 850 nm
1.452 8.6 × 10–6/°C
At 1,550 nm 1.444 8.4 × 10–6/°C
Silica expansion coefficient αSiO2 = dL/L ⋅ dT is 0.5 × 10–6/°C,
expressed also as 0.5 ppm/°C.
The optical path nSiO2 ⋅ L then follows by logarithmic differentiation:
that is, 6.45 ppm/°C at 850 nm and 6.35 ppm/°C at 1,550 nm.
Such a relative thermal variation of the optical path is found in the
reflection wavelength ΛBragg of a Bragg grating (see Section A.9.3), but
also in the transit time τ through a fiber since the phase index and the
group index follow very similar thermal variations:
Conversely, for the proper frequency fp of a fiber gyro related to the
inverse of transit time through the coil:
348

Now if silica is a very stable material thermally, a silica fiber is
protected, as we saw, by a polymer coating which has a high expansion
coefficient, typically 50 to 100 ppm/°C. As the temperature increases, the
coating tends to expand, but its expansion is blocked by the fiber which is
placed under tensile stress. The actual expansion of the coated fiber is
related to the transverse area, Young modulus, Poisson ratio, and
expansion coefficient of silica and the ones of the coating polymers.
A gyro-coil fiber with a cladding diameter of 80 mm and a double-layer-
coating diameter of 170 μm has typically and expansion coefficient: αF =
4 to 5 ppm/°C, that is, about 10 times higher than the expansion of silica
αSiO2 = 0.5 ppm/°C. This additional thermal expansion also changes the
variation of proper frequency:
instead of −6.35 ppm/°C for a bare fiber.
Finally, as we saw, birefringence of PM fiber is created with a stressing
structure made of glass with higher expansion coefficient than silica. The
stress being induced during the cooling phase of this structure over 800°C
to 1,500°C, depending on the softening temperature Tg of the glass used
in the stress-structure, the relative thermal dependence of the birefringence
is conversely:
d ∆nb/(∆nb ⋅ dT) ≈ −1.2 to −0.7 × 10–3/°C
B.2 Discrete Modal Guidance in a Step-Index Fiber
As we already saw, a step-index fiber is composed of a cylindrical core
with an index of refraction n1 and a radius a, and of a surrounding
cladding with a lower index n2 < n1 (Figure B.1). Going to more
mathematics, because of the boundary conditions at the core-cladding
interface, there is a discrete number of eigensolutions of the general
propagation equation that are guided in the fiber. These discrete
eigensolutions are called the modes of the fiber, which is multimode. They
can be written as:
349

Emi(x, y, z, t) = E0mi(x, y)e–(iωt–βiz)
Bmi(x, y, z, t) = B0mi(x, y)e–(iωt–βiz) (B.1)
where x and y are the transverse spatial coordinates, and z is the
longitudinal spatial coordinate corresponding to the direction of
propagation.
Contrary to the case of the plane wave, each mode has specific
transverse distributions of the fields E0mi(x, y) and B0mi(x, y) that tend to
zero far from the core. The propagation phase term e–i(ωt–βiz) depends
on the angular frequency w and on a specific mode propagation constant
βi that depends on ωand that is comprised between the wave number k2
in the cladding and the wave number k1 in the core:
 (B.2)
An equivalent index neqi of the mode i is often used with:
 (B.3)
The modes are denoted by TE for transverse electric or TM for
transverse magnetic, or EH and HE for hybrid electromagnetic, when they
have a longitudinal component Ez or Bz in addition to the usual transverse
components (Ex, Ey) and (Bx, By) of a TEM wave in free space: TE
modes are purely transverse for the electric field and have a longitudinal
magnetic component; conversely, TM modes have a longitudinal electric
component, and EH and HE modes have a longitudinal component for
both E and B fields.
In practice, the index difference ∆n = n1 − n2 is small: the relative
index difference ∆ = ∆n/n2 is usually on the order of 0.2% to 1%. This
yields a negligible longitudinal component, and the modes, then denoted by
LP for linearly polarized, can usually be regarded as transverse waves.
The fundamental interest of this modal decomposition is the fact that
the set of modes is an orthonormal basis of eigenvectors of the ensemble
of all the possible solutions of the propagation equation. This ensemble is,
350

from the mathematical viewpoint, a linear space with a scalar product.
The most familiar linear space is the three-dimensional geometrical
space. Any vector U can be decomposed on the orthonormal basis of
eigenvectors (a1, a2, a3):
 (B.4)
The orthonormal basis is orthogonal; that is, the scalar product of two
different eigenvectors is zero:
ai ⋅ aj = 0 if i ≠ j
and it is also normal; that is, all the scalar square of the eigenvectors are
equal:
a12 = a22 = a32 = ai2
The norm or magnitude or modulus U of a vector U is defined as the
square root of its scalar square, and:
There are two important results that may look obvious, or at least very
familiar, in a geometrical space (Figure B.6), but that are extremely useful
in other linear spaces, for which it is not as straightforward:
Figure B.6 Coordinates x1 and x2 of a vector U in a 2-D geometrical orthonormal
linear space. There are a1 ⋅ a2 = 0 and a12 = a22.
351

The coordinate xi is:
 (B.5)
The square of the modulus is:
 (B.6)
In particular, it is very convenient to consider that the ensemble of
complex functions f(x), which are said to be square integrable, is a linear
space. The infinite integral 
 is convergent (which is the
definition of a square integrable function) and may be regarded as the
generalized scalar square < ff > of the function. A generalized scalar
product may be defined with:
 (B.7)
It is possible to find an orthonormal basis of eigenfunctions fi of this
linear space, any function f being accordingly decomposed to:
 (B.8)
with
and
The fact that the linear space of the functions f has an infinite dimension
does not change the generality of the above results, and this definition of
the scalar product may be extended to a function of several variables with
a multiple integral.
Going back to the fiber, the ensemble of the solutions of the propagation
equation is also a linear space, which is the sum of the nonguided solutions
and the sum of the guided solutions. The dimension of the ensemble of the
nonguided solutions is infinite, but the dimension of the ensemble of the
guided solutions is finite: it is equal to the discrete number of modes in the
352

fiber. Any solution E of the propagation equation may be decomposed
with:
 (B.9)
where emi are the normalized guided modes and eri are the nonguided
modes that are radiated.
The guided modes emi(x, y, z, t) are eigenvectors, and, therefore, their
generalized scalar products < emiemj > are null. Eliminating the z and t
dependence, these generalized scalar products yield, for the transverse
field distributions em0i(x, y), the overlap integrals, which are also null for
orthogonal modes:
 (B.10)
The coordinate xi of E on the mode emi is defined with generalized
scalar products:
 (B.11)
similar to the definition of the coordinate of a vector in geometry with:
xi = (U ⋅ ai)/ai2 (B.12)
With overlap integrals, the (z, t) dependence is eliminated:
 (B.13)
Furthermore, similar to
 in geometry, there is also:
 (B.14)
From the physic standpoint, this last equation shows that the total
power of the wave E equals the sum of the total powers in each mode, as
we might expect. As a matter of fact, the square of the electric field is
proportional to the intensity of the wave (i.e., the spatial density of
353

power), and the overlap integral, which is an infinite integral of the power
density over the transverse plane xy, yields the total power.
This relation applies only to the total powers of the modes. The
problem is very different for the local power density in the core. It is the
square of the sum of the amplitudes of these modes and is the result of
interferences between the various modes. Specifically, there are places
without light because of destructive interferences. With a large number of
modes, this yields a speckle pattern.
Note that overlap integrals using the usual scalar product em0i ⋅ em0j*
are valid with the assumption of transverse LP modes when the index
difference is small. Generally, where there are longitudinal field
components, the term em0i ⋅ em0j* has to be replaced by the vector
product em0i × bm0j. This makes calculations more complicated, but the
basic principle of orthogonality of the modes is preserved.
B.3 Guidance in a Single-Mode (SM) Fiber
B.3.1 Amplitude Distribution of the Fundamental LP01 Mode
The calculation of the modes is usually carried out with a normalized
frequency V that is defined with:
 (B.15)
This can be written:
 (B.16)
where 
 is the numerical aperture of the fiber as defined in
Appendix A. There is also:
 (B.17)
The important result is that when 0 < V < 2.405 a step index fiber is in
the single-mode regime, where only the fundamental spatial mode
(symbolized HE11 in the most general case and LP01 in the low ∆n
approximation) can be guided. The value 2.405 is the first zero of the J0
354

Bessel function. The cutoff wavelength λc is defined by:
 (B.18)
that is
λc = 2.6 a NA
and
The fiber is single-mode for λ > λc. Note that an ideal single-mode fiber
can guide any state of polarization with the same propagation constant: the
two-dimensional linear space of the polarization modes is said to be
degenerated, but in practice there is always a residual difference. A single-
mode fiber is actually a single-spatial-mode fiber, but it is a two-mode fiber
in terms of polarization.
The exact definition of the modes require the use of Bessel and
modified Bessel functions, but the fundamental mode may be described
approximately with a Gaussian distribution as free-space Gaussian beams
described in Section A.11, the wave amplitude being (Figure B.7):
Figure B.7 Pseudo-Gaussian amplitude of the fundamental LP01 mode of a single-
mode fiber (case where λ = 1.2λc).
 (B.19)
where 
 is the radial coordinate.
The mode radius w0 (at 1/e in amplitude and 1/e2 in power density, or
355

optical intensity) is for 0.8λc < λ < 2λc (Figure B.8):
 (B.20)
Is often used the mode field diameter (MFD) with:
MFD = 2w0
An even simpler linear approximation is usually accurate enough in the
practical range of use of a single-mode fiber (i.e.,λc < λ < 1.5λc):
 (B.21)
which yields w0 ≈ 0.42λ/NA and MFD ≈ 0.84 λ/NA.
It is interesting to notice that, in this practical single-mode regime, the
mode radius/diameter is independent of the core radius, and depends only
on the numerical aperture NA and the wavelength.
Figure B.8 Fundamental LP01 mode radius w0 as a function of wavelength λ, with a
linear dependency between λc and 1.5 λc.
Above 1.5λc, the LP01 mode starts to widen very fast, and the fiber
becomes lossy with bending.
356

B.3.2 Equivalent Index neq and Phase Velocity vϕ of the
Fundamental LP01 Mode
The equivalent index neq varies continuously from n2 for an infinite
wavelength to n1 for a null wavelength:
When the wavelength is very large, the mode is very wide and
sees mainly the cladding and its index n2.
When the wavelength is very short, the mode is confined in the
core and sees mainly the core and its index n1.
A normalized propagation constant b(V) is often used with:
 (B.22)
When the relative index difference ∆ is small, we can write:
β ≈ k2(1 + b ⋅ ∆)
or
neq ≈ n2(1 + b ⋅ ∆) (B.23)
The phase velocity vϕ of the mode is then:
 (B.24)
For 0.6 < λc/λ < 1, the value of b(V) can be approximated by (Figure
B.9):
 (B.25)
Then, at the limit of the single-mode regime,
357

 (B.26)
 (B.27)
B.3.3 Group Index ng of the Fundamental LP01 Mode
The wavelength dependence of the propagation constant b(λ) [and of the
equivalent index neq(λ)] yields dispersion effects due to guidance in
addition to the proper chromatic dispersion of the material. In particular,
while the phase velocity is vϕ = ω/β, modulated signals propagate at the
group velocity vg:
Figure B.9 Normalized propagation constant b(λ) and equivalent index neq(λ) of the
fundamental LP01 mode (n1 is the core index and n2 is the cladding index).
 (B.28)
and
 (B.29)
with
 (B.30)
where dn2/dλ is due to the material, and (db/dλ) (n2∆) is due to the
guidance.
One can define a group index ng due to guidance with:
358

remembering that the equivalent index is:
This group index ng is significantly different from neq as displayed on
Figure B.10. In the practical domain of use of a single-mode fiber (λc < λ
< 1.5 λc, that is, 0.7 < λc/λ < 1), ng is about the core index n1, while the
equivalent phase index neq is close to the cladding index n2.
Figure B.10 Guidance group index ng of the fundamental LP01 mode (neq is
displayed with the dotted curve).
In addition of guidance, group velocity depends also on material
dispersion. For silica, the group index ngSiO2 is significantly different
from the index of refraction as summarized in Table B.4.
Table B.4 Index and Group Index of Silica
Wavelength λ
850 nm 1,300 nm 1,550 nm
Index of refraction nSiO21.452
1.446
1.444
Group index ngSiO2
1.468
1.461
1.462
B.3.4 Case of a Parabolic Index Profile
This analysis has been derived for a perfect step-index fiber; however,
359

with some specific manufacturing processes, there is some grading of the
index profile. Evaluation of the characteristics of such fibers is usually
done with the use of an equivalent step-index fiber, which provides simply
approximated values of cutoff and mode diameter. In particular, a
parabolic index profile of maximum radius amax and maximum relative
index difference ∆max may be approximated with an equivalent index step
having a radius ae = 0.8 amax and a relative index difference ∆e = 0.75
∆max (Figure B.11).
B.3.5 Modes of a Few-Mode Fiber
Now, when the fiber is used below its cutoff (λ < λc or V > 2.4), there are
higher-order guided modes. The first one to appear is the antisymmetric
LP11 mode that becomes guided in addition to the fundamental LP01
mode. This second-order mode has an odd distribution with respect to one
transverse coordinate. The wave amplitude may be approximately
described using the normalized derivative of a Gaussian function (Figure
B.12):
Figure B.11 Equivalent index step of a parabolic index profile.
360

Figure B.12 Amplitude and intensity distributions of the second-order LP11 mode.
 (B.31)
This mode is composed of two lobes where the amplitude (or field) has
opposite signs (or a π rad phase difference). The mode is said to be
antisymmetrical; the intensity (or power density), which is the square of
the amplitude (or field), is identical and always positive for both lobes.
The field es0 is maximum and equal to e0 for x = w1 and y = 0. The value
w1 is the half-width at the maximum.
Figure B.13 Spatial degeneracy of the LP11 mode.
The LP11 mode is degenerated in terms of polarization as the LP01
mode, but it also has a spatial degeneracy, since the lobes may be aligned
along any transverse axis (Figure B.13).
When V > 3.8, that is, 1/λ > 1.6/λc or λ < 0.63λc, there are also the
LP21 and LP02 modes. Their equivalent indexes are displayed in Figure
B.14.
The LP21 mode has four lobes with a double antisymmetry and spatial
degeneracy as the LP11 mode. The LP02 has a secondary ring with a sign
change with respect to the central part (Figure B.15). As will be seen in
361

Appendix C, these LP11 and LP21 antisymmetric modes are used to
understand the behavior of light in integrated-optics circuits.
Figure B.14 Equivalent indexes of a few-mode fiber.
Figure B.15 Power distribution of the first modes: signs + and − indicates sign
change on the amplitude, and the LP11 and LP21 modes have a spatial degeneracy.
B.4 Coupling in a Single-Mode Fiber and Its Loss
Mechanisms
B.4.1 Free-Space Coupling
As we already saw in Section B.1.2, at the output of a single-mode fiber,
the pseudo-Gaussian fundamental mode with a radius w0 at 1/e2 is
diffracted to form a free-space diverging pseudo-Gaussian beam, called
the far field, with a divergence angle θD at 1/e2:
362

 (B.32)
and since, in the practical range of use (λc < λ < 1.5λc), wo/a ≈ 1.1λ/λc,
the divergence angle θD is about constant:
θD ≈ 1.5 NA (B.33)
Considering the inverse propagation, a free-space Gaussian beam
converging with this same angle θD creates a focused Gaussian spot with
the same radius w0, and can be fully coupled in the fiber if the core is
centered on the input beam. To get such a converging beam, a parallel
Gaussian laser beam with a beam diameter w0 at 1/e2 has to be focused
with a convergent lens that has a focal length f such as (Figure B.16):
2w/f = θD ≈ 1.5 NA (B.34)
B.4.2 Misalignment Coupling Losses
Misalignments decrease the coupling ratio that can be calculated with the
overlap integral between the input wave and the fundamental mode. The
input wave Ein may be decomposed on the set of eigenvectors, which
comprises a unique guided mode, the normalized fundamental mode ef,
and radiating modes erj:
 (B.35)
Figure B.16 Coupling of a Gaussian free-space beam in a single-mode fiber.
The coordinate xf is calculated by the generalized scalar products:
363

 (B.36)
The power or intensity coupling ratio C is the ratio between the
generalized scalar square of (xf ⋅ ef), which is proportional to the power of
the coupled wave, and the generalized scalar square of Ein which is
proportional to the power of the input wave:
 (B.37)
 (B.38)
The phase term ei(ωt–βz) may be eliminated in these generalized scalar
products, and the power coupling ratio is defined with the overlap integrals
of the transverse field distributions:
 (B.39)
To go back to the analogy with the three-dimensional geometrical space,
the fundamental mode is equivalent to an eigenvector ai, and the input
wave is equivalent to a vector U. Coupling light into the fiber is equivalent
to projecting U on the axis of the eigenvector ai to get a projected vector:
 (B.40)
The coupled power is equivalent to the square of the length of Up, and
the power coupling ratio is equivalent to the square of the cosine of the
angle θ between U and ai:
 (B.41)
When U is perpendicular or orthogonal to ai, the coupling ratio C is zero.
364

Now, with the approximation of Gaussian modes, the power coupling
ratio between a focused Gaussian beam with a waist w0 equal to one of
the modes or between two identical fundamental modes may be calculated
using the integral
 (B.42)
Results are often given in decibels with an attenuation Γ defined by:
Γ = −10log[C] (in dB)
Strictly speaking, the attenuation is in decibels the proportion of light
that is coupled, while the loss is the complementary part which is
uncoupled (an attenuation of −1 dB is 80%, and corresponds to a loss of
20%) but very often the term loss is used for attenuation. There are
several kinds of misalignment that yield coupling attenuation or loss
(Figure B.17):
Transverse misalignment d⊥ in the transverse (x, y) plane:
 (B.43)
Longitudinal shift d// in the z propagation direction:
 (B.44)
Angular misalignment θm:
 (B.45)
It is important to notice that this depends on the mode diameter (MFD
= 2w0) and not on the core diameter.
365

Figure B.17 Misalignment-induced loss: (a) transverse; (b) longitudinal; and (c)
angular.
The transverse and angular misalignments yield the same loss law with
the ratio to the mode radius w0 at 1/e2 and the ratio to the half-divergence
angle θD/2 at 1/e2, respectively, because the problem of angular
misalignment can be considered a problem of transverse misalignment
between the virtual Gaussian far fields.
There is a −0.5 dB (90%) attenuation (i.e., a 10% loss) for:
d⊥ = MFD/6;
θm = θD/6;
d// = 2 MFD/3θD.
With a typical high-NA coil fiber (NA = 0.17) at 1,550 nm, which yields
MFD = 2w0 = 0.84 λ/NA = 8 μm, θD = 1.5 NA = 0.25 rad, and then:
366

d⊥ = 1.3 μm;
θm = 0.04 rad = 2.5°;
d// = 20 μm.
These values are obtained with a dry connection (i.e., with a fiber
interface in air), and the 4% (−0.2 dB attenuation) Fresnel reflection loss
must be added.
With an index-matched connection, there is no Fresnel reflection and
the free-space divergence θD of the mode has to be replaced in the
formulae by the reduced divergence θD′ = θD/n in an index-matched
medium where the actual wavelength is reduced to λm = λ/n. This does
not change the transverse effect, but this same −0.5 dB attenuation is now
obtained for an angular misalignment θm = 2.5°/1.45 = 1.6°, or for a
longitudinal shift d// = 1.45 × 20 μm = 30 μm. As can be seen from this
numerical example, the mechanical tolerances of the transverse alignment
are very difficult, but the longitudinal and angular alignments are less
demanding in comparison.
B.4.3 Mode-Diameter Mismatch Loss of LP01 Mode
Another source of coupling loss is a mode diameter mismatch between
two different fibers, or a fiber and an integrated optic waveguide, or a
fiber and a focused Gaussian beam. The result is also deduced from an
overlap integral which can be easily calculated with Gaussian modes. A
mismatch between two mode diameters 2w0 and 2w0′ at 1/e2 yields an
attenuation:
 (B.46)
and
 (B.47)
An attenuation of −0.5 dB (i.e., a loss of 10%) is induced by a diameter
ratio w0/w0′ = 1.4, which shows that the diameter tolerance is not very
367

critical for single-mode fibers.
In the case of elliptical Gaussian modes, encountered with elliptical core
fibers but also integrated-optic waveguide, the mode amplitude may be
written as:
 (B.48)
where w0x and w0y are the half-widths at 1/e2 along the minor and major
axes instead of the radius w0, and the attenuation due to a width mismatch
is:
and
 (B.49)
Note that when an elliptical mode has to be coupled to a circular mode,
the lowest loss is obtained when the radius w0 of the circular mode is
equal to the geometrical mean value of the half-widths of the elliptical
mode:
 (B.50)
For example, with an ellipticity as high as w0x′ = 4w0y′, then w0 is
optimal when:
w0x′/2 = w0 = 2w0y′
and the loss is only 2 dB. With a ratio w0x′/w0y′ = 2, the optimal loss is
only 0.5 dB, with:
This result for elliptical modes is useful for certain fibers that may have
an elliptical core, but also for coupling to integrated-optic circuit or
semiconductor diodes, which usually have an elliptical emission pattern.
This entire analysis of coupling to a single-mode fiber is assuming an
368

input wave that is spatially coherent; that is, the phases at all the points in
a transverse plane are equal or at least correlated. Spatially incoherent
sources cannot be efficiently coupled in a single-mode fiber.
B.4.4 Mode Size Mismatch Loss of LP11 and LP21 Modes
This analysis of the coupling of the fundamental pseudo-Gaussian LP01
mode can be extended to the case of the second-order pseudo-Gaussian-
derivative LP11 mode. We have seen that an important advantage of the
Gaussian function is that it is invariant under Fourier transform (e–πx2
and e–πσ2 form a pair of Fourier transforms), but the Gaussian derivative
has similar properties.
As a matter of fact, using the derivative theorem of the Fourier
transform, it is found that the Fourier transform of the derivative 
 This means that when the LP11 mode
is diffracted at the output of a fiber, it forms a free-space diverging beam
which keeps the same antisymmetric Gaussian-derivative profile (Figure
B.18). Note that the invariance is not complete, because the additional i
term indicates that the Fourier transform of a real odd function is a purely
imaginary odd function. Optically, this yields an additional π/2 phase shift,
called the Guoy effect, on the output wave as it is diffracted in free space.
Figure B.18 Far field of the LP11 mode.
The pseudo-Gaussian-derivative beam that diverges in free space
369

follows a law similar to the Gaussian beam with a half-width at the
maximum w′(z):
 (B.51)
where w1 is the half-width at the maximum of the mode, and θD1 is the
full divergence angle between both extremes:
Figure B.19 Overlap with mode size mismatch: (a) symmetrical Gaussian axis and (b)
antisymmetrical Gaussian-derivative axis.
 (B.52)
Finally, it is also possible to compute the coupling loss of the LP11
mode between two fibers. In particular, a width mismatch yields an
intensity coupling ratio:
 (B.53)
Note that this formula is similar to those of the fundamental mode, but
is at the fourth power instead of the second.
This fourth power can be decomposed with a first power in the
symmetrical Gaussian axis and with a third power in the unsymmetrical
Gaussian derivative axis.
For the four-lobe antisymmetrical LP21 mode that has an
unsymmetrical Gaussian derivative distribution of the mode in both
orthogonal axes, it yields twice the third power, that is, the sixth power:
370

 (B.54)
B.5 Birefringence in a Single-Mode Fiber
B.5.1 Shape-Induced Linear Birefringence
So far, the problem of polarization has been obviated in the analysis by
considering that the polarization modes are degenerated in a perfect fiber.
However, practical fibers have a residual birefringence which modifies the
state of polarization as the wave propagates. There are two sources of
birefringence of single-mode fibers:
Shape birefringence induced by a noncircular core;
Stress birefringence induced by an anisotropic stress through the
elasto-optic effect.
The propagation constant difference ∆β induced by birefringence is
defined by:
∆β = β2 − β1 (B.55)
where β2 and β1 are the propagation constants of the two eigen
orthogonal polarization modes. It may also be expressed with a
birefringence index difference ∆nb between the equivalent indices neq2
and neq1:
∆nb = neq2 − neq1 (B.56)
with
 (B.57)
or a normalized birefringence B
where β is the mean value between β2 and β1 and neq is the mean
equivalent index value between neq2 and neqi.
The calculation of shape birefringence is difficult, but in the case of a
371

small ellipticity of the core, there is a linear birefringence which can be
approximated by:
 (B.58)
where f(V) is a term that depends on the normalized frequency V and that
is equal to about 0.2 in the practical range of use (1 < λ/λc < 1.5), and
where 
 is the ellipticity of a core that has a half-width ay
along the major axis and ax along the minor axis (Figure B.20). Note that
the shape birefringence is proportional to the square of the normalized
index step D of the core, and that the fast principal axis is parallel to the
minor axis and the slow principal axis is parallel to the major axis.
Figure B.20 Elliptical core fiber.
B.5.2 Stress-Induced Linear and Circular Birefringence
Birefringence may also be due to an anisotropic normal stress Tn (Tn is
positive for tensile stress and negative for compressive stress), which
destroys the isotropy of amorphous silica. Such stress induces index
variations and a uniaxial linear birefringence ∆nb with an extraordinary
index variation δne for the axis parallel to the stress and an ordinary index
variation δno for the two other orthogonal axes. Ignoring the effect of the
372

dopant, their index variations are usually expressed as:
 (B.59)
 (B.60)
 (B.61)
where n = 1.45 is the index, E = 70 GPa is the Young modulus, p11 =
0.121 and p12 = 0.270 are the elasto-optic coefficients, and v = 0.16 is
the Poisson ratio for silica.
It yields
The n3/2 term, Poisson ratio v and Young modulus E in these formulae
come from the fact that the elasto-optic coefficients relate the change of
dielectric impermeability ηi (the inverse of dielectric permittivity εri) to
the strain Si, with:
∆ηi = p11 Si (B.62)
for a parallel strain Si, and:
∆ηi = p12 Sj (j ≠ 1) (B.63)
for a perpendicular strain Sj. And there are:
 (B.64)
and
 (B.65)
 (B.66)
373

A tensile (positive) stress decreases both extraordinary and ordinary
indexes, and conversely a compressive stress produces an increase, since
index is related to the density of matter which decreases under tension and
increases under compression. It is interesting to notice that there is mainly
a change of the ordinary index which corresponds to a polarization
perpendicular to the stress direction. The change of the extraordinary
index, parallel to the stress direction, is six times smaller.
Figure B.21 Stress induced by bending.
When a fiber is bent, a transverse compressive stress Tnc is yielded
parallel to the x-axis in the plane of curvature, and is located in the center
of the fiber where the light is guided (Figure B.21):
 (B.67)
where Rclad is the radius of the fiber cladding and R is the radius of
curvature.
This compressive stress creates a negative linear birefringence with an
index difference:
 (B.68)
The fast extraordinary axis is in the plane of curvature (Figure B.22).
Shear stress induced by twisting the fiber also creates birefringent
effects. The analysis is more complicated and requires consideration of the
longitudinal field component of the fundamental HE11 mode, which is
usually ignored in the transverse LP mode approximation. It may be
374

shown that a twist rate tw (in rad/m) creates a circular birefringence:
∆βc = 0.14 tw (B.69)
With circular birefringence (see Section A.13.2), the eigen polarization
modes are both circular states of polarization, and a linear polarization is
dragged by the fiber twist. The angle θp of rotation of the linear
polarization is proportional to the integrated twist angle θtw of the length L
of fiber:
Figure B.22 Bending-induced birefringence.
θp = ∆βc ⋅ L/2 = 0.07 θtw (B.70)
Note that the twist-induced circular birefringence ∆βc and the angle of
rotation θp are wavelength-independent to first order, while for bend-
induced linear birefringence, it is the birefringence index difference ∆nb,
which is wavelength-independent.
B.5.3 Combination of Linear and Circular Birefringence Effects
When several birefringence effects are combined, the analysis of the
resulting effect may be tedious, but the use of a geometrical representation
on the Poincaré sphere eases understanding. On a Poincaré sphere the two
circular states of polarization are placed respectively at each pole, and the
linear states of polarization are placed on the equatorial line (Figure B.23).
The latitude gives the degree of ellipticity of the state of polarization, and
the longitude gives between 0° and 360°, the double of the angle of the
direction of the major axis of the ellipse with respect to the frame of
reference. Two orthogonal states of polarization are opposite on the
375

sphere. The change of state of polarization due to birefringence is given by
a rotation around a diameter of the sphere. Circular birefringence is
represented by a rotation around the polar diameter, and linear
birefringence by a rotation around an equatorial diameter corresponding to
the position of the principal axes. A quarter-wave plate yields a rotation of
90° and a half-wave plate yields a rotation of 180°.
Figure B.23 Poincaré sphere: (a) top view and (b) side view.
The Poincaré sphere is used in bulk optics to explain the total effect of
several birefringent plates. However, its usefulness is limited because it is
well known that the result of the combination of several successive
rotations around nonparallel axes is not straightforward. In single-mode
fiber optics, it is a much more powerful tool because it may explain simply
the effect of several sources of birefringence combined locally in the fiber.
Geometrically, this does not correspond to the combination of successive
rotations anymore, but to the combination of simultaneous rotations that
can be simply added vectorially. In particular, the combination of linear
and circular birefringence is represented by an elliptical birefringence
vector ∆βe, which is the vectorial sum of the linear birefringence vector
∆βl and the circular birefringence vector ∆βc (Figure B.24):
376

Figure B.24 Elliptical birefringence resulting from the vectorial combination of linear
and circular birefringences.
∆βe = ∆βl + ∆βc (B.71)
and its magnitude is:
 (B.72)
B.6 Polarization-Maintaining (PM) Fibers
B.6.1 Principle of Conservation of Polarization
As we have seen, a standard single-mode (SM) fiber has a residual
birefringence due to shape effects or spurious stresses. This modifies the
state of polarization as the wave propagates, and the output state is not
stable over a long period of time. For an interferometric application like
the fiber gyro, it is very desirable to use a polarization-maintaining (PM)
fiber, since interferences require two waves in the same state of
polarization to get high contrast (the terms “polarization-preserving” or
“polarization-holding” fibers were also used, but today it is clearly a PM
fiber). Such a conservation of polarization is obtained by creating a strong
birefringence in the fiber. When light is coupled in one eigenstate, it will
remain in this state. For example, with a high-linear-birefringence fiber,
light has to be coupled with a linear polarization that is parallel to one of
the two perpendicular principal axes of birefringence.
Polarization conservation could also be obtained with a strong circular
birefringence, which will then preserve a circular state of polarization. This
technique would have the advantage of eliminating the problem of
alignment of principal axes, which is encountered with linear birefringence.
However, in practice this is very difficult to implement, and most PM
377

fibers use linear birefringence.
The phenomenon of polarization conservation in high-birefringence
fiber is explained by the effect of phase mismatch: when light is coupled in
one eigen mode of polarization, a first defect will couple some light in the
crossed mode. However, the primary wave and the coupled wave travel at
different velocities because of birefringence, and the light that will be
coupled by the next defect will not be in phase with the coupled wave
coming from the first defect. They do not interfere constructively, and this
limits the amount of power transferred in the crossed mode.
Practical polarization-maintaining fibers have a strong intrinsic linear
birefringence. The first possible solution is the use of a very elliptical core.
However, getting a significant birefringence requires a large index step of
the core, since B is proportional to ∆2. This has two drawbacks: it requires
(1) a high level of dopant, which increases the loss, and (2) a very small
core to remain in the single spatial mode regime, which makes the
mechanical tolerances of input coupling more severe.
The second possible method, which is now widely generalized, is to use
a stress-induced birefringence with additional materials that have a thermal
expansion coefficient larger than silica (several 10–6/°C instead of 5 × 10–
7/°C for pure silica). The fiber preform is fabricated with two rods of
highly doped silica (usually with boron, phosphorous, or aluminum)
located on each side of the core region. After pulling the fiber at high
temperature, these highly doped rods will tend to contract on cooling, but
their thermal contraction is blocked by the surrounding silica, which has a
much lower thermal contraction. This puts the rods under tensile stress
and by reaction also induces stress in the core region where light
propagates: there is a tensile stress Tn+ in the axis of the rods and a
compressive stress Tn– in the orthogonal axis (Figure B.25).
378

Figure B.25 Stress-induced PM fiber showing the tensile and compressive stresses
in the core region.
The rods are circular in the case of the panda fiber but the stressing
region may have another shape, particularly with bow-tie fiber or with an
elliptical tiger-eye stressing structure (Figure B.26).
Figure B.26 Stress structure of panda, bow-tie, and elliptical cladding (tiger-eye) PM
fibers.
The birefringences induced by each stress are added and the total
birefringence index difference ∆nb is derived from:
 (B.73)
 (B.74)
and
 (B.75)
379

 (B.76)
The fast lower index axis is aligned along yy′, the axis perpendicular to
the stressing structure, and the slow higher index axis is aligned along xx′,
the parallel axis. Such a fabrication technique yields typical ∆nb values of
3 to 7 × 10–4. The birefringence of the fiber is very often expressed in
terms of beat length Λ, which has already been defined as Λ = λ/∆nb. At
λ = 1,550 nm, practical values of Λ are 2.5 to 3.5 mm. Such a value of
the birefringence implies a very high stress in the core region, since the
Young modulus E = 7 GPa for silica:
 (B.77)
It means strain of few tenths of percent.
Note that the birefringence index difference does not depend on the
wavelength to first order, and therefore the beat length is proportional to
the wavelength for a given fiber.
B.6.2 Residual Polarization Crossed-Coupling
In practice, polarization-maintaining fibers are not perfect and yield a
residual coupling in the crossed-polarization mode. Before going through a
detailed mathematical calculation, this crossed-polarization coupling grows
linearly with length. The ratio between the power P⊥ coupled in the
crossed polarization mode and the input power P//in in the parallel
polarization mode of the PM fiber is given by the h-parameter, h standing
for holding. This ratio is often called polarization extinction ratio (PER)
with:
This h-parameter is typically between 10–5 to 10–4 m–1, expressed
also as a PER of −20 to −10 dB over 1 km.
Now, mathematically there are random coupling points along the fiber
which can be described with a stochastic process c(z): at a position z, there
is a coupling of the amplitude Ap(z) of the monochromatic primary wave
in the crossed-polarization state, which yields a crossed amplitude dAc(z):
380

dAc(z) = c(z) ⋅ Ap(z) ⋅dz (B.78)
Along a length L, the total crossed amplitude Ac(L) is the result of the
sum integral of all the dAc terms (Figure B.27). Taking into account the
phase delay due to the propagation constant βp of the primary mode and
the propagation constant βc of the crossed mode:
Figure B.27 Distributed random coupling in the crossed-polarization mode.
Ap(z) = Ap(0)e–iβpz (B.79)
and the crossed-amplitude term dAc(z) yields at L:
dAcL(z) = dAc(z)e–iβc(L–z) (B.80)
Then
 (B.81)
 (B.82)
where ∆β = βp − βc is the difference of propagation constants due to the
birefringence of the fiber, with
Since c(z) is a stochastic process, Ac(L) is one also, which is the result
of a stochastic integral. Its statistical properties may be calculated simply,
when c(z) is a stationary process (i.e., the characteristics of the spurious
random couplings are uniform along the fiber). It is possible to define the
autocorrelation Rc(z) of the stationary process c(z):
Rc(Z) = E{c(z) ⋅ c*(z − Z)} (B.83)
where E{} denotes the ensemble average. The power spectrum (or
spectral density) is the Fourier transform of the autocorrelation:
381

 (B.84)
where σ is the spatial frequency. We have:
 (B.85)
and
 (B.86)
because of the fundamental result of linear transformation, which states
that “the ensemble average of the linear transformation L[x] of a stochastic
process x is equal to the linear transformation of the ensemble average of
this stochastic process x”:
E{L[x]} = L[E{x}] (B.87)
Since AcAc* is the intensity Ic of the crossed-coupled wave, and ApAp* is
the intensity Ip of the input primary wave, the total intensity coupling ratio
C has an ensemble average:
 (B.88)
Applying the change of variable Z = z1 − z2 gives us:
 (B.89)
Assuming that the length L of the fiber is much longer than the width of
the autocorrelation Rc(Z) of the coupling process, we have:
 (B.90)
and since ∆β/2π = 1/Λ, where Λ is the birefringence beat length:
E{C} = L ⋅ Sc(1/Λ) (B.91)
The mean intensity coupling ratio E{C} in the crossed state of
polarization is proportional to the length L of the fiber and to the value of
the power spectrum Sc of the stationary stochastic coupling process c(z)
382

for a spatial frequency equal to the inverse of the birefringence beat length
Λ. This term Sc(1/Λ) is often called the h parameter of the fiber (h
standing for holding), with:
E{C} = h ⋅ L (B.92)
With stress-induced high-birefringence fibers, the typical values of the h
parameter are 10–5 to 10–4 m–1, which corresponds to a polarization
conservation of 20 to 10 dB over 1 km.
This mathematical calculation confirms the explanation of polarization
conservation based on phase mismatch. The random coupling c(z) has a
power spectrum Sc(σ), and its spatial frequency components do not
usually yield crossed coupling, except for the frequency 1/Λ, which is the
only one to be phase-matched, because it is spatially synchronized with
the propagation delay induced by birefringence.
To carry out this calculation simply, we have assumed that the intensity
of the coupled wave remains very small compared to the intensity of the
primary wave, and, therefore, that the light which is recoupled in the
primary mode may be ignored. When this is not the case, the mean value
of C tends to 1/2 because an equilibrium is reached with the same mean
intensity in both orthogonal polarizations, and (Figure B.28):
Figure B.28 Power crossed-coupling E{C} along a polarization-maintaining fiber.
 (B.93)
The previous calculations were derived using ensemble averages on
observations carried out with a monochromatic source. It is well known
with temporal stochastic processes that the statistics of a process may be
determined with temporal averaging on a single observation if the process
383

is ergodic:
E{x(t)} = < x(t) > (B.94)
and
R(τ) = E{x(t)x*(t − τ)} = Γ(τ) = < x(t)x*(t − τ) > (B.95)
where the brackets < > denote temporal averaging.
B.6.3 Depolarization of Crossed-Coupling with a Broadband Source
With the stochastic coupling process c(z), it is possible to define an
equivalent to ergodicity with a broad light spectrum that yields, on a single
observation, a stable intensity coupling ratio Ct equal to the ensemble
average E{C}. The broad spectrum source has to be linearly polarized and
coupled along one principal axis of the high-birefringence fiber. At the
output, most of the input intensity is still in the input eigenstate of
polarization, and there is some spurious intensity in the crossed
polarization that is not coherent with the primary wave. We have seen
(Section A.12.3) that the effect of a broad source in an interferometer may
be explained by considering the propagation of a wave train, which has a
length equal to the decoherence length Ldc of the source. When the path
difference is larger than Ldc, there are two wave trains at the output of the
interferometer that do not overlap and cannot interfere.
Similarly, an input wave train coupled on both polarization modes of a
high-birefringence fiber propagates at different velocities on each mode,
and there are at the output two wave trains which do not overlap if their
path difference is larger than Ldc (Figure B.29). The light then becomes
statistically depolarized; that is, the state of polarization varies randomly in
time, because the phases of both orthogonal mode are not correlated
anymore. The length of fiber required to get such a depolarization is called
the depolarization length Ld. Since the optical path of a high-birefringence
fiber accumulated by one mode is n ⋅ Ld and the one accumulated by the
other is (n + ∆nb)Ld, the path difference must be:
(n + ∆nb)Ld − nLd = Ldc (B.96)
then
Ld = Ldc/∆nb (B.97)
or
384

Ld/Ldc = Λ/λ (B.98)
Taking a source with λ = 1,550 nm, and ∆λFWHM = 15 nm, which
has a decoherence length Ldc = λ2/∆λFWHM = 150 μm, a 5 × 10–4
birefringence index difference yields a depolarization length Ld = 30 cm.
Figure B.29 Propagation of a wave train along both orthogonal polarization modes.
A fiber may be decomposed in segments with a length equal to Ld.
When an input wave train is coupled in one eigen polarization mode, it is
possible to consider that a secondary wave train is coupled in the crossed
mode for each segment (Figure B.30). These secondary wave trains are
not coherent, and are therefore added in intensity. The total intensity
coupling Ct is the sum of all the random intensity couplings Ci along each
segment:
Ct = ΣCi (B.99)
Figure B.30 Secondary wave trains coupled in the crossed-polarization mode
(assuming it is the slow mode).
385

This sum is actually proportional to the ensemble average E{Ci}:
 (B.100)
where N = L/Ld is the number of depolarization lengths Ld along the fiber
length L. Then
 (B.101)
and since E{Ci} = h ⋅ Ld, we find:
Ct = h ⋅ L = E{C} (B.102)
It is important to remember that the measurement of the intensity
crossed-coupling ratio yields a significant result only if the experiment is
carried out with a broad spectrum, because with a single experiment this
actually yields an ensemble average of the couplings on all the
depolarization lengths along the fiber. With a monochromatic light, the
result is a random variable, and a single observation is not sufficient to
deduce the statistical properties of the process.
Note that the simple formula Ld/Ldc = 1/(∆nb) = Λ/λ that defined the
depolarization length Ld is valid only if the birefringence index difference
∆nb is wavelength-independent, which is the case to first order with
stress-induced high-birefringence fibers, which are the most commonly
used for getting polarization conservation.
With elliptical core fiber, the birefringence index difference has a
significant wavelength dependence, particularly with high core ellipticity,
and this simple formula is not valid anymore. The exact definition of the
depolarization length Ld is the length of fiber required to have a difference
of group, not phase propagation time between both polarization modes
equal to the decoherence time τdc. For modes 1 and 2:
 (B.103)
386

Since vg = dω/dβ and 1/vg = dβ/dω (see Appendix A),
 (B.104)
with the birefringence ∆β = ω∆nb/c. If the birefringence index difference
∆nb is, as usual, wavelength- (or frequency-) independent, then:
 (B.105)
and the simple formula Ld/Ldc = 1/(∆nb) is retrieved. However, if it is
wavelength-dependent, then:
 (B.106)
Note that the case of twist-induced circular birefringence yields a very
peculiar result. In fact, we have seen in Section B.5.2 that polarization is
dragged angularly by the twist at a constant rate, independently of the
wavelength; that is, the birefringence ∆β is independent of wavelength (or
frequency). This implies d(∆β)/dω = 0; that is, mathematically, Ld tends
to infinity. In practice, because of second-order effects, the difference of
group velocity between the two eigen circular polarizations is not zero, but
is much smaller than the difference of phase velocity. In this peculiar case,
the phenomenon of depolarization induced by the propagation of a
broadband source in a high-birefringence fiber is greatly reduced, since the
depolarization length is much longer than Ldc/∆nb.
B.6.4 Polarization Mode Dispersion (PMD)
In single-mode telecom fibers, spurious fiber birefringence was first seen
as yielding unstable state of polarization and requiring polarization-
independent components with low polarization-dependent loss (PDL) and
low polarization-dependent coupling (PDC).
However, as the data rate increased, the propagation delay due to
birefringence started to yield problems. It was called polarization mode
dispersion, PMD, and more precisely coupled-mode PMD (PMDc). It is a
random process that grows as the square root of the propagation length. A
387

very low PMDc telecom fiber is below 
The linear birefringence of a PM fiber yields also PMD. PMD is
detrimental in telecom because it broadens the input signal pulse, but it is
useful in the fiber gyro because it separates crossed-polarization wave
trains, equivalent to pulses, yielding depolarization.
However the linear birefringence of a PM fiber is not a random process,
and its PMD effect is called intrinsic PMD, PMDi. It grows linearly with
length. Since the propagation time delay due the birefringence index ∆nb is
∆nb ⋅ L/c, there is:
with a typical ∆nb = 5 × 10–4, it yields a PMDi = 1.7 ns/km.
Note that when a PM fiber is longer than 1/h (h being its holding
parameter) we saw (Figure B.23) that there is a statistic equilibrium with
half the power in each polarization. In terms of PMD, the PM fiber
reaches the regime of coupled-mode PMD (PMDc) that grows as the
square-root of length.
However, since h = 10–4 to 10–5 m–1, 1/h is 10 to 100 km, which is
longer than the length of PM fiber used even in very-high-performance
gyros.
B.6.5 Polarizing (PZ) Fiber
As we saw in Section B.8.1, a polarization-maintaining (PM) fiber has a
strong linear birefringence created by a stressing structure. The tensile
stress Tn+ aligned along the structure decreases mostly the index of its
perpendicular polarization with little effect on its parallel polarization.
Conversely the compressive stress Tn–, orthogonal to the structure,
increases mostly the index of its perpendicular polarization with little effect
on its parallel polarization.
However, this stressed region is localized around the core. In the axis
orthogonal to the stress structure, the index profiles for both polarizations
converge to the index of the unstressed cladding nclad (Figure B.31).
388

Figure B.31 Stress and index profiles of a PM fiber for the slow mode (dotted line)
and the fast mode (solid line).
Operated far above the higher-mode cut-off wavelength (λ > 1.5λc), the
mode profile widens and its equivalent index decreases as seen in Section
B.3.1. The equivalent index neq-slow of the slow (high-index) polarization
mode remains above nclad, and then guided, but the equivalent index neq-
fast of the fast (low-index) polarization mode gets below nclad which
induces leakage, and yields some polarization dependent loss (PDL) of the
PM fiber.
Such a behavior can be optimized with specific index profile to get
single-polarization propagation for the slow mode, yielding a polarizing
(PZ) fiber. However, as λ continues to increase (λ > 1.7λc) the mode
becomes so wide that bending loss increases even for this slow mode.
It is possible to get a window of about 10% of the central wavelength
where the PZ fiber can be used (Figure B.32).
Figure B.32 Fast and slow mode attenuation of a PZ fiber.
B.7 All-Fiber Components
389

B.7.1 Evanescent-Field Coupler and Wavelength Multiplexer
When the phenomenon of interferences in bulk optics has been explained,
we have made the assumption of plane waves propagating in bulk
interferometers that are mechanically aligned; that is, the orientation of the
mirrors and beam splitters is adequate for getting the same phase
difference for the whole light wavefront. In practice, these alignments are
very delicate and there may be interference fringes or rings. The difficult
problems of fringe shape and localization, as well as that of spatial
coherence, have been obviated in the explanation, since single-mode fiber
optics, with which we are concerned, makes things much simpler: by
principle, the fundamental mode of a single-mode fiber is spatially
coherent, and with an all-guided interferometer, there is no spatial fringe
modulation. Single-mode fiber optics is an ideal technology for making
long-path interferometers because problems of mechanical alignments are
limited to those of input power coupling. System-wise, the effect of the
transverse dimensions may be forgotten, and only a device with a single
curvilinear longitudinal coordinate has to be considered.
As we have already seen, the use of polarization-maintaining fibers is
suitable for avoiding problems of polarization control, but to take full
advantage of this technology, it is desirable to duplicate the various
components of a bulk interferometer in a rugged all-guided form.
The main function in an interferometer is beam splitting to separate the
input wave and recombine the interfering waves. Such a function may be
realized in an all-fiber form with evanescent-wave coupling. Light may be
coupled between two adjacent cores because the evanescent tail of the
bell-shaped fundamental mode extends into the cladding and can excite the
mode of the other fiber (Figure B.33).
390

Figure B.33 Principle of evanescent-wave coupling.
With two identical cores, the coupled power Pc follows a sine square
law with respect to the interaction length Lint, and the transmitted power
Pt remains complementary:
Pc = Pin sin2(cs ⋅ Lint)
Pt = Pin cos2(cs ⋅ Lint) (B.107)
where cs is the coupling strength. The power is completely transferred into
the second fiber for the coupling length Lcp, with
cs ⋅ Lcp = π/2 (B.108)
and then starts to come back in the first fiber. To get a 50-50 or 3-dB
coupler, the coupling strength cs has to be adjusted to have the interaction
length Lint equal to the half-coupling length:
 (B.109)
The coupling strength is adjusted with the core-to-core distance dcc. A
good order of magnitude is dcc ≈ 5a (a being the core radius) and Lint ≈ 1
391

mm (i.e., a few thousands of wavelengths in the fiber). Note that when the
wavelength increases, the mode extends further into the cladding, which
improves the coupling strength. A good order of magnitude is a relative
change ∆cs/cs equal to three or four times the relative wavelength change
∆λ/λ. This wavelength dependence is used to make all-fiber wavelength
multiplexer-demultiplexer.
Figure B.34 Side-polished coupler: (a) half-coupler block; (b) grinding and side-
polishing; and (c) coupler assembly.
Such evanescent-field fiber couplers were first fabricated with the side-
polishing technique, where the fiber is bonded in a curved groove sawed
into a supporting silica block. The ensemble is ground and polished
laterally to remove the cladding and get access to the evanescent field.
Two identical blocks are then mated with an index-matching bonding to
get power splitting (Figure B.34). Side-polished couplers can be made very
small (10 mm long) and have an excellent ruggedness and a good thermal
stability. Almost any polarization-preserving fibers may be used, but this
requires orienting the stressing-rod axis perpendicularly to the interface to
minimize crossed-polarization coupling (Figure B.35).
392

Figure B.35 Section view of a side-polished coupler with stress-induced
birefringence fiber.
An alternative technique of fusion tapering has also been developed.
Instead of removing the cladding, two fibers are tapered by fusion and
stretching, which reduces the distance between both cores and also
increases the diameter of the mode, which becomes loosely guided as the
core diameter decreases (Figure B.36). This technique is very
advantageous with telecom single-mode fibers, because the fabrication
process may be automated and fusion provides an excellent thermal
stability. However, with polarization-maintaining fibers, this technique
requires a specific fiber structure to avoid loss induced by the highly doped
stressing rods but this problem has been overcome. The length of a fused
coupler is usually larger (20 to 40 mm) than that of a side-polished
coupler, but fused-coupler technology is clearly the dominant approach
today for couplers and wavelength multiplexer.
Figure B.36 Fused-tapered coupler.
B.7.2 Piezoelectric Phase Modulator
Another important function to fulfill is phase modulation in order to use
signal processing techniques that improve signal-to-noise ratio. This can be
simply implemented with an optical fiber wound around a piezoelectric
tube (Figure B.37). The driving voltage changes the tube diameter and
393

thus modifies the length L of the fiber. Ignoring mode dispersion effects,
the phase change is:
 (B.110)
with
 (B.111)
where, as we have already seen, p12 and p11 are the elasto-optic
coefficients and v is the Poisson ratio of silica. We have:
 (B.112)
in relative value one gets:
 (B.113)
and since nSiO2:
 (B.114)
This 0.78 coefficient is also find in the variation of the relative
wavelength change of a fiber Bragg grating under a longitudinal strain
∆L/L.
Figure B.37 In-line phase modulator using fiber wound around a piezoelectric tube.
Such an all-fiber phase modulator is very simple to fabricate, but its
394

efficiency is limited to the sharp mechanical resonances of the
piezoelectric tube. Three kinds of resonance may be used:
The very efficient loop resonance, which has a typical product
frequency × diameter of about 50 kHz ⋅ cm (i.e., useful for a few
tens of kilohertz);
The height resonance, which has a medium efficiency and a
typical product frequency × height of about 150 kHz ⋅ cm (i.e.,
useful for a few hundred kilohertz);
The thickness resonance, which has a low efficiency, but may
work at a few megahertz, since the typical product frequency ×
thickness is about 2 MHz × mm.
In a fiber gyro, piezo-electric phase modulators are then used for sine
biasing phase modulation (i.e., the open-loop configuration), but they do
not work for wideband feedback modulation as the phase ramp for the
closed-loop configuration.
B.7.3 Polarization Controller
If PM fibers preserve the state of polarization, it is not the case with SM
fibers which then require polarization control. As seen in Section A.13.2, it
can be performed with bulk-optic birefringent plates, in particular half-
wave (Λ/2) and quarter-wave (Λ/4) plates but it can be also done directly
in the SM fiber, by applying stress. For active control, they are devices
that squeeze a fiber inducing birefringence because of transverse stress.
It is also possible to use bending-induced birefringence detailed in
Section B.5.2:
 (B.115)
where Dclad is the diameter of the SM fiber cladding and D is the
diameter of curvature.
For telecom SM fiber with Dclad = 125 μm a quarter-wave (Λ/4) delay
is obtained at 1,550 nm with one loop of 16.5 mm of diameter or two
loops of 33 mm of diameter, and polarization is adjusted by rotating these
all-fiber phase plates or actually phase loops.
The general formula to obtain a delay of λ/m with N loops of diameter
D is:
395

 (B.116)
A polarization controller (Figure B.38) can be composed of a series of
Λ/4, Λ/2, and Λ/4 loops or only two Λ/4 loops.
Figure B.38 All fiber polarization controller (sometimes called Lefevre’s loops).
Sometimes called Lefevre’s loops, the polarization controllers were
invented for the fiber gyro in the early 1980s but have since found many
applications in laboratory experiments, particularly in telecoms.
B.7.4 Lyot Depolarizer
We already saw in Section B.6.3 that propagation in a PM fiber yields
decoherence between the orthogonal states because of birefringence
produces a delay longer than the coherence of the source entering light
with a broad spectrum at 45° of the principal axes produces depolarized
light; however, if the input light is not at 45°, the power is not balanced for
both orthogonal axes and light is only partially depolarized.
396

Figure B.39 Front page of Bell Labs News journal, presenting the first 1 terabit/s
transmission experiment in 1998. Note the numerous all-fiber polarization controllers
in the picture.
This problem is solved in bulk-optics with a Lyot depolarizer composed
of a first birefringent crystal followed by a second one with principal axes
rotated by 45° and the double in length. This can be duplicated in an all-
fiber form with two pieces of PM fiber connected at 45° (Figure B.40).
B.7.5 Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG)
As we already saw in Section A.9.3, a fiber Bragg grating is a multiple-
wave interferometer working on a principle similar to the one of a
multilayer dielectric mirror. A UV lateral grid illumination of the core of the
397

fiber induces a permanent periodic index increase that yields a resonance
effect and reflects the wavelength λR (see Appendix A):
λR = 2 ⋅ nSiO2 ⋅ ΛBragg (B.117)
where nSiO2 is the index of silica (≈ 1.45) and ΛBragg is the period of the
grid illumination.
As we also saw in Section A.14, the relative width of the reflection
bandwidth ∆λR/λR is at best the inverse of the number N of periods
ΛBragg:
 (B.118)
Since ΛBragg is about 0.5 μm at 1,550 nm 104 periods (i.e., a length of
5 mm) are required to get ∆λR = 0.15 nm.
In addition, as seen in Section B.1.5, fiber Bragg gratings follow the
temperature dependence of the index of silica and for a bare fiber:
 (B.119)
However, with a coating, there is an additional thermal expansion and
the relative variation is about 10 to 11 ppm/°C instead of 6.35 ppm/°C.
Figure B.40 Principle of an all-fiber Lyot depolarizer with a length L1 of PM fiber
connected to a length L2 = 2L1 at 45°.
Finally, as seen in Section B.7.2, a strain ∆L/L yields a relative Bragg
reflection wavelength:
 (B.120)
398

B.8 Pigtailed Bulk-Optic Components
B.8.1 General Principle
If fiber-optics makes use of all-fiber components and, as we shall see in
Appendix C, integrated-optic circuits, there are also components using
fiber-pigtailed miniaturized bulk-optic bench.
The basic idea is that, as seen in Section A.11, a Gaussian beam keeps a
constant diameter 2w0 with a quasi-planar phase front over a distance zR
such that λzR/πw02 < 1. It can be approximated considering that a beam
waist 2w0 = Nλ remains about constant over a distance zR = N2λ, where
zR is known as the Rayleigh range (Figure B.41).
In addition, as seen in Section A.7.3, lens aberrations decrease with
very short focal length.
Assuming a telecom fiber with NA = 0.12, and then a divergence of the
output equal to 1.5NA, a focal length f = 2 mm yields a collimated beam
with a diameter 2w0 = 1.5 NA ⋅ f = 360 μm. At a wavelength λ = 1.55
μm, the Rayleigh range zR is as high as 66 mm. Optical waves face
diffraction, but it is possible to manage to have a collimated beam with
few tenths of millimeters in diameter over a length of several tens of
millimeters, where various bulk components can be placed.
B.8.2 Optical Isolator
An isolator allows light to propagate in one direction but blocks it in the
opposite direction. It is a key component to protect lasers, amplifiers and
ASE sources from spurious back-reflected light that produces instabilities.
It is based on the nonreciprocal Faraday effect: a longitudinal magnetic
field creates a circular birefringence that rotates the orientation of the
incoming polarization (see Section A.13.2).
Figure B.41 Rayleigh range zR of a Gaussian beam.
399

Light is first linearly polarized, sent in the Faraday rotator cell, which
provides a 45° rotation of the polarization axis, and goes through a second
polarizer parallel to the polarization exiting the cell. In the reverse
direction, light is also polarized and rotated by 45° in the Faraday cell, but
since Faraday effect is nonreciprocal, this 45° rotation is in the opposite
direction, and it is exiting at 90° of the axis of the first polarizer that blocks
it (Figure B.42).
Figure B.42 Principle of an optical isolator.
The principle of Faraday optical isolation is polarization dependent, but
it is possible to get a polarization-independent design by replacing the
polarizers by polarizing splitters combiners: they divide the input light in
two orthogonal states of polarization that go separately through the
Faraday cell to experience isolation and that are recombined at the output.
Because of the development of EDFAs for telecommunications,
isolators have become a very common component in the 1,550-nm
window, and they can be found in a compact and ruggedized pigtailed
package.
B.8.3 Optical Circulator
A circulator is actually an isolator where, instead of being blocked by a
polarizer, the returning light is sent into a third port by a polarization beam
splitter (PBS) (Figure B.43).
400

Figure B.43 Principle of an optical circulator.
As for the isolator, a circulator comes in a fiber-pigtailed configuration
as well as with a polarization-independent design. It is also now a quite
common component since it is used in combination with fiber Bragg
grating to get the reflected filtered wave without the loss of 6 dB taking
place with a 3-dB coupler (Figure B.44).
B.9 Rare-Earth-Doped Amplifying Fiber
Erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) was a huge revolution in optical
fiber communications during the 1990s, and it happened to be a quasi-
ideal source for the fiber gyro.
Figure B.44 Comparison between the use of a 3-dB coupler and the one of a
circulation with a Fiber Bragg grating (FBG) reflector.
The basic scheme of an EDFA is a pigtailed pump laser diode at 980 nm
(or 1,480 nm), which is multiplexed with the signal in the 1,550-nm range
401

that is amplified in the erbium doped fiber (EDF) with a gain as high as 30
dB. There is an isolator at the output to avoid lasing on back-scattering or
back-reflection (Figure B.45).
This amplifying process is polarization-independent and an EDF is
usually not preserving polarization.
Figure B.45 Basic scheme of an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA).
As already discussed, an EDFA without an input signal emits a
significant broadband optical power through the process of amplified
spontaneous emission (ASE). The basic broadband spontaneous emission
is partly guided in the aperture of the fiber and amplified by stimulated
emission, which preserves the broad spectrum of the seed spontaneous
emission.
To obtain more power, an ASE source uses a double-path configuration.
A mirror is placed at the output to get spontaneous emission amplification
also in the reverse direction. Such a double-path ASE design requires
however a high-rejection isolator to avoid lasing (Figure B.46). Typical
length of EDF for an EDFA or an ASE source is 5 to 20 meters.
If erbium at 1,550 nm is the privileged choice that takes advantage of
the lowest attenuation of silica fiber, note that other rare earths allow
amplification and ASE in silica fiber: ytterbium and neodymium in the
1,050-nm range and thulium in the 2-μm range.
Figure B.46 Basic scheme of an erbium ASE source.
402

B.10 Microstructured Optical Fiber (MOF)
So far, all the optical fibers we discussed were based on total internal
reflection (TIR) between a high-index core and a low-index cladding.
During the 1990s, appeared a drastically different concept. The
vocabulary takes time to settle down: we saw that PM (polarization-
maintaining) fiber were called polarization-preserving or polarization-
holding, and ASE (amplified spontaneous emission) sources were super-
radiant or super-luminescent or super-fluorescent. These microstructured
fibers are also called photonic-crystal fiber or photonic bandgap fibers. In
any case these MOF are of two very different kinds: solid core and hollow
core.
Solid-core microstructured fibers have a silica core surrounded by
air/vacuum channels that lower the averaged index of the cladding (Figure
B.47). They behave like ordinary fibers but with interesting properties. In
particular, the practical single-mode regime is wider in terms of wavelength
than the one of classical fibers. It is possible to have a large core without
bending loss when nonlinearity is a problem or, on the contrary, to have a
very small core to increase nonlinear effects. These fibers have also very
specific dispersion properties.
For the fiber gyro, their advantage is not clear. One may outline that
PM microstructured fibers use shape birefringence and they seem to have
less spurious twist than ordinary PM fibers, which reduces the magnetic
dependence of a fiber gyro. However, since μ-metal shielding is very
efficient, this advantage is not fundamental.
Figure B.47 Solid-core microstructured fiber.
Hollow-core microstructured fibers are working one a completely
different principle. They are composed of an air core surrounded by a
403

honey-comb of air holes (Figure B.48).
Figure B.48 Hollow-core microstructured fiber (courtesy of Photonics Bretagne.).
Guidance in the low-index core is obtained through a resonance effect
of the periodic partial reflections at the air-glass interfaces. It should be
viewed as a 2-D Bragg reflection.
Obviously such a matter-free fiber is of great interest for very-high
performance gyroscope since it drastically reduces matter-related spurious
effects as the nonlinear Kerr effect or the magneto-optic Faraday effect. It
has also some interest for the Shupe effect since it suppresses the thermal
dependence of the index which is about 6 ppm/°C in relative value when
the thermal expansion of silica is only 0.5 ppm/°C but to take full
advantage of this effect one has to reduce the thermal expansion drag of
the coating which can be on the order of 5 ppm/°C as we already saw.
In any case, present attenuation of hollow-core fibers is still on the
order of several dB/km, but one can expect further improvement viewing
the recent progresses.
B.11 Nonlinear Effects in Optical Fibers
So far, we have been concerned only by linear effects: the incoming
frequency does not change and wave velocity does not depend on power.
However, even if the power involved in fiber-optics is not very high, it is
concentrated in a small core and the power density can become significant.
404

Potential nonlinearities are also integrated along a large length.
These nonlinear effects are very important in optical fiber
communications but in a fiber gyro, the only damaging nonlinear effect is
the Kerr effect and we shall see that this problem is solved with a dc
broadband source in the interferometric fiber-gyro.
Of interest for the fiber gyro remain the stimulated Brillouin scattering
(SBS) since it allows distributed measurement of temperature and stress
along a fiber, and they are useful to measure the detailed temperature
response of a fiber coil, with the method of Brillouin optical time domain
analysis (BOTDA).
Selected Bibliography
Agrawal, G.P., Nonlinear Fiber Optics, New York: Academic Press, 1995.
Dakin, J. C., and B. Culshaw, (eds.), Optical Fiber Sensor: Principles and Components,
Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1988.
Daly, J. C., (ed.), Fiber Optics, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1984.
Desurvire, E., Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers, New York: Wiley-Interscience, 2002.
Digonnet, M. J. F., “Broadband Rare-Earth Doped Fiber Laser Sources,” Ch. 9, Optical
Fiber Rotation Sensing, New York: Academic Press, 1994.
Erdogan, T., “Fiber Grating Spectra,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, Vol. 15, No. 8,
1997, pp. 1277–1294.
Jeunhomme, L. B., Single-Mode Fiber Optics, New York: Marcel Dekker, 1990.
Kashyap, R., Fiber Bragg Gratings, New York: Academic Press, 1999.
Marcuse, D., Theory of Dielectric Optical Waveguides, New York: Academic Press,
1974.
Miller, C. M., Optical Fiber Splices and Connectors, New York: Marcel Dekker, 1986.
Okoshi, T., Optical Fibers, New York: Academic Press, 1982.
Papoulis, A., Probability, Random Variables and Stochastic Processes, New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1965.
Russel, P. S. J., “Photonic Crystal Fibers,” J.L.T., Vol. 24, No. 12, 2006, pp. 4729–4749.
Vassalo, C., Optical Waveguide Concepts, New York: Elsevier, 1991.
405

APPENDIX C
Fundamentals of Integrated Optics
for the Fibergyroscope
C.1 Principle and Basic Functions of LiNbO3 Integrated
Optics
C.1.1 Channel Waveguide
The concept of integrated optics is based on the use of microlithographic
techniques to fabricate optical components with waveguides on a planar
substrate. The term planar lightwave circuit (PLC) is by the way
sometimes used for an integrated-optic circuit (IOC). Like integrated
electronics, it provides potential for integrating several functions on the
same circuit which improves compactness and reduces connections.
The basic element of an integrated-optic circuit is the strip or channel
waveguide. It is fabricated by increasing the index of refraction underneath
the surface of a substrate with a dopant in a narrow channel defined with
microlithographic masking techniques. This substrate acts as the equivalent
of the surrounding cladding of an optical fiber (Figure C.1). In particular,
single-mode propagation, which is required in an interferometer, is
obtained with a waveguide width and depth of several micrometers and an
index variation of a few tenths of a percent. These values are very similar
to the characteristics of the core of a single-mode fiber.
Figure C.1 Equivalence between (a) an integrated-optic waveguide and (b) an
optical fiber.
406

However, because of the substrate surface, the cylindrical symmetry of
a fiber is lost, which makes the theory more complicated. In particular, the
fundamental mode is not degenerated anymore in terms of polarization.
Instead of the hybrid HE11 fundamental mode of a fiber, the fundamental
mode is a transverse electric (TE) mode for the polarization parallel to the
substrate surface, and a transverse magnetic (TM) mode for the
polarization perpendicular to the substrate surface as seen for planar
waveguide in Section A.6.2 (see Figure C.2). The longitudinal magnetic
component of the TE mode and the longitudinal electric component of the
TM mode are usually negligible, as is the case of the longitudinal electric
and magnetic components of the HE11 mode of a fiber, because the index
step of the waveguide is also small. They should be called linearly
polarized (LP) modes as in a fiber but the habit is still to call them TE and
TM.
Figure C.2 States of polarization of the HE11 modes of a fiber and the TE and TM
modes of an integrated-optic waveguide.
C.1.2 Coupling Between an Optical Fiber and an Integrated-Optic
Waveguide
To couple light into the waveguide, the sides of the substrate are polished
with a sharp edge, and fiber pigtails are butted against it with their core
facing the waveguide (Figure C.3). Since the fundamental modes of the
fiber and of the waveguide have similar sizes, there is good coupling
efficiency (typically 80% to 90%, that is, a connection attenuation of 1 to
0.5 dB). Several methods may be used to ruggedize these connections. In
particular, the fiber may be held in a small ferrule that is directly bonded to
the substrate side (Figure C.4), the substrate typically being 1 mm in
thickness, while the fiber diameter is on the order of one-tenth of a
millimeter. Taking into account a propagation attenuation of about 0.1
dB/cm, the fiber-to-fiber attenuation of a pigtailed circuit is typically few
to several dB, depending on the complexity of the circuit.
407

Figure C.3 End-fire coupling of a fiber with a waveguide.
Now LiNbO3 (lithium niobate) has indices of refraction around 2.2
when the one of silica fiber is 1.45. It yields a 4% partial reflection at the
connection, as seen in Section A.6.1. To avoid guided back-reflection into
the waveguide, the end-face is polished with a slant angle, as well as the
fiber. The angle pair is typically 10° in LiNbO3 and 15° for the fiber to
respect the refraction law and keep a good coupling (Figure C.5).
Figure C.4 Ruggedized coupling of a fiber with a waveguide.
C.1.3 Fundamental Mode Profile and Equivalence with an LP11 Fiber
Mode
As already seen, an integrated-optic channel waveguide is quite similar to a
fiber core, but with a significant difference: the waveguide is buried just
underneath the substrate top surface, yielding a very high index step in the
y direction perpendicular to this interface. Boundary conditions impose a
null field on this interface. It can be also considered that this interface act
as a perfect mirror working in total internal reflection under grazing
incidence. As seen in Section A.6.1, such reflection yields a π phase shift
which leads to destructive interference between an incoming wave and its
reflection.
In the x direction parallel to the interface, the mode profile is similar to
408

the one of a single-mode fiber, and follows the usual Gaussian curve seen
in Section B.1.2. The waist wx is now the mode half-width at 1/e in
amplitude (or 1/e2 in power density) instead of the mode radius of the
LP01 mode of a fiber.
Figure C.5 Slant-angle faces to avoid backreflection.
In the perpendicular direction, the mode profile is actually very close to
the normalized derivative of a Gaussian function having a maximum for
wy, as with the second order LP11 mode of a fiber (see Section B.3.5) but
with only one lobe (Figure C.6).
Figure C.6 Amplitude distribution of the fundamental mode of a channel waveguide:
symmetrical Gaussian profile in the x parallel direction and Gaussian-derivative
profile in the y perpendicular direction.
The field (amplitude) profile can be decomposed as:
e(x, y) = e0 ⋅ e//(x)⋅ e⊥(y)
with a normalized Gaussian distribution e//(x) in the parallel direction:
409

and a normalized Gaussian-derivative distribution in the perpendicular
direction:
The 1/e value of this normalized Gaussian derivative function is
obtained for y ≈ 0.23wy and y ≈ 2.12wy, and then the full width at 1/e in
amplitude and 1/e2 in intensity (power density) is about 2wy.
The similarity between the perpendicular distribution of the fundamental
mode of a channel waveguide and the distribution of the second-order
LP11 mode of a fiber may be pushed considering a virtual image with a π
phase shift. The fundamental mode of a channel waveguide has actually
the same characteristics as the antisymetric second-order LP11 mode of
an equivalent fiber with a core that has the same width 2ax in the parallel
direction and a width 2ay which is the double of the height ay of the
waveguide in the perpendicular direction (Figure C.8).
This similarity is also found in the equivalent index which follows the
law of an LP11 fiber mode (see Section B.3.5). In particular, if the
fundamental mode of a fiber is unique for a normalized frequency V
following 0 < V < 2.4, and has theoretically not cut off, the fundamental
mode of a channel waveguide is unique for a normalized frequency V
following 2.4 < V < 3.8 as an LP11 fiber mode, and has a cutoff when V
< 2.4, with V being calculated considering that the core radius of the
equivalent fiber is ay, the full height (in the perpendicular direction) of the
actual waveguide.
Figure C.7 Normalized mode profile (Gaussian-derivative) in the y perpendicular
410

direction.
C.1.4 Mismatch Coupling Attenuation Between a Fiber and a
Waveguide
The coupling attenuation between a waveguide and a fiber is calculated
with an overlap integral between the mode of the fiber and the mode of
the waveguide as seen in Section B.4.
Figure C.8 Equivalence between (a) fundamental mode of a channel waveguide with
a size 2ax × ay (b) L P11 mode of a fiber with a core size 2ax × 2ay.
Despite the Gaussian-derivative profile in the perpendicular direction,
the coupling attenuation due to mode mismatch can be simply calculated
with a good approximation considering the waveguide mode as having an
elliptical Gaussian profile with a width 2wx in the parallel direction and a
width 2wy in the perpendicular direction, with 2w0 being the MFD of the
fiber mode. Following Appendix B, the coupling power attenuation is:
As seen in Section B.4.3, the lowest attenuation is obtained for a fiber
mode diameter being the geometrical mean of the widths of the elliptical
waveguide mode.
A typical mode size of a LiNbO3 waveguide at 1,550 nm is:
2wx = 8 μm and 2wy = 5 μm
A 0.17-NA fiber having a mode diameter of 8 μm yields a coupling loss
of 10% (i.e., a coupling attenuation of 90% or 0.5 dB).
The lowest attenuation is obtained for a fiber mode diameter equal to
the geometrical mean 
, that is, an NA of 0.2 for the fiber. It
is then 95% (i.e., 0.25 dB).
The total coupling attenuation is the sum of this mode mismatch
attenuation and the attenuation due to Fresnel partial reflection (4%, that
is, an attenuation of 0.2 dB) as seen in Section C.1.2.
411

C.1.5 Low-Driving-Voltage Phase Modulator
Several materials, such as III-V semiconductors, silica over silicon, or
glass waveguides, are potential candidates for integrated-optic circuits, but
for fiber gyro applications, the optimal choice is lithium niobate (LiNbO3),
which provides efficient phase modulation.
The fundamental function to fulfill is indeed phase modulation, and
LiNbO3 has very good electro-optic properties: by applying an electric E
field with voltage-controlled electrodes, the index of refraction seen by the
optical wave is modified because of the electro-optic Pockels effect, thus
inducing a phase shift. This is actually used to make modulators in bulk
form, but integrated optics provides an additional advantage, since
electrodes can be placed very close to one another around the waveguide,
while, in bulk form, space must be left to avoid diffraction of the light
beam. This shortens the length of the electric field line, compared to that
of bulk modulators, thus reducing the driving voltage for the required E
field value in the material (Figure C.9). The value of Vπ (i.e., the voltage
required to produce a π radian phase shift) falls into the range of a few
volts instead of the hundreds of volts of the bulk form. This makes
LiNbO3 integrated-optics phase modulators compatible with low-voltage
drive electronics. They also have a quasi-flat frequency response from dc
to several tens of megahertz.
C.1.6 Beam Splitting
The main advantage of LiNbO3 integrated optics is clearly low-driving-
voltage wideband phase modulation, but it also allows one to integrate
several components on a unique multifunction integrated-optic circuit
(MIOC).
412

Figure C.9 Comparison of phase modulators: (a) integrated optics with a short
driving-field line and (b) bulk optics with a longer driving-field line.
Beam splitting with evanescent-field coupling can be performed as with
fiber (see Section B.7.1), bringing two waveguides close to each other.
With a typical waveguide distance of few channel-widths, an interaction
length of several millimeters yields 50-50 (3 dB) splitting (Figure C.10).
Figure C.10 The 50-50 evanescent-field coupler in integrated optics.
However, such an evanescent-field coupling is delicate to tune, and it is
wavelength dependent. The simplest way to perform 50-50 splitting in
413

integrated optics is the Y-junction. Light from a base waveguide is divided
equally into two branch waveguides (Figure C.11). The 50-50 splitting is
ensured by symmetry and it is then wavelength independent. With an
adequate design of the branching region, the loss can be small (typically
5% to 10%, that is, an attenuation of 0.25 to 0.5 dB).
C.1.7 Polarization Rejection and Birefringence-Induced
Depolarization
The last important function is polarization rejection. To integrate a
polarizer on a multifunction circuit (MIOC), as we shall see later, can be
performed with an absorbing metallic overlay in titanium-indiffused
waveguide (C.2) or by single-polarization propagation in proton-exchanged
waveguide (C.3).
Figure C.11 The 50-50 splitting in a Y-junction.
Now, as we saw in Section B.6.3 with PM fiber, a birefringent
waveguide yields depolarization when a broad-spectrum source is used.
This depolarization effect is very useful in a fiber-gyro and it is very
efficient in LiNbO3 circuit because of its strong birefringence. LiNbO3 is a
uniaxial crystal with a negative birefringence ∆nb, the difference between
the extraordinary index ne and the ordinary index n0. These index values
are summarized in Table C.1 for the most usual fiber wavelengths:
Table C.1 LiNbO3 Indices as a Function of Wavelength
LiNbO3
λ = 850 nm λ = 1,300 nm λ = 1,550 nm
Ordinary index n0 = nx = ny (slow axes)2.25
2.22
2.21
Extraordinary index ne = nz (fast axis)
2.17
2.15
2.14
∆nb = ne − n0
−0.079
−0.075
−0.073
414

The ordinary index n0 has a temperature dependence:
while the extraordinary index ne has a temperature dependence more than
10 times higher:
It yields a relative thermal dependence of the birefringence of LiNbO3:
In terms of thermal expansion, there is for the x and y ordinary axes:
αxy LiNbO3 = 15 ppm/°C
and for the z extraordinary axis:
αz LiNbO3 = 7 ppm/°C
As with PM fibers, one can define a beat length ΛLiNbO3, the actual
length that provides λ of path difference between both polarization modes:
At 1,550 nm, there is:
ΛLiNbO3 (1550 nm) = 21 μm
Because of this strong birefringence, depolarization is very fast. The
depolarization length Ld defined in Section B.6.3 as Ld = Ldc/∆nb is
much shorter than the circuit length. Taking again the case of a source
with λ = 1,550 nm, ∆λFWHM = 15 nm, and a related decoherence length
Ldc = λ2/∆λFWHM = 150 μm, the depolarization length Ld in lithium
niobate is only 2 mm.
As it will be seen, the depolarization acts as a temporal filtering of the
polarization in addition of the actual rejection of the polarizer. Assuming
an input wave train at 45° of the principal axes of the LiNbO3 circuit, the
attenuated component (in practice, polarized along the slow ordinary axis
415

in the TM mode) gets out of the circuit decorrelated with respect to the
transmitted component (in practice, polarized along the fast extraordinary
axis in the TE mode) (Figure C.12).
Figure C.12 Depolarization of the attenuated polarization TM mode in an LiNbO3
integrated optics.
C.2 Ti-Indiffused LiNbO3 Integrated Optics
C.2.1 Ti-Indiffused Channel Waveguide
The first fabrication technique of LiNbO3 integrated-optic waveguides was
titanium (Ti) indiffusion (Figure C.13). With photolithographic masking,
very narrow strips of a thin film of titanium are deposited on the substrate.
By heating up the wafer to 900°C to 1,100°C for several hours, titanium
diffuses into the substrate and locally increases the index of refraction.
This provides single-mode guidance in narrow
416

Figure C.13 Process of Ti-indiffused waveguides in a LiNbO3 substrate: (a)
deposition of Ti strips and (b) diffusion.
channels without degrading the low attenuation of the bulk material.
Because this slow indiffusion process takes place at high temperatures, Ti-
indiffused LiNbO3 waveguides are very stable over time.
C.2.2 Phase Modulation and Metallic-Overlay Polarizer with Ti-
Indiffused Waveguide
The electro-optic Pockels effect used for phase modulation is complicated,
since LiNbO3 is a uniaxial birefringent crystal, and the electro-optic
efficiency depends on the respective orientations of the driving electric
field Ed and the optical electric field Eop.
The strongest electro-optic coefficient is the diagonal r33 term (r33 =
31 × 10–12 m/V); that is, the most efficient phase modulation is obtained
when both Ed and Eop fields are parallel to the extraordinary z-axis (also
called C-axis). In this case, the index change δnz is:
 (C.1)
where Edz is the z-component of Ed. As with elasto-optic coefficients of
silica (Section B.5.2), the n3/2 term comes from the fact that r33 relates
the change of dielectric impermeability η = 1/εr = 1/n2 to E and that ∆η =
417

∆(1/n2) = −2∆n/n3.
To get this optimal efficiency, an x-cut substrate (i.e., the x-axis is
perpendicular to the substrate surface) with a y-propagating waveguide
(i.e., the waveguide is parallel to the y-axis) is needed. Then the TE mode,
which has a horizontal Eop field parallel to the z-axis, can be efficiently
modulated with planar metallic electrodes that are fabricated on both sides
of the waveguide in a second step of the photolithographic process. Under
the electrodes, the driving Ed field is vertical because of the
electromagnetic boundary conditions on a metal; but the field lines bend
under the surface to connect both electrodes, and Ed is actually parallel to
the horizontal z-axis in the waveguiding region [Figure C.14(a)]. The TM
mode is also modulated through the crossed r13 coefficient, since its
optical Ed field is parallel to the x-axis [Figure C.14(b)], but the value of
r13 is less than one-third of that of r33(r13 = 9 × 10–12 m/V).
Figure C.14 Phase modulations with an x-cut y-propagating waveguide: (a) TE mode
and (b) TM mode.
With such a design, the TE mode has a typical Vπ value of 2 volts, and
the TM mode has a typical Vπ value of 7 volts for a 20-mm modulator
length at a wavelength of 850 nm. Working at a longer wavelength
increases the Vπ value for the same modulator length. As a matter of fact,
the width of the waveguide and the electrode spacing have to be scaled up
418

proportionally to the wavelength ratio to keep the same optimal
configuration. This increase of electrode spacing, and thus of the field line
length, yields an increase of the required driving voltage proportional to the
wavelength ratio. Furthermore, the phase change δϕ is inversely
proportional to the wavelength for a given index change δn since, δϕ = 2π
δn ⋅ L/λ: this adds a second wavelength ratio dependence. Then the Vπ
value is increased proportionally to the square of the wavelength ratio. For
the same TE mode and 20-mm length, Vπ would be 6 volts at 1,550 nm
instead of 2 volts at 850 nm. The thermal variation of Vπ is very
significant; typically -800 ppm/°C.
Another important characteristic of integrated-optic phase modulators is
their driving bandwidth. They can work with a continuous voltage, even if
some problems of long-term drift may arise, and the upper frequency limit
is dictated by the residual electrical capacitance of the two electrodes,
which are very close to one another and placed on a material that has a
very high dielectric permittivity at the usual modulation frequencies
(∈LiNbO3 ≈ 30). A good order of magnitude is a capacitance of 10 pF
for a 10-mm length, which yields a bandwidth of few hundreds of
megahertz with a load resistor of 50Ω in parallel. This value is not limiting
for fiber-gyro applications. Furthermore, the modulator response is very
flat within this bandwidth, which makes integrated optics the ideal
technology to fulfill the important function of phase modulation for fiber-
gyro signal processing techniques.
For telecommunication applications requiring bandwidths of few tens of
gigahertz, the modulator design is much more sophisticated and needs to
use traveling-wave electrodes with matched impedance line.
This x-cut TE configuration is the most efficient and most typical
design, but it may face the problem of outdiffusion of Li2O at the surface
of the substrate during the heating required for the indiffusion of titanium.
LiNbO3 is actually a compound of LiO2 and Nb2O5. The stoichiometric
composition is (Li2O)0·5(Nb2O5)0·5, but the material may withstand a
slightly nonstoichiometric composition (Li2O)x(Nb2O5)1–x, with x ranging
from 0.48 to 0.5. In particular, the highest material uniformity is obtained
in the congruent composition (x = 0 ⋅ 486), for which there is a
composition equilibrium between the solid and liquid phases at the melting
point (1,243°C), where the crystal is grown. Outdiffusion of LiO2
419

decreases the value of x, which does not modify the ordinary index no, but
yields an increase of the extraordinary index ne. This creates a parasitic
planar waveguide for the extraordinary polarization (i.e., the TE mode
with x-cut), which may cause optical leakage or cross-talk between the
useful indiffused channel waveguides. Outdiffusion may be suppressed
with techniques such as wetting the incoming gas flow in the diffusion
furnace or saturating the atmosphere with Li2O powder.
To avoid the effect of outdiffusion, it would be possible to work with
the TM mode, which is polarized along the ordinary x-axis with an x-cut
substrate, but there is a drawback of lower modulation efficiency.
However, this is not desirable for fiber-gyro applications, because another
important component is the polarizer, and the efficient technique to
fabricate such a component is to cover the waveguide with a metallic layer
that absorbs the TM mode while it transmits the TE mode (Figure C.15).
Figure C.15 Attenuation of the TM mode with a metallic overlay polarizer.
However, having this transmitted TE mode polarized along an ordinary
axis that is not affected by outdiffusion, it is possible to use a z-cut
substrate with a y-propagating waveguide. In this configuration, one
electrode must cover the waveguide to get a vertical drivingEd field
parallel to the z-axis in the waveguiding region and to modulate the phase
of the TE mode through the r13 coefficient (Figure C.16). Even if it is not
optimal, the modulation efficiency remains acceptable, and, in addition,
the covering electrode acts as a polarizer, which may be very useful.
For completeness, we may add that some specific components use
alternative orientations and other electro-optic coefficients. In particular, z-
420

propagating waveguides are needed when the effect of the birefringence of
LiNbO3 has to be eliminated, but this is not advantageous for fiber gyros,
where, on the contrary, birefringence is very beneficial because it induces
depolarization.
Figure C.16 Phase modulation of the TE mode with a z-cut y-propagating
waveguide, one electrode acting as a polarizer that attenuates the TM mode.
C.3 Proton-Exchanged LiNbO3 Integrated Optics
C.3.1 Single-Polarization Propagation
Ti-indiffused waveguides on a LiNbO3 substrate is a suitable technology
for the fiber gyro, but, ideally, a single-polarization waveguide would be
preferable to ensure very good polarization filtering. As we have already
seen, outdiffusion of Li2O creates an increase of the extraordinary index,
which yields guidance only for a wave polarized along the z-axis.
However, this technique is difficult to control for channel waveguide,
because the material used for masking must not be diffused, and the
induced lack of oxygen ions increases the attenuation.
A similar effect of single-polarization guidance is obtained with proton
exchange, where the LiNbO3 substrate is placed in a melted organic acid
and H+ ions (i.e., protons) replace Li+ ions in the crystal lattice. This
technique does not degrade the attenuation and has the very attractive
property of increasing the value of the low extraordinary index while
decreasing the value of the high ordinary index. This yields guidance only
for the z-polarized mode parallel to the extraordinary axis. Such single-
polarization waveguides provide a very high extinction ratio for the
nonguided crossed polarization.
Proton exchange is processed at a relatively low temperature (about
200°C to 300°C), which avoids the problem of mask indiffusion, but the
first experimental demonstrations suffered from poor long-term stability.
Annealing techniques have since solved the problem and annealed proton-
exchange circuits is today the optimal choice for fiber-gyro circuits,
421

because high polarization rejection is one of the important features
required for high performance.
C.3.2 Phase Modulation in Proton-Exchanged Waveguide
Optimal modulation efficiency is obtained with the same x-cut, y-
propagating orientation as for Ti indiffusion. Electrodes, placed on both
sides of the proton-exchanged waveguide, modulate the transmitted TE
mode with the strongest r33 electro-optic coefficient (Figure C.17).
Proton-exchanged waveguides show essentially no sensitivity to optical
damage (i.e., index drift under high-power illumination), which may be
encountered with Ti indiffusion. However, this advantage is not very
important for fiber-gyro applications, where the optical power is not very
high.
Figure C.17 Proton-exchanged LiNbO3 phase modulator: x-cut, y-propagating
waveguide with the transmitted TE mode and the driving electrical field aligned on the
z-axis (also called the C-axis).
Note that lithium tantalate LiTaO3 could be a possible alternative to
LiNbO3 as the substrate material. As a matter of fact, LiTaO3 has electro-
optic properties very similar to those of LiNbO3(r33LiTaO3 ≈
r33LiNbO3), and it is also used very often in bulk-optic phase modulators.
However, both crystals are also ferro-electric, and to get a stable electro-
optic efficiency, a ferro-electric crystal has to be electrically poled to orient
all the microscopic domains in the same direction (as a ferro-magnetic
material is magnetically poled to get a permanent magnet); but the poling is
lost when the temperature is raised above Curie temperature TC. For
422

LiNbO3, TC = 1,150°C, and Ti indiffusion remains below TC; but for
LiTaO3, TC = 610°C, which makes metal indiffusion much more
complicated because it requires repoling of each processed wafer. This
drawback of LiTaO3 disappears with proton exchange, since it is realized
at only 200°C to 300°C.
However, LiTaO3 has a birefringence that is more than one order of
magnitude lower than that of LiNbO3 (∆nb is equal to 0.004 instead of
0.07). For fiber-gyro applications, this is a disadvantage, since
depolarization induced by birefringence is very beneficial, as we already
saw.
C.3.3 Theoretical Polarization Rejection of a Proton-Exchanged
LiNbO3 Circuit
The polarization rejection of a proton-exchanged LiNbO3 circuit is not due
to an absorption phenomenon: cross-polarized light is not guided and is
diffracted in the substrate. Therefore, some stray light may be partially
coupled back into the output fiber.
Let us take an example of a 0.2-NA fiber that has a mode-field diameter
2w0 = 6.5 μm at 1,550 nm. Assuming that the nonguided crossed
polarization is diffracted in a uniform medium, the full divergence angle
θD = 1.5 NA/n (see Section B.1.2) is 0.136 rad in LiNbO3 where n ≈ 2.2.
After a length L of 30 mm, the diffraction pattern diameter is 2w0′ = θD ⋅
L = 4 mm [Figure C.18(a)].
The recoupling ratio of the crossed polarization in the output fiber core
(see Section B.4.3) would then be, because of diameter mismatch:
 (C.2)
and since w0′ >> w0:
that is only −50 dB.
Experimental results are better, but this may be explained simply with an
423

interferometric Lloyd’s mirror effect on the top interface of the substrate.
As a matter of fact, the nonguided wave is in total internal reflection on
this interface: this yields a Lloyd’s mirror interferometer with interferences
between two sources, the input fiber mode and its virtual image [Figure
C.18(b)]. Furthermore, total internal reflection under grazing incidence
induces a π radian phase shift; therefore, the central fringe located on the
interface is a black fringe, which reduces drastically the power density that
gets to the output fiber located just below this interface.
Figure C.18 Recoupling of the nonguided polarization. (a) Assuming a uniform
medium with an index n. (b) Lloyd’s mirror effect with the π phase shift induced by
total internal reflection (TIR) under grazing incidence, yielding a reduced overlap for
the parasitic coupling in the output core mode.
To evaluate this parasitic recoupling ratio more precisely, it is possible to
consider that there is actually diffraction of a second-order antisymmetric
mode with a real lobe and a virtual image lobe, which is recoupled in the
second-order mode of an output waveguide composed of the output fiber
and its virtual image. As seen in Section B.4.4, this mode can be
considered as a pseudo-Gaussian derivative mode with a full divergence
angle between both extrema:
424

 (C.3)
where w1 is the half width at the maximum of the input fiber mode.
This half width w1 is about equal to w0, the half diameter at 1/e of the
fundamental mode and:
θD1 ≈ θD/2
After a length L, the width 2w1′ at the maximum becomes:
2w1′ = θD1 ⋅ L
With the previous numerical example (λ = 1,550 nm, 2w1 = 2w0 = 6.5
μm, L = 30 mm):
θD1 ≈ 0.07 rad and 2w1′ = 2 mm
Because of the antisymmetry of the mode, the overlap is much less
efficient [Figure C.18(b)] and as seen in Section B.4.4, the coupling
coefficient is:
That is −88 dB, close to the double of the previous case without the
Lloyd’s mirror effect.
Now, the transmitted TE mode has some fiber-to-fiber attenuation. For
a fiber-gyro circuit, it is typically 6 dB (including the 3 dB splitting of the
Y junction) and then the theoretical rejection is reduced from 88 dB to 82
dB.
Finally, note that it is not surprising that the angle θD1 is about θD/2.
The full width at 1/e in amplitude (1/e2 in intensity/power density) of an
antisymmetric Gaussian-derivative distribution is about the double of the
width between the maximum (see Figure C.18). The antisymmetric
Gaussian-derivative diffraction is the result of interference between two
symmetric Gaussian modes with a π phase difference. The full width of
this interference pattern has to be about the full width of the Gaussian
diffraction of a single Gaussian mode.
425

C.3.4 Practical Polarization Rejection of Proton-Exchanged LiNbO3
Circuit
The theoretical analysis yielding a polarization rejection of about 80 dB
assumes a thick substrate. In practice there is total internal reflection on
the bottom face that limits the actual rejection. Stray light reflected in the
middle of this bottom face reaches the output core, and this light is not
attenuated by the Lloyd mirror effect (Figure C.19).
Figure C.19 Recoupling of the beam reflected in the middle of the bottom face of the
substrate.
To evaluate simply the coupling coefficient, one can consider the image
of the input core through the bottom face mirror sending the diffracted
lobe toward the output fiber (Figure C.20). One sees that the overlap
between the diffracted lobe and the output core mode is in the regime of
symmetrical mode of Figure C.18(a) and not in the antisymmetrical regime
of Figure C.18(b).
Considering the previous numerical example (λ = 1,550 nm, 2w0 = 6.5
μm, L = 30 mm) yielding 2w1′ = 2 mm, and a substrate thickness b = 1
mm, the coupling coefficient is about 50 dB, and since the transmitted TE
polarization has some attenuation (typically 6 dB as we saw for a gyro
MIOC), polarization rejection is actually about 40 to 45 dB only.
426

Figure C.20 Visualization of the overlap between the reflected diffracted lobe and
the output core mode, using an imaged input core.
C.3.5 Improved Polarization Rejection with Absorbing Grooves
To increase the polarization rejection of a proton-exchanged LiNbO3
circuit, one has to suppress or at least reduce this reflection on the bottom
face of the substrate. Antireflection (AR) coating could be a solution but it
is very difficult technologically because of the high index of LiNbO3, and
the grazing incidence.
Some reduction of the amount of reflected light may be also obtained
by grinding the bottom face, but because of the grazing incidence, it is not
very efficient and the specular reflection remains important.
The most common technique to improve the rejection is to fabricate
absorbing grooves in the bottom face to block the light reflected in the
middle that is otherwise sent to the output fiber (Figure C.21).
Figure C.21 Absorbing groove to block stray light.
This places the output core in the geometric shadow of the absorbing
groove, and this can be visualized easily with the imaged input core used
earlier (Figure C.22).
427

Figure C.22 Geometric shadow of the absorbing groove using an imaged input core
and an imaged groove.
Now, as seen in Section A.10.2, the light power is not perfectly
attenuated in the geometric shadow region because of knife-edge near-field
Fresnel diffraction, and the semi-darkness decay is not very fast. Figure
C.23 displays this attenuation in log-log scale with respect to the
normalized abscissa X defined earlier as X = 
 It is interesting to note
that it is a linear function with a −2 slope.
Considering again the previous numerical example (λ = 1,550/2.2 = 700
nm in LiNbO3, D = L/2 = 15 mm), the abscissa is normalized with 
Assuming a groove depth d = 250 μm in a 1-mm-thick substrate, the
output fiber core is placed at 2d from the geometric shadow limits (i.e.,
500 μm = 7X), which yields an attenuation of only 30 dB from one edge.
To get only 10 dB of additional attenuation requires having a shadow three
times wider which is not possible in practice.
Figure C.23 Power density attenuation in the geometric shadow region due to knife-
edge Fresnel diffraction as a function of the normalized abscissa X = 
 (log-log
scale).
In addition there are two edges (this is actually a diffraction by a strip),
both Fresnel diffractions interfere and, in the middle of the geometric
shadow of the strip where the output fiber is placed, there is constructive
interference (similar to a 1-D Arago spot) increasing by fourfold the power
428

issued from a single edge, which reduces the attenuation by 6 dB, yielding
only 24 dB instead of 30 dB.
Figure C.24 Fraunhofer diffraction on the back of the groove.
Considering the 40 to 45 dB of rejection without groove, these
additional 24 dB yield a practical polarization extinction of 65 to 70 dB.
Some additional spurious light is also coming from the reflection on the
back of the groove. Since this groove is narrow and, in addition, receives
the stray light with a grazing incidence, it behaves like a Fraunhofer
diffraction slit that disperses the light and reduces the power density on the
output core (Figure C.24). This diffraction yields an additional attenuation
on the order of 35 to 40 dB.
To further increase rejection, it is possible to use additional vertical
absorbing holes, when the waveguide is not straight as it is the case with a
Y junction. Their rejection is limited by Fresnel diffraction in the
geometric shadow region like with a groove (Figure C.25) and one
typically get an improvement of 15 to 25 dB.
Fresnel diffraction of a groove takes place in a plane perpendicular to
the substrate surface, while it takes place in a plane parallel to the surface
with a hole. Both rejection effects are then multiplied (or added in
decibels) to yield a polarization rejection ratio on the order of 80 to 90 dB.
Figure C.25 Geometric shadow region created by a vertical hole placed between the
branches of a Y junction.
429

C.3.6 Spurious Intensity Modulation
This analysis of polarization rejection of proton-exchanged LiNbO3 circuit
applies also on the problem of spurious intensity modulation of the phase
modulator since they both involve parasitic coupling of stray light in the
output fiber.
Figure C.26 Comparison between recoupling of the unguided TM mode and
recoupling of stray light of the guided TE mode.
For polarization rejection, the TM polarization is not guided, 100% is
diffracted in the substrate and 100% of the power density reaching the
output core is coupled.
For the guided TE polarization, there is a mode mismatch at the input
and typically 10% of the input power is not coupled and diffracted into the
substrate. It follows the same Lloyd’s mirror effect but also the same
problem of reflection on the bottom face as the crossed-polarized TM
wave. Since the output fiber receives 90% of the waveguide power, it has
a potential of 10% to couple back stray light. It can be calculated precisely
but basically the spurious coupling of TE stray light is about 20 dB below
polarization rejection of the TM mode (Figure C.26).
Now we saw in Section C.1.7 that LiNbO3 birefringence yields
depolarization between the transmitted TE wave and the spurious cross-
polarized TM wave, but this decoherence does not take place between the
transmitted TE wave and the spurious TE wave coming from stray light in
the substrate. Their optical path difference ΔLop is just related to the
geometrical path difference between the guided mode propagating along
the length L of the circuit and the reflected stray light propagating along
the hypotenuse path 
 Going back to the previous example (a
circuit length L = 65 mm, and a circuit thickness b = 1 mm), the
geometrical path difference is only 30 μm (i.e., an optical path difference
430

of 140 μm with ne = 2.14 for LiNbO3), which is shorter than the
decoherence length of Er-doped fiber ASE source.
Therefore, this spurious stray light interferes with the main wave, and
as we saw several times, the interference contrast is twice the amplitude
ratio. A typical circuit with 60 dB of polarization rejection has only 80 dB
of spurious coupling of TE stray light, but it yields a power variation (or
intensity modulation) of ±2 × 10–4 when the phase difference between the
guided mode and the stray light is modulated. This is the case when there
is a phase modulator, since it modulates the phase of the guided wave but
not the one of stray light.
Selected Bibliography
Hutcheson, L. D., (ed.), Integrated Optical Circuits and Components, New York: Marcel
Dekker, 1987.
Marcuse, D., Theory of Dielectric Optical Waveguides, New York: Academic Press,
1974.
Vassalo, C., Optical Waveguide Concepts, New York: Elsevier, 1991.
Weiss, R. S., and T. K. Gaylord, “Lithium Niobate: Summary of Physical Properties and
Crystal Structure,” Appl. Physics A, Vol. 37, 1985, pp. 191–203.
Wong, K. K., (ed.), “Integrated Optics and Optoelectronics II,” SPIE Proceedings, Vol.
1374, 1990.
431

APPENDIX D
Electromagnetic Theory of the
Relativistic Sagnac Effect
D.1 Special Relativity and Electromagnetism
Special relativity is based on the principle of equivalence of the inertial
frames of reference for all the laws of physics, particularly mechanics and
electromagnetism, the main effect being that light velocity c in a vacuum is
the same in any inertial frame.
This yields the Lorentz transformation between the spatial coordinates
and the time of two reference frames moving with a constant translation
velocity vt (along the x-axis) with respect to each other:
 (D.1)
with
Compared to the Galilean transformation of classical mechanics:
xG = x − vtt
yG = y (D.2)
zG = z
tG = t
There is a second-order (in vt/c) difference for the spatial coordinate x
and a first-order difference for the time t.
432

To simplify and condense equations, relativity laws are usually
expressed with a four-dimensional notation using contravariant and
covariant coordinates of four vectors and tensors. A space-time four-
vector 4x has contravariant coordinates defined by:
xμ = (x, y, z, ct) with μ = 1 to 4 (D.3)
and covariant coordinates defined by:
xμ = (−x, −y, −z, ct) with μ = 1 to 4 (D.4)
Contravariant coordinates are the usual coordinates, with:
 (D.5)
where aμ are the basis eigenvectors. With the four-dimensional notation,
the Σ term is omitted, and the convention is to sum over any double index
appearing once up and once down:
4x = xμaμ (D.6)
The covariant coordinates are defined with the scalar product:
xμ = 4x ⋅ aμ (D.7)
With the orthonormal basis of a Euclidean frame of reference,
contravariant and covariant coordinates are equal. Some feeling of the
difference between contravariant and covariant coordinates may be
obtained with a nonorthogonal basis of a two-dimensional plane (Figure
D.1). Contravariant coordinates are the usual coordinates defined by a
parallelogram with side lengths equal to x1 and x2 covariant coordinates
defined by the scalar product x ⋅ a1 and x ⋅ a2 correspond to the
perpendicular projection of x on each coordinate axis.
433

Figure D.1 Geometrical representation in a two-dimensional plane, of the
contravariant coordinates xμ (the usual coordinates) and the covariant coordinates
xμ, defined with a scalar product.
The covariant coordinates are related to the usual contravariant
coordinates with a second-rank covariant tensor, the metric tensor gμv =
aμ ⋅ av, which is a characteristic of the frame of reference:
 (D.8)
In an inertial frame, there are:
 (D.9)
Now the Lorentz transformation may be written with:
where
 (D.10)
Note that the length of a four vector and its square defined with a scalar
product is invariant under Lorentz transform:
434

 (D.11)
or
 (D.12)
where s2 is the space-time invariant.
Electromagnetism may also be described with this four-dimensional
formalism. The vector potential A and the scalar potential V form a four-
vector 4A with contravariant components:
 (D.13)
and covariant components:
 (D.14)
This four-potential defined the electromagnetic field represented by a
second-rank covariant antisymmetric tensor Fμv. The usual definitions, E
= −(∂A/∂t) − grad V and B = curl A, may be written:
Fμv = ∂μAv − ∂vAμ (D.15)
where ∂μ is covariant and corresponds to the partial derivative with
respect to the contravariant space-time coordinate, ∂/∂xμ. It can be seen
from this definition that Fμv is antisymmetric, since Fμv = −Fvμ.
Expressed in terms of the conventional E and B field components, the
covariant components of the field tensor are:
 (D.16)
where μ is the column index and v is the line index. The contravariant
components are given by:
Fμv = gμσgvρFσρ (D.17)
435

where gμσ is the contravariant metric tensor related to the covariant
metric tensor gμρ, with:
 (D.18)
We have:
 (D.19)
The first two Maxwell equations, M1 and M2, express that the field is
derived from a potential and may be written:
∂μFρσ + ∂σFμρ + ∂ρFσρ = 0 (with μ ≠ ρ ≠ σ ≠ μ) (D.20)
It is also possible to define a four-current vector 4J with:
Jμ = (jx, jy, jy, cρ)
Jμ = (−jx, −jy, −jy, cρ) (D.21)
The last two Maxwell equations, M3 and M4, may be written as:
∂μFμv = μ0Jv (D.22)
Note that the first two Maxwell equations use the covariant coordinates
Fμv and that the last two use the contravariant coordinates Fμv.
Finally, the propagation equation is:
∂ρ∂ρFμv = 0 (D.23)
where ∂ρ = ∂/∂xρ and ∂ρ = ∂/∂xρ, that is:
 (D.24)
The important point is that Maxwell equations and their consequences,
436

like the propagation equation, are invariant under Lorentz transformation.
In the new frame, the four vectors Aμ and Jμ and the tensor Fμv are
transformed accordingly to:
 (D.25)
and these quantities 
 follow the same laws. In particular, the
propagation equation remains:
∂Lρ∂LρFLμv = 0 (D.26)
with ∂Lρ = ∂/∂xlρ and 
 This result is consistent with the fact
that the velocity of light in a vacuum remains equal to c in any inertial
frame.
Note that the equation 
 is the basis of magnetism. With a
motionless charge, there is only an electric field E and the three magnetic
components of 
 in the rest frame are null:
To take into account the effect of a moving charge, we have to use the
Lorentz transformation between the frame where the charge is motionless
and the frame where the charge is moving at an opposite velocity −vt if vt
is the velocity of the moving frame with respect to the rest frame of the
particle. Calculating 
 we obtain nonzero terms for 
 that is, it appears a magnetic component B: even if it is
sometimes obviated, the magnetic field is a pure relativistic effect. Because
the speed of the particles is usually much smaller than c, the pure effect of
B is usually much smaller than that of E. However, if this applies to one
particle, in the case of a conductor, then there is cancellation of the E
effect, because there are as many positive particles as negative ones, while
the B effect is not cancelled, as the positive and negative particles do not
have the same speed. In this case, the global B effect becomes
predominant despite the fact that the elementary B effect for each particle
is a lower effect. As will be seen, the problem of the Sagnac effect has
some similarities with that of the magnetic field: it is also a first-order
effect that is much lower than the zero-order effect, but the zero-order
effect may also be nulled out because of reciprocity, and in a ring
437

interferometer the first-order effect may become predominant.
The main interest of these notations is that these results remain almost
unchanged with any set of coordinates, even if they are not Cartesian. In
general, we still have:
∂μFρσ + ∂σFμρ + ∂ρFσρ = 0
Fμv = ∂μAv − ∂vAμ (D.27)
and the last two Maxwell equations are slightly modified:
 (D.28)
where g is the determinant of the metric tensor. With an inertial frame and
Cartesian coordinates, we have gI = −1 and 
The case of the propagation equation is much more complicated, as it
uses the high-index derivative ∂ρ in addition to the low-index derivative ∂ρ
that is used in the other formulae, and there is no simple generalization of
the equation. To avoid this mathematical difficulty, it is possible to define a
propagation equation of the four-potential Aμ. As a matter of fact, the
equations:
 (D.29)
yield a propagation equation:
 (D.30)
So far, this analysis has been carried out with the assumption that there
is a vacuum. If there is a medium, a derived field tensor Gμv composed of
the components D and H has to be used. The first two Maxwell equations
that show the relation with a potential are unchanged, but the two last ones
become:
 (D.31)
where 
 is the free current four vector.
438

The derived field tensor Gμv is related to the field tensor Fσρ, with:
Gμv = χμvσρFσρ (D.32)
where χμvσρ is the constitutive tensor of the material. It depends on the
relative permittivity ∈r and the relative permeability μr, but also on the
metric of the frame of reference, since Gμv is used with its contravariant
coordinates and Fσρ is used with its covariant coordinates.
In an inertial frame of reference, there are:
 (D.33)
And the nonzero terms of the constitutive tensor χμvσρ of a motionless
material are:
χ1212 = χ2121 = χ1313 = χ3131 = χ2323 = χ3232 = μ–1μ0–1 (D.34)
χ1414 = χ4141 = χ2424 = χ4242 = χ3434 = χ4343 = −∈μ0–1 (D.35)
In the most general case, the propagation equation of the four-potential
is:
 (D.36)
As an example of this analysis, we can consider the case of cylindrical
coordinates with contravariant (i.e., usual) values:
 (D.37)
The metric tensor gcμv is:
 (D.38)
439

Thus, the determinant gc = −r2 and 
 and the covariant
coordinates 
 are:
xcμ = (−r, −r2θ, −z, ct) (D.39)
The electromagnetic four-potential 4Ac is defined by contravariant
coordinates:
 (D.40)
where Ar, Aθ and Az are the conventional coordinates of A, with
orthogonal unit vectors ar, aθ and az parallel to the equicoordinate lines
(Figure D.2). The covariant coordinates are:
Figure D.2 Cylindrical coordinates.
 (D.41)
For the covariant components of the field tensor, there are, similarly:
 (D.42)
440

and for the contravariant components of the derived field tensor,
 (D.43)
The nonzero terms of the constitutive tensor 
 are:
Note that, in the case of cylindrical coordinates, the general formulation
that has been derived is a way to retrieve the well-known expressions of
the various vector operators (gradient, divergence, curl, and Laplacian)
with these non-Cartesian spatial coordinates. The constitutive tensor 
depends on μ and ∈ (i.e., the effect of the material), but also on r (i.e.,
the effect of the non-Cartesian spatial coordinates).
D.2 Electromagnetism in a Rotating Frame
From a mathematical point of view, the tensor formalism derived in the
previous section may be applied to any kind of coordinates, but we have
to define, from the physics point of view, what coordinates can actually be
used. Considering a given frame, the coordinates must be measurable with
internal experiments relative to this frame. For a translation, it is well
known that the new coordinates have to be derived with the Lorentz
transformation. A Galilean transformation is valid mathematically, but it
yields new coordinates that cannot be measured with internal experiments
in the new frame.
In the case of a rotation of rate Ω, the new coordinates could be derived
with an equivalent Lorentz transformation, where the tangential speed rΩ
replaces vt:
 (D.44)
441

with:
Locally, this transformation is valid, and the potential 
 the field 
and the derived field 
 defined with these coordinates correspond to the
local values seen, particularly by a medium at rest in this rotating frame.
With such a motionless medium, the constitutive tensor 
 is equal to
the constitutive tensor 
 defined for an inertial frame using cylindrical
spatial coordinates.
However, the angular coordinate is periodic, and, if the whole rotating
frame is considered, this periodicity will appear in the time coordinate. To
analyze global experiments like the measurement of a phase difference in a
ring Sagnac interferometer, the time coordinate must be univocal and thus
independent of the periodic angular coordinate, and a Galilean
transformation may be used:
rRG = r
θRG = (θ − Ωt) (D.45)
zRG = z
tRG = t
In contrast to the case of translation, these new coordinates can be
measured in the rotating frame. A clock placed on the rotation axis has the
same time as the time t in the inertial frame, and it may synchronize the
time in the whole rotating frame by sending cylindrical waves that
propagate perpendicularly to the displacement and are thus not modified.
The angle θRG may be defined as a constant portion of a full angle (i.e.,
360°) which remains obviously constant.
Once it is admitted that a Galilean transformation is valid for a rotation,
the general tensor formalism may be applied. In particular, the propagation
equation of a potential in a vacuum is, with the four-dimensional
formalism:
 (D.46)
442

where 
 is the metric tensor corresponding to the contravariant
coordinates 
= (rRG, θRG, zRG, ctRG) and gRG is its determinant. We
have:
 (D.47)
As can be seen, there are two nondiagonal terms 
which yield a difference of propagation velocities between co-rotating and
counter-rotating waves. To the first order in rΩ/c, the propagation
equation in a vacuum becomes:
 (D.48)
where the wave amplitude A is any component of the field or of the
potential. Compared to the familiar propagation equation in an inertial
frame, there is an additional crossed term 
 which modifies the
wave velocity proportionally to Ω.
With a co-rotating medium, the propagation equation is with four-
dimensional formalism:
 (D.49)
where the constitutive tensor 
 replaces 
 This constitutive
tensor 
 has to be calculated with the constitutive tensor 
 in
an inertial frame using cylindrical coordinates and the laws of
transformation of coordinates between 
 and 
 To the first order in
rΩ/c, the propagation equation becomes:
443

 (D.50)
It is very important to note that, if ∈r and μr appear at their usual place
with ∂2A/∂t2, none of them appear in the additional term 
which remains identical to the case of a vacuum. The change of wave
velocity in a rotating frame, called the Sagnac effect, is independent of the
properties of the co-rotating medium, where light propagates.
Note that with this relativistic formalism, it becomes clear that H and D,
involved in Maxwell equations M3 and M4, are connected, as they
compose the same contravariant tensor Gμv E and B represent the basic
field, derived from a potential and involved in the first two Maxwell
equations, M1 and M2, which are independent of matter. They form a
covariant tensor Fμσ, and the derived field tensor Gμv is connected to
Fμσ with the constitutive tensor χμvρσ, which takes into account the
properties of the material, but also the properties of the frame of
reference.
D.3 Case of a Rotating Toroidal Dielectric Waveguide
The case of the fiber gyro may be analyzed more precisely by considering
a toroidal dielectric waveguide, where R is the radius of curvature and a is
the radius of the core (Figure D.3). As has already been seen (Section
B.3.1), an approximate solution of the fundamental mode of a straight
fiber is the pseudo-Gaussian mode of amplitude:
 (D.51)
When the fiber is bent, the spatial propagation term βz may be replaced
by βRθ, and there is a centrifugal shift ∆Rc of the mode. The mode
amplitude becomes:
 (D.52)
with:
 (D.53)
444

Using a perturbation method, the amplitude in a rotating frame with a
co-rotating waveguide is found to be:
Figure D.3 Toroidal waveguide.
 (D.54)
There is an additional radial shift ∆RR due to rotation. It depends on the
relative direction of propagation and rotation through the sign of the
product β ⋅ Ω:
 (D.55)
but, in practice, it is completely negligible (with typical fiber parameters
∆RR ≈ 10–11 for Ω = 1 rad/s).
The perturbation ∆K on the propagation constant is:
 (D.56)
Its relative value ∆K/βR is also very small, but, when the fiber is placed
in a ring interferometer, there is a measurement of the phase difference
between the two opposite paths with respect to 2π rad, and it accumulates
with the length of the propagation path. After N turns of
counterpropagation with the respective propagation constants β + ∆K/R
and −β + ∆K/R, the phase difference becomes:
∆ϕR = 4πN∆K (D.57)
 (D.58)
445

 (D.59)
This result, known as the Sagnac effect, depends only on the light
frequency ω, the vacuum light velocity c, and the total geometrical area
enclosed by the coil A = NπR2. The indices of the core and the cladding,
the phase or group velocities of the mode, and the dispersion of the
medium or of the waveguide have no influence.
The Sagnac effect is a pure temporal delay ∆tR independent of matter,
which is measured with a clock, the frequency ω of the light source.
Because ∆ϕR = ω ⋅ ∆tR, there is:
 (D.60)
However, as the wavelength λ in a vacuum is a more familiar quantity
than the angular frequency ω for optical waves, the formula is usually
written as:
 (D.61)
where D = 2R is the loop diameter, and L = N2πR is the total length of the
waveguide coiled over N turns.
Selected Bibliography
Arditty, H. J., and H. C. Lefèvre, “Theoretical Basis of Sagnac Effect in Fiber Gyroscope,”
Springer-Verlag Series in Optical Sciences, Vol. 32, 1982, pp. 44–51.
Arzelies, H., Cinématique Relativiste, (in French), Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1955.
Landau, L. D., and E. M. Lipshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, New York: Pergamon
Press, 1975.
Lefèvre, H. C., and H. J. Arditty, “Electromagnétisme des milieux diélectriques linéaires en
rotation et application à la propagation d’ondes guidées,” (in French), Applied Optics,
Vol. 21, 1982, pp. 1400–1409.
Post, E. J., “Sagnac Effect,” Review of Modern Physics, Vol. 39, 1967, pp. 475–493.
Post, E. J., “Interferometric Path-Length Changes Due to Motion,” Journal of the Optical
Society of America, Vol. 62, 1972, pp. 234–239.
Tonnelat, M. A., Principles of Electromagnetic Theory and Relativity, London, U.K.:
Gordon and Breach, 1966.
446

APPENDIX E
Basics of Inertial Navigation*
E.1 Introduction
Inertial navigation principle is simple: the craft acceleration is measured
with respect to an inertial frame with accelerometers. A computer
integrates these acceleration measurements to calculate velocity and then
integrates the velocity to calculate position. Because the craft orientation
does not remain stable in the inertial frame, the orientation of the
accelerometers is maintained mechanically stable with respect to the
inertial frame with a gimbaled system, or acceleration measurements are
projected by calculation in this inertial frame in the case of a strap-down
system. In both cases, gyroscopes that measure rotation rate are needed:
in gimbaled systems (Figure E.1), they are used for controlling torque
motors that rotate the gimbals so that gyroscope measurements remain
zero and then keep a stable orientation of the accelerometers; in strap-
down systems (Figure E.2), they are used for computing the Direction
Cosine Matrix, which allows acceleration measurement projection into the
inertial frame.
Therefore, in our 3-D world, an inertial system requires an inertial
measurement unit (IMU) composed of three gyroscopes and three
accelerometers to provide full navigation function. Some inertial systems
may contain fewer sensors for price reduction if the function is limited.
If inertial navigation principle is simple, implementation is more complex
for multiple reasons:
Accelerometers do not only measure acceleration but also the
gravitational field.
Gyroscopes measure rotation rate with respect to an inertial frame
that includes Earth rotation around its spinning axis and Earth
rotation around the Sun.
In most applications, craft navigation is performed on the Earth or
close to the Earth surface and the gyroscopes sense also the
447

Figure E.1 Gimbaled navigation system.
rotational motion generated by the craft move on Earth surface
and the curvature of the Earth,
Earth is not a simple surface and it must be simplified into a
model.
The inertial frame in which all inertial measurements (from
gyroscopes and accelerometers) are referenced to is not the most
convenient one for representing craft position because it does not
rotate with the Earth.
Figure E.2 Strap-down navigation system.
Depending on the accuracy of its sensors, an inertial system provides
different functions and then has a different “jargon” name:
With gyroscopes having a bias stability of few degrees per hour,
the system provides attitude and heading, heading being initialized
by an external mean (for example, magnetic sensor). It is an
Attitude & Heading Reference System (AHRS).
With a bias stability of 0.05° to 0.1° per hour, the system provides
448

also attitude and heading, but heading is autonomously computed
without any external sensor. It is a gyrocompass.
With a bias stability better than 0.01° per hour, the system
provides full autonomous navigation capability: attitude and
autonomous heading, but also autonomous calculation of velocity
and position. It is an Inertial Navigation System (INS).
Any of these systems can be enhanced by one or several measurements
coming from other noninertial sensors. Velocity measurements can be
made available from Air Data Computer on aircrafts, from odometer on
land vehicles, from Doppler or electromagnetic log on vessels or
submarines. Position measurements can be made available from Global
Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) as GPS, Glonass, Galileo, or Beidou,
from acoustic positioning systems, from vision algorithms. Heading
measurements can be made available from magnetic sensors, or from dual
antenna GNNS system.
Most of the time, the data fusion between inertial measurements and
external noninertial sensors is performed by using modern signal
processing techniques, Kalman filtering being the most popular one but not
the only one.
E.2 Inertial Sensors
E.2.1 Accelerometers (Acceleration Sensors)
Almost all accelerometers are force sensors that measure the force that a
proof mass needs to follow the accelerometer case. From Newton’s law:
 (E.1)
where m is the mass of the proof mass,  is the craft inertial acceleration, 
 is the gravitational field (or gravity vector), and  is the applied force on
the proof mass that is measured.
Therefore, an accelerometer measures:
 (E.2)
also called the specific force and there is no mean to separate  from 
 as
it is well known.
From the accelerometer measurement, the only way to compute  is to
449

add 
 which means that  must be known (as a vector) at any location
where the craft is navigating. This is done by using a more or less complex
model of gravity as a function of position on Earth. Obviously, model
complexity is related to requested navigation performance.
E.2.2 Gyroscopes (Rotation Rate Sensors)
Unlike accelerometers, gyroscopes that are used presently in inertial
systems are based on various principles. Historically, the first gyroscopes
used the properties of the conservation of the kinematic moment of a
wheel spinning at high speed. This principle was used with several
different setups like gimbaled gyros, rate integrating gyros, flex or dry-
tuned gyros, but different principles are also used. Among them:
Vibrating gyroscopes based on the Coriolis effect: tuning forks,
hemispherical 
resonating 
gyros 
(HRG), 
and
microelectromechanical system (MEMS) gyroscopes;
Nuclear magnetic resonance gyroscopes;
Optical gyroscopes with two different use of the same Sagnac
effect: ring-laser gyros (RLG) and fiber-optic gyros (FOG) (the
subject of this entire book).
Whatever the technology, gyroscopes measure the angular rate with
respect to the inertial space, which means that, in addition to rotation with
respect to the Earth, they also measure:
The angular rate of Earth around its spinning axis;
The angular rate of Earth around the sun;
The angular rate induced by the Earth’s curvature when the craft
moves over the Earth surface (known as the “craft rate”).
E.2.3 Classification of the Inertial Sensor Performance
Very often, inertial sensor performance is classified with respect to their
application and as a function of their bias stability.
The three main grades for gyros are the rate grade (>10°/h), the tactical
grade (1 to 10°/h) allowing attitude measurement, and the navigation grade
(<10–2°/h) allowing pure (nonaided) inertial navigation better than 1
nautical mile per hour.
The rate grade is usually split into an industrial grade (10 to 100°/h) and
450

a consumer grade (>100°/h).
There is also an intermediate grade (1 to 0.01°/h) between the tactical
and inertial grades that is used for gyrocompassing and GNSS-aided
inertial navigation.
Finally, the high end of navigation grade is usually called the strategic
grade (<0.001°/h) and allows pure nonaided inertial navigation better than
1 nautical mile per day.
This is summarized in Table E.1, with in addition the required bias
performance for the accelerometers.
SI (International System) units are rarely used in inertial navigation. The
correspondence is: 1°/h = 4.87 μrad/s and 1g = 9.81 m/s2.
Table E.1 Classification of Accelerometer and Gyroscope Performance
Accelerometers Gyroscopes
Consumer rate grade>50 mg
>100°/h
Industrial rate grade 10 mg
10 to 100°/h
Tactical grade
1 mg
1 to 10°/h
Intermediate grade
0.1 mg
0.01 to 1°/h
Navigation grade
0.05 mg
<0.01°/h
Strategic grade
0.005 mg
<0.001°/h
E.3 Navigation Computation
Nowadays, almost only strap-down systems are used, and we will
concentrate the description on this technology.
E.3.1 A Bit of Geodesy
Earth surface is not smooth and cannot be accurately represented by a
simple geometrical surface. This is why geodesists have defined models of
the Earth that are easier to use.
The first one, the geoid, is the shape that the surface of the oceans
(extended through the continents) would take if it were submitted only to
gravitation and rotation-induced centrifugal force. All points of the geoid
have the same potential energy (geoid is an equipotential surface), and
therefore at any point of the geoid, the gravity vector is perpendicular to
the geoid local surface. The geoid is a smooth surface, but it is an irregular
surface, mainly due to inhomogeneous density of Earth. It cannot be
described by a simple mathematical model.
451

Nevertheless, it can be approximated by an ellipsoid, a rather simple
mathematical surface which is smooth, regular and that fits quite well the
geoid since the maximum difference between the geoid and the ellipsoid is
less than 200m. The most commonly used reference ellipsoid nowadays is
known as the World Geodetic System (WGS84). This is with respect to
this ellipsoid that latitude, longitude, and elevation are defined.
E.3.2 Reference Frames
The inertial sensors measure rotation rates and specific forces with respect
to inertial space. Therefore, it would seem simpler to make all navigation
computations in the inertial frame defined as an Earth-centered frame that
does not rotate with Earth and keeps a fixed orientation with respect to
inertial space. However, this frame is not convenient for representing the
craft position on the Earth, because this frame is not rotating with it.
A convenient frame for position on the Earth representation is the Earth
frame: this frame is Earth centered and rotates with Earth (Figure E.3).
Figure E.3 Inertial frame and Earth frame.
One of its axes is pointing to the North Pole, while a second axis
pointing to the intersection of the Greenwich meridian and the equatorial
plane. In this frame, position on the Earth is represented by the two angles
of latitude and longitude.
If the craft position on Earth is conveniently represented in the Earth
frame, this is not the case for the orientation of the craft, as a common
reference for attitude and heading is the local vertical direction and North
direction. This is why a third frame is used, the navigation frame (Figure
452

E.4). This frame moves with the craft at the surface of the Earth, or more
exactly on the reference ellipsoid surface. The vertical z-axis is orthogonal
to the tangent plane to the ellipsoid while the x-axis is pointing north and
the y-axis is pointing east.
Figure E.4 Earth frame and navigation frame.
E.3.3 Orientation, Velocity, and Position Computation
Figure E.5 shows the principle of computation of orientation, velocity, and
position. Because orientation is computed in the navigation frame, angular
rates are compensated for the Earth rotation rate and craft rate and then
integrated. Therefore, it is necessary to know or compute initial
orientation.
Specific forces measured by accelerometers are projected into the
navigation frame. To transform them into accelerations, they are
compensated for gravity (gravity is computed using a model stored inside
the inertial system), as well as for Coriolis acceleration and centrifugal
acceleration due to Earth rotation. These accelerations are then integrated
using initial velocity to get instantaneous velocity. Finally, velocities are
integrated using the initial position to compute the present craft location
(Figure E.5).
453

Figure E.5 Orientation, velocity, and position computation diagram.
E.3.4 Altitude Computation
Altitude is computed using the above algorithm. However, we must
observe the following phenomenon that makes altitude error grow
exponentially, even with extremely performing sensors. If, due to an error
sensor, altitude is slightly wrong, the gravity model that takes into account
altitude for computing  will make an error on  that will create an error
on the craft acceleration (remember that craft acceleration is not directly
measured by accelerometer but only with the specific force 
) that will
increase the altitude error. This loop will diverge rapidly. Therefore,
altitude computation must always be aided with an altitude external sensor
like the GNSS receiver, baro-altimeter (the pressure depends on altitude),
or odometer.
E.4 Attitude and Heading Initialization
E.4.1 Attitude Initialization
We have seen above that accelerometer measurements provide only 
What can be considered as a difficulty for velocity and position
computation will be useful for initial attitude computation.
In applications where the inertial system is switched on while the craft is
static with respect to Earth, the acceleration 
 is zero. Therefore, the
accelerometers measure only the projection of gravity on their sensitive
454

axis. Knowing the value of gravity  at the initialization location, it is then
possible to compute the two angles defining orientation of the craft with
respect to the direction of gravity, the vertical axis.
For applications where the inertial system is not static when switched
on,  is not zero. We integrate 
 (E.3)
 is the velocity change during the integration time, while 
 is the
velocity that an object would reach in freefall during the integration time
(300 m/s, i.e., Mach 1 after 30 seconds). So after sufficient time, 
tends toward 
 providing then the initial value of attitude, as an
integration is equivalent to an averaging.
E.4.2 Heading Initialization with Gyrocompassing
The definition of heading with respect to true North is the direction of the
projection of Earth rotation vector on the horizontal plane. The horizontal
plane has been determined with previous procedure. If craft were
completely static with respect to Earth, then gyroscopes would only
measure Earth rotation rate and it would only be needed to project these
measurements on horizontal plane to find North direction. However, it is
very scarce that a craft is completely static in terms of rotation with
respect to Earth: The Earth’s rotation rate is about 15° per hour. Any small
move of the craft (for example, somebody getting inside a land vehicle)
creates an angular velocity that may be hundreds or thousands of times
this value, making the static assumption completely wrong.
Because gyroscopes measure rotation with respect to inertial space, we
use the gyroscope measurements to stabilize the accelerometer
measurements in inertial space frame. Assuming that there is no craft
linear acceleration (or that this acceleration is compensated with some
velocity aiding measurements), then we can see how gravity vector will
vary over time with respect to inertial space because of Earth rotation: 
vector at time t, 
 vector at time t′ (Figure E.6).
455

Figure E.6 Gyrocompass principle.
If we differentiate these two vectors, we obtain a vector 
 whose
direction is West to East. This way, we have found the East direction,
making it easy to convert to the North direction. This procedure for
heading determination is known as gyrocompassing.
This procedure makes sense only if the gyroscope measurements are
accurate enough so that the gravity vector change in the inertial frame is
only due to Earth rotation rate. If this is not the case (gyroscope accuracy
worse than one-hundredth of the Earth’s rotation rate to make it simple),
heading initialization accuracy using only inertial sensors will not be
sufficient and other means need to be used. Among them, the following
aiding sensors for heading initialization can be used: double-antenna GNSS
receiver or magnetometer or flux gate.
This description provides a physical explanation of the way true North
direction is found. Obviously, equations in the inertial system do not
follow completely this physical explanation.
E.5 Velocity and Position Initialization
Velocity and position cannot be initialized autonomously using only inertial
measurements. External assumptions or measurements have to be made.
For velocity, very often, the inertial system is switched on and initialized
while the craft is not moving with respect to Earth. Therefore, initial
velocity can be automatically set to zero. However, this assumption may
456

not always be true. This is the case, for example, when initializing the
inertial system on a vessel at sea. In that case, velocity has to be initialized
by measuring it with an external sensor. Presently, the most popular one is
the GNSS receiver, but other sensors may be used, such as Doppler
velocity log for vessels or odometer for land vehicles.
For position, initial craft location must be known to the inertial system.
GNNS receiver measurement is the most accurate and easy way to do so.
When this is not possible, the initial location must be known by using
maps or referenced points.
E.6 Orders of Magnitude to Remember
The Earth’s rotation rate is precisely 15.04107° per hour; in one year, that
is 365.2422 days, the Earth rotates over 366.2422 turns, as it rotates one
turn around the sun in addition to the daily rotations.
The gyrocompassing procedure for 0.5° (i.e., 10–2 radians) heading
accuracy requires gyroscopes with an accuracy of 0.15° per hour (i.e.,
one-hundredth of the Earth’s rotation rate).
For achieving position accuracy of 1 nautical mile per hour (i.e.,
navigation grade performance) using only inertial sensors, a gyroscope’s
accuracy must be close to 0.01°/hour and accelerometers accuracy must in
the order of 5.10–4 m/s2 (i.e., 50 μg).
Gyroscopes in strap-down inertial systems must measure rotation rates
reaching at least 100° per second. The ratio between the required accuracy
for 1 nautical mile per hour and the whole dynamics is therefore 5 × 10–8.
This explains why it is necessary to have extremely performing gyroscopes
to have a strap-down system with a good performance.
Even if static with respect to Earth, a craft at the equator will run about
40,000 km in a day, that is, a velocity of about 1,700 km/h only due to the
Earth’s rotation rate. At 45° of latitude, these figures become 28,000 km
and 1,200 km/h. These velocities are measured with gyros detecting the
Earth’s rotation. Inertial-grade performance is 1 nautical mile per hour,
that is, about 2 kilometers per hour; therefore, at the equator, it requires an
Earth rate measurement with a relative stability of 2/1,700 of 15°h, that is,
a bias stability of 0.015°/h.
Selected Bibliography
457

Bekir, E., Introduction to Modern Navigation Systems, New York: World Scientific, 2007.
Lawrence, A., Modern Inertial Technology: Navigation, Guidance, and Control, 2nd
ed., New York: Springer, 1998.
Savage, G.P., Introduction to Strapdown Inertial Navigation Systems, Maple Plain, MN:
Strapdown Associates, 1991.
Titterton, D. H., and J. L. Weston, “Strapdown Inertial Navigation Technology,” The
American Institute of Astronautics and Aeronautics & The Institution of Electrical
Engineers, 2004.
* This appendix was written by Dr. Yves Paturel.
458

List of Abbreviations
A/D analog-to-digital
ADEV Allan deviation
AHRS Attitude and Heading Reference System
ARW angular random walk
ASE amplified spontaneous emission
ASIC application-specific integrated circuit
AVAR Allan variance
BS beam-splitter
CCW counterclockwise
CD compact disc
CW clockwise
D/A digital-to-analog
DVD digital video disc
EDF erbium-doped fiber
EDFA erbium-doped fiber amplifier
FBG fiber Bragg grating
FOG fiber-optic gyroscope
FPGA field-programmable gate array
FSR free spectral range
FWHM full width at half maximum
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System
GPS Global Positioning System
HE hybrid electromagnetic
I-FOG interferometric FOG
IMU inertial measurement unit
INS Inertial Navigation System
IO integrated optics
IR infrared
ITU International Telecommunication Union
459

LD laser diode
LED light emitting diode
LH left handed
LP linearly polarized
LSB least sensitive bit or least significant bit
MEMS microelectromechanical system
MFD mode field diameter
MIOC multifunction integrated-optic circuit
MOF microstructured optical fiber
NA numerical aperture
OCDP optical coherence-domain polarimetry
OCDR optical coherence-domain reflectometry
OCT optical coherence tomography
OSA optical spectrum analyzer
OTDR optime time-domain reflectometry
PBS polarization beam splitter
PDL polarization dependent loss
PER polarization extinction ratio
PM polarization maintaining
PMD polarization mode dispersion
PSD power spectral density
PZ polarizing
PZT PbZx Ti1-x O3 (lead zirconatetitanate)
RLG ring laser gyroscope
R-FOG resonant FOG
RH right handed
RIN relative intensity noise
RRW rate random walk
SLD super-luminescent diode
SM single mode
TE transverse electric
TEM transverse electromagnetic
TIR total internal reflection
460

TM transverse magnetic
UV ultraviolet
WDM wavelength division multiplexing
461

List of Symbols
A(t) amplitude of an optical wave
Aμ or Aμ electromagnetic four-potential coordinates
A electromagnetic vector potential
A area or area vector
A area vector
a fiber core radius or acceleration
ae core radius of the equivalent step index fiber
ah size of a spatial filtering hole
a(f) frequency component of A(t)
B normalized birefringence
B magnetic field vector
b(V) normalized propagation constant
C power coupling ratio
c velocity of light in a vacuum (2.998 × 108 m ⋅ s–1)
c(z) random polarization coupling along a fiber
cs coupling strength in an evanescent-field coupler
curl curl operator
D diameter, distance, or diffusivity
D derived electric field vector
d distance or thickness
div divergence operator
E Young modulus
E{} ensemble average
E electric field vector
e exp (1) = 2.7183...
el ellipticity
Fμv or Fμv electromagnetic field tensor
462

F finesse of an optical cavity
f focal length or temporal frequency
 mean temporal frequency
fm modulation frequency
fp proper or eigenfrequency of the coil
f force
g gravity
Guv or Guv derived field tensor
gμv or gμv metric tensor
grad gradient operator
H derived magnetic field vector
HE11 fundamental hybrid electromagnetic mode
h Planck constant (6.63 × 10–34 J ⋅ s)
h h-parameter of a polarization-maintaining fiber
I intensity of an optical wave
i intensity of an electrical current or pure imaginary unit value
Jn Bessel function of order n
Jμ or Jμ electrical four-current
j electrical current density vector
K thermal conductivity
k Boltzmann constant (1.38 × 10–25 J ⋅ K–1)
k0 wavenumber in a vacuum
k1 wavenumber in the core
k2 wavenumber in the cladding
km wavenumber in a medium
L length
Lbb common base-branch length
Lc coherence length
Lcp coupling length
Ld depolarization length
463

Ldc decoherence length
Lop optical path length
Lp length of a pulse
Lpc polarization correlation length
LP01 fundamental linearly polarized mode
LP11 second-order linearly polarized mode
LP21 third linearly polarized mode
LSB least significant bit
M magnetic polarization vector
M(t) modulation signal
N number of turns
Ṅ flow of uncorrelated particles
NA numerical aperture
n index of refraction
n1 index of refraction of the core
n2 index of refraction of the cladding
no ordinary index
ne extraordinary index
neq equivalent index
ng group index
P power or degree of polarization
P electric polarization vector
P perimeter
p pressure or parallel (polarization)
pij elasto-optic coefficients
ppm part per million
q electron charge
R radius or resistance
Rc autocorrelation (ensemble average)
Rf radius of the fiber cladding
R reflectivity
464

r radial coordinate
r radial vector
rij electro-optic coefficients
S recapture factor
s perpendicular (polarization)
T temperature
Ta absolute temperature
TC Curie temperature
Tm period of phase modulation
Tn normal stress
Tnc compressive stress
TE transverse electric mode
TM transverse magnetic mode
t time
T transmissivity
T(λ) transmission of a wavelength filter
V normalized frequency in a waveguide; electromagnetic scalar potential or
voltage; Verdet coefficient; visibility of interference fringes
v light velocity in a medium
v speed or velocity
w radius at 1/e2 in intensity of a Gaussian beam
w0 radius at 1/e2 in intensity of the waist of a Gaussian beam or radius at
1/e2 of the pseudo-Gaussian fundamental LP01 mode
w1 half width at the maximum of the LP11 mode
x, y, z Cartesian spatial coordinates
xj coordinate
Z impedance
Z0 impedance of a vacuum
ZR Rayleigh length
α attenuation per unit length of a fiber
α(f) modulus of a(f)
465

αF Fresnel-Fizeau drag coefficient
β propagation constant
Γ coupling loss
Γ(τ) autocorrelation function (time average)
γ (1 − vt2/c2)–1/2
γ(τ) normalized autocorrelation function (time average)
∆ normalized index difference or difference of
∆e normalized index difference of the equivalent step-index fiber
∆fFB feedback frequency difference
∆fFSR free spectral range of an interference
∆fFWHM full width at half maximum of the temporal frequency spectrum
∆fR rotation-induced frequency difference
∆fbw counting bandwidth
∆L difference of geometrical length
∆Lop difference of optical path length
∆nb birefringence index difference
∆β birefringence
∆ϕ difference of phase
∆ϕe error of phase difference
∆ϕF phase difference induced by Faraday effect
∆ϕFB feedback phase difference
∆ϕK phase difference induced by Kerr effect
∆ϕm modulation of the phase difference
∆ϕPR phase difference induced by phase ramp
∆ϕR rotation-induced phase difference due to Sagnac effect
∆λFWHM full width at half maximum of the wavelength spectrum
∆σFSR free spectral range of an inferometer
∆σFWHM full width at half maximum of the spatial frequency spectrum
∆τg difference of group transit time through the coil
δ variation or shift of
466

δn index variation
δϕ phase shift
∈ small ratio
∈0 dielectric permittivity of a vacuum (8.854 × 10–12 F ⋅ m–1)
∈r relative permittivity of a medium
θ angle
θB Brewster angle
θC critical angle of total internal reflection
θD full divergence angle at 1/e2 of a Gaussian beam in a vacuum
θD′ full divergence angle at 1/e2 of a Gaussian beam in a medium
θinc angular increment of a gyroscope
Λ birefringence beat length
λ wavelength in a vacuum
 mean wavelength
λc cutoff wavelength
λe emission wavelength
λm wavelength in a medium
μ0 magnetic permeability of a vacuum (4π × 10–7H ⋅ m–1)
μr relative permeability of a medium
v Poisson ratio
Π Poynting vector
π 3.14159...
ρ electrical charge density
ρcr cross-coupling polarization intensity
Σ summation
σ spatial frequency
 mean spatial frequency
1σ root-mean-square value or standard deviation
τ temporal delay
τc coherence time, or characteristic time
467

τdc decoherence time
τg group delay
τϕ phase delay
ϕ phase
 slope of analog phase ramp
ϕb phase bias
ϕm phase modulation
ϕPR phase ramp
ϕs phase step
χe dielectric susceptibility
χm magnetic susceptibility
χμvσρ constitutive tensor
Ω rotation rate
Ω rotation rate vector
Ωπ rotation rate inducing a π radian phase difference
Ωμ rotation rate inducing a 1-μrad phase difference
ω angular frequency
 mean angular frequency
ωe emission angular frequency
< > temporal averaging
<  > generalized scalar product of complex functions
  absolute value
∇ vector differential operator
468

About the Author
Hervé 
C. 
Lefèvre 
is 
the 
chief 
scientific 
officer 
at 
iXBlue
(www.ixblue.com) in France. He graduated from the Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Saint-Cloud in Physics and was awarded a Doctorate in
Optics-Photonics from the University of Paris-Orsay in 1979. His
doctorate research was performed at Thales (formerly Thomson-CSF)
Central Research Laboratory and his thesis subject was pioneering work
on the fiber-optic gyroscope.
From 1980 to 1982, he was a postdoctoral research associate at
Stanford University in California, continuing R&D on the fiber-optic
gyroscope. In 1982, he came back to the Thales Central Research
Laboratory and became head of the fiber-optic sensor team. In 1987, he
joined Photonetics, which was then a start-up, and became director of
R&D. In addition to fiber-optic sensors and gyroscopes, the company
developed a very successful line of test instruments for optical fiber
communications. As the company grew, he moved to the position of chief
operating officer in 1999. At the end of 2000, Photonetics was acquired
by the Danish group Nettest while its fiber-gyro activity was spun out to
create iXSea. Dr. Lefèvre remained in Nettest and managed its Photonics
division.
In 2004, he moved to iXCore, the parent company of iXSea, as the vice
president for R&D with a specific involvement in iXSea’s activity, and
became the chief scientific officer of iXBlue at its creation in 2010 as a
merging of iXSea and several other subsidiaries of iXCore.
Dr. Lefèvre was also the president of the French Society of Optics
(SFO) for the 2005–2007 period and the president of the European
Optical Society (EOS) for the 2010–2012 period.
He has authored and coauthored more than 80 journal and conference
publications about the fiber-optic gyroscope and its related technologies
and has been granted more than 50 patents.
He was awarded the Prize Fabry-de-Gramont in 1986 by the French
Society of Optics (SFO) and the Prize Esclangon in 1992 by the French
Society of Physics (SFP).
469

Index
μ-metal shielding, 111, 159
Ωπ, 20–21
3x3 coupler, 165–166
A
Accelerometer, 1, 367–370, 373
Acoustic noise, 105
Acousto-optic modulator (AOM), 120–122
Aether, 7–8
Airy coefficient, 242
Airy pattern, 250
Allan
deviation, 27–30
variance, 27–30
All-digital processing method, 131–136, 153
All-fiber configuration, 53–54, 166–167, 198
Amplified spontaneous emission (ASE), 156–157, 207–208, 327
Angular increment, 16–17, 124, 130–131
Angular random walk (ARW), 25–26
Application specific integrated circuit (ASIC), 162
Attitude and heading reference system (AHRS), 368, 373–374
B
Backreflection, 57–58, 65–66, 333
Backscattering, 68–72, 190
Bandwidth, 31
Beat length, 76, 279, 339
Bending-induced birefringence, 303, 321
Bias drift, 26–28, 370
Bias noise, 25
Biasing modulation, 38–47
Birefringence, 267–272, 300–305
Bragg cell, 120–122
Bragg grating, 246, 324–325
470

Brewster incidence, 225–226
Brillouin optical time domain analysis (BOTDA), 329
Brillouin scattering, 329
C
Channeled spectrum, 145–147, 239–240, 256
Channel waveguide, 331–332
Chromatic dispersion, 218–219
Circular birefringence, 272
Circulator, 37, 153, 325–326
Closed-loop operation, 120–139, 152
Coherence, 254–263
length, 255, 261–262
function, 257, 260–261
Coherent detection, 89, 235
Combination of linear and circular birefringences, 109–110, 304–305
Contrast, 234–236
Coupler, 47–49, 318–321
Coupling loss, 293–300, 335–337
D
Deadband (or dead zone), 17, 139–140
Decibel (dB), 203–204
relative to 1 mW (dBm), 203
Decoherence length, 82, 255–257, 262–263
Degree of polarization, 85
Depolarization, 75–77
length, 76, 81, 273, 314
Dielectric waveguidance, 228–229
Diffraction, 248–254
grating, 246–248
Digital demodulation, 131–134, 153
Doppler effect, 12–13, 18
Dual phase ramp, 171
E
Eigen frequency, 41–47, 152, 281
Elasto-optic coefficients, 302
Electronic coupling, 139, 161–162
Electro-optic effect, 336, 340
471

Elliptical core fiber, 301–302
Equivalent index, 288–289
Erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA), 326–327
Evanescent field coupler, 47–49, 316–319, 336–337
Excess RIN, 206–208
compensation, 157–158
F
Faraday effect, 107–111, 191, 324–
326
Far field, 250–251, 254
Few-mode fiber, 291–293
Fiber Bragg grating (FBG), 246, 323–324
Field-programmable gate array (FPGA), 162
Finesse, 19, 175, 243–244
Focal length, 230–231
Fourier’s law of heat transfer, 101
Four-state modulation, 136–139
Fraunhofer diffraction, 248–250, 350
Free spectral range (FSR), 145–147, 239–240, 243–244, 256
Fresnel coefficients, 224–225
Fresnel diffraction, 250–252, 349–350
Fresnel-Fizeau drag effect, 7–8, 13–15, 17
Fringe visibility, 234, 260
Fundamental LP01 mode, 276–279, 285–290
Fused coupler, 318–319
Fused quartz, 275
G
Gaussian beam, 252–254
Geometrical optics, 229–232
Gimbaled navigation system, 367
Ground loop, 161–162
Group velocity, 218–221
dispersion, 46–47, 220–221
Gyrocompassing, 374–375
H
h-parameter, 75, 279, 308, 310–11
472

Half-wave plate, 269–270, 321
Heat
diffusion, 100–105
diffusivity, 101
Helium-neon (He-Ne) laser, 17–18, 155, 204
Hollow-core fiber, 198, 327–29
Huygens principle, 34–35
I
Impedance of a vacuum, 222
Index of refraction, 215–18
of silica, 218, 280, 290
of LiNbO3, 338–39
Inertial measurement unit (IMU), 367–69
Inertial navigation system (INS), 368, 370–73
Intensity modulation, 45–46, 351
Interference contrast, 234–36
Interferometer
Michelson, 89–90, 235–36
Mach-Zehnder, 50–51, 237
Fabry-Perot, 240–44
Sagnac, 9, 18–19, 34–35
Young double-slit, 238
Interferometric fiber-optic gyroscope (I-FOG), 20–22, 151–53
Isolator, 324, 326
J
Jones formalism, 182–85, 271
K
Kalman filtering, 369
Kerr effect, 112–16, 190
Knife-edge diffraction, 251, 349
L
Laplacian operator, 210
Lefevre’s loops, 321–22
Lens, 230–31
473

Lithium niobate (LiNbO3), 336–45
birefringence, 338
indices, 338–39
phase modulation, 336–37, 340–41, 344
thermal expansion, 339
Lithium tantalate (LiTaO3), 344
Lloyd’s mirror effect, 51, 345–47
Lock-in, 17, 139–40
Lyot depolarizer, 61, 87–88, 322–23
M
Magneto-optic effects, 107–12
Maxwell equations, 209, 216, 223, 356–57
Mean wavelength, 141–42, 156–57
Microstructured optical fiber (MOF), 198, 327–29
Minimum configuration, 46, 152
Mode
equivalent index, 288–89
field diameter (MFD), 277, 287
group index, 289–90
group velocity, 289–90
mismatch loss, 297–300
phase velocity, 288–89
Multifunction integrated-optic circuit (MIOC), 57, 153, 160
Multilayer dielectric mirror, 17, 245
Multiple-wave interference, 240–42
Multiplexer, 316–18, 326–27
N
Near field, 250–51, 254
Nonlinear effects, 112–16, 329
Numerical aperture (NA), 228, 276–77, 285–86
O
Open-loop operation, 119, 166–67, 198
Optical coherence-domain polarimetry (OCDP), 88–93, 152
Optical spectrum analyzer (OSA), 273–74
Optimal length, 23–24
Overlap integral, 294–96
474

P
Path-matched white light interferometry, 88–93, 152
Performance grades, 2, 196–97, 370
Phase front, 229
Phase ramp
analog, 122–26
digital, 126–31, 152
Phase velocity, 219, 288–89
Photon noise, 22–23, 160, 175, 205–06
Piezoelectric phase modulator, 53, 319–21
PIN diode, 160–61
Planar lightwave circuit (PLC), 331
Plane mirror, 229–30
Pockels effect, 336, 340
Poincaré sphere, 109–10, 304–05
Polarization controller, 53, 321–22
Polarization correlation, 81–84
Polarization crossed-coupling, 308–11
Polarization dependent loss (PDL), 61, 85, 317–18
Polarization extinction ratio (PER), 75, 308
Polarization-maintaining (PM) fiber, 60–61, 152, 306–08
Polarization mode dispersion (PMD), 314–15
Polarization nonreciprocities
amplitude-type, 59–60, 84–87
intensity-type, 59, 77–81
Polarization rejection of proton-exchanged LiNbO3 waveguide, 345–51
Polarizing (PZ) fiber, 315–316
Poynting vector, 222
Propagation equation, 210, 217
Proper frequency, 41–47, 152, 281
Protective coating, 279–81
Proton-exchanged LiNbO3 waveguide, 343–45
Q
Quarter-wave plate, 271–73, 321
R
Rare-earth doped fiber, 326–27
Rate ramp, 28–30
Rate random walk (RRW), 28–30
475

Rayleigh backscattering noise, 69V72, 190
Rayleigh scattering, 69–70, 190, 277
Rayleigh range, 324
Reciprocal
behavior of a beam splitter, 34–35
configuration, 36–38, 152
biasing modulation, 38–41, 152
Reciprocity of wave propagation, 33
Refraction, 223–27
Resonant fiber-optic gyroscope (R-FOG), 18–19, 175–93
Ring interferometer, 9, 18–19, 34–35
Ring-laser gyroscope (RLG), 15–18, 196–97
Ring resonant cavity, 19, 244
S
Sagnac effect
in a vacuum, 8–13
in a medium, 13–15, 151, 361–65
Sagnac interferometer, 9, 18–19, 34–35
Sagnac-Laue effect, 7–8
Sawtooth modulation, 121–22
Scale factor
accuracy, 25–27, 119, 140–47
linearity, 25–27, 119–40
Sensing coil, 158, 160
Serrodyne modulation, 122
Shape-induced birefringence, 300–01
Shupe effect, 3, 95–97
Silica
attenuation, 275–76
index, 218, 280, 290
group index, 290
thermal expansion, 280
Slant interface, 65–66
Snell law, 223–224
Spatial frequency, 201–02
Special relativity, 7, 12, 353–61
State of polarization, 212–15
Strap-down navigation system, 198, 369
Stress-induced birefringence, 301–04
Superluminescent diode (SLD), 154–56, 208
476

T
T-dot effect, 99–100
TE mode, 331–32
TE polarization, 228–29
Temperature dependence of
fiber Bragg grating, 323
LiNbO3 indices, 338
PM fiber birefringence, 281
proper frequency, 281
silica index, 280
Vπ of LiNbO3, 143
Temporal frequency, 201–202
Thermal detector noise, 160–61
Thermal expansion of
LiNbO3, 339
silica, 280
Titanium(Ti)-indiffused LiNbO3 waveguide, 340–43
TM mode, 331–32
TM polarization, 228–29
Total internal reflection (TIR), 226–28
Transverse magneto-optic effect, 111–12
Tunable laser, 35, 274
Two-wave interferometry, 232–35
U
Unpolarized source, 61–62, 156, 209
V
VLSB, 127
Vπ, 127, 336, 341
Vπ control loop, 138
Vector differential operator, 209–210
Verdet constant, 107–109
Vibration, 105
W
Waist, 252–54
Wavefront, 229–31
477

Wavelength, 201–02
control, 143–45
dependence of scale factor, 140–43
multiplexer, 316–19, 326–27
Wave train, 69, 75–77, 263
Wiener-Khinchin theorem, 259
Winding
dipolar, 98
quadrupolar, 98–99, 152
Y
Y-coupler configuration, 54–58, 160, 195
Y-junction, 49–53, 33
478

目录
Preface to the Second Edition
15
Chapter 1
17
Introduction
17
Chapter 2
23
Principle of the Fiber-Optic Gyroscope
23
2.1 Sagnac Effect
23
2.1.1 A History of Optics from Aether to Relativity
23
2.1.2 Sagnac Effect in a Vacuum
24
2.1.3 Sagnac Effect in a Medium
30
2.2 Active and Passive Ring Resonators
33
2.2.1 Ring-Laser Gyroscope (RLG)
33
2.2.2 Resonant Fiber-Optic Gyroscope (R-FOG)
37
2.3 Passive Fiber-Ring Interferometer
38
2.3.1 Principle of the Interferometric Fiber-Optic
Gyroscope (I-FOG)
38
2.3.2 Theoretical Sensitivity of the I-FOG
41
2.3.3 Noise, Drift, and Scale Factor
45
2.3.4 Evaluation of Noise and Drift by Allan Variance (or
Allan Deviation)
47
2.3.5 Bandwidth
51
References
52
Chapter 3
54
Reciprocity of a Fiber Ring Interferometer
54
3.1 Principle of Reciprocity
54
3.1.1 Single-Mode Reciprocity of Wave Propagation
54
3.1.2 Reciprocal Behavior of a Beam Splitter
55
3.2 Minimum Configuration of a Ring Fiber Interferometer
57
3.2.1 Reciprocal Configuration
57
479

3.2.2 Reciprocal Biasing Modulation-Demodulation
60
3.2.3 Proper (or Eigen) Frequency
64
3.3 Reciprocity with All-Guided Schemes
71
3.3.1 Evanescent-Field Coupler (or X-Coupler or Four-
Port Coupler)
71
3.3.2 Y-Junction
73
3.3.3 All-Fiber Approach
77
3.3.4 Hybrid Architectures with Integrated Optics: Y-
Coupler Configuration
79
3.4 Problem of Polarization Reciprocity
83
3.4.1 Rejection Requirement with Ordinary Single-Mode
Fiber
83
3.4.2 Use of Polarization-Maintaining (PM) Fiber
87
3.4.3 Use of Depolarizer
87
3.4.4 Use of an Unpolarized Source
88
References
90
Chapter 4
92
Backreflection and Backscattering
92
4.1 Problem of Backreflection
92
4.1.1 Reduction of Backreflection with Slant Interfaces
92
4.1.2 Influence of Source Coherence
94
4.2 Problem of Backscattering
96
4.2.1 Coherent Backscattering
96
4.2.2 Use of a Broadband Source
97
4.2.3 Evaluation of the Residual Rayleigh Backscattering
Noise
98
References
101
Chapter 5
103
Analysis of Polarization Nonreciprocities with
Broadband Source and High-Birefringence
Polarization-Maintaining Fiber
103
480

5.1 Depolarization Effect in High-Birefringence Polarization-
Maintaining Fibers
103
5.2 Analysis of Polarization Nonreciprocities in a Fiber
Gyroscope Using an All-Polarization-Maintaining Waveguide
Configuration
106
5.2.1 Intensity-Type Effects
106
5.2.2 Comment About Length of Depolarization Ld Versus
Length of Polarization Correlation Lpc
111
5.2.3 Amplitude-Type Effects
115
5.3 Use of a Depolarizer
118
5.4 Testing with Optical Coherence Domain Polarimetry
(OCDP)
120
5.4.1 OCDP Based on Path-Matched White-Light
Interferometry
120
5.4.2 OCDP Using Optical Spectrum Analysis
125
References
126
Chapter 6
129
Time Transience-Related Nonreciprocal Effects
129
6.1 Effect of Temperature Transience: The Shupe Effect
129
6.2 Symmetrical Windings
132
6.3 Stress-Induced T-Dot Effect
134
6.4 Basics of Heat Diffusion and Temporal Signature of the
Shupe and T-Dot Effects
135
6.5 Effect of Acoustic Noise and Vibration
141
References
142
Chapter 7
143
Truly Nonreciprocal Effects
143
7.1 Magneto-Optic Faraday Effect
143
7.2 Transverse Magneto-Optic Effect
149
7.3 Nonlinear Kerr Effect
149
References
155
481

Chapter 8
157
Scale Factor Linearity and Accuracy
157
8.1 Problem of Scale Factor Linearity and Accuracy
157
8.2 Closed-Loop Operation Methods to Linearize the Scale
Factor
158
8.2.1 Use of a Frequency Shift
158
8.2.2 Use of an Analog Phase Ramp (or Serrodyne
Modulation)
161
8.2.3 Use of a Digital Phase Ramp
165
8.2.4 All-Digital Closed-Loop Processing Method
172
8.2.5 Control of the Gain of the Modulation Chain with
Four-State Modulation
178
8.2.6 Potential Spurious Lock-In (or Deadband) Effect
182
8.3 Scale Factor Accuracy
183
8.3.1 Problem of Scale Factor Accuracy
183
8.3.2 Wavelength Dependence of an Interferometer
Response with a Broadband Source
184
8.3.3 Effect of Phase Modulation
186
8.3.4 Wavelength Control Schemes
187
8.3.5 Mean Wavelength Change with a Parasitic
Interferometer or Polarimeter
190
References
193
Chapter 9
195
Recapitulation of the Optimal Operating Conditions
and Technologies of the I-FOG
195
9.1 Optimal Operating Conditions
195
9.2 Broadband Source
199
9.2.1 Superluminescent Diode
199
9.2.2 Rare-Earth Doped Fiber ASE Sources
201
9.2.3 Excess RIN Compensation Techniques
202
9.3 Sensing Coil
204
482

9.4 The Heart of the Interferometer
206
9.5 Detector and Processing Electronics
206
References
209
Chapter 10
211
Alternative Approaches for the I-FOG
211
10.1 Alternative Optical Configurations
211
10.2 Alternative Signal Processing Schemes
213
10.2.1 Open-Loop Scheme with Use of Multiple
Harmonics
213
10.2.2 Second Harmonic Feedback
213
10.2.3 Gated Phase Modulation Feedback
214
10.2.4 Heterodyne and Pseudo-Heterodyne Schemes
215
10.2.5 Beat Detection with Phase Ramp Feedback
217
10.2.6 Dual-Phase Ramp Feedback
218
10.3 Extended Dynamic Range with Multiple Wavelength
Source
219
References
220
Chapter 11
222
Resonant Fiber-Optic Gyroscope (R-FOG)
222
11.1 Principle of Operation of an All-Fiber Ring Cavity
222
11.2 Signal Processing Method
226
11.3 Reciprocity of a Ring Fiber Cavity
228
11.3.1 Introduction
228
11.3.2 Basic Reciprocity Within the Ring Resonator
230
11.3.3 Excitation and Detection of Resonances in a Ring
Resonator
234
11.4 Other Parasitic Effects in the R-FOG
240
Acknowledgments
243
References
244
Chapter 12
247
483

Conclusions
247
12.1 The State of Development and Expectations in 1993
247
12.2 The Present State of the Art, Two Decades Later
249
12.2.1 FOG Versus RLG
249
12.2.2 FOG Manufacturers
250
12.3 Trends for the Future and Concluding Remarks
251
References
252
Appendix A
254
Fundamentals of Optics for the Fiber Gyroscope
254
A.1 Basic Parameters of an Optical Wave: Wavelength,
Frequency, and Power
254
A.2 Spontaneous Emission, Stimulated Emission, and Related
Noises
258
A.2.1 Fundamental Photon Noise
258
A.2.2 Spontaneous Emission and Excess Relative Intensity
Noise (Excess RIN)
260
A.2.3 Resonant Stimulated Emission in a Laser Source
261
A.2.4 Amplified Spontaneous Emission (ASE)
262
A.3 Propagation Equation in a Vacuum
264
A.4 State of Polarization of an Optical Wave
267
A.5 Propagation in a Dielectric Medium
272
A.5.1 Index of Refraction
272
A.5.2 Chromatic Dispersion, Group Velocity, and Group
Velocity Dispersion
274
A.5.3 E and B, or E and H?
278
A.6 Dielectric Interface
281
A.6.1 Refraction, Partial Reflection, and Total Internal
Reflection
281
A.6.2 Dielectric Waveguidance
286
A.7 Geometrical Optics
287
A.7.1 Rays and Phase Wavefronts
287
484

A.7.2 Plane Mirror and Beam Splitter
288
A.7.3 Lenses
289
A.8 Interferences
291
A.8.1 Principle of Two-Wave Interferometry
291
A.8.2 Most Common Two-Wave Interferometers:
Michelson and Mach-Zehnder Interferometers, Young
Double-Slit
295
A.8.3 Channeled Spectral Response of a Two-Wave
Interferometer
299
A.9 Multiple-Wave Interferences
301
A.9.1 Fabry-Perot Interferometer
301
A.9.2 Ring Resonant Cavity
306
A.9.3 Multilayer Dielectric Mirror and Bragg Reflector
306
A.9.4 Bulk-Optic Diffraction Grating
308
A.10 Diffraction
310
A.10.1 Fresnel Diffraction and Fraunhofer Diffraction
310
A.10.2 Knife-Edge Fresnel Diffraction
313
A.11 Gaussian Beam
315
A.12 Coherence
317
A.12.1 Basics of Coherence
317
A.12.2 Mathematical Derivation of Temporal Coherence
321
A.12.3 The Concept of a Wave Train
327
A.12.4 The Case of an Asymmetrical Spectrum
328
A.12.5 The Case of Propagation in a Dispersive Medium
331
A.13 Birefringence
333
A.13.1 Birefringence Index Difference
333
A.13.2 Change of Polarization with Birefringence
334
A.13.3 Interference with Birefringence
338
A.14 Optical Spectrum Analysis
340
Reference
341
Selected Bibliography
341
485

Appendix B
342
Fundamentals of Fiber Optics for the Fiber Gyroscope 342
B.1 Main Characteristics of a Single-Mode Optical Fiber
342
B.1.1 Attenuation of a Silica Fiber
342
B.1.2 Gaussian Profile of the Fundamental Mode
344
B.1.3 Beat Length and h Parameter of a PM Fiber
346
B.1.4 Protective Coating
347
B.1.5 Temperature Dependence of Propagation in a PM
Fiber
348
B.2 Discrete Modal Guidance in a Step-Index Fiber
349
B.3 Guidance in a Single-Mode (SM) Fiber
354
B.3.1 Amplitude Distribution of the Fundamental LP01
Mode
354
B.3.2 Equivalent Index neq and Phase Velocity vϕ of the
Fundamental LP01 Mode
357
B.3.3 Group Index ng of the Fundamental LP01 Mode
358
B.3.4 Case of a Parabolic Index Profile
359
B.3.5 Modes of a Few-Mode Fiber
360
B.4 Coupling in a Single-Mode Fiber and Its Loss Mechanisms
362
B.4.1 Free-Space Coupling
362
B.4.2 Misalignment Coupling Losses
363
B.4.3 Mode-Diameter Mismatch Loss of LP01 Mode
367
B.4.4 Mode Size Mismatch Loss of LP11 and LP21 Modes 369
B.5 Birefringence in a Single-Mode Fiber
371
B.5.1 Shape-Induced Linear Birefringence
371
B.5.2 Stress-Induced Linear and Circular Birefringence
372
B.5.3 Combination of Linear and Circular Birefringence
Effects
375
B.6 Polarization-Maintaining (PM) Fibers
377
B.6.1 Principle of Conservation of Polarization
377
B.6.2 Residual Polarization Crossed-Coupling
380
486

B.6.3 Depolarization of Crossed-Coupling with a
Broadband Source
384
B.6.4 Polarization Mode Dispersion (PMD)
387
B.6.5 Polarizing (PZ) Fiber
388
B.7 All-Fiber Components
389
B.7.1 Evanescent-Field Coupler and Wavelength
Multiplexer
390
B.7.2 Piezoelectric Phase Modulator
393
B.7.3 Polarization Controller
395
B.7.4 Lyot Depolarizer
396
B.7.5 Fiber Bragg Grating (FBG)
397
B.8 Pigtailed Bulk-Optic Components
399
B.8.1 General Principle
399
B.8.2 Optical Isolator
399
B.8.3 Optical Circulator
400
B.9 Rare-Earth-Doped Amplifying Fiber
401
B.10 Microstructured Optical Fiber (MOF)
403
B.11 Nonlinear Effects in Optical Fibers
404
Selected Bibliography
405
Appendix C
406
Fundamentals of Integrated Optics for the
Fibergyroscope
406
C.1 Principle and Basic Functions of LiNbO3 Integrated Optics 406
C.1.1 Channel Waveguide
406
C.1.2 Coupling Between an Optical Fiber and an
Integrated-Optic Waveguide
407
C.1.3 Fundamental Mode Profile and Equivalence with an
LP11 Fiber Mode
408
C.1.4 Mismatch Coupling Attenuation Between a Fiber and
a Waveguide
411
C.1.5 Low-Driving-Voltage Phase Modulator
412
487

C.1.6 Beam Splitting
412
C.1.7 Polarization Rejection and Birefringence-Induced
Depolarization
414
C.2 Ti-Indiffused LiNbO3 Integrated Optics
416
C.2.1 Ti-Indiffused Channel Waveguide
416
C.2.2 Phase Modulation and Metallic-Overlay Polarizer
with Ti-Indiffused Waveguide
417
C.3 Proton-Exchanged LiNbO3 Integrated Optics
421
C.3.1 Single-Polarization Propagation
421
C.3.2 Phase Modulation in Proton-Exchanged Waveguide
422
C.3.3 Theoretical Polarization Rejection of a Proton-
Exchanged LiNbO3 Circuit
423
C.3.4 Practical Polarization Rejection of Proton-
Exchanged LiNbO3 Circuit
426
C.3.5 Improved Polarization Rejection with Absorbing
Grooves
427
C.3.6 Spurious Intensity Modulation
430
Selected Bibliography
431
Appendix D
432
Electromagnetic Theory of the Relativistic Sagnac
Effect
432
D.1 Special Relativity and Electromagnetism
432
D.2 Electromagnetism in a Rotating Frame
441
D.3 Case of a Rotating Toroidal Dielectric Waveguide
444
Selected Bibliography
446
Appendix E
447
Basics of Inertial Navigation
447
E.1 Introduction
447
E.2 Inertial Sensors
449
E.2.1 Accelerometers (Acceleration Sensors)
449
E.2.2 Gyroscopes (Rotation Rate Sensors)
450
488

E.2.3 Classification of the Inertial Sensor Performance
450
E.3 Navigation Computation
451
E.3.1 A Bit of Geodesy
451
E.3.2 Reference Frames
452
E.3.3 Orientation, Velocity, and Position Computation
453
E.3.4 Altitude Computation
454
E.4 Attitude and Heading Initialization
454
E.4.1 Attitude Initialization
454
E.4.2 Heading Initialization with Gyrocompassing
455
E.5 Velocity and Position Initialization
456
E.6 Orders of Magnitude to Remember
457
Selected Bibliography
457
List of Abbreviations
459
List of Symbols
462
About the Author
469
489

