The Stars Are The Styx
by Theodore Sturgeon
An A\NN/A Preservation Edition. 
Notes 
Every few years someone thinks to call me Charon. It never lasts. I guess I don’t look the part.
Charon, you’ll remember, was the somber ferryman who steered the boat across the River Styx,
taking the departed souls over to the Other Side. He’s usually pictured as a grim, taciturn
character, tall and gaunt.
I get called Charon, but that’s not what I look like. I’m not exactly taciturn, and I don’t go
around in a flapping black cloak. I’m too fat. Maybe too old, too.
It’s a shrewd gag, though, calling me Charon. I do pass human souls Out, and for nearly half
of them, the stars are indeed the Styx—they will never return.
I have two things I know Charon had. One is that bitter difference from the souls I deal with.
They have lost only one world; the other is before them. But I’m rejected by both.
The other thing has to do with a little-known fragment of the Charon legend. And that, I think,
is worth a yarn.
IT’S JUDSON’S yarn, and I wish he was here to tell it himself—which is foolish; the yarn’s about
why he isn’t here. “Here” is Curbstone, by the way—the stepping-off place to the Other Side. It’s
Earth’s other slow satellite, bumbling along out past the Moon. It was built 7800 years ago for heavy
interplanetary transfer, though of course there’s not much of that left any more. It’s so easy to synthesize
anything nowadays that there’s just no call for imports. We make what we need from energy, and there’s
plenty of that around. There’s plenty of everything. Even insecurity, though you have to come to
Curbstone for that, and be someone like Judson to boot.
It’s no secret—now—that insecurity is vital to the Curbstone project. In a cushioned existence on a
stable Earth, volunteers for Curbstone are rare. But they come in—the adventurous, the dissatisfied, the
yearning ones, to man the tiny ships that will, in due time, give mankind a segment of space so huge that
even mankind’s voracious appetite for expansion will be glutted for millenia. There is a vision that haunts
all humans today—that of a network of force-beams in the form of a tremendous sphere, encompassing
much of the known universe and a great deal of the unknown—through which, like thought impulses
through the synaptic paths of a giant brain, matter will be transmitted instantly, and a man may step from
here to the depths of space while his heart beats once. The vision frightens most and lures a few, and of
those few, some are chosen to go out. Judson was chosen.
I knew he’d come to Curbstone. I’d known it for years, ever since I was on Earth and met him. He
was just a youngster then, thirty or so, and boiling around under that soft-spoken, shockproof surface of
his was something that had to drive him to Curbstone. It showed when he raised his eyes. They got
hungry. Any kind of hunger is rare on Earth. That’s what Curbstone’s for. The ultimate social
balance—an escape for the unbalanced.
Don’t wince like that when I say ‘unbalanced’. Plain talk is plain talk. You can afford to be mighty

plain about social imbalance these days. It’s rare and it’s slight. Thing is, when a man goes through fifteen
years of primary social—childhood, I’m talking about—with all the subtle tinkering that involves, and still
has an imbalance, it’s a thing that sticks with him no matter how slight it is. Even then, the very existence
of Curbstone is enough to make most of ’em quite happy to stay where they are. The handful who do
head for Curbstone do it because they have to. Once here, only about half make the final plunge. The
rest go back—or live here permanently. Whatever they do, Curbstone takes care of the imbalance.
When you come right down to it, misfits are that way either because they lack something or because
they have something extra. On Earth there’s a place for everything and everything’s in its place. On
Curbstone you find someone who has what you lack, or who has the same extra something you
have—or you leave. You go back feeling that Earth’s a pretty nice safe place after all, or you go Out,
and it doesn’t matter to anyone else, ever, whether you’re happy or not.
I WAS waiting in the entry bell when Judson arrived on Curbstone. Judson had nothing to do with
that. I didn’t even know he was on that particular shuttle. It’s just that, aside from the fact that I happen
to be Senior Release Officer on Curbstone, I like to meet the shuttles. All sorts of people come here, for
all sorts of reasons. They stay here or they don’t for all sorts of other reasons. I like to look at the faces
that come down that ramp and guess which ones will go which way. I’m pretty good at it. As soon as I
saw Judson’s face I knew that this boy was bound Out. I recognized that about him even before I
realized who it was.
There was a knot of us there to watch the newcomers come in. Most were there just because it’s
worth watching them all, the hesitant ones, the damn-it-alls, the grim ones. But two Curbstoners I noticed
particularly. Hunters both. One was a lean, slick-haired boy named Wold. It was pretty obvious what he
was hunting. The other was Flower. It was just as obvious what she had her long, wide-spaced eyes out
for, but it was hard to tell why. Last I had heard, she had been solidly wrapped up in an Outbounder
called Clinton.
I forgot about the wolf and the vixen when I recognized Judson and bellowed at him. He dropped his
kit where he stood and came bounding over to me. He grabbed both my biceps and squeezed while I
thumped his ribs. “I was waiting up for you, Judson,” I grinned at him.
“MAN, I’m glad you’re still here,” he said. He was a sandy-haired fellow, all Adam’s apple and
guarded eyes.
“I’m here for the duration,” I told him. “Didn’t you know?”
“No, I—I mean…”
“Don’t be tactful, Jud,” I said. “I belong here by virtue of the fact that there’s nowhere else for me to
go. Earth isn’t happy about men as fat and funny-looking as I am in the era of beautiful people. And I
can’t go Out. I have a left axis deviation. I know that sounds political; actually it’s cardiac.”
“I’m, sorry.” He looked at my brassard. “Well, you’re Mr. Big around here, anyway.”
“I’m just big around here,” I said, swatting my belt-line. “There’s Coördination Office and a
half-squad of Guardians who ice this particular cake. I’m just the final check on Outbounders.”
“Yeah,” he said. “You don’t rate. Much. The whole function of this space-station waits on whether
you say yes to a departure.”
“Shecks now,” I said, exaggerating my embarrassment to cover up my exaggerated embarrassment.

“Whatever, I wouldn’t worry too much if I were you. I could be wrong—we’ll have to run some more
tests on you—but if ever I saw an Outbounder, it’s you.”
“Hi,” said a silken voice. “You already know each other. How nice.”
Flower.
There was something vaguely reptilian about Flower, which didn’t take a thing from her brand of
magnetism. Bit by bit, piece by piece, she was a so-so looking girl. Her eyes were too long, and so dark
they seemed to be all pupil and the whites too white. Her nose was a bit too large and her chin a bit too
small, but so help me, there never was a more perfect mouth. Her voice was like a ’cello bowed up near
the bridge. She was tall, with a fragile-in-the-middle slenderness and spring-steel flanks. The overall
effect was breathtaking. I didn’t like her. She didn’t like me either. She never spoke to me except on
business, and I had practically no business with her. She’d been here a long time. I hadn’t figured out
why, then. But she wouldn’t go Out and she wouldn’t go back to Earth—which in itself was all right; we
had lots of room.
LET me tell you something about modern women and therefore something about Flower—something
you might not reason out unless you get as old and objective as I’ve somehow lived to become.
Used to be, according to what I’ve read, that clothes ran a lot to what I might call indicative
concealment. As long as clothes had the slightest excuse of functionalism, people in general and women in
particular made a large fuss over something called innate modesty—which never did exist; it had to be
learned. But as long as there was weather around to blame clothes on, the myth was accepted. People
exposed what the world was indifferent to in order to whip up interest in the rest. “Modesty is not so
simple a virtue as honesty,” one of the old books says. Clothes as weatherproonng got themselves all
mixed up with clothes as ornament; fashions came and went and people followed them.
But for the past three hundred years or so there hasn’t been any “weather” as such, for anyone, here
or on Earth. Clothes for only aesthetic purposes became more and more the rule, until today it’s up to the
individual to choose what he’s going to wear, if anything. An earring and a tattoo are quite as acceptable
in public as forty meters of iridescent plastiweb and a two-meter coiffure.
Now, most people today are healthy, well-selected, and good to look at. Women are still as vain as
ever. A woman with a bodily defect, real or imagined, has one of two choices: She can cover the defect
with something artfully placed to look as if that was just the best place for it, or she can leave the defect
in the open, knowing that no one today is going to judge her completely in terms of the defect. Folks
nowadays generally wait until they can find out what kind of a human being you are.
But a woman who has no particular defect generally changes her clothes with her mood. It might be a
sash only this morning, but a trailing drape this afternoon. Tomorrow it might be a one-sided blouse and
clinging trousers. You can take it as a very significant thing when such a woman always covers up. She’s
keeping her natural warmth, as it were, under forced draft.
I didn’t go into all this ancient history to impress you with my scholastics. I’m using it to illustrate a
very important facet of Flower’s complex character. Because Flower was one of those forced-draft
jobs. Except on the sun-field and in the swimming pools, where no one ever wears clothes, Flower
always affected a tunic of some kind.
The day Judson arrived, she wore a definitive example of what I mean. It was a single loose black
garment with straight shoulders and no sleeves. On both sides, from a point a hand’s-breath below the
armpit, down to the hipbone, it was slit open. It fastened snugly under her throat with one magne-clasp,
but was also slit from there to the navel. It did not quite reach to mid-thigh, and the soft material carried a

light biostatic electrical charge, so that it clung to and fell away from her body as she moved. So help me,
she was a walking demand for the revival of the extinct profession of peeping Tom.
This, then, was what horned in on my first few words with Judson. I should have known from the way
she looked that she was planning something—something definitely for herself. I should have been doubly
warned by the fact that she took the trouble to speak up just when she did—just when I told Jud he was
a certifiable Outbounder if I ever saw one.
So then and there I made my big mistake. “Flower,” I said, “this is Judson.”
She used the second it took me to speak to suck in her lower lip, so that when she smiled slowly at
Jud, the lip swelled visibly as if by blood pressure. “I am glad,” she all but whispered.
And then she had the craft to turn the smile on me and walk away without another word.
“… Gah!” said Judson through a tight glottis.
“That,” I told him, “was beautifully phrased. Gah, indeed. Reel your eyeballs back in, Jud. We’ll drop
your duffel off at the Outbound quarters and—Judson!”
Flower had disappeared down the inner ramp. I was aware that Judson had just started to breathe
again. “What?” he asked me.
I waddled over and picked up his gear. “Come on,” I said, and steered him by the arm.
JUDSON had nothing to say until after we found him a room and started for my sector. “Who is
she?”
“A hardy perennial,” I said. “Came up to Curbstone two years ago. She’s never been certified. She’ll
get around to it soon—or never. Are you going right ahead?”
“Just how do you handle the certification?”
“Give you some stuff to read. Pound some more knowledge into you for six, seven nights while you
sleep. Look over your reflexes, physical and mental. An examination. If everything’s all right, you’re
certified.”
“Then—Out?”
I shrugged. “If you like. You come to Curbstone strictly on your own. You take your course if and
when you like. And after you’ve been certified, you leave when you want to, with someone or not, and
without telling anyone unless you care to.”
“Man, when you people say ‘Voluntary’ you’re not just talking!”
“There’s no other way to handle a thing like this. And you can bet that we get more people Out this
way than we ever would on a compulsory basis. In the long run, I mean, and this is a long-term project…
six thousand years long.”
He walked silently for a time, and I was pretty sure I knew his thoughts. For Outbounders there is no
return, and the best possible chance they have of survival is something like fifty-four per cent, a figure
which was arrived at after calculations so complex that it might as well be called a guess. You don’t force
people Out against those odds. They go by themselves, driven by their own reasoning, or they don’t go
at all.

AFTER a time Judson said, “I always thought Outbounders were assigned a ship and a departure
time. With certified people leaving whenever they feel like it, what’s to prevent uncertified ones from
doing it?”
“That I’m about to show you.” We passed the Coördination offices and headed out to the launching
racks. They were shut off from Top Central Corridor by a massive gate. Over the gate floated three
words in glowing letters:
SPECIES
GROUP
SELF
Seeing Jud’s eyes on it, I explained, “The three levels of survival. They’re in all of us. You can judge a
man by the way he lines them up. The ones who have them in that order are the best. It’s a good thought
for Outbounders to take away with them.” I watched his face. “Particularly since it’s always the third item
that brings ’em this far.”
Jud smiled slowly. “Along with all that bumbling you carry a sting, don’t you?”
“Mine is a peculiar job,” I grinned back. “Come on in.”
I put my palm on the key-plate. It tingled for a brief, moment and then the shining doors slid back. I
rolled through, stopping just inside the launching court at Judson’s startled yelp.
“Well, come on,” I said.
He stood just inside the doors, straining mightily against nothing at all. “Wh—wh—?” His arms were
spread and his feet slipped as if he were trying to force his way through a steel wall.
Actually he was working on something a good deal stronger than that. “That’s the answer to why
uncertified people don’t go Out,” I told him. “The plate outside scanned the whorls and lines of my hand.
The door opened and that Gillis-Menton field you’re muscling passed me through. It’ll pass anyone
who’s certified, too, but no one else. Now stop pushing or you’ll suddenly fall on your face.”
I stepped to the left bulkhead and palmed the plate there, then beckoned to Judson. He approached
the invisible barrier timidly. It wasn’t there. He came all the way through, and I took my hand off the
scanner.
“That second plate,” I explained, “works for me and certified people only. There’s no way for an
uncertified person to get into the launching court unless I bring him in personally. It’s as simple as that.
When the certified are good and ready, they go. If they want to go Out with a banquet and a parade
beforehand, they can. If they want to roll out of bed some night and slip Out quietly, they can. Most of
’em do it quietly. Come on and have a look at the ships.”
WE CROSSED the court to the row of low doorways along the far wall. I opened one at random
and we stepped into the ship.
“It’s just a room!”
“They all say that,” I chuckled. “I suppose you expected a planet-type space job, only more
elaborate.”

“I thought they’d at least look like ships. This is a double room out of some luxury hotel.”
“It’s that, and then some.” I showed him around—the capacious food lockers, the automatic air
re-circulators, and, most comforting of all, the synthesizer, which meant food, fuel, tools and materials
converted directly from energy to matter.
“Curbstone’s more than a space station, Jud. It’s a factory, for one thing. When you decide to go on
your way, you’ll flip that lever by the door. (You’ll be catapulted out—you won’t feel it, because of the
stasis generator and artificial gravity.) As soon as you’re gone, another ship will come up from below into
this slot. By the time you’re clear of Curbstone’s gravitic field and slip into hyper-drive, the new ship’ll be
waiting for passengers.”
“And that will be going on for six thousand years?”
“More or less.”
“That’s a powerful lot of ships.”
“As long as Outbounders keep the quota, it is indeed. Nine hundred thousand—including forty-six
per cent failure.”
“Failure,” said Jud. He looked at me and I held his gaze.
“Yes,” I said. “The forty-six per cent who are not expected to get where they are going. The ones
who materialize inside solid matter. The ones who go into the space-time nexus and never come out. The
ones who reach their assigned synaptic junction and wait, and wait, and wait until they die of old age
because no one gets to them soon enough. The ones who go mad and kill themselves or their shipmates.”
I spread my hands. “The forty-six per cent.”
“You can convince a man of danger,” said Judson evenly, “but nobody ever believed he was really
and truly going to die. Death is something that happens to other people. I won’t be one of the forty-six
per cent.”
That was Judson. I wish he was still here.
I let the remark lie there on the thick carpet and went on with my guided tour. I showed him the
casing of the intricate beam-power apparatus that contained the whole reason for the project, and gave
him a preliminary look at the astrogational and manual maneuvering equipment and controls. “But don’t
bother your pretty little head about it just now,” I added. “It’ll all be crammed into you before you get
certified.”
We went back to the court, closing the door of the ship behind us.
“There’s a lot of stuff piled into those ships,” I observed, “but the one thing that can’t be packed in
sardine-size is the hyper-drive. I suppose you know that.”
“I’ve heard something about it. The initial kick into second-order space comes from the station here,
doesn’t it? But how is the ship returned to normal space on arrival?”
“That’s technology so refined it sounds like mysticism,” I answered. “I don’t begin to understand it. I
can give you an analogy, though. It takes a power source, a compression device, and valving to fill a
pneumatic tire. It takes a plain nail to let the air out again. See what I mean?”
“Vaguely. Anyway, the important thing is that Outbound is strictly one way. Those ships never come
back. Right?”

“So right.”
One of the doors behind us opened, and a girl stepped out of a ship. “Oh… I didn’t know there was
anyone here!” she said, and came toward us with a long, easy stride. “Am I in the way?”
“YOU—in the way, Tween?” I answered. “Not a chance.” I was very fond of Tween. To these jaded
old eyes she was one of the loveliest things that ever happened. Two centuries ago, before variation limits
were as rigidly set as they are now, Eugenics dreamed up her kind—olive-skinned true-breeds with the
silver hair and deep ruby eyes of an albino. It was an experiment they should never have stopped.
Albinoism wasn’t dominant, but in Tween it had come out strongly. She wore her hair long—really long;
she could tuck the ends of it under her toes and stand up straight when it was loose. Now it was braided
in two ingenious halves of a coronet that looked like real silver. Around her throat and streaming behind
her as she walked was a single length of flame-colored material.
“This is Judson, Tween,” I said. “We were friends back on Earth. What are you up to?”
She laughed, a captivating, self-conscious laugh. “I was sitting in a ship pretending that it was Outside.
We’d looked at each other one day and suddenly said, ‘Let’s!’ and off we’d gone.” Her face was
luminous. “It was lovely. And that’s just what we’re going to do one of these days. You’ll see.”
“‘We’? Oh—you mean Wold.”
“Wold,” she breathed, and I wished, briefly and sharply, that someone, somewhere, someday would
speak my name like that. And on the heels of that reaction came the mental picture of Wold as I had seen
him an hour before, slick and smooth, watching the shuttle passengers with his dark hunting eyes. There
was nothing I could say, though. My duties have their limits. If Wold didn’t know a good thing when he
saw it, that was his hard luck.
But looking at that shining face, I knew it would be her hard luck. “You’re certified?” Judson asked,
awed.
“Oh, yes,” she smiled, and I said, “Sure is, Jud. But she had her troubles, didn’t you, Tween?”
We started for the gate. “I did indeed,” said Tween. (I loved hearing her talk. There was a
comforting, restful quality to her speech like silence when an unnoticed, irritating noise disappears.) “I just
didn’t have the logical aptitudes when I first came. Some things just wouldn’t stick in my head, even in
hypnopedia. All the facts in the universe won’t help if you don’t know how to put them together.” She
grinned. “I used to hate you.”
“Don’t blame you a bit.” I nudged Judson. “I turned down her certification eight times. She used to
come to my office to get the bad news, and she’d stand there after I’d told her and shuffle her feet and
gulp a little bit. And the first thing she said then was always, ‘Well, when can I start retraining?’”
SHE flushed, laughing. “You’re telling secrets!”
Judson touched her. “It’s all right. I don’t think less of you for any of his maunderings… You must
have wanted that certificate very much.”
“Yes,” she said. “Very much.”
“Could—could I ask why?”
She looked at him, in him, through him, past him. “All our lives,” she said quietly, “are safe and sure
and small. This—” she waved back towards the ships—“is the only thing in our experience that’s none

of those things. I could give you fifty reasons for going Out. But I think they all come down to that one.”
We were silent for a moment, and then I said, “I’ll put that in my notebook, Tween. You couldn’t be
more right. Modern life gives us infinite variety in everything except the magnitude of the things we do.
And that stays pretty tiny.” And, I thought, big, fat, superannuated station officials, rejected by one world
and unqualified for the next. A small chore for a small mind.
“The only reason most of us do puny things and think puny thoughts,” Judson was saying, “is that
Earth has too few jobs like his in these efficient times.”
“Too few men like him for jobs like his,” Tween corrected.
I blinked at them both. It was me they were talking about. I don’t think I changed expression much,
but I felt as warm as the color of Tween’s eyes.
WE PASSED through the gates, Tween first with never a thought for the barrier which did not exist
for her, then Judson, waiting cautiously for my go-ahead after the inside scanning plate had examined the
whorls and lines of my hand. I followed, and the great gates closed behind us.
“Want to come up to the office?” I asked Tween when we reached Central Corridor.
“Thanks, no,” she said. “I’m going to find Wold.” She turned to Judson. “You’ll be certified quickly,”
she told him. “I just know. But, Judson—”
“Say it, whatever it is,” said Jud, sensing her hesitation.
“I was going to say get certified first. Don’t try to decide anything else before that. You’ll have to take
my word for it, but nothing that ever happened to you is quite like the knowledge that you’re free to go
through those gates any time you feel like it.”
Judson’s face assumed a slightly puzzled, slightly stubborn expression. It disappeared, and I knew it
was a conscious effort for him to do it. Then he put out his hand and touched her heavy silver hair.
“Thanks,” he said.
She strode off, the carriage of her head telling us that her face was eager as she went to Wold. At the
turn of the corridor she waved and was gone.
“I’m going to miss that girl,” I said, and turned back to Judson. The puzzled, stubborn look was back,
full force. “What’s the matter?”
“What did she mean by that sisterly advice about getting certified first? What else would I have to
decide about right now?”
I swatted his shoulder. “Don’t let it bother you, Jud. She sees something in you that you can’t see
yourself, yet.”
That didn’t satisfy him at all. “Like what?” When I didn’t answer, he asked, “You see it, too, don’t
you?”
We started up the ramp to my office. “I like you,” I said. “I liked you the minute I laid eyes on you,
years ago, when you were just a sprout.”
“You’ve changed the subject.”
“Hell I have. Now let me save my wind for the ramp.” This was only slightly a stall. As the years went
by, that ramp seemed to get steeper and steeper. Twice Coördination had offered to power it for me and

I’d refused haughtily. I could see the time coming when I was going to be too heavy for my high-horse.
All the same, I was glad for the chance to stall my answer to Judson’s question. The answer lay in my
liking him; I knew that instinctively. But it needed thinking through. We’ve conditioned ourselves too
much to analyze our dislikes and to take our likes for granted.
THE outer door opened as we approached. There was a man waiting in the appointment foyer, a big
fellow with a gray cape and a golden circlet around his blue-black hair. “Clinton!” I said. “How are you,
son? Waiting for me?”
The inner door opened for me and I went into my office, Clinton behind me. I fell down in my
specially molded chair and waved him to a relaxer. At the door Judson cleared his throat. “Shall
I—uh…”
Clinton looked up swiftly, an annoyed, tense motion. He raked a blazing blue gaze across Jud, and his
expression changed. “Come in, for God’s sake. Newcomer, hm? Sit down. Listen. You can’t learn
enough about this project. Or these people. Or the kind of flat spin an Outbounder can get himself into.”
“Clint, this’s Judson,” I said. “Jud, Clint’s about the itchy-footedest Outbounder of them all. What is
on your mind, son?”
Clinton wet his lips. “How’s about me heading Out—alone?”
I said, “Your privilege, if you think you’ll enjoy it.”
He smacked a heavy fist into his palm. “Good, then.”
“Of course,” I said, looking at the overhead, “the ships are built for two. I’d personally be a bit
troubled about the prospect of spending—uh—however long it might be, staring at that empty bunk
across the way. Specially,” I added, loudly, to interrupt what he was going to say, “if I had to spend
some hours or weeks or maybe a decade with the knowledge that I was alone because I took off with a
mad on.”
“This isn’t what you might call a fit of pique,” snapped Clinton. “It’s been years building—first
because I had a need and recognised it; second because the need got greater when I started to work
toward filling it; third because I found who and what would satisfy it; fourth because I was so wrong on
point three.”
“You are wrong? Or you’re afraid you’re wrong?”
He looked at me blankly. “I don’t know,” he said, all the snap gone out of his voice. “Not for sure.”
“Well, then, you’ve no real problem. All you do is ask yourself whether it’s worthwhile to take off
alone because of a problem you haven’t solved. If it is, go ahead.”
He rose and went to the door. “Clinton!” My voice must have crackled; he stopped without turning,
and from the corner of my eye I saw Judson sit up abruptly. I said, more quietly, “When Judson here
suggested that he go away and leave us alone, why did you tell him to come in? What did you see in him
that made you do it?”
Clinton’s thoughtfully slitted eyes hardly masked their blazing blue as he turned them on Judson, who
squirmed like a schoolboy. Clinton said, “I think it’s because he looks as if he can be reached. And
trusted. That answer you?”
“It does.” I waved him out cheerfully. Judson said, “You have an awesome way of operating.”

“On him?”
“On both of us. How do you know what you did by turning his problem back on himself? He’s likely
to go straight to the launching-court.”
“He won’t.”
“You’re sure?”
“Of course I’m sure,” I said flatly. “If Clinton hadn’t already decided not to take off alone—not
today, anyhow—he wouldn’t have come to see me and get argued out of it.”
“What’s really bothering him?”
“I can’t say.” I wouldn’t say. Not to Judson. Not now, at least. Clinton was ripe to leave, and he was
the kind to act when ready. He had found what he thought was the perfect human being for him to go
with. She wasn’t ready to go. She never in all time and eternity would be ready to go.
“All right,” said Jud. “What about me? That was very embarrassing.”
I LAUGHED at him. “Sometimes when you don’t know exactly how to phrase something for
yourself, you can shock a stranger into doing it for you. Why did I like you on sight, years ago, and now,
too? Why did Clinton feel you were trustworthy? Why did Tween feel free to pass you some
advice—and what prompted the advice? Why did—” No. Don’t mention the most significant one of all.
Leave her out of it. “—Well, there’s no point in itemizing all afternoon. Clinton said it. You can be
reached. Practically anyone meeting you knows—feels, anyhow—that you can be reached…
touched… affected. We like feeling that we have an effect on someone.”
Judson closed his eyes, screwed up his brow. I knew he was digging around in his memory, thinking
of close and casual acquaintances… how many of them… how much they had meant to him and he to
them. He looked at me. “Should I change?”
“God, no! Only—don’t let it be too true. I think that’s what Tween was driving at when she said not
to jump at any decisions until you’ve reached the comparative serenity of certification.”
“Serenity… I could use some of that,” he murmured. “Jud.”
“Mm?”
“Did you ever try to put into one simple statement just why you came to Curbstone?”
He looked startled. Like most people, he had been living, and living ardently, without ever wondering
particularly what for. And like most people, he had sooner or later had to answer the jackpot question:
“What am I doing here?”
“I CAME because—because… no, that wouldn’t be a simple statement.”
“All right. Run it off, anyway. A simple statement will come out of it if there’s anything really important
there. Any basic is simple, Jud. Every basic is important. Complicated matters may be fascinating,
frightening, funny, intriguing, worrisome, educational, or what have you; but if they’re complicated, they
are, by definition, not important.”
He leaned forward and put his elbows on his knees. His hands wound tightly around one another, and
his head went down.

“I came here… looking for something. Not because I thought it was here. There was just nowhere
else left to look. Earth is under such strict discipline… discipline by comfort; discipline by constructive
luxury. Every need is taken care of that you can name, and no one seems to understand that the needs
you can’t name are the important ones. And all Earth is in a state of arrested development because of
Curbstone. Everything is held in check. The status quo rules because for six thousand years it must and
will. Six thousand years of physical and social evolution will be sacrificed for the single tremendous step
that Curbstone makes possible. And I couldn’t find a place for myself in the static part of the plan, so the
only place for me to go was to the active part.”
He was quiet so long after that, I felt I had to nudge him along. “Could it be that there is a way to
make you happy on Earth, and you just haven’t been able to find it?”
“Oh, no,” he said positively. Then he raised his head and stared at me. “Wait a minute. You’re very
close to the mark there. That—that simple statement is trying to crawl out.” He frowned. This time I kept
my mouth shut and watched him.
“The something I’m looking for,” he said finally, in the surest tones he’d used yet, “is something I lack,
or something I have that I haven’t been able to name yet. If there’s anything on Earth or here that can fill
that hollow place, and if I find it, I won’t want to go Out. I won’t need to go—I shouldn’t go. But if it
doesn’t exist for me here, then Out I go, as part of a big something, rather than as a something missing a
part. Wait!” He chewed his lower lip. His knuckle-joints crackled as he twisted his hands together. “I’ll
rephrase that and you’ll have your simple statement.”
He took a deep breath and said, “I came to Curbstone to find out… whether there’s something I
haven’t had yet that belongs to me, or whether I… belong to something that hasn’t had me yet.”
“Fine,” I said. “Very damned fine. You keep looking, Jud. The answer’s here, somewhere, in some
form. I’ve never heard it put better: Do you owe, or are you owed? There are three possible courses
open to you, no matter which way you decide.”
“There are? Three?”
I put up fingers one at a time. “Earth. Here. Out.”
“I—see.”
“And you can take the course of any one of the words you saw floating over the gate to the launching
court.”
He stood up. “I’ve got a lot to think about.”
“You have.”
“But I’ve got me one hell of a blueprint.”
I just grinned at him.
“You through with me?” he asked.
“For now.”
“When do I start work for my certificate?”
“At the moment, you’re just about four-ninths through.”
“You dog! All this has been—”

“I’m a working man, Jud. I work all the time. Now beat it. You’ll hear from me.”
“You dog,” he said again. “You old hound-dog!” But he left.
I sat back to think. I thought about Judson, of course. And Clinton and his worrisome solo ideas. The
trip can be done solo, but it isn’t a good idea. The human mind’s communications equipment isn’t a
convenience—it’s a vital necessity. Tween. How beautiful can a girl get? And the way she lights up when
she thinks about going Out. She’s certified now. Guess she and Wold will be taking off any time now.
Then my mind spun back to Flower. Put those pieces together… something should fit. Turn it this
way, back—Ah! Clinton wants Out. He’s been waiting and waiting for his girl to get certified. She hasn’t
even tried. He’s not going to wait much longer. Who’s his girl now…?
Flower.
Flower, who turned all that heat on Judson.
Why Judson? There were bigger men, smarter, better-looking ones. What was special about Judson?
I filed the whole item away in my mind—with a red priority tab on it.
THE days went by. A gong chimed and the number-board over my desk glowed. I didn’t have to
look up the numbers to know who it was. Fort and Mariellen. Nice kids. Slipped Out during a sleep
period. I thought about them, watched the chain of checking lights flicker on, one after another.
Palm-patterns removed from the Gate scanner; they’d never be used there again. Ship replaced.
Quarters cleared and readied. Launching time reported to Coördination. Marriage recorded. Automatic
machinery calculated, filed, punched cards, activated more automatic machinery until Fort and Mariellen
were only axial alignments on the molecules of a magnetic tape… names… memories… dead, perhaps;
gone, certainly, for the next six thousand years.
Hold tight, Earth! Wait for them, the fifty-four per cent (I hope, I ardently hope) who will come back.
Their relatives, their Earthbound friends will be long dead, and all their children and theirs; so let the
Outbounders come home at least to the same Earth, the same language, the same traditions. They will be
the millennial traditions of a more-than-Earth, the source of the unthinkable spatial sphere made
fingertip-available to humankind through the efforts of the Outbounders. Earth is prepaying six thousand
years of progress in exchange for the ability to use stars for stepping-stones, to be able to make Mars in
a minute, Antares and Betelgeuse afternoon stops in a delivery run. Six thousand years of sacred stasis
buys all but a universe, conquers Time, eliminates the fractionation of humanity into ship-riding,
minute-shackled fragments of diverging evolution among the stars. All the stars will be in the next room
when the Outbounders return.
Six thousand times around Sol, with Sol moving in a moving galaxy, and the galaxy in flight through a
fluxing universe. That all amounts to a resultant movement of Earth through nine Mollner degrees around
the Universal Curve. For six thousand years Curbstone flings off its tiny ships, its monstrous power-plant
kicking them into space-time and the automatics holding them there until all—or until enough—are
positioned. Some will materialize in the known universe and some in faintly suspected nebulae; some will
appear in the empty nothingnesses beyond the galactic clusters, and some will burst into normal space
inside molten suns.
BUT when the time comes, and the little ships are positioned in a great spherical pattern out around
space, and together they become real again, they will send to each other a blaze of tight-beam energy.
Like the wiring of a great switchboard, like the synapses of a brain, each beam will find its neighbors, and
through them Earth.

And then, within and all through that sphere, humanity will spread, stepping from rim to rim of the
universe in seconds, instantaneously transmitting men and materials from and to the stars. Here a ship can
be sent piecemeal and assembled, there a space-station. Yonder, on some unheard-of planet of an
unknown star, men light years away from Earth can assemble matter transceivers and hook them up to
the great sphere, and add yet another world to those already visited.
AND what of the Outbounders? Real time, six thousand years.
Ship’s time, from second-order spatial entry to materialization—zero.
Fort and Mariellen. Nice kids. Memories now; lights on a board, one after another, until they’re all
accounted for. At Curbstone, the quiet machinery says, “Next!”
Fort and Mariellen. Clinging together, they press down the launching lever. Effortlessly in their
launching, they whirl away from Curbstone. In minutes there is a flicker of gray, or perhaps not even that.
Strange stars surround them. They stare at one another. They are elsewhere… elsewhen. Lights glow.
This one says the tight-beam has gone on, pouring out toward the neighbors and, through them, to all the
others. That one cries “emergency” and Fort whips to the manual controls and does what he can to
avoid a dust-cloud, a planet… perhaps an alien ship.
Fort and Mariellen (or George and Viki, or Bruce, who went Out by himself, or Eleanor and Grace,
or Sam and Rod—they were brothers) may materialize and die in an intolerable matter-displacement
explosion so quickly that there is no time for pain. They may be holed by a meteor and watch, with
glazing freezing eyes, the froth bubbling up from each other’s bursting lungs. They may survive for minutes
or weeks, and then fall captive to some giant planet or unsuspected sun. They may be hunted down and
killed or captured by beings undreamed of.
And some of them will survive all this and wait for the blessed contact; the strident heralding of the
matter transceiver with which each ship is equipped—and the abrupt appearance of a man, sixty
centuries unborn when they left Curbstone, instantly transmitted from Earth to their vessel. Back with him
they’ll go, to an unchanged and ecstatic Earth, teeming with billions of trained, mature humans ready to fill
the universe with human ways—the new humans who have left war and greed behind them, who have
acquired a universe so huge that they need exploit no creature’s properties, so rich and available is
everything they require.
And some will survive, and wait, and die waiting because of some remotely extrapolated
miscalculation. The beams never reach them; their beams contact nothing. And perhaps a few of these
will not die, but will find refuge on some planet to leave a marker that will shock whatever is alive and
intelligent a million years hence. Perhaps they will leave more than that. Perhaps there will be a slower,
more hazardous planting of humanity in the gulfs.
But fifty-four per cent, the calculations insist, will establish the star-conquering sphere and return.
THE weeks went by. A chime: Bark and Barbara. Damn it all, no more of Barbara’s banana cream
pie. The filing, the sweeping, the recording, the lights. Marriage recorded.
When a man and a woman go Out together, that is marriage. There is another way to be married on
Curbstone. There is a touch less speed involved in it than in joined hands pressing down a launching
lever. There is not one whit less solemnity. It means what it means because it is not stamped with
necessity. Children derive their names from their mothers, wed or not, and there is no distinction. Men
and women, as responsible adults, do as they please within limits which are extremely wide. Except…

By arduous trial and tragic error, humanity has evolved modern marriage. With social pressure
removed from the pursuit of a mate, with the end of the ribald persecution of spinsterhood, a marriage
ceases to be a rubber stamp upon what people are sure to do, with or without ceremonies. Where men
and women are free to seek their own company, as and when they choose, without social penalties, they
will not be trapped into hypocrisies with marriage vows. Under such conditions a marriage is entered
gravely and with sincerity, and it constitutes a public statement of choice and—with the full
implementation of a mature society—of inviolability. The lovely, ancient words “forsaking all others” spell
out the nature of modern marriage, with the universally respected adjunct that fidelity is not a command
or a restriction, but a chosen path. Divorce is swift and simple, and almost unheard of. Married people
live this way, single people live that way; the lines are drawn and deeply respected. People marry
because they intend to live within the limits of marriage. The fact that a marriage exists is complete proof
that it is working.
I had a word about marriage with Tween. Ran into her in the Gate corridor. I think she’d been in one
of the ships again. If she was pale, her olive skin hid it. If her eyes were bloodshot, the lustrous ruby of
her eyes covered it up. Maybe I saw her dragging her feet as she walked, or some such. I took her chin
in my hand and tilted her head back. “Any dragons I can kill?”
She gave me a brilliant smile which lived only on her lips. “I’m wonderful,” she said bravely.
“You are,” I agreed. “Which doesn’t necessarily have anything to do with the way you feel. I won’t
pry, child; but tell me—if you ever ate too many green apples, or stubbed your toe on a cactus, do you
know a nice safe something you could hang on to while you cried it out?”
“I do,” she said breathlessly, making the smile just as hard as she could. “Oh, I do.” She patted my
cheek. “You’re… listen. Would you tell me something if I asked you?”
“About certificates? No, Tween. Not about anyone else’s certificate. But—all he has to do is
complete his final hypnopediae, and he just hasn’t showed up.”
She hated to hear it, but I’d made her laugh, too, a little. “Do you read minds, the way they all say?”
“I do not. And if I could, I wouldn’t. And if I couldn’t help reading ’em, I’d sure never act as if I
could. In other words, no. It’s just that I’ve been alive long enough to know what pushes people around.
So’s I don’t care much about a person, I can judge pretty well what’s bothering him.
“’Course,” I added, “if I do give a damn, I can tell even better. Tween, you’ll be getting married
pretty soon, right?”
Perhaps I shouldn’t have said that. She gasped, and for a moment she just stopped making that smile.
Then, “Oh, yes,” she said brightly. “Well, not exactly. What I mean is, when we go Out, you see, so
we might as well not, and I imagine as soon as Wold gets his certificate, we’ll… we kind of feel going
Out is the best—I seem to have gotten something in my eye. I’m s-sor…”
I let her go. But when I saw Wold next—it was down in the Euphoria Sector—I went up to him very
cheerfully. There are ways I feel sometimes that make me real jovial.
I laid my hand on his shoulder. His back bowed a bit and it seemed to me I felt vertebrae grinding
together. “Wold, old boy,” I said heartily. “Good to see you. You haven’t been around much recently.
Mad?”
He pulled away from me. “A little,” he said sullenly. His hair was too shiny and he had perfect teeth
that always reminded me of a keyboard instrument.

“Well, drop around,” I said. “I like to see young folks get ahead. You,” I added with a certain amount
of emphasis, “have gone pretty damn far.”
“So have you,” he said with even more emphasis.
“Well, then.” I slapped him on the back. His eyeballs stayed in, which surprised me. “You can top
me. You can go farther than I ever can. See you soon, old fellow.”
I WALKED off, feeling the cold brown points of his gaze.
And as it happened, next ten minutes later I saw that kakumba dance. I don’t see much dancing
usually, but there was an animal roar from the dance-chamber that stopped me, and I ducked in to see
what had the public so charmed.
The dance had gone through most of its figures, with the caller already worked up into a froth and
only three couples left. As I shouldered my way to a vantage point, one of the three couples was
bounced, leaving the two best. One was a tall blonde with periwigged hair and subvoltaic bracelets that
passed and repassed a clatter of pastel arcs; she was dancing with one of the armor-monkeys from the
Curbstone Hull Division, and they were good.
The other couple featured a slender, fluid dark girl in an open tunic of deep brown. She moved so
beautifully that I caught my breath, and watched so avidly that it was seconds before I realized that it was
Flower. The reaction to that made me lose more seconds in realizing that her partner was Judson. Good
as the other couple were, they were better. I’d tested Jud’s reflexes, and they were phenomenal, but I’d
had no idea he could respond like this to anything.
The caller threw the solo light to the first couple. There was a wild burst of music and the arc-wielding
blonde and her arc-wielding boy friend cut loose in an intricate frenzy of disjointed limbs and half-beat
stamping. So much happened between those two people so fast that I thought they’d never get separated
when the music stopped. But they untangled right with the closing bars, and a roar went up from the
people watching them. And then the same blare of music was thrown at Jud and Flower.
Judson simply stood back and folded his arms, walking out a simple figure to indicate that, honest, he
was dancing, too. But he gave it all to Flower.
Now I’ll tell you what she did in a single sentence: she knelt before him and slowly stood up with her
arms over her head. But words will never describe the process completely. It took her about twelve
minutes to get all the way up. At the fourth minute the crowd began to realize that her body was
trembling. It wasn’t a wriggle or a shimmy, or anything as crude as that. It was a steady, apparently
uncontrollable shiver. At about the eighth minute the audience began to realize it was controlled, and just
how completely controlled it was. It was hypnotic, incredible. At the final crescendo she was on her
tiptoes with her arms stretched high, and when the music stopped she made no flourish; she simply
relaxed and stood still, smiling at Jud. Even from where I stood I could see the moisture on Jud’s face.
A big man standing beside me grunted, a tight, painful sound. I turned to him; it was Clinton. Tension
crawled through his jaw-muscles like a rat under a rug. I put my hand on his arm. It was rocky. “Clint.”
“Wh—oh. Hi.”
“Thirsty?”
“No,” he said. He turned back to the dance floor, searched it with his eyes, found Flower.
“Yes, you are, son,” I said. “Come on.”

“Why don’t you go and—” He got hold of himself. “You’re right. I am thirsty.”
We went to the almost deserted Card Room and dispensed ourselves some methyl-caffeine. I didn’t
say anything until we’d found a table. He sat stiffly looking at his drink without seeing it. Then he said,
“Thanks.”
“For what?”
“I was about to be real uncivilized in there.”
I just waited.
He, said truculently, “Well, damn it, she’s free to do what she wants, isn’t she? She likes to
dance—good. Why shouldn’t she? Damn it, what is there to get excited about?”
“Who’s excited?”
“It’s that Judson. What’s he have to be crawling around her all the time for? She hasn’t done a damn
thing about getting her certificate since he got here.” He drank his liquor down at a gulp. It had no
apparent effect, which meant something.
“What had she done before he got here?” I asked quietly. When he didn’t answer I said, “Jud’s
Outbound, Clint. I wouldn’t worry. I can guarantee Flower won’t be with him when he goes, and that
will be real soon. Hold on and wait.”
“Wait?” His lip curled. “I’ve been ready to go for weeks. I used to think of… of Flower and me
working together, helping, each other. I used to make plans for a celebration the day we got certified. I
used to look at the stars and think about the net we’d help throw around them, pull ’em down, pack ’em
in a basket. Flower and me, back on Earth after six thousand years, watching humanity come into its
own, knowing we’d done something to help. I’ve been waiting, and you say wait some more.”
“This,” I said, “is what you call an unstable situation. It can’t stay the way it is and it won’t. Wait, I tell
you: wait. There’s got to be a blow-off.” 
There was.
IN MY office the chime sounded. Moira and Bill. Certificates denied to Hester, Elizabeth, Jenks,
Mella. Hester back to earth. Hallowell and Letitia, marriage recorded. Certificates granted to Aaron,
Musette, n’Guchi, Mancinelli, Judson.
Judson took the news quietly, glowing. I hadn’t seen much of him recently. Flower took up a lot of his
time, and training the rest. After he was certified and I’d gone with him to test the hand-scanner by the
gate and give him his final briefing, he cut out on the double, I guess to give Flower the great news. I
remember wondering how he’d like her reaction.
WHEN I got back to my office Tween was there. She rose from the foyer couch as I wheezed in off
the ramp. I took one look at her and said, “Come inside.” She followed me through the inner door. I
waved my hand over the infra-red plate and it closed. Then I out out my arms.
She bleated like a new-born lamb and flew to me. Her tears were scalding, and I don’t think human
muscles are built for the wrenching those agonized sobs gave her. People should cry more. They ought to
learn how to do it easily, like laughing or sweating. Crying piles up. In people like Tween, who do nothing
if they can’t smile and make a habit-pattern of it, it really piles up. With a reservoir like that, and no
developed outlet, things get torn when the pressure builds too high.

I just held her tight so she wouldn’t explode. The only thing I said to her was “sh-h-h” once when she
tried to talk while she wept. One thing at a time.
It took a while, but when she was finished she was finished. She didn’t taper off. She was weak from
all that punishment, but calm. She talked.
“He isn’t a real thing at all,” she said bleakly. “He’s something I made up out of starshine, out of
wanting so much to be a part of something as big as this project. I never felt I had anything big about me
except that. I wanted to join it with something bigger than I was, and, together, we’d build something so
big that it would be worthy of Curbstone.
“I thought it was Wold. I made it be Wold. Oh, none of this is his fault. I could have seen what he
was, and I just wouldn’t. What I did with him, what I felt for him, was just as crazy as if I’d convinced
myself he had wings and then hated him because he wouldn’t fly. He isn’t anything but a h-hero. He struts
to the newcomers and the rejected ones pretending he’s a man who will one day give himself to humanity
and the stars. He… probably believes that about himself. But he won’t complete his training, and he…
now I know, now I can see it—he tried everything he could think of to stop me from being certified. I
was no use to him with a certificate. He couldn’t treat me as his pretty, slightly stupid little girl, once I was
certified. And he couldn’t get his own certificate because if he did he’d have to go Out, one of these
days, and that’s something he can’t face.
“He—wants me to leave him. If I will, if it’s my decision, he can wear my memory like a black band
on his arm, and delude himself for the rest of his life that his succession of women is just a search for
something to replace me. Then he’ll always have an excuse; he’ll never, never have to risk his neck. He’ll
be the shattered hero, and women as stupid as I was will try to heal the wounds he’s arranged for me to
give him.”
“You don’t hate him?” I asked her quietly.
“No. Oh, no, no! I told you, it wasn’t his fault. I—loved something. A man lived in my heart, lived
there for years. He had no name and no face. I gave him Wold’s name and Wold’s face and just
wouldn’t believe it wasn’t Wold. I did it. Wold didn’t. I don’t hate him. I don’t like him. I just don’t… 
anything.”
I PATTED her shoulder. “Good. You’re cured. If you hated him, he’d still be important. What are
you going to do?”
“What shall I do?”
“I’d never tell you what to do about a thing like this, Tween. You know that. You’ve got to figure out
your own answers. I can advise you to use those new-opened eyes of yours carefully, though. And don’t
think that that man who lives in your heart doesn’t exist anywhere else. He does. Right here on this
station, maybe. You just haven’t been able to see him before.”
“Who?”
“God, girl, don’t ask me that! Ask Tween next time you see her; no one will ever know for sure but
Tween.”
“You’re so wise…”
“Nah. I’m old enough to have made more mistakes than most people, that’s all, and I have a good
memory.”

She rose shakily. I put out a hand and helped her. “You’re played out, Tween. Look—don’t go back
yet. Hide out for a few days and get some rest and do some thinking. There’s a suite on this level. No
one will bother you, and you’ll find everything there you need, including silence and privacy.”
“That would be good,” she said softly. “Thank you.”
“All right… listen. Mind if I send someone in to talk to you?”
“Talk? Who?”
“Let me play it as it comes.”
The ruby eyes sent a warm wave to me, and she smiled. I thought, I wish I was as confident of myself
as she is of me. “It’s 412,” I said, “the third door to your left. Stay there as long as you want to. Come
back when you feel like it.”
She came close to me and tried to say something. I thought for a second she was going to kiss me on
the mouth. She didn’t; she kissed my hand. “I’ll swat your bottom!” I roared, flustered. “Git, now,
dammit!” She laughed… she always had a bit of laughter tucked away in her, no matter what, bless her
cotton head…
As soon as she was gone, I turned to the annunciator and sent out a call for Judson. Hell, I thought,
you can try, can’t you? Waiting, I thought about Judson’s hungry, upward look, and that hole in his
head… that quality of reachableness, and what happened when he was reached by the wrong thing.
Lord, responsive people certainly make the worst damn fools of all!
He was there in minutes, looking flushed, excited, happy, and worried all at once. “Was on my way
here when your call went out,” he said.
“SIT down, Jud. I have a small project in mind. Maybe you could help.”
He sat. I looked for just the right words to use. I couldn’t say anything about Flower. She had her
hooks into him; if I said anything about her, he’d defend her. And one of the oldest phenomena in human
relations is that we come to be very fond of the thing we find ourselves defending, even if we didn’t like it
before. I thought again of the hunger that lived in Jud, and what Tween might see of it with her newly
opened eyes.
“Jud—”
“I’m married,” he blurted.
I sat very still. I don’t think my face did anything at all.
“It was the right thing for me to do,” he said, almost angrily. “Don’t you see? You know what my
problem is—it was you who found it for me. I was looking for something that should belong to me… or
something to belong to.”
“Flower,” I said.
“Of course. Who else? Listen, that girl’s got trouble, too. What do you suppose blocks her from
taking her certificate? She doesn’t think she’s worthy of it.”
My, I said. Fortunately, I said it to myself.
Jud said, “No matter what happens, I’ve done the right thing. If I can help her get her certificate, we’ll
go Out together, and that’s what we’re here for. If I can’t help her do that, but find that she fills that place

in me that’s been so empty for so long, well and good—that’s what I’m here for. We can go back to
Earth and be happy.”
“You’re quite sure of all this.”
“Sure I’m sure! Do you think I’d have gone ahead with the marriage if I weren’t sure?”
Sure you would, I thought. I said, “Congratulations, then. You know I wish you the best.”
He stood up uncertainly, started to say something, and apparently couldn’t find it. He went to the
door, turned back. “Will you come for dinner tonight?” I hesitated. He said, “Please. I’d appreciate it.”
I cocked an eyebrow. “Answer me straight, Jud. Is dinner your idea or Flower’s?”
He laughed embarrassedly. “Damn it, you always see too much. Mine… sort of… I mean, it isn’t that
she dislikes you, but… well, hell, I want the two of you to be friends, and I think you’d understand her
and me, too, a lot better if you made the effort.”
I could think of things I’d much rather do than have dinner with Flower. A short swim in boiling oil,
for example. I looked up at his anxious face. Oh, hell. “I’d love to,” I said. “Around eight?”
“Fine! Gee,” he said, like a school kid. “Gee, thanks.” He shuffled, not knowing whether to go right
away or not. “Hey,” he said suddenly. “You sent out a call for me. What’s this project you wanted me
for?”
“Nothing, Jud,” I said tiredly. “I’ve… changed my mind. See you later, son.”
THE dinner was something special. Steaks. Jud had broiled them himself. I got the idea that he’d
selected them, too, and set the table. It was Flower, though, who got me something to sit on. She looked
me over, slowly and without concealing it, went to the table, pulled the light formed-aluminum chair away,
and dragged over a massive relaxer. She then smiled straight at me. A little unnecessary, I thought; I’m
bulky, but those aluminum chairs have always held up under me so far.
I won’t give it to you round by round. The meal passed with Flower either in a sullen silence or
manufacturing small brittle whips of conversation. When she was quiet, Jud tried to goad her into talking.
When she talked, he tried to turn the conversation away from me. The occasion, I think, was a complete
success—for Flower. For Jud it must have been hell. For me—well, it was interesting.
Item: Flower poked and prodded at her steak, and when she got a lull in the labored talk Jud and I
were squeezing out, she began to cut meticulously around the edges of the steak. “If there is anything I
can’t stand the sight or the smell of,” she said clearly, “it’s fat.”
Item: She said, “Oh, Lord” this and “Lord sakes” that in a drawl that made it come out “Lard” every
time.
Item: I sneezed once. She whipped a tissue over to me swiftly and politely enough, and then said
“Render unto sneezers…” which stood as a cute quip until she nudged her husband and said, “Render!”
at which point things got real hushed.
Item: When she had finished, she leaned back and sighed. “If I ate like that all the time, I’d be as big
as—” She looked straight at me and stopped. Jud, flushing miserably, tried to kick her under the table; I
know, because it was me he kicked. Flower finished, “—as big as a lifeboat.” But she kept looking at
me, easily and insultingly.
Item—You get the idea. All I can say for myself is that I got through it all. I wouldn’t give her the

satisfaction of driving me out until I’d had all she could give me. I wouldn’t be overtly angry, because if I
did, she’d present me to Jud ever after as the man who hated her. If Jud ever had wit enough, this
evening could be remembered as the time she was insufferably insulting, and that was all I wanted.
It was over at last, and I made my excuses as late as I possibly could withdut staying overnight. As I
left, she took Jud’s arm and held it tight until I was out of sight, thereby removing the one chance he had
to come along a little way and apologize to me.
He didn’t get close enough to speak to me for four days, and when he did, I had the impression that
he had lied to be there, that Flower thought he was somewhere else. He said rapidly, “About the other
night, you mustn’t think that—”
And I cut him off as gently and firmly as I could: “I understand it perfectly, Jud. Think a minute and
you’ll know that.”
“Look, Flower was just out of sorts. I’ll work on her. Next time you come there’ll be a real
difference. You’ll see.”
“I’m sure I will, Jud. But drop it, will you? There’s no harm done.” And I thought, next time I come
will be six months after the Outbounders get back. That gives me sixty centuries or so to get
case-hardened.
ABOUT a week after Jud’s wedding, I was in the Upper Central corridor where it ramps into the
Gate passageway. Now whether it was some sixth sense, or whether I actually did smell something, I
don’t know. I got a powerful, sourceless impression of methyl-caffeine in the air, and at the same time I
looked down the passage and saw the Gate just closing.
I got down there altogether too fast to do my leaky valves any good. I palmed the doors open and
sprinted across the court. When anything my size and shape gets to sprinting, it’s harder to stop it than let
it keep going. One of the ship ports was open and I was heading for it. It started to swing closed. I lost
all thought of trying to slow down and put what little energy I could find into pumping my old legs faster.
With a horrible slow-motion feeling of disaster, I felt one toe tip my other heel, and my center of
gravity began to move forward faster than I was traveling. I was in mid-air for an age—long enough to
chew and swallow a tongue—and then I hit on my stomach, rocked forward on my receding chest and
two of my chins, and slid. I had my hands out in front of me. My left hit the bulkhead and buckled. My
right shot through what was left of the opening of the door, which crunched shut on my forearm. Then my
forehead hit the sill and I blacked out.
When the lights dimmed on again, I was spread out on a ship’s bunk, apparently alone. My left arm
hurt more than I could bear, and my right arm hurt worse, and both of them together couldn’t match what
was going on in my head.
A man appeared from the service cubicle when I let out a groan. He had a bowl of warm water and
the ship’s B first-aid kit in his hands. He crossed quickly to me, and began to stanch the blood from
between some of my chins. It wasn’t until then that my blurring sight made out who he was.
“Clinton, you hub-forted son of a bastich!” I roared at him. “Leave the chin alone and get some
plexicaine into those arms!”
HE HAD the gall to laugh at me. “One thing at a time, old man. You are bleeding. Let’s try to be a
patient, not an impatient.”

“Impatient, out-patient,” I yelped, “get that plex into me! I am just not the strong, silent type!”
“Okay, okay.” He got the needle out of the kit, squirted it upward, and plunged it deftly into my arms.
A good boy. He hit the bicep on one, the forearm on the other, and got just the right ganglia. The pain
vanished. That left my head, but he fed me an analgesic and that cataclysmic ache began to recede.
“I’m afraid the left is broken,” he said. “As for the right—well, if I hadn’t seen that hand come
crawling in over the sill like a pet puppy, and reversed the door control, I’d have cut your fingernails off
clear up to the elbow. What in time did you think you were doing?”
“I can’t remember; maybe I’ve got a concussion. For some reason or other it seemed I had to look
inside the ship. Can you splint this arm?”
“Let’s call the medic.”
“You can do just as well.” He went for the C kit and got a traction splint out. He whipped the
prepared cushioning around the swelling arm, clamped the ends of the splint at wrist and elbow, and
played an infra-red lamp on it. In a few seconds the splint began to lengthen. When the broken forearm
was a few millimeters longer than the other, he shut off the heat and the thermoplastic splint automatically
set and snugged into the cushioning. Clinton threw off the clamps. “That’s good enough for now. All right,
are you ready to tell me what made you get in my way?”
“No.”
“Stop trying to look like an innocent babe! Your stubble gives you away. You knew I was going to
solo, didn’t you?”
“No one said anything to me.”
“No one ever has to,” he said in irritation, and then chuckled. “Man, I wish I could stay mad at you.
All right—what next?”
“You’re not going to take off?”
“With you in here? Don’t be foolish. The station’d lose too much and I wouldn’t be gaining a thing.
Damn you! I’d worked up the most glamorous drunk on methyl-caffeine, and you had to get me all
anxious and drive away the fumes… Well, go ahead. I’ll play it your way. What do we do?”
“Stop trying to make a Machiavelli out of me,” I growled. “Give me a hand back to my quarters and
I’ll let you go do whatever you want.”
“It’s never that simple with you,” he half-grinned. “Okay. Let’s go.”
When I got to my feet—with more of his help than I like to admit—my heart began to pound. He
must have felt it, because he said nothing while we stood there and waited for it to behave itself. Clinton
was a good lad.
We negotiated the court and the Gate all right, but slowly. When we got to the foot of my ramp, I
shook my head. “Not that,” I wheezed.
“Couldn’t make it. Down this way.”
WE WENT down the lateral corridor to 412. The door slid back for me.
“Hi!” I called. “Company.”

“What? Who is it?” came the crystal voice. Tween appeared. “Oh—oh! I didn’t want to see anyone
just—why, what’s happened?”
My eyelids flickered. I moaned. Clinton said, “I think we better get him spread out. He’s not doing so
well.”
Tween ran to us and took my arm gently above the splint. They got me to a couch and I collapsed on
it.
“Damn him,” said Clinton good-humoredly. “He seems to be working full time to keep me from going
Out.”
There was such a long silence that I opened one eye to look at them. Tween was staring at him as if
she had never seen him before—as, actually, she hadn’t, with her eyes so full of Wold.
“Do you really want to go Out?” she asked softly.
“More than…” He looked at her hair, her lovely face. “I don’t think I’ve seen you around much.
You’re—Tween, aren’t you?”
She nodded and they stopped talking. I snapped my eyes shut because they were sure to look at me
just for something to do.
“Is he all right?” she asked.
“I think he’s—yes, he’s asleep. Don’t wonder. He’s been through a lot.”
“Let’s go in the other room where we can talk together without disturbing him.”
They closed the door. I could barely hear them. It went on for a long time, with occasional silences.
Finally I heard what I’d been listening for: “If it hadn’t been for him, I’d be gone now. I was just about to
solo.”
“No! Oh, I’m glad… I’m glad you didn’t.”
One of those silences. Then, “So am I, Tween. Tween…” in a whisper of astonishment.
I got up off the couch and silently let myself out. I went back to my quarters, even managing to climb
the ramp. I felt real fine.
I HEARD an ugly rumor. I’d seen a lot and I’d done a lot, and I regarded myself as pretty
shockproof, but this one jolted me to the core. I took refuge in the old ointment, “It can’t be, it just can’t
be,” but in my heart I knew it could.
I got hold of Judson. He was hollow-eyed and much quieter than usual. I asked him what he was
doing these days, though I knew.
“Boning up on the fine points of astrogation,” he told me. “I’ve never hit anything so fascinating. It’s
one thing to have the stuff shoveled into your head when you’re asleep, and something else again to
experience it all, note by note, like music.”
“But you’re spending an awful lot of time in the archives, son.”
“It takes a lot of time.”

“Can’t you study at home?”
I think he only just then realized what I was driving at. “Look,” he said quietly, “I have my troubles. I
have things wrong with me. But I’m not blind. I’m not stupid. You wouldn’t tell me to my face that I
couldn’t handle problems that are strictly my own, would you?”
“I would if I were sure,” I said. “Damn it, I’m not. And I’m not going to pry for details.”
“I’m glad of that,” he said soberly. “Now we don’t have to talk about it at all, do we?”
In spite of myself, I laughed aloud.
“What’s funny?”
“I am, Jud, boy. I been—handled.”
He saw the point, and smiled a little with me. “Hell, I know what you’ve been hinting at. But you’re
not close enough to the situation to know all the angles. I am. When the time comes, I’ll take care of it.
Until then, it’s no one’s problem but my own.”
He picked up his star-chart reels and I knew that one single word more would be one too many. I
squeezed his arm and let him go.
Five people, I thought: Wold, Judson, Tween, Clinton, Flower. Take away two and that leaves three.
Three’s a crowd—in this case, a very explosive kind of crowd.
Nothing, nothing justifies infidelity in a modern marriage. But the ugly rumors kept trickling in.
“I want my certificate,” Wold said.
I looked up at him and a bushel of conjecture flipped through my mind. So you want your certificate?
Why? And why just now, of all times? What can a man do with a certificate that he can’t do without
one—aside from going Out? Because, damn you, you’ll never go Out. Not of your own accord, you
won’t.
All this, but none of it slipped out. I said, “All right. That’s what I’m here for, Wold.” And we got to
work.
He worked hard, and smoothly and easily, the way he talked, the way he moved. I am constantly
astonished at how small accomplished people can make themselves at times.
He was certified easy as breathing. And can you believe it, I worked with him, saw how hard he was
working, helped him through, and never realized what it was he was after?
After going through the routines of certification for him, I wasn’t happy. There was something wrong
somewhere… something missing. This was a puzzle that ought to fall together easily, and it wouldn’t. I
wish—Lord, how I wish I could have thought a little faster.
I let a day go by after Wold was certified. I couldn’t sleep, and I couldn’t eat, and I couldn’t analyze
what it was that was bothering me. So I began to cruise, to see if I could find out.
I went to the archives. “Where’s Judson?”
The girl told me he hadn’t been there for forty-eight hours.
I looked in the Recreation Sector, in the libraries, in the stereo and observation rooms. Some kind of
rock-bottom good sense kept me from sending out a general call for him. But it began to be obvious that

he just wasn’t around. Of course, there were hundreds of rooms and corridors in Curbstone that were
unused—they wouldn’t be used until the interplanetary project was completed and the matter transmitters
started working. But Jud wasn’t the kind to hide from anything.
I squared my shoulders and realized that I was doing a lot of speculation to delay looking in the
obvious place. I think, more than anything else, I was afraid that he would not be there…
I passed my hand over the door announcer. In a moment she answered; she had apparently come in
from the sun-field and hadn’t bothered to see who it was. She was warm brown from head to toe, all
spring-steel and velvet. Her long eyes were sleepy and her mouth was pouty. But when she recognized
me, she stood squarely in the doorway.
I think that in the back of every human mind is a machine that works out all the answers and never
makes mistakes. I think mine had had enough data to figure out what was happening, what was going to
happen, for a long while now. Only I hadn’t been able to read the answer until now. Seeing Flower, in
that split second, opened more than one door for me…
“You want something?” she asked. The emphasis was hard and very insulting.
I went in. It was completely up to her whether she moved aside or was walked down. She moved
aside. The door swung shut.
“Where’s Jud?”
“I don’t know.”
I LOOKED into those long secret eyes and raised my hand. I think I was going to hit her. Instead I
put my hand on her chest and shoved. She fell, unhurt but terrified, across a relaxer. “What do you th—”
“You won’t see him again,” I said, and my voice bounced harshly off the acoust-absorbing walls.
“He’s gone. They’re gone.”
“They?” Her face went pasty under the deep tan.
“You ought to be killed,” I said. “But I think it’s better if you live with it. You couldn’t hold either of
them, or anyone else.”
I went out.
MY HEAD was buzzing and my knitting arm throbbed. I moved with utter certainty; never once did it
occur to me to ask myself: “Why did I say that?” All the ugly pieces made sense.
I found Wold in the Recreation Sector. He was tanked. I decided against speaking to him, went
straight to the launching court and tried the row of ship ports. There was no one there, no one in any of
them. My eye must have photographed something in the third ship, because I felt compelled to go back
there and look again.
I stared hard at the deep-flocked floor. The soft pile of it looked right and yet not-right. I went to the
control panel and unracked an emergency torch, turned it to needle-focus and put it, lit, on the floor. A
horizontal beam will tell you things no other light knows about.
I turned the light on the door and slowly swung the sharp streak across the carpet. The monotone,
amorphous surface took on streaks and ridges, shadows and shadings. A curved scuff inside. Two
parallel ones, long, where something had been dragged. A blurred sector where something heavy had lain

long enough to press the springy fibers down for a while, over by the left-hand bunk.
I looked at the bunk. It was unruffled, which meant nothing; the resilient surface was meant to leave
no impressions. But at the edge was a single rubbed spot, as if something had spilled there and been
wiped hard.
I went to the service cubicle. Everything seemed in order, except one of the cabinet doors, which
wouldn’t quite close. I looked inside.
It was a food locker. The food was there all right, each container socketed in place in the prepared
shelves. But on, between, and among them were micro-reels for the book projector.
I frowned and looked further. Reels were packed into the disposal lock, the towel dispenser, the
spare-parts chest for the air exchanger.
Something was where the book-reels belonged, and the reels had been hidden by someone who
could not leave them in sight or carry them off.
And where did the reels belong?
I went back to the central chamber and the left-hand bunk. I touched the stud that should have rolled
the bunk outward, opening the top, so that the storage space under it could be reached. The bunk didn’t
move.
I examined the stud. It was coated over with quick-setting leak-sealer. The stuff was tough but
resilient. I got a steel rod and a hammer from the tool-rack and, placing the rod against the stud, hit it
once. The leak-sealer cracked off. The bed rolled forward and opened.
It was useless to move him or touch him, or, for that matter, to say anything. Judson was dead, his
head twisted almost all the way around. His face was bluish and his eyes stared. He was pushed,
jammed, wedged into the small space.
I hit the stud again and the bunk rolled back. Moving without any volition that I could analyze, feeling
nothing but a great angry numbness, I cleaned up. I put the rod and the hammer away and fluffed up the
piling of the carpeting by the bunk. Then I went and stood in the service cubicle and began to wait.
Wait. Not just stay—wait. I knew he’d be back, just as I suddenly and belatedly understood what it
was that every factor in five people had made inevitable. I was coldly hating myself for not having known
it sooner.
The great, the admirable, the adventurous in modern civilization were Outbounders. To one who
wanted and needed personal power, there would be an ultimate goal, greater even than being an
Outbounder. And that would be to stand between an Outbounder and his destiny.
For months Flower had blocked Clinton. When she saw she must ultimately lose him to the stars, she
went hunting. She saw Judson—reachable, restless Jud—and she heard my assurance that he would
soon go Out. Then and there Judson was doomed.
Wold needed admiration the way Flower needed power. To be an Outbounder and wait for poor
struggling Tween suited him perfectly. Tween’s certification gave him no alternative but to get rid of her;
he couldn’t bring himself to go Out
Once I had taken care of Tween for him, there remained one person on the entire project who could
keep him from going Out—and she was married to Jud. Having married, Jud would stay married. Wold
did what he could to smash that marriage. When Jud still hung on, wanting to help Flower, wanting to
show me that he had made the right choice, there remained one alternative for Wold. Evidence of that lay

cramped and staring under the bunk.
But Wold wasn’t finished. He wouldn’t be finished while Jud’s body remained on Curbstone. In
Wold’s emotional state, he would have to go somewhere and drink to figure out the next step. There was
no way of sending a ship Out without riding it. So—I waited.
HE CAME back all right. I was cramped, then, and one foot was asleep. I curled and uncurled the
toes frantically when I saw the door begin to move, and tried to flatten my big bulk back down out of
sight.
He was breathing hard. He put his lips together and blew like a winded horse, wiped his lips on his
forearm. He seemed to have difficulty in focusing his eyes. I wondered how much liquor he had poured
into that empty place where most men keep their courage.
He took a fine coil of single-strand plastic cord out of his belt-pouch. Fumbling for the end, he found
it and dropped the coil. With the exaggerated care of a drunk, he threw a bowline and drew the loop
tight, pulled the bight through the loop so he had a running noose. He made this fast to a triangular
bracket over the control panel, led it along the edge of the chart-rack and down to the launching control
lever. He bent two half-hitches in the cord, slipped it over the end of the lever and drew it tight. The cord
now bound the lever in the up—“off”—position.
From the bulkhead he unfastened the clamps which held the heavy-duty fire extinguisher and lifted it
down. It weighed half as much as he did. He set it on the floor in front of the control panel, brought the
dangling end of the cord through the U-shaped clamp gudgeons on the extinguisher, took a loose
half-hitch around the bight, and, lifting the extinguisher between his free arm and his body, pulled the knot
tight. Another half-hitch secured it.
Now the heavy extinguisher dangled in mid-air under the control panel. The cord which supported it
ran up to the handle of the launching lever and from there, bending over the edge of the chart-rack, to the
bracket.
Panting, Wold took out a cigarette and shook it alight. He drew on it hungrily, and then put it on the
chart-rack, resting it against the plastic cord.
When the cigarette burned down to the cord, the thermoplastic would melt through with great
enthusiasm. The cord would break, the extinguisher would fall, dragging the lever down. And Out would
go all the evidence, to be hidden forever, as far as Wold was concerned, and 6,000 years from anyone
else.
Wold stepped back to survey his work just as I stepped forward out of the service cubicle. I brought
up my broken arm and swung it with all my weight—and that is really weight—against the side of his
head. The cast, though not heavy, was hard, and it must have hit him like a crowbar.
He went down like an elevator, hitched to his knees, and for a second seemed about to topple. His
head sagged. He shook it, slowly looked up and saw me.
“I could use one of those needle-guns,” I said. “Or I could kick you cold and let Coördination handle
you. There are regulations for things like you. But I’d rather do it this way. Get up.”
“I never…”
“Get up!” I bellowed, and kicked at him.
He threw his arms around my leg and rolled. As I started down, I pulled the leg in close and whipped

it out again. We both hit with a crash on opposite sides of the room. The bunk broke my fall; he was not
so lucky. He rose groggily, sliding his back up the door. I lumbered across, deliberately crashed into him,
and heard ribs crack as the wind gushed out of his lungs.
I STOOD back a little as he began to sag. I hit him savagely in the face, and his face came back and
hit my hand again as his head bounced off the door. I let him fall, then knelt beside him.
There are things you can do to a human body if you know enough physiology—pressures on this and
that nerve center which paralyze and cramp and immobilize whole motor-trunk systems. I did these
things, and got op, finally, leaving him twisted, sweating in agony. I wheezed over to the control bank and
looked critically at the smoldering cigarette. Less than a minute.
“I know you can hear me,” I whispered with what breath I could find. “I’d… like you to know… that
you’ll be a hero. Your name will… be on the Great Roll of the… Outbounders. You always… wanted
that without any… effort on your part… now you’ve got it.”
I went out. I stopped and leaned back against the wall beside the door. In a few seconds it swung
silently shut. I forced back the waves of gray that wanted to engulf me, turned and peered into the port. It
showed only blackness.
Jud … Jud, boy . . . you always wanted it, too. You almost got cheated out of it. You’ll be all
right now, son… .
I TOTTERED across the court and out the gate. There was someone standing there. She flew to me,
pounded my chest with small hard hands. “Did he go? Did he really go?”
I brushed her off as if she had been a midge, and closed one eye so I could get a single image. It was
Flower, without her come-on tunic. Her hair was disarrayed and her eyes were bloodshot.
“They left,” I croaked. “I told you they would. Jud and Wold… you couldn’t stop them.”
“Together? They left together?”
“That’s what Wold got certified for.” I looked bluntly up and down her supple body. “Like
everybody else who goes Out together, they had something in common.”
I pushed past her and went back to my office. Lights were blazing over the desk. Judson and Wold.
Ship replaced. Quarters cleaned. Palm-key removed and filed. I sat and looked blindly until they were all
lit and the board blanked out.
I thought, this pump of mine won’t last much longer under this kind of treatment.
I thought, I keep convincing myself that I handle things impartially and fairly, without getting involved.
I felt bad. Bad.
I thought, this is a job without authority, without any real power. I certify ’em, send ’em along, check
’em out. A clerk’s job. And because of that I have to be God. I have to make up my own justice, and
execute it myself. Wold was no threat to me or to Curbstone, yet it was in me to give oblivion to him and
purgatory to Flower.
I felt frightened and disgusted and puny.
Someone came in, and I looked up blindly. For a moment I could make out nothing but a

silver-haloed figure and a muted, wordless murmuring. I forced my eyes to focus, and I had to close them
again, as if I had looked into the sun.
Her hair was unbound beneath a diamond ring that circled her brows. The silver silk cascaded about
her, brushing the floor behind her, mantling her warm-toned shoulders, capturing small threads of light
and weaving them in and about the gleaming light that was her hair. Her deep pigeon’s-blood eyes shone
and her lips trembled.
“Tween…”
The soft murmuring became words, laughter that wept with happiness, small shaking syllables of
rapture. “He’s waiting. He wanted to say good-by to you, too… but he asked me to do it for him. He
said you’d like that better.”
I could only nod.
She came close to the desk. “I love him. I love him more than I thought anyone could. Somehow,
loving him that much, I can love you, too…”
She bent over the desk and kissed my mouth. Her lips were cool. She—blurred then. Or maybe it
was my eyes. When I could see again, she was gone.
The chime, and the lights, one after another.
Marriage recorded…
Suddenly I relaxed and I knew I could live with the viciousness of what I had done to Wold and to
Flower. It had been my will that Judson go Out, and that Tween be happy, and I had been crossed, and
I had taken vengeance. And that was small, and decidedly human—not godlike at all.
So, I thought, every day I find something out about people. And, today, I’m people. I felt the pudgy
lips that Tween had kissed. I’m old and I’m fat, I thought, and by the Lord, I’m people.
When they call me Charon, they forget what it must be like to be denied both worlds instead of
only one.
And they forget the other thing—the little-known fragment of the Charon legend. To the
Etruscans, he was more than a ferryman.
He was an executioner.
The End.
Notes and proofing history
Scanned with preliminary proofing by A/NN\A
December 2nd, 2007—v1.0
from the original source: Galaxy, October, 1950

