Lecture Notes in Production Engineering
Knut Großmann    Editor
Thermo-energetic 
Design of Machine 
Tools
A Systemic Approach to Solve the 
Conflict Between Power Efficiency, 
Accuracy and Productivity 
Demonstrated at the Example of 
Machining Production

Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools

Lecture Notes in Production Engineering
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/10642

Knut Großmann
Editor
Thermo-energetic
Design of Machine
Tools
A Systemic Approach to Solve the
Conﬂict Between Power Efﬁciency,
Accuracy and Productivity
Demonstrated at the Example of
Machining Production
123

Editor
Knut Großmann
Institut für Werkzeugmaschinen
und Steuerungstechnik
TU Dresden
Dresden
Germany
ISSN 2194-0525
ISSN 2194-0533
(electronic)
ISBN 978-3-319-12624-1
ISBN 978-3-319-12625-8
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8
Library of Congress Control Number: 2014954346
Springer Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or
information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief
excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the
purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of
the work. Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of
the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must
always be obtained from Springer. Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the
Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt
from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Contents
1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Knut Großmann and Gritt Ott
2
Model-Based Representation of Thermo-energetic Effects
in Cutting Tools and Part Clamping Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Michael Bräunig, Ulrich Semmler, Gerhard Schmidt,
Volker Wittstock and Matthias Putz
3
Model and Method for the Determination and Distribution
of Converted Energies in Milling Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
Matthias Brockmann, Fritz Klocke and Drazen Veselovac
4
Energy Model for Grinding Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Matthias Rasim, Fritz Klocke and Patrick Mattfeld
5
Thermo-energetic Modelling of Fluid Power Systems . . . . . . . . . .
49
Juliane Weber and Jürgen Weber
6
Simulation of Pose- and Process-Dependent Machine
Tool Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
Marian Partzsch and Michael Beitelschmidt
7
Thermo-Elastic Simulation of Entire Machine Tool . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Alexander Galant, Knut Großmann and Andreas Mühl
8
Model Order Reduction for Thermo-Elastic Assembly
Group Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Norman Lang, Jens Saak and Peter Benner
v

9
High-Accuracy Thermo-Elastic Simulation on Massively
Parallel Computer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
Andreas Naumann, Florian Stenger, Axel Voigt and Jörg Wensch
10
Modelling of Thermal Interactions Between Environment
and Machine Tool. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
Reimund Neugebauer, Steffen Ihlenfeldt, Carsten Zwingenberger,
Janine Glänzel and Carsten Richter
11
Determination and Modelling of Heat Transfer Mechanisms
Acting Among Machine Tool Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
Sarah Vieler, Yona Frekers, Michael Burghold and Reinhold Kneer
12
Investigation of Components and Assembly Groups . . . . . . . . . . .
135
Christian Brecher, Marcel Fey, Dorothea Haber
and Kolja Bakarinow
13
Adjustment of Uncertain Parameters in Thermal Models
of Machine Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
Bernd Kauschinger, Klaus Kabitzsch and Steffen Schroeder
14
Correction Algorithms and High-Dimensional Characteristic
Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
159
Christian Naumann, Ilka Riedel, Ulrich Priber and Roland Herzog
15
Correction Model of Load-Dependent Structural Deformations
Based on Transfer Functions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
175
Christian Brecher, Marcel Fey and Matthias Wennemer
16
Structural Model-Based Correction of Thermo-elastic Machine
Tool Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
185
Xaver Thiem, Knut Großmann and Andreas Mühl
17
Modelling and Design of Systems for Active Control
of Temperature Distribution in Frame Subassemblies. . . . . . . . . .
199
Welf-Guntram Drossel, André Bucht and Christoph Ohsenbrügge
18
Structurally Integrated Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
209
Christian Wenzel and Michel Klatte
19
Thermo-Energetic Motor Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
223
Stefan Winkler and Ralf Werner
vi
Contents

20
Technical and Economic Benchmarking Guideline
for the Compensation and Correction of Thermally
Induced Machine Tool Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
233
Hajo Wiemer, Lars Neidhardt, Werner Esswein and Richard Braun
21
Experimental Analysis of the Thermo-Elastic Behaviour
of Machine Tools by Means of Selective Thermography
and Close-Range Photogrammetry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
247
Knut Großmann, Jens Müller, Marcel Merx and Mirko Riedel
Contents
vii

Abbreviations
ADS
Automation Device Speciﬁcation
AMDiS
Adaptive MultiDimensional Simulations
AS
Assemblies
BC
Boundary Conditions
BPMN
Business Process Management and Notation
BT
Balanced Truncation
CFD
Computational Fluid Dynamics
CFRP
Carbon Fibre-Reinforced Plastics
CL
Cooling Lubricant
CRC/TR 96
Collaborative Research Centres/Transregio 96
CS
Coordinate System
DBS
Block-oriented Digital Simulation
DFG
German Research Foundation
DoF
Degrees of Freedom
DPA
Digital Photogrammetric Analysis
FE
Finite Elements
FEM
Finite Element Method
GMRES
Generalized Minimal Residual Method
HMI
Human–Machine Interface
HPC
High Performance Cutting
IR
Infrared Camera
IRKA
Iterative Rational Krylov Algorithm
IWM
Institute for Machine Tools and Control Technology
IWU
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology
LTI
Linear Time Invariant
LTV
Linear Time Varying
MOR
Model Order Reduction
MOR Sim
Model Order Reduction Simulation
MR ﬂuids
Magnetorheological ﬂuids
MT
Machine Tool
ix

NC
Numerical Control
ODE
Ordinary Differential Equation
PCM
Phase-Change Materials
PDE
Partial Differential Equation
PMOR
Parametric Model Order Reduction
POD
Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
SEM
Scanning Electron Microscope
SGR
Smoothed Grid Regression
SLS
Switched Linear Systems
TCP
Tool Center Point
VDMA
Association of German Machine and Plant Engineering
WZL
Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering
x
Abbreviations

Chapter 1
Introduction
Knut Großmann and Gritt Ott
Abstract The approach to the solution within the CRC/TR 96 ﬁnanced by the
German Research Foundation DFG aims at measures that will allow manufacturing
accuracy to be maintained under thermally unstable conditions with increased
productivity, without an additional demand for energy for tempering. The challenge
of research in the CRC/TR 96 derives from the attempt to satisfy the conﬂicting
goals of reducing energy consumption and increasing accuracy and productivity in
machining. In the current research performed in 19 subprojects within the scope of
the CRC/TR 96, correction and compensation solutions that inﬂuence the thermo-
elastic machine tool behaviour efﬁciently and are oriented along the thermo-elastic
functional chain are explored and implemented.
1.1 Problem
With the aim of higher proﬁtability, cutting machines are faced with the challenge
of achieving both higher productivity and accuracy requirements (Kinkel and Lay
2006). This trend is accompanied by an ever more pronounced demand for
improved energy efﬁciency in production. As demonstrated in Fig. 1.1, it is
impossible to trace productivity, accuracy and energy consumption individually.
Following a simpliﬁed assumption that expresses productivity by the metal
removal rate Qw and energy consumption by the cutting power PC, then the fol-
lowing simpliﬁed relationships
PC = K  QW
with
QW ¼ A  vf
ð1:1Þ
K. Großmann  G. Ott (&)
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Institute for Machine Tools and Control Engineering,
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: gritt.ott@tu-dresden.de
K. Großmann
e-mail: knut.grossmann@tu-dresden.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_1
1

K = kC  vc
vf
and
PC = kC  A  vC
yield that energy consumption grows proportionally with productivity. In this
equation, kC is the speciﬁc cutting force, vc the cutting speed, vf the feed rate and A
the chip area.
Since power dissipation Pv, in the form of heat ﬂux is composed both of the
power losses in the drives and moving contacts and that of the machining process,
Pv is proportional to cutting power PC and thus, in turn, productivity, which is
quantiﬁed by the metal removal rate Qw. Thus, productivity growth entails a greater
amount of heat introduced in the machine tool structure. As a result, and according
to the thermo-elastic functional chain, a temperature ﬁeld is developed as a function
of the thermal accumulation and transfer characteristics of the structure as well as
the environmental conditions. Corresponding to
PV = Ctherm  dT
dt + L  D T
ð1:2Þ
the temperatures T and the temperature differences D T grow as a function of the
power dissipation Pv introduced. In this equation, Ctherm is the heat capacity (heat
accumulation capacity) and L the thermal conductivity (heat transfer properties).
The non-steadiness of the latter parameters grows due to increasing manufacturing
dynamics. Due to thermal expansion immediately in the machine structure, this
temperature ﬁeld results in a thermally induced deformation ﬁeld that depends on
the structural geometry and material. At the same time, the driving, bearing and
guidance bases of the machine tool’s feed system are distorted and lead to kine-
matic errors at the TCP, which, in turn, depending on their location in the work-
space and the manufacturing geometry, are represented as dimensional and form
errors of the workpiece. Assuming, for a clear and simpliﬁed demonstration, that,
for instance, the change in the structural length l
productivity
metal removal rate:=chip area * feed rate
energy consumption
Cutting power:=
cutting speed * cutting forces
profitability
quality
error at 
TCP
deformation
field
temperature
field
heat
fluxes
power 
dissipation
temperature:=f(heat flux, accumulation and transfer properties of structure and environment) 
thermal strain:=
f(temperature, structural
geometry and material)
Dimension and shape:=
f(thermal strain, cutting
geometry) 
marginal productivity growth
heat flux:=
cutting power + power dissipation
energy consumption
accuracy
Fig. 1.1 Increase in productivity limited by increased heat input
2
K. Großmann and G. Ott

D l = a therm  l  D T
ð1:3Þ
causes a kinematic error of D X ¼ D l directly situated in the direction of the
workpiece dimension W due to the temperature difference D T and the thermal
linear expansion coefﬁcient atherm, then we obtain for the accuracy
GW =
W
D X
with
D W = D X;
ð1:4Þ
when the accuracy is understood as the inverse of the relative deviation D W/W.
This means, assuming the strong simpliﬁcations mentioned above, that along the
chain of proportionalities,
QW  PC  PV  D T  D l  D X 
1
GW
ð1:5Þ
one can detect a hyperbolic decrease in accuracy with increasing productivity.
The basic relationship remains valid, although the real conditions are much more
complex as a result of the spatial machine structures, kinematic mechanisms and
workpiece geometries, as well as the inﬂuence of nonlinearities.
It is currently possible, on the one hand, to keep the errors due to geometric-
kinematic and static impacts on the workpiece low as a result of optimised design
and the use of high quality components; however, on the other hand, the thermo-
elastically induced error ratio nevertheless ranges from 70 to 75 % (Brecher et al.
2014). From this ﬁnding, one must conclude that the increases in productivity thanks
to higher machine power have reached their limits, if no other measures are taken.
The measures currently practiced aim at achieve a thermal state of inertia by
introducing power dissipations as widely as homogeneously as possible or by
guaranteeing boundary conditions to the greatest extent possible. These conven-
tional measures, for instance, include “warming up” in the steady-state condition
before starting intrinsic manufacturing, the continuous use of thermally stabilising
hydraulic and metalworking ﬂuid cycles in idle times as well, tempering of struc-
tural supporting areas of the machine tools by means of ﬂuids to be re-cooled and
air-conditioning the entire production areas.
1.2 Objectives and Project Structure of the CRC/TR 96
However, the approach to the solution within the CRC/TR 96 ﬁnanced by the German
Research Foundation DFG aims at measures that will allow manufacturing accuracy
to be maintained under thermally unstable conditions with increased productivity,
without an additional demand for energy for tempering. The challenge of research in
the CRC/TR 96 derives from the attempt to satisfy the conﬂicting goals of reducing
energy consumption and increasing accuracy and productivity in machining.
1
Introduction
3

In the current research performed in 19 subprojects within the scope of the CRC/
TR 96, correction and compensation solutions that inﬂuence the thermo-elastic
machine tool behaviour efﬁciently and are oriented along the thermo-elastic func-
tional chain of Fig. 1.2 are explored and implemented. As part of this general
objective, the following issues must be researched and engineered in an interdis-
ciplinary setting and brought together into useful overall solutions:
1. Providing the modelling fundamentals to calculate the heat ﬂuxes and the
resulting thermo-elastic deformations in a comprehensive manner,
2. Mapping of the structural variability as a result of the relative movement inside
the machine tool,
3. Providing the tools for an efﬁcient adjustment of parameters that vary greatly in
time and space by means of parameter identiﬁcation methods as a prerequisite
for correction and compensation solutions,
4. Engineering and demonstrating solutions to control-integrated correction of
thermo-elastic errors by an inverse position setpoint compensation of the error at
the TCP,
5. Engineering and demonstrating solutions based on the material properties to
compensate for thermo-elastic effects through a homogeneous propagation of
the temperature ﬁeld, as well as reducing and smoothing the distribution of heat
dissipated in supporting structures,
Fig. 1.2 Approach across the thermo-elastic functional chain
4
K. Großmann and G. Ott

6. Developing metrological fundamentals to record the thermo-elastic errors in
special structural areas of machine tools,
7. Engineering a methodological approach to simultaneous and complex evalua-
tion of the CRC/TR 96 solutions, referring to their impact on product quality,
production rate, energy consumption and machine tool costs.
Fundamental modelling and simulation technologies, as well as content related
to the partial models for calculation and analysis of the thermo-elastic behaviour of
assemblies and the active moving overall cutting machine system were engineered,
coordinated and connected in the subprojects in the project area A “Active process
machine tool model”:
A01
Deformation of tool and clamping device (Chap. 2)
A02
Energy model for milling processes (Chap. 3)
A03
Energy model for grinding processes (Chap. 4)
A04
Thermo-ﬂuid technology (Chap. 5)
A05
Simulation of active machine tool models (Chaps. 6 and 7)
A06
Model order reduction (Chap. 8)
A07
High-resolution thermo-elastic simulation (Chap. 9)
Project area B, entitled “Parameter setting and correction”, and its corresponding
subprojects are focussed on the development, investigation and application of
alternative motion correction methods, as well as studies of parameter setting for the
required models that represent thermo-elastic machine tool behaviour:
B01
Thermal interaction between environment and machine tool (Chap. 10)
B02
Heat transfer mechanisms between machine tool components (Chap. 11)
B03
Investigations of components and assemblies (Chap. 12)
B04
Object-related parameter identiﬁcation (Chap. 13)
B05
Performance data based correction (Chap. 14)
B06
Property model based correction (Chap. 15)
B07
Structure model based correction (Chap. 16)
Finally, project area C, “Component and machine tool design and—evaluation”,
brings together the subprojects focussed on design that are required to design
compensation solutions. Activities to implement, demonstrate and benchmark the
correction, compensation and metrological solutions in a manner that covers the
working areas and subjects, were coordinated:
C02
Controlled heat ﬂux (Chap. 17)
C03
Structurally integrated sensors (Chap. 18)
C04
Thermo-energetic motor optimisation (Chap. 19)
C05
Benchmarking (Chap. 20)
C06
Test bed (Chap. 21)
1
Introduction
5

1.3 Design-Integrated Compensation
and Control-Integrated Correction
Design-integrated compensation affects a priori the power dissipation values
transferred into heat and the formation of the temperature ﬁeld. The objective is to
represent heat input as a continuous process in case of transient load situations and
to achieve a homogeneous distribution of the resulting temperature ﬁeld. First, the
basic mechanisms of latent heat accumulation in phase-change materials (PCM)/
metal foam, as well as heat bridges switched by means of magneto-rheological
ﬂuids, are investigated. These relationships are explored using primary beam and
plate structures. (Chap. 17)
In control-integrated correction methods, the thermally induced kinematic errors
that occur at the TCP have to be smoothed. As a prerequisite, they need active or
updated process information about the variables to be corrected by means of feed
drives or additional control axes. This information can be obtained from the models,
on the one hand, and from direct deformation measurement, on the other hand.
The demand for a complete model that is effective for the active process refers
not only to the thermal loads, but also to the structural changes caused by the
assemblies’ relative motions. To map the machine tool effectively for the active
process, partial models of assemblies and components are brought together.
(Chap. 7). They include the operation-dependent losses and heat ﬂux distributions
in the electrical drives (Chap. 19) and the ﬂuid-technical systems (Chap. 5), the
bearings’ and guidance components’ frictional losses depending on velocity and
load (Chap. 12), as well as those heat quantities dissipating into the machine tool,
which come from the technological parameters (Chaps. 3 and 4), and the distri-
bution of the dissipated heat content to tool, workpiece and chip in the cutting
process (Chap. 2). The resulting FE models are sophisticated and require lengthy
computation times. Consequently, to make them feasible, they have to be reduced
to a time-saving calculation model by means of innovative algorithms for model
order reduction (Chap. 8). This reduction is necessary to run the control-integrated
machine tool correction in real time mode. The models of reduced order were
veriﬁed by simulation (Chap. 7).
The activities within the CRC/TR 96 investigate three alternative methods to
correct the thermally induced kinematic errors in the control in real time.
• The correlation-based correction model (Chap. 14) explores the relationships
between selected discrete temperature values from the machine structure and
associated TCP displacements.
• Modelling for property model based correction (Chap. 15) is based on the
response between the process-typical load parameters, such as the mechanical
load proﬁle and the thermo-elastically induced TCP displacements that occur.
• Structural model-based correction (Chap. 16) relies on the sufﬁciently reliable
calculation of the temperature distribution to be run in real time and the resulting
TCP displacement as a function of the effective process guidance via a structural
6
K. Großmann and G. Ott

model. This model is generated from the order-reduced FE representations of the
structural assemblies, as well as the heat source representations of the process
and the drive, bearing and guidance components, synchronised to the process
and updated in terms of parameters and structure.
1.4 Metrological Analysis and Benchmarking
The deformation measurement activities are performed with two aims. On the one
hand, a structure-integrated sensor system (Chap. 18) is developed, which ﬁrst
directly captures local structural deformations, shown for the example of a machine
bed. On the other hand, the opportunities for direct high-resolution TCP mea-
surement by combining close range photogrammetry and selective thermography
are investigated (Chap. 21).
To guarantee the required model quality for the correction methods, various
fundamental investigations are performed. Furthermore, highly efﬁcient and feasi-
ble strategies to assist modelling are engineered. A rapid, comprehensive and low-
cost method is developed for the metrological adjustment of the parameters that are
difﬁcultly to ﬁnd, dependent on each individual object and varying over the
operation period, with the model (Chap. 13). The technical content of the FE
models is also enriched by a more precisely determined contact heat transfer
coefﬁcient in joint components (Chap. 11), and the representation of the interface
between the environment and the machine tool based on the FE method (Chap. 10).
An adequate benchmarking tool is created to benchmark all solution methods
found within the scope of the CRC/TR 96 for the correction and/or compensation of
thermally induced machining errors. The tool compares different consequences
related to achievable accuracy and the production rate, as well the endeavours
required for their generation and application (Chap. 20).
1.5 Test Beds and Demonstrators
The algorithms and strategies for modelling and parameter setting, correction- and
compensation solutions, as well as for benchmarking, which are developed in the
subprojects, are also implemented, tested and evaluated (benchmarked) on several
test stands and demonstrators.
Table 1.1 shows the individual test beds and demonstrators and their locations in
overview.
Through several subprojects, research was conducted on the assemblies and
demonstrators introduced below.
The column of the Auerbach ACW630 belonged to a prototype-like machining
centre by the ﬁrm Auerbach Maschinenfabrik GmbH. (Chaps. 10 and 14)
1
Introduction
7

The column assembly was equipped with individually switchable heating ﬁlms
in the area of the z guidances that are insulated against the environment. This makes
it possible to simulate in experiment a spindle head’s movement, which is in reality
connected with “non-steady” heat dissipation in the area of the guidances due to
friction, in experiment (Fig. 1.3).
Table 1.1 Demonstrators
Aachen
Chemnitz
Dresden
Test beds
Test beds for studies at
ball screws, guidance
systems and main
spindles
Test bed equipped with mea-
suring instruments: tool chuck
and part clamping system in an
air-conditioned room
Motor spin-
dle sleeve
bearing test
bed
Analysed
assemblies
Column of the Auerbach
ACW630
Column
assembly
Demonstrators
DMU 40eVo linear
Experimental machine tool
HEC800
MiniHex
test bed
MAX
Fig. 1.3 Demonstrator of a
milling machine column at the
Dresden location
8
K. Großmann and G. Ott

This setup is designed to test and verify the following solutions in experiment:
1. Column-spindle head motion—simulation of a thermal network model of var-
iable structure which is correspondingly reduced in terms of model order
(Chap. 6)
2. Testing the measurement methods developed for photogrammetric deformation
measurement and testing the connection of this deformation measurement by
means of thermographic temperature ﬁeld measurement for selective thermal
imaging (Chap. 21)
3. Comparison of alternative modelling methods to create reduced models with
variable structure (Chap. 8) versus unreduced structurally variable (Chap. 9)
thermo-elastic models for the temperature values really measured on the
assembly as a function of time
In Dresden, the test bed MAX was built up; due to its lightweight construction
based on aluminium structures, low heat capacities and high thermal coefﬁcients of
expansion are to be expected. Furthermore, high locally variable heat inputs are to
be expected from structurally integrated direct linear drives run without cooling.
The test bed embodies a three-axis Cartesian kinematic mechanism, in which all
motions are carried out by the workpiece. In the cross slide, linear direct drives free
of iron are used to generate the motion in X- and Y-axes. Correction motions in all
the three rotational degrees of freedom φX, φY, φZ in connection with the elastic
coupling of the mobile assemblies upon articulated solid joints are made possible by
the redundant drives in the Y- and Z-axes. The machine frame of the test bed is
designed in lightweight construction and consists of three steel angle sections. A
light weight framework carries the milling spindle and enables force and torque
measurements at the TCP in all directions by means of the load cells mounted into
the rods (Fig. 1.4).
Test bed control was implemented by the PC based system TwinCAT 3.1 by
Beckhoff. EtherCAT was used as the ﬁeldbus. Path generation and data logging are
performed by a higher-order user interface (BOF) developed at the IWM. User
interface and TwinCAT communicate via ADS interface (Automation Device
Speciﬁcation). In this communication, ADS makes available ports for various areas
in the TwinCAT system. Thus, the desired path is speciﬁed and, conversely, data
are logged via an ADS port to the TwinCAT’s PLC. For determination of the
temperature ﬁeld, 36 Pt100 temperature sensors were applied alone to the X-, Y-
and Z-slides. All measured data were captured with EtherCAT modules and can be
logged centrally in the machine control (BOF).
The MiniHex is used as an additional demonstrator of smaller size. It is ﬁtted
with six struts of variable length. The struts are driven by ball screws, each with a
synchronous servo-motor. The positions were measured indirectly upon the servo-
motors’ rotary transducers. Cardan joints of simple structure are used as articulated
joints between the base frame and the strut axes or the strut axes and the platform.
1
Introduction
9

The rotational degree of freedom, which is required for the kinematic mechanism of
the Hexapod, is implemented by the torsion of the ball nut against the strut axes’
screw shaft. Control of the MiniHex and capturing of the measured temperatures is
executed in the same way as for the test bed with the PC based controlling system
TwinCAT 3.1.
In Chemnitz, there is an experimental machine, whose structure conforms to a
commercially available machining centre, but which by contrast enables manifold
partial modiﬁcation options through the exchange of assemblies and integration of
components. As a result, this machine is extremely well suited for testing and the
investigation of the compensation solutions.
In Aachen, explorations are performed under real manufacturing conditions
similar to practice on two production machines representing the current industrial
standard—a milling centre (DBF 630) and a grinding machine (Microcut BD 10).
The following chapters elucidate in detail the strategy and the outcomes of the
19 subprojects of the CRC/TR 96, whose exploration began in July 2011 and has
continued until now.
All authors would like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for
ﬁnancial support within the CRC/TR 96.
Fig. 1.4 Test bed at the Dresden location
10
K. Großmann and G. Ott

References
Brecher C, Fey M, Bakarinow K, Neus S (2014) Kugelgewindetrieb-Drehzahl beeinﬂusst
Maschinengenauigkeit. MM Maschinenmarkt 27:60–63
Kinkel S (2005) Anforderungen an die Fertigungstechnik von morgen. Mitteilungen aus der
Produktionsinnovationserhebung. PI-Mitteilungen 37
Kinkel S, Lay G (2006) Technologietrends in der Produktion. Praxis der Anlagenmodernisierung
in der deutschen Metall- und Elektroindustrie. Mitteilungen aus der Produktionsinnovationse-
rhebung 39
1
Introduction
11

Chapter 2
Model-Based Representation
of Thermo-energetic Effects in Cutting
Tools and Part Clamping Devices
Michael Bräunig, Ulrich Semmler, Gerhard Schmidt,
Volker Wittstock and Matthias Putz
Abstract In the representation of the machine tool’s manufacturing accuracy,
involving thermo-elastic deformations in the tool and its chuck in the considerations
is unavoidable, since a portion of the process heat is transmitted into the tool.
Capture and estimation of the resultant thermo-elastic deformations is of signiﬁcant
importance for their compensation and correction. This paper presents the inves-
tigation and evaluation of thermo-elastic displacements in the tool-chuck system
resulting from the heat ﬂows from machining. The temperature and displacement
measurements were conducted on a test bed with measuring equipment. In the ﬁrst
series of experiments, the transient heat conduction in the stationary tool and the
chucking system, decoupled from the motor spindle, was captured. The chucks
were compared in terms of their working principle. The identiﬁcation of the thermal
boundary and contact conditions was assisted by Finite Element models. The paper
describes the experimental setups, the methods of measurement and the numerical
models. An additional section discusses the determination of realistic heat sources
generated in the machining process. Since measurement of these heat ﬂows is either
impossible or expensive and time-consuming, they are determined by numerical
simulation of the machining process itself. This way, it can be determined to what
extent the heat ﬂows generated in the experiments by means of heating cartridge or
induction correspond to those generated by the actual machining heat sources.
M. Bräunig (&)  V. Wittstock  M. Putz
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Chemnitz University of Technology,
Chemnitz, Germany
e-mail: michael.braeunig@mb.tu-chemnitz.de
V. Wittstock
e-mail: volker.wittstock@mb.tu-chemnitz.de
M. Putz
e-mail: matthias.putz@mb.tu-chemnitz.de
U. Semmler  G. Schmidt
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology, Chemnitz, Germany
e-mail: ulrich.semmler@iwu.fraunhofer.de
G. Schmidt
e-mail: gerhard.schmidt@iwu.fraunhofer.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_2
13

2.1 Introduction
2.1.1 Motivation and Problem Deﬁnition
The machining heat generated immediately in the tool-workpiece contact area is a
major heat source in the overall system of the machine tool. Heat dissipates into the
tool chuck and from there into the motor spindle, as well as through the part and the
part clamping system into the machine table. The temperature ﬁelds cause non-
negligible thermo-elastic deformations in the systems tool chuck—spindle, as well
as the part clamping system—machine table that work against the requirement for
manufacturing accuracy. The trend towards high performance cutting (HPC) and
dry metal cutting or minimal quantity lubrication increases the thermal stresses and
thus thermally-induced workpiece errors. The conﬂict among the criteria of accu-
racy, productivity and energy consumption is complicated by small manufacturing
batches, changing manufacturing orders and tool changes, as well as shut downs of
the base load power to conserve energy. The result would be a thermally unstable
machine tool structure with low manufacturing accuracy.
2.1.2 Aim
The aim of the subproject A01 on “Deformation of tool and clamping device”
consists of modelling the tool and its clamping system (chuck) under the
assumption of real process parameters, such as process heat and the self- and
externally-excited bypassing ﬂows as the input variables, the boundary and envi-
ronmental conditions of the workspace, and the heat transfer conditions at the
relevant interfaces of the tool and its clamping system.
The exploration of the thermal manufacturing inﬂuences for complex metal
removal processes is the subject of the DFG main programme 1480. The general
aim is modelling and simulation of, as well as compensation on, the component or
workpiece through experimental and simulation assisted investigations (Biermann
and Iovkov 2013). Subproject A01 limits this overall focus to tool-oriented studies.
Experimental and model-assisted investigations are conducted to identify the
relevant parameters, such as temperature, dislocations and heat ﬂows. The chal-
lenge in the experiment is to realise the process heat, whereas, in simulation,
assumptions regarding the convective heat transfer conditions have to be agreed.
The two methods of investigation—experiment and simulation—supplement one
another and provide a veriﬁcation of the parameters mentioned above.
The identiﬁcation of the temperature ﬁelds makes it possible to abstract com-
pensation measures in order to obtain stable thermo-elastic characteristics in the
future.
14
M. Bräunig et al.

2.2 Approach
2.2.1 Test Bed Description
A test bed equipped with measuring instruments was designed and built (Fig. 2.1) to
investigate the thermal behaviour of the cutting tools and the clamping systems—that
is, the tool chuck and part clamping device—experimentally. The placement of the
setup in an air-conditioned room allows for long-term-experiments with temperature
monitoring. The test bed consists of machine bed, motor spindle to be mounted both
in horizontal and vertical positions, control, cooling lubrication system and mea-
suring equipment. In addition to the inﬂuence of the self-circulating and forced
moving air on the thermal behaviour, the inﬂuence of the cutting ﬂuid can be shown.
2.2.2 Subject of Experimental Investigations
A 20 mm diameter end mill made entirely of carbide was used as the tool. The
milling cutter can be integrated into the test bed, has cooling channels inside, and
allows for transferability of the results to other tools and machining processes, such
as drilling. For tool clamping, three tool chuck principles were investigated in
detail: hydraulic chuck, shrink ﬁt chuck and chuck with a lateral clamping surface
Fig. 2.1 Test bed equipped with measuring equipment
2
Model-Based Representation of Thermo-energetic Effects …
15

(Weldon type chuck) each with SK40 spindle interface. Up to 16 measuring points
for temperature and 4 measuring points for deformation were attached to the tool
and the chuck. Temperature measurement was predominantly executed by resis-
tance thermometers designed using thin-ﬁlm technology as Pt100 or Pt1000 sen-
sors. The displacements were traced by inductive sensors, eddy current sensors and
laser sensors. For tools in standstill position, the measurements were conducted at
the SK40 interface, whereby the tool was clamped in the motor spindle and ther-
mally insulated at the SK40 interface. Rotating tools were measured under the
inﬂuence of motor spindle tempering. For rotating tools, the temperature mea-
surement signals were transmitted to the measurement ampliﬁers by means of slip
ring assemblies. Contactless eddy current transducers and laser sensors were
employed exclusively. This decision made it necessary to have available planar
measurement surfaces on the tool. To fulﬁl this condition, initially a dummy end
mill was employed in the experiments. The transfer to the real tool’s geometry was
conducted using the simulation assisted investigations. The measurement setups for
the various operation modes are described in detail in (Drossel et al. 2013). Fig-
ure 2.2 illustrates the measurement installation applied to the rotating tool.
For the investigations of the tool in standstill position, the tool was heated using
a ceramic immersion heater. Effective heat transfer was provided by thermally
conductive grease, so that heat immediately dissipated into the tool. In contrast, for
rotating tools, the principle of contactless inductive heating was employed.
Fig. 2.2 Measurement setup
for the rotating tool
16
M. Bräunig et al.

2.2.3 Simulation Assisted Investigations
In the measurement setup, the real amount of the heat ﬂow introduced and the
parameters for heat transfer to the environment or between tool and chuck, as well
as between the chuck and the motor spindle were unknown. For their identiﬁcation,
FE models describing the tools employed (real tool and dummy tool), as well as of
all chucks, were developed, and the parameters were adjusted by making use of the
characteristic temperature and deformation parameters measured. Figures 2.3 and
2.4 illustrate the respective FE models, as well as the thermal boundary and contact
conditions underlying the models.
The thermo-elastic and thermo-physical material parameters of the K40 tungsten
carbide (tool material) and 1.2342 (X38CrMoV5-1) (chuck material) are taken from
the material and manufacturer’s information databases.
Thanks to these validated models, arbitrary thermal loads—varying in amount
and timing—can be simulated without expensive and time-consuming experiments.
This strategy targets simpliﬁed models for simulation in real time, capable of
delivering the current correction values during the manufacturing processes.
The measurement and simulation results are introduced and discussed in the
following section.
Fig. 2.3 Exemplary FE models—tool and chuck models (top dummy tool in shrink-ﬁt chuck,
bottom end mill and chuck with clamping surface, separated representation)
2
Model-Based Representation of Thermo-energetic Effects …
17

2.3 Results
2.3.1 Temperature Fields and Thermo-elastic Elongation
in the Chuck
Initially, the clamping principles were compared in a preliminary test series. These
tests had to verify the measurement methods and reliable repeatability of mea-
surements in each test setup, as well as a relative comparison of the clamping
principles, taking into account relevant inﬂuential factors in the real chip forming
process. Figure 2.5 outlines the values provided for the stationary state of the three
chuck types used.
Analyzing the shrink-ﬁt chuck, a homogeneous drop in temperature along the
rotational axis can be observed. For the process parameters mentioned, tool tip
displacement amounts to approximately 60 µm. The hydraulic chuck suggests that
the hydraulic clamping principle isolates the tool from the chuck, because the
temperatures inside the tool are clearly higher. Signiﬁcantly lower displacements
can be detected on the chuck with a lateral clamping surface. Geometry has an
important inﬂuence on the thermo-elastic elongation. The chuck is smaller in size
and cannot be directly compared with the other clamping principles. The tool is
arrested by means of a setscrew, and an air gap emerges as a result. The air gap has
an insulating inﬂuence on the tool, and, consequently, less heat is transferred to the
chuck. The temperatures in the chuck are less versus shrink-ﬁt- and versus
hydraulic chucks.
Fig. 2.4 FE model of dummy tool in shrink-ﬁt chuck, with thermal boundary conditions and heat
transfer between tool and chuck (from tool to chuck)
18
M. Bräunig et al.

2.3.2 Simulation Results and Adjustment with Experimental
Investigations
The thermal boundary and contact conditions for the test series with the standstill
tool were exemplarily adjusted for the shrink-ﬁt chuck. The closest correspondence
with the measurements was achieved for a heat transfer coefﬁcient aLuft ¼
8 W=m2K to the environment and a heat ﬂow of 8.1 W into the tool’s tip.
Figures 2.6 and 2.7 show the measured and simulated temperature values for these
parameters, as well as the axial displacements at the tool tip and on the chuck’s
face. The temperature measuring points TMP1–TMP5 correspond to the measuring
points in Fig. 2.5—from tool tip to chuck.
In the stationary temperature range, the absolute deviations between the values
measured and calculated amounted to a maximum of 4 K in the case of tempera-
tures and 7 µm in the case of displacements.
The contact heat transfer coefﬁcients in the tool-chuck contact cannot be traced
directly. In the FE models, based on investigations of the subproject B02, a value of
atherm ¼ 12;000 W=m2K (see Chap. 11 and Ustinov et al. 2010) was used. How-
ever, these coefﬁcients turned out not to play a signiﬁcant role in the heat ﬂow out
of the tool, as can be seen for different α values by the temperature curve along the
interface (Fig. 2.8).
Fig. 2.5 Comparison of the displacement values measured and the stationary temperature proﬁles
for shrink-ﬁt chucks, chucks with damping surface and hydraulic chucks
2
Model-Based Representation of Thermo-energetic Effects …
19

The temperature jumps are shown for two cross sections, which correspond to
the positions of the temperature measuring points TMP4 and TMP5 (upper curves
20 mm, lower curves 40 mm distance to face of the chuck).
Fig. 2.6 Measured versus simulated temperatures for the shrink-ﬁt chuck with clamped dummy
tool
Fig. 2.7 Measured versus simulated displacements (DMP1 face side of tool, DMP2 face side of
chuck)
20
M. Bräunig et al.

2.3.3 Determination of Process Heat Parameters
The amounts of heat generated in the machining process, their introduction in the
form of heat ﬂows dissipating into the tool, the workpiece and the chips (which, in
turn, also introduce heat into the machine tool at the point at which they are
deposited or removed) and the TCP displacements to be corrected or compensated
are of crucial importance for thermo-energetic machine tool design. It has still to be
veriﬁed how accurately the heat sources in the measurements, either by ceramic
immersion heater or by induction heating, represent realistic sources, and, conse-
quently, to what extent the TCP displacements measured or simulated are repre-
sentative for the system of the chuck-tool-part-clamping device. Complex
measurement equipment is needed to directly measure the heat content generated in
the machining process, and measurements are only possible for simpliﬁed process
conditions with tools and parts of adequate design (Davies et al. 2007).
For temperature distribution in the chip formation and friction contact zone,
empirical and analytical models are provided by Komanduri et al. (2001). However,
all of these models are based on simpliﬁed model assumptions and are thus inac-
curate and only transferable to a limited extent to most machining processes.
Consequently, the input variable from process heat was selected so that the
parameter is located in the range of conventional process representation and can be
captured by means of thin-ﬁlm sensors. This means that the absolute temperatures
at the measuring points, particularly those located immediately behind the chip
formation zone, should be less than 120 °C.
The heat source affecting a real machining process results from the plastic
deformation energy transformed during chip formation and the frictional heat
generated by the contact of tool and workpiece or chip. For heat source determi-
nation, numerical simulation of the chip formation procedure was used. The
methodology is described in detail by Drossel et al. (2014). Simulation results are
shown for machining of steel AISI-1045 in free orthogonal cut with the model
parameters following:
Fig. 2.8 Temperature jumps calculated in the tool-chuck contact for different heat transfer
coefﬁcients α
2
Model-Based Representation of Thermo-energetic Effects …
21

cutting speed vc ¼ 10; 35; 70; 140; 280; 560 m=min;
depth of cut h ¼ fz ¼ 30 lm; cutting edge radius r ¼ 5 lm,
rake angle a ¼ 2;
tool orthogonal clearance a ¼ 7:
These parameters are referred to in Figs. 2.9 and 2.10.
Concerning the thermal balance of the machining process, heat generated in the
machining process is increasing approximately proportionally with cutting speed
(Fig. 2.9), whereby the fraction of the process heat that dissipates into the chips
grows substantially (approximately 70 % for vc ¼ 560 m=min, Fig. 2.10), whereas
the portion dissipating into the workpiece drops down to 26 %. For the conse-
quences in the tool-chuck system investigated here, the tool fraction of process heat
is important, which only slightly changes with increasing cutting speed and which
is approximately 4 %.
For other machining processes, such as turning (non-free cutting), milling and
drilling, the heat ﬂow values Psim calculated in simulation have to be scaled with
factors or correction values according to Table 2.1:
Fig. 2.10 Heat ﬂow
distribution in per cent,
calculated for different cutting
speed values
Fig. 2.9 Heat ﬂows
calculated for different cutting
speed values
22
M. Bräunig et al.

Preal ¼ Psim  C1  C2  C3  C4  C5
ð2:1Þ
For an HPC milling process using the end mill, as in the experiments
(d = 20 mm, 3 cutting edges) with the cutting parameters n = 2,228 min−1 (that
means vc = 140 m/min), ae = 5 mm, ap = 2 mm, fz = 0.05 mm (that means
Achip_real = 0.1 mm2), the following correction values are obtained (Achip_sim =
0.03 mm2) C1 = 3.33, C2 = 3, C3 = 1.5, C4 = 0.75, C5 = 0.167. Simulation of the 2D
planing process results in a heat ﬂow Psim = 13.1 W, which results in a real heat
ﬂow of Preal = 24.6 W under the consideration of the correction values.
The thermal output of this heat source is approximately 300 % of the heat source
of 8.1 W, which was used in the long-term experiments. In the real processes, these
thermal impacts mostly appear over shorter periods of time; however, for instance
when machining integral parts made of titanium, they can last longer. Taking this
into account, the displacements of the experiments have realistic dimensions.
2.4 Classiﬁcation of Outcomes in the SFB/TR 96
The temperature and deformation characteristics’ models of the tool and the chuck
—and in the future also of the workpiece and the clamping device, as well as the
resultant heat ﬂows into the motor spindle and the machine table—include coefﬁ-
cients of heat transfer between the parts clamped, resulting from explorations
carried out in the subproject B02. Although, as has been demonstrated, these heat
transitions are insigniﬁcant for the tool-chuck interface due to the high clamping
forces, they will probably be relevant in the systems of part-clamping device—
machine table and of chuck-motor spindle.
The force and temperature measurement results obtained on the test bed
developed in subproject A02 (see Chap. 4) were used to adjust the simulation
models for heat source calculation. Conversely, the simulation results are used to
verify the analytical chip formation process model to be developed in subproject
A02. The content and distribution of the machining heat is also important to know
in this subproject. These results can and will be transferred to other, particularly
Table 2.1 Correction values for calculation of heat dissipating from machining
Parameter
Meaning
C1 ¼ Achip
real
Achip
sim
Other chip cross section
C2 ¼ z
z cutting edges engaged
C3  1:5
3D process (for instance external cylindrical turning) instead of simulated 2D
process
C4  0:75
Process with varying chip area (milling)
C5 ¼ tcut
ttotal
Process with interrupted cut
2
Model-Based Representation of Thermo-energetic Effects …
23

3-dimensional, cutting processes and processes with interrupted cut in the future
(Klocke et al. 2011).
The numerical simulation method developed for the calculation of heat ﬂows
dissipating from metal cutting can be analogously transferred to machining pro-
cesses with geometrically undeﬁned cutting edge, like those investigated in the
subproject A03. The proof of transferability has hitherto been given in the simu-
lation of engagement of an individual grain, whereby the force and temperature
measurements in subproject A03 are used for model adjustment. From the present
state of expertise, it is impossible to determine the grinding process’s heat source
alone from the grain engagement temperatures measured alone, without the
numerical simulation of the metal removal process.
2.5 Outlook
The measurements and simulations of the system tool chuck–spindle, without
considering the inﬂuence of cutting ﬂuids, have been completed. The simulation
models considering the inﬂuence of air and cutting ﬂuids on heat ﬂow have been
developed, but have yet to be explored regarding their effects on the thermo-
energetic behaviour (Krettek 2014).
The evaluation of the identiﬁed parameters makes it possible to elaborate
approaches for compensation, including, for instance, design optimisation through
geometry and inﬂuence on heat ﬂows through calculated measures.
Thermo-energetic investigations regarding the part clamping device will be
performed in the future. As a precondition for these studies, a test bed was designed
and installed, and the numerical models were developed.
The simulation methodology to balance the heat dissipated from metal cutting
processes has to be extended to additional materials and manufacturing processes
(turning as non-free cutting, milling, drilling). The correction factors C1–C5, which
have been hitherto determined by means of exemplary models, have to be proven
for these processes.
References
Biermann D, Iovkov I (2013) Modeling and simulation of heat input in deep-hole drilling with
twist drills and MQL. In: 14th CIRP conference on modeling of machining operations, 13–14
June. Procedia CIRP, vol 8, pp 88–93
Davies MA, Ueda T, M’Saoubi R, Mullany B, Cooke AL (2007) On the measurement of
temperature in material removal processes. CIRP Ann Manuf Technol 56(2):581–604
Drossel WG, Wittstock V, Bräunig M, Schmidt G (2013) Untersuchung der thermischen
Werkzeugverformung. wt-Werkstatttechnik online 103(11/12):882–887
24
M. Bräunig et al.

Drossel W-G, Schmidt G, Semmler U, Wittstock V, Bräunig M (2014) Thermal deformations of
cutting tools: measurement and numerical simulation. Prod Eng Res Dev 8:543–550. doi:10.
1007/s11740-014-0538-y
Klocke F, Bergs T, Busch M, Rohde L, Witty M, Cabral GF (2011) Integrated approach for a
knowledge-based process layout for simultaneous 5-axis-milling of advanced materials. Adv
Tribol 2:108–115
Komanduri R, Hou ZB (2001) Thermal modeling of the metal cutting process, part III: temperature
rise distribution due to the combined effects of shear plane heat source and the tool-chip
interface. Int J Mech Sci 43:89–107
Krettek L (2014) Simulation einphasiger Strömungsausbildung am rotierenden Fräswerkzeug.
Master thesis, TU Chemnitz
Ustinov V, Kneer R, Al-Sibai F, Schulz SG, El-Magd E (2010) Inﬂuence of surface roughness on
the contact heat transfer. In: The 14th international heat transfer conference IHTC14,
Washington DC, USA, 7–13 Aug
2
Model-Based Representation of Thermo-energetic Effects …
25

Chapter 3
Model and Method for the Determination
and Distribution of Converted Energies
in Milling Processes
Matthias Brockmann, Fritz Klocke and Drazen Veselovac
Abstract This paper summarises the current state of project research focussing on
the energy model for milling processes. The general methodology of heat ﬂux
determination is described in detail. An analytical temperature distribution model
that has been engineered in a subproject is presented as an initial result. The
potential theory provides complex solutions for the differential equation of thermal
conduction that make available temperature ﬁeld and heat ﬂux ﬁeld at the same
time. The models were validated by means of the temperature ﬁelds measured. An
online calibration method combining an infrared camera with a two-colour
pyrometer was developed to ensure the quality of the captured data. Finally, the
principal paradigm of determining heat ﬂuxes from the temperature models is
brieﬂy introduced.
3.1 Introduction
Metal cutting using a geometrically deﬁned cutting edge is a highly sophisticated
physical process. The cutting edge penetrates the part material until a critical shear
stress value has been overcome. The surface layer removed is then moved across
the tool’s rake surface. During the cutting process, most of the mechanical energy
required is converted into thermal energy. Thus the metal cutting process is one of
the main heat sources in a machine tool. The temperature distributions in the
components involved in metal cutting—chip, part and tool—immediately affect the
M. Brockmann (&)  F. Klocke  D. Veselovac
Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical
Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
e-mail: M.Brockmann@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
F. Klocke
e-mail: F.Klocke@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
D. Veselovac
e-mail: D.Veselovac@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_3
27

thermo-elastic deformation of tool and part holders, heat radiation into the machine
tool’s interior and the metalworking ﬂuid’s temperature. Consequently, the target of
the subproject is the derivation of a heat ﬂux distribution model based on param-
eters. In addition to the pure machining parameters, the parameters characterising
different metal cutting processes and various combinations of part and tool mate-
rials, are also understood as parameters. The focus of the research is mainly on the
milling process.
3.2 Approach
Fourier’s law of thermal conduction is used to determine heat ﬂux through thermal
conduction:
q ¼ k oT
on
ð3:1Þ
Heat ﬂux q can thus be determined from thermal conductivity λ and the tem-
perature gradient oT=on in each normal direction. Since it is impossible to measure
the heat ﬂuxes directly, the temperature ﬁelds appearing in the components of chip,
tool and part during metal cutting are the key to the parameterised model that is
sought. To derive the models for the temperature ﬁelds, in principal, it is possible to
select empirical, analytical or simulation approaches. Empirical models are derived
from measurements by means of regression without having to know the physical
laws. In simulation and analytical models, these laws are taken into account in the
solution to the thermal conduction differential equation. The thermal conduction
differential equation can be presented in a generalised form as:
qc oT
ot ¼
o
ox ðk oT
oxÞ þ o
oy ðk oT
oyÞ þ o
oz ðk oT
ozÞ


þ U
ð3:2Þ
For constant thermal conductivity λ, it may be simpliﬁed to:
qc oT
ot ¼ k o2T
ox2 þ o2T
oy2 þ o2T
oz2


þ U
ð3:3Þ
where ρ is the density, c is the speciﬁc heat capacity and Φ a term to take into
account heat sources in the control volume. As a prerequisite to derive temperature
ﬁelds for metal cutting, mainly milling, the derived analytical solutions must satisfy
the differential equation.
28
M. Brockmann et al.

3.3 Results
Prior to the formulation of parameter-based temperature distribution and heat ﬂux
models in the metal cutting process, potential analytical solutions Ψ are derived, see
Fig. 3.1. These solutions are initially the mathematical solutions to (3.3) and depend
not only on the spatial coordinates x and y, but also the model parameters (in
Fig. 3.1 named as a, b, …).
Having adequately identiﬁed these model parameters, it is possible to derive
temperature distributions during metal cutting TModel. The parameters in these
distributions correspond to the cutting parameters (for instance, the cutting speed vc
or the feed f). The modelled temperatures are validated by comparing them with the
captured values TMess using the temperature ﬁelds found experimentally. Only
temperatures are measured rather than heat ﬂuxes. For this reason, the heat ﬂux ﬁeld
can only be validated indirectly. The heat ﬂuxes are obtained from (3.1), differ-
entiating the temperature ﬁeld equation oTModel=on in the correspondingly chosen
normal direction.
3.3.1 Derivation of Analytical Temperature Models in Metal
Cutting
Since sensor access to the measured objects is limited, models predicting the
temperatures during metal cutting were required very early on. Most of the existing
models are empirical ones, and frequently the so-called heat partition coefﬁcient
describing the percentage of heat that ﬂows in the tool and the chip is used.
Empirical models do not have a physical basis, and it is impossible to predict entire
temperature ﬁelds. Due to these weaknesses, this type of model is inﬂexible and
difﬁcult to transfer to new cases of application. In contrast, analytical models are
based on the solution of the thermal conductivity differential equation and are thus
regarded in principle as universal approaches. The model by Komanduri and Hou
(2000, 2001a, b) whose approach uses an inclined band heat source, is the last
model in this context and includes former models in a special solution. All models
that have been provided up to now are based on real solutions of the thermal
conductivity differential equation.
Model Derivation
Ψ(x,y,a,b,…)
Temperature Field
TModell(x,y,vc,f,..)
Validation
TMess(x,y,vc,f,…) 
Heat Flow 
Calculation: 
n
TModel
∂
∂
Fig. 3.1 Scientiﬁc approach for determination of heat ﬂow
3
Model and Method for the Determination and Distribution …
29

In the modelling performed in subproject A02, a potential theory-based model
was made available. The potential theory provides methods for a complex solution
of the thermal conductivity differential equation. The advantages in comparison
with the state of the art result from the simultaneous modelling of the temperature
ﬁeld and the heat ﬂuxes, as well as the ﬂexible modelling opportunities following
the tool-kit principle. Using the methodology shown in Fig. 3.1, it is possible to
derive a solution for the temperature ﬁeld in metal cutting. The following complex
function is obtained:
FðzÞ ¼ Funiform þ Fvortex þ Fcorner
¼ Azeia þ Bi
2p lnðz þ zsumÞ þ C  zk
rot
ð3:4Þ
The function is superpositioned from the partial solutions Funiform, Fvortex and
Fcorner. Each function can be assigned a physical interpretation analogously to ﬂuid
mechanics, which need not be detailed here. For a detailed derivation, see Gierlings
and Brockmann (2013). The imaginary part Ψ, which can be interpreted as a function
for the temperature ﬁeld according to the methodology in Fig. 3.1, is given as:
Wtotalðx; yÞ ¼ A sinðaÞ  B
2p lnð
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
x2
total þ y2
total
q
Þ
þ C  ½
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðx cos h  y sin hÞ2 þ ðx sin h þ y cos hÞ2
q
k sinðkhÞ
ð3:5Þ
The parameters A, α, B, C, θ and k can be regarded as constants.
The terms xtotal and ytotal are introduced to take into account the heat sources from
friction and shearing. Figure 3.2 presents a plot of the calculated temperature ﬁeld as
well as of an exemplary temperature curve along the contact zone. To validate the
temperature ﬁelds measured, the temperature ﬁelds are compared with the mea-
surements. The direct relationship between the solution parameters and the cutting
parameters was not determined in the project activities demonstrated; the parameters
were chosen so that the qualitative curve of the temperature ﬁelds conforms.
3.3.2 Measurement of Temperature Fields in Metal Cutting
Different commonly available temperature sensor systems were engineered for a
metal cutting application to capture temperatures in the metal cutting process. First,
indirect measurement techniques and techniques with time-resolution can be dis-
tinguished. Indirect measurements, such as the use of temperature-sensitive colours
or of powders with a constant melting point, as well as the estimation of metal-
lurgical microsections, are not feasible as temperature measurement techniques
applied to science and industry.
30
M. Brockmann et al.

The more suitable time-resolved measurement methods, in turn, can be subdivided
into thermo-electrical techniques and radiation measurement procedures. Resistance
thermometers and thermocouples belong to the ﬁrst type. These measurement
methods were not employed in the subproject, since they are inappropriate for exact
measurement of temperature ﬁelds in short measurement times.
The thermographic and pyrometric principles categorized as radiation mea-
surement, offer the strength of contactless measurement, which can be distinctly
advantageous in metal cutting investigations. Thermographic cameras are capable
of recording a complete temperature image, with which it is possible to draw
conclusions about a complete temperature ﬁeld in a single measurement. One
disadvantage of the camera technologies currently available, however, is that
emissivity of metals, which, in turn, depends on wave length and temperature, is
unknown. A real remedy is provided by two-colour pyrometry, based on—in
contrast to thermography—the measurement of radiation at two discrete wave-
lengths. A suitable wavelength selection can allow for a change in emissivity to be
neglected to a certain degree and thus guarantee absolute temperature measurement.
However, a weakness of this technique is that the measurement is only conducted at
one measuring point.
Fig. 3.2 Model plot and temperature along the contact zone
3
Model and Method for the Determination and Distribution …
31

To combine the strengths of the two radiation measurement techniques, an
online emissivity calibration method was engineered in the subproject: a spot on the
test object is recorded by both sensor systems at the same time. Thus it is possible to
compare the digital level of the infrared (IR) camera with the temperature recorded
by means of the two-colour pyrometer and use the outcomes for emissivity
determination; compare with the diagram in Fig. 3.3.
Since the image rate is limited and dependent on the integration time, it is nec-
essary to specify the location of the common measurement spot in the metal cutting
zone. This is especially valid for the zones shown in the IR camera image—rake
face, contact zone, chip and chip underside; see upper part of Fig. 3.3. By adjusting
the IR images calibrated in the abovementioned manner, model validation by means
of accurate measured data can be guaranteed.
3.3.3 Equation for the Heat Flux
To derive the heat ﬂux model based on parameters from the temperature models, it
is ﬁrst necessary to derive the direction of the heat ﬂux. According to (3.1), heat
ﬂux is to be determined in the corresponding normal direction. In other words, the
Fig. 3.3 Methodology for online emissivity calibration
32
M. Brockmann et al.

ﬁeld is perpendicular to the isothermals determined by (3.5). Since the equation was
derived from a potential function F zð Þ ¼ U þ iW, the real and imaginary parts of
the function are in a mutually vertical position (except in singular points in which
the Cauchy-Riemann conditions are not fulﬁlled). Consequently, the heat ﬂux
resulting from the real part Φ of (3.5) is given as:
U = Acos(aÞ þ B
2p tan1ðytotal
xtotal
Þ
þ C½
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðx cosðhÞ  y sinðhÞ2 þ ðx sinðhÞ þ y sinðhÞ2
q
k cosðkhÞ
ð3:6Þ
The meaning of the parameters is identical with those in (3.5). The strength of
the heat ﬂux results from the gradient in the direction of this ﬁeld. Figure 3.4
elucidates the geometric relationships between the isothermal and the heat ﬂux.
The heat ﬂuxes in x and y directions can be derived from the corresponding
derivatives of the Ψ function. To calculate heat ﬂux into the components, heat ﬂux
is multiplied by the area considered.
3.4 Classiﬁcation of Outcomes CRC/TR 96
Parameter-based modelling of the temperature ﬁeld induced by the metal cutting
process is a key parameter for compensation and correction solutions.
The tool holder and part clamping components are immediately affected by the
heat ﬂux out of the metal cutting process. Heat is mainly transmitted via contact
grooves between tool and tool holder as well as between part and part clamping.
The machine interior is also affected directly by heat radiation, which is, in turn,
dependent on the temperature of the component’s chip, tool and part. The cooling
lubricant that is available in most metal-cutting processes is also heated by con-
vection and thus changes the temperature in the hydraulic circuit. As a whole,
isotherm 
Ψ
. 
Φ
x
q
q
y
q
x 
y 
real function
Φ
imaginary function
Ψ 
heat flow
in x direction
heat flow
in y direction 
heat flow in normal 
direction
y
q
x
q
Fig. 3.4 Heat source ﬁeld and direction
3
Model and Method for the Determination and Distribution …
33

complex process representation is created, showing the tool and the part interacting
with the cutting process as the heat source to be characterized by parameters (that is,
to be changed by cutting parameters, such as cutting speed and feed).
This representation can be employed for process optimisation, on the one hand.
On the other hand, the models can be used for speciﬁc relationships between energy
input and accuracy curves as a function of productivity. In this way, they provide
technological support for the overall system of the CRC/TR 96.
3.5 Outlook
The model to predict the temperature ﬁelds in the components of tool, part and chip
engineered in the subproject A02 needs to be further developed in the ongoing
subproject activities. In a ﬁrst step, the relationship to the cutting parameters is
generated explicitly in order to assess the models according to the productivity axis.
In a second step, the model is expanded to more general chip geometries and cases
of application. This is guaranteed by a method for the application of elementary
solutions. Analogously to ﬂuid mechanics, this paradigm is known as panel theory.
Initially, the model can only be used for stationary cases in concrete applications.
The intention is to extend the approach to unsteady cases by means of the theory of
minor disturbances.
References
Gierlings S, Brockmann M (2013) Analytical modelling of temperature distribution using potential
theory by reference to broaching of nickel-based alloys. Adv Mater Res 769:139–146
Komanduri R, Hou ZB (2000) Thermal modeling of the metal cutting process. Part I: Temperature
rise distribution due to shear plane heat source. Int J Mech Sci 42:1715–1752
Komanduri R, Hou ZB (2001a) Thermal modeling of the metal cutting process. Part II:
Temperature rise distribution due to frictional heat source at the tool–chip interface. Int J Mech
Sci 43:57–88
Komanduri R, Hou ZB (2001b) Thermal modeling of the metal cutting process. Part III:
Temperature rise distribution due to the combined effects of shear plane heat source and the
tool–chip interface frictional heat source. Int J Mech Sci 43:89–107
34
M. Brockmann et al.

Chapter 4
Energy Model for Grinding Processes
Matthias Rasim, Fritz Klocke and Patrick Mattfeld
Abstract A major percentage of the mechanical energy introduced during the
grinding process is converted into heat. For this reason, the grinding process has a
great inﬂuence on the thermo-elastic behaviour of the complete machine tool. This
paper introduces an approach to model the energy conversion in the grinding
process, taking into account grinding wheel topography. An analytical-empirical
energy model for grain engagement is abstracted from the phases of chip formation
when a single grain is engaged. Chip formation on a single grain was analysed
using two newly developed test beds. In this approach, it was possible for the ﬁrst
time to identify the chip formation phases and to demonstrate their signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the energy converted during grain engagement. Moreover, it was
possible to derive initial characteristic parameters to model the inﬂuence of the
grain shape. The Finite-Element simulation of single grain engagement makes it
possible to vary the process variables in further experiments, in particular the grain
shape properties, independent of one another and in a controlled manner, and to
study their inﬂuence. It is the goal of ongoing studies to generalise the energy
model for single grain engagement as a model for multi-grain engagement and thus
the entire grinding process by means of a geometric-kinematic grain engagement
model.
M. Rasim (&)  F. Klocke  P. Mattfeld
Laboratory of Machine Tools and Production Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical
Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
e-mail: M.Rasim@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
F. Klocke
e-mail: F.Klocke@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
P. Mattfeld
e-mail: P.Mattfeld@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_4
35

4.1 Introduction
In addition to the drives, the metal cutting process is a major heat source in the
machine tool. In particular in the grinding process, due to the many small-sized
cutting edges with negative rake angles, friction appears between the workpiece,
tool and chips, which, in turn, results in heat. In addition to this, considerable heat is
generated by the elastic and plastic deformation during chip formation (Brinksmeier
1982). The emerging heat dissipates into the components involved, that is, tool,
part, coolant and chips. The amount and distribution of the heat ﬂuxes vary as a
function of process guidance and cooling strategy, as well as of the design of the
components (Brinksmeier et al. 2006). The grinding process as a whole is complex
due to the high number of irregularly shaped, statistically distributed grinding
grains, which interact simultaneously with the part material. Consequently, at
present, heat generation in the grinding process has been inadequately explored, and
it is impossible to predict the amount of heat transferred to the machine by the
process. However, this prediction is necessary in order to completely model the
thermo-elastic behaviour of machine tools and to abstract solutions for workpiece
errors arising from it.
For this reason, the overall target of the subproject A03 (see Chap. 3) is to
develop a process model based on parameters that is able to represent the heat ﬂux
distribution in grinding. In the ﬁrst step, the target is to calculate the relevant heat
sources in the grinding process. In subsequent steps, the thermal conduction
mechanisms for stationary and, later on, for unsteady conditions have to be iden-
tiﬁed. Finally, a model is shaped that maps heat generation in the grinding process
and the distribution of the heat ﬂuxes onto the components involved in the grinding
process—grinding wheel, workpiece, coolant and chips.
4.2 Approach
4.2.1 Methodology to Model the Heat Sources
in the Grinding Process
The major part of the mechanical energy introduced during the grinding process is
converted into heat. Previous approaches to model heat generation in the grinding
process consider the complete grinding wheel as a global input parameter and
regard the grinding wheel in interaction with the workpiece in terms of its envel-
oping body. As a consequence, the models are only valid for a speciﬁc grinding
wheel at a constant dressing condition. For generally valid modelling of heat
generation, it is necessary to take into account the topography of the grinding wheel
interacting with the workpiece. Grinding wheel topography can be regarded as a
vast number of single grains interacting individually with the workpiece. Each chip
formation that appears at a single grain represents a heat source (see Fig. 4.1).
36
M. Rasim et al.

The number of engaging grains, as well as their penetration depth, depends on
the process parameters and the grain disposition on the grinding wheel. Corre-
spondingly, when modelling heat generation in the grinding process, the approach
that is followed is based on the chip formation procedures for the single grain. First,
heat generation during the engagement of a single grain and the chip formation that
results from this engagement are mapped as functions of the process parameters. To
do this, experimental, as well as numerical, scratch tests with single grains based on
the Finite Element method (FEM) are used. Based on these outcomes, the resultant
heat source during the engagement of the grains in the overall contact zone will be
modelled. Modelling will be conducted on the basis of a geometric-kinematic grain
engagement model using scratch tests with multiple grains and grinding experi-
ments (see Fig. 4.2).
4.2.2 Energy Model for Single Grain Engagement
In contrast to metal cutting processes with geometrically deﬁned cutting edges, chip
formation in grinding cannot be directly represented by the geometric-kinematic
engagement conditions, since the grains, which are geometrically undeﬁned, are
characterised by complex engagement conditions. Model assumptions were devel-
oped that are able to map the chip formation process in grinding (Brinksmeier et al.
2006; Denkena et al. 2012). These models consider the path by which the abrasive
vs
Grain
Workpiece
x
Q
x
Q
y
x
Q
y
x
Q
y
tMG = 0
tMG = 1
Single grain
engagement
3D-multiple grain
engagement
x
Q
Workpiece
2D-multiple grain
engagement
Time variation
Stochastic variation
Time + stoch. variation
x
Q
x
Q
tSG = 0
tSG = 1
x
Q
x
Q
Grain A
Grain B
Fig. 4.1 Complexity of heat generation in the grinding process
4
Energy model for grinding processes
37

grain penetrates the workpiece. Theoretical consideration of the grain engagement
performed this way distinguishes zones of elastic deformation (I) and elastic-plastic
deformation (II), as well as elastic-plastic deformation in combination with chip
removal (III), see Fig. 4.3, (Marinescu 2004; Malkin and Guo 2008; Klocke and
König 2005). Actual chip removal begins at the grain cutting depth Tµ, which, in
turn, depends on the material to be cut, the grinding parameters used, and the friction
conditions between abrasive grain and workpiece (Tönshoff et al. 1992).
Grain engagement model
Geometric-kinematic
calculation of the grain
engagements
Depending on process
parameters, grain shape and
distribution
Energy model grinding process
Description of the heat source in
the contact zone
Stat. consideration of the grain
shape and -distribution
Multi grain
scratch &
grinding test
Topography of the
grinding wheel
Energy model single grain
engagement
Energy balance at the single grain
Chip formation phases depending
on the process parameters
Consideration of the grain shape
Single grain
scratch tests
Single grain
scratch FE-
Simulation
Calibration
data
Fig. 4.2 Methodology of the subproject
Phases of chip formation
er:
Specific energy of friction
ev:
Spec. energy of deformation
(elastic & plastic)
esp: Spec. energy of chip formation
ekin: Spec. kinetic energy of the chip
with
ev = ev,el + ev,pl
ec = er + ev + esp + ekin
vs
I
III
II
el.
+
pl.
el.
el. + pl.
+
Chip removal
Grain
Tµ
eI
eII
eIII
erev,el
ev,pl
esp
Fig. 4.3 Energy conversion during chip formation on a single grain (according to Klocke, Malkin)
38
M. Rasim et al.

Energy conversion in the grinding process can be classiﬁed according to the
processes that occur during chip formation. Thus, the speciﬁc grinding energy ec is
composed of the speciﬁc energy of friction er, the speciﬁc energy of material
deformation ev, the speciﬁc energy of chip formation esp, the shearing energy, and
the speciﬁc kinetic energy of the chip ekin (Malkin and Guo 2008). The contribution
of the chips’ kinetic energy was shown to be less than one per cent and is thus
negligible (Zeppenfeld 2005). The remaining fractions of the speciﬁc energy can be
assigned to the individual chip formation phases (see Fig. 4.3). Friction, as well as
elastic material deformation, occurs in all phases. The material is also subject to
plastic deformation with the beginning of the second phase. Having achieved the
grain cutting depth Tµ the workpiece material is cut off, and a chip forms. Con-
sequently, it is possible to subdivide the speciﬁc grinding energy ec into phase-
speciﬁc part energies (eI, eII, eIII). In view of this division, according to (4.1), an
analytic-empirical energy model for single grain engagement can be concluded.
ec ¼ eI aI; bI; . . .
ð
Þ þ eII aII; bII; . . .
ð
Þ þ eIII aIII; bIII; . . .
ð
Þ
ð4:1Þ
The phase-speciﬁc partial energies, in turn, depend on different parameters
(aI, bI, …) that are deﬁned by the materials and the process parameters, such as
grinding wheel circumferential speed vs, chip thickness hcu, and the grain geometry.
These inﬂuencing factors have to be determined by empirical investigations to build
up the energy model.
4.3 Results
4.3.1 Investigations to Characterize Chip Formation
In the ﬁrst step, chip formation and thus the development of the individual chip
formation phases were analysed. The transitions between the individual chip for-
mation phases depend not only on the process parameters, the part material and
lubricant, but also mainly on grain geometry. A new test setup for single grain
scratching was developed and implemented to identify the local resolution of the
chip formation phases I–III during single grain engagement as a function of the
kinematic process parameters and the grain shape (Rasim et al. 2013). In contrast to
“conventional” single grain scratching, the grain to be scratched is here ﬁxed on the
machine table, and relative motion is carried out by the workpiece. Chip geometry
was transformed in order to provide the same engagement conditions. To do this, the
curve of cutting depth hcu over the contact length was transformed into a convex
contact length by superimposing the radius of a round solid (see Fig. 4.4). The
contour calculated this way was ground into the workpiece by proﬁle grinding,
which was ﬁxed afterwards on a rotating carrier disk. Since the scratching grain is in
stationary position, it is possible for the ﬁrst time to record the chip formation by
means of a high-speed camera and high-frequency force measurement (see Fig. 4.4).
4
Energy model for grinding processes
39

A great challenge in the camera images was the extremely short exposure time of less
than Δtexpo = 30 µs resulting from the image frequency used, which was 33,333 fps
(frames per second). Sufﬁcient illumination of images could only be guaranteed by
the use of high-performance light sources.
The chip formation phases can be visually identiﬁed by an analysis of the camera
records. In the next step, the chip formation phases are correlated with the emerging
forces and, in connection with the geometric engagement conditions, with the
scratching energies. The high relevance of the chip formation phases for the
description of the converted energy could already be shown in the results achieved
so far. In Fig. 4.5, the curve of the instantaneous speciﬁc scratching energy se is
shown. The curve is obtained from the quotient of the tangential force curve Ft and
the curve of the groove section Acu according to (4.2). The derivation can be taken
from (Rasim et al. 2014).
seðtÞ ¼ FtðtÞ
AcuðtÞ
ð4:2Þ
As chip removal begins, a clear drop in the instantaneous speciﬁc scratching
energy se can be observed (see Fig. 4.5), which is due to a change in the predominant
mechanisms in the interaction of grain and part material. As expected, the energy
necessary to remove a speciﬁc material volume is lower due to the transition from
exclusively plastic and elastic material deformation into the shearing of workpiece
material, which is conducted in combination with elastic and plastic deformations.
Force measuring platform
hcu,max
High speed
camera
vST
4
hcu,max
vs
2
hcu,max
vs
3
Contact length
1
1
0
=
0
−
1
vs
Workpiece
Grain
hcu,max
Grain
Grain holder
Workpiece
h
Fig. 4.4 Modiﬁed test setup for visual recording of the chip formation during single grain
scratching (according to Rasim et al. 2013)
40
M. Rasim et al.

The database must now be expanded through additional investigations in order to
determine inﬂuences of the grain shape and the process parameters. In particular, it is
necessary to abstract characteristic parameters, which describe the characteristics of
the grain shape that are signiﬁcant for the formation of the chip formation phases,
such as rake angle or section area, and can be used as parameters in (4.1).
4.3.2 Analysis of Energy Conversion During Chip Formation
In the second step, the energy conversion and thus the approximate heat generation
during single grain engagement in each chip formation phase was analysed. In this
analysis, the process forces that appear, as well as the geometric engagement
conditions, are studied. To determine the inﬂuence of the process parameters and
the grain shape on energy conversion, another test bed for the exploration of single
grain engagement was developed. The target for this setup was to guarantee the
high local and temporal resolution when recording the process parameters required
by the engagement ratios. This setup makes it possible, on the one hand, to capture
the process forces along the contact length of a couple of millimetres at a contact
time of less than tk = 2 ms, with good resolution. On the other hand, the temper-
atures that emerge can be measured with a foil workpiece-thermocouple at deﬁned
points (see Fig. 4.6). The measurement methodology employed made it possible to
Chip
No chip
Chip
0.02
0.04
0.06
Instantan. spec. scratching
energy se [N/mm²]
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
17.5
Scratch length lR [mm]
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.25
1.5
1.75
Time t [ms]
Workpiece
Workpiece
Fig. 4.5 Identiﬁcation of beginning chip removal by means of high speed camera records and
inﬂuence on instantaneous speciﬁc scratching energy
4
Energy model for grinding processes
41

successfully record the high temperature gradients of up to 107 K/s appearing
during grain engagement (Rasim et al. 2013). The local temperatures determined
this way were used for the qualitative assessment of the inﬂuencing factors on heat
generation. Moreover, the temperature values can be applied as validation values
for the Finite Element simulation illustrated in Fig. 4.8.
For the description of the grain shape inﬂuence, the above mentioned approach
to abstract characteristic parameters that map the characteristics of the grain shape
that are signiﬁcant for energy conversion is followed. In Fig. 4.7, the temperatures
are shown as a function of the groove section area Acu. The temperatures increase
continuously as a function of section area. A higher workpiece volume is deformed
as a result of the greater groove section area. With increasing section area, the
contact area between grain and part material also increases, so that more friction
and, in turn, more heat is generated. In the investigations, the groove section area
vs
Chip
Workpiece
Grain
+
-
Grain
Workpiece
Force
measuring
platform
Workpiece with
temperature measurement
Workpiece
100Cr6
Constantan wire
Constantan layer(25 µm)
Insulating layer(10 µm)
Fig. 4.6 Measurement method to record the temperatures during single grain scratching
(according to Rasim et al. 2013)
500
600
700
800
900
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Scratch cross-section Acu [ m2]
Temperature T [ C]
Workpiece
100Cr6 (60 ± 1 HRC)
Cutting material
B213 (ABN600)
Parameter
vs
= 10 m/s
ft
= 0.212 mm
ae
= 2 mm
hcu,max= 30 µm
Fig. 4.7 Temperature depending on the scratching section during single grain scratching
42
M. Rasim et al.

varies both due to the different cutting depths and different grain shapes. As a result,
there is no unique correlation between the scratching groove section areas and the
contact areas of grain and workpiece. Consequently, the scratching groove section
area could be identiﬁed as a relevant parameter, though it must be supplemented by
other characteristic parameters in ongoing explorations, in order to represent the
inﬂuence factors that were not considered in the scratching section area.
In experimental studies, potential inﬂuencing factors can only be partially
adjusted in a controlled and individual manner. Thus, ﬁrst of all, the grain shape
characteristics, such as the rake angle and the section area or the radius at the crest
cannot be arbitrarily combined by the use of standard CBN-abrasive grains, but
speciﬁed by the available grains, and can only be recorded before the test.
For this reason, single grain engagement was also simulated with a thermo-
mechanical FE model. This model permits freely variation of the grain shape and
exploration of its inﬂuences in a controlled manner. The challenge arises from the
adaptation of the model to the geometric and kinematic boundary conditions of the
grinding process. In particular when grinding in the part material, high temperatures
[more than 1,100 °C (Zäh et al. 2009)] and strain rates [105–107 s−1 (Stef-
fens 1983)] occur. On the current test beds, for these conditions, parameters able to
represent the material behaviour cannot be obtained adequately. Consequently,
material laws based on material data determined in experiments at lower strain rates
(up to 104 s−1) are used for simulations. These laws are extrapolated into the zone of
high strain rates without being veriﬁable. For this reason, the temperature values
measured at deﬁned points in the single grain scratching experiments were applied
to calibrate the FE model and thus to enhance the results’ accuracy.
60 µm
x105
Strain rate - Effective
((mm/mm)/sec)
1.0
0.5
0
-100
0
100
-20
0
20
40
Width x [µm]
Depth y [µm]
Grain
SEM picture
FEM body
Scratching process
Simulation
Experiment
Groove contour
Workpiece
Grain
vs
Fig. 4.8 FE simulation of the single grain scratching process
4
Energy model for grinding processes
43

The structure of the FE model and the simulation of the single grain engagement
was conducted by means of the software Deform 3D in cooperation with partners
from the subproject A01 and the Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and
Forming Technology (IWU) in Chemnitz. In this simulation, the geometry of an
actual abrasive grain was used, which was also applied to the single grain
scratching experiment mentioned before. The grain geometry was mapped by
means of three scanning electron microscope (SEM) images, captured from dif-
ferent perspectives, found by means of a triangulation technique in the form of a 3D
point cloud. Afterwards, this cloud was transferred into a Finite Element solid in
several steps (see Fig. 4.8).
In the simulation, the abrasive grain was used in the same orientation as in the
experimental studies and at an identical circumferential speed of vs = 10 m/s. The
Johnson-Cook material model was applied to the representation of the material
behaviour, whereby the material speciﬁc parameters were taken from literature (see
Fig. 4.9). When comparing the simulation outcomes with the experimental results,
the scratched groove contours were seen to strongly coincide (see Fig. 4.8, right
top). Minor deviations were found in the lower zone of the contour, resulting from
the transformation of the grain geometry and the simpliﬁcation of geometry per-
formed. Lesser differences at the contour’s boundary are due to errors from tactile
measurement of the scratching groove generated in experiment, and, in turn,
resulting from the geometry of the measuring needle used. However, the resultant
process forces are in simulation only about half of the force values measured in
experiments. In simulation, high strain rates of _e [ 105 s−1 can be determined (see
Fig. 4.8, middle top). When considering the material constants (see Fig. 4.9), it
becomes obvious that, in the case of the parameters used, the inﬂuence of the strain
rate (constant C) is small. This is one potential reason that the resultant force values
are too low. Consequently, the material constants applied to the Johnson-Cook
model, and further parameters with effects outside this material law in terms of the
scratching forces, such as the coefﬁcient of friction, have to be checked and adapted.
To do this, the results gained from investigations still to be carried out on a Split-
Hopkinson bar test bed will be referred to.
=
+
·
· 1 +
·
0
·
·
·
1 −
−
0
−
0
A (MPa)
B (MPa)
n
C
m
688.17
150.82
0.3362
0.04279
2.7786
Fig. 4.9 Johnson-Cook material law equation and constants for 100Cr6—AISI 52100 (Ramesh
and Melkote 2008)
44
M. Rasim et al.

4.3.3 Transferring the Energy Model onto the Multi Grain
Engagement
Having created the energy model for single grain engagement, this model has to be
transferred to multi grain engagement and thus also to the grinding process. For this
purpose, multi grain scratching experiments are conducted, following a strategy
analogous to those of the single grain scratch tests. Wheels equipped with several
abrasive grains are brought into engagement with the workpiece. In the process, the
forces that appear and the temperatures are recorded, and the energy is concluded
from the engagement geometry. The abrasive layer topography is represented by the
characterising parameters, identiﬁed during the single grain scratching experiments
and mapping the inﬂuence of the grain shape onto heat generation. These charac-
teristic parameters are an input variable for the energy model in the form of sta-
tistical frequency distributions for the abrasive layer topography used. The
inﬂuence of different distributions of the grains and the grain shape properties is
analysed by using different multi-grain scratching tools. Apart from the existing
abrasive layer topography, the geometric-kinematic process parameters determine
which zones of topography and thereby which grains engage with the workpiece.
Accordingly, the distribution of the grain shape’s characteristic parameters also
depends on the process parameters. To consider this relationship, the energy model
is connected with a grain engagement model (see Fig. 4.2). This model uses the
limiting angle of cutting edge offset εGrenz, representing the shadowing effect of the
single grains on one other as a function of the process parameters (Kassen 1969),
see (4.3).
tan eGrenz ¼ vw
vs
 2 
ae
ds

1
2
ð4:3Þ
vw
workpiece speed
ds
grinding wheel diameter
vs
grinding wheel circumferential speed
ae
infeed
The grain engagement model determines, based on εGrenz, the zones of the
existing abrasive layer topography that are engaged (see Fig. 4.10) (Duscha et al.
2009).
From these zones, the characterisation parameters, such as the contact surface in
tangential or normal direction, can be abstracted. Based on the outcomes of the
single grain scratch tests, the grain engagement model can be continuously
extended in order to obtain the relevant characteristic parameters of the abrasive
layer topography.
4
Energy model for grinding processes
45

4.4 Classiﬁcation of Outcomes in the CRC/TR 96
The metal removal process is a major source of heat in the machine tool. In
grinding, in particular, a vast amount of the mechanical energy introduced is
converted into heat due to the many abrasive grains interacting with the workpiece,
which are characterised by negative rake angles. According to that circumstance,
the energy model for the grinding process is a fundamental prerequisite for the real
process representation of the machine tool to be developed in the CRC/TR 96. Only
if the thermal energy generated by the grinding process is considered the com-
pensation solutions can be designed according to demand and the correction
solutions can be sufﬁciently validated.
4.5 Outlook
Modelling of the heat source in the grinding process as a function of the process
parameters is the basis for another issue in further research projects—modelling of
the heat dissipated in the components involved in grinding. For this task, the
paradigm of the inverse determination of heat ﬂuxes is to be applied, as it already
has been used in subproject B02. Based on the calculations of the heat sources
previously performed, temperatures are to be determined in experiment in a discrete
local and temporal resolution in order to draw conclusions about thermal conduc-
tion and thereby the heat ﬂuxes. The heat ﬂuxes, in turn, are signiﬁcant input
variables for the subprojects A01, A04 and B02 (see Chaps. 2, 4 and 11) in the
consideration of the cutting tools, ﬂuid systems, as well as the heat ﬂux across
machine components.
Flank face
Rake face
3D-view
Normal view
Tangential 
view
Workpiece
vw
vs
Grinding wheel
Fig. 4.10 Qualitative representation of the limiting angle of cutting edge offset and the surfaces
engaged during machining (Duscha et al. 2009)
46
M. Rasim et al.

References
Brinksmeier E (1982) Randzonenanalyse geschliffener Werkstücke. Dissertation, University of
Hannover
Brinksmeier E, Aurich CJ, Govekar E, Heinzel C, Hoffmeister H-W, Peters J, Rentsch R,
Stephenson DJ, Uhlmann E, Weinert K, Wittmann M (2006) Advances in modeling and
simulation of grinding processes. Ann CIRP 55(2): 667–696
Denkena B, Köhler J, Kästner J (2012) Chip formation in grinding: an experimental study. Prod
Eng 6(2):107–115
Duscha M, Klocke F, Wegner H, Gröning H (2009) Erfassung und Charakterisierung der
Schleifscheibentopographie für die anwendungsgerechte Prozessauslegung. Teil 2. Diam Bus
28(2):28–33
Kassen G (1969) Beschreibung der elementaren Kinematik des Schleifvorganges. Dissertation,
RWTH Aachen University
Klocke F, König W (2005) Fertigungsverfahren Band 2: Schleifen, Honen, Läppen. Springer,
Berlin
Malkin S, Guo C (2008) Grinding technology. Theory and applications of machining with
abrasives, 2nd edn. Industrial Press, New York
Marinescu ID (2004) Tribology of abrasive machining processes. Andrew, Norwich
Ramesh A, Melkote SN (2008) Modeling of white layer formation under thermally dominant
conditions in orthogonal machining of hardened AISI 52100 steel. J Mach Tools Manuf
48:402–414
Rasim M, Duscha M, Klocke F (2013) Innovative Versuchsmethodik zur Identiﬁkation der
thermischen & mechanischen Werkstoffbeanspruchung während der Spanbildungsphasen beim
Schleifen. In: Hoffmeister H-W, Denkena B (eds) Jahrbuch Schleifen, Honen, Läppen und
Polieren, vol 66. Vulkan, Essen, pp 2–19
Rasim M, Klocke F, Weiß M (2014) Identiﬁkation der Spanbildungsphasen beim Schleifen. In:
Neugebauer R, Drossel W-G (ed) Innovations of sustainable production for green mobility
energy-efﬁcient technologies in production part 1. 3rd international Chemnitz manufacturing
colloquium ICMC 2014 3rd international colloquium of the cluster of excellence eniPROD
reports from the IWU, vol 80, pp 813–831
Steffens K (1983) Thermomechanik des Schleifens. Dissertation, RWTH Aachen University
Tönshoff HK, Inasaki I, Paul T, Peters J (1992) Modelling and simulation of grinding processes.
Ann CIRP 41(2):677–688
Zäh MF, Föckerer T, Brinksmeier E, Heinzel C, Huntemann J-W (2009) Experimentelle und
numerische Bestimmung der Einhärtetiefe beim Schleifhärten. Einﬂüsse und Absicherung der
Wärmequellenmodellierung. wt Werkstattstechnik online 99(1–2):49–55
Zeppenfeld C (2005) Schnellhubschleifen von [gamma]-Titanaluminiden. Dissertation, RWTH
Aachen University
4
Energy model for grinding processes
47

Chapter 5
Thermo-energetic Modelling of Fluid
Power Systems
Juliane Weber and Jürgen Weber
Abstract The subproject A04 is concerned with the analysis of ﬂuidic overall
systems and components in machine tools are investigated. The target of the
research activities is the development and validation of calculation models that
represent the thermo-energetic behaviour of ﬂuid systems. Based on experiments
carried out on an overall system, it is possible to identify the key ﬂuid power
components and abstract fundamental statements about their working structure and
functionality. The outcomes of these investigations form the basis for the engi-
neering of appropriate calculation models. This paper explains the methodological
approach in detail. The initial outcomes of the experimental analysis of a milling
centre are introduced. Four essential ﬂuidic subsystems are identiﬁed and investi-
gated. The work or motor spindle is regarded as a relevant key component in ﬂuidic
tempering systems. The calculation models and simulation results, as well as the
experimental studies to validate the models, are introduced speciﬁcally for the stator
cooling unit of a motor spindle.
5.1 Introduction
In machine tools, a huge variety of ﬂuidic components and systems is used—these
include, for instance, pumps, heat exchangers or cooling components in motors and
work spindles. While the drive tasks for feed motions and tool or part clamping are
receding further and further into the background (Kuttkat 2011; Kraus 2012),
tempering of the machine tool is becoming more and more important. Fluid power
systems can be used to cool or preheat both individual components and entire
J. Weber (&)  J. Weber
Faculty of Mechanical Science and Engineering, Institute of Fluid Power,
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: juweber@ifd.mw.tu-dresden.de
J. Weber
e-mail: weber@ifd.mw.tu-dresden.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_5
49

assemblies (e.g. frame structures) and signiﬁcantly affect the thermo-elastic char-
acteristics of machine tools.
However, increasing complexity and performance of the ﬂuid power systems
also results in an increase in energy consumption (Denkena 2011), which has to be
discussed from economic and ecological perspectives. Up to now, the optimisation
problem arising from additional energy demand, on the one hand, and thermal
characteristics, on the other hand, could not be solved sufﬁciently due to the
complex system structures, absence of fundamental research and design tools.
The target of research in subproject A04 is the engineering of thermo-energetic
calculation models of ﬂuidic tempering systems in machine tools. Following a
holistic approach, fundamentals of modelling and calculation methods for a sci-
entiﬁcally justiﬁed interpretation, with a particular focus on optimal thermal
behaviour with minimal use of auxiliary energy, are provided. The system
boundaries are deﬁned by the surrounding component wall or the exit plane of the
ﬂuid into the environment. Since machine tools for metal cutting are extremely
precise, high accuracy is also necessary for the thermo-energetic calculation of the
ﬂuidic systems in order to be able to represent the three-dimensional energy
exchange operations that cross the boundaries of a component.
Consequently, the reﬁnement of network-based simulation models (Gebert 1997;
Bossmanns 1999; Chien 2008) is a main issue of research.
5.2 Approach
The approach is subdivided into four subdomains altogether, as shown in Fig. 5.1.
In the ﬁrst step, the ﬂuid power systems are studied directly on the machine tool in
experiments. The goal is to provide basic statements on the working structure and
modes of operation have to be elaborated. Based on these outcomes, in a second
step, the key components to be studied in experiments have to be chosen and
analysed on suitable test stands. These experimental investigations—both of the
system as a whole and of the key components—are an important precondition for
modelling. Relevant characteristic variables and parameters to be used for the
calculation models can be extracted from the measured data. The development of
thermo-energetic component models starts with the analysis of available simulation
tools as well as the identiﬁcation of the speciﬁc modelling requirements. After-
wards, in step three, comprehensive numerical simulations (esp. CFD simulations)
are conducted. Using these analyses, it is possible to visualise the thermo-energetic
exchange processes in high resolution both temporally and spatially. They are used
as a tool to abstract structures and parameters for engineering of component-based
node models. Furthermore, the analyses can be employed—apart from the mea-
sured data—as an additional reference for comparison. Unlike numerical CFD
models, lumped parameter models allow for quicker calculation with the same or
possibly even less calculation power. Consequently, the latter are extremely well
suited to represent entire system structures by combining individual component
50
J. Weber and J. Weber

models with one another. Thus it is possible to represent the emerging physical
relationships and interactions among the components at the system level. Finally,
the system behaviour is repeatedly validated by experiments in order to check the
extent to which the new component models inside a system model are suitable for
precise calculation and ensure that an impermissible number of errors do not occur.
5.3 Results
5.3.1 Complete Machine Analysis of a Milling Centre
Figure 5.2 shows the investigated ﬂuid systems of the demonstrator machine with
the related key components. The machine is equipped with ﬁve separately driven
axes (X-, Y-, Z-, B- and U axes). The headstock (2) can be traversed in Y direction,
and the column (1) can be traversed in X direction by means of the driving motors
(8) and (9). Rotation (B axis) and horizontal longitudinal motion of the table (4) in
Z direction are made possible by another two servo motors. An additional servo
motor moves the radial facing slide (U axis, not explicitly illustrated in Fig. 5.2).
Altogether, four ﬂuid systems have to be investigated in detail according to their
speciﬁc function: The cooling lubricant system, the cooling circuit, the lubrication
circuit and the hydraulic system. All of the pumps in the ﬂuid systems are driven by
asynchronous motors (three-phase current of 400 V and 50 Hz).
Fig. 5.1 Overview of methodology
5
Thermo-energetic Modelling of Fluid Power Systems
51

In the cooling lubricant system, two submerged pumps (12) supply (feed) the
metalworking ﬂuid to the machining zone. This is necessary in order to reduce
friction between workpiece and tool and thus to diminish heat generation, as well as
to guarantee heat and chip removal out of the machining zone. The high pressure
pump is used for internal coolant supply through the tool (19). To avoid contam-
ination, a ﬁlter element (14) is integrated here. Furthermore, the circuit is pre-
stressed to a pressure of 1 bar by means of the check valve (16). The low pressure
pump is designed for ﬂushing (17) of the machining zone and external coolant
supply (18). The contaminated ﬂuid is fed into a drip container by means of a chip
conveyor. In the next step, the contaminated ﬂuid is recycled by ﬂushing it onto a
belt ﬁlter (15) by a centrifugal pump (11) and thus separating it from the chips.
The hydraulic system is used for the clamping of tool (28) and rotary table (4), as
well as to actuate the retaining brake (29) of the headstock. A ﬁxed displacement
pump (24) is integrated in the hydraulic unit. The individual components can be
clamped or unclamped by pressurization of each feeding line by means of direc-
tional control valves. The current states of each component are supervised by means
of additional pressure switches.
Fig. 5.2 Simpliﬁed representation of the relevant ﬂuid power systems in the machine tool
investigated (Weber 2014)
52
J. Weber and J. Weber

In the cooling circuit, a ﬁxed displacement pump (20) is used as drive. To cool
the ﬂuid to a predeﬁned initial temperature, a heat exchanger is additionally inte-
grated into the circuit. For use as an antifreeze, as well as to avoid corrosion and
furring, a mix of water and max. 20 % Antifrogen® N is used as ﬂuid. The work
spindle drive (7), rotary table (4), and the electrical cabinet (6) have to be cooled.
To estimate the power consumed by the machine tool’s ﬂuid systems, it is
necessary to distinguish different operation states. They can be classiﬁed into
machining times and auxiliary times according to Götze (2010). Four operation
states in terms of machine use were abstracted for the investigations conducted
here:
• Warm-up phase (commissioning of the machine and data capturing until a
quasi-stationary state of the ﬂuid systems has been established),
• Setup mode (tool/part change and CNC programming),
• Manufacturing process (layer-by-layer plane milling using two different cutting
tools),
• Idle run (variation of spindle speed, cooling lubricant (CL) supply and axis
position).
Power values were captured for the different operation states of the milling
machine in order to estimate energy requirement (power consumption). Figure 5.3
shows the required power as determined from the measured data over a deﬁned test
cycle in idle run mode, which was explained in detail in Weber (2014). For this test
cycle, lasting as a whole t = 275 s, an overall (electrical) power consumption of
approximately 3,300 kJ was measured. The largest percentage of the energy con-
sumption, about 45 %, emerges when driving the axes. The ﬂuidic systems demand
Fig. 5.3 Power consumption of the studied subsystems and components in idle run (test cycle
lasting t = 275 s)
5
Thermo-energetic Modelling of Fluid Power Systems
53

an overall ratio of approximately 44 %. The remaining 11 % is required for aux-
iliary consumers, such as CNC, lightening and pneumatic systems. The cooling
lubricant system, demanding approximately 16 % of the consumed power, repre-
sents the maximal percentage among the ﬂuid systems. Power consumption of the
cooling system is approximately 12 % and corresponds roughly with the percentage
consumed by the lubrication system. The least amount of power is consumed by
the hydraulic clamping system with approximately 4 %.
Figure 5.4 illustrates the energy ﬂow for the cooling circuit, determined from the
measured temperature, pressure and volumetric ﬂow values. Energy ﬂow can be
differentiated into static, dynamic and thermal energy in the cooling agent. Thermal
energy is calculated using a reference level of Tref = 24 °C (as a rule, it corresponds
Fig. 5.4 Cooling circuit in idle run mode. a Simpliﬁed circuit diagram, b ﬂuid temperature curve
T1 (immediately behind the cooling pump) and T7 (immediately behind the heat exchanger),
electrical power characteristics Pel of the heat exchanger, c Sankey diagram for the inactive phase
of the heat exchanger, d Sankey diagram for the active phase of the heat exchanger (Weber 2014)
54
J. Weber and J. Weber

to the ambient temperature). Concerning the operation mode of the heat exchanger
in the cooling system (two-position controller), in turn, two different phases have to
be distinguished (illustrated in Fig. 5.4b). During the ﬁrst phase, the heat exchanger
is switched off, and the cooling agent bypassing it warms up. As soon as a deﬁned
maximal temperature has been achieved, the heat exchanger in the second phase is
switched on. This switch-on phase lasts until the ﬂuid has reached a deﬁned lower
temperature limit. For the analysis of energy ﬂux, it is sufﬁcient to consider the
steady state of each phase, which means the temperature changes have to be con-
stant. As the energy ﬂux diagram shows, the ﬂuid cools down in the inactive phase
of the heat exchanger (Fig. 5.4c) in the electrical cabinet (E) and the rotary table
(R). Fluid is only warmed up in the spindle (S), or, in other words, only the spindle
is cooled during the inactive phase of the heat exchanger. The ﬂuid is cold enough
to cool even the electrical cabinet and the rotary table only in the active phase
(Fig. 5.4d). As can be seen in the two energy ﬂux diagrams, the largest amount of
heat is entered into the cooling circuit through the work spindle. For this reason, the
work spindle is a relevant main component that has to be explored in detail.
Table 5.1 summarises the share of the energy consumed that relates to each
position for the Sankey diagrams shown in Fig. 5.4. The different shares of the
energy usage are calculated according to the equations listed in Fig. 5.4 for each
operation phase. It can be seen that share of energy consumed as thermal energy
is higher by many orders of magnitude than that of the static or dynamic energy.
Consequently it makes sense to further analyse the thermal effect in detail
separately.
Table 5.1 Share of energy consumed (static energy Ep, dynamic energy Edyn, thermal energy Eth)
according to the positions enumerated in Fig. 5.4
1
78.0
1.04
6,701
2
71.0
0.79
6,115
3a
23.4
0.03
2,010
3b
6.4
0.03
1,957
4a
23.4
0.03
2,034
4b
6.4
0.03
1,810
5a
24.4
0.03
2,071
5b
6.7
0.03
2,311
6
19.5
1.04
6,078
7
14.3
1.04
6,828
Ep (kJ)
E kin (kJ)
Eth.I (kJ)
(cf. Fig. 5.4c)
Energy
Position
5
Thermo-energetic Modelling of Fluid Power Systems
55

5.3.2 Experimental Component Analysis of the Motor
Spindle Cooling Sleeve
In the subproject, a test bed was developed (Fig. 5.5) that made it possible to
capture the ﬂuid and solid temperatures in the stator cooling sleeve under deﬁned
boundary conditions and to process them using a computer. At the same time, the
pressure at the entry and exit, as well as volumetric ﬂow, can be measured. Thanks
to the modular test bed structure, it is possible to exchange the cooling sleeve easily
and thereby investigate different ﬂow geometries in detail. The stator was replaced
with two heating cartridges that were centrically inserted into an aluminium cyl-
inder (the so-called heating element). Energy is input by means of two heating
cartridges whose temperature or power can be controlled autonomously. Temper-
ature is captured points-wise not only in the ﬂuid, but also on the internal wall of
the cooling sleeve and the housing surface. For this strategy, thermocouples are
placed on the corresponding components in axial direction with deﬁned distances.
Variable parameters are the heat amount entered, volumetric ﬂow and the com-
position of the cooling liquid. Additionally, a thermographic camera is used for
areal capturing of temperature and characterisation of the temperature distributions
on the housing surface.
The ﬁrst tests were conducted using water as the cooling agent. A constant entry
temperature of 20 °C can be adjusted by means of a temperature sensor integrated
into the cooling unit. For ﬂuid temperature measurement, the thermocouples were
electrically insulated with a thin lacquer layer and each was attached to a PVC
screw. If these are screwed into the housing, the test probe protrudes into the ﬂuid
ﬂow in the helical channel, and the ﬂuid temperature can be captured. Thermo-
couples of the T type, whose measuring uncertainty is ±0.5 K due to the class 1
calibration conducted, are employed as temperature sensors. A turbine ﬂow sensor
of ±0.5 %FS (full scale) accuracy is used to record the volumetric ﬂow. The
pressure in forward and return ﬂows is also measured. Accuracy of the installed
pressure-measuring transducer is inside ±0.123 %FS. All signals are captured by
means of an M series’ NI multifunctional board and processed.
throttle valve
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2
3
connection to chiller
8
9
8
9
temperature sensor
(control of the hc)
heating cartridge
(hc)
end face isolation
housing with
temperatur sensors
heating element
connection block with
• pressure sensors
• temperature sensors
• flow volume sensor
(in the return flow)
stator cooling sleeve
peripheral seal
)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Fig. 5.5 Test bed CAD model (left) and practice implementation (right)
56
J. Weber and J. Weber

5.3.3 Simulation Model for the Calculation of the Motor
Spindle Cooling Sleeve
Simulation models with lumped parameters are mainly characterized by compre-
hensive interfaces with external CAx and database programs, short calculation times
and, as a result, cost savings. As can be seen in Fig. 5.6, the node model of the motor
spindle cooling system consists of individual units describing the physical rela-
tionships of the system model. The potentials required for calculation are transmitted
via connections between the individual units. The complete model is composed
of individual simple partial elements whose characteristics can be described by
equations established in thermodynamics and ﬂuid technology (Sigloch 2009;
VDI 2006; Schmidt 1967; Hak 1956).
Warming of the ﬂuid along the spindle axis is illustrated for different volumetric
ﬂows or different heating element temperatures in Fig. 5.7. Here, the numerical and
network-based simulation results, as well as the temperature values in the ﬂuid
found in experiments, are compared. As expected, ﬂuid temperature decreases as
volumetric ﬂow increases or heating element temperature decreases. The maximal
temperature in the exit zone is achieved due to continuous heat absorption by the
ﬂuid along the spindle axis. As can be seen, for the onefold helical stator cooling
sleeve, the node model developed already corresponds closely to the numerical
simulation and the data obtained in experiments. Here, the two upper diagrams
indicate the relative deviation between the node model (SimX) and the numerical
simulation (CFD) or the experiment (Exp.). In comparison with the values deter-
mined in experiments, the deviation is maximal 2.4 % (Fig. 5.7a) or 2.8 %
(Fig. 5.7b).
Fig. 5.6 Node model of the onefold helical stator cooling socket in the simulation ambient ITI
SimulationX (abbrev. SimX), according to Weber (2013)
5
Thermo-energetic Modelling of Fluid Power Systems
57

5.4 Classiﬁcation of Outcomes CRC/TR 96
In high speed milling, above all, thermal strains resulting from heat entry have a
signiﬁcant effect on manufacturing accuracy and production quality. Hence targeted
control of the temperature distribution—most of all in the spindle—is the main
precondition for highly precise machining. In subproject A04, a lumped parameter
model describing the heating and ﬂow processes emerging in a high speed spindle
has been developed. With this model, it is possible to characterise the forced
convection in the cooling water in detail, as well as to achieve an enhanced pre-
diction of temperature distribution and an increase in manufacturing accuracy. In
comparison with a model using distributed parameters (CFD), the lumped param-
eter model also beneﬁts from less effort in modelling and shorter calculation times.
The combination of individual component-based network models also makes it
possible to represent entire system structures (such as the whole cooling circuit).
The resulting network-based calculation models for typical cooling circuits can
be integrated into the complete model of the virtual machine tool, which is under
development in subproject A05. The model makes it possible to compute ﬂows,
pressure drops and heat transfers in the circuits. Thus, it is possible to make
available information about the thermal characteristics and heat entry into the
machine structure or the active mechanical components for subproject B01 and
subproject B03. Predictions of the ﬂuid systems’ cooling performance in motor
Fig. 5.7 Simulation outcomes for ﬂuid warming along the spindle axis; a for a constant heating
element temperature TH = 40 °C at different volumetric ﬂows; b for a constant volumetric ﬂow
_V = 5 l/min at different heating element temperatures
58
J. Weber and J. Weber

spindles contribute to subproject C04 during motor modelling and optimisation.
The numerical CFD models were also analysed and evaluated in cooperation with
the subproject A07.
References
Götze U et al (2010) Energetische Bilanzierung und Bewertung von Werkzeugmaschinen. In: 1.
Internationales Kolloquium des Spitzentechnologieclusters eniPROD, Chemnitz, pp 157–184,
24–25 June 2010
Bossmanns B, Tu JF (1999) A thermal model for high speed motorized spindles. Int J Mach Tools
Manuf 39(9):1345–1366
Chien CH, Jang JY (2008) 3-D numerical and experimental analysis of a built-in motorized high-
speed spindle with helical water cooling. Appl Therm Eng 28(17–18):2327–2336
Denkena B et al (2011) Efﬁziente Fluidtechnik für Werkzeugmaschinen. Werkstatttechnik online
101(5):347–352
Gebert K (1997) Ein Beitrag zur thermischen Modellbildung von schnelldrehenden Motorspin-
deln. TU Darmstadt, Shaker Verlag, Aachen
Hak J (1956) Lösung eines Wärmequellen-Netzes mit Berücksichtigung der Kühlströme. Archiv
für Elektrotechnik 42(3):137–154
Kraus J (2012) Hydraulik fordert Elektromechanik in der Energieefﬁzienz heraus. Maschinenmarkt
(5):32–35
Kuttkat B (2011) Elektromechanische Spannmittel verdrängen energiefressende Fluidik. Maschi-
nenmarkt 3:24–25
Schmidt EF (1967) Wärmeübergang und Druckverlust in Rohrschlangen. Zeitschrift für
Technische Chemie, Verfahrenstechnik und Apparatewesen 39(13):781–832
Sigloch H (2009) Technische Fluidmechanik. Springer, Berlin
VDI (ed) (2006) VDI-Wärmeatlas. Berechnungsunterlagen für Druckverlust, Wärme- und
Stoffübertragung. Springer, Berlin
Weber J, Weber J (2013) Thermo-energetic analysis and simulation of the ﬂuidic cooling system
of motorized high-speed spindles. In: 13th Scandinavian international conference on ﬂuid
power, Linköping, Sweden, 3–5 June 2013
Weber J, Weber J (2014) Thermo-energetic analysis of the ﬂuidic cooling systems in tooling
machines. In: 9th international ﬂuid power conference, Aachen, 24–26 Mar 2014
5
Thermo-energetic Modelling of Fluid Power Systems
59

Chapter 6
Simulation of Pose- and
Process-Dependent Machine Tool Models
Marian Partzsch and Michael Beitelschmidt
Abstract Within the CRC/TR 96, when calculating the thermal behaviour of
machine tools, the consideration of the structural variability of machine tools is an
approach to enhance the representational quality of the associated simulation
models. A potential solution, which uses embedding moving model elements in
sequential thermo-elastic analyses using discrete moving loads, is described in the
following. The method is implemented in the proprietary FE software ANSYS.
Based on selected theoretical fundamentals, embedding of motion is outlined in
detail, focussing on an efﬁcient use of the modelling tools made available by
ANSYS. Various non-trivial special features that may hinder a successful simulation
are highlighted. Measures to avoid these problems are described. Finally the
inﬂuence of the method on the simulation results is described using the example of
experiments carried out in an application.
6.1 Introduction
A central objective in research is the in-process overall system simulation of the
machine tool and test setups investigated in the CRC/TR 96 by means of pro-
prietary FE software. For simulation, the ANSYS-Mechanical software package
(currently v14.5, issued 27 Feb 2014), which is widely used and tested, is
employed. Choosing this system and limiting it to exclusively program-internal
functions are measures aimed at ensuring the simple application of the research
results by third parties.
M. Partzsch (&)  M. Beitelschmidt
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Institute for Solid Mechanics (IFKM),
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: marian.partzsch@tu-dresden.de
M. Beitelschmidt
e-mail: michael.beitelschmidt@tu-dresden.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_6
61

Based on the requirement for in-process-suitability, another goal is to consider in
the model the structural variabilities relevant for machine tools. For this reason,
initial investigations deal with the methodology of embedding moving model ele-
ments in ANSYS in general. The following explanations describe the chosen
methodology and the outcomes obtained. First, how to choose the fundamental
analysis type is shown.
For the calculation of the thermo-elastic system behaviour, ANSYS provides
several coupled-ﬁeld elements (such as SOLID226) that enable strong coupling of
the thermal and structural engineering ﬁeld problems. To bypass the substantial
effort required to resolve the systems by means of asymmetric matrices, a sequential
analysis of the thermo-elastic problem is instead conducted (see Fig. 6.1). First, the
exclusively thermal ﬁeld is calculated in-process including the kinematics. With the
thermal loads obtained this way, the resultant displacement of the structure due to
temperature is subsequently determined at discrete points in time. In this process,
the inﬂuence of the structural changes on the thermal ﬁeld via the effects of piezo-
caloric damping or very large deformations is ignored. This simpliﬁcation is a
reliable assumption for the investigated systems due to the different time constants
of the two ﬁelds. In the analysis type selected, the exclusive integration of the
structural variabilities into the thermal part of the analysis also avoids contact-
induced convergence problems, since no unknown structural deformations are
generated.
The intrinsic coupling of the ﬁelds in ANSYS is a standard function in terms of
FE technology and thus is not described here. Moreover, structure variability does
not affect it, so the problem can be limited to embedding of motions in purely
thermal simulations.
6.2 Approach to Mapping of Structural Variability
To implement structural variability in thermal analyses, the functions available in
ANSYS are combined. Table 6.1 shows which main platforms of the software
package are employed in the individual analysis sections, and which work steps are
thus particularly supported.
Fig. 6.1 Theory of coupled and sequential analysis for discrete thermo-elastic ﬁeld problems
(common nomenclature)
62
M. Partzsch and M. Beitelschmidt

This methodology is also useful because in the ANSYS-Workbench, which is
similar to a CAD program, it is possible to approach the structure of the existing
problem
more
heuristically.
Subsequent
processing
in
ANSYS-Classic—as
explained in detail below—is necessary for analyses of variable structures, on the
one hand. On the other hand, it simultaneously enables the execution of exact
and reproducible simulations due to the implementation and application of APDL
scripts.
6.2.1 General Strategy to Represent Discrete Motions
As illustrated in Fig. 6.2, a moving body is embedded during a transient analysis by
discrete rigid body displacement via adaptation of the corresponding Boundary
condition (BC) at the structural degrees of freedom (DoF) u. Their necessary
existence during simulation compels meshing of the moving assemblies with
coupled-ﬁeld elements even in exclusively thermal analyses, whereby the ﬁeld
coupling is suppressed by a thermal coefﬁcient of expansion equal to zero.
The aim of the investigations was to integrate the physical interaction of sta-
tionary and moving assemblies into simulation. Since deﬁned translational kine-
matic proﬁles are mapped, the instantaneous model structure is known at all points
during the analysis, so that the heat ﬂux caused by friction _qfric can be manually
applied as the NEUMANN-BC to the contact zone. Apart from this, the model
structure is identiﬁed automatically [Pinball algorithm, see Rust (2011)] by means
of the element technology oriented to contact mechanics (such as CONTA174),
which later deﬁnes the heat ﬂux1 _qcond exchanged by conduction by means of the
temperature conditions appearing in the contact zone.
After the solids involved in the contact are loaded with the additionally over-
lapping contact boundary, they are subsequently evaluated as separate thermal
marginal value problems. The requirement that the solution at Δt →0 must con-
verge to the case of a continuous motion is fulﬁlled by this method.
Table 6.1 Supported functions of ANSYS Mechanical Capabilities
ANSYS workbench
ANSYS classic
Analysis section
Pre-processing
Solution
Post-processing
Facilitated work steps
Simpliﬁcation of geometry
Deﬁnition of constraints
Mesh control/meshing
Control of analysis
Memory and administration of results
1 Corresponds to an individual ROBIN-BC resulting from the surface temperatures involved and
the heat transfer coefﬁcient in contact of aTCC where _qcond ¼ aTCC TC  TT
ð
Þ.
6
Simulation of Pose- and Process-Dependent Machine Tool Models
63

6.2.2 Motion in FE Models—Selected Aspects
The consideration of structural variability must already been taken into account for
the modelling process. Thereby the main focus in adapting the pre-processing is on
regular meshing of the rail regions that are in contact in the direction of movement.
Tetrahedron elements have to be avoided since they result in considerable
numerically caused discontinuities in the temperature ﬁeld that appears, particularly
when large time intervals are chosen. Instead, it is recommended to mesh the rails
by means of the Sweep-method using hexahedrons to allow for a homogeneous rail
load orthogonal to the direction of movement.
Figure 6.3 left depicts the execution of this methodology by means of the proﬁle
rail guidance investigated in (Haber and Partzsch 2013). The mesh control is mainly
conducted through meshing of the basic area and should be performed according to
the physical requirements of the system to be simulated. For the case under con-
sideration, this is expressed by a very ﬁne meshing of the thermally active contact
regions, meaning the positions where the rolling elements roll along the rail.
As a rule, it is not possible to design the overall FE model in a way that a Sweep
meshing can be carried out throughout the geometry. This case, as well as the
measures recommended as remedies, can be seen in Fig. 6.3, right. Figure 6.3
Fig. 6.2 Motion in numerical analyses—left schematic illustration of applied theory [from Haber
and Partzsch (2013)]—right discrete adjustment of displacement for load steps L1 to L4 (Partzsch
and Beitelschmidt 2014)
Fig. 6.3 Meshing in FE modeling with structural variability—left proﬁle rail guidance (Haber and
Partzsch 2013)—right column assembly
64
M. Partzsch and M. Beitelschmidt

outlines an example of an FE model of variable structure—the column assembly
(see Chap. 1), which has already been explored repeatedly. For this example, in the
ANSYS DesignModeler, each of the two assemblies was separated into a sweep-able
body and a body that could be freely meshed. Afterwards, their associated FE
models can be unproblematically recombined into a thermal unit via a bonded
contact.
At present, the Coupled-Field elements required for the motion are only avail-
able in ANSYS Classic, so that it is still impossible to completely process items with
structural variability in the ANSYS Workbench. That means that the change of the
platform that is performed after meshing, has even until now been constrained by
the limitations of the software. As previously mentioned in Table 6.1, in this way,
among others, the deﬁnition of the motion-dependent boundary conditions can be
handled more beneﬁcially.
The contact friction, which, in the case of a purely thermal analysis, is inter-
preted as the NEUMANN-BC _qfric on the covered rail surfaces (compare Fig. 6.2),
is in many simulations an extremely dominant heat source in the systems with
structural variability considered here. Their correct mapping is of crucial impor-
tance for the quality of the overall analysis. When positioning the moving assembly
arbitrarily in the current load step, in general, there are element layers of the
stationary assembly under their ends in the direction of movement, which are only
partially covered (see Fig. 6.4). For these layers, heat ﬂux has to be modiﬁed
according to the overlap per linear scaling. The following heat ﬂuxes _qi are yielded
for a body of length lx moved in parallel to the x axis with the current rigid body
displacement dx for the geometric position data from Fig. 6.4 for the covered
element layers i ¼ 1. . .n:
_q1 ¼ x2  dx
x2  x1
_qfric
_q2...n1 ¼ _qfric
_qn ¼ dx þ lx  xn
xnþ1  xn
_qfric
ð6:1Þ
The necessity of this correction does not depend on the time increment; it is also
applicable for analyses close to time convergence. Consequently, it is necessary to
take it into account for the analysis method in terms of structural variability.2
Fig. 6.4 Deﬁnition of frictional heat ﬂux on spatially discretised stationary body
2 Disregarding the incorrect heat ﬂux densities in the event that they are not corrected is only
conceivable for rail models of high mesh density (h-convergency).
6
Simulation of Pose- and Process-Dependent Machine Tool Models
65

6.3 Results
6.3.1 Example of Proﬁle Rail Guidance
Since the intrinsic results of the methodological explorations have already been
explained in the preceding section, here their application should be elucidated using
a concrete example. Thus it is to be shown how the motion really impacts the
resultant temperature ﬁeld.
Heat build-up due to friction in a proﬁle rail guidance is investigated. The data
for model adjustment and validation were captured in an experiment in the sub-
project B03 (see Haber and Partzsch 2013). The corresponding FE model was
created by means of standardised strategies in thermal analyses and has already
been demonstrated (in Fig. 6.3, left).
Figure 6.5 left indicates the measurement and simulation results at two mea-
surement points on the rail for the ﬁrst 600 s of rail heating due to operation. The
carriage moves back and forth at a constant velocity of 20 m/min between the end
points of a rail section of 540 mm length. Model adjustment, particularly quanti-
ﬁcation of BC’s, such as moving friction and thermal conduction to the coupling
structures, was conducted by means of measurement values for heat build-up over
the longer term. The temperature curves as a function of time (see Fig. 6.5) conﬁrm
that the model maps the heat build-up on the rail with sufﬁcient accuracy.
In the measurement, the two heating curves shown start with a visible difference,
which remains nearly constant during the operation. It is impossible to meaning-
fully integrate this offset into the simulation.
The real effects on the heat build-up of the structural variability considered here,
that is, the oscillation of the rail temperature caused by motion as can be seen in
detail in Fig. 6.5 right, is of primary interest indeed. It can be clearly observed that
the temperature rises as the carriage passes and then drops down again due to
subsequent thermal conduction into the body’s interior. Since the heating at ﬁrst is
Fig. 6.5 Progress of rail temperature in measurement and simulation—overall period (left) and
detail (right)
66
M. Partzsch and M. Beitelschmidt

greater than the subsequent drop, the system sustains lasting heat, as can be
observed in Fig. 6.5, left. The maximal deviations from the assumed average
temperature, which result from the motion, are ≈0.01 K and thus very low.
When considering the results, it can be stated that it is not reasonable to consider
the motion by the introduced method for the example given. For a model with
20,000 nodes, the comprehensive calculations (1,600 load steps) are not justiﬁed
given the resulting reﬁnement in the accuracy that can be achieved. Consequently,
for the simulation of actual existing systems with friction loads on a similar order of
magnitude, in which mainly the long-term heat build-up is of interest, it is pref-
erable to apply load deﬁnition methods that permit a more efﬁcient utilisation of
large-scale thermal time constants. In an initial approach, it is conceivable, for
instance, to use constant friction loads along the overall rail whose height values are
provided in proportion to each coverage time per moving period.
A useful application is also conceivable for problems with higher loads and
materials with a higher thermal diffusivity. However, in future, the primary use is
expected for the reference calculation within the scope of numerical experiments,
using models of variable structure, since the method can provide very accurate and
reliable solutions for unambiguously deﬁned problems.
6.4 Classiﬁcation in the CRC/TR 96
As mentioned in Sect. 6.3, at present, the method developed is applied to numer-
ically represent the thermal behaviour of the proﬁle rail guidance [see Haber and
Partzsch (2013)].
In addition, in the subprojects A07 [see Chap. 9, (Naumann and Wensch 2013)—
Defect Corrected Averaging] and A06 [see Chap. 8, (Benner et al. 2013)—Para-
metric MOR], as well as in the subproject A05 [see Chap. 7, (Galant 2012)—Ordinary
MOR on Systems with Structural Variabilities], some methods at a higher level of
mathematical abstraction, which ought to take into account the structural variabilities
in numerical analyses with signiﬁcantly less effort, have been engineered. For
their validation, the rather intuitive approach introduced here and its implementation
using the trustworthy software ANSYS should provide reliable reference results for
different case studies.
6.5 Outlook
Current studies work to reﬁne the technique described here to enhance its efﬁciency
despite the limited range of its application. For this purpose, methods that correct
the negative inﬂuence of large time intervals on the accuracy of the results are being
engineered. The ﬁrst of these correction methods is described in detail in Partzsch
and Beitelschmidt (2014) and counteracts the unavoidable non-uniform distribution
6
Simulation of Pose- and Process-Dependent Machine Tool Models
67

of introduced coupling heat, which distinctly affects the result quality in case of
large time intervals. Further studies will clarify how a more infrequent updating
of the conductive exchange heat affects the results.
In parallel, in continuation of the approaches in Haber and Partzsch (2013)
(SOLID structures in relative mutual motion) and Beisitzer and Beitelschmidt
(2012) (detailed mapping of the rolling elements by means of LINK elements),
future works are dedicated to making possible the intrinsic mapping of the coupling
assemblies in FE models with different levels of detail.
References
Beisitzer S, Beitelschmidt M (2012) Fallstudien zur thermischen Simulation von bewegten,
proﬁlschienengeführten Baugruppen. Paper presented at the ANSYS conference and 30th
CADFEM user’s meeting 2012, Kassel, 24–26 Oct 2012
Benner P, Lang N, Saak J (2013) Modeling structural variability in reduced order models of
machine tool assembly groups via parametric MOR. PAMM 13:481–482
Galant A (2012) Efﬁziente Simulation thermo-elastischer Verformungen an Werkzeugmaschinen
mit ordnungsreduzierten Modellen bei Berücksichtigung großer Relativbewegungen. Paper
presented at the ANSYS conference and 30th CADFEM user’s meeting 2012, Kassel, 24–26
Oct 2012
Haber D, Partzsch M (2013) Reib- und Temperaturverhalten von Proﬁlschienenführungen in
Experiment und Simulation. Paper presented at the 3rd SFB/TR96-colloquium ”Experimentelle
Methodik“, Aachen, 29–30 Oct 2013
Naumann A, Wensch J (2013) Defect corrected averaging for parabolic PDEs. PAMM
13:509–510
Partzsch M, Beitelschmidt M (2014) An arithmetic correction for avoiding non-uniform heat input
distribution caused by translational motions within time-discrete thermal analyses. Proceedings
of the ASME 2014 12th biennial conference on engineering systems design and analysis
Rust W (2011) Nichtlineare Finite-Elemente-Berechnungen: Kontakt, Geometrie, Material, 2edn.
Vieweg+Teubner, Wiesbaden
68
M. Partzsch and M. Beitelschmidt

Chapter 7
Thermo-Elastic Simulation of Entire
Machine Tool
Alexander Galant, Knut Großmann and Andreas Mühl
Abstract This paper presents an integrated approach to simulate the thermo-elastic
behaviour of machine tools—from the CAD geometry data to FE modelling up to
the thermo-elastic network model of variable structure that can be run in real time
mode. The ﬁrst part outlines the theoretical aspects of the methodology developed,
whereas the second part demonstrates implementation in practice by means of
concrete examples.
7.1 Introduction
Thermo-elastic models that can be simulated for the overall system consisting of
machine tool, process and environment are required for the design of compensation
solutions, the evaluation of thermo-elastic behaviour and the correction of thermo-
elastic errors during machine tool operation.
If it is important for the evaluation of the targeted design of the thermo-elastic
behaviour in the design-oriented development phases to be carried out without real-
time requirements to be fulﬁlled by the calculation algorithm, then the modelling,
simulation and evaluation process can completely be executed at the FE system
level. This approach is shown in the Chap. 6 in the same Lecture Notes.
Minimisation of calculation time is a key requirement for a quick analysis of a
wide spectrum of thermal loads and boundary conditions and the correction of
thermo-elastic errors during machine tool operation. Network-based modelling
A. Galant (&)  K. Großmann  A. Mühl
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Institute for Machine Tools and Control Engineering,
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: Alexander.galant@tu-dresden.de
K. Großmann
e-mail: knut.grossmann@tu-dresden.de
A. Mühl
e-mail: andreas.muehl@tu-dresden.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_7
69

provides a solution: FE modelled machine tool (MT) assemblies without inner
relative motions are transformed into compact objects by using model order
reduction (MOR) method and are linked into a network model in a form of
SIMULINK block diagram.
7.2 Approach
In purely thermo-elastic calculations, it is only necessary to take into account the
static deformation effects, since the natural frequencies of the structural dynamics,
which are signiﬁcantly higher, are—as a rule—not excited by relatively slow
thermal processes. For this reason, the so-called integration strategy of weak cou-
pling is employed (Groth and Müller 2009; ANSYS 2014): in a ﬁrst step, the
temperature vector {T} is determined by means of numerical integration. In a
second step, the problem of calculating the deformation vector {x} = f({T}) is
solved as a quasi-static one on a possibly much rougher time scale.
This methodology makes it possible to divide the overall thermo-elastic problem
into thermal transient and mechanical quasi-static subtasks. After discretization by
means of FE method, both a system of differential Eq. (7.1a) and a system of linear
Eq. (7.1b) of the following type are obtained
½CTf _Tg þ ½KTfTg ¼ f _Qg
ð7:1aÞ
½Kfxg ¼ fFg  ½KxTfTg
ð7:1bÞ
with [CT], [KT], [K] and [KxT]—capacity, conductivity, mechanical stiffness and
thermal stiffness matrices, {x} and {T}—the deformation and temperature vectors,
{F} and { _Q}—mechanical and thermal load vectors.
The approach traced here is assembly-oriented. In this context, an assembly is a
structural area with no internal relative motion. The assemblies, in turn, are
connected to a network model by contact representations mapping the effect of
large-sized relative motions like those typical for machine tools.
The associated modelling and calculation concept is illustrated in Fig. 7.1. The
CAD models of machine structure are detailed in assemblies, from which thermal
FE models are generated. The FE models are transformed into objects with sub-
stantially fewer degrees of freedom by means of model order reduction methods
explained later. The contacts are led back to “external heat sources” mapping the
heat exchange depending on the relative motion. Afterwards, the calculated vectors
of the reduced degrees of freedom are retransformed into complete real assembly
temperature vectors. The pose-speciﬁc deformation of the overall structure is ﬁnally
determined by means of the pose-speciﬁc quasi-static Eq. (7.1b).
70
A. Galant et al.

7.3 Results
7.3.1 Model Order Reduction
The Model Order Reduction (MOR) methods make it possible to efﬁciently gen-
erate compact model with good approximation properties directly from an original
FE model (Schilders et al. 2000; Benner et al. 2005).
The approach starts with a formulation of the thermal subproblem as a state
space representation that is entirely equivalent to the linear dynamic system (7.1a):
u1
...
uk
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
! R : f _Tgþ ½AfTg
fyg
¼
¼
½Bfug
½CTfTg !
y1
...
ym
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
ð7:2Þ
The MOR method is applied to the thermal subproblem (7.1a) according to the
conceptual design of the calculation, Fig. 7.1. For the transformation of the FE
model (7.1a) in the form (7.2) see (Großmann et al. 2012b).
The input signals ui are time-dependent parameters representing the loads applied
to the FE model. The temperature vector {T} acts as the state vector in system (7.2).
The system matrix [A] is determined by the geometry of the assembly to be modelled
and its material parameters. Assuming that the thermal system is loaded by con-
vection, the system matrix can be understood as the linear combination
Fig. 7.1 Modeling and calculation concept
7
Thermo-Elastic Simulation of Entire Machine Tool
71

A
½  ¼ a1 A1
½
 þ    þ as As
½

ð7:3Þ
with heat transfer coefﬁcients αi. The control matrix [B] describes the location of the
node positions of the loads the FE system is charged with. The output signals yi
map the state values that can be observed either as temperatures in selected FE
nodes or as average temperatures over special ranges. The temperatures to be
observed are chosen by means of the measurement matrix [C]. If [C] is deﬁned as
identity matrix, then this is the special case in which the original system (7.2)
provides the overall temperature vector {T} as output signal vector {y}. The
dimension N of the overall system Σ is deﬁned by the dimension of the state vector
{T}.
7.3.2 Structure and Parameter Preserving Krylov Model
Order Reduction
A special type of MOR method was developed and employed. The basic idea of the
method is that the original state vector is approximated in a Krylov subspace by
means of its projection (Krylov 1931).
Let Kn ¼ spanffv1g; . . .; fvngg  RN
be the subspace, and assume that
n ≪N and fv1g; . . .; fvng its orthonormal base. The matrix Vn
½
 ¼ ½v1; . . .; vnis
called the transformation matrix.
After insertion of the approximation ½Vnf^Tg ¼ ^T1fv1g þ    þ ^Tnfvng into
system (7.2) thereby replacing the state vector {T} and later multiplication by the
orthogonal matrix ½VnT, the reduced system ^R
u1
...
uk
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
! ^R : f _^Tgþ ½^Af^Tg
f^yg
¼
¼
½^Bfug
½^CTf^Tg !
^y1
..
.
^ym
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
ð7:4Þ
is generated from the original system R. In this equation, f^Tg is the vector of the
generalized coordinates related to the decomposition of {T} according to the base
fv1g; . . .; fvng of the projection subspace Kn, and ½^A; ½^B; ½^C deﬁned as follows:
^B
 
¼ Vn
½
T  B
½ ;
^C
 
¼ Vn
½
T  C
½ ; ^A
 
¼
X
al ^Al


with ^Al


¼ Vn
½
T  Al
½
  Vn
½

ð7:5Þ
The key task when designing the reduced model ^R from the original model R is
to obtain the transformation matrix [Vn] or the Krylov subspace Kn.
72
A. Galant et al.

The system R is linear, so problem (7.2) can be expressed equivalently as given
below:
R :
_T1


þ P al Al
½

ð
Þ T1
f
g ¼ u1 b1
f
g
;
y1
f
g ¼ C
½ T T1
f
g
  
  
_Tk


þ P al Al
½

ð
Þ Tk
f
g ¼ uk bk
f
g
;
yk
f
g ¼ C
½ T Tk
f
g
y
f g ¼ y1
f
g þ    yk
f
g
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
ð7:6Þ
where {b1},…, {bk} are the column vectors of the matrix [B].
The k ﬁrst equations of (7.6) are subsystems of “single input signal” type and can
each be handled by means of a classic Arnoldi process (Arnoldi 1951; Lohmann
and Salimbahrami 2004; Großmann and Mühl 2010). In this case, the Arnoldi
procedure explicitly provides the orthonormal base of the Krylov subspace. It
should be mentioned that the parameter vector {α} = {α1,…, αs} is replaced by
a 1-vector {1,…, 1} to build up the transformation matrices in the Arnoldi process.
P ½Al
ð
Þ; fb1g :
!
Arnoldi
½V1
n
!
ð5Þ
½^A1
l ; f^b1g; ½^C1
  
  
  
P ½Al
ð
Þ; fbkg :
!
Arnoldi
½Vk
n
!
ð5Þ
½^Ak
l ; f^bkg; ½^Ck
ð7:7Þ
Consequently, k reduced partial models (^R1; . . .; ^Rk) of the dimension n ≪N are
generated for k input signals of the original model Σ.
^R :
^R1 :
_^T1
n
o
þ P al A1
l



 ^T1


¼ u1 ^b1


;
^y1
f
g ¼ ^C1

T ^T1


  
  
^Rk :
_^Tk
n
o
þ P al A1
l



 ^Tk


¼ uk ^bk


;
^yk
f
g ¼ ^Ck

T ^Tk


^y
f g ¼ ^y1
f
g þ    ^yk
f
g
8
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
:
ð7:8Þ
The superposition of the output signal vectors of the partial models provides the
approximation of the original model’s output signal vector (7.2).
Although it is impossible to a priori determine the accuracy of the MOR method,
it was possible to successfully verify it in many practical examples. Selected val-
idation experiments are described at the end of this paper.
At the end the following conclusions are derived:
1. The reduced model is of signiﬁcantly smaller dimension in comparison with the
unreduced FE original model if n ≪N and can thus be calculated much more
quickly.
2. The generation of the reduced model is independent of the speciﬁed input
signals ui and parameter values αi.
3. The structure of the original system R is explicitly preserved with the reduced
system ^R.
7
Thermo-Elastic Simulation of Entire Machine Tool
73

4. In the special case of the [C] identity matrix, the last equation of (7.8) provides
the instructions to retransform the reduced temperature vector to the full tem-
perature vector of the original FE model:
T
f g ¼ V1
n

 ^T1


þ    þ Vk
n

 ^Tk


ð7:9Þ
In the thermal system, the time-dependent load parameters (such as heat ﬂows
and ambient temperatures) become a part of the input signal vector {u}, whereas the
convective heat transfer coefﬁcients become a part of the parameter vector {α}. For
this reason, the points 2 and 3 given above mean that the generation of the compact
reduced model from the original FE model is independent of the setting of the load
parameters and can thus be carried out before parameter setting. Consequently, the
one-time generated reduced model can be applied to different load distributions.
The structure preserving Krylov model order reduction method described above
is called MOR-FE method in the following, since it is carried out immediately after
the FE procedure thereby using the FE model as the original model for the MOR
process, on the one hand. On the other hand, the outcomes obtained with the
reduced calculation can be projected by retransformation to the original FE mesh to
be used in, for instance, additional structural analyses in the FE domain or for
visualisation purposes (compare Fig. 7.1).
7.3.3 Handling of Structural Variability
7.3.3.1 Thermal Model
Using the MOR-FE analysis described, a small-dimensional thermal model with
load parameters standing for the inputs, as well as temperature values for the
outputs, can be generated for each assembly (AS). The MOR-FEM-AS objects are
the key elements of the network model created further on (compare Fig. 7.5).
The AS objects are coupled with other AS and environmental objects via con-
tact-load conditions. These conditions in particular depend on the relative location
of the contacting partners, and can be interpreted as movable heat sources from the
view of a single AS object.
Structural variability in the thermal overall model is mapped as follows: at each
point in time, the current location of the assemblies in relation to each other and to
their ambient space is monitored. Each individual AS model’s load parameters
depending on this location are calculated and transferred to the AS objects as
inputs. Afterwards, state
^TBG


is calculated on the individual AS models.
74
A. Galant et al.

7.3.3.2 Mechanical Model
Having obtained the results of the numerical integration of the reduced thermal
problem, the thermal state {^T j} is known for each AS object j at the current point in
time. Now we seek the deformation of the machine tool structure consisting of
L assemblies in the time interval, in which the AS temperature does not change
signiﬁcantly.
First it is possible to reproduce the temperature vector fT jg for each AS and thus
the temperature state
T
f g ¼
fT1g; . . .; fTLg


of the overall machine tool (MT)
structure by means of retransformation (7.9). The deformation {x} is found
according to Eq. (7.1b) fxg ¼ ½K1fFg  ½K1½KxTfTg, whereby the stiffness
matrix and the thermal stiffness matrix depend on the assembly location relative to
one to another (compare Fig. 7.2). The mutual arrangement of the AS (referred to as
pose in the following), in turn, depends on the current TCP position in the work-
space. As a result, deformation {x} is pose-speciﬁc.
In the mechanical overall model, structural variability is considered as follows: a
regular mesh of TCP supporting positions is placed over the workspace. A deﬁned
position of the MT structure exists for each of these discrete supporting positions
(from 1 to M). The stiffness matrices ½K1; . . .; ½KM and the thermal stiffness
matrices ½K1
xT; . . .; ½KM
xT are calculated previously and the deformation vectors
Fig. 7.2 Pose dependency of the mechanical and thermal stiffness matrices on a hexapod
MiniHex (compare Chap. 1); detailed to local positions of feed axes. Subdivision of the feed axis
into four stationary assemblies (AS)
7
Thermo-Elastic Simulation of Entire Machine Tool
75

fx1g; . . .; fxMg are determined in real time by solving the simple system of linear
Eq. (7.1b) only for these poses. The deformation in AS arrangements which are
situated between the supporting positions is found via interpolation. This way full
consistency with the correction model in subproject B07 (see Chap. 16) is achieved.
7.3.3.3 Thermo-Elastic Model
Distinguishing in the mechanical subproblem (7.1b) between subsystems that are
independent of the temperature (7.10a) and those that are dependent on temperature
(7.10b),
fxgstatic ¼ ½K1fFg
ð7:10aÞ
fxgtherm ¼ ½K1½KxTfTg
ð7:10bÞ
fxg ¼ fxgstatic þ fxgtherm
ð7:10cÞ
we ﬁnd that (7.10b) has a structure identical to that of the second equation of the
state
space
representation
of
the
thermal
subproblem
(7.2)
(with
½CT ¼ ½K1½KxT). Thermal deformation fxgtherm can thus be understood as an
additional output signal vector of the thermal problem.
More exactly it means the following:
Let j be the ﬁxed pose and ½K j; ½K j
xT the related stiffness matrices. The com-
plete MT structure consists of L assemblies so that the overall temperature vector
{T} is composed of temperature vectors of single ASfTg ¼ fTBG1g; . . .; fTBGLg
f
g.
Consequently, the thermal deformation in position j can be expressed as superpo-
sition as follows (compare (7.10b))
fx jgtherm ¼ ½K j1 ½K j
xT
h
i
BG1
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
½CBG1
x
T
fTBG1g þ    þ ½K j1 ½K j
xT
h
i
BGL
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
½CBGL
x
T
fTBGLg
ð7:11Þ
where
½K j1 ½K j
xT
h
i
BGi¼ ½CBG1
x
T are the elements of the complete matrix
½K j1 ½K j
xT the i-th AS temperature affects. Expanding the thermal AS-related
model (7.2) using the equation fyBGi
x
g ¼ ½CBGi
x
TfTBGig, the output signal vector
fyBGi
x
g provides the partial deformation of the MT structure. The superposition of
these signal vectors over all of the assemblies supplies then the total thermal
deformation fx jgtherm in pose j.
76
A. Galant et al.

The MOR method described above can be applied to the AS-related thermo-
elastic original system Rx extended this way
Rx :
_T
 
þ A
½  T
f g ¼ B
½  u
f g;
y
f g ¼ C
½ T T
f g;
yx
f g ¼ Cx
½
 T
f g
ð7:12Þ
The extended reduced system will include the identical set of transformation
matrices (compare (7.7)), because the Arnoldi procedure remains independent of
the additional measurement matrix [Cx] in the Krylov MOR.
Depending on requirements of each application, two approaches to deformation
calculation can be distinguished: deformation can be obtained by solving the
mechanical subtask (7.1b) or (7.10a, 7.10b, 7.10c) by using the complete temper-
ature vector {T} as input, whereby {T} is ﬁrst calculated by the solution of the
reduced thermal subtask ^R and subsequent retransformation by means of Eq. (7.9).
An alternative is to interpret thermal deformation as an additional output signal of
the thermal system (as described above). The extended reduced system ^Rx provides
the approximation of this additional output signal.
The two approaches are identical in terms of accuracy. However, the second
variant is more efﬁcient in terms of the computational efforts, since the time-
consuming retransformation step (compare (7.9)) is unnecessary. This extended
thermo-elastic MOR-FEM is particularly efﬁcient if only the displacement at the
TCP, rather than the total deformation, is of interest, as it is, for instance, in the case
of the correction application (compare Chap. 16).
7.3.4 Practice Implementation of the Approach Shown
for a Ball Screw Axis
This section elucidates the step-wise application of the methods described above
developed for a typical machine tool structure of a ball screw axis of a hexapod
MiniHex (compare Fig. 7.2). Starting from the CAD model, a rapid network model
in form of Simulink block diagram (see Fig. 7.5) is developed.
Step 1 CAD preparation: First, the complete MT structure has to be subdivided
into assemblies (AS) without relevant inner relative motions, see Fig. 7.2. Further,
the procedure is continued in an AS-oriented manner according to the approach
(Fig. 7.1).
The AS geometry can be simpliﬁed by removing thermo-elastically irrelevant
geometry details.
Remark: Such irrelevant geometry details are typically removed before the FE
analysis. The reason is to obtain a model with a justiﬁable quantity of degrees of
freedom (DoF) during meshing with non-degenerated ﬁnite elements. This quantity
is proportional to the calculation time for the (unreduced) FE model. However,
during MOR-FE analysis, the reduced model is used for calculation. Thanks to the
MOR procedure, the reduced model’s DoF quantity is less by orders of magnitude.
7
Thermo-Elastic Simulation of Entire Machine Tool
77

As a consequence, the mostly manual operation of geometry simpliﬁcation no
longer plays an important role, and can, under certain circumstances, even be
omitted if appropriate automatic FE meshing tool is available.
Step 2 Thermal FE modelling: The AS geometry is imported into the FE
software (for instance ANSYS), meshed, and the thermal material parameters
(density, speciﬁc heat capacity and thermal conduction) are assigned. Then load
types are applied to the AS—as a rule, on surfaces. Thereby convective loads and
miscellaneous impressed heat ﬂows are classiﬁed (compare Fig. 7.3).
A particular issue is the handling of surfaces through which heat ﬂows are
introduced depending on the relative AS position, such as spindle surfaces that are
in frictional contact during the nut motion. These surfaces are cut into equidistant
segments, see Fig. 7.3. One heat ﬂow can be assigned to each segment. Thus it is
possible to reconstruct the heat source motion, and thus it is completely consistent
with the “local assignment” method in Chap. 16.
Ultimately, the matrices of the thermal FE model (7.2) are exported from ANSYS
by means of in-house developed automatic ANSYS export routines (Großmann et al.
2011).
Step 3 Generation of Simulink-AS objects: A special library of “thermo-elastic
network models” was developed and implemented (Fig. 7.4) for the block-oriented
digital simulation (DBS) domain under Simulink. This library makes it possible to
link the AS objects (block “AS”) mapped in a reduced way into the thermo-elastic
network model, thereby considering the structural variability (compare Fig. 7.5).
When creating the AS block, the FE model exported from ANSYS is imported to
Matlab/Simulink by using in-house developed routines and transformed into the
reduced model by means of the MOR methods mentioned above.
Fig. 7.3 AS-oriented thermal FE modelling with prepared segmented spindle surface to enter
position-dependent heat ﬂows
78
A. Galant et al.

Fig. 7.4 Blocks of the Simulink library “thermo-elastic network models”
Fig. 7.5 Network model of the ball screw based strut axis mapped as SIMULINK block diagram
7
Thermo-Elastic Simulation of Entire Machine Tool
79

Step 4 Insertion of control blocks: Special control blocks were developed for
the library of “thermo-elastic network models”: a “temperature sensor” block makes
it possible to deﬁne the ambient temperature (see Fig. 7.4); another sensor block,
the “heat ﬂow sensor”, provides deﬁned heat ﬂows as outputs.
An axis block represents a feed axis object returning typical axis process
parameters, such as the motor torques of the axis drive, as well as the position and
velocity in the axis coordinate system (compare Fig. 7.4).
Step 5 Initial positioning: At ﬁrst, each AS has a local coordinate system (CS).
For each AS object, the location of the local CS in the global CS is deﬁned in
relation to a “zero-AS arrangement” of the machine tool. Here the zero-AS
arrangement means just the pose, in which the relative mutual position of the
moved assemblies (AS) is zero. This is coherent to a {0, 0, 0}T position in the
machine coordinate system of an MT.
The positions of the sensor and axis objects in the global CS are speciﬁed
analogously.
Step 6 Linking into a network model: The AS blocks are linked with each
other and, if necessary, with the ambient (sensor) blocks by means of the contact
blocks, see Fig. 7.5. The contact block represent a contact-load condition (compare
Sect. 7.3.3 “Handling of structural variability”). Depending on the contact type, it is
possible to choose among four contact blocks (compare Fig. 7.4).
Step 7 Parameter setting: The transient thermal calculation in the network
model is carried out in the AS blocks at the level of reduced models. For this
calculation, input signals, which are load parameters of the thermal model, are
required. These load parameters are speciﬁed in the contact blocks. In the spindle-
nut contact block, for instance, the heat ﬂows for spindle and nut are each generated
as functions of the axis parameters “position” and “velocity”. Heat conduction
between spindle and nut is also considered, and the boundary temperatures of the
frictional contact partners enter the heat ﬂow calculation (compare Fig. 7.5).
The thermal network model is ready for simulation after step 7 when the input data
(kinematic regime, external heat ﬂows, ambient temperatures, etc.) are supplied.
If the network model is only supposed to be run “off-line”, then it is sufﬁcient to
supply input data captured by data logging from real or emulated operational
scenarios.
For correction applications, however, the network model has to run “online”
directly in the control of an MT. In this case, the input data are read out of the
machine’s CNC during the operation in real time, and are transmitted to the network
model. This variant was demonstrated successfully for the network model of the
hexapod MiniHex at the technical exhibition SPS-IPC-Drives 2013 (Großmann et al.
2013) and at the 2nd Vienna Production Technology Congress (Großmann et al.
2014b). Details about the control core—model interface are described in Chap. 16.
Step 8 Mechanic FE modelling: For the extended thermo-elastic AS network
model, the extended measurement matrix ½CBGi
x
 has to be generated according to
Eq. (7.12) by means of the FE domain. For this purpose, the AS geometries meshed
under step 2 are imported to ANSYS, where they are brought into the pose-speciﬁc
80
A. Galant et al.

AS arrangement and the mechanical material data and load parameters are assigned.
Afterwards, the pose-dependent stiffness matrices ½KPosej; ½KPosej
xT
, as well as the
static force vectors fFPosejg are exported from ANSYS analogously to step 2. This
process is repeated for each pose. For example, for a ball screw, the corresponding
matrices are generated for two local poses (compare Fig. 7.2, right).
Step 9 Extension of the AS objects: Analogously to step 3, the mechanical part
of the extended thermo-elastic model is imported to Matlab/Simulink and trans-
formed into the reduced form.
Thermo-elastic extension means that the AS block has an additional outputfyxg.
This vector consists of triples of part deformation in x, y and z. The superposition of
these part deformations provides the thermal deformation at the TCP in the poses
considered.
7.3.5 Calculation Results and Performance
The results are demonstrated for two typical MT structures. The ﬁrst is a column-
spindle head structure described in Großmann et al. (2012a) and in Galant (2013),
see also Fig. 7.1. The second example is the ball screw based strut axis of the
hexapod MiniHex (see Fig. 7.2).
7.3.5.1 ANSYS Versus Matlab/Simulink Calculation
The variable loads due to the movement of the spindle head were simulated on the
machine column.
The outcomes of a comparison between a conventional unreduced calculation
using ANSYS and the reduced network model calculation are summarised in
Fig. 7.6. A more detailed explanation is given in Großmann et al. (2012a, b). The
transient simulated temperatures of the unreduced original FE model and the
reduced network model are almost congruent; whereby the reduced variant provides
savings in computing time of several orders of magnitude (18,000 s. vs. 18 s.).
7.3.5.2 Simulation Versus Experiment: Column-Spindle Head
For the same column-spindle head structure, loads were simulated on the machine
column investigated on a test bed with 13 switchable heating ﬁlms for each guiding
rail. The variable loads again resulted from spindle head movement. The test bed is
depicted in detail in Großmann et al. (2014a) and in Chap. 21.
The comparison of measurement versus simulation of the reduced network
model indicates only slight deviations, see Fig. 7.7.
7
Thermo-Elastic Simulation of Entire Machine Tool
81

7.3.5.3 Simulation Versus Experiment: Ball Screw Based Strut Axis
The reduced network model of the MiniHex was immediately implemented into
the machine control and validated by measurements in cooperation with the sub-
projects B04, B07, C04 and C06. The comparison results for simulation versus
measurement demonstrated by the temperatures of two strut axes at the same
kinematic regime are illustrated in Fig. 7.8 and coincide signiﬁcantly.
Fig. 7.6 Outcomes and performance of the unreduced and reduced models in comparison.
Temperature (left) and displacement (right) in selected reference points
Fig. 7.7 Column-spindle head structure: measured versus simulated temperatures by using the
high-speed reduced model
82
A. Galant et al.

7.4 Classiﬁcation Among the Objectives of the CRC/TR 96
The studies and research performed in the subproject A05 regarding the reduced
thermo-elastic network model provide essential prerequisites for structure-variable
modelling, particularly regarding the performance in terms of calculating time,
permitting a structural model-based correction that explicitly represents the overall
thermo-elastic functional chain to be implemented in the ﬁrst place. For this reason,
subproject A05 is closely aligned with subproject B07, which deals with structural
model-based correction.
Expertise in parameter setting for power dissipations and heat transfers, mainly
from the subprojects B04 and C04, is an additional contribution to the activities of
subproject A05.
It is essential to validate the algorithms and models from A05 in experiment; this
validation was conducted in cooperation with the work carried out in C06 and B07.
Ideas derived from subproject A06, especially regarding the parameter pre-
serving model order reduction studied and developed in A06, were adopted and
contributed to the network modelling algorithms.
Fig. 7.8 Ball screw feed axis: measured temperatures versus temperatures obtained from
simulations using the network model in real time
7
Thermo-Elastic Simulation of Entire Machine Tool
83

7.5 Outlook
In the follow-up phases, the subproject A05 will retain its function as a lead project
bringing together the partial models, as well as the technologies for modelling and
parameter setting. Additional examples of machine tools will be explored, and the
complexity of the associated network models is expected to increase signiﬁcantly.
References
ANSYS, Inc. (2014) Help topics. Ofﬂine-Hilfe des Programmpakets ANSYS, Teil coupled effects
Arnoldi WE (1951) The principle of minimized iterations in solution of the matrix eigenvalue
problem. Q Appl Math 9:17–29
Benner P, Mehrmann V, Sorensen DC (2005) Dimension reduction of large-scale systems. Lecture
notes in computational science and engineering, vol 45. Springer, Heidelberg
Galant A (2013) Automatisierte Synthese blockorientierter Simulationsmodelle für die efﬁziente
Berechnung thermo-elastischer Verformungen an Werkzeugmaschinen bei Berücksichtigung
großer Relativbewegungen. In: Ansys conference & 31st CADFEM users’ meeting 2013,
Mannheim, 19–21 June 2013
Großmann K, Mühl A (2010) Reduktion strukturdynamischer und thermoelastischer FE-Modelle.
ZWF 105(6):594–599
Großmann K, Galant A, Mühl A (2011) Model order reduction (MOR) for thermo-elastic models
of frame structural components on machine tools. In: Ansys conference & 29th CADFEM
users’ meeting 2011, Stuttgart, 19–21 Oct 2011
Großmann K, Städel Ch, Galant A, Mühl A (2012a) Berechnung von Temperaturfeldern an
Werkzeugmaschinen. Vergleichende Untersuchung alternativer Methoden zur Erzeugung
kompakter Modelle. ZWF 107(6):452–456
Großmann K, Galant A, Mühl A (2012b) Efﬁziente Simulation durch Modellordnungsreduktion.
Thermo-elastische Berechnung von Werkzeugmaschinen-Baugruppen. ZWF 107(6):457–461
Großmann K, Kauschinger B, Galant A, Thiem X et al (2013) Messestand MiniHex mit
Präsentation der Teilprojekte A05, B04, B07, C06. Messe SPS-IPC-DRIVES, 26–28 Nov 2013
Großmann K, Galant A, Merx M, Riedel M (2014a) Verfahren zur efﬁzienten Analyse des thermo-
elastischen Verhaltens von Werkzeugmaschinen. In: 3rd International Chemnitz Manufacturing
Colloquium ICMC 2014 “Innovations of Sustainable Production for Green Mobility”, Reports
from the IWU, vol 80, pp 683–700
Großmann K, Kauschinger B, Merx M, Riedel M, Galant A (2014b) Efﬁziente modell- und
experimentgestützte Analyse des thermischen Verhaltens von Werkzeugmaschinen. 2.Wiener
Produktionstechnik Kongress, 07–08 May 2014. Wien, Tagungsband, SS. 271–280
Groth C, Müller G (2009) FEM für Praktiker. Band 3: Temperaturfelder. Expert-Verlag
Krylov AN (1931) On the numerical solution of the equation by which in technical questions
frequencies of small oscillations of material systems are determined. Izvestija AN SSSR (News
of Academy of Sciences of the USSR), Otdel mat i estest nauk 7(4):491–539
Lohmann B, Salimbahrami B (2004) Ordnungsreduktion mittels Krylov-Unterraummethoden. at
Automatisierungstechnik 52(1):30–38
Schilders W, van der Vorst H, Rommes J (2000) Model order reduction: theory, research aspects
and applications. Springer, Heidelberg
84
A. Galant et al.

Chapter 8
Model Order Reduction
for Thermo-Elastic Assembly Group
Models
Norman Lang, Jens Saak and Peter Benner
Abstract We present two model order reduction approaches based on different
modelling strategies for a thermo-elastic assembly group model. Here, we consider
the machine stand example given in Chap. 7. The focus is on capturing the
structural variability. Therefore, we compare a switched linear systems (SLS)
approach based on reduced order models determined by the Balanced Truncation
(BT) method and a parametric model order reduction (PMOR) scheme based on an
interpolatory projection method via the iterative rational Krylov algorithm (IRKA).
In order to avoid the high dimensional coupled thermo-elastic system, additionally a
Schur complement representation is applied to exploit the special structure of the
one-sided coupling property of the system. The results show that both methods
generate relative errors in the range of one per thousand.
8.1 Introduction
Throughout this contribution we consider the thermo-elastic model of the machine
stand described in Chap. 7. The movement of the tool slide changes the contact
boundary conditions of the heat transfer model. Therefore, we consider the equation
Eth _T ¼ AthT þ Bthz
ð8:1Þ
N. Lang (&)  J. Saak  P. Benner
Mathematics in Industry and Technology, Department of Mathematics,
University of Technology, Chemnitz, Germany
e-mail: lang@mathematik.tu-chemnitz.de
J. Saak
e-mail: saak@mathematik.tu-chemnitz.de
P. Benner
e-mail: benner@mathematik.tu-chemnitz.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_8
85

to model the temperature ﬁeld T 2 Rn of the machine stand. The operators Ath 2
Rnn and Bth 2 Rnm denote the variable system and input matrices of the thermal
model for the machine stand, depending on the slide position, respectively. The tool
slide is in full contact at every time instance t and therefore is described by a
constant model with respect to the time. Therefore, it is sufﬁcient to restrict our-
selves to the heat model (8.1) of the machine stand for illustrating the structural
variability. To this end, we treat the slide temperature implicitly via the input z.
The input z 2 Rm models the thermal loads inﬂuencing the system. In addition to
the heat transfer model we consider
0 ¼ AthelT  Aelu
ð8:2Þ
to model the stationary linear elastic behavior of the stand structure described by the
deformation u 2 R3n. Here Ael 2 R3n3n denotes the elasticity system matrix and
Athel 2 R3nn is the coupling matrix which describes the thermally driven distor-
tions in the elasticity model (8.2). Both matrices in Eq. (8.2) are associated to the
same FE grid as the heat model (8.1). Therefore, the dimension of the elasticity
model is 3n due to the x; y; z—directions of the deformation in every FE node. Note,
there is no direct impact of the slide movement on the elasticity model and
therefore, there is no change in the model with respect to the position of the tool
slide. This leads to the coupled thermo-elastic system
Eth
0
0
0


_T
_u
"
#
¼
Ath
0
Athel
Ael

 T
u


þ
Bth
0


z
,: E_x ¼ Ax þ Bz
ð8:3Þ
of dimension 4n, with the state x ¼
T
u


2 R4n. Furthermore, an output equation
y ¼ 0;
Cel
½
 T
u


¼ Cx
ð8:4Þ
is needed to identify the degrees of freedom (DOF) that correspond to the locations
of, e.g., measurement sensors. Since we are interested in the deformations of the
machine stand, we only observe some DOFs corresponding to the deformations at
the surface of interest. Therefore, Cel 2 Rq3n is the elasticity output matrix. The
task now is to capture the structural variability by the reduction methods we use.
Therefore, we consider parametric model reduction in Sect. 8.3 and an approach for
switched linear systems in Sect. 8.2. The particular structure of the matrices Ath; Bth
will be shown in the corresponding sections.
For a ﬁxed relative positioning of the machine stand and the tool slide, i.e.,
A :¼ A; B :¼ B are time invariant, the associated system will lead to a generalised
linear time invariant (LTI) state-space system of the form
86
N. Lang et al.

E_x ¼ Ax þ Bz;
y ¼ Cx
with constant matrices E; A 2 R4n4n; B 2 R4nm and C 2 Rq4n. The idea of
projection based MOR now is to ﬁnd projection matrices V; W 2 R4nr, such that a
reduced order model
^E_^x ¼ ^A^x þ ^Bz;
^y ¼ ^C^x
of dimension r4n with ^y  y can be achieved. The reduced order matrices are
computed in the form
^E :¼ WTEV 2 Rrr;
^A :¼ WTAV 2 Rrr;
^B :¼ WTB 2 Rrm;
^C :¼ CV 2 Rqr:
For
the
more
advanced
task
of
parameter
dependent
matrices
EðlÞ; AðlÞ; BðlÞ; CðlÞ we consider systems of the form
EðlÞ_x ¼ AðlÞx þ BðlÞz;
y ¼ CðlÞx;
ð8:5Þ
where the quantity l describes the parameter that we want to preserve within the
model order reduction process. Therefore, without loss of generality (see e.g.,
Haasdonk and Ohlberger 2009), we consider the parameter dependence in the
system matrices to be of an afﬁne form
E l
ð Þ ¼ E0 þ e1ðlÞE1 þ    þ eMEðlÞEME;
ME 2 N:
ð8:6Þ
Analogously, the matrices AðlÞ; BðlÞ; CðlÞ are represented by parameter
dependent functions fjðlÞ; gjðlÞ; hjðlÞ and the numbers MA; MB; MC 2 N, respec-
tively. ME; MA; MB; MC denote the numbers of afﬁne summands to deﬁne
E; A; B; C. Exploiting the parameter afﬁne structure of the matrices allows us to
compute reduced matrices
^Ej :¼ WTEjV;
j ¼ 1; . . . ; ME;
ð8:7Þ
while the parameter evaluation can be performed on the reduced order level
afterwards by evaluating the functions ejðlÞ; j ¼ 1; . . . ; ME. Analogously, the
matrices AðlÞ; BðlÞ; CðlÞ can be reduced independent of l and evaluated with
respect to the parameter by fj; gj; hj, respectively. Note that the numbers
MA; MB; MC of summands in the analogues for AðlÞ; BðlÞ; CðlÞ of Eq. (8.6) do not
necessarily need to be equal.
8
Model Order Reduction for Thermo-Elastic Assembly Group Models
87

In order to avoid computations based on the coupled thermo-elastic model of
dimension 4n we want to exploit the special structure given in (8.3), i.e., we make
use of the one-sided coupling. Since we assume no coupling from the elasticity
model in the direction of the thermal model, we have a zero block of size n  3n in
the upper right corner of the system matrix A of Eq. (8.3). Applying the Schur
complement to Eqs. (8.3) and (8.4) for ﬁxed Ath :¼ Ath and Bth :¼ Bth as proposed
in Freitas et al. (2008) in advance of the MOR procedure we obtain the system
Eth _T ¼ AthT þ Bthz;
y ¼ CelA1
el AthelT ¼ CT:
ð8:8Þ
Now the system (8.8), for which we want to ﬁnd a reduced order approximant, is
again of order n which is the dimension of the heat transfer model. That is, due to
the special structure of the coupled thermo-elastic model, here we need to pay
particular attention to the modiﬁed output matrix C. The matrices V and W, we are
looking for now, have dimension n  r.
8.2 MOR for Switched and Coupled Systems
Since the actual position of the slide is described by a time dependent trajectory,
one can think of a special case of parameter dependence, namely, time variability.
Here linear time varying (LTV) systems become the focus of attention. Model
reduction for LTV systems is a highly storage consuming process. Therefore, here
we use detailed information given by the model described in Chap. 7. Since the
guide rails are modelled by 15 segments and additionally the slide follows discrete
positions during the movement, we set up a switched linear system (SLS). Due to
the speciﬁc height of the tool slide and the ﬁxed mesh resolution on the guide rails,
the contact boundary can only change within a ﬁxed number of possible setups. In
particular we know that at every time step, the slide covers exactly 5 segments on
the rail. This in fact allows 11 discrete positions which can be reached and we
consider the heat transfer model to be a SLS of the form
Eth _T ¼ Aa
thT þ Bthza:
ð8:9Þ
Here, a is a piecewise constant function of time, which takes its value from the
index set J ¼ f1; . . .; 11g. The function aðtÞ denotes a switching signal, repre-
senting the active boundary part at time t. In other words, each discrete stand-slide-
conﬁguration is determined by a. Together with Eqs. (8.2) and (8.4) and applying
the Schur complement representation (8.8) we obtain the system
88
N. Lang et al.

Eth _T ¼ Aa
thT þ Bthza;
y ¼ CT:
ð8:10Þ
Here, the change of the input operator Bth :¼ Bth is hidden in the input za itself.
In order to obtain a reduced order model approximating (8.8), we compute sets of
projection matrices Vj; Wj for each ﬁxed position j ¼ 1; . . . ; 11 of the tool slide
using the Balanced Truncation (BT) method (for details on BT see e.g., Enns 1984;
Laub et al. 1987; Moore 1981). Therefore, every stand-slide setup is modelled by
one of these subsystems. Finally, we need to decide which subsystem needs to be
used during the online simulation via the switching signal aðtÞ. For a deeper insight
into BT model reduction for switched systems we refer the reader to e.g., Geuss and
Diepold (2013), Monshizadeh et al. (2011), and the references therein.
For veriﬁcation of the proposed methods, we follow the simulation example
given in Chap. 7. That is, we solve the dynamic heat model (8.9) on the time
interval ½0; 16:5 ðhÞ with a ﬁxed step size of s ¼ 10 ðs). The full order model is of
dimension n ¼ 16;626 and we also consider the outputs described in Chap. 7. This
in fact means that we observe 27 deformation DOFs via Cel 2 R273n. Here, the
trajectory of the full order system is compared to the trajectories produced by
reduced order systems of size 10; 40 and 60 [see Fig. 8.1 (left)] in each possible
slide position. In the comparison we consider Node 1 of the description in Chap. 7.
To quantify the results the relative errors are presented in Fig. 8.1 (right). For a
reduced order r ¼ 60 a relative error in the range of one per thousand could be
achieved, which is quite satisfactory. Note, the peak at hour 11 in the relative error
plot is a purely numerical issue in the evaluation of the relative simulation error and
is not problematic for practical applications.
0
4
8
12
16
−40
−20
0
20
40
time in [h]
deformation in [ m]
full order
red. order 10
red. order 40
red. order 60
0
4
8
12
16
10−6
10−4
10−2
100
102
time in [h]
µ
Fig. 8.1 Deformation progress and relative error of the full order system compared to reduced
systems of order r 2 f10; 40; 60g represented in Node 1
8
Model Order Reduction for Thermo-Elastic Assembly Group Models
89

8.3 PMOR by the Iterative Rational Krylov Algorithm
Since in case of the switched systems approach we need to compute a single
reduced order system for each possible discrete position of the tool slide, which
easily becomes highly memory demanding when more than just a few subsystems
have to be considered, in this section we consider the varying position of the tool
slide to be a parameter l of the system. Depending on l one has to decide which
parts of the boundary are affected by the contact of the tool slide and the stand.
Therefore, Eq. (8.1) becomes the parametric thermal state equation
Eth _T ¼ AthðlÞT þ BthðlÞz
of dimension n, with Ath :¼ AthðlÞ and Bth :¼ BthðlÞ. Similar to the SLS (8.10), we
use the Schur complement representation to exploit the one-sided coupling structure
of the system (8.3) and we end up with the modiﬁed parametric model
Eth _T ¼ AthðlÞT þ BthðlÞz;
y ¼ CT:
ð8:11Þ
The remainder is a straightforward implementation of known theory for model
order reduction by Krylov-based interpolatory projection methods shown in Baur
et al. (2011). This means that for the computation of the required matrices V; W in
this section we use the iterative rational Krylov algorithm (IRKA) following the
theory given there. The main idea we adopt here is to simply use interpolatory
model reduction for ﬁxed parameter sample values l1; . . .; lk, i.e., we generate pairs
Vj; Wj 2 Rnrj; j ¼ 1; . . . ; k, which build H2 optimal reduced order models of
dimension rj in the parameter sample points (for details on H2 model reduction see
e.g., Bunse-Gerstner et al. 2010; Gallivan et al. 2008; Gugercin et al. 2008). The
local reduction bases Vj; Wj with respect to the parameter lj form the global
reduction bases
V ¼ ½V1; . . . ; Vk;
W ¼ ½W1; . . . ; Wk;
by concatenation. The global matrices V; W 2 Rnr with r ¼ Pk
j¼1 rj are used to
compute the reduced order matrices ^Ej; ^Aj; ^Bj; ^Cj in the parameter afﬁne represen-
tation, feasible over the whole parameter range as shown in Eq. (8.7). Again, the
reduced order model is set up by evaluating the parameter dependent functions
e; f ; g; h in Eq. (8.6) in the form
^AðlÞ ¼
X
MA
j¼1
fjðlÞ^Aj ¼
X
MA
j¼1
fjðlÞWTAjV;
90
N. Lang et al.

where MA is the number of parameter afﬁne summands for ^AðlÞ. The matrix ^BðlÞ is
computed analogously with gjðlÞ and MB. Note that the Petrov-Galerkin projection
by V; W produced by IRKA does not ensure stability of the reduced system. We use
one-sided Ritz-Galerkin projection, i.e., V ¼ W, since this is known to preserve the
stability of the original system by Sylvester’s law of inertia (see e.g., Golub and
Van Loan 1996). For several numerical examples, in particular the one under
investigation here, it is a common observation that this is indeed necessary.
As in the previous section, the progression of the deformation of the output
nodes described in Chap. 7 is shown. Here, we have to determine the position of the
slide at a certain time t to evaluate the parameter dependent functions in the afﬁne
representation (8.6) of the system (8.11). The following ﬁgures show the full order
simulation of the thermo-elastic model compared to the reduced order trajectories
[see Fig. 8.2 (left)] in Nodes 1–3, as well as the relative error of the deformation
trajectories [see Fig. 8.2 (right)]. The orders r1; . . . ; rk of the reduced systems in the
chosen parameter sample points are equally chosen to be 25. Therefore, the order of
the global reduced system with respect to the parameter range is krj. Here, we chose
the k ¼ 3 sample points as equally distributed over the parameter range, i.e., we get
a reduced order of r ¼ 75. The relative error plot shows that already for 3 sample
points, the relative errors lie on average below the percent range. Similar to the
results for the switched system approach the peaks here can be explained by
the division by a number close to zero in the relative error.
Comparing the results in Sects. 8.2 and 8.3 we observe that the SLS approach
solves the problem in less time compared to the PMOR method for both, the full
order and reduced order system, respectively. This is due to the fact that for the SLS
scheme we have exactly 11 possible stand-slide conﬁgurations and additionally we
solve the heat model for a ﬁxed time-step size. That means, the operator of the
linear system, with which we have to solve in every time step, does not change and
we can recycle the LU-decompositions of the linear system. In the case of the
12
16
−70
−40
0
40
time in [h]
deformation in [ m]
full order
red. order
0
4
8
0
4
8
12
16
10−4
10−2
100
102
time in [h]
µ
Fig. 8.2 Deformation progress and relative error in Nodes 1 (), 2 () and 3 (h), described in
Chap. 7, of the full order system compared to global reduced system with respect to the parameter
l of order r ¼ 75
8
Model Order Reduction for Thermo-Elastic Assembly Group Models
91

parametric model the variability described by the parameter l is considered to be
continuous and therefore we do not have a ﬁxed number of discrete positions as in
the SLS case. That means, since the operator of the linear system changes con-
tinuously, we cannot recycle the LU-decompositions for solving the problem in a
comparable simple way. On the other, choosing the most storage efﬁcient method
with respect to e.g., memory constraints on micro controllers directly depends on
the number of subsystems and additionally the corresponding number of state-space
transformations in the SLS method or the number of summands ME; MA; MB; MC in
the parameter afﬁne representation of the PMOR approach, respectively. Never-
theless, both methods lead to a drastic reduction of the simulation time compared to
their full order simulations. A comparison of the system orders, the execution times
for the reduction procedures and the corresponding simulation times for the full and
reduced order models can be found in Table 8.1. The simulation approximates the
heating process described in Chap. 7 over 16:5 ðhÞ induced by the moving tool
slide.
Regarding the computation times of the reduction procedures one should note
that this is done in the ofﬂine phase, i.e., the projection matrices V; W are only
computed once in advance of the online simulation. Furthermore, the reduction
times can be further reduced using parallel algorithms. That is, since the reduced
systems of all stand-slide conﬁgurations in the SLS approach can be computed
completely independent, as well as the 3 reduced order models for the parameter
sample points in the parametric ansatz, we can reduce the execution time by a factor
of approximately 11 and 3, respectively.
8.4 Integration into the CRC/Transregio
Structural variability is an omnipresent problem in the CRC due to relatively
moving assembly groups. In the context of heat transfer this immediately induces a
moving load problem. Proper MOR for this type of task is an active research topic.
We have investigated two approaches that allow us to ﬁnd a moderate reduced order
approximant of such kind of variable models. The ﬁrst approach treats the special
discrete structure of the model arising in Chap. 7. The second method rewrites the
actual time dependence as a continuous parameter dependence. Both approaches
Table 8.1 Comparison of system orders, times for the reduction processes and the corresponding
simulation times for the full and the reduced order systems for the SLS approach and the PMOR
scheme, respectively
System order
Time for reduction
Simulation time (s)
Full order SLS
16626
–
43.11
Reduced SLS
60
4560.32
0.69
Full order PAR
16626
–
1028.22
Reduced PAR
75
2090.56
1.76
92
N. Lang et al.

enable the application of well-approved methods for linear time invariant systems.
The explicit treatment of the actual linear time varying problem, although theo-
retically well understood for decades, requires additional research on the numerical
methods. The main challenges for future activities are to investigate proper storage
schemes and to ﬁnd solvers for the underlying equations.
References
Baur U, Beattie CA, Benner P, Gugercin S (2011) Interpolatory projection methods for
parameterized model reduction. SIAM J Sci Comput 33(5):2489–2518
Bunse-Gerstner A, Kubalinska D, Vossen G, Wilczek D (2010) h2-norm optimal model reduction
for large scale discrete dynamical MIMO systems. J Comput Appl Math 233(5):1205–1216
Enns DF (1984) Model reduction with balanced realizations: an error bound and a frequency
weighted generalization. In: The 23rd IEEE conference on decision and control, vol 23,
pp 127–132
Freitas F, Rommes J, Martins N (2008) Gramian-based reduction method applied to large sparse
power system descriptor models. IEEE Trans Power Syst 23(3):1258–1270
Gallivan K, Vandendorpe A, Van Dooren P (2008) H2-optimal model reduction of MIMO
systems. Appl Math Lett 21:1267–1273
Geuss M, Diepold KJ (2013) An approach for stability-preserving model order reduction for
switched linear systems based on individual subspaces. In: Roppenecker G, Lohmann B (eds)
Methoden und Anwendungen der Regelungstechnik. Shaker Verlag, Aachen
Golub G, Van Loan C (1996) Matrix computations, 3rd edn. Johns Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore
Gugercin S, Antoulas AC, Beattie C (2008) H2 model reduction for large-scale dynamical
systems. SIAM J Matrix Anal Appl 30(2):609–638
Haasdonk B, Ohlberger M (2009) Efﬁcient reduced models for parametrized dynamical systems by
ofﬂine/online decomposition. In: Proceedings of the MATHMOD 2009, 6th Vienna interna-
tional conference on mathematical modelling
Laub AJ, Heath MT, Paige CC, Ward RC (1987) Computation of system balancing
transformations and other applications of simultaneous diagonalization algorithms. IEEE
Trans Autom Control 32(2):115–122
Monshizadeh N, Trentelman HL, Çamlibel MK (2011) Simultaneous balancing and model
reduction of switched linear systems. In: The 50th IEEE conference on decision and control
and European control conference, pp 6552–6557
Moore BC (1981) Principal component analysis in linear systems: controllability, observability,
and model reduction. IEEE Trans Autom Control AC-26(1):17–32
8
Model Order Reduction for Thermo-Elastic Assembly Group Models
93

Chapter 9
High-Accuracy Thermo-Elastic Simulation
on Massively Parallel Computer
Andreas Naumann, Florian Stenger, Axel Voigt and Jörg Wensch
Abstract Subproject A07 develops and explores numerical methods and tech-
niques to implement them to solve problems in connection with thermo-elastic
subassemblies’ and machine tools’ simulation in the CRC/Transregio 96. For this
purpose, high-resolution discretization methods were developed, tested and applied
both for high resolution discretization in space and for efﬁcient integration in the
long term.
9.1 Introduction
The goal of this subproject entails the development of efﬁcient methods to simulate
the thermo-elastic performance of machine tools or their subassemblies under real
load conditions. Modelling and parameter setting approaches covering the entire
system of the machine tool and used for the validation of several techniques for
model reduction are developed. A milling machine column and a spindle are chosen
as exemplary subassemblies (see Fig. 9.1, Chap. 1). The geometry of both parts is
represented by a CAD model. The spindle moves up and down at a given speed.
Frictional heat emitted along the line of contact makes the machine tool designers
interested in understanding the heat distribution within the machine tool and the
resulting deformation.
A. Naumann (&)  F. Stenger  A. Voigt  J. Wensch
Institut für Wissenschaftliches Rechnen, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
e-mail: andreas.naumann@tu-dresden.de
F. Stenger
e-mail: ﬂorian.stenger@tu-dresden.de
A. Voigt
e-mail: axel.voigt@tu-dresden.de
J. Wensch
e-mail: joerg.wensch@tu-dresden.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_9
95

Two mathematical approaches are taken into account for the phenomena
described above:
• Two different geometries, which are given independently, are sliding against
each other during the process. This leads to a contact problem with varying
contact conditions, which have to be considered numerically. Two different
approaches will be compared. A diffuse domain approach, introduced in Li et al.
(2009), in which the geometries and therefor also the contact area, are only
implicitly described by a phase-ﬁeld function on one global discretization, and a
direct approach, in which the contact area is explicitly computed in each time
step and an interpolation between two different meshes is used to deal with the
heat exchange along the contact area. The different method and their comparison
on a simpliﬁed geometry are described in Sect. 9.2.2.
• In the reference problem, the thermo-elastic machine tool behaviour was sim-
ulated over a period of 15 h. Here, the spindle head’s movement occurs peri-
odically in one-hour time increments, with periods from 1.5 to 48 s. The periods
and velocities are shown in Table. 9.1. The timescale of the periods is clearly
shorter than that of the integration. Section 9.2.3 deals with an approach that
makes use of this periodicity in temporal integration. For numerical simulation,
defect corrected averaging employs a replacement problem identiﬁed as suit-
able, which precisely approximates the solution in stroboscopic spaces.
Fig. 9.1 The tool’s original geometry (left) and the simpliﬁed geometry used for different
simulation approaches (right). A spindle (blue, Xmov) and a column of a milling machine (red, Xfix)
is shown, the spindle moves up and down the column. Neumann boundaries C:;N are denoted and
the contact line CR ¼ Xfix
T Xmov
96
A. Naumann et al.

Table 9.1 Velocities and corresponding periods
h
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
v (m/min)
2.5
2.5
2.5
5
5
5
10
10
10
15
15
15
20
20
20
Period (s)
12
48
12
6
24
6
3
12
3
2
8
2
1.5
6
1.5
9
High-Accuracy Thermo-Elastic Simulation on Massively …
97

9.2 Approaches
9.2.1 Mathematical Model for Heat Exchange
On the two domains Xfix and Xmov, where the ﬁrst one is ﬁxed and the second one
represents the moving part, two temperatures Tfix and Tmov have to be considered.
The equations read:
qcpotTfix  kDTfix ¼ 0
in
Xfix
ð9:1Þ
qcpðotTmov þ r  ðvTmovÞ  bDT  mov ¼ 0
in
XmovðtÞ
ð9:2Þ
where q is the materials density, cp the speciﬁc heat capacity and k the thermal
conductivity. v is the given velocity of the moving part. The boundary conditions
rTfix  n ¼ 0
on Cfix;NðtÞ
ð9:3Þ
rTfix  n ¼ aðTfix  TmovÞ þ g
2
on CRðtÞ
ð9:4Þ
rTmov  n ¼ 0
on Cmov;NðtÞ
ð9:5Þ
rTmov  n ¼ aðTmov  TfixÞ þ g
2
on CRðtÞ;
ð9:6Þ
with a the heat exchange parameter and g a source term due to friction, are applied.
Both equations are coupled through the boundary condition on the moving contact
line CR tð Þ. On the remaining boundaries Cfix;N and Cmov;N a no-ﬂux condition with
n denoting the normal is assumed. Finally Xmov 0
ð Þ ¼ Xmov;0 and Tfix ¼ Tmov ¼ T0
for the moving part and the temperatures are used as initial conditions respectively.
9.2.2 Spatial Discretization for Contact Problem
in a Simpliﬁed Geometry
9.2.2.1 The Diffuse-Domain Method
A phase-ﬁeld representation of the geometry is constructed in each time step and an
implicit mesh deﬁned in the larger box-domain Xdd, with an adapted grid resolution
according to the position of the spindle. Three different were considered phase-ﬁeld
variables, one for the column /fix, one for the spindle /mov tð Þ, and one for the
98
A. Naumann et al.

boundary, where both domains are in contact /bnd tð Þ: /fix and /mov tð Þ are deﬁned
according to
/ðx; tÞ :¼ 1
2
1  tanh 3rðx; tÞ
e




;
ð9:7Þ
where r x; t
ð
Þ is the signed distance function to oXfix or oXmov tð Þ. e is the length
scale determining the width of the diffuse interface. /bnd tð Þ results as the product of
/fix and /mov tð Þ. Figure 9.2 shows the three phase-ﬁeld functions on distinct clips of
the implicit mesh in Xdd ¼ 0; 400
½
  0; 900
½
  0; 900
½
 in cm.
All quantities are extended to Xdd and the diffuse domain approximation is
speciﬁed as
qcp/fixotTfix  kr  ð/fixrTfixÞ þ 1
e Bð/bndÞðaðTfix  TmovÞ þ g
2Þ ¼ 0
ð9:8Þ
qcpðotð/movTmovÞ þ r  ð/movvTmovÞÞ  kr  ð/movrTmovÞ
þ 1
e Bð/bndÞðaðTmov  TfixÞ þ g
2Þ ¼ 0
ð9:9Þ
Fig. 9.2 Three clips through the implicit mesh showing the phase-ﬁelds for the column (left), the
spindle (middle) and the interface between both parts (right). In each of the three pictures the
respective component is shown by a transparent grey 0,5-contour. The mesh has approximately 1,2
Mio elements, the smallest edge is approximately 1.7 cm. Due to reﬁnement and coarsening the
number of elements remains almost constant during the simulation
9
High-Accuracy Thermo-Elastic Simulation on Massively …
99

in Xdd  e1B /bnd
ð
Þ ¼ e1/2
bnd 1  /bnd
ð
Þ2 serves as an approximation for the delta-
function of CR. The initial conditions are speciﬁed as rTfix  n ¼ rTmov  n ¼ 0 on
oXdd and Tfix ¼ Tmov ¼ T0.
9.2.2.2 Explicit Contact Formulation
The two coupled heat transfer equations (9.1) and (9.2) with their corresponding
boundary conditions (9.3) to (9.6) are discretized independently of each other by
means of linear ﬁnite elements in space. They appear in the corresponding weak
formulation
Tfix x; t
ð
Þ ¼
X
i
Tfix;i tð Þufix;i x
ð Þ
Tmov x tð Þ; t
ð
Þ ¼
X
i
Tmov;i tð Þumov;i x tð Þ; t
ð
Þ
8j : qcp otTfix; ufix;j


þ k rTfix; rufix;j


¼
g
2 þ a Tfix  Tmov


; ufix;j


CR tð Þ
8j : qcp otTmov; umov;j


þ k rTmov; rumov;j


¼
g
2 þ a Tmov  Tfix


; umov;j


CR tð Þ
with the test functions umov and ufix as well as the commonly used L2-scalar
product ðf ; gÞ ¼
R
X f gdx with X ¼ Xfix; Xmov. The difﬁculty arises from the
approximation of the boundary integrals and the coupling of Tmov and Tfix at the
contact area.
The time dependency of the boundary integration area is represented by means
of the time dependent indicator function
Sðt; xÞ ¼
1
x 2 CRðtÞ
0
else
(
:
Thus the boundary integrals are extended to the whole frictional boundary
CR ¼ S
t2 0;1
½
 CR tð Þ, independent of the time.
The corresponding boundary integrals
g
2 þ aðTfix  TmovÞ; ufix;j


CRðtÞ ¼
Sðt; xÞ g
2 þ aðTfix  TmovÞ


; ufix;j


CR
¼ ðFðt; xÞ; ufix;jÞCR
now only contain the time dependent non-linear function F t; x
ð
Þ. This function
includes the temperature difference Tmov  Tfix, whose evaluation is illustrated in
Fig. 9.3 for the example of Tfix ci
ð Þ on the moved boundary of Xmov. The value of
100
A. Naumann et al.

Tfix at the quadrature point ci is determined by the interpolation of the basis
functions on Xfix.
Spatial discretization followed by the special processing of the contact boundary
condition produces an ordinary differential equation of the type
Mfix
0
0
Mmov


Tfix
Tmov


¼
A11ðtÞ A12ðtÞ
A21ðtÞ A22ðtÞ


Tfix
Tmov


þ
G1ðtÞ
G2ðtÞ


ð9:10Þ
including the mass matrices Mfix and Mmov, the time dependent stiffness matrices Aij
and the friction terms Gj tð Þ. The resulting system of ordinary differential equations
is solved by suitable time integration techniques. Because this is a stiff problem,
implicit techniques have to be employed. The Rosenbrock methods have particu-
larly proved to be the method of choice.
9.2.3 Efﬁcient Long-Term Integration of the Column
Geometry
9.2.3.1 Defect Corrected Averaging
When interpreting the thermal or thermo-elastic machine tool simulation according
to the method of lines, then, after having performed the spatial discretization, an
ordinary differential equation (9.10) is obtained. A notable feature in the case of the
spatially discretized machine tool is a periodic source term on the right side,
whereas the period is very short versus temporal horizon of simulation. It is costly
and labour-intensive to subject the problem to long-term integration with simulta-
neous resolution of the small timescale, which, in turn, is dictated by the period
Fig. 9.3 Interpolation of the
solutions fo Xfix (red) in
the quadrature point ci of the
moved grid Xmov (blue) at the
contact area
9
High-Accuracy Thermo-Elastic Simulation on Massively …
101

itself. With the method of defect corrected averaging engineered by the authors, it is
possible to reach a solution in large time intervals with signiﬁcantly less calculation
time thanks to the use of longer increments. In the following sections, this meth-
odology is introduced when applied to ordinary differential equations of the form
y0ðtÞ ¼ LyðtÞ þ fðtÞ;
yð0Þ ¼ y0
ð9:11Þ
In this equation, Ly results from the spatial discretization of an elliptic differ-
ential operator, and the discretized source f tð Þ is periodical with period e, that is,
f t þ e
ð
Þ ¼ f tð Þ.
A promising approach consists of replacing the source terms by averaging over a
period. Simple averaging, however, leads to solutions that are relatively inaccurate.
Defect corrected averaging, in turn, is similar to the concept of stroboscopic
averaging by Calvo et al. (2011) and deﬁnes a replacement problem, which can be
solved with large time increments. The replacement problem is deﬁned so that its
exact solution in the stroboscopic points t ¼ ne largely conform to the exact
solution of the initial problem. The discretized differential operator L remains
unchanged here, and the right side f tð Þ is replaced by a constant v.
The strategy is illustrated in Fig. 9.4. The highly oscillating solution of the initial
problem is marked by circle symbols in the stroboscopic points. The solution by
means of simple averaging is a coarse approximation in the stroboscopic points
(triangle symbols). The solution of the replacement problem approximates the
solution of the initial problem in the stroboscopic points at high accuracy (Fig. 9.5).
Let S t0; t1; y0; f
ð
Þ be the solution operator of the differential equation (9.11) with
the source f tð Þ, meaning that the solution in t1 yields y t1
ð Þ ¼ S t0; t1; y0; f
ð
Þ for
Fig. 9.4 Principle approach in defect corrected averaging: the exact solution (bold) is signiﬁcantly
better approximated in the stroboscopic points (circle symbol) by defect corrected averaging (cross
symbol) rather than by simple averaging (triangle symbol)
102
A. Naumann et al.

y t0
ð Þ ¼ y0. For a constant source term f tð Þ ¼ v, the solution is represented (see
Strehmel and Weiner 1982) as
Sðt0; t0 þ t; y0; fÞ ¼ expðtLÞy0 þ t/1ðtLÞv; with /ðzÞ ¼ ðez  1Þ=z:
ð9:12Þ
Sð0; ne; y0; vÞ ¼ Sð0; ne; ðn þ 1Þe; y0; vÞ8y0; 8n 2 N:
ð9:13Þ
is required for the constant replacement source f tð Þ ¼ v. Utilising the following
properties of the solution operator
Sð0; t1; y0; fðtÞÞ ¼ Sð0; t1; y0; 0Þ þ Sð0; t1; 0; fðtÞÞ
ð9:14Þ
Sð0; t1; 0; f1 þ f2Þ ¼ Sð0; t1; 0; f1Þ þ Sð0; t1; 0; f2Þ:
ð9:15Þ
Equation (9.13) is reduced to
Sð0; e; 0; vÞ ¼ Sð0; e; 0; f ðtÞÞ;
ð9:16Þ
whereby only S 0; ne; 0; v
ð
Þ ¼ t/1 tL
ð
Þv is valid exactly.
A more in-depth consideration of this relation discloses the structure of the
ordinary differential equation (ODE). The solution of the ODE with the periodic
source over a time interval e is on the right side. On the left side, we ﬁnd a solution
with the unknown source v. On the left side, a linear operator affects the unknown
v. The coefﬁcients of the corresponding matrix are unknown, but the matrix-vector
product can be evaluated by solving the ODE numerically over an interval of e. In
other words: A linear equation system Ax ¼ b has to be solved, in which the
coefﬁcients of A are unknown, whereas the products Ax can be calculated. This is
the standard situation for the application of (in which .. are used) Krylov solvers.
The Krylov method GMRES according to Saad and Schultz (1986) is used here.
Fig. 9.5 Comparison of
reference grid temperature
with the diffuse domain
solution along the line on Xfix
9
High-Accuracy Thermo-Elastic Simulation on Massively …
103

The algorithm to calculate a solution in t ¼ te ¼ ne is described as follows:
1. Determine b ¼ S 0; e; 0; f
ð
Þ with sufﬁcient accuracy by means of a small-scale
integrator.
2. Solve S 0; e; 0; v
ð
Þ ¼ b by means of GMRES, whereby S 0; e; 0; v
ð
Þ is calculated
with the small-scale integrator.
3. Solve y0 ¼ Ly þ v by means of a suitable large-scale integrator in 0; te
½
.
When the solution is to be computed not only at the ﬁnal point te ¼ ne, but also
at other stroboscopic points t0 2 0; te
ð
Þ, then it is possible to choose the incremental
steps of the large-scale integrator. If the solution also has to be found for non-
stroboscopic points ti, then it is necessary to determine the solution by means of the
large-scale integrator at the ﬁrst previous stroboscopic point, and to subsequently
achieve the solution at ti, by means of a small scale integrator. The method is very
efﬁcient, if the solution is sought at a few selected points on a large time scale.
As practical tests show, it is possible to enhance the convergence of the GMRES
iteration when initialising with an averaging of the sources over a period so that it is
only necessary to correct the defect between the exact solution and the solution
which has been achieved through simple averaging over a period. Tests for this
simple defect corrected averaging by Naumann and Wensch (2013) enhance defect
reduction by a factor of 100 in comparison with simple averaging. Preconditioners,
which offer an opportunity for further acceleration of computation, are introduced
in Sect. 9.2.4.2.
9.2.3.2 Preconditioning in Defect Corrected Averaging
Our problem consists in the solution of the linear equation system
Ax ¼ b
ð9:17Þ
whereby matrix A results from the spatially discretized differential operator
L through
A ¼ e/1ðeLÞ ¼ e eL  1
eL
:
ð9:18Þ
A good preconditioner P is an approximation of the inverse of matrix A,
whereby the condition of P should be signiﬁcantly less than the condition of A. For
this purpose, the authors employ Pade approximations R zð Þ of the function /1 zð Þ1
in z ¼ 0, but, additionally, we demand the same asymptotic behaviour. The
resulting preconditioner is P ¼ R L
ð Þ. Since /1 shows for z ! 1 the same
asymptotic behaviour as z, then p ¼ q þ 1, with p as the degree of numerator and
q as the degree of denominator. This results in 2q degrees of freedom, one of which
is used for the asymptote at 1, and the others for the adjustment of the derivates
in z ¼ 0. This means that one can adjust 2q  1 derivates in z ¼ 0.
104
A. Naumann et al.

The variants q ¼ 0 and q ¼ 1 yield:
1. R linear, R 0
ð Þ ¼ /1 0
ð Þ1
RðzÞ ¼  z
2 þ 1:
2. R is a rational fraction, degree of numerator 2, degree of denominator 1
RðzÞ ¼ z2  2z þ 2
z þ 2
These preconditioners make the defect corrected averaging signiﬁcantly more
efﬁcient and allow for an exact solution for large oscillating ODEs on large time
scales.
9.3 Results
9.3.1 Comparison of the Diffuse-Domain Method
with Explicit Formulation of the Contact
The two approaches described under Sects. 9.2.2.1 and 9.2.2.2 were compared in
terms of computation accuracy and run time characteristics. First, the convergence
behaviour of the explicit formulation of the contact was explored. To do this, 3
adaptively reﬁned grids were used. The basic grid in Fig. 9.6 was reﬁned along the
heating boundary so that the grid width is halved in this area. To calculate the
Fig. 9.6 Temperature on the explicit grid with the formulation of the contact at the times 6 and 20 s
9
High-Accuracy Thermo-Elastic Simulation on Massively …
105

reference solution, the time stepsize dt ¼ 24=320 and the basic grid reﬁned twice
from Fig. 9.6 were used. The temperatures were compared at the point of t ¼ 12 s.
At this point, the spindle head is in the half-height position. The accuracy of the
explicit simulation is shown in Table 9.2.
The solutions of the explicit discretization are compared not only with the time
stepsizes 24/80, 24/160 and 24/320, but also with the basic grid and the grid reﬁned
once with the reference solution in the L2 norm. For sufﬁciently ﬁne grids, the
defect behaviour, shown in Table 9.2, corresponds to the theoretical prediction of
the implicit Euler method used. On the basic grid, however, the spatial defect
dominates.
The convergence behaviour of the diffuse domain method has already been
explored in Franz et al. (2012) and shows quadratic convergence in e.
For validation, the one-time motion of the spindle head upward is simulated.
After each time step, the implicit grid is adapted to the moved geometry. After 81
time increments, the spindle head reaches the upper end of the machine column.
Figures 9.7 and 9.6 show the temperature distribution on the subassembly’s
surface by means of the diffuse domain method and explicit discretization at two
different simulation times. The parameters q ¼ 7:200 kg/m3, Cp ¼ 460 kJ/ kg K
ð
Þ,
Fig. 9.7 Temperature ﬁeld on the implicit grid by means of the diffuse domain method (sectional
plane) the times 6 and 20 s
Table 9.2 Accuracy and convergence behaviour of the explicit solution at time t ¼ 12
Tdt;h  Tref


2
h
h/2
EOCdt h
ð Þ
24/80
0.005
0.003
0.6
24/160
0.003
0.002
1.1
24/320
0.003
0.001
1.6
EOCh dt
ð Þ
0.5
1
1.9
106
A. Naumann et al.

k ¼ 50; 000 kW/ km
ð
Þ, a ¼ 100 W/K, h ¼ 17:1875 J and v ¼ 0:041667 m/s were
used. The interface width was e ¼ 0:2 m.
The reference solution for the explicit coupling and the diffuse domain solution
described were used to compare both methods. Temperature is shown in Fig. 9.5
along the black line on the frictional boundary. Both temperature curves are
qualitatively similar. The offset is approximately equal to the washing out due to the
phase ﬁeld width e.
The defect in the L2-norm over the entire area is 0.0065 and thus in the order of
magnitude of the explicit discretization’s numerical error, which conﬁrms the
usability of the diffuse domain method. It took about 36 h to carry out the simu-
lation with the diffuse domain method, but only 72 min to perform the explicit
formulation of the contact for 320 time increments. The long runtime requirements
are caused by the substantially higher number of degrees of freedom. The signiﬁ-
cant advantage of the approach, which is founded on rapid and simple grid gen-
eration and the usability of standard routines, is thus nulliﬁed again by the increased
runtime demand again. This becomes more obvious when using the original
geometry and process conditions. In the following, the explicit formulation of the
contact boundary condition was employed.
In both paradigms, the ﬁnite element discretization was performed by means of
the parallel adaptive ﬁnite element library AMDiS by Vey and Voigt (2007), Voigt
and Witkowski (2012), however, were used in the sequential mode.
9.3.2 Results of Defect Corrected Averaging
The method was used in order to simulate the thermo-elastic behaviour of the col-
umn/spindle conﬁguration in its complex geometry over a period of 15 h. This
problem was regarded as the reference problem to evaluate and benchmark the
MOR techniques developed under A05 and A06. The periodic source is given here
by the frictional heat at the periodically moved contact position. For the whole
boundary, heterogeneous Robin boundary conditions are used, which represent the
ambient cooling. In this time span, 75–2,400 periodical motions are executed per
hour. The solution calculated by means of the small scale indicator was used as
reference solution. The comparison involves the solutions with simple averaging
and defect corrected averaging, where the latter was used with preconditioner. The
results in Table 9.3 demonstrate that defect correction enhances simple averaging.
Table 9.3 Runtime versus accuracy—compared for different averaging methods
Method
Runtime
Error (K)
Small scale integration
72 h
Simple averaging
3 min
0.25
Defect corr. averaging with preconditioning
22 min
0.025
9
High-Accuracy Thermo-Elastic Simulation on Massively …
107

The cost of this advantage is an increased calculation time; however, this is still
lower by some orders of magnitude than in small scale simulation. In this simu-
lation, one third of the correction effort results from the application of the pre-
conditioned GMRES, and the other two thirds from the calculation of the right side
with 100 steps. After simulation of the thermal behaviour, the temperature ﬁelds are
employed to determine the corresponding deformations from linear elasticity.
The combination of the two approaches permits an efﬁcient simulation of the
machine tool with its moving subassemblies. Figures 9.8 and 9.9 illustrate the
calculated temperature ﬁelds and the amount of deformation in the original
geometry with the given, varying periods after 15 h. The calculation is also carried
out in AMDiS.
Fig. 9.8 Temperaturfeld mit
defektkorrigierter Mittelung
nach 15 h
Fig. 9.9 Absolutwert der
Verschiebungen nach 15 h.
Die roten Linien entsprechen
der deformierten Geometrie
mit 100 facher Verstärkung
der Verschiebungen
108
A. Naumann et al.

Figure 9.9 clearly shows the strongest heating at the frictional boundary; the
difference in temperature is here 11 K. In the correspondent right Fig. 9.9, the
absolute displacement is shown. The red lines represent the deformed geometry,
with the deformation ampliﬁed by a factor of 200 for visualisation. A detailed
comparison of the simulation results with the subprojects A05 and A06 and the
measurements gained in experiments is now underway.
9.4 Classiﬁcation in the CRC/TR 96
In subproject A07, different mathematical methods for the simulation of the thermo-
elastic machine tool behaviour were investigated. Coupling strategies for ﬁnite
element spaces moved against each other were developed to simulate thermo-
elasticity in moving geometries. The interpolation algorithm applied here provided
exact results and is used to generate reference solutions for other subprojects. As an
alternative, the diffuse domain approach was tested. This approach provides similar
results and permits the use of standard methods and an easy processing of geom-
etries, but suffers, however, from substantially longer computer runtime. The high
resolution reference solutions generated contribute to the validation of the numer-
ical results obtained using the commercial software packages in A05 and the results
of the model reduction methods in A06. The comparisons (benchmarks) will be
published elsewhere.
9.5 Outlook
Defect corrected averaging was developed and further reﬁned by preconditioning
techniques for the simulation over long time intervals, in which periodic motions
appear over large partial intervals. This method makes possible efﬁcient simulation
over very long time intervals and is signiﬁcantly more accurate than simple aver-
aging techniques. An additional strength is that it is substantially faster than a
simulation on the small time scale of periodic motions. After successful processing
of spatial discretization, the focus is on further improvement of time discretization.
At the time of publication, the method is being expanded by the Robin boundary
conditions that they are needed in subproject A05. In the next phase, temporal
integration methods that can be paralleled will be used in order to carry out sim-
ulations more efﬁciently over greater time spans. The methods of choice in terms of
the structure of the thermo-elastic FE models are the approaches by ParaReal
(Nielsen 2012), as well as ParaExp (Gander and Güttel 2013).
9
High-Accuracy Thermo-Elastic Simulation on Massively …
109

References
Calvo MP, Chartier P, Murua A, Sanz-Serna JM (2011) Numerical stroboscopic averaging for
ODEs and DAEs. Appl Numer Math 61(10):1077–1095. doi:10.1016/j.apnum.2011.06.007.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apnum.2011.06.007
Franz S, Gärtner R, Roos H, Voigt A (2012) A note on the convergence analysis of a diffuse-
domain approach. Comp Meth Appl Math 12:153–167
Gander MJ, Güttel S (2013) Paraexp: A parallel integrator for linear initial-value problems. SIAM
J. Scientiﬁc Computing
Li X, Lowengrub J, Raetz A, Voigt A (2009) Solving pde’s in complex geometries: a diffuse
domain approach. Commun Math Sci 7:81–107
Naumann A, Wensch J (2013) Defect corrected averaging for highly oscillatory pdes. PAMM
(accepted for publication)
Nielsen AS (2012) Feasibility study of the parareal algorithm. Master’s thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, DTU Informatics, E-mail: reception@imm.dtu.dk, Asmussens Alle,
Building 305, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. http://www.imm.dtu.dk/English.aspx, DTU
supervisor: Allan P. Engsig Karup, apek@imm.dtu.dk, DTU Informatics
Saad Y, Schultz M (1986) GMRES: a generalized minimal residual algorithm for solving
nonsymmetric linear systems. SIAM J Sci Stat Comput 7:856–869
Strehmel K, Weiner R (1982) Behandlung steifer Anfangswertprobleme gewöhnlicher Differen-
tialgleichungen mit adaptiven Runge-Kutta-Methoden. Computing 29:153–165
Vey S, Voigt A (2007) AMDiS: adaptive multidimensional simulations. Comput Vis Sci 10
(1):57–67. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00791-006-0048-3
Voigt A, Witkowski T (2012) A multi-mesh ﬁnite element method for lagrange elements of
arbitrary degree. J Comput Sci 3:420–428
110
A. Naumann et al.

Chapter 10
Modelling of Thermal Interactions
Between Environment and Machine Tool
Reimund Neugebauer, Steffen Ihlenfeldt, Carsten Zwingenberger,
Janine Glänzel and Carsten Richter
Abstract Thermal boundary conditions, such as heat ﬂux, play an important role in
the overall context of representing machine tools’ thermal behaviour and their
interactions with the environment in a way that is close to reality. In this contri-
bution, the machine tool–environment interface is represented based on the ﬁnite-
element method and the required parameters are assigned. The term “environment”
refers in this paper to the surrounding atmosphere and sometimes the foundation.
The approach includes the determination of the relevant environmental boundary
conditions, such as convection and heat radiation, and the description of how to
integrate them systematically into the ﬁnite-element model.
10.1 Introduction
Comparing measurements and simulations, it can be seen that the computational
analysis of the machine tools’ thermal behaviour and performance evinces an
obvious potential for improvement potential concerning their reliability in terms of
quality and quantity (Neugebauer et al. 2009; Großmann et al. 2013). Particularly in
the ﬁeld of the coupled analysis of thermal properties and properties from structural
mechanics, there is a lack of sufﬁciently exact knowledge of the description of
interactions between the environment and the machine tool. As a rule, this limi-
tation arises from difﬁculty in describing the environmental conditions as precisely
R. Neugebauer (&)  S. Ihlenfeldt  C. Zwingenberger  J. Glänzel  C. Richter
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology IWU, Chemnitz, Germany
e-mail: reimund.neugebauer@iwu.fraunhofer.de
S. Ihlenfeldt
e-mail: steffen.ihlenfeldt@iwu.fraunhofer.de
J. Glänzel
e-mail: janine.glaenzel@iwu.fraunhofer.de
C. Richter
e-mail: carsten.richter@iwu.fraunhofer.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_10
111

as necessary. The values found in simulation—for heat ﬂux density, heat transfer
coefﬁcients and heat emission parameters—frequently differ by more than 50 %
from those measured. This phenomenon is, for instance, based on the fact that in
transient thermo-elastic simulations, the use of homogeneous environmental tem-
peratures results in convection and radiation conditions that are insufﬁciently exact.
Finally, the complex feedback between the thermal effects of conduction, con-
vection, and heat radiation, as well as their non-linear characteristics, complicates a
reliable mapping of the different inﬂuencing factors. However, the most exact
possible prediction of the machine properties directly depends on the quality of the
input data that provide the boundary conditions for the simulation models.
Concerning the representation of interaction between structure and environment
due to convection, empirical calculation guidelines exist for simple geometric
bodies given deﬁned assumptions (VDI 2006), which have to be chosen for each
real case of application on a machine tool. However, this analytical strategy of
determination of heat ﬂuxes does not provide a sufﬁciently exact prediction of
complex thermal machine tool properties. Consequently, in this subproject,
boundary conditions found by calculations are also used. In addition to the ana-
lytical calculation, ﬂuid simulation is employed as a new approach to determine the
thermally relevant parameters for convection, heat transfer and heat radiation.
10.2 Approach
In an innovative strategy, minimal models are generated for the modelling of
boundary conditions, which become a part of the structural mechanical ﬁnite ele-
ment (FE) simulation to calculate the thermo-elastic displacements of an assembly.
To determine the relevant boundary conditions for convection, not only analytical
computations are carried out, but also CFD simulations by means of ANSYS-CFX.
For this purpose, it is necessary to model the corresponding FE meshes to map the
ﬂow conditions around the assembly. The ﬂow model applied ﬁrst considers a
laminar ﬂow for immobile assemblies, such as the machine column in standstill
position. Based on this, the moving assemblies (such as the moving machine col-
umn) are investigated, and this makes it necessary to represent forced ﬂows.
A FE model needed to verify the machine tool to be explored has to be generated
at the beginning. The minimal models of complex assemblies, such as mounting
systems and ball screws, as they are described here and to be developed in the other
subprojects, will be integrated into this model later on. The parameters for the
minimal models are identiﬁed to represent the heat transfer behaviour. The
parameters found are introduced afterwards in the mechanical FE model for the
thermo-elastic displacements’ calculation. This methodology is veriﬁed by means
of examples from industrial practice. The options for an automated deﬁnition of the
thermal environmental boundary conditions in the application of the FE method,
which provides a uniform calculation algorithm and the integration of the known
empiric calculation equations in order to express the interaction between the
112
R. Neugebauer et al.

machine tool structure and its environment, are enhanced. The procedures
describing the transfer of heat are mapped by the three transfer mechanisms of
thermal conduction, convection, and radiation (Baehr and Stephan 2004). The
temperature ﬁeld thereby derived shapes the basis for the calculation of the ther-
mally induced displacements. The consequences of the resulting displacements of
the tool centre point (TCP) directly affect the machine tool’s machining accuracy
and are thus signiﬁcant when deducing and evaluating design measures or cor-
rection methods.
10.3 Results
10.3.1 Modelling of Thermal Inﬂuences and Interactions
The thermal convection and radiation transfer mechanisms mostly occur in parallel;
however, they are sometimes linked to different conditions. The amount of the
transferred heat ﬂux due to radiation strongly depends on the temperature level.
This is caused by the fact that when calculating the heat ﬂuxes due to thermal
radiation, absolute temperature enters in the fourth power, whereas we have a linear
relationship in convection. Because the surfaces that are involved in the transfer by
radiation are sometimes very large, in every case it must be determined whether
thermal radiation should also be taken into account in the representation of the
boundary conditions even at room temperature.
Heat transfer procedures between the structure and the environment were
evaluated in terms of their relevance based on fundamental investigations and
comparisons of thermal radiation and convection, which are, in turn, based on
analytical calculation methods and the use of numerical approaches, as well as
sensitivity analysis executed for an assembly chosen as an example.
10.3.1.1 Representation of the Boundary Conditions for Convection
In addition to analytical calculation methods, various numerical methods are
available to calculate the energy transfer by thermal convection.
Numerical Versus Analytical Calculation
Analytical method For solids with simple geometries, it is possible to analytically
calculate the heat ﬂuxes transferred to the environment by means of convection.
Here, particularly in the case of free convection, simplifying assumptions have to be
employed to make the known empirical computation equations usable. Thus, for
10
Modelling of Thermal Interactions Between Environment …
113

instance, a plane plate A1 of 1 m2 surface is chosen. To calculate the heat transfer
coefﬁcients with free convection, empirical equations from (VDI 2006).
QKonv ¼ h  A1  T1T2
ð
Þ
ð10:1Þ
The heat ﬂux transferred between the machine tool structure and environment is,
according to Eq. (10.1), linearly dependent on the temperature difference
ΔT = T1 −T2 and the heat transfer coefﬁcient h to be deﬁned following Groth and
Müller (2001).
Numerical method Temperature ﬁelds inside a structure can not only be calcu-
lated based on structural mechanical (mechanics) FE models, but also by means of
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). This does not only provide the option to
analyse the temperature ﬁeld inside the structure and the ﬂuid, which is also
involved in the model; the heat ﬂowing on the boundary between the structure and
ﬂuid also permits an evaluation of the heat transfer coefﬁcient. This qualiﬁes this
kind of numerical analysis to be applied to commensurable considerations of the
boundary conditions found empirically and thus to detect existing deﬁcits in the
description of convection.
When comparing the two calculation approaches by tendency, it was possible to
ascertain that the analytical determination of the heat ﬂux between the surfaces and
the environment predicts a more intensive heat transfer than forecasted by CFD
simulation. Despite the relatively simple geometries analysed, the two procedures
differ by maximally 35 % and thus indicate a clear need for action. It can be
assumed that the “high-order” CFD simulation model provides more accurate
results than the analytical procedure based on empirical equations. However, the
considerations introduced do not permit us to conclude beyond doubt whether the
trend towards the prediction of a higher heat transfer in the case of analytical
calculation is also true for real component geometries. Figure 10.1 illustrates the
higher growth of the heat ﬂuxes in the direct comparison of the analytically and
numerically computed heat ﬂuxes, shown for a horizontal plate.
heating
hor. top
heating
hor. bottom
cooling
hor. top
cooling hor.
bottom
0
10
20
30
˙Q [W]
numeric
analytic
Fig. 10.1 Heat ﬂuxes due to convection on a horizontal plate obtained from numerical and
analytical calculations (high mesh density in the boundary layer)
114
R. Neugebauer et al.

Systemised deﬁnition of heat transfer coefﬁcients The heat ﬂux transferred into
the environment depends on two inﬂuencing variables—the difference in temper-
ature between the structure and the ambient air—and the heat transfer coefﬁcient,
which, in turn, depends on several factors. One of them is also the difference in
temperature so that the temperature ﬁeld, which also changes, results in heat
transfer coefﬁcients of the problem that change as a function of time. Starting from
the structural mechanical simulation model, the surface elements of the structure are
identiﬁed according to their geometric properties (such as horizontal surface 0–15°,
vertical surface of 75–105°, …), which permits a classiﬁcation into ﬁve different
regions. In order to make this approach viable for real component geometries, it is
necessary to deﬁne limits for the angle of inclination for the ﬁve areas mentioned
above. As a rule, a value of ±15° is introduced for the deviation from horizontal and
vertical alignment to distinguish the individual surface orientations. This classiﬁ-
cation is also used here as a distinctive criterion to express the position to the
gravitation vector. The algorithm to classify the surface elements of the structure
investigated is elucidated in Fig. 10.2 in a schematic diagram.
The result of this classiﬁcation obtained for the machine column is shown in
Fig. 10.3. The orientation of the elements against gravitation has to be deﬁned, and
the elements have to be grouped according to their distance from the foundation.
Comprehensive measurements showed a clear inﬂuence of the foundation tem-
perature on the air temperatures, particularly on the machine tool mounting, which,
in turn, results in air layers of different temperatures.
To determine the individual heat transfer coefﬁcients, analytical calculation rules
are applied to the indicated areas, which take into account the geometric prereq-
uisites in terms of free convection, see also (Neugebauer et al. 2010). The tem-
perature stratiﬁcations and differences between the structure and the environment
are taken into account. Thus, it is possible to determine the heat transfer coefﬁcient
in a systemised manner and to transfer (port) the results to the corresponding
surface elements.
Fig. 10.2 Classiﬁcation of the structural surface—algorithm
10
Modelling of Thermal Interactions Between Environment …
115

As can be seen from the ﬂow simulations for the load case of a machine column
heated by an external heat source, different ﬂow velocities are established in the
surrounding air. This phenomenon mainly results from the structural formation of
the geometry. Figure 10.4 clariﬁes the so-called “chimney effect” inside the
machine tool structure. The sectional view through the surrounding air makes it
possible, among other things, to analyse the ﬂow velocities. Factors like these that
inﬂuence the heat transfer between structure and environment either cannot or can
only be incompletely captured by means of empirical computation equations. Flow
simulation can provide essential results here, which could otherwise only be
identiﬁed by experiments with great effort. The transferred heat ﬂuxes are not only
affected by the ﬂow velocities mentioned above, but also by the differences in the
structural and environmental temperatures, and, consequently, have to be consid-
ered. CFD simulations can guarantee that the structural areas affected thereby are
correctly identiﬁed.
10.3.1.2 Representation of the Radiation Boundary Conditions
Analytical approach The analytical computation of the heat ﬂux from a plane plate
to the surrounding air due to radiation functions without the determination of the
radiation coefﬁcient. This coefﬁcient is 1.0, if radiation is transferred between the
surface and the overall hemi-cube. Thus, another factor is that only the emissivity is
entered into the calculation. The transferred heat ﬂux is only inﬂuenced by the
difference in temperature, the emissivity and the area of the surface. Heat ﬂux is
calculated by means of the equations below (VDI 2006), capt. 5, Formula (10.5)
Fig. 10.3 Classiﬁcation of the structural surface, shown for the machine tool column
116
R. Neugebauer et al.

Qstr ¼ r12  A1 
T1
ð
Þ4 T2
ð
Þ4


ð10:2Þ
r12 ¼ rs12
v12
1  11
ð
Þ 12
ð
ÞA1
A2
v12
ð
Þ2
Since the heat ﬂux transferred due to thermal radiation into the environment is
mostly directed in parallel to the heat ﬂux by convection, it is possible to formulate
a heat transfer coefﬁcient hstr valid for thermal radiation by means of linearisation of
the temperature difference T1
4 −T2
4 between the wall temperature T1 and the ﬂuid
temperature T2. Heat ﬂux according to radiation according to Eq. (10.2)
Qstr ¼ r12  A1 
T1
ð
Þ4 T2
ð
Þ4


¼ hstr  A1  T1T2
ð
Þ
ð10:3Þ
can be calculated by using the binomial formula
Fig. 10.4 Flow velocity of air around the machine tool atmosphere (free convection)
10
Modelling of Thermal Interactions Between Environment …
117

T1
ð
Þ4 T2
ð
Þ4¼ T1 T2


 T1 þ T2



T1
ð
Þ2 T2
ð
Þ2


ð10:4Þ
in a linearised manner.
hstr ¼ r12  T1 þ T2
ð
Þ 
T1
ð
Þ2 T2
ð
Þ2


ð10:5Þ
Numerical approach The FEM software ANSYS applied involves three distinct
strategies to calculate radiation effects on three-dimensional models for a numerical
analysis based on structural mechanical models:
• Application of surface effect elements to model surface effects
• Use of a radiation matrix in the form of a superelement in a thermal analysis
• Use of a radiosity solver
The method mentioned ﬁrst, based on surface effect elements, is suitable to model
radiation effects between a surface and a point, and was employed for numerical
implementation. The methods mentioned second and third, using the radiation
matrix and the radiosity solver, can be used in a more general sense and also makes it
possible to model the interaction between several surfaces and the environment. It
takes more calculation time to create the radiation matrix by means of the radiosity
method for large models. A limitation when using the radiation matrix arises from
the option of deﬁning temperature-dependent emissivities dropped here; this,
however, is not relevant for an application to a machine tool structure.
Numerical versus analytical computation The numerical solution quantifying the
radiation to the environment does not appreciably differ from the analytical one.
This is made clear by the difference of approx. 16 % obtained for two surfaces that
are in a position vertical to one another. Figure 10.5 shows the results gained for
both the analytical and numerical solutions of the problem in comparison.
radiation
between
parallel plates
analytic
numeric
5
10
15
20
22.86
20.36
˙Q12 [W]
analytic radiation calculation based on
established calculation rules of the irra-
diating numbers
numeric radiation calculation based on
FE-method (ANSYS) with radiation ma-
trices as superelement
Fig. 10.5 Analytical and numerical computation results in comparison
118
R. Neugebauer et al.

The introduction of an overall heat transfer coefﬁcient (compare Zwingenberger
2014) hges ¼ hstr þ hkonv makes it possible to represent the interaction with the
environment for convection and thermal radiation in a combined manner and at the
same time reduces the calculation time when using the Finite-Element method,
since it is not necessary to run additional iterations because of additional
nonlinearities.
10.3.2 Sensitivity Analysis on a Machine Tool Structure
The inﬂuence of each individual thermal boundary condition in the total heat ﬂux
was evidenced by a sensitivity analysis, shown for a column assembly and spindle
unit, as well as the required components, consisting of linear guidances, ball screw,
roller bearing and feed drive. The model used is based on a prototype-like
machining centre by the ﬁrm Auerbach Maschinenfabrik GmbH. In Fig. 10.6, the
analysed part of the machine structure is shaded. The main spindle of the prototype
is represented by a dummy with no machining function; it represents the main
spindle in terms of geometry and mass.
component of
column
dimensions:
1990mm x 920mm x 2730mm
representation of geometry and
mass from the main spindle by
a
placeholder
“
“
(no functioning
main spindle available)
x
y
z
Fig. 10.6 Components of the simulation model for sensitivity analysis (Auerbach ACW630)
10
Modelling of Thermal Interactions Between Environment …
119

The partial model of the machine tool structure is illustrated in Fig. 10.7. Since
the structure’s sensitivity was checked regarding the thermal boundary conditions,
that is, a comparison between the effects of convection and thermal radiation,
fundamental conclusions in this case are made possible by considering an indi-
vidual complex assembly from the machining centre. The load case assumed takes
into account the heat ﬂux from the feed drive, which brings into action the vertical
slide motion. The heat source is assumed to be 250 W independently of the real
load cycle; it is deﬁned as a heat source rate in the feed drive. The heat ﬂux
dissipating into the environment as well as adjacent assemblies as power loss of the
feed drive was derived from the servo-motors’ parameters. The splitting of the heat
ﬂux from power losses into convection, thermal radiation and thermal conduction
on the motor ﬂange largely depends on the mounting conditions, above all on the
thermal conduction into the machine tool structure, and cannot be expressed in a
generalised way. However, as has been shown by investigations of the thermal
losses and their introduction into the machine tool structure, the relevant share is
transferred by thermal conduction via motor ﬂange to the adjacent components
(Neugebauer et al. 2009). A temperature boundary condition assumed to be 20 °C
on the linear guides in X direction deﬁnes the interface with the machine bed.
Inﬂuences of convection and radiation Figure 10.8 indicates the temperatures
under different convection boundary conditions for chosen analysis positions
assembly groups
servo engine
machine base
support
main spindle
ball screw
linear guides
analysis position
temperatures:
ﬁxed bearing KGT
machine base
support
displacements:
TCP
(X, Y, Z)
Fig. 10.7 Analysis positions on machine tool column
120
R. Neugebauer et al.

(see Fig. 10.7) on the assembly investigated. The thermal interactions between the
structure and the environment are characterised by deﬁned boundary conditions for
the thermal radiation (emissivity ε = 0.9) and a constant ambient temperature of
20 °C. There are no interactions between the individual parts of the structural
surface, which would permit a heat ﬂux at an assumed temperature difference due to
visual contact. The heat transfer coefﬁcient varies from simulation to simulation,
but remains constant during the calculation of the stationary state.
On the positions evaluated on the structural surface, the mean variation of the
heat transfer coefﬁcient results in a deviation of 22.4 % on the rigid bearing of the
ball screw of the vertical axis, and 1.2 % on the slide. Since the temperature
difference diminishes as a function of the heat source distance, the heat ﬂuxes
between the structure and the environment also decrease, which ﬁnally results in a
reduced inﬂuence of the boundary conditions deﬁned.
The varied boundary conditions for radiation in the sensitivity analysis include
the interaction between the structure and the environment. For a comprehensive
analysis and a representation of all effective heat ﬂuxes induced by radiation,
interaction between the individual assemblies has to be taken into consideration, if
they are in mutual visual contact. In the concrete case, for a consideration like this, it
is necessary not only to include the structural assemblies, but also the entire machine
tool cover. Since the machine tool structure investigated had no cover, and the
interaction due to thermal radiation between the assemblies and for an individual
inﬂuence of convection
C
temperature
ﬁxed
bearing
(KGT)
20
25
30
temperature
machine
base
20
22
24
temperature
support
20.0
20.1
20.2
no convection
h = 2 W/ (m 2K)
h = 4 W/ (m 2K)
h = 6 W/ (m 2K)
h = 8 W/ (m 2K)
h = 10 W/ (m 2K)
air temp.:
= 20
emissivity:
= 0 .9
radiating to the environ-
ment
C
C
C
Fig. 10.8 Inﬂuence affected by convection on the temperature ﬁeld (chosen measurement points)
10
Modelling of Thermal Interactions Between Environment …
121

component (in the case of radiation to itself) would cause considerable calculation
efforts, sensitivity analysis was limited to radiation into the environment.
The inﬂuence of the used radiation boundary conditions used on the simulation
outcomes can be taken from Fig. 10.9. The convection boundary conditions acting
in parallel are identical for all variants investigated, and deﬁned by a uniform heat
transfer coefﬁcient h = 5 W/(m2 K) and an ambient temperature g ¼ 20 °C, which
is also chosen as a constant. Emissivity is deﬁned as a variable parameter between
ε = 0 (without thermal radiation) and ε = 1.
Analysis The sensitivity analysis executed on the assembly introduced indicates
that both thermal effects explored—free convection and thermal radiation—make
up similar percentages of the overall heat ﬂux. Thus, both heat transfer mechanisms
have to be considered here with sufﬁcient accuracy, when analysing the interaction
between the machine tool structure and the environment, in order to be able to
capture the heat ﬂux transferred on the boundary surfaces to the environment in
terms of quality and quantity in a manner that is closely to reality.
When expending the load cases considered by the traverse motions of the
individual assemblies and the resulting air motions, the share of the heat ﬂux
transferred due to thermal radiation is reduced signiﬁcantly for the surfaces situated
in the area inﬂuenced by forced air ﬂows. For the part of a machine tool structure
without a machine cover, like that studied here, the interaction between parts of the
structural surface that are in mutual visual contact is relatively minor. If a machine
tool cover exists, then areas of the machine surface are separated from each other,
which means that visual contact is avoided and, at the same time, that a percentage
of the emitted radiation is reﬂected by the cover and absorbed by the structural
surface. This effect normally also appears inside the machine tool structure, at the
interaction between the walls of cavities; however, it remains unconsidered in the
chosen deﬁnition of the radiation boundary condition to the environment.
inﬂuence of heat radiation
µm
displacement (amount)
TCP
5
10
15
dx
dy
dz
no radiation
= 0 .2
= 0 .4
= 0 .6
= 0 .8
air temp.:
= 20 C
heat transfer coefficient:
h = 5 W / (m 2K)
radiating to the environ-
ment
Fig. 10.9 Inﬂuence of thermal radiation on the thermally induced TCP displacements
122
R. Neugebauer et al.

10.3.3 Veriﬁcation in Experiment
Figure 10.10 elucidates the displacement on the spindle collar for the X axis
direction. The stationary simulation initial state is used as a homing position, which
means that the value at the point in time t = 0 is subtracted from all displacement
values. Consequently, only the displacements caused by the temporally changed
temperature ﬁeld are outlined and shown.
The TCP displacements are reproduced in a manner close to reality in terms of
quality and quantity by means of the simulation with transiently adapted heat
transfer coefﬁcients. In general, looking at the thermal displacements calculated, it
can be ascertained that the method introduced for transient adaptation of the heat
transfer coefﬁcients provides the most reliable prediction.
10.4 Classiﬁcation According to the Goals of the CRC/TR 96
and Outlook
The activities executed in subproject B01 “Modelling of thermal interaction
between environment and machine tool” describe the interface between the envi-
ronment and the machine tool. The studies and work performed to determine the
inﬂuences of convection and radiation were able to establish the scientiﬁc basis for
improved modelling of the thermal interactions between the environment and the
machine tool, shown for a machine column. The authors succeeded in classifying
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
time [s]
× 10 4
−10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
displacement [µm]
displacement S2 - X-direction
measurement
sim h1 = 2 W/ (m 2 K)
sim h2 = 5 W / (m 2 K)
sim h3 = 10 W / (m 2 K)
sim trans KRB
Fig. 10.10 Thermally induced TCP displacement in X axis direction
10
Modelling of Thermal Interactions Between Environment …
123

surface areas by means of structural analysis and the assignment of individual heat
transfer coefﬁcients. Based on these outcomes, calculation models able to map the
complete machine tool with all external surfaces and its geometrical features can be
established.
For
this
purpose,
approximation
functions
allowing
structural
mechanical simulations to be used without CFD simulations have to be developed.
These approximation functions contribute to an optimal transfer of the parameters
obtained from ﬂow simulation to the surface of the FE model. Based on these
results, the structural mechanical FE model can be developed and calculated efﬁ-
ciently, reducing the calculation time. This makes it possible to calculate variants
with different alpha values and to optimise parameters.
Initial preliminary studies on sensitivity related to the machine tool surface
geometry and the relevant boundary conditions were executed to develop this
approximation functions and to implement it as a software module. Based on these
outcomes, the high quality and efﬁciency of the approximation functions to be
developed have to be assured in connection with performance data analyses. In the
ﬁrst stage of application, the analyses are mainly carried out for free ﬂows.
References
Baehr HD, Stephan K (2004) Wärme- und Stoffübertragung, Auﬂage: 4., neu bearb. u. erw. Auﬂ.
Korr. Nachdruck. Springer, Berlin u.a
Großmann K, Müller J, Merx M, Riedel M (2013) Grundlagen der experimentellen Analyse des
thermo-elastischen Verhaltens von Werkzeugmaschinen mit Hilfe der selektiven Thermograﬁe.
ZWF Zeitschrift für wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb 118:492–497
Groth C, Müller G (2001) FEM für Praktiker - Band 3: Temperaturfelder: Temperaturfelder:
Basiswissen und Arbeitsbeispiele zu FEM-Anwendungen der Temperaturfeldberechnung -
Lösungen mit dem FE-Programm ANSYS(R). expert, Renningen-Malmsheim
Neugebauer R, Ihlenfeldt S, Zwingenberger C (2010) An extended procedure for convective
boundary conditions on transient thermal simulations of machine tools. Prod Eng Res Dev
4:641–646. doi:10.1007/s11740-010-0263-0
Neugebauer R, Zwingenberger C, Schädlich K, Vesely J (2009) Simulation des Wärmegangs von
Werkzeugmaschinen, Chemnitz
VDI-Gesellschaft Verfahrenstechnik und Chemieingenieurwesen (2006) VDI-Wärmeatlas Ber-
echnungsblätter für den Wärmeübergang, Karlsruhe
Zwingenberger C (2014) Beitrag zur Verbesserung der Simulationsgenauigkeit bei der Bestim-
mung des thermischen Verhaltens von Werkzeugmaschinen. Dissertation, TU Chemnitz
124
R. Neugebauer et al.

Chapter 11
Determination and Modelling of Heat
Transfer Mechanisms Acting Among
Machine Tool Components
Sarah Vieler, Yona Frekers, Michael Burghold and Reinhold Kneer
Abstract Quantifying the thermal resistances between machine components in
contact with each other has key importance for the characterisation of the machine
tool’s thermal behaviour. Against this background, this paper outlines analytical,
experimental and numerical approaches to calculate thermal resistances at con-
tacting surfaces.
11.1 Introduction
The aim of the CRC/TR 96 is to create an overall model for transient thermo-elastic
machine tool behaviour. For this, many individual machine tool components are
modelled by means of ﬁnite-element-method (FEM). In order to achieve a reliable
prediction of the thermo-energetic behaviour, heat ﬂows throughout various com-
ponents, as well as at interfaces between contacting components need to be taken
into account. These interfaces include rigid joints at the spindle, tool chuck or
machine table. However, heat is also transferred between components under relative
movement, such as in guiding elements. Figure 11.1 provides a schematic over-
view: Three components are in contact with each other, whereas the left is in a ﬁxed
coupling with the middle component. The right component is moved relatively to
the middle one, resulting in friction and thereby imposing a heat source. For this
reason, heat ﬂows throughout the assembly occur.
S. Vieler  Y. Frekers (&)  M. Burghold  R. Kneer
Institute of Heat and Mass Transfer, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
e-mail: frekers@wsa.rwth-aachen.de
S. Vieler
e-mail: vieler@wsa.rwth-aachen.de
M. Burghold
e-mail: burghold@wsa.rwth-aachen.de
R. Kneer
e-mail: kneer@wsa.rwth-aachen.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_11
125

Heat ﬂow at the static contacting joint is displayed on the right. As shown, the
actual surface of two components within contact (real surface area) equates to a
fraction of the nominal surface area. This is due to material roughness, which
occurs subject to the manufacturing process of the components surface. As a result,
thermal resistance arises, which, in turn, causes temperature-difference between the
two components at the joint. For the development of reliable models, precise
knowledge of the heat transfer mechanisms at these joints is required. The aim of
the research project is therefore to quantitatively describe the heat transfer mech-
anisms at the joints.
The relationship between the temperature drop at the joint and the heat ﬂow
through the contact surface is expressed by following Eq. (11.1)
_Q ¼ hc  A  DTc
ð11:1Þ
whereby A represents the nominal area and DTc the temperature difference between
the component surfaces within contact. The parameter hc describes the heat transfer
coefﬁcient, which links the temperature differences with the respective heat ﬂow.
Various heat transfer mechanisms occur at the contact area. These include thermal
conduction through the solid bodies, as well as heat transfer through the ﬂuid within
the cavities. Radiation heat also has to be taken into account at high surface tem-
peratures. However, thermal conduction through the joints constitutes the major
part of thermal transmission (Yovanovich 2005), which therefore is focused on in
detail below.
The relevant inﬂuencing parameters on thermal conduction are related to the
consistency of the contact region and can be subdivided into three groups (see
Fig. 11.2). On the one hand, the surface geometry of the non-deformed joint partners
has signiﬁcance and can be described by the parameters of roughness and slope. The
Fig. 11.1 Left Multi-layer component with joints. Right Heat ﬂow through a real contact joint
126
S. Vieler et al.

real contact area is also inﬂuenced by the nominal pressure on the joint (mechanical
force upon the nominal surface area), since the contact ratio is changed due to
deformation as a function of the mechanical properties. In addition to this, calcu-
lation of the heat transfer coefﬁcient also requires the consideration of the thermo-
physical properties, such as the heat conductivity of both joint partners.
Within literature, various approaches are provided to describe the contact heat
transfer coefﬁcient hc. One of the best known methods originates from Mikic (1974):
hc ¼ 1:13~k tan h
Rq
p
p þ H

0:94
ð11:2Þ
The parameters in Eq. 11.2 include the harmonic mean of both components’ heat
conductivities ~k, the root mean square roughness Rq, the mean-angle of the
roughness peaks (h), the nominal pressure (p) and the material hardness (H). The
correlation however, can only be used as an approximation, since the determination
of the mean angle of the roughness peaks in particular, is unknown in most cases
and its measurement takes considerable time and expense. The model is also based
on the assumption that both specimen surfaces have Gaussian, isotropic height
distribution with semi-spherical roughness peaks. It is assumed that the individual
contact spots do not inﬂuence each other thermally or mechanically. This and other
analytical approaches have already been reﬁned and expanded by adding inﬂu-
encing parameters. Here, ﬁrst of all, the model by Bahrami et al. (2004) should be
mentioned, which takes into account heat transport mechanisms throughout the gas
inside the cavities.
Figure 11.3 outlines a comparison of the heat transfer coefﬁcients determined by
means of the given Mikic model and the model by Bahrami et al. (2004) with
experimental studies. Obvious deviations are shown both between the two models
and in comparison with the experimental outcomes. As a result, this elucidates the
open issues that have to be clariﬁed by research in order to derive a reliable heat
transfer model.
Fig. 11.2 Variables that inﬂuence contact transmission: surface structure (left), change in contact
areas as a function of contact pressure (middle), thermophysical properties (right)
11
Determination and Modelling of Heat Transfer Mechanisms …
127

11.2 Approach
11.2.1 Determination of Contact Heat Transfer
in Experiments
To quantify the contact heat transfer by means of measurement, different require-
ments have to be fulﬁlled by the experimental setup and procedure. On the one
hand, representative joints for machine tools need to be modelled and characterised
as accurately as possible in terms of material and structural consistency. On the
other hand contact pressure between the surfaces needs to be varied in a range that
is relevant for the component joints. Since the goal of the experiment is to quantify
heat ﬂows (local temperature gradients) by means of temperature measurements,
which, in turn, also permits conclusions regarding the heat transfer coefﬁcient,
stringent requirements have to be fulﬁlled by the measurement method’s accuracy.
This is achieved by means of a high resolution infrared thermographic camera.
The measurements are executed by using two specimens of similar surface and
material properties as relevant machine components. As with the machine com-
ponents under consideration, the specimens are pressed together at their faces
within a hydraulic test machine. A photo of the test setup and a characteristic
infrared image is shown in Fig. 11.4.
The investigations described here focused on the mild steel C45 (material no.
1.0503), which is, for instance, employed as machine tool tables and clamping
ﬁxtures.
These temporally resolved temperature data are used to determine the contact
heat transfer. To do this, the test concept illustrated in Fig. 11.5 is implemented for
the experimental studies.
Unequal initial temperatures cause heat transfer from the hotter to the colder
specimen as soon as the two are brought into contact. The pressure-time curve is
measured in addition to temperature distribution (Fig. 11.5, bottom left). With the
Fig. 11.3 Experimental
contact heat transfer
coefﬁcients (continuous
lines), compared with
correlations by (according to)
Mikic and Bahrami et al. (dot-
dashed-lines) (Fieberg 2007)
128
S. Vieler et al.

specimens’ temperature difference at the contact area, the solution to the respective
inverse heat conduction problem is obtained in accordance with Fieberg (2007). Its
solution resolves the value of the contact heat transfer coefﬁcient (Fig. 11.5, right).
Experimentally gained heat transfer coefﬁcients not only make a direct quantitative
prediction regarding heat transfer possible, but can also be used as validation data
for numerical calculations.
Fig. 11.4 Test setup (left); Infrared image (right)
Fig. 11.5 Strategy and evaluation of the compression tests
11
Determination and Modelling of Heat Transfer Mechanisms …
129

11.2.2 Modelling the Contact Heat Transfer
Analytical correlations to quantify the contact heat transfer use several assumptions
and simpliﬁcations, both regarding surface geometry and in terms of mechanics and
heat transfer. The main assumptions reduce the surface to an isotropic structure with
a Gaussian roughness proﬁle. By this, the number of free parameters in surface
representation is reduced to two: roughness and mean slope. Figure 11.6 demon-
strates the results of a roughness and contour measurement using a caliper arm,
obtained for two different technically machined surfaces, supported by the Labo-
ratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering (WZL Aachen). As can be
seen from these outcomes, the assumptions of Gaussian distribution and isotropy
are not justiﬁed for real, technically relevant surfaces, and technically manufactured
surfaces may have different geometries despite similar characteristic values (in this
case roughness value Ra).
This shows the necessity to validate the analytical correlations using experi-
mental measurements and to numerically analyse the different surfaces regarding
their mechanical and thermal contact behaviour without relying on geometrical
assumptions and simpliﬁcations. For this purpose, a simulation tool was developed,
which models the contact behaviour of generated surfaces with isotropic and
Gaussian roughness, as well as with topographically measured technical surfaces
(Frekers et al. 2014).
This calculation is performed in two steps. First the elastic semi-sphere model by
Bhushan (1998) is applied and enhanced using a plastic component as developed by
Willner (2004) and Görke (2010). The deformed surfaces’ thermal behaviour is
subsequently computed by means of an implicit ﬁnite difference technique. The
contact heat transfer coefﬁcient results from the calculated temperature drop over
the contact area.
Fig. 11.6 Topographic
measurement of two different
technical surfaces with similar
roughness
130
S. Vieler et al.

11.3 Results
The outcomes for the simulation of real and generated surfaces are taken from
Frekers et al. (2014) and are compared to measurement results obtained from the
experimental setup described. Contact heat transfer coefﬁcients are computed and
measured as a function of the nominal contact pressure. Mild steel C45 was used as
the specimen material. The heat transfer coefﬁcients elucidated in Figs. 11.7 and
11.8 are normalized by the conductivity of the material. This is done, since heat
conductivity has a linear inﬂuence of heat transfer—both within the developed
model and as stated by the Mikic-correlation. This makes the results more com-
parable for different joint materials.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
pressure, p [MPa]
normalized heat transfer coefficient, hc/k [1/m]
real surface (0°)
real surface (90°)
generated surface
Fig. 11.7 Simulation
outcomes of pressure-
dependent heat transfer
coefﬁcients for real and
generated surfaces (Frekers
et al. 2014)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
pressure, p [MPa]
normalized heat transfer coefficient, hc/k [1/m]
Rq = 5 μm
Rq = 10 μm
Ra = 6.5 μm
Simulation;
Simulation;
Measurement;
Rq = 5 μm
Mikic;
Rq = 10 μm
Mikic;
Fig. 11.8 Contact heat
transfers—found in
experiments and simulated, as
well as found by approach
correlations according to (by)
Mikic
11
Determination and Modelling of Heat Transfer Mechanisms …
131

Figure 11.7 shows the comparison between a generated surface and a real
measured technical surface. The real surface is simulated in contact with itself, ﬁrst
under a 0° angle (mirrored), and then rotated at an angle of 90° to one another. In
comparison, the generated surface has identical roughness and mean slope.
The results demonstrate a change in the contact heat transfer at different contact
angles, as well as differences between the transfer coefﬁcients of real and generated
surfaces. Overall however, the variation in contact heat transfer coefﬁcient values
between generated and real surfaces is low.
Simulation outcomes and predictions of the Mikic correlation are compared with
experimental measurements in Fig. 11.8.
The shown experimental data each are obtained from different test specimens.
The exact microscopic surface geometry of each specimen examined is, as is the
case of problems commonly appearing in practice, not completely known. Only the
mean roughness value (Ra value) was measured, to 6.5 µm. The different simulated
surfaces have squared roughness values (Rq value) that amount to 5 or 10 µm, and a
mean slope tan h
ð
Þ of 0.2 mm.
As the measured results indicate, the developed simulation model is able to
predict contact heat transfer coefﬁcients in the observed pressure range considerably
better than the Mikic correlation. The measurement results strongly vary at high
coefﬁcients. A possible explanation for this is the measurement accuracy, since high
heat transfer coefﬁcients make the analysis procedure more fault-prone. It should
also be noted that the surface geometry of the experimental specimens is only
insufﬁciently represented beyond the roughness value. Slightly differing contact
geometries also result in greater scattering of outcomes in cases of increasing heat
transfer coefﬁcients. From these observations and ﬁndings, future research needs
can be identiﬁed clearly.
11.4 Classiﬁcation of Outcomes in the CRC/TR 96
The model developed and the experiments performed enable the quantiﬁcation of
the heat transfer coefﬁcients at component joints. By using these experimental and
numerical methods, the parameters can be derived for each joint and integrated into
the corresponding calculation tool. For many components within a machine tool,
the thermal resistance at the joint is crucially relevant for the thermal behaviour of
the whole machine and thus, decisive for model accuracy. Hence, the heat transfer
coefﬁcients quantiﬁed here make precise representation and modelling of the
machine tool possible.
132
S. Vieler et al.

11.5 Outlook
The described investigations deal with the experimental exploration of C45 as
specimen material. Thus, continuing research is aimed to using this methodical
approach to characterise all relevant steel types employed in machine tool building.
Nevertheless, reliable models for an exact representation of the heat transfer
behaviour as a function of geometric and structural mechanical parameters that can
be measured easily are still needed. It is particularly important to provide data for a
wide scope of varying pressures and geometry values. For this reason, ongoing
research activities are aimed at the steady reﬁnement and adaptation of the simu-
lation models.
References
Bahrami M, Culham JR, Yovanovich MM, Schneider GE (2004) Thermal joint resistance of
conforming rough surfaces with gas-ﬁlled gaps. J Thermophys Heat Transf 18:318–325
Bhushan B (1998) Contact mechanics of rough surfaces in tribology: multiple asperity contact.
Tribol Lett 4:1–35
Fieberg C (2007) Kontaktwärbergang unter hohen Druck- und Temperaturbedingungen.
Dissertation, RWTH Aachen
Frekers Y, Vieler S, van Buren S, et al (2014) Mechanical simulation. In: 15th International heat
transfer conference (accepted)
Görke D (2010) Experimentelle und numerische Untersuchungen des normal- und Tangential-
kontaktverhaltens rauer metallischer Oberﬂächen. PhD. thesis, Universität Erlangen
Mikic BB (1974) Thermal contact conductance; theoretical considerations. Int J Heat Mass Transf
17:205–214
Willner K (2004) Elasto-plastic normal contact of three-dimensional fractal surfaces using
halfspace theory. J Tribol 126:28–33. doi:10.1115/1.1631019
Yovanovich MM (2005) Four decades of research on thermal contact, gap, and joint resistance in
microelectronics. IEEE Trans Compon Packag Technol 28:182–206. doi:10.1109/TCAPT.
2005.848483
11
Determination and Modelling of Heat Transfer Mechanisms …
133

Chapter 12
Investigation of Components
and Assembly Groups
Christian Brecher, Marcel Fey, Dorothea Haber and Kolja
Bakarinow
Abstract Machine tools comprise thermally active and passive components. This
results in a heterogeneous temperature ﬁeld, which may cause displacements inside
the machine and, ultimately, a TCP displacement. In subproject B03, the individual
components are subjected to metrological study and transformed into a simulation
model in order to obtain a simulation representation of the thermo-elastic machine
tool behaviour. In the methodology to determine the complete machine behaviour, a
distinction is made between a top-down- and a bottom-up approach. In the ﬁrst
case, the behaviour of the complete machine is analysed and synchronized with the
simulation model. Thus, for instance, it is possible to represent the behaviour of the
passive components. In the second case, the thermally active components—ball
screws, guidance systems and the main spindle—of the machine tool are individ-
ually studied on test beds. Information gleaned from the investigations conducted
on the test beds and the models derived from them are added to the complete
machine model, where they are employed to identify the complete temperature- and
displacement ﬁeld. To exclude the ambient inﬂuence as much as possible, the test
beds are installed in a climatic chamber.
C. Brecher (&)  M. Fey  D. Haber  K. Bakarinow
Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering (WZL),
RWTH Aachen University, Aache, Germany
e-mail: c.brecher@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
M. Fey
e-mail: m.fey@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
D. Haber
e-mail: d.haber@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
K. Bakarinow
e-mail: k.bakarinow@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_12
135

12.1 Introduction
In subproject B03 on the “Investigation of Components and Assembly Groups”, the
aim is to extend the state of knowledge of the thermal behaviour of machine tool
components and subassemblies, as well as of machine tools, depending on different
thermal stress states and intensities. In this process, the components can be sub-
divided into the following two subgroups:
Firstly, a machine tool is made of thermally active components, generating heat
by friction and electrical losses and, in this way, causing that heat to enter into the
machine structure. Tactile temperature sensors are used for measurement, on the one
hand. On the other hand, newer developments indicate (Koscàk 2007) that investi-
gations by means of thermographic cameras make sense in order to make a surface-
related statement about the temperature ﬁeld. This approach is pursued in detail in the
studies. In the CRC/TR 96, the following components are explored in more detail:
main spindle, ball screws (Heisel et al. 2005; Kunc 2013; Chang 2009; Ess 2012) and
linear guideways (Kunc 2013; Ess 2012). Drives that also introduce heat into the
system are explored, with the results that are obtained being made available to the
subproject C04 (see Chap. 19). Investigation is here focussed on a targeted variation
of inﬂuencing parameters, such as revolutions per minute and feed. Secondly, a
machine tool also consists of passive components. They absorb heat and transfer it to
the adjacent components, such as, for instance, the machine bed (Neugebauer 2001),
machine table and the slides, or dissipate it into the environment.
Due to the variety of materials these machine tool components are made of, as
well as to the heterogeneous distribution of the heat sources and heterogeneous heat
transitions, an unpredictable inhomogeneous temperature ﬁeld is built up in the
machine tool (Brecher et al. 2011; Mayr 2009; Neugebauer et al. 2002), which is
extremely difﬁcult to deﬁne because of the unknown constraints. To determine the
thermo-elastic deformations by means of a simulation model (Neugebauer et al.
2001, 2002), one has to know the heat sources and sinks, as well as the heat transfer
conditions, to deﬁne the emerging temperature ﬁeld and the resulting displace-
ments. The parameterisation of a model like this is conducted not only through
analysis of the individual components, but also by investigation of the complete
machine. The individual components are explored in terms of their thermo-elastic
behaviour on test beds, while the complete machine is loaded as a whole. In this
process, both the temperatures in the complete structure and the displacement at the
Tool Center Point (TCP) are determined. In the next step, models of the individual
components are generated, which are kept as simple as possible, but nevertheless
map the thermo-elastic component behaviour. These individual models are then
integrated into the model of the complete machine. This overall model allows for
mapping of various load cases and alignment with experiments carried out using the
entire machine.
The ﬁnal objective is to make use of the results and models from the subproject,
both for control-internal correction and for compensation in machine tool design
136
C. Brecher et al.

and dimensioning (Ess 2012; Heisel and Stehle 1996). By varying the settings, it is
possible to create simulation models that can represent the thermo-elastic compo-
nent behaviour very realistically and thus promise high predictive accuracy.
12.2 Approach
The objectives described above are achieved by the following two different
approaches shown in principle in Fig. 12.1 (left). The ﬁrst approach followed is a
bottom-up one. The thermally active machine tool components are investigated
individually on test beds. These components are ball screws, guidance systems and
the main spindle. Information resulting from the test bed investigations and the
models thereby derived are added to the complete machine model and are employed
in the model. To achieve high accuracy in the individual models, the same com-
ponents that are employed in the complete machine, are tested in the test bed
investigations. The machine tool is depicted as a CAD model in Fig. 12.1 (right).
The second approach traced is the top-down strategy. This means that the
behaviour of the complete machine tool is analysed and is also aligned with the
simulation model. This makes it possible, for example, to map the thermo-elastic
behaviour of the passive components. Since the heat transfer conditions in the
machine are different from those on the test beds, additional investigations of the
complete machine tool are necessary. Continuous alignment of the two approaches
makes it possible to provide the optimal simulation result.
12.2.1 Guidance Systems
The test bed to investigate guidance systems is shown in a schematic view in
Fig. 12.2 (left). Two guide rails of the same structure are interlocked via load unit.
simulation
measurement
bottom-up-
approach
top-down-
approach
comparison
comparison
Fig. 12.1 Top-down and bottom-up approaches (left), Simpliﬁed CAD model of the complete
machine (right)
12
Investigation of Components and Assembly Groups
137

Both guide shoes are driven by a linear motor. The linear drive is linked with the
guide shoe by a slide and is thus locally and thermally discoupled. A sensor for
frictional force measurement is situated between the slide and the moving parts. The
frictional force is crucial to quantify the thermal output entering the system.
In the experiment, the guide shoes were traversed at constant speed under a
constant fastening force. The traversing motion stops every 2 min, and the tem-
peratures are measured both by thermocouples and a thermographic camera. Holes
cut into the upper test guide shoe and the guide rail make it possible to measure the
temperatures inside at different positions. The temperature curves on the surface
were recorded by means of a thermographic camera, and PT100 sensors were
attached for alignment. The frictional force is also measured every 30 min. In this
way it was possible to trace the change of the frictional force depending on the
temperature trend.
Variations in the ambient temperature do not affect the investigations, since the
test bed, as represented in Fig. 12.2 (right), is housed in a mobile climatic chamber.
12.2.2 Ball Screws
The ball screw for the Z axis of the complete machine tool was investigated on the
test bed shown in Fig. 12.3. The ball screw is driven by a servomotor by means of a
dog clutch. The nut is connected with the slide via a load cell, at which both axial
force and torsion are measured. A linear motor, transferring a speciﬁc load
opposing the traversing motion, is installed under the slide.
To be able to quantify the temperature inside the ball screw despite the constant
rotational motion, temperature is recorded by means of a thermographic camera. To
do this, it is necessary to blacken the components in order to determine the emission
coefﬁcient. Furthermore, reﬂections from the environment on shiny metal cause a
falsiﬁcation of measurement results. PT100 sensors are attached to the structure for
alignment and thus quantify the emission coefﬁcient.
Fig. 12.2 Test bed for guidance systems
138
C. Brecher et al.

As was also the case in the experiments with the guidance systems, these are
continuous load tests. The ball screw is driven at a constant speed over 8 h and
subjected to a constant linear drive load until a steady state has been achieved. The
test bed then stands still and the components cool down. Since the warming up and
the cooling down phases have different performance characteristics, temperatures
are also measured in the cooling down stage.
To exclude the impact of the ambient temperature to the greatest extent possible,
the test bed is shielded from sunlight and draught, and ambient temperature is
recorded for monitoring.
An eddy-current sensor is applied on the spindle’s front face and thus traces
spindle lengthening as a result of warming up. This is not only relevant for mod-
eling, but also for a correction of displacements later on.
12.2.3 Demonstrator Machine Tool
Both approaches are investigated on the demonstrator machine. Experiments are
conducted to apply the top-down approach. The measuring setup used is illustrated
in Fig. 12.4 (left). A test mandrel made of Invar steel is fastened to the machine tool
interface, and a measuring angle is mounted on the machine table. In this angle, there
are ﬁxed—as recommended in ISO 230-3—ﬁve path sensors to capture the TCP
displacements in X-, Y- and Z directions, as well as inclination related to the X- and
Y axes. Heat is introduced into the machine tool by traversing a linear axis. At ﬁrst,
each axis was traversed individually in the air cut to consider the heat sources
separately. The subject of investigation is a ﬁve-axis machine tool whose Z axis is
driven via a ball screw, and the remaining axes are driven by linear drives. Apart
from the TCP displacements, temperatures and strains were metered in the machine
tool structure for alignment with the simulation model, see Fig. 12.4 (right).
load cell
blackened ball screw
linear motor
for load
eddy current
sensor
PT 100 
elements
drive motor
Fig. 12.3 Test bed for ball screw investigation
12
Investigation of Components and Assembly Groups
139

12.3 Results
12.3.1 Rail Guidance Systems
The frictional force emerging during the traversing motion was captured on the test
bed introduced in Fig. 12.2 by means of a piezoelectric force sensor at 30-min
intervals. The average frictional force is shown for various traversing speed values as
a function of the measurement quantity in Fig. 12.5. It is clear that frictional force
increases as a function of speed. However, this response seems to be non-linear, as
expected. The zero position of the frictional force shown at the beginning and at the
end can be explained by the fact that the test bed stands still at the moment of
measurement, and thus no friction emerges. From the diagram, it can also be
abstracted that the frictional force is constant over the duration of the test. As a
consequence, the temperature in the guidance system does not affect, or only
x
z
y
Fig. 12.4 Measurement setup for the entire machine tool (left), meshed model (right)
Fig. 12.5 Average frictional
force for various speed values
as a function of the test
duration
140
C. Brecher et al.

negligibly affects the frictional force and, in turn, the thermal dissipation output. The
friction power is calculated using the frictional force and the speed, which can be
read from the control. This power is almost completely transferred into thermal
output, so that it can be used as an input variable in the models. The thermo-elastic
behaviour of a machine component can be mapped by simulation by using the power
produced by friction. In the test, an adjustment with the component temperatures
measured is executed for a view that very closely approximates reality. This partial
model shapes the basis for the entire simulation model of the machine tool.
12.3.2 Ball Screws
The explorations of the ball screw for the Z axis of the entire machine were
conducted for several speeds and load values to characterise the component’s
holistic behaviour. As previously mentioned, the warming up phase lasted
approximately 8 h and was followed by a cooling-down stage, in which the test bed
does not traverse any more. This made it possible to attach PT100 sensors to the
spindle in this phase to align them directly with the thermographic camera images
and to calibrate the thermographic camera. For alignment, additional temperature
sensors were attached to the back of the load cell and the nut. In Fig. 12.6, the
emission coefﬁcient is still one at each point.
For systematic evaluation of the ball screw’s thermal behaviour, the temperature
curve was ﬁrst analysed at individual points. Figure 12.7 represents the exemplary
PT100 elements
Fig. 12.6 Thermographic representation of the ball screw test bed
12
Investigation of Components and Assembly Groups
141

temperature curve for the ball screw nut at several speed values, though without the
linear drive’s load.
The characteristic exponential performance both in the warming up- and the
cooling down phases can be seen. At the minimal speed of 10 m/min, the maximal
temperature of approximately 35 °C appears, and, with the highest speed value of
30 m/min, the maximal temperature is 38 °C. The steady state was established after
approximately 2.5 h, and the temperature remained constant after this time. Due to
the fact that the nut has almost the same temperature at a speed of 20 m/min and at
the higher speed value, it is still impossible to predict the precise relationships.
Consequently, additional measurements and an ongoing analysis of the measure-
ments already carried out are required for a complete characterisation. In this
process, the thermographic camera photos after the determination of the speciﬁc
emission coefﬁcients play an important part in the analysis of the heat ﬂows and
temperature ﬁelds.
12.3.3 The Machine Tool as a Whole
The investigations described above became a part of the simulation model of the
complete machine tool in the bottom-up approach. For individual load cases, the
heat input from the guidance systems and the ball screw were introduced into the
complete machine tool. Temperatures were also measured for the structural parts
and the drives in the measurements of the machine (top-down approach). They were
employed to align the component investigations. However, they also bridged the
gaps in components which could not be modelled until adequate models had been
stored for them. Thus, a temperature distribution could be calculated in the machine
tool simulation, which conforms relatively closely to the measurements (Fig. 12.8).
20
24
28
32
36
40
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
temperature [°C]
time [h]
temperature of the nut with 0% load and different
 velocities
v=10 m/min
v=20 m/min
v=30 m/min
Fig. 12.7 Temperature of the
ball screw nut at several
speeds
142
C. Brecher et al.

In this case, the Z axis is traversed, whereas the X- and Y axes are not traversed, so
that the heat introduced into the guide rail and ball screw of the Z axis is limited. To
represent the thermo-elastic behaviour reliably and also for various load cases,
however, it is necessary to store both more precise models for the components and
to parameterise also other constraints as well, such as convection and heat transi-
tions between components. Thus, for instance, the temperature shown for the Z
slide is still too low, since the heat build-up of the spindle controlled in closed-loop
has not yet been modelled.
12.4 Classiﬁcation of Outcomes CRC/TR 96
A thermally suitable design for machine tools resulting in a reduction in thermally
induced machine tool errors demands exact knowledge of the thermo-elastic
behaviour of the machine components and subassemblies, and, as a result, of the
complete machine tool. This behaviour is explored and subjected to a systematic
consideration in the subproject B03 with the aim of working in conjunction with the
other subprojects, such as A05, B02, B05 and C04, to ﬁnd a solution to the conﬂict
of interests arising in the overall CRC/TR 96 among energy use, accuracy and
productivity.
Temp in 
. 
°C
Fig. 12.8 Simulated temperature distribution for the complete machine tool
12
Investigation of Components and Assembly Groups
143

12.5 Outlook
The studies demonstrate that it is already possible to determine the temperature ﬁeld
that appears in the machine as a whole for individual load cases with limited
accuracy. However, optimisation measures are necessary for the further use of the
model. In this process, the constraints, such as convection, heat transitions, and the
response of individual components under different loads have to be determined,
and, ﬁnally, the temperature ﬁelds have to be transferred to the displacement of the
machine.
References
Brecher C, Wissmann A, Klein W (2011) Thermisch bedingtes Verformungsverhalten von
Werkzeugmaschinen. ZWF Zeitschrift für wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb 106:663–666
Chang C-F (2009) A theory of ball-screw thermal compensation. In: International multiconference
of engineers and computer scientists
Ess M (2012) Simulation and compensation of thermal errors of machine tools. Dissertation, ETH
Zürich
Heisel U, Stehle T (1996) Ermittlung und Kompensation thermisch bedingter Deformationen an
Werkzeugmaschinen und Industrierobotern. Produktion und Management. Produktion und
Management 86
Heisel U, Stehle T, Koscàk G (2005) Thermisches Verhalten von Kugelgewindetrieben. wt
Werkstattstechnik 320
Koscàk G (2007) Ermittlung des instationären thermischen Verhaltens von Vorschubachsen mit
Kugelgewindetrieb mit Hilfe der Verarbeitung thermograﬁscher Messdaten. Dissertation,
Universität Stuttgart
Kunc M (2013) Identiﬁkation und Modellierung von nichtlinearen Dämpfungseffekten in
Vorschubachsen für Werkzeugmaschinen. Dissertation, RWTH Aachen
Mayr J (2009) Beurteilung und Kompensation des Temperaturgangs von Werkzeugmaschinen.
Dissertation, ETH Zürich
Neugebauer R, Harzbecker C, Nestmann S (2001) Optimization of thermal behavior of machine
tools with separated machine bed components. Prod Eng Res Dev Germany Ann German Acad
Soc Prod Eng 8:137–140
Neugebauer R, Weidermann F, Nestmann S (2002) A modeling approach to optimize the thermal
behaviour of machine tool components. Production Engineering vol IX/1. Production
engineering. Research and development
144
C. Brecher et al.

Chapter 13
Adjustment of Uncertain Parameters
in Thermal Models of Machine Tools
Bernd Kauschinger, Klaus Kabitzsch and Steffen Schroeder
Abstract Thermal models of machine tools contain parameters that represent
machine-speciﬁc and time-variable properties. In the design process, these
parameters cannot be estimated with sufﬁcient accuracy. Thus, they have to be
adjusted by measurements. At present, substantial time, effort and expensive
measurement equipment are required for adjustment, as well as in-depth expertise.
Consequently, the goal is to develop cost efﬁcient methods for rapid and com-
prehensive adjustment. This is to be achieved using a systematic strategy for the
support and automation of adjustment processes. The strategy is demonstrated
based on a thermal model of a bearing assembly.
13.1 Introduction
In the scope of the CRC/TR 96 measures for passive compensation and active
correction of thermally induced deformations as well as for a thermo-energetic
optimized design of machine tools are being developed. Basis of these measures are
thermal behaviour models of the machine and its assemblies. They are used as a
tool for evaluation and optimisation of relevant design features as well as for the
generation of correction values for the feed axes. In the latter case there are par-
ticularly high demands on model accuracy.
B. Kauschinger  S. Schroeder (&)
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Institute for Machine Tools and Control Engineering,
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: steffen.schroeder1@tu-dresden.de
B. Kauschinger
e-mail: bernd.kauschinger@tu-dresden.de
K. Kabitzsch
Faculty of Computer Science, Institute for Technical Information Systems,
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: klaus.kabitzsch@tu-dresden.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_13
145

Thermal models can be distinguished in three categories: correlative, property-
based and structure-based models (Großmann 2012). Correlative and property-
based thermal models are based on empirical model approaches. Hence, the validity
of these models is limited in general. All model parameters need to be adjusted by
means of experimental measurement on the real machine. These models are only
suitable for correction purposes. Structure-based thermal models use physically
founded approaches. This results in a principally wider validity. These models are
suitable not only for correction (Chap. 16) but also for analysis and optimization in
the design process or compensation measures (Chap. 17). Therefore, subproject
B04 focuses on structure-based models.
In contrast to correlative and property-based models most of the parameters in
structure-based models can be estimated from design data with sufﬁcient accuracy.
Hence there are only a few parameters that need to be adjusted based on experi-
mental measurements. But the adjustment procedure and suitable experiments need
to be designed speciﬁcally for every machine (resp. model) and expert knowledge
of the thermal behaviour is required for that. Up to now the design and execution of
the adjustment procedure is very inefﬁcient, since there are no (software) tools for
support and automation available that encapsulate the required expert knowledge.
The need for research resulting from this is addressed in subproject B04.
13.1.1 Uncertain Parameters in Thermal Models
Structure-based thermal models describe the whole thermal causal chain. Model
inputs are technological data generally available in the control, such as spindle
speed or feed rate. They are used to calculate thermal loads (power loss, heat ﬂow).
Based on these loads the transient temperature ﬁeld and the resulting thermal
deformation of the machine’s assemblies are calculated. By applying the position-
dependent kinematic transformation ﬁnally the thermally induced displacement of
the tool center point (TCP) is determined (Großmann and Jungnickel 2001).
Uncertain parameters that need experimental adjustment are located in model
parts for the calculation of thermal loads and temperature ﬁelds. Notably these are
convective heat exchange and generation of power loss. Convective heat exchange
takes place between the machine and the environment as well as in ﬂuid circulation
systems. Power loss is caused by electrical processes in drives and by friction in
guiding elements.
Rolling bearings are a typical example of these guiding elements. Despite their
low friction coefﬁcient in conjunction with the usual speed range, rolling bearings
generate noticeable power losses and can thus become the main heat sources in the
machine. This is especially the case in high-speed main spindles. In addition, the
heat of the inner and outer ring of the bearing is exchanged via the rolling elements.
As a result, rolling bearings substantially affect the temperature distribution in the
machine and thus also thermal deformations relevant for accuracy (Großmann
1998).
146
B. Kauschinger et al.

Power loss of rolling bearings is generated by friction. The major proportion of
heat arises in the moving contact between the rolling elements and the bearing
rings. Friction is inﬂuenced by several coupled elasto-hydrodynamic processes
(Großmann and Jungnickel 2003). Essential processes that appear are:
• Transition from Coulomb friction to viscous friction as a nonlinear function of
speed,
• Sliding- and rolling-off procedures in the contact,
• Elastic deformation of the solids in contact caused by preload,
• Friction generates power loss and therefore changes the bearing temperature,
• Change in preload due to thermally induced deformations of the bearing
assembly and
• Change in lubricant viscosity caused by temperature and speed.
These phenomena result in a frictional torque of the bearing, which depends on
many inﬂuences and shows explicitly nonlinear and time-variable characteristics
depending on speed and temperature (Fig. 13.1). This frictional behaviour has been
studied in a comprehensive manner previously (Bäumler et al. 2012). As a result
there is a variety of friction model approaches that can be used as submodels in the
structure-based thermal model. Due to the complex inﬂuences commonly used
model approaches are mainly of empiric nature. Though they are able to reproduce
relevant effects sufﬁciently, there are signiﬁcant uncertainties in the model
parameters, resulting in substantial model errors. The investigations by Fritz (2011)
should be mentioned as an example. Here calculated friction coefﬁcients differed
from measured ones by 30–200%.
The approaches to determine the parameters of friction models are one reason for
the uncertainties (Jedrzejewski et al. 1989). In some models, for instance, the
average diameter is taken out of many geometric values to determine a parameter
that represents the geometric inﬂuence. The exemplary nature of the inﬂuences of
friction due to manufacturing and assembly tolerances is another reason for
Fig. 13.1 Measured temperature- and speed-dependent bearing friction of an angular contact ball
bearing of the 7207-B-2RS type
13
Adjustment of Uncertain Parameters …
147

parameter uncertainty, e.g. bearing preload. Even close geometric tolerances of the
bearing assembly components may lead to considerable deviations in preload. Last
but not least, another reason can also be found in the bearings’ running-in
behaviour, which is characterised by changing frictional conditions. Measurements
by Nachimowicz and Jałbrzykowski (2012) have shown a long-term decrease of the
frictional torque of angular contact ball bearings by 60 %.
13.1.2 Adjustment of Uncertain Parameters
In general, total model uncertainty results from the selected model approach (model
structure) and its parameters. The parameter uncertainty can be machine-related
classiﬁed in type-identical or instance-related uncertainty. In the case of type-
identical uncertainty, the parameter values only slightly scatter among several
machines of the same type, and, consequently, an adjustment is only needed once
for each machine type. However, in the case of instance-related uncertainty, the
properties scatter widely, e.g. due to manufacturing and assembly tolerances. In
these cases, the parameters have to be adjusted for each individual machine
instance. Parameter uncertainty can also be distinguished in terms of the long-term
characteristics of the real properties. If the properties signiﬁcantly change over time
due to running-in and wear effects, then it is necessary to repeatedly readjust the
parameters. A summary of parameter uncertainty classiﬁcation under parameter
adjustment aspects is given in Table 13.1. Most parameters that need an adjustment
are instance-related.
In addition to the speciﬁc background of the uncertain parameters mentioned
above, there are essential boundary conditions that have to be regarded in parameter
adjustment of thermal models:
• Almost the entire machine structure as well as the surroundings are relevant for
behaviour. Additionally several physical areas (thermal loads, temperature
ﬁelds, deformations, kinematics) have to be represented along the thermal causal
chain, which demands comprehensive and complex models.
• Many properties emerge during assembly and use of the machine. Hence an
adjustment can only be conducted on the assembled machine where access for
metrological purposes is strongly limited and only indirect measurements are
possible.
Table 13.1 Classiﬁcation of parameter uncertainties
Machine related
Long-term related
Parameter
uncertainty
Type-identical
Instance-related
Constant
Variable
Parameter
adjustment
Once for machine
type
For every machine
instance
Once
Several
times
148
B. Kauschinger et al.

• Submodels with uncertain parameters typically include nonlinear approaches
that complicate the adjustment.
• The thermal behaviour is transient and its time constants range from minutes to
hours. Consequently the parameter effect is substantially delayed and mea-
surement times are long.
• Because of strong thermal coupling of machine parts individual parameters
show far-ranging effects. Thus, the effects of different parameters overlap.
• Initial temperature values as a result of thermal history have to be predeﬁned for
the thermal model. This requires a special methodology, since it is impossible to
measure the whole temperature ﬁeld in an economical way.
• The adjustment process demands several sub-steps, such as analysis, planning,
measurement and mathematical optimization. This requires widely varying
approaches. These sub-steps have to be linked, which, in turn, means a high
number of information-processing subtasks.
The performance of previous parameter adjustments of thermal machine models
(Großmann and Jungnickel 2006) shows numerous shortcomings. Thus the tests
can only be carried out under laboratory conditions. Only some dominant param-
eters of selected assemblies, such as bearing power loss of the main spindle, are
adjusted. The load cases to stimulate the parameter effect are of very simple design.
The parameters are successively investigated. Typically constant loads to stimulate
one parameter at a time are applied. The resulting temperature and deformation step
responses needed for adjustment take a long time. As a result performing all load
cases can last from a few days to weeks. The parameter’s effect is mostly traced by
tactile measurements of the TCP displacement and additionally a few temperature
sensors. Model and measurements are adjusted using manual empirical adaptation
of parameters (by intuition) during the iterative comparison of simulation and
measurement. Altogether, many manual operations and considerable amount of
technical expertise are required for this methodology.
To eliminate the existing deﬁcits, a method for rapid, comprehensive, low-cost
and low-time adjustment of uncertain parameters has to be developed. This solution
entails the engineering of efﬁcient methods that permit support and automation of
the adjustment. A fully automated implementation of the model under industrial
conditions is the long-term objective.
13.2 Approach
13.2.1 Engineering of Efﬁcient Parameter Adjustment
Methods
The development of an efﬁcient parameter adjustment procedure starts with making
available supporting methods to solve the subtasks of adjustment. The boundary
conditions are most of all predeﬁned by the speciﬁc features of the thermal models
13
Adjustment of Uncertain Parameters …
149

mentioned above and the measurement and adjusting opportunities on the machine
tools. The studies assume that the model already exists, and thus do not intend any
modelling. Another precondition is that the fundamental strategy for parameter
identiﬁcation and the mathematical methods required for nonlinear optimisation are
known (e.g. Marquardt 1963; Davidon 1991). These methods are applied as state of
the art and as they are. Rather, the objective is to design the comprehensive process
of parameter adjustment to efﬁciently get appropriate data for the numerical
optimization.
The schematic diagram of the development of an efﬁcient parameter adjustment
is shown in Fig. 13.2. The main tasks are split according to the engineering of
methods applied to the individual procedural steps as well as to their formalisation
and automation.
A procedural steps indicated in the Figure involve the following subtasks to be
solved successively:
1. In a model analysis fundamental issues dealing with the uncertainty of param-
eters as well as their effect on the TCP displacement are investigated.
2. Ideal measuring points and stimulation for parameter adjustment are taken from
the parameter inﬂuence analysis. The extent to which uncertain parameters
affect state variables along the thermal causal chain and where these parameters
affect the machine structure locally are investigated. Additionally the stimulation
of parameters by load variables is explored.
3. Procedural planning provides the best suited and possibly least time-consuming
load case for the stimulation of parameter effects and explores which data can
really be acquired at given technical-economic and operational conditions. Aim
of this step is an optimal design of the adjustment experiment.
4. The stimulation and measurement implies not only data acquisition at the real
machine but also the setup and conﬁguration of the experiment.
Fig. 13.2 Development strategy for efﬁcient parameter adjustments
150
B. Kauschinger et al.

5. The data conditioning implies disturbance reduction (ﬁltering, averaging),
compression as well as transformation of the raw data acquired in step 4 to
prepare it as input data for the optimization.
6. The nonlinear optimization step includes the extension of the thermal model for
a simulation of the complete experiment, the selection and conﬁguration of a
mathematical optimization algorithm and the calculation to adjust model
parameters itself.
7. Finally a veriﬁcation of results is carried out, e.g. by means of characteristic
indicators, such as residual errors and statistical data as well as evaluation
measurements at the real machine.
These 7 steps are developed and investigated in terms of increasing model com-
plexity. Starting from simple machine elements, such as bearings and ball screws,
with a low number of uncertain parameters, complexity is increased via individual
axis assemblies up to the complete machine tool. Hence the measurements will
become more indirect and the measuring points are located farther from the optimal
positions with the strongest parameter impacts. In the investigations, the number of
measurements and the requirements to be fulﬁlled by the measurement equipment are
reduced step by step to ﬁnally achieve a parameter adjustment procedure that
appropriately works under real operational conditions of the machine tool.
13.2.2 Information Processing Methods for Parameter
Adjustment
An efﬁcient solution of the subtasks mentioned above needs support by software
tools. As a basis for these tools customized information processing methods have to
be engineered. A systematic and formal methodology is created and implemented in
a demonstration software. From the analysis and planning tasks of the conceptual
design stage (Fig. 13.2, steps 1–3) to parameter adjustment in the application phase
(Fig. 13.2, steps 4–7) itself the software has to assist in subtasks with different
content.
In addition to these generic concepts that are to be developed individual sub-
steps can be improved using innovative techniques from other domains of computer
science. Thus, the use of Virtual Sensors (Dementjev and Ribbecke 2011) would
provide a solution for the acquisition of essential measurement variables that are
important for the behaviour models but difﬁcult to access by the available mea-
surement equipment.
Furthermore, the techniques of automated design based on ontologies, like those
presently in use in building automation, can be modiﬁed and applied to sub-steps of
parameter identiﬁcation (Dibowski 2013; Özlük 2013; Dibowski and Kabitzsch
2011; Ryssel et al. 2011; Dibowski et al. 2010). This would make it possible for
software tools to generate recommendations for additional measurement equipment
(Fig. 13.2, step 3). This is necessary, for instance, in cases in which there are no
13
Adjustment of Uncertain Parameters …
151

measurement devices available to capture relevant abstract measuring values of the
behaviour model. Methods of automated design can also be adapted proﬁtably to
identify suitable conditioning steps (Kubin 2009) for the conditioning of measured
values (Fig. 13.2, step 5) and to deﬁne their processing sequence.
13.3 Results
13.3.1 Visualisation for the Parameter Inﬂuence Analysis
The ﬁrst parameter adjustment studies were conducted on bearing assemblies. A
bearing test bed was engineered and built to be used for the explorations and the
proof of efﬁcient adjustment methods. The test bed consists of a pair of preloaded
angular contact bearings and surrounding components relevant for function
(Fig. 13.3). The surrounding parts are engineered to adjust the bearing loads as well
as the bearing boundary conditions in both the thermal and mechanical domain.
The test bed provides ideal measurement conditions compared to an assembled
machine. It is possible to measure temperature distribution, rotation speed and
preload. Additionally the frictional torque of the bearings can be measured directly.
This value serves as a reference for the parameter adjustment of the power loss
models.
The ﬁrst tasks of the parameter adjustment process for the model of the bearing
test bed are a model analysis (step 1) and a parameter inﬂuence analysis (step 2).
Fig. 13.3 Bearing test bed setup
152
B. Kauschinger et al.

Here the effect of uncertain parameters has to be evaluated and adequate measuring
variables and positions have to be found. To be able to make statements like these,
an overview of the information of the comprehensive and complex model is
required. A representation fulﬁlling these requirements cannot be provided by
existing tools of mathematics, digital block simulation or ﬁnite element analysis.
To overcome these obstacles, new methods for a condensed visualization of the
relevant information have been developed. Figure 13.4 shows the visualisation
method for a part of the test bed model. The model structure is represented as a
network of the parameters of the thermal model, consisting of capacities and
conductances. The Assignment of capacities to the real structure is visualized by the
surrounding element contour. Model behaviour is represented by heat ﬂow and
temperature and can be animated over simulation time. An innovative aspect of this
method is the concurrent representation of qualitative informations by scaling the
symbol size of a parameter due to its value. In the example (Fig. 13.4) the parameter
values are represented by the symbol area.
The visualisation method allows to recognize qualitative relations between real
structure, model structure, model parameters and model behavior at one glance. It
enables for important conclusions regarding the thermal behaviour and thus the
parameter effect. In this way a rapid and visually assisted formulation of statements
relevant for parameter adjustment is possible. The methods were implemented in a
software demonstrator.
Fig. 13.4 New visualisation
method on the example of the
analysis of the thermal test
bed model and its parameters
13
Adjustment of Uncertain Parameters …
153

13.3.2 Load Cases for Data Acquisition
In the sub-task of procedural planning for parameter adjustment (Fig. 13.2, step 3)
load cases for the stimulation of the parameter effect on the bearing assembly were
developed. The friction model of the bearing involves speed and temperatures as
time-variable input parameters. Thus, the uncertain parameters have to be adjusted
as a function of these input parameters. Because of nonlinear relations measurement
data for the adjustment has to be gathered over the whole range of both input
parameters. During the measurement the spindle speed can be adjusted directly
using the machine control, whereas the respective temperatures can only be inﬂu-
enced indirectly through friction loss in conjunction with the delayed thermal time
response. Thus the needed measurement combinations of temperature and speed
have to be achieved through a load case controlled in time.
Several load cases were investigated, thereby intentionally controlling speed
values as a function of time according to thermal system properties. The load cases
were explored in terms of the coverage of relevant speed and temperature ranges, of
the customizing effort of the load templates as well as the time required for the
experiments. Figure 13.5 illustrates this on two load cases. Both load cases cover
nearly the same speed and temperature range. Load case 1 has a narrow coverage of
the parameter range and is easy to customize and execute—but it implies a long
experiment time. Load case 2 has a narrow coverage only in selected parameter
Fig. 13.5 Characteristic of two load templates and the according distribution of measured values
(dots) with constant sampling rate
154
B. Kauschinger et al.

ranges and is more difﬁcult to customize and execute. But it implies a far shorter
experiment time compared to load case 1 (number of dots).
As a result of these investigations a suitable and time-saving load case (i.e. load
case 2) can be developed based on load templates which are tailored to the
respective adjustment task. Thus it is possible to estimate the effort and expendi-
tures for measurement and preparation beforehand.
Another topic in the project was the optimization of uncertain parameters on the
example of a bearing friction model. The adjustment was based on measured data
with a suitable load case chosen. The model according to Palmgren (1964),
assuming time-variable parameters of speed n and lubricant viscosity, was used to
represent the bearings frictional torque MR. The parameter of lubricant viscosity is
determined by means of a partial model by Vogel-Cameron as a function of tem-
perature T. These partial models contain many constant parameters that have been
summed up to the coefﬁcients k1 to k4, thus reducing the number of model
parameters to be adjusted and leading to the following equation:
MR ¼ k0 þ k1 
n  e
k2
Tþk3

k4
ð13:1Þ
The coefﬁcients of the model are the uncertain parameters that were adjusted by
means of the Levenberg-Marquardt method as a mathematical algorithm for non-
linear optimisation.
Figure 13.6 shows the model with adjusted parameters (grid) and the underlying
measured values acquired at the bearing test bed (dots). Initial parameter values
were determined by estimates of Schaefﬂer (2012). The average deviation of the
calculated values to the measured values was reduced from nearly 33 % to 10 %
after adjustment.
Fig. 13.6 Frictional torque—
measured and calculated
values based on adjusted
parameters
13
Adjustment of Uncertain Parameters …
155

13.4 Summary and Outlook
Thermal models for machine tools include parameters that represent properties
varying from machine to machine and over time. These parameters cannot be
estimated with sufﬁcient accuracy in the design process. As a result it is necessary
to adjust them by measurements. Since the essential properties only emerge during
assembly adjustment is only possible in the operational state of the machine tool.
On the one hand, great effort and expenditures are required for the process of
parameter adjustment. On the other hand, comprehensive speciﬁc domain knowl-
edge is needed. As a result, parameter identiﬁcation can only be conducted under
laboratory conditions and is limited to only a few dominant parameters.
Aim of the project is the development of a rapid, comprehensive and efﬁcient
adjustment of uncertain parameters. This goal will be achieved by using a sys-
tematic approach to support and possibly automate parameter adjustment. In this
paradigm activities focus on the development of methods and tools to support the
individual steps of parameter adjustment as well as on an integrated data processing
concept by linking the tools of the subtasks in a support software.
Methods and tools for higher efﬁciency in model adjustment were introduced for
several sub-steps related to a machine-typical bearing assembly. This development
will be continued for further sub-steps. Future activities anticipate reﬁning the
algorithms and tools in order to also support more complex application scenarios
appearing in axis assemblies and the complete machine.
References
Bäumler St, Brecher C, Haber D, Rossaint J, Großmann K, Kauschinger B, Schroeder St (2012)
Simulation der Erwärmung von Spindellagern auf der Basis eines lokalen Reibmodells. 2.
Kolloqium zum SFB/TR-96 Thermo-Energetische Gestaltung von Werkzeugmaschinen,
Chemnitz, 24–25 Oct 2012
Davidon WC (1991) Variable metric method for minimization. SI-OPT 1(1):1–17
Dementjev A, Ribbecke H-D (2011) Improvement of prediction performance in virtual metrology.
In: Proceedings of the 11th European AEC/APC conference. Dresden, pp 71–76
Dibowski H (2013) Semantischer Gerätebeschreibungsansatz für einen automatisierten Entwurf
von Raumautomationssystemen. Dissertation, TU Dresden
Dibowski H, Kabitzsch K (2011) Ontology-based device descriptions and device repository for
building automation devices. EURASIP J Embed Syst 2011:Article ID 623461
Dibowski H, Kabitzsch K, Ploennigs J (2010) Automated design of build-ing automation systems.
IEEE Trans Ind Electron 57:3606–3613
Fritz F (2011) Modellierung von Wälzlagern als generische Maschinenelemente einer Me-
hrkörpersimulation. Dissertation, Karlsruher Institut für Technologie
Großmann K (2012) Thermo-Energetische Gestaltung von Werkzeugmaschinen – Eine Übersicht
zu Zielen und Vorgehen im SFB/Transregio 96. ZWF Zeitschrift für wirtschaftlichen
Fabrikbetrieb 107:307–314
Großmann K, Jungnickel G (1998) Das thermische Verhalten veränderlicher Strukturen.
Konstruktion 50:27–31
156
B. Kauschinger et al.

Großmann K, Jungnickel G (2003) Instationäres thermoelastisches Verhalten von Vorschubachsen
mit bewegtem Wälzkontakt
Großmann K, Jungnickel G (2006) Prozessgerechte Bewertung des thermischen Verhaltens von
Werkzeugmaschinen
Großmann K, Jungnickel G Korrektur thermisch bedingter Fehler an Werkzeugmaschinen mit
ﬂexibler Arbeitsraum-Konﬁguration. Tagungsband zur CPK 2001
Jedrzejewski J, Kwasny W, Potrykus J (1989) Beurteilung der Berechnungsmethoden für die
Bestimmung der Energieverluste in Wälzlagern. Schmierungstechnik 20(8):243–244
Kubin H, Benesch M, Dementjev A, Kabitzsch K, Unkelbach T, Nyderle R, Metzner C (2009)
ADM; process identiﬁcation tool for experts and technologists. In: 35th Annual conference of
IEEE industrial electronics, 2009, IECON ‘09, pp 1444–1449
Marquardt D (1963) An algorithm for least-squares estimation of nonlinear parameters. J Soc Ind
Appl Math 11:431–441. doi:10.1137/0111030
Nachimowicz J, Jabrzykowski M (2012) Performance evaluation of rolling element bearings based
on tribological behaviour. In: Performance evaluation of bearings. doi:10.5772/51144
Özlük AC (2013) Design space exploration for building automation systems. PhD. dissertation,
TU Dresden
Palmgren A (1964) Grundlagen der Wälzlagertechnik, 3rd edn. Franckh’sche Verlagshandlung,
Stuttgart
Ryssel U, Distel F, Borchmann D (2011) Fast computation of proper premises. In: Proceedings of
the 8th international conference on concept lattices and their applications. Nancy, France,
pp 101–113
Schaefﬂer Technologies (2012) Technische Grundlagen
13
Adjustment of Uncertain Parameters …
157

Chapter 14
Correction Algorithms
and High-Dimensional Characteristic
Diagrams
Christian Naumann, Ilka Riedel, Ulrich Priber and Roland Herzog
Abstract The time-dependent consideration of the thermal situation in machine
tools requires online-enabled methods for the correction of the tool position during
the machining process. Higher-dimensional characteristic diagrams, which act as a
lookup table for the prediction of the tool center point displacement from several
temperature (or other) measurements, are well suited for this purpose. These
characteristic diagrams are trained by ﬁnite element simulations. On the other hand,
least-squares estimators together with reduced order models provide an alternative
online-capable prediction technique for the tool displacement. In this context,
optimal placement problems for the temperature sensors are described. In any case,
the accuracy of simulations and estimation depends crucially on several parameters
in the thermo-dynamic model. An approach that reveals the most relevant param-
eters using sensitivity analysis is also discussed.
14.1 Determination of Relevant Parameters Using
Adjoint-Based Sensitivity Analysis
The accurate simulation of the thermo-elastic behaviour of machine tools requires
good knowledge of model parameters and boundary conditions, see Table 14.1.
Some of these quantities, e.g., material parameters, are often well known, while
C. Naumann (&)  U. Priber
Fraunhofer IWU Chemnitz, Chemnitz, Germany
e-mail: christian.naumann@iwu.fraunhofer.de
U. Priber
e-mail: ulrich.priber@iwu.fraunhofer.de
I. Riedel  R. Herzog
TU Chemnitz, Chemnitz, Germany
e-mail: ilka.riedel@mathematik.tu-chemnitz.de
R. Herzog
e-mail: roland.herzog@mathematik.tu-chemnitz.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_14
159

others, such as the heat transfer coefﬁcient describing the thermal interaction
between machine and environment, are more difﬁcult to determine. Reliable values
for the effective heat transfer coefﬁcient are available in the literature only for simple
geometric situations. For complex geometries, one has to resort either to computa-
tionally expensive CFD simulations of free convection/radiation problems, or model
calibration using experimental data. Both approaches can be rather expensive.
It can be shown that the accurate determination of the effective heat transfer
coefﬁcient is not equally important in all parts of the machine structure. Knowledge
about less important regions can help to signiﬁcantly reduce experimental and
computational efforts. The importance is based on how strongly inaccuracies in the
parameter will cause inaccuracies in the value of the tool center point (TCP) dis-
placement. An adjoint-based sensitivity analysis is proposed to identify regions of
particular importance concerning the accurate value of model parameters. This
technique can be used for any of the model parameters (or combinations thereof). It
is elaborated below in the case of the heat transfer coefﬁcient a.
14.1.1 Background of Adjoint-Based Sensitivity Analysis
The thermo-elastic behaviour of a machine is modeled by a coupled system of
partial differential equations. The ﬁrst part of the system is the heat equation. Here
the stationary case is considered,
div krT
ð
Þ ¼ 0
in X;
ð14:1aÞ
Table 14.1 Table of symbols
Symbol
Meaning
Unit
T
Temperature
K
u
Displacement
m
σ
Stress
N/m2
ε
Strain
1
r
Thermal surface load
W/m2
λ
Thermal conductivity
W/(Km)
ρ
Density
kg/m3
cp
Speciﬁc heat at constant pressure
J/(kg K)
α
Heat transfer coefﬁcient
W/(Km2)
Tref
Ambient temperature
°C
ν
Poisson’s ratio
1
E
Young’s modulus of elasticity
N/m2
β
Thermal volumetric expansion coefﬁcient
1/K
160
C. Naumann et al.

k oT
on þ a T  Tref
ð
Þ ¼ r
on C:
ð14:1bÞ
The domain X represents the geometry of the machine and C is its boundary.
The boundary conditions represent a simple model for the effective heat transfer
which subsumes the transfer due to radiation and the free convection occurring at
the lateral and top surfaces of the machine. The constant Tref denotes the ambient
temperature.
The second part of the system is the elastic model, which consists of the balance
of forces,
div r ¼ 0
in X
ð14:2Þ
involving the stress tensor r. The relation between stresses and strains is given by
Hooke’s law. An additive split of the linearized strain tensor e into its mechanically
and thermally induced parts is employed, i.e.,
e ¼ eel þ eth;
eel ¼ C1r :¼ 1þv
E r  V
E trace(rÞI;
eðuÞ ¼ 1
2 ðru þ ru>Þ;
eth ¼ bðT  TrefÞI;

ð14:3Þ
which yields an additive split of the stress tensor r, i.e.,
r ¼ Ce  bðT  TrefÞ C I;
C s ¼
E
1 þ m s þ
Em
ð1 þ mÞð1  2mÞ traceðsÞI:
The elastic model (14.2)–(14.3) is closed by the boundary conditions
u ¼ 0
on CD;
ð14:4aÞ
r  n ¼ 0
on CN;
ð14:4bÞ
which represent clamping on a part CD and absence of forces on the remainder of
the surface C.
This coupled system (14.1a, 14.1b)–(14.4a, 14.4b) can be understood as an
implicit equation
eðx; aÞ ¼ 0
ð14:5Þ
with states x ¼ ðT; uÞ consisting of the temperature and the displacement, and
parameter a.
In order to determine the sensitivity of the state w.r.t. the parameter, the calculation
of the derivative of x w.r.t. a is required. This is achieved by total differentiation of
(14.5). The directional derivative (sensitivity) of a 7! xðaÞ at a nominal value a0 of the
14
Correction Algorithms and High-Dimensional Characteristic …
161

parameter and under variations in the direction da is denoted by x0ða0Þda. This
quantity satisﬁes the following linear equation,
exðx0; a0Þx0ða0Þda þ eaðx0; a0Þda ¼ 0
) x0ða0Þda ¼ exðx0; a0Þ1eaðx0; a0Þda:
Note that the sensitivity depends on the nominal value ðx0; a0Þ for the states and
the parameter due to the nonlinear coupling in the boundary condition (14.1b).
As mentioned above, one is not interested in the sensitivity of the entire state but
only in the sensitivity of certain quantities such as the TCP displacement. There-
fore, one additionally deﬁnes an output functional f : X ! R, which maps the state
onto the desired quantity. Then the directional sensitivity of the output w.r.t.
changes in a follows from the chain rule,
d
da f ðxða0ÞÞda ¼ f 0ðx0Þx0ða0Þda
¼ f 0ðx0Þexðx0; a0Þ1eaðx0; a0Þda
ð14:6Þ
Evaluating (14.6) as is would require potentially repeatedly solving linearized
thermo-mechanical models, as represented by the term exðx0; a0Þ1 with multiple
right hand sides (depending on the dimension of the parameter a).
The main idea of the adjoint approach is to evaluate (14.6) in a different order by
deﬁning the so-called adjoint state y through the adjoint equation,
exðx0; a0Þ>y ¼ f 0ðx0Þ>:
Then (14.6) can be rewritten as
d
da f ðxða0ÞÞda ¼ y>eaðx0; a0Þda:
ð14:7Þ
It can be concluded that only one (adjoint) thermo-mechanical model has to be
solved now. The approach is further illustrated by choosing f ðxÞ ¼ uzðTCPÞ, i.e.,
the z-displacement of the TCP. Then the adjoint state y ¼ ðS; vÞ, consisting of
adjoint temperature S and adjoint displacement v, satisﬁes the following adjoint
system:
divðkrSÞ ¼ b
E
1  2m traceðeðvÞÞ
in X;
div s ¼ ½0; 0; dTCP>
in X
with the adjoint stress tensor s ¼ CeðvÞ and homogeneous boundary conditions
162
C. Naumann et al.

k oS
on þ a S ¼ 0 on C;
v ¼ 0 on CD
and
s  n ¼ 0 on CN:
Having solved the adjoint system for ðS; vÞ, the desired sensitivity can be efﬁ-
ciently calculated from (14.7), i.e.,
d
da f x a0
ð
Þ
ð
Þda ¼
Z
C
da T  Tref
ð
ÞS ds
ð14:8Þ
for arbitrary, in particular also local, perturbations da.
14.1.2 Numerical Results
The method was tested for the Auerbach ACW630 machine column with two heat
sources, one at the top of the motor ﬂange and the other at the spindle nut. The
picture shows the sensitivity factor ðT  TrefÞS from (14.8) in (K mm/W). In areas
with high values the z-displacement at the TCP is very sensitive w.r.t. changes or
inaccuracies in the effective heat transfer coefﬁcient. Hence in these zones the heat
transfer coefﬁcient a should be calculated (or determined experimentally) at high
accuracy. On the other hand, in areas with low sensitivity values, inaccuracies in a
have only little inﬂuence on the z-displacement at the TCP.
14
Correction Algorithms and High-Dimensional Characteristic …
163

14.2 Optimal Placement of Temperature Sensors
for the Estimation of the TCP Displacement
The accuracy and robustness of an estimation of the TCP displacement from
temperature measurements depends signiﬁcantly on the locations where the thermal
sensors are placed on the machine surface. This observation is true both for the
estimation by means of characteristic diagrams, as in Sect. 14.3, and for a direct
estimation method, which is developed in the course of this section.
To be more precise, a simulation-based estimator is developed based on a
reduced order model for the TCP displacement, which uses a number of temper-
ature sensors spread across the machine surface. Later on, the sensor positions are
optimized with the goal of increasing the robustness of the estimator, i.e.,
decreasing its sensitivity w.r.t. measurement errors. As in the previous section,
numerical results are presented for the Auerbach ACW630 machine column.
14.2.1 TCP Displacement Estimation
With the aim of estimating the TCP displacement, the ﬁrst goal is to reconstruct the
entire temperature ﬁeld from nmeas temperature measurements ^Tj, then calculate the
displacement ﬁeld and read out the desired quantity, i.e., the TCP displacement.
The reconstruction of the temperature ﬁeld is in general an ill-posed inverse
problem. However, if the operating conditions, especially the heat inputs, of the
machine are known, then a reduced order model can be set up a priori. Conse-
quently, the temperature ﬁeld can be represented as a linear combination of few
basis vectors ui 2 RnFE, also known as modes,
T ¼ Tref þ
X
nPOD
i¼1
fiui:
ð14:9Þ
These basis vectors, which can be interpreted as typical temperature distribu-
tions, are determined here by proper orthogonal decomposition (POD), see e.g.
Kunisch and Volkwein (2001).
POD is a simulation-based model order reduction method. To apply it, one
simulates the time-dependent heat equation,
qcp _T  divðkTÞ ¼ 0
in X;
ð14:10Þ
with boundary conditions (14.1b) and a possibly time-dependent heat source rðtÞ,
and
saves
snapshots
RnFE 3 yj ¼ TðtjÞ  Tref
at
a
number
of
time
points
0 ¼ t0\t1\. . .\tnsnap. The POD approach is to construct orthonormal basis
164
C. Naumann et al.

vectors ui which approximate these snapshots as well as possible in the least-
squares sense, i.e.
minimize
X
nsnap
j¼1
yj 
X
nPOD
i¼1
yj; ui


Wui


2
W
;
s: t: ui; uj


W ¼ dij;
u1; . . . ; unPOD:
Here W is a ﬁnite element mass matrix which represents a suitable inner product.
The solution u1; . . .; unPOD of this minimization problem is given by the ﬁrst nPOD
eigenvectors of the generalized eigenvalue problem
WYY>Wui ¼ kWui;
where Y ¼ ½y1; . . .; ynsnap is the matrix of snapshots.
The reconstruction of the entire temperature ﬁeld is now reduced to the deter-
mination of the few POD coefﬁcients f1; . . . ; fnPOD such that the reconstructed
temperature ﬁts the measurements as well as possible in the least-squares sense,
minimize
1
2
X
nmeas
j¼1
Tref þ
X
nPOD
i¼1
fiui xj
 
 ^Tj xj
 
"
#2
;
f 2 RnPOD:
ð14:11Þ
The solution of (14.11) is given by the normal equation
J>Jf ¼ J>ð^T  TrefÞ;
where ^T  Tref ¼ ð^T1  Tref; . . .; ^Tnmeas  TrefÞ 2 Rnmeas is the shifted vector of
measurements and the Jacobian of the residual functions is given by
J ¼ JðxÞ ¼
u1ðx1Þ
. . .
unPODðx1Þ
..
.
..
.
u1ðxnmeasÞ
. . .
unPODðxnmeasÞ
2
64
3
75 2 Rnmeas  nPOD:
Using (14.9), one can rewrite the reconstructed temperature as follows,
T ¼ Tref þ UðJ>JÞ1J>ð^T  TrefÞ
with U ¼ u1; . . . ; unPOD

	
. The TCP displacement can then be calculated by ﬁrst
solving the elasticity Eqs. (14.2)–(14.4a, 14.4b), denoted by the operator S : T 7! u,
u ¼ STref þ SUðJ>JÞ1J>ð^T  TrefÞ
¼ 0 þ SUðJ>JÞ1J>ð^T  TrefÞ;
14
Correction Algorithms and High-Dimensional Characteristic …
165

and then extracting the TCP components from the entire displacement ﬁeld, i.e.,
uðTCPÞ ¼ BSU JðxÞ>JðxÞ

1
JðxÞ>
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
:¼AðxÞ
^T  Tref


ð14:12Þ
with an observation matrix B. Note that the matrix BSU 2 R3nPOD can be calculated
ofﬂine by solving only nPOD elasticity equations and that during the operation of the
estimator, no further solving of the heat equation nor the elasticity system is
required. In other words, the reduced order POD model for the temperature natu-
rally induces a reduced order model for the structural mechanics part as well.
The relation (14.12) can be understood as a linear estimator, which maps tem-
perature measurements ^T to the TCP displacement uðTCPÞ. As the Jacobian J
depends on the sensor positions x ¼ ½x1; . . . ; xnmeas, the reliability of the estimator
depends on x as well.
14.2.2 Optimization of the Estimator’s Quality
It is well known that the reliability of a least-squares estimator, such as (14.12) can
be judged by the eigenvalues of its covariance matrix. Assuming that all temper-
ature sensors have the same standard deviation then the covariance matrix of the
estimator is (up to a constant)
C :¼ CovTCPðxÞ ¼ AðxÞAðxÞ>
¼ BSUðJðxÞ>JðxÞÞ1U>S>B>:
ð14:13Þ
Large eigenvalues in CovTCP point to a high sensitivity of the estimated TCP
displacement w.r.t. perturbations in the temperature measurements, while small
eigenvalues stand for a high robustness of the estimator against measurement errors.
This means that a good experimental setup, i.e., a good choice of sensor posi-
tions x, is distinguished from a less suitable one by the eigenvalues of CovTCPðxÞ.
One possible criterion is the so-called E-criterion, which minimizes the largest
eigenvalue of the covariance matrix. To this end, the optimal placement problem
could be formulated as follows:
Minimize
kmaxðCovTCPðxÞÞ;
x ¼ x1; . . . ; xnmeas
½
 2 R3nmeas
subject to
x1; . . . ; xnmeas 2 Cfeas;
ð14:14Þ
where Cfeas are the parts of the machine surface where sensors can be placed.
The complexity of the optimization problem (14.14) is based on at least two
distinct features. On the one hand, the eigenvalues of CovTCP are a continuous but
non-differentiable function w.r.t. the location matrix x, which would require
166
C. Naumann et al.

specialized optimization solvers. On the other hand, it would be necessary to
parametrize the constraint x1; . . . ; xnmeas 2 Cfeas with a complicated surface such as
that of a machine column. In the sequel, the complexity of the problem will be
reduced to make it tractable.
First, sensor locations are allowed only in a ﬁnite, possibly large, subset Cfinite of
Cfeas. An obvious choice for Cfinite would be the nodes of the ﬁnite element mesh.
The placement problem then becomes a high dimensional combinatorial optimi-
zation problem. For the machine column it is jCfinitej ¼ 25;288 and there would be
319,728,828 possibilities to place only two sensors. To this end, the simultaneous
placement of all sensors as in (14.14) is replaced by a sequential (greedy) placement
of one sensor at a time, see Algorithm 1. This will lead to sub-optimal solutions of
(14.16), but render the overall problem tractable. Numerical evidence in Herzog and
Riedel (2013) justiﬁes this approach.
Algorithm 1 (Sequential placement)
1: Set i := 0
2: repeat
3:
Set i := i+ 1
4:
Solve problem (15)
5: until i ≥nPOD and stopping criterion (17) is met
In each step of the sequential placement the position of one sensor is determined
by solving the optimization problem (14.15), while other sensors at positions
x1; . . . ; xi1 have already been placed and will be kept ﬁxed.
Minimize
kmaxðCovTCPðxiÞÞ
subject to
x1 2 Cfeas:
ð14:15Þ
Herein,
CovTCPðxiÞ ¼ BSUiðJiðxiÞ>JiðxiÞÞ1U>
i S>B>
ð14:16Þ
denotes the covariance matrix of the estimator in stage i, which maps the ﬁrst i
temperature measurements to the TCP displacement vector. Herein, Ji and Ui are
restrictions of J and U, see Herzog and Riedel (2013) for details.
Besides making the placement tractable, the sequential placement approach
allows the determination of the number of sensors nmeas on the ﬂy rather than a
priori. Algorithm 1 is stopped as soon as i  nPOD and
kmaxðCovTCPðxiÞÞ 
etol
rrðaÞ

2
ð14:17Þ
with a user-deﬁned tolerance etol, the standard deviation r of the sensors, a conﬁdence
level a 2 ½0; 1 and the squared radius rðaÞ2 ¼ F1
v2
3 ðaÞ the inverse cumulative dis-
tribution function of a v2 distribution with three degrees of freedom. The condition
14
Correction Algorithms and High-Dimensional Characteristic …
167

(14.17) guarantees that the largest half axis of the conﬁdence ellipsoid describing the
estimated tool center point displacement will be at most etol.
14.2.3 Numerical Results
The sensor placement was tested again for the Auerbach ACW630 machine col-
umn. Two heat sources were assumed, one on top of the motor ﬂange and the other
at the spindle nut, see Fig. 14.1a. The TCP displacement was approximated by the
mean displacement of the mounting points shown in Fig. 14.1b of the sledge
holding the spindle with the tool, shown in Fig. 14.1b.
Fig. 14.1 Geometric location of heat sources, mounting points and ﬁrst POD modes. a Location
and strengths in W/m2 of the heat sources r at Cflange and Cnut. b Mounting points which determine
the TCP location. c First three POD modes ui i = 1, 2, 3
168
C. Naumann et al.

A POD simulation was carried out by heating each of the two sources until a
stationary state was reached and cooling it down to the ambient temperature
afterwards. It turned out that nPOD ¼ 5 basis vectors, Fig. 14.1c shows the ﬁrst three
modes, yield a pretty good reduced model for the temperature.
For the constants in the stopping criterion (14.17) of algorithm 1 a standard
deviation of 3r ¼ 0:1K was chosen, i.e., 99.73 % of all temperature measurements
lie within 0.1 K of their true value, a conﬁdence level of a ¼ 0:95 and a tolerance
etol ¼ 1  106 m. Then one obtains that nmeas ¼ 6 sensors are enough to reach the
desired accuracy of etol. Figure 14.2 shows the square root of the maximal eigen-
value of the covariance matrix (14.16) during the ﬁrst four placement problems, as
well as the optimal sensor locations (yellow circles) at the points where the largest
eigenvalue is minimal. As expected, all sensors lie near the two heat sources at the
motor ﬂange and the spindle nut.
Placing sensors in this way, one obtains a Jacobian JðxÞ 2 Rnmeas  nPOD ¼ R6  5,
which leads (in a suboptimal sense due to the sequential placement) to a TCP
displacement estimator (14.12) with minimal variance in the sense of (14.14).
14.3 Characteristic Diagrams
An alternative way of estimating the TCP displacement from temperature mea-
surements according to (14.12) is through the use of characteristic diagrams. This
can be conceived as a multi-dimensional lookup table which has been set up and
trained in an ofﬂine phase. Typical input dimensions include temperature mea-
surements at certain locations, but might include other information, such as the
current geometrical conﬁguration, (e.g. the current spindle height), as well. In this
respect, characteristic diagrams are more ﬂexible than direct estimators such as
(14.12). The output in the present context would consist of the three components (x,
y, z) of the TCP displacement.
Effectively, the use of a characteristic diagram corresponds to an interpolation and
extrapolation of thermal states from selected locations (or selected grid points in a FE
Fig. 14.2 First four sensor positions
14
Correction Algorithms and High-Dimensional Characteristic …
169

mesh) established during the training phase. Depending on the machine geometry
and the FE discretization used, there will be many geometrical grid points with very
little signiﬁcance to the TCP displacement, either because their temperature is highly
dependent on that of their neighbors, or because deformations in their vicinity have
little effect on the TCP. Therefore, a few grid points are expected to be sufﬁcient to
estimate the TCP displacement with good accuracy.
Finding out which grid points matter most and how many are at least needed to
achieve a given accuracy is subject of the sensitivity analysis and can be achieved
with the methods described in Sect. 14.2. For now, it is simply assumed that a small
number ng of such grid points sufﬁces for the prediction. By determining the
maximum and minimum temperature each grid point may reach during the machine
tool’s operation and splitting the resulting intervals into discrete segments one gets
ng 1D grids, which are combined into one large ng-dimensional grid of temperature
variables. Each point in this grid represents one thermal state to which a TCP
displacement vector is assigned.
f : t ¼ T1; T2; . . . ; Tng


2 Rng ! x; y; z
ð
ÞTCP 2 R3
Using data gathered in experiments or obtained through simulation, an attempt
was made to ﬁt an ng-dimensional hypersurface into this ðng þ 1Þ-dimensional
space, see Fig. 14.3. As with any ﬁtting, these samples need to cover as much of the
grid as possible. Especially with measured data points one also needs some
redundancy to reduce the effect of random errors.
A method called Smoothed Grid Regression (SGR) that was developed prior to
this project, see Priber (2003) and Naumann (2012), uses least squares to calculate
such hypersurfaces for a given temperature grid and a database of samples. It does
so by weighting the penalties resulting from data errors, i.e., the distance of the
samples from the hypersurface, against those resulting from a lack of smoothness, i.
e., from large changes in the deformation gradient. This will lead to a large and
over-determined linear system such as
z
0


¼
A
S


R;
Fig. 14.3 Characteristic diagram for two temperature inputs
170
C. Naumann et al.

where each column of A and S corresponds to a grid vertex. Each row of matrix A
describes the location of a data point w.r.t. its surrounding grid points while its
value is the corresponding entry in z. Each row of matrix S requires a grid point’s
value to be colinear to its left and right neighboring values in every grid dimension.
While the SGR method requires very little knowledge of the underlying prob-
lem, its approximation quality heavily depends on the choice of input variables used
for the grid. Another weakness of this method is the exponential growth of the
resulting linear system with the dimension of the grid. Even though the assembled
matrices have a very sparse structure, with only few elements in each row and
column, problems with memory shortage arise quickly as the grid dimension
increases. If direct solvers are used to solve these linear systems (in a least-squares
sense) then the unavoidable ﬁll-in will cause an overﬂow much sooner still. The
same goes for the computation time, which grows along with the grid size. The
main goal is therefore to make very large least-squares problems computable in
order to boost the approximation quality of characteristic diagrams.
To solve these performance issues three elements are needed: a fast iterative
solver, a way of solving the linear system without having to assemble the entire
matrix and a way of reducing a large complete grid to a much smaller grid without
much loss of accuracy. While there are a number of fast direct solvers, some of
which make very good use of the SGR’s band matrix structure, they are bound to
create a certain ﬁll-in which grows rapidly for an increasing grid ﬁneness. They also
have trouble using the underlying grid and with assembling the matrix piece-by-
piece during the solution process. For all these reasons iterative solvers become
attractive alternatives. Since the efﬁciency of iterative solvers for symmetric
problems (such as least-squares) largely depends on the condition number and
distribution of eigenvalues, preconditioning becomes an important aspect. The SGR
is a grid based method where the ﬁneness of the grid can be arbitrary. Therefore, it
is easy to establish a set of hierarchical grids that can be used by a multigrid solver
or a multigrid preconditioner, e.g., in a conjugate gradient method.
Multigrid methods, see e.g. Trottenberg et al. (2001), were originally developed
to solve linear systems arising through the discretization of a partial differential
equation (PDE), e.g., from a ﬁnite element approach. By expressing the regression
problem as an energy minimization problem
min
u
1
2
X
ndata
i¼1
zi  u xi
ð Þ
j
j2 þ 1
2
Z
X
k x
ð Þ  ru x
ð Þ
j
j2dx;
one gets the following PDE in weak form:
8du :
X
ndata
i¼1
zi  u xi
ð Þ
ð
Þ  du xi
ð Þ þ
Z
X
k x
ð Þ  ru x
ð Þ  rdu x
ð Þdx ¼ 0:
14
Correction Algorithms and High-Dimensional Characteristic …
171

The second term in the energy functional corresponds to a smoothing term. The
one shown above prefers constant values of the unknown function u, whereas terms
favoring constant gradients are also used frequently.
Experimentally it was shown that this SGR-based multigrid preconditioned CG
solver achieves optimal complexity. Even the best iterative solver cannot beat
OðnpÞ operations, where np is the total number of vertices in the temperature grid. It
is thus essential to make the grid as small as possible for a given, ﬁxed accuracy.
Using an orthogonal grid is quite useful both in the multigrid and in the FEM but a
simple grid in which every grid axis corresponds to one geometrical node leads to a
hypercube of thermal states in which large parts can never be realized during the
machine tool’s operation. This problem calls for a principal component analysis of
the input variables (temperatures). By rotating the hypercube and shrinking it to
form a kind of minimal orthogonal convex hull around the relevant thermal states,
one accomplishes the task of concentrating most of the information in only a few
wide dimensions, which makes it possible to cut off all the very narrow dimensions
and to use a coarser discretization on the intermediate ones.
Another technique for reducing the number of grid points involves the use of
adaptive FEM. Rather than discretizing the entire hypercube uniformly down to the
ﬁnest level, one can also make the discretization ﬁner in those regions with the
greatest data error. In this particular case these are the states with large second
derivatives of the TCP displacement uðxÞ.
In the following test performed on experimentally measured data, the results of
the described characteristic diagram approach are demonstrated. To do this a
training data set and a test data set were assembled from two measurements on a
machine tool. Figure 14.4 shows how well the characteristic diagram based on the
training data predicts the displacements of the test data.
One can see that the predicted TCP displacement (thin, black) roughly follows
the actual displacement (thick, gray). While the training data (not shown here) can
be predicted with no more than ±10 μm, the test data still produces a maximum
Fig. 14.4 Approximation of TCP displacement from temperature sensor data
172
C. Naumann et al.

error of ±20 μm. This reduces the maximum error to one third, which is a good
start. Parts of the predicted curve that strongly deviate from the measured curve
suggest that the test data contradicts the training data. This most likely means that
some data points that lie in the same region of the grid strongly differ in a
dimension that cannot be seen. One can therefore not fully distinguish all relevant
thermal states of the machine tool from this thermal sensor setup, which shows the
importance of the choice of input variables for the quality of any characteristic
diagram. Similar tests have shown that a poor choice of input variables leads to
particularly large errors when the temperature gradient is big. In these cases some
machine tool parts have already heated up, expanded and thus caused a TCP
displacement before any of the thermal sensors have picked it up. The opposite case
has also occured, where the thermal sensors have picked up heat before any of the
relevant machine parts have started expanding.
Beside further advances in the efﬁcient calculation of characteristic diagrams,
another interesting research topic will be the improvement of predictions with a
non-ideal choice of input variables. This will be particularly relevant in cases in
which the sensor placement is restricted by safety or practical limitations.
14.4 Integration into the CRC/TR 96 and Outlook
To summarize, subproject B05 is one out of three subprojects dealing with real-time
correction algorithms, where the time scale is determined by the thermal constants
of the machine tool. All three approaches are based on a prediction of the thermally
induced TCP displacement in order to allow for its correction through the
machine’s NC controller.
The three approaches differ with respect to the input data that serve as the basis
of the TCP displacement prediction. They also differ with respect to the way in
which the thermo-mechanical functional chain is taken into account. Subproject
B05 offers two algorithms to achieve the prediction of the TCP displacement. First,
characteristic diagrams (Sect. 14.3) capture the thermo-mechanical behavior
through a multidimensional lookup table which needs to be set up in an ofﬂine
phase either from measurements or simulated data. Second, a least-squares esti-
mator (Sect. 14.2) has been developed that incorporates a reduced order model of
the thermo-mechanical effects. In contrast to B06 and B07, both algorithms typi-
cally use temperature measurements, which are easy to gather, as their input, but are
open to extension to other input data. Since the temperature data constitute part of
the state of the machine (in contrast to, e.g., thermal loads), both algorithms in B05
avoid a drift-off of the predicted versus the true thermal state due to model inac-
curacies. A ﬁnal distinguishing feature of the approach taken in project B05 is the
optimal placement of temperature sensors according to their information content
with regard to the TCP displacement. This helps to reduce the amount of input data
and further adds to the robustness of the estimator.
14
Correction Algorithms and High-Dimensional Characteristic …
173

It should be mentioned that all results so far were obtained for a static pose of the
machine tool and it is ongoing work to incorporate changes in the pose. Moreover,
we emphasize that all projects that employ simulation technology, among them
A05, A06, A07, B05, B07, rely on the accuracy of model parameters for realistic
results. Most notably, this concerns the heat transfer coefﬁcient, which determines
the rate of heat exchange with the machine’s environment. As shown in Sect. 14.1,
however, the TCP displacement may depend strongly on the actual value(s) of this
parameter in certain regions of the surface. Therefore, the real-time identiﬁcation of
the heat transfer coefﬁcient will be a major goal for the future work in this project.
References
Herzog R, Riedel I (2013) Sequentially optimal sensor placement in thermoelastic models.
Technical report, TU Chemnitz
Kunisch K, Volkwein S (2001) Galerkin proper orthogonal decomposition methods for parabolic
problems. Numer Math 90(1):117–148
Naumann C (2012) Proceedings, 22nd workshop computational intelligence, Dortmund, 6–7 Dec
2012
Priber U (2003) Proceedings, 13th workshop fuzzy system 2003, Dortmund, 19–21 Nov 2003
Trottenberg U, Oosterlee CW, Schüller A (2001) Multigrid. Academic Press Inc., San Diego, CA,
2001 (With contributions by A. Brandt, P. Oswald and K. Stüben)
174
C. Naumann et al.

Chapter 15
Correction Model of Load-Dependent
Structural Deformations Based
on Transfer Functions
Christian Brecher, Marcel Fey and Matthias Wennemer
Abstract An indirect technique for the correction of thermo-elastic displacements
induced by loads of the linear axes is developed in subproject B06. The basis is
formed by an control-internal correction approach describing the functional rela-
tionship between the mechanical load proﬁle and the displacement of the Tool
Center Point using transfer functions of different orders. The model parameters
referred to are determined in displacement experiments. Since axes load-induced
displacements highly depend on the position, a volumetric measurement and cor-
rection approach is utilised.
15.1 Introduction
The principal aim of the subproject B06 is a method for correcting thermally
induced machining errors based on control-internal data, independent of the type
and amount of machine load and the Tool Center Point (TCP) position. This
control-internal correction results in both high precision machining and energy
efﬁciency, since cooling and tempering measures can be reduced and remachining
becomes unnecessary.
The correction method involves load-induced thermo-elastic displacements of the
TCP in the entire workspace, resulting from the load acting on the linear axes, as well
as the spindle. The correction of spindle load- and ambient temperature-dependent
thermally induced TCP displacements, that have already been developed at the
C. Brecher  M. Fey  M. Wennemer (&)
Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering (WZL),
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany
e-mail: m.wennemer@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
C. Brecher
e-mail: c.brecher@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
M. Fey
e-mail: m.fey@wzl.rwth-aachen.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_15
175

Laboratory of Machine Tools and Production Engineering (WZL) of the RWTH
Aachen, are associated with the newly developing axes dependent model.
Measurement of workspace-dependent displacements is conducted by means of
tracking interferometers, which are commonly used in coordinate measuring tech-
nology, but nowadays have also been introduced in machine tools for volumetric
corrections. This measuring equipment makes it technical feasible to quickly record
the workspace dependent displacements for a great variety of load states in the
micrometer range. Since modeling individual positions in the workspace would be
inefﬁcient for a thermal correction, a method according to the error parameters of the
ISO 230 has been designed. This makes it possible to derive the thermal displace-
ments over the entire workspace based on just a minimum of measuring points.
15.2 Approach
The development focuses on a transfer function based correction procedure for
axes, load-dependent thermo-elastic displacements. In contrast to spindle related
thermo-elastic displacements, those of the axes depend to a great degree on the
position. Consequently, the entire workspace has to be considered.
15.2.1 Correction Method
The correction algorithm bases on transfer functions between the load-representa-
tive physical auxiliary variables regarded as the cause and the TCP displacement
regarded as the effect. In the easiest case, modelling is carried out using delay
elements of the PT1 form. The associated functional relationship is characterized by
the following differential equation in the time domain:
T  _yðtÞ þ yðtÞ ¼ K  uðtÞ
whereby
ð15:1Þ
y(t)
output variable (displacement)
u(t)
input variable (power)
K
ampliﬁcation factor
T
time constant
Consequently, the complex transfer function in the Laplace domain follows the
expression:
GðsÞ ¼
K
1 þ T  s
ð15:2Þ
176
C. Brecher et al.

The order and quantity of transfer functions for the correction algorithm have to
be chosen appropriately on basis of the experimental determined thermo-elastic
displacement characteristics of the machine tool. Afterwards, the correction algo-
rithm is formulated for the selected transfer functions and the determined param-
eters are stored in the machine tool control. The limitation of the experimental
scope to a few representative load cases that are capable of representing the thermal
axis characteristics is decisive for implementing the correction technique on an
industrial scale.
Figure 15.1 elucidates the integration of the correction method into the machine
tool. In future operation, the correction technique running at the Human Machine
Interface (HMI) records the required machine parameters, such as power or revo-
lutions per minute, and calculates the TCP’s displacement for ﬁxed or variable
times. The minute range has to be deﬁned by means of the stored correction
algorithms. At the end, the calculated displacement values are passed to the
machine control as an offset.
As a rule, each variable available by machine control with a functional rela-
tionship to the displacement can be considered as an auxiliary variable. The cal-
culated power of the associated axis, which is already been provided by the
Numerical Control (NC), is a suitable variable. However, for axes related errors at
least one second parameter is required to distinguish between a low traverse speed
with a high cutting force and a high traverse speed with a low cut-ting force. Thus,
it can be expected that, in the latter case, the guideways will heat up much more
and, consequently, the thermo-elastic deformations of the machine structure will
differ. Speed, which—like power—can be directly read out from the machine
control, is a parameter suitable for this distinction.
Fig. 15.1 Correction
approach
15
Correction Model of Load-Dependent Structural Deformations …
177

15.2.2 Experimental Methodology
Knowledge of the step function in form of the load and the step function response
as the TCP displacement is sufﬁcient to suitably parameterize the transfer functions.
For this reason, displacement experiments of the machine tool axes are conducted
under constant load to model the thermal characteristics.
Figure 15.2 illustrates the sequence of experiments to investigate the thermo-
elastic characteristics. The experiments consist of both a heat up and a cool down
stage by reason of different time constants which requires individual modeling.
During experiments, the TCP displacements are continuously captured in time
intervals to be deﬁned as a function of the machine behavior, together with NC
data, such as power and revolutions per minute. Displacements have been previ-
ously measured point-wise using a ﬁxture with displacement transducers according
to ISO 230-3 for the preliminary investigations, as well as in a volumetric manner
by means of tracking interferometers. Based on these measurements, it is possible
to determine the parameters of the transfer functions.
15.3 Results
The idea for a transfer function based correction model has already been realized
and successfully experimented for the spindle load-induced displacement error at
the WZL as part of the EU project entitled “Next Generation Production Systems”.
Fig. 15.2 Experimental design
178
C. Brecher et al.

In this process, the thermal spindle displacements are modeled for one point in the
workspace under various loads by a speciﬁcally designed loading unit. It could be
demonstrated that thermo-elastic TCP displacements can be reduced by 70 % using
the existing correction approach (Brecher and Wissmann 2009).
Subproject B06 is aimed at transferring this methodology to the axes portion of
thermally induced displacements and thus due to position dependency of axes
related errors into the entire workspace.
15.3.1 Stressing Unit for a Targeted Load of the Machine
Axes
Axis-related heat transfer into the machine structure caused by a load resulting in a
displacement of the TCP position can mainly be traced back to tribologic effects (e.
g. rolling bearings, guideways etc.) and electrical energy losses that appear during
cutting and air cuts to differing extents. Therefore a stressing unit was designed to
investigate the inﬂuence of these effects by experiments. The unit is capable of
charging the linear machine axes separately and simultaneously with a deﬁned and
reproducible load. The energy loss that emerges within the structure of the stressing
unit has to be isolated from the machine to prevent foreign inﬂuences. In addition to
these requirements, measurability of the entire machine volume must be particularly
maintained in order to apply volumetric measurements with sufﬁcient accuracy.
Figure 15.3 illustrates the engineered stressing unit with the corresponding
hydraulic circuit diagram. The entire unit consists of two separate linear axes with a
ball screw. They are attached to a cross table by means of a bracket and mounted as
a parallel kinematic to the machine tool. To avoid distortions between the kinematic
mechanisms, the complete unit is linked via a ball joint at the spindle. Furthermore
an automatic uncoupling and recoupling of the unit for the measuring procedure is
possible.
In this setup, the load is charged using a hydraulic pump, working against a
pressure control valve. It is mechanically driven by means of the ball screw of the
stressing unit via the machine tool. The easy dissipation of heat losses is in com-
parison to others an advantage of hydraulic systems. To charge a deﬁned load, a
force measurement device for all three spatial directions is positioned between the
spindle and the stressing unit.
15.3.2 Displacement Model for One Point in the Workspace
Prior to volumetric considerations, a displacement model describing one point in
the workspace is created.
15
Correction Model of Load-Dependent Structural Deformations …
179

The result of an validation cycle of this model is shown in Fig. 15.4. In this
experiment, displacements are measured according to ISO 230-3 by means of a
ﬁxture and ﬁve inductive displacement transducers (see Fig. 15.2).
The model used for this purpose based on two experiments per axis, which were
conducted using two different speed/power values over 24 h per experiment. In
each of these modelling trials only one axis is loaded. The TCP position’s dis-
placement of the single axis is represented by an PT1 approach. As a result, six
Fig. 15.3 Stressing unit
Fig. 15.4 Correction results for a speciﬁc point of the machine volume (Brecher and Wennemer
2013)
180
C. Brecher et al.

displacement experiments provide the database for modelling the investigated 3
axis machine. During validation trial of Fig. 15.4 all axes are loaded simulta-
neously. Furthermore both, load and off periods and motion sequences varied.
As a result, it is possible to reduce the displacement in the validation trials to less
than 5 µm when using the actual conditioned model (Brecher and Wennemer 2013).
Reliable results are obtained during heat up, but further optimization efforts are
needed for the cool down phase. The chosen method of a transfer functions based
correction of axial errors is thus promising.
15.3.3 Development of a Volumetric Method to Measure
Thermo-Elastic Displacements
As has been mentioned, thermo-elastic displacements regarding the axes are
position-dependent, so that modelling has to involve the entire machining space.
Thus, a volumetric method of measurement has to be drafted and experimented for
thermo-elastic displacements. Furthermore the existing modelling method has to be
applied to the entire machine volume.
Tracking interferometers by the ﬁrm Etalon (Schwenke et al. 2008) are used to
measure the thermo-elastic displacements over the entire machine tool volume. In
contrast to laser trackers, the measuring method using the so-called Laser Tracers is
distinguished by the fact that only the length data, and no angular data at all, is
applied to determine the relative reﬂector positions. Thanks to this analysis method
and the internal structure the inﬂuence of angular errors of the Laser Tracer motor
position on the measurement result is negligibly low. Figure 15.5 shows the
measurement system in use.
With the conventional measurement and analysis method, the relative mutual
location of the spindle positions can be determined in the micrometer range. For a
thermally induced displacement, the position of the entire volume relative to the
machine table—in contrast to a solely geometric correction—is also relevant.
Fig. 15.5 Volumetric measuring method
15
Correction Model of Load-Dependent Structural Deformations …
181

However, this position is characterised by substantially higher measurement inac-
curacies. These uncertainties result from the high inaccuracy in determining the
Laser Tracer positions, whose relative location is the referencing connector between
the single measurements. They are a function of the measurement strategy and
volume and approximately reach 15 µm. However, the measurement inaccuracy
speciﬁed can be reduced by about 50 % including a time series analysis involving
all series of measurement. Due to the fact of a referencing connector the relative
position of the Laser Tracers to each other has to be guaranteed by a thermostable
linkage mechanism made of, for instance, carbon ﬁbre-reinforced plastics. Fur-
thermore appropriate software was developed for automatic measurement and the
necessary calculations. Thus, a measurement method with satisfactory precision for
the correction of thermo-elastic displacements is made available (Brecher et al.
2014).
15.4 Classiﬁcation of Outcomes CRC/TR 96
The introduced correction method offers the potential to correct axes related ther-
mally induced machining errors over the entire workspace of machine tools. This
method could enable highly accurate machining to be efﬁcient in the sense of the
global objective of the CRC/TR 96, since re-work is unnecessary.
The subproject B07 maps the whole thermo-energetic functional chain for the
generation of thermo-elastic errors in a structure model. This means that the ﬁnal
displacement is derived from the mechanical load proﬁles as input variable by very
detailed thermal models. The difference is that, in the transfer function based cor-
rection, this functional relationship between the displacement and the load is rep-
resented in a simpliﬁed manner by a model based on delay elements. Modelling
effort for a detailed virtual image becomes unnecessary, on the one hand. On the
other hand, the experimental efforts to identify the parameters expand. In contrast to
these two techniques, subproject B05, characteristic diagram based correction, uses
measured temperature ﬁelds in the machine structure together with their corre-
sponding TCP-displacements as input variables. The displacement’s functional
dependency on temperature is represented by a higher-dimensional map, and thus
entails a high level of abstraction similar to that in subproject B06.
15.5 Outlook
The ﬁrst trials to validate the transfer function based correction method for axes
related thermally induced displacements in a workspace point lead to promising
results. Furthermore, it is now possible to measure the displacements in the volume
in an automated manner by means of Laser Tracers. Now the modelling method can
be transferred to the entire operating volume as part of the current activities.
182
C. Brecher et al.

References
Brecher C, Fey M, Wennemer M (2014) Volumetric compensation of thermal machine tool errors
as a result of linear axes loads. Special Interest Group: Thermal Issues
Brecher C, Wennemer M (2013) Eigenschaftsmodellbasierter Ansatz zur Korrektur thermoelas-
tischer Verlagerungen. Tradition und Gegenwart bei der Analyse des thermischen Verhaltens
spanender Werkzeugmaschinen. Dresden, pp 155–170
Brecher C, Wissmann A (2009) Modelling of thermal behaviour of a milling machine due to
spindle load. In: 12th CIRP conference on modelling of machining operations, vol 2,
pp 673–678
Schwenke H, Knapp W, Haitjema H et al (2008) Geometric error measurement and compensation
of machines—an update. CIRP Ann Manufact Technol 57:660–675. doi:10.1016/j.cirp.2008.
09.008
15
Correction Model of Load-Dependent Structural Deformations …
183

Chapter 16
Structural Model-Based Correction
of Thermo-elastic Machine Tool Errors
Xaver Thiem, Knut Großmann and Andreas Mühl
Abstract With the load data collected in a machine tool control, the resultant
thermally induced error at the tool center point (TCP) can be concluded by means of
the thermal and thermo-elastic simulation models derived from the machine tool
structure, while the machining accuracy can be increased upon correction of this
error. This paper provides an overview of the software modules required to
implement the structural model-based correction. The main modules are detailed in
terms of their characteristics (such as interfaces and cycle times). The concrete
implementation of the communication interface between the control core and the
model level is brieﬂy demonstrated for the Beckhoff TwinCAT3 control and the
simulation software Matlab.
16.1 Introduction
In subproject B07, a method for the structural model-based correction of thermo-
elastically induced machine tool errors is generated. In this correction method, the
load and trajectory data logged in the control (motor current and velocity values,
positions) are converted to heat ﬂuxes in motors, bearings and guidances by means of
power dissipation models. The load data are converted into thermal conduction
values, which map the heat transfer between these moving assemblies. These heat
ﬂuxes and heat transfer representations are speciﬁed in a thermo-elastic network
model. The network model consists of reduced-order FE models describing structural
X. Thiem (&)  K. Großmann  A. Mühl
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Institute for Machine Tools and Control Engineering,
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: xaver.thiem1@tu-dresden.de
K. Großmann
e-mail: knut.grossmann@tu-dresden.de
A. Mühl
e-mail: andreas.muehl@tu-dresden.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_16
185

machine parts. They are connected with thermal conduction values, which represent
the guidance, contact and surrounding conditions. The network model is numerically
integrated in the time domain. The error at the tool center point (TCP) is calculated as
a function of position through this numerical integration and follow-up deformation
calculation and is then sent to the corresponding feed axes inversely as an offset of the
nominal position value. Thus the structural model-based correction represents the
complete causal functional chain—from the generation of thermo-elastic errors to
their correction (Fig. 16.1) (Großmann 2012). Other authors also map the overall
thermo-elastic functional chain for correction purposes (Denkena and Scharschmidt
2009; Brecher and Wissmann 2009; Scharschmidt 2011), but by means of behaviour-
oriented equivalent representations, in which a reference to structure is either limited
or not possible at all. Conversely, in the structural model-based paradigm outlined in
B07, the reference to the machine tool structure, as well as the direct model’s and
parameter’s reference to the thermal FE models, is generally maintained.
The approach to the structural model-based correction is given for the example
of the “MAX” test bed. The basic conceptual design of the test bed was ﬁrst
described in (Großmann 2009) and is explained in detail in Chap. 1.
16.2 Approach
The modules of the structural model-based correction were drafted according to the
thermo-elastic functional chain (Fig. 16.2). The modules’ functionality is brieﬂy
elucidated below.
Mechanical and electrical load data are recorded drive related in the load data
capturing module. The load data may have to be compressed due to data transfer
bandwidth limitations at the communication interface between control core and
model. Data compression can be done by, for instance, averaging (load data
compression module). The load variables are consolidated into data records (create
Load profile
Temperature
field
Deformation
field
Error at TCP
Heat flow and
ther. conduction
I , v ,
x
1
1
1
Thermal behavior
Process dependent
load
Thermo-elastic
behavior
Transfor-
mation
{Q }=f({I },{v },{x })
f({I },{v },{x })
(t)
(t)
(t)
(t)
(t)
(t)
(t)
{L}=
L ,
Q
1
1
Structural model
Correction
model
Parameter
I , v ,
x
n
n
n
L ,
Q
n
n
{w}=-[K] [K ][T]
-1
wT
{w
}=f({w})
TCP
[C ]{T}+[K ]{T}={Q }
[K ]=f({L})
T
T
(t)
T
Fig. 16.1 Thermo-elastic functional chain shown for the example of the “MAX” test bed
186
X. Thiem et al.

data record module). If the sampling interval at which the data records are captured
is less than the transmission time of the communication interface, then the data
records have to be grouped into blocks before transmission (group data records to
blocks module). For the models, the blocks have to be resolved again (resolve
blocks module).
The load-dependent power dissipation (heat sources) and thermal conduction
(heat transfers) values of the thermal model are determined from the captured load
data in the calculate power dissipation and thermal conduction module.
Assemblies with mutual relative movement require a local assignment module
for the allocation of power dissipation and thermal conduction values in the model.
Thus, for instance, it is necessary to assign the power dissipation generated for a
ball screw in contact with a spindle-nut to the spindle range travelled.
The modules described up to now can be found in the thermo-elastic functional
chain under the parameter range shown in Figs. 16.1 and 16.2.
The assigned power dissipation and thermal conduction values are transmitted to
the thermal model module. This module calculates the temperature ﬁeld of the
machine tool. The ambient state, that is the machine tool’s ambient temperature, is
captured by temperature sensors. This ambient temperature is considered as a
constraint when calculating the temperature ﬁeld. It has to be calculated in thermal
real time. For this reason, no detailed FE machine tool model can be employed, and
the order of the FE model has to be reduced [FEM-MOR (Großmann et al. 2012a)].
Send
Current
position
Receive
Send
Parameter
Structural model
Communication interface
Load data capturing
Load data
compression
Create data record
Group data records
to blocks
Resolve blocks
Calculate power
dissipation and
thermal conduction
Local assignment
Thermal model
Thermo-elastic
model
Correction model
Compression of
correction
parameters
Updating of
correction
parameter record
Position-dependent
correction value
Addition of
correction value
Control core
Model
Receive
Fig. 16.2 Modules for structure based correction of thermal deformations
16
Structural Model-Based Correction of Thermo-elastic …
187

An alternative is to use a thermal capacity-conductance network model (node
model) as the reduced model. The calculated temperature ﬁeld is transmitted to the
thermo-elastic model module, which calculates the deformation ﬁeld of the machine
tool. The error vector at the TCP is taken from the structure deformation vector,
which, in turn, represents the overall deformation ﬁeld of the machine tool. The
modules described above map the range deﬁned as the structural model of the
thermo-elastic functional chain (see Fig. 16.1).
The correction values for the correction axes are calculated by inverting the error
vector and transforming it onto the axes (correction model module). The machine
tool driving axes are used as correction axes.
The thermo-elastic model is position-speciﬁc. The mutual arrangement of the
assemblies depends on the current position of the Tool Center Point (TCP) in the
workspace. Consequently, the stiffness matrix K and the thermal power matrix KwT,
(compare Fig. 16.1) depend on the position and result in position-speciﬁc thermo-
elastic models. As a rule, it is impossible to calculate these position-speciﬁc models
in the control’s interpolation cycle (IPO cycle). However, it is necessary that cor-
rection values can be made available in interpolation cycle as a function of the TCP
position in the workspace. This problem can be solved by calculating the correction
value in a slower cycle, by means of each position-speciﬁc thermo-elastic model at
TCP positions regularly distributed over the workspace (supporting positions, see
Fig. 16.7). Afterwards, the correction values are compressed by regression (com-
pression of correction parameters module) and transmitted to the control (updating
of correction parameter record module). The position-dependent correction value
is calculated in a module in the control by means of the current position and the
compressed correction values. This method is described in detail in the section
“Position-dependent calculation of the correction value”. Finally, the correction
values have to be added to the nominal position values of the correction axes; this
process is represented by the addition of correction value module.
16.3 Results
16.3.1 Real Time Thermal Model
The reduced-order thermal model (FEM-MOR) of the “MAX” test bed was devel-
oped in parallel with subproject B07 in A05. It was created in Matlab and was not
available in its entirety at the beginning of research in B07. For test purposes, the
thermal node models of the ball screw-based z drives of the test bed were also
generated in Matlab with the goal of calculating the thermo-elastic errors on the axis
z as well as φx and φy afterwards. The alternative usability of node models and
reduced-order thermal models was demonstrated in a generalised way in (Großmann
et al. 2012b). The node model (see Fig. 16.3, left) is designed to provide the same
characteristic parameters both for the input and output interfaces as those used for the
reduced-order thermo-elastic model from A05 (see Fig. 16.3, right), compare
188
X. Thiem et al.

(Großmann et al. 2012a). For this reason, it is possible, in principle, to mutually
exchange the two model variants in the thermal model and thermo-elastic model
modules.
16.3.2 Requirements in Terms of the Load Data’s Sampling
Intervals
The load parameters required as source data to determine power dissipation and
thermal conductions are, as a rule, motor current I or motor torque M, velocity v and
position x (or the associated rotatory parameters) of the drive axes. The necessary
sampling interval can be derived from the limits of jerk jmax, acceleration amax and
velocity vmax of the drives (see follow-up description). These limits were deﬁned in
the control during the axes commissioning. The time curves are charted in
Fig. 16.4.
The time values ΔtI, Δtv and Δtx (see Fig. 16.4 and Table 16.1) are yielded by the
maximal rises of acceleration, velocity and position. The current can be assumed to
be proportional to driving axis acceleration. Consequently, the sampling interval is
determined by means of the acceleration curve. It takes the drive the time value ΔtI
Fig. 16.3 Ball screw spindle as node model and as FEM-MOR
j
I~a
v
x
jmax
amax
vmax
t
t
t
t
Δ
Δ
t
t
I
a
Δtv
Δtx
LE
Jerk
Acceleration
Velocity
Position
Fig. 16.4 Rise times based on the maximum values of jerk, acceleration and velocity
16
Structural Model-Based Correction of Thermo-elastic …
189

to achieve maximal acceleration amax with maximal jerk jmax. For sufﬁciently high
resolution of current, the sampling interval TI was chosen, according to the Nyquist-
Shannon sampling theorem, with one tenth of ΔtI.
The sampling interval Tv for velocity can be deﬁned analogously to the sampling
interval for current.
The position has to be scanned at a sufﬁcient frequency in order to assign it
unambiguously to an element in the thermal model. The position sampling interval
has to be deﬁned accordingly. Thus we obtain the maximally permitted sampling
interval Δtx from edge length LE of the elements used in the thermal model and
maximal feed speed vmax. Thus, in the case of a ball screw, edge length LE is equal
to the axial length of an element. It also makes sense in this case to choose a smaller
sampling interval Tx.
From a software engineering perspective, it makes sense to scan all load data in
the control core or of the drives at the same sampling interval TCore. For this reason,
the lowest calculated sampling interval for all load data (TI, Tv, Tx) and all driving
axes is chosen.
16.3.3 Local Assignment
If the assemblies move relative to one another, local assignment of power dissi-
pation and heat transfer or thermal conduction values to nodes and the coupling
coordinates in the model is necessary. The local assignment approach is explained
in the following for the ball screw on the “MAX” test bed. It is necessary to assign
the power dissipation generated in the spindle-nut contact that is caused by friction
to the coupling coordinates of the thermal model, which maps the spindle. Thermal
conduction between the spindle elements and the nut also has to be determined by
means of the position (see Fig. 16.5).
As a rule, the integration time increment ttotal, with which the thermal model is
calculated and in which the parameters used are constant, is greater than the sampling
interval TCore of the load data. Hence power dissipation and thermal conduction
calculated over the time interval ttotal have to be averaged. A solution algorithm in
this regard is depicted in Fig. 16.5 for the ball screw. The power dissipation values,
determined by means of local assignment and affecting the individual elements, are
added together and averaged over the time interval ttotal ¼ i  TCore.
Table 16.1 Necessary sampling interval for current, velocity and position
Current
Velocity
Position
Chosen sampling interval
DtI ¼ amax
jmax
Dtv ¼ vmax
amax
Dtx ¼ LE
vmax
TI  DtI
10
Tv  Dtv
10
Tx  Dtx
10
190
X. Thiem et al.

Regarding characteristics, the thermal model is similar to a PT1 element with
time constant τ in control engineering and thus functions as a low-pass ﬁlter. Since
averaging also serves as a low-pass ﬁlter, the simulation result is rarely impaired
when averaging over one tenth of the time constant. For this reason averaging is
permissible.
For illustration, Fig. 16.6 shows the spectrum analysis of white noise ﬁltered
both by a PT1 element and a PT1 element with prior averaging. As can be observed
in the amplitude spectrum, averaging over a tenth of the time constant rarely
inﬂuences the frequency spectrum transmitted. The time constant of 1794 s used in
the example is the typical time constant for the spindle of the ball screw used in the
“MAX” test bed.
PV,n,j
Pos. x(t)
1
i
2
3
LE
i
Pos. x(t)
1
i
2
Nut
1 23...
...k
Power dissipation
Thermal conduction
Sampling
interval:
TCore
TCore
Spindle
Spindle
0
0
ttotal
PV,n
i
Lni
n
n=1
i
1 23...
...k
j ...
LE
j ...
n
Ln,j
i
n=1
i
ttotal
Σ
Σ
Fig. 16.5 Local assignment of power dissipation and thermal conduction to elements of the ball
screw spindle in the simulation model. The elements have an edge length of LE. Power dissipation
and thermal conduction are averaged over the period ttotal
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
x 10
-3
0
0.5
1
1.5
x 10
-3
Amplitude spectrum
Frequency (Hz)
Fig. 16.6 Amplitude spectrum of white noise ﬁltered by PT1 element (solid line) and ﬁltered by
PT1 element with prior averaging (dashed line). The time constant τ of the PT1 element is 1794 s
and the average is calculated over τ/10
16
Structural Model-Based Correction of Thermo-elastic …
191

16.3.4 Position-Dependent Calculation of the Correction
Value
The thermally induced change in machine tool deformation is characterized by
slowness (Großmann et al. 2013). This means that relevant changes in deformations
appear in the range of several minutes (due to large thermal time constants of the
assemblies relevant for deformation). In the case of quick mutual movement of the
assemblies, however, the resultant error can change at the TCP within milliseconds
due to quickly changing transformation of the thermal assembly deformation at the
TCP due to the relative movement. For this reason, the correction values have to be
calculated position-dependently in the interpolation cycle of the control (IPO cycle,
for example 2 ms). This requirement can be met by generating and calculating the
thermo-elastic model for supporting positions that are regularly distributed across
the workspace (positions of the TCP). The error vector can be interpolated at the
TCP (ΔwTCP) (see Fig. 16.7, left) between these supporting positions. When using
the 27 supporting points sketched ({ΔwTCP}0,0,0 to {ΔwTCP}2,2,2), the error vector
can be approximated by parabolic polynomials (Großmann et al. 2011):
DwTCP ¼
DxTCPðx; y; zÞ
DyTCPðx; y; zÞ
DzTCPðx; y; zÞ
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
¼
a0 þ a1x þ a2x2
ð
Þ  b0 þ b1y þ b2y2
ð
Þ  c0 þ c1z þ c2z2
ð
Þ
d0 þ d1x þ d2x2
ð
Þ  e0 þ e1y þ e2y2
ð
Þ  f0 þ f1z þ f2z2
ð
Þ
g0 þ g1x þ g2x2
ð
Þ  h0 þ h1y þ h2y2
ð
Þ  i0 þ i1z þ i2z2
ð
Þ
8
>
<
>
:
9
>
=
>
;
ð16:1Þ
z
y
x
{ w
}
TCP 0,0,0
{ w
}
TCP 2,2,2
z
z
z1
z2
z3
LSp
0
I.) 3D-case: Error
depending on actual
position in the workspace
II.) Special case: Error in z-
direction of a ball screw
Δ
Δ
Δ
Fig. 16.7 Calculation of the correction value depending on actual position in the workspace (left
side) or depending on the nut position on the ball screw spindle (right side). LSp is the length of the
ball screw spindle
192
X. Thiem et al.

This strategy can be followed analogously in the one-dimensional case for the
ball screw in the test bed described above (see Fig. 16.7, right). To approach the
error in the z direction, for instance, a polynomial can be employed to interpolate
the four supporting points shown in the ﬁgure:
DzðzÞ ¼ a1z þ a2z2 þ a3z3 þ a4z4
ð16:2Þ
The polynomial coefﬁcients are transmitted to the control. The error vector can
be determined with minimal computation effort in the IPO cycle by means of the
polynomial functions and the current position in the workspace.
16.3.5 Implementation of Load Data Capture
in the TwinCAT3 Control
Load data capture was implemented for the control Beckhoff TwinCAT3 used for
the “MAX” test bed (see Fig. 16.8). A communication program gains access to the
data in the control via the ADS interface1 (ADS-DLL for C/C ++) made available in
TwinCAT3. The load data (x, v, I) required are cyclically scanned in the control and
transmitted to the communication program by notiﬁcation. In the program, the data
are grouped into blocks and stored together with a time stamp in a shared memory
used both by the control core and the thermal model run under Matlab. The shared
memory takes on the function of the communication interface (see Fig. 16.2).
Matlab accesses the shared memory in a time increment given by a timer. Memory
access is performed using a mex function written in C. Correct transfer of the data
block is checked in Matlab based on the time stamp. Checks are run to determine
whether the data block has already been read out or if a data block has been lost.
Apart from reading out the load data, the timer also controls the writing of cor-
rection values in the shared memory. Furthermore the timer calls the simulation
model and ensures that it is calculated in the speciﬁed time increment. Thus the
timer allows the real time requirements to be fulﬁlled by the model. The commu-
nication program cyclically reads out the correction values in turn using a timer and
sends them to the control via ADS interface.
For the communication interface introduced, the model part (here: Matlab) is
independent of the speciﬁc control. Instead of Matlab, also other programming
environments can also be used to implement the simulation model. As a pre-
condition, access to the shared memory and a sufﬁciently accurate timer should be
available.
1 ADS-Automation Device Speciﬁcation.
16
Structural Model-Based Correction of Thermo-elastic …
193

16.3.6 Test of Control-Integrated Load Data Capture
and Temperature Field Calculation
Load data capture, communication and integration of models from the subproject
A05 were ﬁrst tested for a mobile demonstrator (MiniHex). The captured load data
and the resultant error Dz are depicted in Fig. 16.9. The models comprise the
reduced-order thermal FE model of a ball screw of the demonstrator, as well as the
thermo-elastic model and the power dissipation and thermal conduction models, see
Chap. 7. The models were implemented in Matlab, and the TwinCAT3 was used as
control.
Control
TwinCAT 3
Cyclical
notification
Load data
Correction
value
ADS-
Interface
(ADS-DLL)
Shared Memory
Load data
Shared Memory
Correction value
Matlab
simulation
model
Timer
Communi-
cation
program
Timer
Fig. 16.8 Load data capture and transfer of the correction value
Fig. 16.9 Load data (gray current, dashed line velocity, solid line position) and the resulting error
values (Δz) for different nut positions on the ball screw spindle
194
X. Thiem et al.

The load data (I, v, x), as well as the ambient temperature were captured in the
control at a sampling interval of 10 ms and grouped into blocks of 10 s. These
blocks were transmitted to the Matlab model by means of the communication
interface described (see Fig. 16.8). In Matlab, power dissipation and thermal con-
duction were calculated and averaged. The temperature ﬁeld was determined by
means of thermal conduction and power dissipation values, and the resultant error
Δz in the axis direction of the ball screw was ascertained from the temperature ﬁeld.
16.4 Classiﬁcation of Outcomes in the CRC/TR 96
B07 provides one of the three correction paradigms explored within the CRC/
TR 96. By using a thermal and a thermo-elastic model, the approach maps the
thermo-elastic functional chain so that the machine tool structure remains visible in
the model. The approach to the structural model-based correction is based on
algorithms, technologies and models for real-time simulation of the thermo-elastic
behaviour (among others, model order reduction methods from the subprojects A05
and A06). Related to this paper, subproject A05 provided reduced-order thermal
network models of the test bed.
The parameters of the machine tool for the frictional and contact positions of the
guidances and bearings in the thermal network model are set in coordination with
subproject B04.
The setting for power dissipation of the driving motor models in the network
model of the test bed was parameterised for the machine tool based on motor power
dissipation models from C04.
Making available the “MAX” test bed, subproject C06 provides the experimental
basis and the control functionality in order to test, verify and demonstrate the
correction system. From the correction system, in turn, arise requirements to be
fulﬁlled by the control interfaces as described above, for instance for load data
capture.
In parallel, the correction system was tested on a mobile demonstrator (hexapod
MiniHex, compare Chap. 7), in which six variable-length struts driven by ball
screws move an end effector. The mobile demonstrator is—as was the “MAX” test
bed—run with a Beckhoff TwinCAT3 control.
16.4.1 Applicability Options for Structural Model-Based
Correction
The focus of the application of structural model-based correction is on machine
tools with greatly varying machining processes or ambient conditions. In these
cases, the qualitative characteristics of the corresponding deformation-relevant
16
Structural Model-Based Correction of Thermo-elastic …
195

temperature ﬁelds are also subject to high variability. Correlative correction
approaches (Wu et al. 2006, 2011) map a part of the thermo-elastic functional chain
by means of regression, fuzzy or neuronal models and mediate between the mea-
sured temperatures and the deformations. In terms of the variability mentioned,
these correction approaches require a large number of temperature measuring points
to capture the variable temperature ﬁelds relevant for deformation at sufﬁcient
resolution. Due to the metrological efforts necessary or lack of temperature sensor
accessibility to the desired temperature measuring points, this correlative approach
may be subject to limitations.
As a precondition for structural model-based correction, access to the load data
used in the machine tool control is needed, and it should be possible to add the
correction values to the nominal values in position control of the feed axes. During
the design and testing of the concrete structural model-based correction, the
developer needs thermal modelling know how and sufﬁciently assured knowledge
of all essential power dissipation and heat transfer parameters.
The method provides an opportunity to correct thermally induced errors without
additional energy consumption by the machine tool, for instance by additional
cooling. Furthermore, except for the ambient temperature sensors that make
available the signals involved as a constraint, the application of additional sensors
to the machine tool is not mandatory.
16.5 Outlook
The modules labelled “Parameter” and “Structural model” in Fig. 16.2 have been
implemented as examples up to now. To be able to demonstrate and test the full
correction system, the modules framed at the right of Fig. 16.2 will be implemented
for the “MAX” test bed and the mobile demonstrator (MiniHex).
References
Brecher C, Wissmann A (2009) Modelling of thermal behavior of a milling machine due to spindle
load. In: Proceedings of the 12th CIRP conference on modeling of machining operations, vol 2,
San Sebastian, 7–8 May 2009
Denkena B, Scharschmidt K-H (2009) Modellbasierte Temperaturkompensation für Werkzeugm-
aschinen. ZWF 104(9):698–702
Großmann K (2009) MAX – Versuchsträger für eine Hochgeschwindigkeits-Leichtbau-Gena-
uigkeitsmaschine. In: Großmann K (ed) Lineardirektantriebe in Werkzeugmaschinen, Dresden,
2009
Großmann K (2012) Thermo-Energetische Gestaltung von Werkzeugmaschinen. ZWF 107
(5):307–314
Großmann K, Jungnickel G, Kauschinger B, Mühl A, Rehn S (2011) Prozessaktuelle
strukturmodellbasierte Korrektur thermoelastischer Fehler. In: Conference proceedings of the
1. colloquium of the CRC/Transregio96, Dresden, 28–29 Nov 2011
196
X. Thiem et al.

Großmann K, Galant A, Mühl A (2012a) Efﬁziente Simulation durch Modellordnungsreduktion.
ZWF 107(6):457–461
Großmann K, Städel C, Galant A, Mühl A (2012b) Berechnung von Temperaturfeldern an
Werkzeugmaschinen. ZWF 107(6):452–456
Großmann K, Städel C, Mühl A (2013) Simulative Erweiterung der Datenbasis zur korrelativen
Korrektur thermoelastischer Verformungen. In: Großmann K (ed) Tradition und Gegenwart bei
der Analyse des thermischen Verhaltens spanender Werkzeugmaschinen, Dresden, 2013
Scharschmidt K-H (2011) Model-based method for compensation of thermal deformations of
machine tools. Dissertation, IFW Leibniz Universität Hannover
Wu H, Li G, Shi D (2006) Fuzzy logic thermal error compensation for computer numerical control
noncircular turning system. In: International conference on automation, robotics and computer
vision, Singapore, 5–8 Dec 2006
Wu C-W, Tang C-H, Chang C-F, Shiao Y-S (2011) Thermal error compensation method for
machine center. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 59:681–689
16
Structural Model-Based Correction of Thermo-elastic …
197

Chapter 17
Modelling and Design of Systems
for Active Control of Temperature
Distribution in Frame Subassemblies
Welf-Guntram Drossel, André Bucht and Christoph Ohsenbrügge
Abstract This paper outlines theoretical and experimental investigations into
opportunities for active control of heat ﬂows in frame structures. The application of
phase-change materials using metal foam as matrix material makes it possible to
achieve an increased thermal capacity that is coupled with the frame structures as
needed by means of variable thermal conductance based on active materials.
17.1 Introduction
The more inhomogeneous the occurring temperature ﬁelds, the more challenging it
is to correct or compensate for thermally induced deformations, particularly if the
frame structures do not reach a thermal equilibrium. In practice, the current desire
for shut-down measures in order to increase power-efﬁciency results, however, in
an increase in heat ﬂows that are inhomogeneous both in time and location. To
counteract the negative consequences of this phenomenon, an intervention must
occur in the thermal effect chain at the level of the heat ﬂow and the temperature
ﬁelds that result from it. Inﬂuencing heat ﬂows and temperature ﬁelds at the
component level can thus enhance the thermal behaviour of the machine as a whole.
W.-G. Drossel  A. Bucht
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology (IWU),
Chemnitz, Germany
e-mail: Welf-Guntram.Drossel@iwu.fraunhofer.de
A. Bucht
e-mail: Andre.Bucht@iwu.fraunhofer.de
C. Ohsenbrügge (&)
Professorship for Adaptronics and Lightweight Design, TU Chemnitz,
Chemnitz, Germany
e-mail: Christoph.Ohsenbruegge@iwu.fraunhofer.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_17
199

17.2 Approach
Stabilisation given heat inputs that are inhomogeneous in time can be achieved by
means of additional thermal capacities and a concomitant higher thermal inertia in
the system. In view of this, a thermal equilibrium—once achieved—can be sus-
tained longer against a varying heat ﬂow. However, an increased thermal capacity
has a disadvantageous inﬂuence on transient behaviour outside the steady state.
Increased inertia can greatly delay or even prevent the achievement of thermal
equilibrium (Fig. 17.1b). Possibilities for active control of heat ﬂows were con-
sidered to improve this transient behaviour. In this process, a high-capacity heat
storage structure is to be isolated from the component during warm-up. After the
steady state is established, the thermal capacity is raised through thermal coupling
with the storage and thus it is possible to input or output heat ﬂows varying in time
and/or amount in a controlled manner (Fig. 17.1c).
To implement the heat storage, phase-change materials (PCM) able to absorb or
release large amounts of thermal energy within a small temperature range due to the
enthalpy of thermodynamic changes of state were investigated. These materials
provide high storage density in the range of phase transition (typically from solid to
liquid), resulting in a thermal stabilisation in the range of the PCM’s melting
temperature. To optimise the thermal transfer inside or into the storage, the phase-
change material was inﬁltrated into a substrate made of aluminium foam. Two
material-based mechanisms were considered as a way to achieve variable coupling
of the storage device to the component to be thermally regulated: ﬁrst, the aniso-
tropic behaviour of magneto-rheological ﬂuids under the inﬂuence of the magnetic
ﬁeld, and, second, the mechanical response of thermal shape memory alloys to
changes of the thermal ﬁeld.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 17.1 Schematic view showing the inﬂuence of the considered measures a temperature curve,
uninﬂuenced, b with heat storage, c with heat storage and variable conductance
200
W.-G. Drossel et al.

17.3 Results
17.3.1 Material Composite of Phase-Change Material
and Metal Foam
Closed-cell aluminium foam was considered as matrix for the phase-change
material. Encapsulating the PCM in closed cavities ensures that the volumetric
expansion in the phase transition (of up to 16 % in case of the PCM based on
parafﬁn investigated here) does not affect the outside. The distribution of the PCM
in small amounts in the composite material provides good heat introduction and
thus makes it possible to absorb or release large heat ﬂows. The inﬁltration of the
foam takes place at temperatures above the parafﬁn’s melting point after having
evacuated the metal foam body or through dipping into a tank with liquid PCM. In
this process, micro-cracks in the cell walls are used to enable the pores located
inside to be ﬁlled (Fig. 17.2).
Fill rates of up to 100 % can be obtained with this technique. However, the
actual ﬁll rate depends on the statistical distribution of pores and micro-cracks. The
volume of embedded PCM can be increased by a cooling down procedure during
inﬁltration. The volume reduction during PCM solidiﬁcation causes a partial vac-
uum, and additional material is drawn in. However, an increase in the ﬁll rate due to
this method is only desirable up to complete inﬁltration in the liquid state. If the
cavities are completely ﬁlled with already partially solidiﬁed PCM, the volumetric
expansion in the melting procedure will expand the PCM to a volume larger than
the cavities, which is to be avoided.
Designing the matrix as a sandwich structure, in which the cover layers made of
solid material are metallurgically bonded to the foamed core, is a measure to
improve heat entry into the heat-storage structure. When metal foam structures are
used in a sandwich design, two outer sides have already been sealed by means of
the cover layers (see also Fig. 17.3). Additional sealing measures are necessary for
the open outer sides that remain. In this context, sealing by forming proved to be an
efﬁcient method. Here, parts of the foamed core are removed and protruding cover
sheet plates are bent and used for sealing. The bent cover sheet plates are either
welded or glued.
A homogenized material model representing a substitute material, whose thermal
behaviour conforms to that of the material composite, was developed. It is possible
to determine the thermally relevant material properties of density qh and speciﬁc
Fig. 17.2 Metal foam with PCM embedded in the pores
17
Modelling and Design of Systems for Active Control …
201

thermal capacity cp;h for the homogenized material from the material characteristics
of the aluminium- and PCM portions of the composite material by using (17.1) and
(17.2).
cp;h ¼ malu  cp;alu þ mpcm  cp;pcm
malu þ mpcm
ð17:1Þ
ph ¼ malu þ mpcm
Vges
ð17:2Þ
The inﬂuence of the latent heat that is absorbed in the phase transition can be
represented by two approaches: ﬁrst, by an increased speciﬁc thermal capacity in
the melting region and, second, by specifying the temperature-dependent enthalpy.
From a numerical point of view, the second approach is to be preferred, since the
material characteristics do not change abruptly. Thermal conductivity of the metal
foam can be determined using the modelling approaches by Singh and Kasana
(2004), as well as Bhattacharya et al. (2002).
The two relevant variables—absorbable heat and thermal conductivity—conﬂict
in terms of objectives. Thermal conductivity diminishes as a function of increasing
porosity of the metal foam, on the one hand. On the other hand, the PCM volume
that can be introduced, and, consequently, the absorbable heat, increase. As a result,
it is necessary to weigh the respective importance of the variables based on the
given requirements.
A basic demonstrator showed that the thermal behaviour of a plate structure can
be inﬂuenced by inﬁltrating it with PCM. The basic body of 0.0013 m3 volume and
786 kg/m3 density was inﬁltrated with 0.49 kg PCM RT 33 by the ﬁrm Rubitherm
and subjected to a heat ﬂow of 19 W (Fig. 17.4 left). The inﬂuence of thermal
stabilisation can also be demonstrated by simulation, by comparing metal foam
elements with and without PCM (Fig. 17.4 right). Hence the results show the
suitability of the approach and are generally in accord with the results previously
published by Aggogeri et al. (2010).
Fig. 17.3 Metal foam structure in sandwich design, micro-cracks in cell walls (white arrows),
cover layers made of aluminium and metallurgically bonded (white hollow arrows)
202
W.-G. Drossel et al.

17.3.2 Switchable Thermal Conduction Based on Shape
Memory Alloys
The working mechanism investigated to inﬂuence heat ﬂows by means of thermally
active shape memory alloys was to macroscopically inﬂuence the contact properties
by opening and closing air gaps. Thermal shape memory alloys (SMA) can exert a
force after reaching an activation temperature based on the one-way shape memory
effect. SMAs exhibit a very large volume speciﬁc work capacity in comparison to
other actuator-principles. This allows for a lightweight and highly integrated
solution. Activation of SMA-actuators can be done actively by heating or by using
the heat of the process itself.
Thermal equivalent networks are used to model the thermal conductivity prop-
erties. The thermal resistances in a contact are inﬂuenced by actuators based on
shape memory alloys. Consideration of a simple heat transfer path in a beam
structure, which can be inﬂuenced by actuators based on the shape memory effect,
produced the networks depicted in Fig. 17.5. The heat bridge created in the
experiment (Fig. 17.5a) consists of a heat source, a heat sink, and a structure with
good thermal conductivity to connect sink and source. A v-shaped section of this
structure can be inserted and pulled off via a shape memory actuator working
against a spring. Thermal equivalent circuits for the setup are shown in
Fig. 17.5b–d. In case of active triggering of the shape memory actuator, it was
switched between arrangements with good and restricted heat transfer. In this setup,
the shape memory actuator works against a resetting spring element made of
conventional material. The latter opens up the transfer path in the basic state
because the spring force of the resetting element exceeds the force of the actuator
element. Due to heating of the active element, the force exerted increases beyond
the reactive component, and the thermal contact is established. In experiments with
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
0
1
2
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
1
2
3
4
5
Temperature [ C]
°
Time [h]
Time [h]
Temperature [ C]
°
Fig. 17.4 Temperature curves obtained by experiment (left) and simulation for metal foam
sandwiches with PCM (dashed line unﬁlled, drawn through line ﬁlled)
17
Modelling and Design of Systems for Active Control …
203

the path open, heat source and heat sink differed in temperature by 80 K. Upon
activation of the shape memory element, the gradient was reduced to 12 K. The
resistance in this setup dropped from 16.2 K/W down to 2.3 K/W.
Actuators made of thermal shape memory alloys allow for a self-sufﬁcient mode
of operation due to the use of available thermal energy. By contacting an actuator
element directly to the heat source, it is activated once a temperature threshold value
has been exceeded. Figure 17.6 demonstrates the transient thermal behaviour of a
setup like this: First, a high thermal load (30 W) was applied for 3,600 s. In the ﬁrst
case (heat source isolated from heat sink; “open gap”), this resulted in a rapid
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 17.5 Experimental setup of the heat bridge and thermal equivalent circuits. a Overview on
overall setup. b Network of overall setup. c Network for closed heat bridge. d Network for opened
heat bridge
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Temperature [ °C]
Time [s]
100
leaf spring assembly
open gap
closed gap
Fig. 17.6 Transient thermal heat source behaviour in experimental setup for an autonomously
switching heat bridge. A step change in thermal input power is the input variable
204
W.-G. Drossel et al.

warming up of the structure. With a permanently closed transfer path (“closed gap”),
a stationary state was achieved after a delay. Direct coupling of the shape memory
element to the heat source, in turn, led to rapid warming up due to the isolation of
both source and sink. Reaching the activation temperature in the actuator material
closed the air gap, and heat can dissipate into the sink. After reducing the heat supply
to 0.7 W, as a consequence, in this case autonomously inﬂuenced, the temperature
quickly dropped back to the initial state. In the permanently closed case, the ﬁnal
temperature dropped more dramatically (Neugebauer et al. 2012).
17.3.3 Switchable Thermal Conduction Based
on Magnetorheological Fluids
Magnetorheological ﬂuids (MR ﬂuids) are suspensions of ferromagnetic particles in
a carrier ﬂuid that demonstrate signiﬁcant changes in properties under the inﬂuence
of an external magnetic ﬁeld. Whereas most prior investigations and applications of
these suspensions mainly focussed on the mechanical properties that are inﬂuenced,
here the thermal characteristic parameters were considered as a function of the
magnetic ﬁeld. When generating a magnetic ﬁeld, the magnetic particles of the ﬂuid
form chain- or column-like structures. As a result, an anisotropic heat-conducting
structure of increased thermal conductivity kII forms in the direction of the magnetic
ﬁeld. Heat transfer is signiﬁcantly lower if the particles in the ﬂuid are sedimented,
for instance, due to the inﬂuence of gravity, thus forming two separate layers.
Theoretical preliminary studies by Bruggeman (1935) permit a prediction of
thermal conductivity in the uninﬂuenced state. Reinecke et al. (2008) describe a
model for a ﬂuid inﬂuenced by a magnetic ﬁeld. This thermal conductivity depends
on the volume content of particles in the overall ﬂuid U and the thermal conduc-
tivity of the materials used.
Intensity of the magnetic ﬁeld does not directly affect the model but it can be
considered by describing the packing fraction inside the particle chains that
increases with ﬁeld intensity. The model is structured in two stages and, ﬁrst, the
thermal conductivity in the chains kchain under the inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld is
calculated by using (17.3). This thermal conductivity is then used in a parallel
connection to the surrounding ﬂuid according to (17.4) to determine the effective
overall conductivity of the ﬂuid kII. The volume fraction of particles inside the
chains Uint is used as a variable parameter for model adjustment. Extending this
approach, it is also possible to predict heat transfer in a deposited ﬂuid: ﬁrst, a value
ksed is determined for the deposited layer with particles with a fraction Uint, and this
is evaluated in comparison with the pure ﬂuid layer in series connection according
to (17.5).
17
Modelling and Design of Systems for Active Control …
205

kchain  kp
kbase  kp


kbase
kchain

1=3
¼ 1  /int
ð17:3Þ
kII ¼ kbase 1  /
/int


þ kchain
/
/int


ð17:4Þ
kII ¼
1
kbase
1  /
/int


þ 1
ksed
/
/int



1
ð17:5Þ
An experimental setup was designed to determine thermal conductivity. In the
setup, the temperature difference between a heat source and sink was measured in
thermal equilibrium under a constant heat supply both with and without a magnetic
ﬁeld. Investigating several samples made it possible to show the functional prin-
ciple of increased thermal conductivity due to the inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld.
The results also outlined the inﬂuence of the particle volume fraction. However, in
the case of very high volume fractions, the difference between the two switching
states is diminished. This can also be explained by the model, since the volume
fraction in the chains or deposited layers is limited by the possible packing fraction.
If the total volume fraction of particles in the suspension is equal to the maximal
packing fraction, then the suspension’s thermal conductivity can no longer be
inﬂuenced because no variation of particle density can be achieved. In Fig. 17.7, the
predictions by the model are compared with the values measured for spherical iron
particles in silicone oil. The values inﬂuenced by the magnetic ﬁeld were measured
at a magnetic ﬁeld intensity of 105 mT, while the deposited state was reached after
a latent period of at least 12 h.
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
ke / kf
Particle volume fraction 
_int=0,5
disperse
no field
with field
sedimented
φ
Fig. 17.7 Thermal conductivity as a function of the particle volume fraction, related to thermal
conductivity of the basic ﬂuid. Theoretical (dashed curve for disperse case, dotted curves for
magnetic ﬁeld inﬂuence and deposited ﬂuid at an internal volumetric fraction of 0.5) and measured
values (check marks) for thermal conductivity, scaled to the basic ﬂuid’s thermal conductivity
206
W.-G. Drossel et al.

17.4 Classiﬁcation in the CRC/TR 96
The thermal behaviour of individual components and parts can be actively or
passively inﬂuenced by the materials and the composite materials investigated, and
thus, the overall thermal behaviour of a machine tool can be enhanced. More and
more partially heterogeneous thermal behaviour is to be expected due to increasing
lightweight construction, as well as anticipated measures towards more energy-
efﬁcient utilisation of machine tools, such as switching off subsystems and units
during breaks in machining and, as a result, reducing thermal basic load. It is
possible to decrease these inhomogeneities by means of the functional mechanisms
of compensation investigated here. A lower range of variation in the temperature
ﬁeld reduces the effort required for correction methods to compensate for thermally
induced errors in the TCP. The temperature ﬁeld can be stabilized particularly at
positions with a substantial entry of dissipated power and strongly varying heat
sources, such as in feed drives, bearings or electronic components.
17.5 Outlook
In future project steps, switchable thermal conduction based on shape memory
alloys will ﬁrst be investigated in more detail. The focus will be on maximizing the
switching effect and on an investigation of the behaviour as a control system. Both
approaches to switchable thermal conduction have to be evaluated in terms of their
applicability according to the requirements in frame structures.
The composite structure consisting of PCM and metal foam will be explored in
more detail in co-operation with subproject A07 (see Chap. 9). The diffuse domain
method allows for easy discretization of complex geometries. The characteristic
values of a metal foam-PCM composite structure determined by means of this
method are to be compared both to the simulation results based on the simpliﬁed
material model and to experimental data.
Finally, the combination of the working principles of thermal storage and var-
iable thermal bonding are to be veriﬁed in experiments, and the consequences to the
thermal ﬁeld of a predeﬁned machine structure will be simulated.
References
Aggogeri F et al (2010) Multifunctional structure solutions for ultra high precision (UHP) machine
tools. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 50:366–373
Bhattacharya et al (2002) Thermophysical properties of high porosity metal foams. Int J Heat Mass
Transf 42:1017–1031
17
Modelling and Design of Systems for Active Control …
207

Bruggeman DAG (1935) Berechnung verschiedener physikalischer Konstanten von heterogenen
Substanzen. I. Dielektrizitätskonstanten und Leitfähigkeiten der Mischkörper aus isotropen
Substanzen. Ann Phys 24(7):636–664
Neugebauer R et al (2012) Control of thermal ﬂow in machine tools using shape memory alloys.
WASET Int Sci Index 71:493–498
Reinecke BN et al (2008) On the anisotropic thermal conductivity of magnetorheological
suspensions. J Appl Phys 104:023507
Singh R, Kasana HS (2004) Computational aspects of effective thermal conductivity of highly
porous metal foams. Appl Therm Eng 24:1841–1849
208
W.-G. Drossel et al.

Chapter 18
Structurally Integrated Sensors
Christian Wenzel and Michel Klatte
Abstract The work described here explores the suitability of metrological appli-
cations for direct measurement of thermo-elastic deformations in a machine tool’s
basic structure with the goal of correcting positioning errors by means of control
engineering. This paper ﬁrst introduces the measurement principle of the sensors
applied. It then presents the outcomes of investigations aimed at the system
approach’s validation, demonstrating the concept’s suitability to measure structural
deformations. It was also possible to show that the deformation of simple structural
elements can be represented with sufﬁcient accuracy by the linear functions of the
signals obtained using structurally integrated sensors.
18.1 Introduction
In currently available machine tools, it is common practice to directly measure the
thermal expansions or deformations of spindles (Yoshimi et al. 1989) or tool
holders (Stahlgren et al. 1996) and to correct them by means of control engineering
to avoid workpiece errors. However, only a portion of the overall temperature-
induced TCP displacement can be measured by this method, since these compo-
nents represent only a relatively short path in the kinematic chain between the
workpiece and the tool, which is completed by the entire machine structure.
When expanding the approach of uniaxial measurement and correction of local
thermo-elastic deformations into a general and comprehensive concept, it is thus
necessary to involve the deformation of the whole kinematic chain and thus of the
machine structure (Biral et al. 2006; Mitsuishi et al. 2001). Thus it is possible to
C. Wenzel  M. Klatte (&)
Fraunhofer Institute for Production Technology (IPT), Aachen, Germany
e-mail: michel.klatte@ipt.fraunhofer.de
C. Wenzel
e-mail: christian.wenzel@ipt.fraunhofer.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_18
209

implement the correction of the TCP displacement based on direct measurement of
the real deformation.
Consequently, the subproject C03 targets the implementation of metrological
applications to directly capture thermo-elastic deformations in the machine tool’s
basic structure by means of an integrated sensor system during part machining.
Another objective is to calculate the correction data for the tool centre point (TCP)
based on the measured values recorded.
The sensor system, which consists of many individual path measurement sen-
sors, makes it possible to measure the local thermo-elastic relative displacement at
relevant measuring points. A geometric-kinematic transmission model of the
machine representing the location of the individual machine tool sensors and their
kinematic behaviour will be engineered. Using this model, the individual dis-
placements measured are expected to be converted into an overall displacement
related to the TCP and added to the nominal position values as correction data.
18.2 Conﬁguration of Sensor Applications
18.2.1 Measurement Principle
The measurement principle employed in capturing the thermo-elastic deformations is
based on thermally stable rods integrated into the machine structure (see Fig. 18.1).
Each thermally stable rod is mounted in the machine structure without stresses via a
ﬁxed and ﬂoating bearing arrangement. If the length of the surrounding structure
changes, for example, due to thermo-elastic deformation, the structure displaces the
thermally stable rods on the ﬂoating bearing side. It is possible to directly capture this
displacement by means of speciﬁc displacement sensors.
Fig. 18.1 Measurement principle for direct measurement of thermo-elastic deformations
210
C. Wenzel and M. Klatte

The thermally stable rods are tube-shaped to minimize deﬂection due to weight.
Their thermal coefﬁcient of extension ought to be several orders of magnitudes less
than that of steel or other structural materials, so that it can be considered negligible
in deformation measurement. For this reason, the rods are made of carbon ﬁbre-
reinforced plastics (CFRP) by a pultrusion method, so that all ﬁbres inside have the
same orientation longitudinally. The material parameters yielded are presented in
Table 18.1.
18.2.2 Sensor Arrangement in Complex Machine Structures
When several sensor applications are arranged in the same area, even complex
deformations can be mapped. Bending states for the corresponding structure can
also be represented by means of two sensors arranged in parallel. The difference
between the signals of two sensor applications can be derived and analysed in this
state. This is elucidated in Fig. 18.2.
Thus, bending around two axes can be mapped by means of a three-dimensional
arrangement of three sensor applications. In both cases, the elongation of the
structure along an axis can also be directly measured.
Table 18.1 Material
parameters of the applied
thermally stable rods made of
ﬁbre-reinforced plastics
Property
Value
Thermal coefﬁcient of
extension
−0.1 × 10−6 K−1 longitudinal
to ﬁbre
Fibre orientation
Unidirectional
Fibre volume percentage
Approx. 65 %
Thermal conductivity
17 W/m K
Speciﬁc heat
0.71 J/g K
Fig. 18.2 Capture of complex deformation states (in this case: bending) by using several
measurement applications—diagrammatic view
18
Structurally Integrated Sensors
211

As mentioned previously, a sensor application can be employed to directly
measure the deformation state of a simple structure, such as a cuboid element.
Machine tool structures are frequently relatively simple in design. Thus, for
instance, the approximated representation of a machine column could be achieved
by a three-dimensional arrangement of three sensor applications. However, if a
more complex machine structure must be mapped, or the complete machine, this
can be done by linking several sensor groups.
The machine structure is subdivided into cuboid elements (see Fig. 18.3). Each
cuboid element includes a sensor arrangement. Connecting several cuboid elements
makes possible, for instance, an approximate mapping of the complete structure of a
bridgeport milling machine.
18.3 Test Bed Results
18.3.1 Determining the Suitability of the Sensor Applications
Sufﬁciently high measurement accuracy is one of the requirements that must be
fulﬁlled by the sensor applications. The measurement result should especially not
be distorted by stick-slip effects in the bearing elements. The signals have to be
stable over the long term, since the sensor applications are functionally permanently
integrated into the machine tools and are supposed to make values available for
correction by means of control engineering.
Investigations of measurement accuracy and long-term stability tests were
conducted in order to verify ﬁrst of all whether these requirements are fulﬁlled by
the sensor applications introduced in the section.
Tests were also done to determine the measurability of deformation states of
simple structural elements by means of a several sensor applications.
Sensor
Fig. 18.3 Extending the sensor concept to complex structures, shown for a bridgeport milling
machine
212
C. Wenzel and M. Klatte

18.3.1.1 Veriﬁcation of the Measurement Principle
Tests Designed to Determine the Suitability of the Sensor Application
Investigations to test the suitability of the sensors in the complete sensor setup for
the application were carried out on a simply designed test bench. The test bench
setup is explained in the following.
The basic test bench geometry is a cuboid. The cuboid is made of mineral
casting which is a typical structural material, and is equipped with two structurally
integrated sensor applications (see Fig. 18.4). In these applications, different dis-
placement sensors can be employed for deformation measurement, making it
possible to test the usability of different displacement sensors. After concluding a
series of tests with different sensor principles, eddy current transducers were ulti-
mately chosen for the demonstrator. For this reason, the following explanations are
based on the results gained during the veriﬁcation of the transducer type. To verify
the measurement results of the structurally integrated sensors, external capacitive
displacement sensors that measure outside the structure against the same reference
surfaces, are used. For these investigations, the test bench is located on an assembly
plate and run in a thermally stabilised (±1 °K) environment (Table 18.2).
To induce different deformation states, the test bench is ﬁtted with ten heating
cartridges altogether (ﬁve per side). The heating cartridges are arranged in parallel
so that they can be run independently of each other at different heating power
Fig. 18.4 Test bed to verify the measurement principle
18
Structurally Integrated Sensors
213

values. This way both symmetric and asymmetric deformation states of the test
bench can be generated.
In the ﬁrst veriﬁcation measurements, the cuboid was ﬁrst homogeneously, that
is symmetrically, heated by 500 W of power. A uniaxial thermo-elastic elongation
state formed. After a measured elongation of approximately 80 µm, the heating was
switched off so that the cuboid’s elongation retracted. This period is deﬁned as the
cooling down phase.
The measurement results provided in Fig. 18.5 show that there is an approxi-
mately 2 % maximal relative deviation between the signals of the structurally
integrated sensor applications and the signals obtained from the external sensors.
This observation is independent of the measurement principle of the displacement
sensor used. As intended, it is possible to measure the elongation of the ambient
structure with very high accuracy at the point where the sensor application is ﬁxed.
An asymmetric deformation of the structure was initiated in ongoing tests. To do
this, the cuboid was heated via the integrated heating cartridges by 250 W of power
over 1 h. The two structurally integrated sensors clearly show different deviations
according to their own position in the cuboid. Consequently the bending states can
be identiﬁed using the difference between the two signals (Fig. 18.6).
Table 18.2 Material parameters of the mineral casting material used
Property
Value (approx.)
At a temperature of (°C)
Thermal coefﬁcient of extension
15 × 10−6 K−1
20
Thermal conductivity
2.9 W/m K
25
Speciﬁc heat
0.73 J/g K
25
Thermal diffusivity
1.75 mm2/s
25
Fig. 18.5 Measurement
results obtained for the
veriﬁcation of the sensor
application by means of eddy
current transducers
214
C. Wenzel and M. Klatte

18.3.1.2 Long-Term Stability Tests
To guarantee that the measurement results obtained remain valid over a longer time
and to ensure that it is not necessary to recalibrate the total system too often, the
displacement sensors should have long-term stability. Since eddy current trans-
ducers can also be affected—as a condition of the principle according to which they
function—due to
temperature
variations,
corresponding investigations were
performed.
The goal of these investigations was to exclude to the greatest extent possible all
external error factors for the measurement and to track the changes in the measured
signal over a longer period. When external inﬂuencing factors are excluded, it can
be concluded that corresponding instabilities in the measured signals are caused by
the sensor itself.
The test bench is mainly composed of a simple sensor holder made of Invar to
provide a stable temperature (see Fig. 18.7). This ﬁxture houses three displacement
sensors that measure together on a surface (target). The distance from displacement
00:00
01:00
02:00
03:00
04:00
05:00
−10
0
10
20
30
40
Time [Hours]
Stroke [µm]
Sensor 1
Sensor 2
Fig. 18.6 Veriﬁcation of recording bending by means of two sensor applications—measurement
results
Target
(Aluminium)
Fixture
(Invar)
PT100
Eddy Current
Sensor
Fig. 18.7 Test setup for long-term stability tests
18
Structurally Integrated Sensors
215

sensor to target is adjusted to a ﬁxed value. However, the distance between the
displacement sensors and the target is inﬂuenced by the thermo-elastic character-
istics of the sensor ﬁxture. For this reason, the total setup is placed in a thermally
isolated reservoir that decreases temperature variations in the environment and
ensures that they do not directly affect the temperature of the measurement setup.
The total test setup is run in an air-conditioned environment, in which the tem-
perature variations should be less than 1 °C. Nevertheless, the sensor ﬁxture’s
temperature is captured at two positions and recorded.
Electromagnetic interference also inﬂuences the measurements. To minimise the
inﬂuence from sources of electromagnetic disturbances, the overall setup is run in
an insulated environment. Inside this insulated space, there is only the sensors’
evaluation electronics.
The stability test was performed as follows. The test bench was established as
described above and the sensors were put into operation. Then the recording was
started. The measurements of the sensor signals and at the ﬁxed temperature sensors
were executed without additional external impacts over more than 7 days.
As a result (see Fig. 18.8) it can be stated that the temperature of the sensor
ﬁxture could be kept constant within 1.5 °K during the experiment. This value
corresponds to the theoretical error inﬂuence on the test signals of (to be calculated:
effective length and thermal coefﬁcient of extension).
According to our observations of the ﬁrst 6 h, all of the sensors drifted in the
same direction by approximately 0.8–1.2 µm, as illustrated in the Figure. This drift
does not correlate with the setup temperature and thus could result from sensor
electronic heating. After this heating stage at the beginning, the signals remain
constant within a band of 0.33 µm up to maximum 0.5 µm (sensor 3). Maximal drift
is also charted in the diagram in Fig. 18.8.
Furthermore, it was also found that the sensors’ temperature dependency is
approximately 0.05µm/°C. Sensor temperature should ideally be kept constant to avoid
measurement errors. However, sensitivity to variations in the ambient temperature is
relatively low. Consequently, slight temperature variations can be tolerated.
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
Mon
Tue
Wed
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
Time [Weekdays]
Displacement [µm]
Maximum Drift Band
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Temperature [°C]
Sensor 1
Sensor 2
Sensor 3
Temperature
Fig. 18.8 Measurement result of the long-term stability test of eddy current transducers
216
C. Wenzel and M. Klatte

The dominant inﬂuence on temperature dependency results from the sensor electronics.
Therefore the sensor system should only be put into service after a sufﬁciently long
warm-up phase for the sensor electronics. The displacement sensors can be regarded as
stable under these conditions.
18.3.2 Validation Measurements
This section focusses on the exploration of more complex deformation states,
particularly bending. Fundamentally the relationship between the real deformation
and the signals from the structurally integrated sensor applications had to be clar-
iﬁed. This relationship forms the basis of the deformation models necessary to
implement a correction by means of control engineering.
For validation measurements, the test bench for fundamental investigations
introduced in Sect. 3.1 is extended as follows. The cuboid is clamped on one side
for the follow-up tests. In the case of asymmetric heating, a bending state should
appear which causes the structure to be deﬂected against the clamp. This type of
mounting approximately corresponds to a machine tool column.
A prerequisite for the external capture of more complex deformation states is the
ability to determine the elastic line or deﬂection of the test bench. This can be
achieved if a series of displacement sensors measure in the direction of the lateral
face of the test cuboid. This setup is shown in the diagram in Fig. 18.9. Ten
Fig. 18.9 Extension of the test bench for fundamental investigations for validation measurements
18
Structurally Integrated Sensors
217

displacement sensors are available to determine the elastic line, so that it is possible
to measure the elastic line using ten support points at high local resolution at each
point in time. A displacement sensor is also employed in order to directly measure
the deﬂection of the unclamped side of the cuboid.
Before each measurement, the cuboid is in a state of equilibrium with the
environment. In this state, the cuboid has a homogeneous temperature distribution
of approximately 20 °C.
Before switching on the power supply for the heating cartridges, homing of all
displacement sensors is performed. Starting from this home position, the thermo-
elastic cuboid deformation is observed.
After 1 h of heating, the power supply for the heating cartridges is switched off,
and the cuboid cools down slowly until the ambient temperature has been reached.
Cooling down was recorded over at least 4 h to make sure that any retraction and
possible changes in the thermally induced deformation in the cooling down phase
can also be recorded. In all measurements, the measurement values were taken at 1-
s intervals.
Thus, (Fig. 18.10), for instance, elucidates the measurement of the elastic line by
means of external sensors at ﬁve points in time. At the beginning of the test, the
values of all sensors were set to zero, which means that the elastic line is understood
to be a straight line. The strongly curved lines show the state of maximal defor-
mation, as well as the deformation state at points just before and after the maxi-
mum. As is to be expected, a clear bending of test bench and a total displacement or
deﬂection of the left side can be observed. The ﬁfth curve, in turn, is almost a
straight line per se, that means bending has returned to the initial state.
To determine whether there is a linear relationship between the deﬂection and
the signals of the integrated sensors, the following approach was applied. First the
deﬂection value was deﬁned as the parameter to be investigated. For modelling,
these parameters could be directly used, for instance, in order to describe the
characteristic of the machine column deﬂection.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Sensor#
Deflection [µm]
Curvature at start (00:00h)
Curvature at 00:34h
Curvature at maximum (01:09h)
Curvature at 01:45h
Curvature at end (04:40h)
Fig. 18.10 Measurement results of the recorded elastic line at test bench for fundamental
investigations
218
C. Wenzel and M. Klatte

In Fig. 18.11, the signals of the structurally integrated sensors and the deﬂection
parameter are shown. The ascending branch indicates a heterogeneous expansion of
the test cuboid at the positions of the individual sensors (sensor 1 shows a higher
deﬂection than sensor 2) and a corresponding increase in thermo-elastic deforma-
tion. During the subsequent cooling down period, the points accordingly go back to
their initial state (both the internal sensors and the deﬂection).
This diagram clearly shows that all of the points measured are situated in the
vicinity of a plane. This indicates a linear relationship between the externally
measured deﬂection and the signals from the structurally integrated sensors.
The function of this plane could then be found through a compensation algo-
rithm using the least square method. Consequently, the linearity of the relationship
is provided by the maximal point—plane distance. Linearity was determined to be
(as) 2.16 % of the measurement range (2.98 µm maximal absolute deviation).
The same error also appeared in the temporal representation (see Fig. 18.12). In
this diagram, both the measured deﬂection curve and the deﬂection curve that was
0
20
40
−10
−5
0
5
−100
0
100
200
300
Sensor 1 [µm]
Sensor 2 [µm]
Deflection [µm]
Measured
LSM−Fit
Fig. 18.11 Representation of
sensor signals over the
measured cuboid deﬂection
with deﬂection plane
00:00
01:00
02:00
03:00
04:00
05:00
−20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Time [Hours]
Deflection [µm]
Calculated
Measured
Res. Error
Fig. 18.12 Deﬂection as a
function of time—measured
and obtained from
compensation calculations—
in comparison
18
Structurally Integrated Sensors
219

calculated across the compensation plane, as well as the uncorrected error were
charted. A very high concordance between the graphs and thus high linearity were
indicated, especially in the heating phase.
Based on the tests, it can be concluded that signals from structurally integrated
sensors can be used to characterise the deformation state of a structural element
using simple, linear models for the corresponding load cases.
18.4 Classiﬁcation in the CRC
The subproject C03 “Structurally integrated sensors” is immediately connected with
the overall topic of the CRC and intersects in various ways with other subprojects in
the consortium.
Thanks to the structurally integrated sensors, it is possible to immediately cap-
ture the thermo-elastic deformation of the machine structure. Structurally integrated
sensors offer an additional source of data for any kind of correction methods
(subprojects B05–B07). As a result, not only machine data or temperatures can be
employed as input variables, but also information about the real thermo-elastic
deformation of the machine structure. Furthermore, the approach permits validation
of the methods to calculate structural deformations from subproject B07 on the real
machine bed.
As a part of project area C, this subproject is another opportunity to enhance the
machining accuracy of machine tools by means of design measures in machine
frames and components.
18.5 Outlook
In the ongoing project phase, a three-axis bridgeport milling machine will be
commissioned with a system consisting of 21 structurally integrated sensor appli-
cations. The sensor applications can be veriﬁed in connection with a complex
geometric structure by means of this demonstrator. Furthermore the deformation
models developed in the project can be extended to complex structures and vali-
dated with the demonstrator. Thus the basis for a correction of the TCP displace-
ment by means of control engineering will be generated.
References
Biral F (2006) A new direct deformation sensor for active compensation of positioning errors in
large milling machines, Istanbul, Türkei, pp 126–131
Mitsuishi M (2001) Development of an intelligent high-speed machining center. CIRP Ann Manuf
Technol 50(1):275–280
220
C. Wenzel and M. Klatte

Stahlgren B, Stubbe R, Ericsson C (1996) Arrangement for sensing elastic deformation in a tool
stem in a machine tool
Yoshimi T, Matsuura A, Takashima T, Nakano H (1989) Apparatus for compensating for the
thermal displacement of the main spindle of a machine tool
18
Structurally Integrated Sensors
221

Chapter 19
Thermo-Energetic Motor Optimisation
Stefan Winkler and Ralf Werner
Abstract The thermo-elastic deformations of a machine tool can only be deter-
mined if the heat sources inducing them are known. In the electric drives of a
machine tool, heating results from the losses that appear during the transformation
of electric into mechanical energy. The objective of subproject C04 is to model the
individual dissipation mechanisms and the heat ﬂuxes responsible for them. To do
this, calculation equations suitable for the mechanisms were created and adapted to
the motor types used in the machine tools. The models generated this way were
subsequently validated through measurements. Based on the physical interactions
among the losses, the authors succeeded in engineering a method by which the
dissipations can be actively controlled via motor control. The extent to which this
dissipation control can be utilised in order to speciﬁcally adapt the heating of the
drive for the required warming up of the machine tool is still to be clariﬁed. For
thermal modelling, unlike classical modelling, the main focus is not on the internal
motor structure, but on heat transfers from the drives that are directed towards the
machine tool and/or the environment.
19.1 Introduction
The electric drive dissipations of a machine tool are a part of the machine’s most
signiﬁcant heat sources. The target of subproject C04 is to calculate these dissi-
pations and the resulting heat ﬂuxes that contribute to the warming up of the
machine tool.
S. Winkler (&)  R. Werner
Professorship Electrical Energy Conversion Systems and Drives, Faculty of Electrical
Engineering and Information Technology, Chemnitz University of Technology,
Chemnitz, Germany
e-mail: stefan.winkler@etit.tu-chemnitz.de
R. Werner
e-mail: ralf.werner@hrz.tu-chemnitz.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_19
223

For this purpose, ﬁrst the dissipation models of the individual drives have to be
created. The dissipations found this way are used as follow-up input variables for
the thermal models, by means of which the desired heat ﬂuxes from the drives to the
surrounding parts of the machine tool are ultimately calculated.
To minimise additional motor fabrication costs, the models are structured so that
they can function without additional sensors, such as further temperature sensors.
As a result, the only available input variables are those that can be obtained via
machine tool control.
Another requirement is to design the models as simply as possible so that they
can be calculated in real time by the control. This ensures that the temperature
distribution caused by the drives at any point in time is available for correction
methods within the machine tool.
19.2 Approach
The ﬁrst step is to determine the relevant motor types that are used as drives in
machine tools. This selection is a prerequisite for the generation of the power
dissipation models.
When engineering the dissipation models, in general, attention must be paid to
the subdivision of the overall dissipations into load-dependent and load-indepen-
dent dissipations. The special features of each motor have to be taken into account.
The design of synchronous motors, for instance, is without rotor windings so that
dissipation due to current heat only appears in the stator.
As soon as the dissipation models have been established, they are veriﬁed by
measurements on selected motors. In the next step, the thermal models are generated
for the relevant models using the dissipation as input variables.
The primary focus in thermal modelling is on the drives’ interaction with the
other machine tool components. In this process, the motor design type and the way
in which it is attached are decisive factors, since these issues determine the direct
contact between the motor and the machine tool frame. The type of cooling and the
coolant used are also important for the distribution of the heat ﬂuxes.
The heat ﬂuxes inside the motor play a subordinate role in heat exchange with
the other machine tool components. For this reason, thermal modelling can be
performed without exact modelling of the internal motor structure.
19.3 Results
19.3.1 Power Dissipation Models
In general, advanced machine tools are equipped with two different motor types.
Permanent magnet synchronous motors are preferentially employed as feed drives
due to their high power density, which allows them to be designed compactly.
224
S. Winkler and R. Werner

Asynchronous motors are mechanically robust and easy to control. As a result, they
are frequently used as work spindle and accessory drives. Other motor types are not
applied in machine tools. Consequently, modelling only considers the special
features of asynchronous and synchronous motors.
Basically, the power dissipation models can be adapted to all motors, since all
motors are characterised by the same loss types. Consequently, an analogous
strategy is chosen to determine the losses of all motors. According to their principle,
they can be subdivided into four categories.
Heat dissipation from current: These losses appear in all motor windings due to
current conduction.
Cyclic magnetisation losses: These losses are caused by the change of the
magnetic ﬁeld within the ferromagnetic motor components. They are also called
magnetic or hysteresis losses PV,Fe.
Frictional losses: Frictional losses can be grouped into two types—losses gen-
erated by bearing friction and losses due to air friction and ventilator.
Additional losses: Additional losses involve all losses that do not ﬁt into the
categories mentioned above. These miscellaneous losses occur for different reasons,
for instance skin effects in conductors, reluctance losses due to the changing
location of the stator and rotor teeth with regard to each other or by harmonic waves
in the magnetic ﬁeld. They are strongly dependent on geometry and magnetising of
each motor. All of them are alike—in opposition to the other loss types—in not
being directly measurable. Thus, they can be estimated at best.
The stator-side Joule’s heat losses PV,W,S are calculated in the same way for all
motors (DIN 2008). The results are obtained by means of the equation
PV;W;S ¼ 1:5  RKl  I2
L
ð19:1Þ
Variables to be inserted are resistance RKl between two stator terminals and the
effective value of conductor current IL. Terminal resistance can either be determined
by means of resistance measurement or be taken from the motor’s data sheet. For
exact quantiﬁcation of losses during the motor run, the temperature dependence has
to be considered. The effective current value can either be measured autonomously
by means of a separate measuring device, or the value provided by the control can
be employed. When doing this, it must be taken into consideration that the mea-
suring devices of the frequency converter used for the control can have a mea-
surement uncertainty of max. 5 %.
In asynchronous motors, Joule’s heat losses also appear in the rotor. To provide a
robust motor design, in general, short-circuit cages are in use. However, with these
cages, neither rotor current nor resistance can be measured. Based on the model for
the asynchronous motors, the losses can be calculated with the following equation
PMech ¼ Pd  PV;W;R ¼ Pd  s  Pd
ð19:2Þ
19
Thermo-Energetic Motor Optimisation
225

Various approaches, e.g. in Nürnberg and Hanitsch (2001), exist to calculate the
air gap power Pδ, necessary to compute the rotor-related Joule’s heat losses con-
sidering different aspects of power ﬂow inside the motor (Fig. 19.1).
To clarify which of the paradigms provides the most accurate result, comparative
measurements were conducted with slip ring induction motors, since both rotor
current and resistance can be directly measured on these motors. The most exact
consistency is yielded if the air gap power is computed as following
Pd ¼ PEl  PV;W;S  PV:U
ð19:3Þ
Cyclic magnetisation losses PV,U depend on the adjusted rotary frequency and
the motors’ magnetisation. In case of asynchronous motors, magnetisation is
determined by the amount of applied voltage, whereas, in synchronous motors, it is
ﬁxed by the magnets. In principle, the cyclic magnetisation losses are measured in a
no-load measurement. In case of asynchronous motors, a ﬁxed rotary frequency is
set up, and voltage varies between the half and full nominal voltage. Then the cyclic
magnetisation losses together with the frictional losses PV,R yield the load-inde-
pendent losses:
PV;U þ PV;R ¼ PEl  PV;W;S
ð19:4Þ
The load-independent losses can be subdivided using the iron loss resistance RFe
as a function of voltage U
PV;U þ PV;R ¼ U2
RFe
þ PV;R
ð19:5Þ
Iron loss resistance is speciﬁed in the data sheet as part of the extended
equivalent circuit diagram. When using the value from the data sheet, it has to be
taken into consideration that the value can have a deviation of up to 20 % due to
variations of the material values and manufacturing tolerances.
Fig. 19.1 Measured and
computed rotor losses of an
induction motor with slip
rings in comparison
226
S. Winkler and R. Werner

Synchronous motors have a constant magnetic ﬁeld since they use permanent
magnets. It is possible to vary the magnetic ﬁeld by impressing an additional
magnetising current via motor control. However, this measure increases the motor’s
required idle power and thus its losses. Furthermore, there is the risk that the
magnets may be permanently demagnetised if the ﬁeld is weakened too much,
making the motor unusable. For this reason, an adequate determination and division
of losses, as is common practice for asynchronous motors, is impossible. Dis-
mounting the rotor would be necessary for a division of the load-independent
losses.
It is also possible to use the motor’s S1 characteristic by means of the data sheet.
This characteristic speciﬁes the motor’s operating point S1 in continuous operation,
in which the stator windings achieve a certain ﬁnal excess temperature, usually
100 K, in comparison with the environment. Since the synchronous motors carried
out as servo-design do not have ventilators, their capacity to emit heat into the
environment is the same at each operating point. Since, at a standstill, it is only
possible to convert load-dependent losses, the total losses PV,Ges can be determined
by means of the motor constant as Joule’s heat losses—PV,W,S and in terms of
additional losses PV,Z. Afterwards, it is possible to calculate the load-independent
losses as a function of speed n
PV;U n
ð Þ þ PV;R n
ð Þ ¼ PV;Ges  PV;W;S M
ð
Þ  PV;ZðMÞ
ð19:6Þ
for each other point of the S1 characteristic by means of the motor constant. Then it
is possible to approach the load-independent losses obtained thus from the data
sheet or no-load measurement for the loss model as a speed-dependent function.
As previously mentioned, the frictional losses are subdivided into two types—
bearing friction and gas friction. Bearing friction is provided using the frictional
coefﬁcient, the bearing load, and the rotational speed. Gas friction is proportional to
the friction-producing surface and the cube of the rotational speed. Calculation of
friction mainly depends on which bearing is used with which lubricant, or, for
instance, the consistency of the rotor surface. Since, in general, these variables are
as little known as bearing pre-stress, which has a signiﬁcant effect on the bearing
load, each determination of frictional losses by calculation can only provide an
estimate in the best case. An accurate determination of friction can only be gained
by measurements. If no measurement is carried out, for estimation, the following
equation from electrical engineering (Müller and Ponick 2009) provides a solution:
PV;R ¼ kV;R  D 
l þ 0:83  0:6  D  p
2p


 p  n  D
ð
Þ2
ð19:7Þ
as well as rotor diameter D, rotor length l, number of pairs of poles p and speed
n (Fig. 19.2).
Finally the additional losses should be mentioned. These losses can only be
determined indirectly by comparing the absorbed and emitted motor power. The
method is in principle highly uncertain for measurement, so the additional losses
19
Thermo-Energetic Motor Optimisation
227

measured are accordingly inexact. Calculation of the additional losses can only be
estimated. As been demonstrated by the motors measured, an assumption of
PV;Z ¼ 0:1  PV;W;S
ð19:8Þ
supplied the best conformity with the given measured results (Fig. 19.3).
This calculation equation can be employed for all motors, independently of
motor type and nominal power. The pulse frequency and the pulse pattern of the
converter control have just as minimal a measurable inﬂuence on the additional
losses.
With knowledge of the losses and their dependencies from the drive parameters,
the drives can be operated at any point of operation, which is optimal in terms of
losses. This is enabled by a variation of magnetic ﬂow Φ.
Magnetic ﬂow directly affects the cyclic magnetisation losses and provides the
load current required and thus indirectly the Joule’s heat losses according to the
formula
Fig. 19.2 Drive dimensions
Fig. 19.3 Measured and
calculated additional losses,
absorbed on an asynchronous
machine, in comparison
228
S. Winkler and R. Werner

M ¼ k  /  I
ð19:9Þ
According to the present state of the art, magnetic ﬂow is kept constant, if
possible, so that the drive can load the maximal torque at any time. The approach
followed by the subproject anticipates adapting magnetic ﬂow as a function of the
operating point. Thus, for instance, in the partial load range, losses of up to 10 %
can be avoided. The no-load losses can even be reduced by almost half (Fig. 19.4).
19.3.2 Thermal Models
The thermal models for the drives must fulﬁl two functions. On the one hand, they
are intended to calculate the temperatures inside the motors, for the temperature-
dependent motor parameters, such as winding resistance. On the other hand, they
have to enable heat ﬂux to other components of the machine tool to be calculated.
For this purpose, subproject C04 employs network models consisting of nodes. An
advantage of this is that the structure of a motor can be rebuilt with these models, as
by means of an FE model. They can also be converted into electrically equivalent
networks and then be computed by using methods of electrical network analysis.
The required heat ﬂuxes are provided as currents in the corresponding branches of
the network, and the temperatures accordingly as the potentials of the nodes
(Fig. 19.5).
A network has to be established for each motor type, in order to take into
account the special abovementioned characteristic features of the motors. However,
the inner structure is not known, in general. For this reason, a largely simpliﬁed
standard model can be generated for each motor type at best. The measurements
carried out up to now have demonstrated that a standard model like this is sufﬁcient
to determine the inner temperature distribution. Concerning the accuracy of the
Fig. 19.4 Potential saving in
losses due to changed
magnetic ﬂow
19
Thermo-Energetic Motor Optimisation
229

higher ranking machine tool model, the transfers from the motors to the environ-
ment are of signiﬁcantly higher importance than the heat ﬂuxes inside the drives.
Consequently, the correct determination of the heat transfers to coolant, envi-
ronment and into the machine frame are the major goals in the generation of the
thermal models.
19.4 Classiﬁcation in the CRC/TR 96
Subproject C04 provides methods that are required to specify the losses in the
drives of a machine tool. Based on these losses, the thermal models that are created
in cooperation with the other subprojects make it possible to calculate heat ﬂuxes
between the machine tool, the motors and the environment.
19.5 Outlook
The generation of power dissipation models for the individual motor types has been
completed. At present, it remains to be seen to what extent an adaptation of the
control that is optimal in terms of losses inﬂuences the everyday operation of
machine tools.
Fig. 19.5 Basic structure of an electrically equivalent heat source network, courtesy (Wiedemann
and Kellenberger 1967)
230
S. Winkler and R. Werner

As they are, the thermal models are too complex for real-time calculation inside
the machine tool control. Current investigations are determining the degree to
which it is possible to simplify the inner motor structure. The aim is to reduce the
number of nodes as much as possible and to model the thermal behaviour with
sufﬁcient accuracy. In this context, the linear motors pose another problem. Unlike
the compact design of rotating machines, in linear motors, we cannot assume that
the whole motor is warmed homogeneously. The main focus of further research is
here on the determination of symmetry conditions in order to simplify the model.
References
DIN (2008) DIN VDE 0530 Drehende elektrische Maschinen—Teil 2-1: Standardverfahren zur
Bestimmung der Verluste und des Wirkungsgrades aus Prüfungen (ausgenommen Maschinen
für Schienen- und Straßenfahrzeuge)
Müller G, Ponick B (2009) Elektrische Maschinen, 1. Grundlagen elektrischer Maschinen.
WILEY-VCH, Weinheim
Nürnberg W, Hanitsch R (2001) Die Prüfung elektrischer Maschinen, 7th edn. Springer, Berlin
Wiedemann E, Kellenberger W (1967) Konstruktion elektrischer Maschinen. Springer, Berlin
19
Thermo-Energetic Motor Optimisation
231

Chapter 20
Technical and Economic Benchmarking
Guideline for the Compensation
and Correction of Thermally Induced
Machine Tool Errors
Hajo Wiemer, Lars Neidhardt, Werner Esswein and Richard Braun
Abstract The approaches to the correction and/or compensation of thermally
caused machining errors developed in the CRC/TR 96 have different effects on the
accuracy that can be achieved and on the throughput capacity. Consequently, the
approaches generate different beneﬁts. At the same time, the costs and time required
for their generation and application differ as well. As a result, not only the technical,
but also the economic consequences of each method in terms of its usability for
practice-relevant applications are of interest to potential users. Methods for com-
paring the various approaches are developed in subproject C05. These methods are
based on the technical and economic benchmarking guidelines introduced in the
paper.
20.1 Introduction
The goal of the research activities is a holistic, comparative assessment or bench-
marking of the compensation and correction methods (Fig. 20.1) developed. The
term holistic here includes specifying the consequences for the machine tool
development process resulting from the solutions, as well as comparing the solu-
tions’ suitability for different conditions of use in a high-quality and cost-effective
operation. The requirements to be fulﬁlled by a holistic benchmarking method like
this are as follows:
H. Wiemer (&)  L. Neidhardt
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Institute for Machine Tools and Control Engineering,
Technical University, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: hajo.wiemer@tu-dresden.de
W. Esswein  R. Braun
Technical University, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: werner.esswein@tu-dresden.de
R. Braun
e-mail: richard.braun@tu-dresden.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_20
233

• The compensation and correction methods, whose application results in different
machine conﬁgurations, have to be described by their distinguishing features
and the parameters relevant for benchmarking.
• The various technological use cases have to be formulated. The operational
performance- and market-related constraints have to be involved.
• For benchmarking of methods, evaluation criteria for beneﬁt and cost (such as
additional resources needed) have to be formulated.
There is at present a lack of benchmarking methods that combine technical and
economic aspects. As a rule, the technical efﬁcacy of innovative solutions is
assessed based on experience. The technical benchmarking of machine tools has
hitherto been conducted with regard to individual aspects. Abele et al. (2010),
Lindner and Götze (2011) and Denkena et al. (2010) proclaim that life cycle costs
are suitable for a cost-related balancing of machine tools. The VDMA standard
sheet no. 34160 predeﬁnes the conditions for their determination (Verband Deut-
scher Maschinen- und Anlagenbau e.V. 2012). Lindner and Götze (2011) propose
to model the components as well as the development and operational processes of
the machine tools as a basis for cost determination, for which basic features are
lacking. Domain-speciﬁc languages adapted for business process modelling, as
mentioned in Zor et al. (2011), could provide support.
Strategic models that make it possible to evaluate technological feasibility and
proﬁtability at an early point in the development process were developed, among
others in Ehrlenspiel (2009) and Eversheim and Schuh (2005). These models were
created at the level of development and design methods and of engineering man-
agement. However, no immediate relationships to the business analysis of the
workﬂows exist that are connected with the development.
The determination of the machine tool’s accuracy is an essential issue for beneﬁt
benchmarking from the CRC/TR 96’s perspective. There exist sufﬁciently estab-
lished largely standardised measurement techniques, such as (DIN 1999), on the
one hand. On the other hand, test parts are frequently used, which—however—are
not particularly designed to detect thermally induced errors.
Consequently, powerful individual methods are available, but, as a rule, they
require detailed data that are not available to the CRC/TR 96. This is mainly
information about the machine tool development costs and company-speciﬁc
organisational sequences connected with the machine tool. These stand-alone
Fig. 20.1 Correction and compensation methods, assigned to the subprojects
234
H. Wiemer et al.

approaches are not purposefully integrated into a technical-economic benchmarking
method. This means that the methods available do not work in practice.
As a result, the current research is aimed at a suitable benchmarking model
mapping the characteristics of the correction and compensation methods and their
potential cases of application, as well as the interactions with the business envi-
ronment, which comprises cost-beneﬁt evaluation criteria for the comparison of the
methods. Techniques are also needed that can determine the required information or
parameters as efﬁciently as possible. The model is expected to provide benchmarks
ﬁrst for the methods to be developed within the scope of the CRC/TR 96 in order to
deﬁne real states and elucidate improvement potential. Finally, the model should
also be made available to the machine tool manufacturers and users to provide
decision support when implementing the techniques in a machine tool or pur-
chasing a machine tool.
20.2 The Benchmarking Model
The general model developed for benchmarking is shown in Fig. 20.2. The model
brings together the required technical and economic levels of consideration and
consists of the following partial models: “machine tool conﬁguration”, into which
the compensation and correction methods are integrated, “technological application
cases”, “operational constraints” and “market-related constraints”. The bench-
marking model also includes the “metrics for the valuation criteria” to assess
beneﬁt, cost and time, as well as the methods for determination of parameters and
benchmarking.
Figure 20.3 introduces the guidelines for the economic comparison of the
methods. For benchmarking purposes, the compensation and correction methods
Fig. 20.2 Model approach to assess the methods intended to reduce the thermally induced
machine tools’ dislocations
20
Technical and Economic Benchmarking Guideline for the …
235

developed must ﬁrst be brought into a system in a standardised manner, as well as
the fundamental concepts to be represented by their input and output variables. It is
also necessary to analyse the activities of the subprojects and to document the
expected workﬂows that are affected by the development, implementation and
application of the methods. Furthermore, the workﬂows’ effects on the machine life
cycle costs have to be estimated. Finally, all of the factors in the evaluation are
brought together in a metric for holistic benchmarking. Further details on the
framework are described in Braun and Esswein (2014).
The strategy of conceptual modelling (Schütte and Rotthowe 1998) which is
common in business informatics, is employed for systematic analysis and repre-
sentation of the workﬂows for the development, implementation and use of the
CRC/TR 96 methods and connected with the model-based management approach
(Esswein et al. 2010).
20.2.1 Partial Model “Machine Tool Conﬁguration”
The “machine tool conﬁguration” partial model describes the machine superstruc-
tures that result from a potential application of the different methods in a basic
machine. A hierarchic functional structure is chosen for a simple and clearly
structured representation of the machine tool conﬁguration. The compensation and
correction methods are integrated as a function into the basic machine structure.
The benchmark-relevant factors are also entered into the partial model according to
function.
The detail level of the hierarchic functional structure is modiﬁed according to
each task. Thus, two levels are sufﬁcient in order to represent different methods in a
basic machine (see Fig. 20.4a). Additional details in the functional structure are
needed to benchmark the methods for different basic machine tools that, for
example, differ in their frame design type (Fig. 20.4b). Modelling can be supported
Fig. 20.3 Method assessment framework (Braun and Esswein 2014)
236
H. Wiemer et al.

by specifying a general system (Fig. 20.4c) with the commonly used functional
characteristics and the methods traced. The concrete machine tool conﬁguration is
deﬁned from this system by selection of the corresponding functions.
20.2.2 Application Conditions
A machine tool conﬁguration’s suitability for the operator’s purposes has to be
assessed by taking into account the current application conditions. For this reason,
the application conditions are shaped by the “technological application cases”,
“operational constraints” and “market-related constraints” together.
Fig. 20.4 Hierarchic functional model as a basis for the partial model “machine tool
conﬁguration” a method for a basic machine, b method for different basic machines, c general
classiﬁcation of the machine tool’s functions
20
Technical and Economic Benchmarking Guideline for the …
237

The “technological application cases” involve data for the parts to be machined,
such as size, required tool number, lot size and accuracy requirements. It is possible
to derive typical machining and setup times, as well as the process output, by using
these data. From lot size, it can be determined how often the machine tool has to be
reset for another workpiece (classiﬁcation in Fig. 20.5 according to Schlegel 2002).
The “operational constraints” represent relevant data on production, such as the
work time regime or air-conditioning of the factory ﬂoor. Run and down times, as
well as the restart frequency of the machine tool, result from the work time regime,
whereas air conditioning of the factory ﬂoor inﬂuences the transmission of external
thermal inﬂuences to the machine tool (Wiemer et al. 2014). The “market-related
constraints” consider different cost situations in purchasing, as well as for energy
and personnel.
To simplify the considerations of the new methods’ benchmark, ﬁrst, the same
market-related constraints and the same operational constraints are assumed for all
operators. Thus, the technological application conditions are the only variable.
Three reference cases that are typical for the industry were chosen from the
assortment of potential technological application cases (see Fig. 20.5):
• “Diemaking”: workpieces of 5,000 mm max. edge length, 1–5 pieces, high tool
number
• “Mechanical engineering”: workpieces of max. 800 mm edge length, part
quantity 100, medium number of tools
• “Motor manufacturing”: parts of max. 200 mm edge length, part quantity
10,000, low tool number.
The outcomes of the application condition benchmarking can also be applied by
the machine tool manufacturers, since they know under what conditions the
Fig. 20.5 Technological application cases for which the machine tool’s suitability has to be
assessed
238
H. Wiemer et al.

machine tools are really run. To assess the effect of the methods on the machine
tool, the cases of special-purpose machines and series machines are differentiated.
This classiﬁcation makes sense in order to take into account the copy-cost effect in
case of a potential multiple use of correction methods.
20.2.3 Benchmarking Criteria
For the reference application cases chosen, the suitability of the compensations and
correction methods is judged according to the benchmarking metric in terms of
beneﬁt and costs. A method’s beneﬁt is benchmarked via properties to be deter-
mined, and these properties are described in the following section. When estimating
the necessary time and costs, consideration is given to the additional expenses
necessary during development, implementation, commissioning and operation of
such a machine in comparison with those for a machine tool functioning without
compensation and correction methods.
20.2.3.1 Benchmarking Criteria for Beneﬁt Description
The beneﬁt of a method represents the achievable improvements in the machine
tool’s performance in terms of increased accuracy, shorter machining times and/or
lower energy consumption. To determine the parameters for beneﬁt assessment,
established methodologies are investigated to determine their usability in general
and their efﬁcient usability in particular, as well as, if possible, the potential for
modiﬁcations designed to meet the speciﬁc requirements of the CRC/TR 96. Ini-
tially selected evaluation criteria that represent the beneﬁt are detailed.
Machining Accuracy
For a machine tool, the term “machining accuracy” indicates the product quality
that can be achieved in the shape and positional tolerances of the part. Different
factors, such as geometry, statics and dynamics, as well as the machine’s posi-
tioning performance, affect the machining accuracy (Verein Deutscher Ingenieure
1977). These factors are not inﬂuenced by thermal behaviour and have to be
considered separately from the total behaviour for thermal behaviour investigations.
For machine tools, this can be done by machine analyses both in the cold and
warmed states. The machine is subjected to a thermal load through an appropriate
introduction of energy. The changes in geometry that result are either measured
(analogously to the standard DIN 1999) or captured through the manufacture of a
test part. A functioning test piece was engineered in the subproject.
A method for energy introduction into the machine tool that functions without
any additional loading devices was engineered in conjunction with the test piece.
20
Technical and Economic Benchmarking Guideline for the …
239

The relevant drives initiate a travel mode, which is carried out cyclically without the
machining process. The travel mode has the same energetic effects as a represen-
tative machining process. The thermally induced machine tool displacements are
transferred in shape elements on the test piece by means of a milling process.
At the beginning of the experiment associated with the test piece, test surfaces
are milled in the test piece in the cold machine state. This process is run very
quickly and thus virtually no thermally induced machine tool displacements occur
during its performance. The thermally induced machine tool displacements gen-
erated during the experiment are transferred onto the test piece in deﬁned time
intervals. Figure 20.6 shows the test part with all 22 shape elements for the x-, y-
and z-directions. Assuming 20 min intervals in the manufacturing sequence of the
shape elements, it is possible to execute tests lasting 7 h.
The thermally induced machine tool displacements are found by scanning the
test part afterwards in order to ﬁnally determine the displacement curves as a
function of time depending on direction.
Process Quality (Variance)
Process quality speciﬁes the repeatability with which the machining process can be
conducted or the probability values at which special tolerances can be produced on
the machine tool (Verein Deutscher Ingenieure 2002). Here only the thermally
induced portion of process quality is taken into account. To quantify the process
quality, the thermally induced dislocations are ﬁrst determined for a certain quantity
of workpieces by using the methods to investigate machining accuracy. This
number is given by the productive machine running time with no breaks, as well as
the part’s machining time and thus, in turn, the technological application case
Fig. 20.6 Thermal test piece. a Test piece. b Thermal displacement
240
H. Wiemer et al.

depending on the operational constraints. Average, standard deviation σ and the
process capability index CP are calculated from the measured displacements of the
individual tests (Weck 2006; DIN 1999).
Productivity
A machine tool’s productivity can be quantiﬁed by the number of workpieces
yielded per machine hour. Two tests are required to determine the curve of the
thermally induced machine tool displacement as a function of time with different
power consumption to warm up the machine tool in order to explore a method’s
inﬂuence on productivity by means of a test piece. It is possible to estimate the
inﬂuence of increased part output on the maintenance of required tolerances. Based
on the results, the number of ok parts and thus the process capability index CP are
derived for two different experimental conditions. Thus, the part output for this
nominal value can be calculated based on the speciﬁcation of a nominal process
capability index value CP of, for instance, 1, in a 6σ process, using the simpliﬁed
assumption of an inversely proportional relationship between the process capability
index CP and part output. The productivity of these machine tool conﬁgurations can
be benchmarked by comparing the part output values determined this way for
different machine tool conﬁgurations.
Energy Consumption
Energy input is captured over the overall test period when determining the curve of
the thermally induced machine tool displacements as a function of time. Energy
consumption per workpiece can be found by means of the part output (see pro-
ductivity). This value is used to assess the energy input of the machine tool con-
ﬁguration investigated. Benchmarks of the corresponding results for different
machine tool conﬁgurations only make sense for the same technological application
case (see Fig. 20.5). For an overall consideration of the methods’ energetic impacts,
for instance, on air conditioning of the factory ﬂoor that may not be needed, it is
necessary to extend the benchmarking model using the relevant peripheral
equipment.
20.2.3.2 Benchmarking Criteria Representing Costs
Expense benchmarking of the individual methods mainly analyses the costs, both in
money and time, that occur as a result of the application of a compensation and
correction method for each machine tool. It is assumed that the expenditures for the
methods differ during the various life cycle phases of a machine (such as devel-
opment, commissioning, operation). Consequently, a life cycle model for the rep-
resentation of the relevant realm is used. The expenses (personnel and resource
20
Technical and Economic Benchmarking Guideline for the …
241

costs) accruing in each phase are analysed by means of process modelling lan-
guages [see for instance (Zur Muehlen and Indulska 2010)] in the form of workﬂow
models. These models consider the corresponding circumstances (payload/salary,
test capacities, opportunities to carry out simulations, etc.) of the machine tool
producer, for which one of the developed methods is benchmarked, on the one
hand. On the other hand, incoming information from the subprojects about the
expenses to be expected in operation (e.g. for the modiﬁcation of correction
models) is also considered.
Machine Life Cycle Costs
Machine life cycle models represent every phase of the machine’s creation, oper-
ation and recycling. The VDMA standard sheet no. 34160 presents detailed esti-
mated costs based on a life cycle model (Verband Deutscher Maschinen- und
Anlagenbau e.V. 2012). In the context of this project, these estimated costs are
modiﬁed to identify relevant life cycle phases and are used, rather than merely
understood purely as estimates. It is necessary to expand the guidelines for these
estimated costs, since they only take into account the operator’s view, though the
methods also result in expenses for the machine tool manufacturers.
Figure 20.7 illustrates the modiﬁed guidelines for cost benchmarking and points
out sections for each phase that are inﬂuenced by the methods according to the
current state of expertise, which are thus analysed. In the “development phase”, for
instance, additional expenses in machine modelling and simulation result from the
methods’ application. Thus, it could be necessary, for example, to regularly adjust
the correction models in the “operation phase”, and these adjustments would
Fig. 20.7 Extended life cycle cost model with explicit focus on the correction or compensation
methods
242
H. Wiemer et al.

increase the maintenance and inspection costs. The phase “end of use” should not to
be considered since it is relatively irrelevant.
From the current perspective, it is expected that additional expenses caused by
the correction methods will be caused predominantly by personnel costs. Thus, for
instance, experimental or model-based analyses of the thermal machine tool
behaviour become necessary. The compensation methods mainly result in increased
expenses for the purchase of components and semi-ﬁnished products.
The workﬂows related to the personnel costs are sophisticated and difﬁcult to
represent and deﬁne in terms of the resources and costs involved. For this reason,
the workﬂows are analysed by means of workﬂow models.
Engineering Workﬂows
Modelling of workﬂows is performed by means of the process modelling language
BPMN 2.0 [Business Process Management and Notation, compare (Recker 2008)].
The BPMN was modiﬁed for the domain (Braun and Esswein 2014) following an
approach by Stroppi et al. (2011) so that resources and temporal or ﬁnancial aspects
of the speciﬁc workﬂows can be represented. A selection of the additional elements’
graphic representations is provided in Fig. 20.8. Non-graphic object attributes were
also added.
The enquiry for the ﬂow models is performed by interviews conducted regarding
the workﬂows connected with the methods’ implementation and the expenses and
times spent in the subprojects. The interviews are carried out repeatedly so that the
states of progress that have changed due to the research outcomes can be mapped.
Experts from industry are asked for their opinions on the solution methods’ con-
sequences in practice based on these technology-speciﬁc ﬂow models. These
interviews are executed by means of the Delphi method to be able to, for instance,
estimate expected expenses and required time in the operation phase. The ﬂow
Fig. 20.8 Simpliﬁed BPMN model with extension elements (screenshot from the Meta modelling
tool Cubetto Toolset). From left to right human resource (“engineer”), application/equipment
(“CAX software”), time (“machining time”), auxiliary material, human resource (“worker”),
material and machine
20
Technical and Economic Benchmarking Guideline for the …
243

models are enhanced by this information. The ﬂow models with the associated
resource elements are created for each method (compare Fig. 20.8). In a second
step, the parameter values of these models are assigned special values, such as for
the number of employee hours required and hourly rates. Assignment of concrete
data is done either based on the market prices or on business-individual cost.
It is possible to record the employee hours required per work step by means of
the diary method (Rausch et al. 2012) and to estimate the values for the hourly rates
or to take them from published wages. Thus it is possible to compare the solutions’
methods.
20.3 Model Application
The model for technical-economic benchmarking of the methods to compensate and
correct thermally induced machine tool errors is to be applied step by step depending
on the research progress of the other subprojects. The analyses in the ﬁrst phase of
the CRC/TR 96 are initially focussed on the engineering-oriented issues of the
correction methods. The benchmarking model is applied as mentioned below:
• Representation of the machine tool functions, including the methods applied to
the partial model “machine tool conﬁguration”,
• Determination of the individual key performance indicators for benchmarking
for the machine tool conﬁgurations: beneﬁt key performance indicators to be
found by means of the thermal test piece; as well as expense key performance
indicators by means of workﬂow modelling,
• Bringing together the individual evaluations by weighed benchmarking of the
suitability of the machine tool conﬁgurations for each reference case. Weighing
makes it possible to consider different priorities resulting from the application
cases in the machine properties’ analysis. The weighed individual assessments
are summarised at the end.
The individual benchmarking key performance indicators are concrete values
representing, for instance, the accuracy that can be achieved with one method,
related to one application case. Thus they are a means of support for the persons
responsible for decision making. The weighed benchmark provides a total evalu-
ation of a method implemented on a machine tool to obtain a rough overview by
means of one key performance indicator.
20.4 Classiﬁcation in the CRC/TR 96 and Outlook
In the current project step, the subproject’s development ﬂows related to the cor-
rection method are analysed so that the expenses incurred in their future industrial
implementation can be estimated. Furthermore, these analyses make available
244
H. Wiemer et al.

expertise related to the different methods’ economic and technical consequences for
the subprojects for different reference cases. These, in turn, contribute to further
enhancement of the methods and to the classiﬁcation of ﬁelds of application in
business as a whole.
The plan is to perform beneﬁt analysis for the compensation and correction
methods in later project phases, after they have been integrated into demonstrator
machines and are thus available for testing.
References
Abele E, Kuhrke B, Rothenbücher S (2010) Entwicklungstrends zur Erhöhung und Bewertung der
Energieefﬁzienz spanender Werkzeugmaschinen. Tagungsband des 1. Internationalen Kol-
loquiums des Spitzentechnologieclusters eniPROD “Energieefﬁziente Produkt- und Prozess-
innovationen in der Produktionstechnik”
Braun R, Esswein W (2014) Extending BPMN for modeling resource aspects in the domain of
machine tools. WIT Trans Eng Sci 87:450–458
Denkena B, Schürmeyer J, Eikötter M (2010) Berücksichtigung temporärer Effekte von Lebens-
zykluskosten in der Technologiebewertung. Integration der Kapitalwertmethode in total cost
and beneﬁts of ownership. ZWF Zeitschrift für wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb 105:959–963
DIN
Deutsches
Institut
für
Normung
e.V.
(1999)
DIN
ISO
230
Prüfregeln
für
Werkzeugmaschinen
Ehrlenspiel K (2009) Integrierte Produktentwicklung. Denkabläufe, Methodeneinsatz, Zusam-
menar-beit. Carl Hanser Verlag, München, 2009, 4., überarb. Carl Hanser Verlag, München
Esswein W, Turowski K, Juhrisch M (2010) Modellierung betrieblicher Informationssysteme.
Modellgestütztes Management
Eversheim W, Schuh G (2005) Integrierte Produkt- und Prozessgestaltung. Springer, Berlin
Lindner
G,
Götze
U
Lebenszykluskostenrechnung
als
Instrument
der
energiebezogenen
wirtschaftlichen Bilanzierung und Bewertung von Werkzeugmaschinen. In: Neugebauer R,
Götze U, Drossel W-G (eds) Methoden der energetisch- wirtschaftlichen Bilanzierung und
Bewertung in der Produktionstechnik, pp 115–129
Rausch A, Kögler K, Laireiter A (2012) Tagebuchverfahren zur prozessnahen Datenerhebung in
Feldstudien Gestaltungsparameter und Anwendungsempfehlungen. Verl. Empirische Päda-
gogik, Landau
Recker J-C (2008) BPMN modeling—who, where, how and why. BPTrends 5:1–8
Schlegel A (2002) Konzeption und Einsatzvorbereitung eines Werkzeuges für die Bestimmung der
Prozessqualität mittels Kennzahlenüberwachung und wissensbasierter Simulation. Dissertation,
TU Chemnitz
Schuette R, Rotthowe T (1998) The guidelines of modeling—an approach to enhance the quality
in information models. In: Ling T-W, Ram S, Lee ML (eds) Conceptual modeling—ER.
Springer, Berlin, pp 240–254
Stroppi LJR, Chiotti O, Villarreal PD (2011) Extending BPMN 2.0: method and tool support. In:
Dijkman R, Hofstetter J, Koehler J (eds) Business process model and notation. Springer,
Berlin, pp 59–73
Verband Deutscher Maschinen- und Anlagenbau e.V. (2012) Prognose der Lebenszykluskosten
gemäß VDMA Einheitsblatt 34160
Verein Deutscher Ingenieure (1977) Deutsche Gesellschaft für Qualität: VDI/DGQ 3441—
Statistische Prüfung der Arbeits- und Positionsgenauigkeit von Werkzeugmaschinen -
Grundlagen
20
Technical and Economic Benchmarking Guideline for the …
245

Verein Deutscher Ingenieure, Verband der Elektrotechnik Elektronik Informationstechnik (2002)
VDI/VDE 3712 Blatt 2—Bestimmung der Maschinenfähigkeit von Dispenssystemen
Weck M (2006) Werkzeugmaschinen 5: Messtechnische Untersuchung und Beurteilung,
dynamische Stabilität, 7th edn. Springer, Berlin
Wiemer H, Neidhardt L, Großmann K, Braun R, Esswein W (2014) Reduzierung thermisch
bedingter Verlagerungen des TCP von spanenden Werkzeugmaschinen - Verbreitung von
Maßnahmen und Nutzen-Aufwands-Bewertung. ZWF Zeitschrift für wirtschaftlichen Fabrik-
betrieb 109:225–231
Zor S, Schumm D, Leymann F (2011) A proposal of BPMN extensions for the manufacturing
domain. In: Proceedings of 44th CIRP international conference on manufacturing systems
Zur Muehlen M, Indulska M (2010) Modeling languages for business processes and business
rules: a representational analysis. Inf Syst 35:379–390. doi:10.1016/j.is.2009.02.006
246
H. Wiemer et al.

Chapter 21
Experimental Analysis
of the Thermo-Elastic Behaviour
of Machine Tools by Means of Selective
Thermography and Close-Range
Photogrammetry
Knut Großmann, Jens Müller, Marcel Merx and Mirko Riedel
Abstract The measuring methodology developed in subproject C06 provides an
efﬁcient analysis of the thermal and thermo-elastic behaviour of machine tools.
Contactless measurement of deformations and displacements by means of close-
range photogrammetry, as well as temperature measurement using selective ther-
mography make possible high structural resolution with minimal instrumentation
and measurement execution effort. In conjunction with distributed data logging,
Data acquired inside and outside the control are considered and provide information
for a comprehensive database for analysis.
21.1 Introduction
As a rule, temperatures and displacements can only be measured on the surface of
structural components. Heat ﬂows can be calculated from kinematic and load
parameters by means of power dissipation approaches, assuming known parameter
dependencies. Temperatures are mostly acquired in a tactile way on the surface of
parts and subassemblies, requiring great effort to fasten, calibrate and wire the
temperature sensors. Tactile displacement and deformation measurements demand,
K. Großmann  J. Müller  M. Merx (&)  M. Riedel
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Institute for Machine Tools and Control Engineering,
Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany
e-mail: marcel.merx@tu-dresden.de
K. Großmann
e-mail: knut.grossmann@tu-dresden.de
J. Müller
e-mail: jens.mueller@tu-dresden.de
M. Riedel
e-mail: Mirko.riedel@tu-dresden.de
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
K. Großmann (ed.), Thermo-energetic Design of Machine Tools,
Lecture Notes in Production Engineering, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12625-8_21
247

as described in Weck (2006), an expensive temperature-stable measuring platform
(e.g. a rod framework made of Invar steel). The great instrumentation effort needed
for the measurements, as a rule, results in a compromise in the beneﬁt of low
structural resolution—in other words, a small number of measuring points. The
application of the thermography measurement technique to determine temperatures
and temperature ﬁelds and the optical measuring method to quantify deformations
and displacements offers a method to achieve higher structural resolution. Using the
contactless measuring methods of both close-range photogrammetry (Fig. 21.1, left)
and selective thermography (Fig. 21.1, middle), it is also possible to signiﬁcantly
reduce the instrumentation effort. In close-range photogrammetry, deformations and
displacements are acquired at predeﬁned measuring points on the part’s surface. In
case of subproject C06 the measuring points are deﬁned by photogrammetry-targets.
Selective thermography utilises the information in the visible (optical) range of the
spectrum and projects the coordinates of the targets onto the thermal image, thereby
making use of the known relative orientation of the optical and thermographic
cameras. Temperature is measured in a selective manner at the targets. The targets
exhibit a high degree of emissions, which, in turn, enhances the accuracy of the
temperature measurement, particularly for shiny metallic surfaces.
Up to now, data available in the machine control, such as revolutions per minute
and feed rates, have only been considered to a minimal extent or not at all during
the analysis along the thermo-elastic functional chain. But these are useful input
data, for instance, for power dissipation models. The database for machine analysis
can be signiﬁcantly expanded by the synchronised acquisition of control-internal
and -external measured data by means of distributed data logging (Fig. 21.1, right).
Consequently, in the subproject, a software framework was engineered for dis-
tributed data logging to be applied to various control systems.
Fig. 21.1 Measuring methodology for efﬁcient analysis of thermo-elastic behaviour according to
Großmann (2013a, b)
248
K. Großmann et al.

The measuring methodology according to Fig. 21.1 elaborated in the subproject
can be used to analyse complete machine tools and large-sized machine tool sub-
assemblies even under working conditions and with minimal instrumentation effort.
As a result, the measuring methodology offers a way to generate data for the
adjustment of simulation and correction models (for instance, in the subprojects
A05, A06, A07, B05, B06, B07), for exemplary parameter identiﬁcation for
components in the mounted-in state (subproject B04) and, ﬁnally, to evaluate
compensation and correction methods (in the subprojects C05 and C06).
21.2 Approach
21.2.1 Measuring Method of Selective Thermography
The measuring methodology of selective thermography engineered within the scope
of the subproject, brings together the advantages of thermographic temperature
measurement with those of photogrammetric deformation and displacement mea-
surement [Fig. 21.2, top; comp. Großmann et al. (2013a) and Luhmann (2010)].
Fig. 21.2 Classiﬁcation and measurement principle of selective thermography according to
Großmann et al. (2013a, b)
21
Experimental Analysis of the Thermo-Elastic Behaviour …
249

It makes possible contactless temperature measurement even in the event of relative
motion of object and thermography camera and with insufﬁcient contrast in the
thermal image (comp. thermal images in Fig. 21.7). The temperature is measured at
deﬁned targets attached to the surface of the object (e.g. printed paper labels). These
adhesive photogrammetry targets exhibit a degree of emissions that is known,
constant and as high as possible. The spatial location of the targets is determined in
the optical image by means of photogrammetric methods (1st in Fig. 21.2, bottom).
With a known relative location and orientation of both thermography camera and
optical camera in a camera ﬁxture, it is possible to determine where the pixels
belonging to the targets lie in the thermal image (2nd in Fig. 21.2, bottom).
Temperature is read at these pixels and assigned to the target (3rd in Fig. 21.2,
bottom). Comparable approaches were also introduced by Smith (2002) and Acker
et al. (2011). However, the latter rely on an areal recording of the object surface in
the visible range of the spectrum by means of Speckle Texture Projection Photo-
grammetry or Strip Light Projection to map the thermal image on a 3D model of the
object.
Selective thermography employs a wide range of photogrammetry methods.
Accordingly, multiple measurement system conﬁgurations and models can be
implemented. Three measurement system conﬁgurations are shown in an exemplary
view in Fig. 21.3.
One can determine the location and orientation of the object to be analysed for
each recording period using a 3D model that contains the 3D coordinates of the
Fig. 21.3 Exemplary measurement system conﬁgurations to implement selective thermography
according to Großmann et al. (2013a)
250
K. Großmann et al.

targets on the object, and a known scale reference L0 in the image (conﬁguration A
in Fig. 21.3). The 3D coordinates can be projected onto the thermal image given the
known relative orientation of optical to thermographic camera inside the camera
ﬁxture. For each target, one can also determine angle φ and its distance LCam from
the thermographic camera, thereby enabling the consideration of angle-dependent
emission behaviour or of the transmission properties of the medium passed through.
Analysis can be conducted online during image acquisition or, as a post-process,
after image acquisition, in ofﬂine mode. The 3D object model required can be
obtained, for example, through preliminary calibration (coordinate measurement)
by means of a photogrammetric measurement system.
If in each recording period, at least three images of an object state assumed to be
constant are traced from three different perspectives, then the 3D coordinates of the
targets can be determined by bundle block adjustment even without knowing the
placement of the targets at the object beforehand (conﬁguration B in Fig. 21.3).
Adjustment calculation over all periods is only possible after having completed
image acquisition, so it is executed ofﬂine, as is the projection of the target coor-
dinates in the thermal images.
Having available at least two optical cameras in the camera ﬁxture, assuming a
known camera base Lf, it is possible to determine the 3D coordinates of the mea-
sured points for each period by triangulation (conﬁguration C in Fig. 21.3). With a
measurement system conﬁguration like this, one can measure deformations in each
recording period. The coordinates of the targets can also be projected onto the
thermal image once after optical image acquisition. Analysis is mostly executed
online, since the effort required for calculation is lower than that required for bundle
block adjustment.
Both bundle block adjustment (conﬁguration B) and triangulation (conﬁguration
C) can be expanded by using a 3D model of the coordinates of the targets attached
at the object (comp. conﬁguration A), thus making it possible to ﬁnd the object’s
position and orientation.
21.3 Results
21.3.1 Preliminary Investigations and Photogrammetric
Deformation and Position Measurements at the Test
Bed
The photogrammetric measurement system DPA (Digital Photogrammetric Analy-
sis) by the ﬁrm AICON 3D Systems GmbH was used for measurements at the test
bed (see Chap. 1) to evaluate the performance of commercially available systems.
Figure 21.4, left, illustrates the machine structure equipped with targets, whereas the
point cloud recorded is shown in Fig. 21.4, right. When using the manually guided
sensor (high resolution digital camera Nikon D3x) for image acquisition from
21
Experimental Analysis of the Thermo-Elastic Behaviour …
251

various perspectives, only insufﬁcient accuracy values could be reached in defor-
mation measurement because of thermal changes during the recording time (approx.
10 … 30 min) and because of varying picture sets. The position of individual moving
subassemblies could only be determined with difﬁculty through the later clustering
of the associated measured points in the point cloud and, according to deformation
measurement, was too inexact. Brecher (2013) achieved deviations in the range of
10 µm by means of a stationary two-camera-stereo system by the same manufac-
turer, but with a smaller volume to be measured. However, he only determined the
coordinates of the individual measured points, rather than the positions of the moved
subassemblies.
The authors’ own preliminary tests to evaluate the performance of commercially
available systems, and the studies by Brecher (2013) clarify the potential of the
photogrammetric recording of thermally affected deformations and displacements
on machine tools. The investigations open up issues in research in terms of the
optimization of measurement system conﬁgurations (number and allocation of
cameras) and the extension of the measurement models, for instance, to consider
kinematic constraints.
First, selective thermographic temperature measurement, as well as photo-
grammetric deformation and displacement measurement, were investigated sepa-
rately at test objects with a simple structure (machine column and Hexapod
MiniHex). Two series of measurements based on fundamental studies on the
development of software tools and the calibration of measurement systems are
introduced in the following chapters.
Fig. 21.4 Photogrammetric measurement by means of AICON DPA at the test bed left Photo
from the series of images; right Recorded point cloud
252
K. Großmann et al.

21.3.2 Development of Software to Execute and Analyse
Photogrammetric and Selective Thermographic
Measurements
Appropriate software tools were created or reﬁned for the execution and analysis of
photogrammetric and selective thermographic measurements. Figure 21.5 gives an
overview of the tools applied at the Institute for Machine Tools and Control Tech-
nology (IWM). The data recording tool was enhanced by a driver and live image
display for the high resolution thermography camera InfraTEC VarioCAM HD.
The photogrammetric toolkit engineered at the IWM and introduced, among
others, in Großmann et al. (2012a), was added for selective thermography
(Fig. 21.5, right). With the toolkit, camera ﬁxtures can be calibrated and mea-
surements can be analysed by means of extensive measurement models. The toolkit
relies on available image data. This means that analysis is conducted ofﬂine.
Online analysis tools tailored to the measurement task (Fig. 21.5, left) make it
possible to immediately process the image data read from the ring-buffer and to
store only the results obtained from it. This strategy makes sense in measurements
with less complicated measurement models, but with huge data volumes, for
instance, due to the long duration of measurement or the high image acquisition
frequency.
21.3.3 Characterisation of Targets and Design
of a Procedure to Calibrate a Camera Fixture
Fundamental investigations of the characterisation of selected materials and surface
coatings as well of the emittance behaviour of target materials were conducted on a
test specimen that was heated in a deﬁned manner, [see Großmann et al. (2013b) for
description of test specimen and experimental setup]. The usability of self-sticking
paper targets (adhesive photogrammetry targets) for photogrammetric deformation
and displacement measurement, as well as thermographic temperature measure-
ment, could be veriﬁed. In addition to adhesive targets, tests were also done using
Fig. 21.5 Software tools to execute and analyse photogrammetric and selective thermographic
measurements
21
Experimental Analysis of the Thermo-Elastic Behaviour …
253

targets on magnetic ﬁlms and active infrared targets (SMD resistors and IR LEDs).
However, these are only usable to a limited degree for selective thermography [see
Großmann et al. (2013b)].
A technique able to calibrate the camera ﬁxture needed for selective thermog-
raphy was developed and applied to two camera ﬁxtures [see Großmann et al.
(2013b, c)]. The calibration gauge required has to implement “combined” targets
visible both in the optical and the thermal images. Calibration delivers sufﬁciently
high accuracy to assign the targets in the thermal image. Calibration inaccuracy
values are speciﬁed in Großmann et al. (2013d).
21.3.4 Selective Thermographic Temperature Measurement
of a Machine Column
The temperature ﬁeld of the machine column introduced by Großmann et al.
(2012c, d) was measured to evaluate the measuring method of selective thermog-
raphy. Thirteen heating foils attached on each guideway that can be switched
individually serve as the thermal load (see Chap. 1 on the experimental setup).
Emulated power dissipation corresponds to a spindle head movement of approxi-
mately 20 m/min, which is ﬁrst applied in the bottom range of both guideways (area
A in Fig. 21.6) and later in the upper area of the guideway (area B in Fig. 21.6).
The lateral walls and the back side of the machine column are equipped with a
total of 20 Pt100 temperature sensors that are attached, as well as six air temper-
ature sensors and two temperature sensors to record the base temperature for
commensurable measurement of the temperature ﬁeld. The selective thermographic
temperature measurement is carried out on 17 coded adhesive targets, 7 of those are
located at maximal distance of approximately 50 mm to a Pt100 temperature sensor,
thus making possible a qualitative comparison of the measured temperature values
(see Fig. 21.6 middle and Chap. 1). An AVT Prosilica GX6600 (6,576 × 4,384
pixels) camera was employed as the optical camera. An InfraTec VarioCAM HD
(2,048 × 1,536 pixels with resolution enhancement, thermal resolution 0.05 K) was
applied to thermography (see Fig. 21.6 right). The measurement system conﬁgu-
ration corresponds to the conﬁguration A in Fig. 21.3. However, analysis was
conducted after image acquisition (ofﬂine) by means of the photogrammetric
toolkit. Before starting the test, the machine column equipped with targets was
calibrated by means of the photogrammetric measurement system AICON DPA in
order to determine the 3D coordinates of the targets and to assign them to the 3D
column model.
In Fig. 21.7, the temperatures recorded exemplarily for two selected temperature
sensors (T21 left/T26 right column side wall) in a tactile and thermographic manner
at next nearest targets are depicted as a function of time. Optical and thermal images
with the highlighted target centre points were each mapped for four periods.
Additionally the diagram shows the temperature curves calculated for both
254
K. Großmann et al.

temperature sensors by means of a reduced-order thermal FE model (see Chap. 7)
for detail on the MOR-Simulation).
It is also necessary to take into account a slight systematic deviation in the
measured values due to the distance of the points measured in a thermographic and
tactile manner (see Fig. 21.6 middle).
Additional tests are planned to quantify the achievable measuring inaccuracies.
The measurement described outlines the potential of selective thermography for
contactless temperature measurement. It was possible to measure the temperature
ﬁeld in a contactless manner on three sides of the machine column with minimal
instrumentation effort (sticking on the adhesive targets and photogrammetric cali-
bration of the targets’ coordinates at the structure). A deviation of less than 0.5 °C
from the temperature values acquired in a tactile approach was achieved under the
existing unfavourable boundary conditions. However, the accuracy potential of the
measuring method is far greater.
Adjusting the simulation and measured results (see MOR-Sim in Fig. 21.7), an
application was described in which selective thermography—thanks to less
instrumentation effort in conjunction with high structural resolution—substantially
contributes to the improvement of the machine behaviour analysis along the
thermo-elastic functional chain.
Fig. 21.6 Test setup for machine column analysis by means of selective thermography according
to Großmann et al. (2014)
21
Experimental Analysis of the Thermo-Elastic Behaviour …
255

Fig. 21.7 Results of the selective thermographic temperature measurement at machine column
according to Großmann (2014)
256
K. Großmann et al.

21.3.5 Photogrammetric Measurement of Thermally Affected
Displacements on a Hexapod
Thermally affected displacements were captured by means of a photogrammetric
measurement system conﬁguration on the MiniHex (see Chap. 1 and Kauschinger
2006). In Fig. 21.8, left, the test setup given by Großmann et al. (2013c) is shown.
To measure displacements and inclinations, three cameras (AVT Prosilica
GC2450 with 2,450 × 2,050 pixels) were attached to the baseplate, and three
cameras were afﬁxed to the platform (AVT Manta with 1,280 × 9,64 pixels) (see
Fig. 21.8). The cameras on the baseplate have a convergent visual ﬁeld and thus
make it possible to measure the relative platform position (displacement) with high
accuracy. The cameras on the platform cover as a group the largest possible visual
ﬁeld (divergent visual ﬁeld) and thus provide high accuracy in the measurement of
the relative angle (inclination) between baseplate and platform. The camera system
is self-calibrating, so that 10 various positions were approached for calibration
[compare Großmann et al. (2013d)]. Figure 21.8, right, shows the representation of
the targets’ 3D coordinates and the allocation of cameras after completed calibra-
tion. The temperatures of the bearings, ball nuts and the tubes of the rod axes were
each measured in a tactile manner and recorded by means of the machine tool
control (according to distributed data logging in Fig. 21.1, right). To warm up the
machine structure, each rod axis was moved out and retracted again in rapid tra-
verse for 30 times within one load cycle. The traversed path is 250 mm for each axis
(see Fig. 21.9, right top). Afterwards, a photogrammetric displacement measure-
ment was carried out automatically in the starting position (see Fig. 21.8, left).
These load cycles were repeated 15 times, after which it was switched over to the
Fig. 21.8 Test setup for the photogrammetric measurement of thermally affected displacements
on a hexapod [compare Großmann et al. (2013d)]
21
Experimental Analysis of the Thermo-Elastic Behaviour …
257

next rod. In this way, each rod axis is charged with a load over approximately
12 min and can ﬁnally cool down over a period of about 60 min.
Figure 21.9 shows a cutout of the series of measurement lasting altogether
approximately 8 h. Figure 21.9, top includes the temperatures measured in a tactile
manner (distributed data logging) on the ball nuts of the rod axes. The 15 load
cycles on each of the individual rod axes are unambiguously mapped in the tem-
perature curves.
Fig. 21.9 Results of photogrammetric displacement measurement at MiniHex
258
K. Großmann et al.

Whereas the displacement of the platform on the Z axis remains almost constant
except for a long-term trend, the load cycles are periodically represented on the X or
Y-displacement (see relative displacement of the platform in Fig. 21.9). The dis-
placement in the negative X direction due to warming up of the rod axes 1 and 6 or
the displacement (translatory movement) in positive Y direction due to warming up
of the rod axes 5 and 4 can be clearly traced.
Thermal expansion of the individual rod axes is obvious in view of torsion of the
platform across the Z axis (Fig. 21.9, bottom). Warming of the rod axis 3 results in
torsion of the platform in positive φZ direction. Warming of the rod axis 2 effects a
reverse rotation of the platform in negative φZ direction. This sequence is repeated
periodically with each change to the next rod axis. Greater periods that correspond
to a complete revolution of all six rod axes appear for the inclination of the platform
across the X- and Y-axes (see Fig. 21.9, middle).
The results of the series of measurements on the MiniHex (Fig. 21.9) demon-
strate the way to measure relative displacements and inclinations on machine tools
by means of close-range photogrammetry. There is no problem with, and no lim-
itations on, recording the kinematic deviations in all six degrees of freedom, except
for the visibility of targets. Measuring inaccuracy is sufﬁciently low.
Still lower measuring inaccuracy values can be obtained by an optimisation of
the measurement system conﬁguration, which also qualiﬁes the method, as
described in Großmann et al. (2012b), also for serial kinematic structures with very
low positioning inaccuracy values. The existing series of measurements also clar-
iﬁes the inﬂuence of example-speciﬁc variations of the parameters of individual
machine components (compare subproject B04). Thus, on the ball nuts of the rod
axes 6 and 5, a greater rise in temperature occurs than in the other axes.
21.4 Classiﬁcation of Outcomes in the CRC/TR 96
In the future, the measurement methodology introduced makes it possible to cor-
relate the temperature ﬁeld with deformation and displacement, taking into account
the operation state of the characterised machine by means of distributed data log-
ging. This allows for a holistic analysis of the machine behaviour along the thermo-
elastic functional chain. The measurement methodology primarily beneﬁts those
users who have to analyse whole machines under operation conditions “on site”.
The methodology provides a major contribution to the adjustment of simulation and
correction models (such as in the subprojects A05, A06, A07, B05, B06, B07), for
object-related parameter identiﬁcation, particularly for components in the mounted-
in state (subproject B04) and ﬁnally the evaluation of compensation and correction
methods (subprojects C05 and C06).
The measurement methodology introduced in this paper provides a crucial
methodological contribution to the CRC/TR 96.
21
Experimental Analysis of the Thermo-Elastic Behaviour …
259

21.5 Outlook
The measurement methodology according to Fig. 21.1 is used for the compre-
hensive thermo-elastic analysis of the MiniHex (see Fig. 21.8) and, at the end,
implemented at the test bed (see Fig. 21.4) to demonstrate its usability even under
poor boundary conditions. Furthermore, additional investigations to quantify the
measurement inaccuracy in selective thermographic temperature measurement are
planned. The measurement system conﬁgurations described in the paper and ade-
quate software tools will be continuously improved and reﬁned.
The techniques to consider the emittance of the targets and the inﬂuence of the
radiation background are being reﬁned in order to increase the accuracy of the
selective thermographic temperature measurement.
In the future, at the test bed, different compensation methods are to be integrated,
and correction methods are to be implemented on the PC-based control system by
using distributed data logging. The comparison of the methods in terms of their
compensation or correction effect is carried out by means of a photogrammetric
measurement system conﬁguration installed at the test bed in a ﬁxed manner.
Moreover, this measurement system conﬁguration is the basis for a correction
approach based on metrology, which will be developed in the third project stage of
subproject C06. Within this approach, geometric-kinematic deviations at deﬁned
intervals, such as, for instance, in machining idle times are measured photogram-
metrically, and correction values for the feed drives are calculated using a kinematic
model and corrected.
References
Acker W, Denkena B, Möhring H-C (2011) Berührungslose Erfassungseinrichtung. German
Patent DE102009030644B4, 3 Feb 2011
Brecher C, Haber D, Rietdorf A (2013) Thermoelastische Verformung von Werkzeugmaschinen
—Thermisch bedingte Strukturverformungen kamerabasiert erfassen und visualisieren. Wt
Online 103(5):364–369
Großmann K, Kauschinger B, Riedel M (2012a) Photogrammetrischer Modellbaukasten zur
Erfassung von Bewegungsfehlern an Werkzeugmaschinen. In: Photogrammetrie, Laserscanning,
optische 3D-Messtechnik—Beiträge der Oldenburger 3D-Tage 2012. Wichmann, Heidelberg
Großmann
K,
Kauschinger,
B,
Riedel
M
(2012b)
Photogrammetrische
Erfassung
von
Bewegungsfehlern an Werkzeugmaschinen und Linearachsen. In: 15. Anwendungsbezogener
Workshop zur Erfassung, Modellierung, Verarbeitung und Auswertung von 3D-Daten.
Gesellschaft zur Förderung angewandter Informatik e.V. (GFaI), Berlin
Großmann K, Städel C, Galant A, Mühl A (2012c) Berechnung von Temperaturfeldern an
Werkzeugmaschinen—Vergleichende Untersuchung alternativer Methoden zur Erzeugung
kompakter Modelle. ZWF 107(6):452–456
Großmann K, Galant A, Mühl A (2012d) Efﬁziente Simulation durch Modell-ordnungs-reduktion—
Thermo-elastische Berechnung von Werkzeug-maschinen-Baugruppen. ZWF 107(6):457–461
260
K. Großmann et al.

Großmann K, Müller J, Merx M, Riedel M (2013a) Untersuchung des thermo-elastischen
Verhaltens von Werkzeugmaschinen—Grundlagen der experimentellen Analyse mit Hilfe der
selektiven Thermograﬁe. ZWF 108(7–8):492–497
Großmann K, Merx M, Riedel M (2013b) Thermograﬁe und Nahbereichsphotogrammetrie zur
Erfassung von Temperatur- und Verlagerungsfeldern. In: Tradition und Gegenwart bei der
Analyse des thermischen Verhaltens spanender Werkzeugmaschinen, DWM e.V., Dresden
Großmann K, Merx M, Riedel M (2013c) Temperatur- und Verlagerungsmessung an einem
Versuchsträger mittels selektiver Thermograﬁe und Nahbereichs-Photogrammetrie. Paper
presented at the 3rd CRC/TR colloquium, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, 29–30 Oct 2013. http://
nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:14-qucosa-143947
Großmann K, Riedel M, Merx M (2013d) Thermograﬁe und Nahbereichsphotogrammetrie zur
Erfassung von Temperatur- und Verlagerungsfeldern. In: 16. Anwendungs-bezogener Work-
shop zur Erfassung, Modellierung, Verarbeitung und Auswertung von 3D-Daten. Gesellschaft
zur Förderung angewandter Informatik e.V. (GFaI), Berlin, ISBN 978-3-942709-09-5
Großmann K, Galant A, Merx M, Riedel M (2014) Verfahren zur efﬁzienten Analyse des thermo-
elastischen Verhaltens von Werkzeugmaschinen. In: Neugebauer R, Drossel W-G (eds)
Innovations of sustainable production for green mobility—energy-efﬁcient technologies in
production, vol 80. Reports from the IWU, pp 683–699
Kauschinger B (2006) Verbesserung der Bewegungsgenauigkeit an einem Hexapod einfacher
Bauart. Dissertation, Technische Universität Dresden
Luhmann T (2010) Nahbereichsphotogrammetrie—Grundlagen, Methoden und Anwendungen.
Wichmann, Berlin
Smith ST (2002) Modelling hot bodies—combined real-time 3D and thermal imaging for medical
applications. 3D-MATIC department, Glasgow University
Weck M, Brecher C (2006) Werkzeugmaschinen—Messtechnische Untersuchung und Beurtei-
lung, dynamische Stabilität. Springer, Berlin
21
Experimental Analysis of the Thermo-Elastic Behaviour …
261

