Eric J. McNulty
Three Critical Shifts 
in Thinking for the 
Evolving Leader

Eric J. McNulty
Three Critical Shifts
in Thinking for the
Evolving Leader

978-1-4919-5113-2
[LSI]
Three Critical Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader
by Eric J. McNulty
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Laurel Ruma
Production Editor: Matthew Hacker
Copyeditor: Jasmine Kwityn
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
February 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-01-27 First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Three Critical
Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader, the cover image, and related trade dress
are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Three Critical Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
The Shortcomings of Traditional Leadership Development             2
Three Critical Shifts for an Evolving Leadership Landscape            4
The Ascendance of Influence                                                              15
Making the Shifts to Leadership Thinking                                        17
iii


Three Critical Shifts in Thinking
for the Evolving Leader
When I spoke at Cultivate 2015 in Portland, OR, about the mental
shifts necessary for leaders to make, the response was so positive that it
was clear that the preliminary post I had written for strategy+business
as I organized my talk was too brief to fully explore this territory. Here
is a deeper dive.
Despite writing thousands of books and articles, academics have yet
to agree on a definition of “leadership.” What makes someone a
leader? For my colleagues and me at the National Preparedness
Leadership Initiative, it’s really as simple as this: people are voluntar‐
ily following them. Followers are investing their energy and initia‐
tive toward some outcome articulated by an individual they deem a
leader. The question, of course, is why? When I ask groups to think
about someone they have personally known who they consider to be
a great leader, they have arrived at a common, more descriptive defi‐
nition, and the initial lists of characteristics are consistent: these
people have integrity, a positive vision for the future, an ability to
motivate people, a bias toward action, and are adept at making
tough decisions to name a few. Letting people do their jobs and
encouraging them to develop are often mentioned, as are empathy
and ego control.
These all reflect values and behaviors, not role or rank. Never has
anyone said that a person earned the designation of “great leader”
because they were promoted to senior vice president or were gradu‐
ated from a top university or business school. It is not about the size
of their office or their compensation package. They don’t mention
that these people may have invented a breakthrough product or
1

service—it’s about who they are more than what they’ve achieved.
These inspiring individuals are found at every level of the organiza‐
tion and demonstrate influence beyond their formal authority. So
what’s the secret?
The Shortcomings of Traditional Leadership
Development
If you want to be someone that others follow, the leadership devel‐
opment programs you typically encounter will only take you so far.
Many start by designating individuals who performed well at a pres‐
tigious school as having high executive potential—sometimes called
“high-pos”—and putting them on a fast track to significant respon‐
sibility. Putting aside that the high-po designation makes everyone
else a “low-po,” a lowering of expectations that can mask great con‐
tributions these people can make, academic prowess does not neces‐
sarily correlate to leadership effectiveness.
Then, these high-pos are accelerated through a series of positions
that give them broad exposure to different aspects of the business.
The goal of the high-pos and their organizations is to get these peo‐
ple rapidly to senior positions where, in theory, they can have
greater impact that benefits both. This technically focused develop‐
ment can shortchange opportunities for building proficiency with
the human factors that are at the heart of leadership. In fact, when
both the individual and their team expect a short tenure in any posi‐
tion, both lack incentive to invest much in establishing meaningful
relationships, developing emotional intelligence, or understanding
human and organizational behavior—the very things that do corre‐
late with leadership impact.
A better approach would be to target those people who are demon‐
strating leadership and then put them through a highly individual‐
ized program that helps them develop their particular strengths as
well as cultivating deeper self-understanding and self-awareness.
Sadly, few organizations hone their ability to spot true leaders.
Even if you are not in an organization with a high-po orientation,
you are likely to find that leadership development concentrates on
how you do, or conceptually understand doing, a certain set of skills
and behaviors deemed desirable. They are standardized across the
enterprise and are measured through pre- and post-training assess‐
2 
| 
Three Critical Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader

ments that allow the training department to quantify the outcome of
its activities. Reports are generated. Certificates are awarded. But lit‐
tle is actually learned about whether the participants in these pro‐
grams can actually lead. That is because leadership is behavior and
values based and requires not only competency, but demonstrated
proficiency with people, not test modules. Reading every book on
tennis will not prepare you to confront Serena Williams on the
court. You have to get out and play. You practice and learn from
what goes well as well as what goes wrong. You hone your under‐
standing of what works (or won’t work) for you in different situa‐
tions to build your capacity to adapt and adjust. You don’t simply
improve at what you do. You deepen your grasp of why you do it. It
is developing the right mindset that helps you not only acquire these
competencies but deploy them effectively.
With this expanded mental model, you can begin to discover how to
be the best leader you can be. Much like a tennis match, success is
not just about you playing “your game.” You must also account for
your opponent, the court surface, the weather, and other elements
that will factor into the outcome. It is not about executing a series of
rote actions but rather taking all of the factors into account—the
personalities, proficiencies, preferences, and passions of various
stakeholders (including yourself)—and creating the conditions
under which your desired outcome is most likely to emerge.
Effective leaders navigate a duality: they are authentically themselves
while also being the leader others need them to be. If your team is
stuck, you may need to assert direction even though your natural
tendency is to be more inclusive, for example. You develop the abil‐
ity to both be yourself and see yourself as others see you. When you
master this skill to be and see, you are able to intentionally adjust
your presence in ways that resonate with your followers. According
to Dr. Mindy Hall, author of Leading with Intention, “Being present
enough that you can flex your behavior to get the result you want is
one of the highest forms of self-awareness.” Is this social manipula‐
tion? I prefer to think of it as behavioral negotiation, because it is
not about lying or being false. It is a matter of adjusting your bear‐
ing and actions to elicit the reaction from your followers that moves
you all forward. No generic approach to your leadership develop‐
ment can help you hone this skill.
Many of these old leadership development models are actually based
on a management mindset. Modern management practice arose in
The Shortcomings of Traditional Leadership Development 
| 
3

the Industrial Age, which valued optimizing throughput and stand‐
ardizing output. Your individual strengths, needs, and desires are
not high on the priority list. The “leadership” components reflect
that increasing compensation required taking on responsibility for a
larger and larger number of subordinates in addition to acquiring a
familiarity with the basics of marketing, manufacturing, and the
rest. Thus, the goal is to prepare a person to occupy a certain spot in
a fixed hierarchy. Like academic performance, achieving manage‐
ment expertise is good, even essential for some roles, but not suffi‐
cient to make you the person that others will enthusiastically follow.
Three Critical Shifts for an Evolving Leadership
Landscape
In a world where change is constant and seems to constantly accel‐
erate, new leadership thinking and practice are required. Fewer and
fewer organizations are built as the strict hierarchies of old and thus
effectiveness is more likely to be secured through your influence
rather than formally accrued authority. In the knowledge-based
work common to technology, media, and other companies that are
the powerhouses of the 21st-century economy, the group you aspire
to lead may be a highly fluid collection of individual contributors
scattered around the globe rather than a tightly interdependent, co-
located team. This makes achieving unity of effort a more complex
endeavor.
Leadership thinking can be learned, but is difficult to teach. It is a
matter of getting your “best leader” to emerge by actively and inten‐
tionally asking questions, taking on challenges, and pushing beyond
your perceived limitations. It requires wanting to lead and commit‐
ting to ongoing growth and improvement.
There are three significant shifts you need to make to get on your
way: from they to you; from linearity to complexity; and from
“focus” as a noun to “focus” as a verb.
Shift 1: From They to You
As broadly critical as I am of many corporate leadership develop‐
ment programs, there are some that are excellent. However, even
these have one fundamental flaw that you can easily overcome: they
are based on the organization’s view of what it needs, not what you
4 
| 
Three Critical Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader

need. The shift from they to you is not a return to some ego-centric
“Great Man” theory of leadership; it is about taking ownership of
your personal leadership development so that you are best able to
serve others as a leader.
For too long, training departments have dictated how people should
develop as leaders and too many people have unquestioningly gone
along. The company typically develops competency models to create
uniformity across the business and the training agenda cascades
from there. Competency models are not all bad. They offer “clarity,
consistency, and connectivity [with other HR processes],” according
to Jay Conger of the Marshall School of Business and Douglas Ready
of MIT’s Sloan School. Conger and Ready also note that the 30 or
even 50 components comprising the model can get complicated—
they’re based on a leadership ideal, so they’re inherently conceptual,
and they focus on the perceived current state of the business rather
than future needs. Further, they often mix management skills
such as financial acuity with the more nuanced requirements of
leadership.
Several years back, the company I worked for sent me to a program
offered by The Center for Creative Leadership that I credit with
starting my current interest in better understanding leadership.
There was not a competency map in sight. Instead, it began before I
arrived with a 360-degree review that prompted greater self-
awareness. At the program itself, there was coaching as well as small
group work to stimulate progress along an individual development
path. I left that week-long experience understanding that I wasn’t
entitled to a leadership role based on my past accomplishments; I
had to earn it and take responsibility for becoming the best leader I
could be. I also left on a high that not only did I have potential but
so too did the three dozen or so other people from a variety of
organizations with whom I shared that week.
The fundamental truth is that your development has to start with
you. What are your distinctive strengths? How have your education
and experience shaped you? Where do you want to go? What drives
you? How do you describe the impact you want to have? These are
the kinds of questions you must answer for yourself. They are the
building blocks of your leadership narrative. Only when you articu‐
late this will you be able to lead others.
Three Critical Shifts for an Evolving Leadership Landscape 
| 
5

Steve Jobs is an excellent example. Jobs is perhaps the most iconic
chief executive of the late 20th and early 21st century. He cofounded
Apple with a distinct view of what a computer should be, and more
important, how it could help unlock human potential. Apple gained
a niche of loyal supporters with its early Macintosh machines. How‐
ever, it struggled financially, almost going under on more than one
occasion. Jobs was ousted only to be brought back several years later
after an unsuccessful run at the startup NeXT and great success at
Pixar. In this reprise performance Jobs led Apple to become the
most valuable corporation on the planet. Along the way, the com‐
pany reimagined the music business with its iPod product and
iTunes service—although Apple did not invent the MP3 player. The
iPhone instantly set the standard for both design and functionality
in handsets. Once again, Apple was not the first company with a
functional touchscreen smartphone. That honor belongs to IBM’s
Simon. The iPad launched the tablet revolution. The sparse Apple
stores became the epitome of retail design. Time and again, Apple
brought forward innovations that had customers standing in
line (long, long lines), had analysts on the edge of their seats, and
competitors nervously fidgeting before each product or service
introduction.
Jobs was instantly recognizable—bespectacled, bearded, wearing
jeans and a black turtleneck. He was a master showman. His design
sense seemed unerring. But was he a great leader?
While he has been lionized since his premature death, only history
will judge Jobs’ ultimate impact. He was clearly a visionary. He was a
design fanatic. A perfectionist about the user experience. However,
if you look at a typical leadership competency matrix, he would
score as mediocre at best at quite a number of the “critical” skills. I
never met him, though I have known people who worked at Apple
and have read quite a bit about Jobs himself. Walter Isaacson, author
of the most definitive Jobs biography, described “good Steve” and
“bad Steve”. Bad Steve lacked empathy. In fact, he was known to be
fairly irascible. His hefty ego was no secret. If you shared his vision
and passion for sleek design, Jobs was inspiring. If you pushed back
or questioned that vision, however, he was reported to be brutally
defensive.
Jobs was clearly a highly effective leader in the market, if perhaps
less so within the walls of Apple. That can be all right. In a complex
world, there is a demand for leadership in several domains and few
6 
| 
Three Critical Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader

people will excel in all of them. If there is a domain where you per‐
ceive yourself falling short, surround yourself with strong people
who have the appropriate strengths. Be frank about your weaknesses
and be honest, and courageous, enough to embrace highly compe‐
tent people with complementary skills. For all of the focus on Jobs as
an individual, there was an executive team that was collectively
responsible for the company’s performance.
The reason for this detour into the story of one individual is this:
Jobs understood his strengths and made the most of them. He didn’t
try to fit into a mold of the perfect executive. When he was recruited
back to Apple it was clear that it was for his particular skill set and
mindset. In fairness (and a lesson to would-be iconoclasts), had he
been less of a genius, he likely would have been limited by his lack of
emotional intelligence and ability to work with people with differing
opinions. The world has too many divas who are more difficult than
they are brilliant. The best measure over the medium term may be
the impact of his successor, Tim Cook. Cook is not a Jobs wannabe.
He has his own strengths, and despite some minor stumbles, the
company has continued to do well. The truest measure of a leader is
what happens after they are gone, not simply what happens when
they are there.
One simple yet profound way to explore these issues for your lead‐
ership is to keep a journal. Take a few minutes each day or two to jot
down things that went well and those where you could have done
better. How are you testing your limitations and expanding your
comfort zone? Think about these issues not only from your perspec‐
tive but from that of the others involved. The goal is to develop a
habit of reflection and curiosity. Regularly capturing what you
notice about yourself and others can help sharpen your self-
awareness, empathy, and other components of emotional intelli‐
gence. Journaling creates a time for you to focus on yourself, not in
a selfish sense but as an exercise in open inquiry. The process will
foster your ability to be and see. You can capture your own insights
and the feedback of others that can often be lost in your busy days.
Looking back over your journal every few months will help you see
your progress toward leadership proficiency.
Three Critical Shifts for an Evolving Leadership Landscape 
| 
7

Reflective exercises such as journaling help you process and absorb
both successes and failures. Noted management and leadership
thinker Peter Drucker said, “Follow effective action with quiet
reflection. From the quiet reflection will come even more effective
action.”
Whenever you can, expose yourself to the experiences and insights
of others. Read. Delve into the many video and audio resources
available to explore the ideas and experiences of a variety of leaders.
Start with the rich repository at Safari. Watch TED Talks. Look
beyond your industry or natural area of interest. There is no excuse
for not constantly exploring the ever-expanding knowledge base.
Three of my favorite enduring books relevant to leaders are Daniel
Kahneman’s Thinking, Fast and Slow; Margaret Wheatley’s Leader‐
ship and the New Science; and Ron Heifetz’s Leadership Without Easy
Answers. You’ll soon find that you have a collection of your own.
You don’t become a leader through any single course. It is an ongo‐
ing journey toward increased mastery.
I am also a fan of having a coach. I have worked with one for years.
Once assigned as a corrective measure to problematic executives,
coaches are now seen as an integral part of overall leadership devel‐
opment. A good coach is someone who can provide unbiased—and
often unvarnished—feedback of the kind you cannot get from a col‐
league, boss, spouse, or friend. A coach can help you identify areas
for development, create a specific plan to address them, encourage
you, and hold you accountable for doing the hard work required.
Regularly scheduled coaching sessions also ensure that you allocate
time for your development activities.
Just as you take ownership of your own leadership development, be
active in encouraging your team members to do so as well. Take
advantage of your company’s offerings, but don’t relegate all respon‐
sibility to the organization. High-impact leaders attract and value
strong people and help them grow stronger. Leadership is not a
magical power bestowed on individuals; it exists in the relationship
between the leader and their followers. They are two equally impor‐
tant parts to the equation: your interests and theirs. This interweav‐
ing of interests to catalyze change and achieve a shared goal is called
transformational leadership.
Have one-on-one meetings where you can better understand the
desires and motivations of the people you lead. Expand your leader‐
8 
| 
Three Critical Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader

ship narrative to include them in ways in which they see themselves
as meaningful parts of a larger story. You will amplify the power,
agility, and resilience of your work group when you cultivate leader‐
ship throughout its ranks.
Shift 2: From Linearity to Complexity
Think about the spreadsheets you use to manage your budget. Or
the process flowcharts through which you track your projects. And
the slides you build to pitch ideas or present results. These and other
management systems and processes are linear. They assume a high
degree of predictability—that similar inputs will result in similar
outputs. Plan the work, work the plan, and the plan will work. In
many situations, particularly those with mechanistic production
methods, this holds true.
Now think of how you actually get the work done. Chances are that
it involves a lot of free-flowing idea sharing and problem solving,
working across informal networks, and improvising in the face of
changing circumstances that is not reflected on those spreadsheets,
flowcharts, and slides. That is because many of us work, and you
must lead, at a level of complexity impossible to capture in a single
snapshot. Understanding and leading through their dynamics
means embracing complexity.
Mechanical systems such as the plumbing in your home are linear.
Even complicated code is linear. Whenever you find that strict if-
then relationships govern, you are confronting linearity. However, as
soon as the human element is introduced, the system becomes both
complex and adaptive. It is dynamic—similar inputs may bring
about wildly divergent outputs. Work teams, families, organizations,
and communities are all examples of complex adaptive systems: a
group of diverse, interdependent parts that acts as a whole and
which learns and adjusts over time. You understand a linear system
by taking it apart into its component systems. With a complex adap‐
tive system, you gain insight by looking at the whole.
One of my “aha” moments about leading in complex systems came
from reading an article about urban planning. Christopher
Alexander examined why cities that had grown organically over
time, such as London or New York, have a greater vibrancy and
appeal than those that conform to a master plan such as Brasilia or
England’s Garden Cities. His conclusion was that the human brain
Three Critical Shifts for an Evolving Leadership Landscape 
| 
9

simply cannot design at the same level of complexity at which a city
functions. Early in our evolution, the ability to simplify patterns was
of great use to our survival, as it allowed our forebears to distinguish
a predator from other creatures and the landscape.
Unfortunately, this ability to simplify, which was essential in one
context, is self-defeating when it comes to designing cities as well as
large contemporary organizations. We design with what Alexander
called a tree with a single point of connection between one compo‐
nent and another—a typical organization chart is a perfect
example—whereas function was better represented by a lattice struc‐
ture with multiple points of connection between components.
Accepting that there will be both formal and informal connections
among people, departments, and other entities, not all of which will
be discernable by you, helps you grasp the reality in which you must
lead. There is always more to discover.
Another distinctive feature of complex, adaptive systems is emer‐
gence: qualities of the system not found in any of the constituent
parts. Classically stated, the whole is more than the sum of its parts.
Think, for example, of the acapella musical performances in the tele‐
vision show, Glee, or the hit Pitch Perfect movies. While each of the
performers brings their own talent, the show-stopping performan‐
ces feature intricate harmonies where individual voices blend,
amplify, and accentuate each other to produce a sound that none of
them could achieve alone.
While your group may not sing—and that’s probably a good thing—
your situation is analogous. As a leader in a complex adaptive sys‐
tem, you are not simply putting star players together; you are
charged with catalyzing group performance toward a shared goal.
You will need to divine what motivates each person and how they
can best contribute. You want to create the conditions under which
they will gel into a high-performance, high-commitment team.
In a complex, adaptive system, the relationships between the pieces
are more important to system function than the pieces themselves.
You cannot plug-and-play people and expect the dynamics to
remain the same. How people interact, how well they build upon
each other’s work, and how they support each other will be the
measure of your leadership success.
I ran a conference business for several years and each event had a
detailed critical path consisting of more than 200 steps that would
10 
| 
Three Critical Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader

keep us on track over months of preparation. While careful plan‐
ning and execution were key to successful events, what really made
the business soar were the relationships we developed with our
speakers, attendees, sponsors, vendors, and most important, each
other. By building trust-based relationships with sponsors and
speakers, we were able to identify and explore important issues in
meaningful ways. When participants arrived on scene, they were
delighted to find that the staff were already familiar with them and
any special needs they had identified. We were able to work with
vendors to create memorable experiences that stood out from a typi‐
cal “butts in seats” conference. None of this appeared as a line item
on a plan.
I do not take credit for all of this aside from being aware enough to
hire some incredibly smart, talented people and make helping them
succeed my principal job. I put some simple rules in place: each
project had to have editorial integrity, demonstrate financial viabil‐
ity, and offer the opportunity to create a memorable experience for
our attendees. And one more: we were going to have fun. That last
one was not about foosball tables; it centered on appreciating and
fostering each person’s passion for the part they played in the larger
enterprise and how important they were to our collective success.
An important realization for me—and one you should keep in
mind—is that as leader you are part of this system but you are not
always its gravitational center. Your people are not planets who orbit
around you as their radiant sun. In fact, you may not always be the
one leading. Allowing others to step up when they have greater
expertise or responsibility for a particular activity helps them
develop as leaders as they demonstrate their value and earn your
confidence. Your focus is on the ultimate outcome and modeling the
behavior that helps everyone see that individual accomplishment is
viewed in the context of a larger mission.
Remember also that this complex adaptive system extends beyond
your immediate team to include other units and departments in
your organization as well as your customers, competitors, vendors,
and the communities in which you do business. The expectations
they set, the actions they take, and the innovations they introduce all
affect how the system functions. For example, if you are involved
with any product in which design is at all important, you must be
cognizant of what design leaders such as Apple and Herman Miller
are doing. On the service front, companies such as Zappos do the
Three Critical Shifts for an Evolving Leadership Landscape 
| 
11

same. They set expectations and standards that shape the collective
consciousness of your stakeholders.
One way to grasp the intricacy of complexity is through a Power‐
Point slide that The New York Times called one of the worst ever cre‐
ated. It looks like spaghetti thrown against the wall. It is almost
impossible to decipher. Yet I think that this slide is one of the best—
at least as a way to visually represent all of the forces at work in a
complex adaptive system. General Stanley McChrystal had it devel‐
oped when he was commander of the coalition forces in Afghani‐
stan. While you may not be fighting a war, when you map your cus‐
tomers, competitors, associates, their families, the communities in
which you operate, regulators, non-governmental organizations,
and other stakeholders in the larger system along with their connec‐
tions and interdependencies, you will quickly see that you, too, are
leading through a bit of spaghetti.
This leads to one last important point about complexity: in a com‐
plex adaptive system, no single person controls everything. When
you embrace complexity, you accept that no one has all of the
answer and that anyone may have part of the answer. That mindset
opens you to possibilities and opportunities you might otherwise
miss. You minimize your leadership blind spots by listening and
asking questions. Your goal is order, not control. How do you get
there? That’s the third shift.
Shift 3: From “Focus” as a Noun to “Focus” as a Verb
Once you have embraced the dynamism of complexity, the limita‐
tions of setting static goals becomes evident. The net profit target or
acceptable customer acquisition cost that makes perfect sense dur‐
ing your budget cycle may not be optimal six months later. More
tempting, yet more dangerous, is limiting goals to those things
which can easily be quantified. Such approaches will get people to
put their heads down as they drive to a focal point—“focus” as a
noun—rather than having their heads up to understand important
changes in their operating and competitive environment. In times of
change and turbulence, your leadership challenge is to maintain
clarity—“focus” as a verb.
Look, for example, at Nokia and Microsoft’s ongoing struggles in the
smartphone market. Nokia was once the dominant leader in mobile
but was late to notice the shift from standard handsets to handheld
12 
| 
Three Critical Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader

computers that happen to have a telephone feature. While the full
story is complex, it can be seen how a heads-down focus on sales of
a current product, for example, can obscure the need to question
assumptions about how customer demands, expectations, and
desires change over time. Nokia was acquired by Microsoft, another
laggard in mobile, and together they continue to stumble.
Maintaining clarity requires constant recalibration to ensure that
you have set the most relevant goals, much as a photographer
adjusts the camera’s aperture and shutter speed in changing light
conditions. Your goals should include quantitative performance but
also those qualitative measures, such as values, that help you navi‐
gate through volatility. The multiple activities in a business of any
significant scale make clarity elusive. Each time someone joins or
departs your team, collective understanding of your goals becomes a
bit blurred because the new person was not part of goal creation and
the person departing takes that understanding with them. Competi‐
tors make moves and launch new products and services that alter
the landscape. You enter a new geographic market with distinct
needs and opportunities. A regulator makes yesterday’s possibility
impossible (or the other way around). Each of these creates distor‐
tions and distractions. When you create clarity, you foster agility
throughout the organization. You enable order without having to
control every action and decision. That’s leadership.
How do you set your leadership agenda for clarity? I advocate three
equally weighted areas: purpose, values, and performance.
Purpose can be at a 30,000-foot level—Why does your organization
exist?—though I suggest you start much closer to ground level, fol‐
lowing Drucker’s advice again, that the purpose of a business is to
create a customer. Rather than asking why do you exist, ask how you
are being useful. Or as Harvard Business School professor Clay
Christensen has asked, what job is your customer hiring you to help
them do? Beginning your inquiry here embeds change—evolution‐
ary or revolutionary—into your thinking, because it promotes deep
and ongoing exploration of who your customers are, what they hope
to achieve, and how you can do it better than others.
Yes, you must meet sales and profit goals, but if you can do so
by better understanding those who buy, you and those you lead
are less likely to let a static target obscure long-term threats and
opportunities.
Three Critical Shifts for an Evolving Leadership Landscape 
| 
13

Values should endure through fluctuations in the market and devel‐
opments in product and service offerings. Clarity here means ensur‐
ing that they are relevant and integral to fulfilling your purpose.
They can’t simply be etched on a wall or relegated to the frontispiece
of the annual report. Almost every company has lofty values—even
those cited for significant misdeeds or found to be engaged in negli‐
gent behavior or criminal activity. Values must actually guide action.
Are the organization’s stated values tangibly reflected in your poli‐
cies and procedures? Does violating them come with significant
consequences? As a leader, you must make sure that it is so.
Performance comes last because so often it is placed first to the det‐
riment of other considerations. You and your team must deliver
results—on time, on budget, and the rest. However, if the pursuit of
short-term financial goals overshadows everything else, you will
surely stumble. In the exhaustive work on corporate failure by Dart‐
mouth professor Sidney Finkelstein and his team, they found that
the causes of failure were always there to be seen if only executive’s
eyes had been up and looking about rather than fixed on immediate
returns.
Make performance measures a reflection of purpose and values as
well as the ringing of the cash register. Daniel Pink is among those
who have shown that making incremental progress toward a mean‐
ingful goal is a powerful motivator. The rush of achieving a profit
goal is exhilarating—and profit is necessary if your business is to
exist for very long—but it will soon fade as you start the march
toward the next marker. It is often celebrated in individual bonuses
or other rewards. Knowing that you are making a positive difference
in people’s lives builds pride that stimulates group identity and cohe‐
sion. You catalyze collaboration and innovation to accomplish great
things together.
When you lead for clarity, your aim is improved function of the sys‐
tem. People know what to expect of you and what you expect of
them. There is a shared mission and vision that enables independent
action. You refine the design of the elements you control. You influ‐
ence, not obsess over, that which is beyond your control. You are
open to feedback that reveals successes as well as dissonance because
it helps you make the necessary adjustments to maintain clarity
amidst the swirling activity of daily operations.
14 
| 
Three Critical Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader

The Ascendance of Influence
In old-school organizations, the designation of “leader” often went
to the person with the most formal power. Your leadership status
was tightly tied to the number of people under your command, the
size of the contract you were authorized to sign, and the box you
were allocated on the organizational chart. I have even seen organi‐
zations where the square footage of offices was precisely calibrated
to one’s position in the hierarchy. Authority still carries some weight,
but in a complex, dynamic environment, influence is far more
important.
Influence is your ability to change or have an effect on someone or
something. It’s your persuasive power. The deeper your understand‐
ing of influence, the better you will be able to develop and deploy
it. Robert Cialdini of Arizona State University is the foremost
authority on influence and persuasion. Through research, he and his
team have identified six sources of influence that are present across
cultures (albeit each element varies in prominence from culture to
culture).
The first is likability. In short, if people like you, you will have more
influence over them. They will want to hear your opinion, advice,
and insights. You will be included in conversations and decisions.
The human brain is highly attuned to risks and rewards, and being
likable lowers your risk profile for others. The simple advice: don’t
be a jerk. This doesn’t mean that you cannot be tough. You simply
must match toughness with fairness.
The second source is reciprocity. People appreciate reciprocal rela‐
tionships where you help them and they help you. When you act
with generosity of spirit and action, you build influence because
most people will want to repay what you have done in some way.
You can even set up the expectation of reciprocity by verbalizing it.
For example, “Of course I’ll help you. We take care of each other
here at Acme Software.”
Third is social proof. The hardest follower to get is your first. When
others see one person following you, others will feel more open to
following as well. Each new follower lowers the potential risk in
being identified as one who supports you. Influence cascades. There
is a video on YouTube that illustrates the point. It is called Dancing
Man and shows an outdoor music festival where the crowd is relax‐
The Ascendance of Influence 
| 
15

ing on a sunny hillside. That is all except for one man who is up and
dancing with abandon. It takes a few minutes until a second person
joins him. Then a third. Soon almost the entire crowd is up and
moving to the rhythm. By the end, the outliers are the non-dancers.
Fourth is commitment and consistency. Once someone has commit‐
ted to something—you as a leader, a product development plan, or
to support a cause, they like to remain consistent with that original
decision. This is one reason why first impressions are so important.
If people support you initially, they will continue to want to do so. If
they do not, you’ll have work to do to win them over. Once you can
get people to make that first commitment, you will influence their
future behavior.
The fifth source is the scarcity of the resources you control. The
more in demand they are, the more influence you will have. These
could be people, money, or equipment. In knowledge work, possess‐
ing or controlling skills and expertise can result in significant influ‐
ence. For example, if it is you and your team who can make sense of
the varied streams of big data, people will look to curry your favor
or attract your efforts to their cause. It’s not just what you can do but
what others believe they need that makes the difference.
Finally, the sixth source is authority itself. Your position in the orga‐
nization can make people open to your persuasion. Having a great
idea is one thing, but without the ability to dedicate sufficient
resources or direct a course of action to carry it out, you may find
few followers. The opinion of a senior vice president may carry
more weight than that of a manager because the former “has more
juice” to get things done. Similarly, the stature of your profession or
academic achievement may grant you authority. Doctors, for exam‐
ple, are generally looked up to—that includes physicians as well as
PhDs. Never discount the power of authority, but try not to rely on
it too heavily.
What is clear from Cialdini’s work is that influence can be built
intentionally. Marketers use the six sources in their pitches to per‐
suade consumers to buy. Attention to these variables can subtly
influence behavior throughout the system in which you lead.
Reflect, for example, on how you can affect perceptions of scarcity.
In another presentation at Cultivate in Portland, IBM’s Phil Gilbert
shared how the company had created an elite new design team and
made them available only to those internal clients willing to attend a
16 
| 
Three Critical Shifts in Thinking for the Evolving Leader

boot camp to learn how to work with a designer. By raising the bar
to access, they stimulated demand for and acceptance of a design-
driven approach to projects.
It is important to remember that your positional authority is tied to
your job. You are, in essence, borrowing it for the duration of your
tenure and will get new authority when you assume another posi‐
tion. Influence, however, can follow you and accrue over your entire
career. When you develop a reputation as someone who is trustwor‐
thy, fair, and reliable, people will assume that you will carry those
qualities from project to project and position to position. You want
to be known as someone who is good to work for, the person others
will eagerly follow. As hierarchies become less relevant and work
more team-based, influence is indispensable if you aspire to lead.
Making the Shifts to Leadership Thinking
The three shifts that I have outlined are not the only adaptations you
must make as you step into a leadership role. These three will, how‐
ever, steer you in the right direction and accelerate your progress.
The tools of management that serve you well in conditions that are
stable and predictable will be of little value in the world in which
you lead now. The US military has developed the acronym VUCA to
describe our current context: volatile, uncertain, complex, and
ambiguous. This is true whether you look at geopolitics, the envi‐
ronment, or the marketplace. Change is constant. The challenges
many. Agility is essential. Your people will look to you for a steady
hand amidst turbulence. One of your roles as a leader will be as
sense-maker. People look for meaning in their work and you will be
called upon to be a clear, reasoned voice who can explain what is
going on, what it means, and how to move forward. If you can meet
those needs, you will be the person they follow not only voluntarily
but enthusiastically.
Making the Shifts to Leadership Thinking 
| 
17

About the Author
Eric J. McNulty is Director of Research at Harvard’s National Pre‐
paredness Leadership Initiative. In this work, he has been with lead‐
ers during high-pressure, high-stakes situations, such as the respon‐
ses to the Deepwater Horizon and Hurricane Sandy. As contributing
editor at strategy+business, Business Review (China), and the Cen‐
ter for Higher Ambition Leadership, McNulty has interviewed doz‐
ens of executives, academics, and others who know what it takes to
lead in today’s fast-paced, turbulent world. He is the author of Your
Critical First 10 Days as a Leader (O’Reilly) and coauthor of Renego‐
tiating Healthcare: Resolving Conflict to Build Collaboration (Jossey-
Bass). He has also written for Harvard Business Review and other
leading publications, and speaks and teaches frequently on
leadership-related topics.

