Three-Tier Shared Spectrum, Shared Infrastructure, and a Path to 5G
Written by a leading expert in the ﬁeld, this unique book describes the technical
requirements for three-tier shared spectrum, the key policy rationale, the opportunity
it creates for shared infrastructure, such as neutral host networks, and the likely impact
for 5G.
Detail is provided on the inception of the concept and its implementation in the US
Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS), along with descriptions of standards for
deployment, algorithms required for implementation, and the broader consequences for
wireless network and service architectures. The economic and innovation incentives
offered by three-tier spectrum are described, along with potential outcomes such as
widely deployed neutral host networks. There is also detailed technical analysis of
the unique challenges introduced by three-tier spectrum, such as coexistence among
non-cooperating networks.
Covering a wide range of spectrum bands, ITU international allocations, and rule
structures that can be adapted for different spectrum-sharing regimes and nations, this
is ideal for an international readership of communications engineers, policy-makers,
regulators, and industry strategic planners.
Preston Marshall led the Google and Alphabet Inc. efforts to establish the technical,
commercial, and regulatory ecosystem to make three-tier spectrum a success in the USA.
He was a major participant in the USA PCAST study that was the basis of the three-tier
concept. He chairs the Wireless Innovation Forum Spectrum Sharing Committee, and
is founding vice chair of the CBRS Alliance. Previously he was Deputy Director of
the Information Sciences Institute (ISI) at the University of Southern California (USC),
Research Professor at USC’s Electrical Engineering Department, and Program Manager
for wireless, cognitive radio, and networking programs at the US Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA).
15:14:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

15:14:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Three-Tier Shared Spectrum,
Shared Infrastructure,
and a Path to 5G
PRESTON MARSHALL
15:14:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
4843/24, 2nd Floor, Ansari Road, Daryaganj, Delhi – 110002, India
79 Anson Road, #06-04/06, Singapore 079906
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107196964
DOI: 10.1017/9781108165020
© Cambridge University Press 2017
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2017
Printed in the United Kingdom by Clays, St Ives plc
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-107-19696-4 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
15:14:35, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Contents
Acknowledgments
page xii
Preface
xiv
Part I Spectrum Sharing Background
1
1
Introduction to Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
3
1.1
Overview
3
1.2
The Problem of Spectrum Scarcity, Densiﬁcation, and Wireless Growth
4
1.3
Inadequacy of Traditional Approaches to Spectrum Management and
Allocation
5
1.4
Spectrum Challenges to Transition from Exclusive to Shared Infrastructure
8
1.5
Challenges in Achieving Signiﬁcant Levels of Spectrum Sharing
8
1.6
The Concepts Behind Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
9
1.7
Outline of this Book’s Treatment
10
1.8
Suggested Reading
16
References
16
2
Prior Dynamic Spectrum-Sharing Regimes
18
2.1
Introduction
18
2.2
Exclusive-Usage Models
18
2.3
Unlicensed Spectrum
19
2.4
Dynamic Frequency Selection for 5 GHz
21
2.5
Television “White Space” Spectrum Sharing
22
2.6
European Two-Tier Model (ASA/LSA)
27
2.7
Secondary Markets
29
2.8
Summary of Spectrum Sharing Concepts
32
2.9
Suggested Reading
33
References
34
Part II Three-Tier Dynamic Spectrum Models
35
3
Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations
37
3.1
Movement Towards Flexible, Dynamic Spectrum Policies
37
3.2
PCAST Findings and Recommendations
37
3.3
Analysis of PCAST Recommendations
41
15:14:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

vi
Contents
3.4
Ability of PCAST Proposals to Address Spectrum Sharing Issues
45
3.5
Incumbent Interests in Considering Spectrum Sharing
47
3.6
Criticism of PCAST Recommendations
48
3.7
Consensus Formation Through PCAST
50
3.8
A Note on Capacity Versus Coverage Networks, and the Small Cell Model
51
3.9
Interference Protection Priority
52
3.10
A Model for Spectrum Usage Through Opportunity Cost
53
3.11
Suggested Reading
54
References
54
4
US FCC CBRS Regulations, and Other International Activity
56
4.1
Introduction
56
4.2
Summary of FCC Actions and Timeline
57
4.3
Comparison of FCC CBRS and Three-Tier Proposals
59
4.4
Speciﬁc Protection Provided to Incumbent Classes
60
4.5
Protection Requirements for Naval Operations
62
4.6
Protection Requirements for Satellite Operations
63
4.7
Protection Requirements for Wireless Internet Service Providers (WISP)
and Utility Operations
65
4.8
Protection Requirements for Priority Access Operations
66
4.9
Second-Tier Protection Acquisition Method (Auction)
67
4.10
SAS Competition and Information Sharing
68
4.11
Secondary Markets
69
4.12
Spectrum Access System Operational Considerations
70
4.13
Device Classes
70
4.14
Proposals for Three-Tier Outside of the USA
71
4.15
Summary
73
4.16
Suggested Reading
73
References
74
Part III Components of a Three-Tier Architecture
77
5
Three-Tier Spectrum Admission Control Systems
79
5.1
Database-driven Spectrum Management Framework
79
5.2
Ecosystem Awareness
82
5.3
Analysis Algorithms
83
5.4
Device/Network Interaction
84
5.5
Protection Decision-making
85
5.6
Coexistence Optimizations
85
5.7
Example Implementations of Database Systems
86
5.8
Suggested Reading
88
References
89
15:14:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Contents
vii
6
Admission Control Management of Access Point Devices and Their Clients
91
6.1
Introduction
91
6.2
Management of Different Connectivity Models
91
6.3
Device Considerations in Three-Tier Spectrum Management Regimes
97
6.4
Database Interaction Capability
98
6.5
Frequency Flexibility and Client Control
99
6.6
Access Point Access Constraints
100
6.7
Point-to-Point and Multipoint Model
101
6.8
Suggested Reading
101
References
102
7
Taxonomy of Protection Methods to Be Provided Across and Within Tiers
103
7.1
Introduction to Three-Tier Analytic Components
103
7.2
Challenges in Ecosystem Interference Protection
103
7.3
Propagation Modeling
104
7.4
Three-Dimensional Propagation
108
7.5
Density Modeling
108
7.6
Modeling Interference Aggregation
109
7.7
The Protection of Receiver Linearity
112
7.8
Methods for Specifying Receiver Protection Thresholds
113
7.9
Summary
117
7.10
Suggested Reading
117
References
118
Part IV Protection Processes for Incumbents and Peers
121
8
General Process for Database System Operation
123
8.1
Introduction
123
8.2
Major Admission Control System and Device Transactions
123
8.3
Admission Control System Persistent State
124
8.4
Admission Control System Initiation With Static Data Process
124
8.5
Logical Flow of an Admission Control Process
125
8.6
Logical Flow of the Interference Resolution, Incumbent Notiﬁcation,
and Continued Authorization
128
8.7
Logical Flow of Database Synchronization Process
130
8.8
Computational Consistency and Admission Decision Correctness
132
8.9
Logical Flow of a Spectrum Inquiry Process
133
8.10
Absolute Versus Relative Protection Criteria
137
8.11
Statistical Considerations
137
8.12
Site- and Path-speciﬁc Considerations
139
8.13
Apportionment of Interference Margins
139
8.14
Suggested Reading
141
References
142
15:14:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

viii
Contents
9
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
143
9.1
Introduction
143
9.2
Unique Aspects of Satellite Uplink and Downlink Protection
144
9.3
Antenna Pointing and Gain Models
145
9.4
Satellite Receiver Characteristics
149
9.5
Frequency Domain Analysis
150
9.6
Aggregate Emissions Into FSS Receivers
158
9.7
Other Possible Satellite Spectrum Sharing Scenarios
160
References
161
10
Protection to and From Terrestrial Access Points and Point-to-Point Networks
163
10.1
Unique Aspects of Terrestrial Protection
163
10.2
Implications of Sub-channeling of Access Point
or its Clients
164
10.3
Implications of MAC layer, TDD, and FDD operation
165
10.4
Impact of Network Client Device Clouds on External Networks
166
10.5
Point-to-Point Protection
169
10.6
Three-Dimensional Considerations
171
10.7
Suggested Reading
172
References
173
11
Protection to and From Radar Systems
174
11.1
Unique Aspects of Radar Systems
174
11.2
A General Model of Radar System Design and Performance
174
11.3
Interference to Radar and Space Sensor Systems
177
11.4
Detection of Radar System Presence
180
11.5
Interference From Radar Systems to Communications Systems
184
11.6
Future Technology to Increase Radar and Communications System
Coexistence
186
11.7
Radars in a Three-Tier Framework
187
11.8
Suggested Reading
187
References
188
12
Coexistence Between Unprotected Peer Devices
189
12.1
The Role of Coexistence in Spectrum Protection Systems
189
12.2
Model for Coexistence Services
189
12.3
Indoor Coexistence Analysis with Realistic Environments
190
12.4
Listen Before Talk MAC Layer Coexistence
196
12.5
Lessons Learned From LTE-U/LAA and Wi-Fi Conﬂicts
197
12.6
Hybrid Strategies that Integrate Protected and Unprotected Spectrum
198
12.7
An Integrated Framework for Technology-Neutral and
Technology-Speciﬁc Coexistence
198
12.8
Suggested Reading
200
References
201
15:14:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Contents
ix
Part V Example Use of Three-Tier Spectrum: Use of the 3.5 GHz CBRS Band in
the USA
203
13
Device and Network Interaction with the Spectrum Access System
205
13.1
Introduction
205
13.2
CBSD Shutdown and Relocation Assurance
206
13.3
General Principles of Device Interaction with the SAS
208
13.4
SAS, CBSD, and Installer Authentication
208
13.5
Device Interaction with the SAS
210
13.6
Extensibility of the Interface
222
13.7
Suggested Reading
222
References
223
14
CBRS SAS Requirements
224
14.1
Introduction to the SAS Design
224
14.2
CBRS SAS Departures from the Reference Three-Tier Model
225
14.3
Authentication and Protection of Data from Corruption
225
14.4
PA Protection Requirements
226
14.5
Naval Radar Protection Requirements
227
14.6
Secondary Market in CBRS
227
14.7
Transparency and Visibility Requirements, and SAS-to-SAS Coordination
228
14.8
Implementation of SAS Synchronization
230
14.9
Impacts of SAS Differentiation
231
14.10 Suggested Reading
233
References
233
Part VI Future Bands, Network Services, Business Models, and Technology
235
15
Potential Services and Business Models Enabled by Three-Tier Spectrum
237
15.1
Introduction
237
15.2
Opportunities Introduced by Common Shared Spectrum
238
15.3
Venture Funding Friendly Innovation
239
15.4
Private Network Opportunity
240
15.5
Neutral Host Services in Common Spectrum
241
15.6
Third-Party Ofﬂoad Opportunity
243
15.7
Potential Enhancements to Three-Tier Concept to Increase Innovation
Friendliness
244
15.8
Suggested Reading
245
References
245
16
Candidate Incumbent Bands for Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
246
16.1
Introduction
246
16.2
Evaluation Criteria for Considering Opportunities for Three-Tier
Spectrum
246
15:14:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

x
Contents
16.3
Introduction to Usage-by-Usage Analysis
248
16.4
Satellite Uplinks and Downlinks
249
16.5
Ground-Based Radar Bands
253
16.6
Non-Communications Satellite Space Allocations
254
16.7
Amateur
258
16.8
Aeronautical Services
259
16.9
Mobile Services
260
16.10 Broadcast Services
260
16.11 Radio Navigation
261
16.12 Suggested Reading
261
References
261
17
From Shared Spectrum, to Shared Infrastructure, to a New Model of 5G
263
17.1
Introduction
263
17.2
The Traditional TELCO Model of Infrastructure
263
17.3
The Internet Model of Infrastructure
264
17.4
Issues in Deploying 5G Above 6 GHz
265
17.5
Neutral-Host/Shared-Infrastructure Model for 5G Deployment
267
17.6
Barriers to Shared Infrastructure Model
268
17.7
Abstraction of Heterogeneous Network Technologies and Deployments
270
17.8
Implications for the 5G Spectrum Policy
271
17.9
Impacts on Infrastructure and Virtualization
275
17.10 Suggested Reading
276
References
276
18
Future Actions to Deploy More Three-Tier Spectrum Bands and Nations
278
18.1
Issues for International Expansion
278
18.2
Regulatory Virtualization
278
18.3
Device Commonality
279
18.4
Admission Control System Commonality
280
18.5
A Model for International Three-Tier Multi-Band Roaming
280
18.6
Dynamic Markets
283
18.7
US Experience as Conﬁdence Building
283
18.8
Suggested Reading
284
References
285
19
Alternatives to Three-Tier Operation
287
19.1
Introduction
287
19.2
Cognitive Radio
287
19.3
Market-based Alternative
289
19.4
Management and Allocation by Regulators
290
19.5
Removal of PA Rights Tier
291
19.6
Removal of GAA Rights Tier
291
19.7
Reallocation as an Alternative
291
15:14:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Contents
xi
19.8
Summary
292
19.9
Suggested Reading
292
References
294
20
Conclusions and a Look Ahead
295
20.1
Beneﬁts and Roadmap of a Transition to Three-Tier
295
20.2
Technology and Policy
295
20.3
National Activities
296
20.4
International Activities
296
20.5
What Might Come After the Three-Tier Spectrum Regimes
298
20.6
Summary
301
20.7
Suggested Reading
302
References
302
Part VII Appendices
305
Appendix A Terms and Acronyms
307
Appendix B Symbols
312
Appendix C Opportunity Cost Model of Spectrum Utilization
315
C.1
Key Objectives for Introducing Cognitive Processes to Wireless Systems
315
C.2
Metrics for Wireless Network Effectiveness
316
References
319
Index
320
15:14:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
The United States of America (USA) is embarking on the development and application
of a new model for the management of spectrum. This model has evolved through
more than a decade of academic, policy, and economic concept development and
analysis. It has now been embraced by sufﬁcient major participants in the wireless
ecosystem to achieve the critical mass to succeed. Although this model is focused
on spectrum management, it has signiﬁcant implications on the broader questions of
wireless architecture, the structure of wireless service models, and even the nature of
the wireless industry itself.
As the title suggests, this book is about the intersection of spectrum and innovation.
There is a fundamental linkage between the ﬂexible availability of spectrum, and the
ability of entrepreneurs and innovators to create and deploy new technology, business
models, and services. Therefore, we consider spectrum policy from the perspective
that it should effectively provide spectrum to the services that require it, and at the
same time, ensure that the operation of the spectrum mechanism does not fossilize
the industries and services it supports. Spectrum policy that focuses primarily on the
technical protection of incumbents will inevitably end up primarily protecting the
business and technical models of those same incumbents.
While many topics in spectrum management and wireless have a rich literature, the
rapid growth of the three-tier concept has not yet created an extensive base of either
rationale or descriptive material. I believe there was a need to create a single work that
is inclusive of the ideas that had been developed, and the actions that had been taken
in the concept’s short history. Second, the available documentation, mostly consisting
of government regulations, reports, and legal ﬁlings, is deﬁcient in establishing the
rationale for many aspects of, and objections to, three-tier spectrum, and do not address
the link between this regime and the creation of innovation-friendly spectrum policies.
From an implementation perspective, there was no source of context describing what
the real-world implementations of these concepts were, and could be.
Today, the community is focused on a very small set of use cases; one country, one
primary incumbent, and a limited set of bands. A general framework that can be applied
internationally, with many incumbent user classes, and many bands, is necessary for a
scalable introduction of the concept worldwide. Lastly, although the subject is spectrum
management policy, it is important to look beyond the lower layers, and consider the
impact of three-tier spectrum policies that create a band accessible by a much wider
terms of use, 
.001
19:07:40, subject to the Cambridge Core

Preface
xv
range of participants and technical models. There are many opportunities for different
network and service architectures that are enabled by this ﬂexibility in spectrum usage.
The opportunity to share spectrum through bands that are common to operators
and non-operators has led to the consideration of large-scale neutral host networks
that leverage shared infrastructure to provide localized capacity to multiple wireless
operators. In the three-tier framework, carrier accessible deployments can be performed
by a wide range of organizations, such as venue owners and enterprises that are able
to perform these deployments at a lower cost through integration with their own
information technology, power and management infrastructures, and where the costs
would be shared among them, and the carriers using the ofﬂoad service. Shared, or
common, spectrum, is an enabler for these neutral host deployments, and at least one
industry organization, the CBRS Alliance in the USA, is aggressively pursuing the
technical standards for the integration of private capacity into carrier networks.
In this book, we will ﬁrst examine the traditional methods of allocating spectrum
to users and services. These mechanisms have been highly effective, enabling a vast
ecosystem of wireless services and sensing to be deployed, and it is certainly the
baseline from which all other concepts must evolve. This book will then examine more
ﬂexible ideas of spectrum management that have emerged, driven by the need to enable
innovation, as well as the need to more ﬂexibly utilize spectrum.
This discussion will start with the concepts developed in two successive US policy
efforts, the initial PCAST report, and the subsequent US regulations that established the
three-tier Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) band. These are not the complete
models of three-tier spectrum, but they are valuable points of departure. The technical
constraints are common for all the world, while regulatory law, economics, policy, and
of course, politics will vary nation by nation and region by region; and all of these
impact three-tier spectrum. That said, the US efforts are a valuable point of departure,
and their development and implementation are highly instructive about the challenges
all nations will face in developing appropriate three-tier policies.
To understand these challenges fully, a description of the USA’s CBRS regime is
provided in order to examine speciﬁc technical approaches and implementations that
would enable three-tier regimes to be established in bands occupied by a much wider
range of protected incumbents or mid-tier users. Lastly, in keeping with the desire for
innovation, this book will examine the impact of three-tier spectrum on the ability
of innovators to deploy their ideas in a scalable and effective manner. The growth of
Internet services and applications was fostered because it could thrive in an incremental,
scalable, funding regime, such as practiced by the venture capital community. We will
consider how spectrum policy can enable wireless services to avail themselves of the
same evolution path.
At the same time we consider these new objectives of a spectrum regime, we need to
consider the changing needs for spectrum. Whereas the traditional wireless deployment
was for Wide Area Network (WAN) base stations to provide reliable coverage, the
need for spectrum is increasingly focused on small cells, serving dense populations in
nomadic usage. It is not clear that the deployment model for this capacity is monolithic
carrier owned, operated and deployed devices. Instead neutral host hybrid networks
terms of use, 
.001
19:07:40, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

xvi
Preface
might evolve more in the model of Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi) deployment than operator
deployments, but still integrated into operator network services. If this evolves, this
model requires a very different method of spectrum management.
At its core, three-tier spectrum sharing addresses the following two, apparently
conﬂicting, objectives:
1. How do we provide a spectrum regime that can support the intensive capital
investment and deployments that are essential to high capacity modern wireless; and
2. Still provide a regime in which all spectrum can be utilized for some useful purpose
(Use it or share it principle)?
An example of this objective is a management framework in which one spectrum
usage pattern might emerge in Times Square, New York and Piccadilly Circus, London;
another distinct one in a suburb ﬁfty miles from a major city center; and yet a third,
completely different one, far away in agricultural ﬁelds, where the major application
would be low density, soil condition instrumentation. Local demand in each of these
locales would drive the spectrum allocation and usage, not the regulators.
This is the fundamental challenge of three-tier spectrum; to create not the optimal
spectrum regime, but create a framework that can adapt itself to meet the local demand,
market conditions, economics, and system needs. It is not an argument between licensed
and unlicensed, or exclusive and non-exclusive spectrum access. Instead, it is a hybrid
that is inclusive of all of these models, and adapts locally to demand, rather than be
dictated by “one size ﬁts all” regulation.
The concept of three-tier spectrum management is very much in its infancy. The
development of three-tier spectrum sharing is a logical consequence of a series of
developments in wireless networking, and the concomitant requirement to provide these
networks with the needed spectrum. If this book was written three years ago, the concept
would have been, at best, a proposal from an unknown study group. Several years
ago, it was only a regulatory action in the USA, almost universally opposed by the
entire commercial wireless industry. Even a year ago, it was an interesting US initiative,
but not of worldwide signiﬁcance. Today, it is fully embraced by major players in the
wireless ecosystem.
Early consideration in the USA has certainly demonstrated that both traditional and
non-traditional users have shown signiﬁcant interest in using the ﬁrst three-tier spectrum
band. Among other beneﬁts, it appears to solve some of the intractable problems
in economically deploying indoor cellular coverage sufﬁcient to meet the escalating
demand. It is reasonable to assume that, as additional spectrum is made available
through this mechanism, it will be used effectively, if differently, in each local situation.
Some of the concepts that underlay three-tier spectrum were described in a previous
book by the author.1 This previous work explored the unique challenges of dense and
scalable capacity networks. The concept of treating the impact of emissions footprint
and receiver protection symmetrically was the basis for the quantitative model of the
1 P. Marshall (2012), Scalability, Density, and Decision Making in Cognitive Wireless Networks,
Cambridge University Press.
terms of use, 
.001
19:07:40, subject to the Cambridge Core

Preface
xvii
spectrum that was provided in the PCAST report spectrum utilization model, and was
the basis for several of the recommendations. This concept considers spectrum usage as
the capacity that was denied to the other users of the spectrum, regardless of whether
it was the impact of the emission causing interference to other users, or limitations
on the use of the band, due to receiver performance. The effective spectrum usage
was considered to be the “opportunity cost” lost to other spectrum users. Readers of
this previous book should recognize many of its more theoretical principles applied to
practice in three-tier spectrum management.
One ﬁnal note. Three-tier spectrum is very much a work in progress. Trials in the USA
have just started; tailoring of existing technology standards is now only at its infancy;
and no systems have yet been developed that are native to, and fully leverage, the unique
opportunities provided by three-tier spectrum. And it has not yet expanded beyond the
USA. There are still many waves of innovation to come.
terms of use, 
.001
19:07:40, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

terms of use, 
.001
19:07:40, subject to the Cambridge Core

Part I
Spectrum Sharing
Background
15:56:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

15:56:47, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

1
Introduction to Three-Tier
Spectrum Sharing
1.1
Overview
This book will develop the general principles of three-tier shared spectrum and shared
infrastructure. Then it will explore what the impact of these principles will be on the
deployment of future wireless generations, such as Fifth-Generation Wireless Systems
(5G). These two highly related technology topics can fundamentally change the nature
of wireless architectures as these architectures evolve from a focus on ensuring area
coverage to high local capacity, and the transition from 4G to 5G technology and
capability.
• Spectrum sharing, which creates the opportunity for access to common spectrum and
technology by both traditional wireless operators and non-traditional operators, such
as enterprises, and venue operators, and enables new sources of investment in high
bandwidth services.
• Infrastructure sharing, which greatly expands the range of entities that can deploy
wireless capacity, both reduces and shares costs, and creates bandwidth abundance.
• Extending the shared infrastructure model to 5G will require partnerships between
operators and building and venue owners, operators and enterprises with access to
siting, power, and backhaul.
Spectrum sharing is the enabler of infrastructure sharing. Spectrum sharing requires
overcoming many technical, regulatory, and cultural obstacles, and much of this
book will focus on overcoming these challenges. Infrastructure sharing requires these
solutions for shared spectrum challenges, as well as signiﬁcant changes in the concept
and technology of a wireless operator, and the model of infrastructure deployment and
control.
This emphasis represents the fusion of many concepts that have emerged in wireless
practice, spectrum management, and an understanding of the conditions needed to
encourage and promote innovation in technology and services. These considerations
run the gamut from very technical considerations of path loss, link analysis and device
performance, to national economic policy, economic and market principles, and ﬁscal
policies. Creating these new opportunities that embrace and support modern wireless
practice, together with policies that embrace and promote these new opportunities, is
the challenge.
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

4
Introduction to Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
Individually, each of the underlying concepts is an evolutionary continuation of
current thrusts. However, collectively, they offer a unique opportunity to utilize new
technology approaches to solve fundamental challenges in the level of innovation in
wireless ecosystems. This fusion is just in the process of being incepted in the United
States of America (USA), but has already attracted massive industry interest, and it is
inevitable that it will be viewed favorably worldwide.
1.2
The Problem of Spectrum Scarcity, Densiﬁcation, and
Wireless Growth
The growth of wireless demand has created an almost linear demand for spectrum
in which to operate these systems. In most of the world, the opportunities to readily
allocate spectrum to meet these needs has long since been exhausted, and even the
opportunity to easily reallocate spectrum by relocating or terminating existing services,
has also been effectively exhausted. Each successive reallocation has been more
expensive, more disruptive to the uses of the spectrum being reallocated, and often
results in constraints on the use of the band for the eventual (new) incumbent. The
“Low Hanging Fruit” becomes rapidly exhausted to depletion!
The drive for more spectrum has resulted in massive investments by industry,
governments, militaries, and other users of the spectrum. Additionally, it has driven
signiﬁcant compromises in wireless systems, in order to accommodate the increasing
demand, and concomitant scarcity of spectrum. Spectrum has become an investment,
on the principle that no more spectrum can be created, so it must become more scarce,
and thus more valuable. This has had the perverse effect of actually taking spectrum out
of use and “warehouse” it, in order to maximize its market timing and value.
Yet, some in the spectrum community have argued that the issue facing all of the
spectrum-dependent activities is not the lack of spectrum, but is the lack of spectrum
access. This argument is that there is unused spectrum available in most, if not all,
locations and times, and that the methods of managing spectrum are the limiting factors
in accessing this available spectrum, not its implicit scarcity.
It is certainly true that if the spectrum in any speciﬁc location is measured with
receiving equipment, the spectrum will appear to be very empty. An example of
spectrum measurements is shown in Figure 1.1. These measurements [1] were collected
in the center of downtown Chicago, IL by Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) from the
highest building in the vicinity.
Much of the apparently unused spectrum in this measurement is, in fact, used by one
or another service, or, at the very least, its use would cause interference to a usage
in the vicinity. For example, short pulse width radars are hard to detect with long
integration time receivers, and unlikely to be detected (very often) by scanning receivers.
Satellite uplinks can be interfered with by emitters that can be anywhere in hundreds of
millions of square kilometers. Fixed Satellite Service (FSS) receivers are very sensitive
to interference, and operate at such low signal levels that a directional antenna must
be pointed upwards directly at the satellite’s orbital position. Airborne users may be
receiving a ground terminal that is not in line of sight of the sensor, but where the
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core

1.3 Inadequacy of Traditional Approaches
5
0
5
10
15
20
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
–90
–80
–70
–60
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
Frequency (in MHz)  
dBm per 7.2 MHz Channel
Time (Hours)
Threshold Power (dBm)  
Figure 1.1 Spectrum occupancy overview (from [2]).
aircraft would be interfered with by the usage. However, no matter how many special
cases are considered, it is obvious that there is a considerable resource of spectrum that
could, and should, be made available for use.
Although there is general agreement that some spectrum is available for sharing at
times; the technical issues involved are signiﬁcant. They include how to determine what
device would interfere with what device, how to know whether there is even someone
present to interfere with, or how to resolve conﬂicts that arise due to this usage. These
issues have limited spectrum sharing to very few applications, despite the opportunity
it would appear to provide.
The pressure to achieve spectrum sharing is driven not only by a general desire to
deploy more access points, but to diversify the participation in densifying the networks.
Spectrum sharing is less relevant if deployment is homogeneous and linear. However,
if one of the adaptations needed to achieve densiﬁcation is to empower many more
organizations to participate in deploying wireless capacity in dense proximity, then new
principles of spectrum and system management are essential.
But, before discussing new methods of spectrum sharing, it is important to examine
some of the more systemic weaknesses in the current approaches to spectrum allocation,
assignment, and management.
1.3
Inadequacy of Traditional Approaches to Spectrum
Management and Allocation
Some spectrum regulators recognize that the very evolved framework of spectrum
management actually hinders the effective use of spectrum, and creates artiﬁcial
partitions among the various classes of spectrum users. This partitioning not only
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

6
Introduction to Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
impacts spectrum policy, it forces structures onto the industries that use this spectrum.
For example, a nationwide Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi) supplier is in a similar business as a
nationwide wireless carrier, yet their business and technical models are differentiated by
the impact of the spectrum they use, rather than any fundamental difference in mission.
An example of this recognition is found in the introduction to the US Citizens
Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) ﬁnal rule-making [3], which succinctly stated the
purpose of this ﬁrst three-tier band as:
“The Citizens Broadband Radio Service takes advantage of advances in technology and spectrum
policy to dissolve age-old regulatory divisions between commercial and federal users, exclusive
and non-exclusive authorizations, and private and carrier networks.”
The traditional model of spectrum usage has been to provide a single usage, or
single user, with exclusive rights to use a portion of the spectrum, in a speciﬁed region,
typically with an expectation of perpetual rights. It is the lost opportunity cost of
spectrum that is inherent in this model that drives the consideration of multiple tier
approaches. Some of the weaknesses in this approach include:
Geographic Exclusivity An allocation of spectrum across a large region runs the risk
that the permitted users of the spectrum will not have equally deep needs at all
locations. For example, a broadband ofﬂoad service may be starved of spectrum in a
very densely populated portion of a city, but may have much less need of spectrum in
the sparsely populated outlying areas. Conversely, other users might have a different
focus in these less dense areas, such as wireless Internet services, and could use the
spectrum, with no loss of utility to the primary network. Or, the ofﬂoad network
could have limited ability to deploy in some locations, such as building interiors, but
the spectrum could not be used, even in those areas where the primary licensee could
not deploy.
Usage Exclusivity An allocation of spectrum exclusively to a single purpose, and
typically to a large number of users of that purpose. Broadcast, satellite up and
downlinks, Land Mobile Radio (LMR) are all examples of this allocation. However,
this spectrum is unavailable for use by other services that could be compatible with
this protected usage. Attempts to add services in underutilized bands have generally
met stiff resistance from incumbents, who view the spectrum as “theirs.”
Obsolete Allocations Even then brilliant decisions fade, and appear less brilliant
with time. The user or service receiving the exclusive spectrum rights are likely
to be supplanted by different technologies and modalities. For example, ﬁber
optic communications have displaced microwave in many applications, video is
increasingly distributed by the Internet, and not by satellite, and broadcast television
is viewed over cable, if at all. At the same time, telephony services and Internet
access are increasingly migrating from wired connections to wireless connections,
with concomitant spectrum requirements. Other than generally ineffective secondary
markets,1 there is no process to “refresh” spectrum allocations or assignments.
1 The reasons secondary markets have not addressed these fundamental challenges will be discussed in
Section 2.7.
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core

1.3 Inadequacy of Traditional Approaches
7
Complicating the issues described above is that reclaiming spectrum is extremely
difﬁcult. Systems designed to operate in exclusive spectrum are typically incapable
of accepting any forms of interference.2 The expectation of exclusive access is built
into the design of the radios, the operating procedures and business planning. And few
services just disappear, unless forced out by regulators. They develop a constituency
that resists any change in the spectrum allocation, despite the opportunity cost of the
spectrum to other users. Since existing users are typically more organized than potential,
future users, the process is highly resistant to “re-farming” of spectrum.
Another complication is that radio designers typically examine the existing radio
allocations and usage when designing receivers. One of the cost and power consumption
drivers of receivers is the worst case amplitude of the signals in adjacent channels (or
bands) that must be rejected. A radio designed to operate next to a low power satellite
downlink will not be perceived to need a high degree of robustness to strong adjacent
signals. This impact is referred to as “blocking” because it blocks the receiver from
being able to effectively operate, rather than directly interfering with the signal.
However, when that spectrum is “re-farmed” to a new, higher-powered application,
these lower receiver performance devices will be at risk of failing in the new
environment. This situation has occurred several times in the USA. When NEXTEL
installed high power cellular systems, they interfered with the lower performance public
safety systems that had assumed no high power adjacent band usage [4]. Similarly, when
LightSquared proposed to place high power Long-Term Evolution (LTE) systems in
a band previously occupied by low power INMARSAT links, the Global Positioning
System (GPS) community was able to effectively block this use, based on the claim that
it would cause interference to the GPS receivers that had not been designed to handle
strong adjacent signals [5]. Spectrum policy is not just about allocating the emission
frequency and associated rights, it is much more of an ecosystem management problem,
where all users of the spectrum interact in some way.3
One approach has been to utilize ﬁnancial pressures and opportunities to remove
existing allocations that are perceived to be less beneﬁcial than possible new uses. The
US Incentive Auction is offering television broadcasters with a portion of the auction
revenues if they agree to vacate their broadcast channel, or to share one with another
broadcaster. While this attempt to share the Government revenue, in order to incentivize
broadcast spectrum licensees to relinquish their spectrum was successful, it had to
overcome considerable resistance to the concept of rewarding private license holders
to give up spectrum for which they paid nothing. And the ﬁnancial model has limited
applicability to government-allocated spectrum. Any spectrum revenue a government
organization received would likely be offset in their budgets, resulting in zero net beneﬁt
to the organization. They thus have limited incentive to take the risk and complexity of
voluntarily sharing their spectrum.
2 Or, at the very least, this is what incumbents claim is true in order to minimize the possibility that “their”
spectrum will be forced to be shared with others.
3 As if that was not complex enough, it is often the case that users of the spectrum do not really understand
these interactions until they become an issue.
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

8
Introduction to Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
1.4
Spectrum Challenges to Transition from Exclusive to
Shared Infrastructure
The previous discussion addressed the shortfalls in current exclusive shared spectrum
allocation concept. An equivalent set of shortfalls exist in our current infrastructure
concepts. The default of exclusive infrastructure was a good engineering solution
when base station sites were sparse, and fully loaded with individual carrier demand.
However, in the future, deployments will be made on a building-by-building, and, in
5G, a room-by-room basis, rather than over an order of tens of square kilometers.
The spectrum under consideration for three-tier spectrum management typically ﬁts in
between the current 4G and future 5G frequency ranges.
Some of the spectrum allocation attributes that enable shared infrastructure include:
• The spectrum available to wireless operators and to non-operators is common to both,
so that networks and devices intended for either community are available to both of
the communities.
• The access to spectrum in a common band is available to all mobile operators (Mobile
Network Operators (MNO), Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO), and Mobile
System Operator (MSO)), as well as private network users.
• The capacity available is sufﬁcient to support the demand from multiple operators, so
that sharing resources is acceptable in terms of the customer Quality of Service (QoS)
commitments that must be assured.
• The cost of third-party deployment is comparable, or less than the equivalent cost of
traditional deployment of equivalent capacity.
Very clearly, today’s partition of carriers into exclusively licensed spectrum, and
non-carriers into unlicensed, does not meet the ﬁrst two of these conditions. A building
owner cannot independently deploy capacity in a carrier’s exclusive band except with
the support of the carrier, and even if they did, only that one carrier could access the
speciﬁc Radio Frequency (RF) channel.
1.5
Challenges in Achieving Signiﬁcant Levels of
Spectrum Sharing
Sharing existing spectrum has become a technically attractive opportunity to address
some of the spectrum shortfalls. It enables spectrum to be utilized by new services
without the necessity to remove the existing ones. It enables national spectrum
regulators to say “Yes” to both the incumbent and the new users. It has the appearance
of creating literally something from nothing. The technical community has thus invested
considerable time and effort in investigating the technology and management of these
regimes. Some of the speciﬁc methods and approaches are discussed in the next chapter.
Spectrum sharing has signiﬁcant issues from the perspective of both national
regulators, and of potential users. These perceived issues include:
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core

1.6 The Concepts Behind Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
9
Revenue Licensing spectrum is a signiﬁcant source of revenue for many nations, and
opportunistically shared spectrum appears to lack an equivalent government revenue
model that would create income for these nations.
Interference Assurance Users of existing spectrum have essentially absolute assur-
ance of no interference, or at least predictable interference. Shared spectrum
commons appear to have no such assurances. It would be difﬁcult for traditional
operators to justify the signiﬁcant investments in using such spectrum.
Localization Spectrum sharing opportunities are localized in place, and may be
temporary in time. Therefore, the beneﬁts of shared spectrum would be localized
and possibly transient; this also makes it difﬁcult to justify the required investment.
Transaction Costs The process of determining if sharing would be possible is a
complex process. Today, it is often a legalistic, regulatory, and often a political
process that has a very high transaction cost. The results of the process could be
obsolete by the time they could address speciﬁc spectrum sharing opportunities.
Performing this process on a large scale would appear to be impractical, as the
transaction costs would be too high to justify the investment in localized spectrum
opportunities.
Incumbent Protection Despite the best technical protection methods, there is always
a possibility of interference to protected incumbents, due to errors in the spectrum
sharing regime, device performance issues, rogue operation, or incorrect deployment
data. A method to ensure that admission control is provided, and that sharing nodes
can be controlled in cases of interference, is critical to the incumbent’s perception of
protection, but does not exist and would be difﬁcult for governments to provide.
Vague Rights Most spectrum allocations have no generally accepted, established,
engineering-level, deﬁned spectrum protection rights. The lack of speciﬁc rights
pertains to the conditions in their, and/or the adjacent, spectrum. Incumbents
typically design their systems to be effective in the context of the adjacent usage
at the time of deployment; therefore, they are at risk in any subsequent change
in adjacent usage. These issues are typically resolved in regulatory, litigation, or
political venues, such as in the USA when NEXTEL deployed high power cellular
base stations adjacent to public safety, or when LightSquared similarly proposed to
deploy high power LTE macrocells in close proximity to the GPS spectrum [4, 5].
In subsequent chapters, we will use this list of considerations as a “checklist” to
evaluate the impact of advanced spectrum regimes and the extent to which they resolve
these spectrum sharing issues.
1.6
The Concepts Behind Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
The US President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) recently
provided a framework and approach to addressing these challenges, through three-tier
spectrum sharing [6]. This concept has been further iterated by US regulatory action
[3, 7, 8, 9, 10]. It is not inherently inconsistent with the two-tier models being
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

10
Introduction to Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
developed in Europe [11], but extends the regime to enable more extensive sharing of
underutilized spectrum, and provides a mechanism for shared infrastructure deployment
by non-operators.
Three-tier spectrum concepts have evolved to address many of the perceived
weaknesses of the traditional approaches to spectrum allocation. Later sections will
provide speciﬁc descriptions of different three-tier regimes, but proposed regimes share
some common characteristics, including:
1. There is more than one unique tier in which users of the band have some expectations
of protection levels, which presumably are hierarchical in their rights structure.4
2. There is a lowest tier that can share any spectrum that is not “used” by any higher-tier
user.
3. The lowest-tier users have no expectations of any interference protection.
4. The allocation of spectrum is performed in small geographic and time units to
promote ﬂexibility to maximize lower-tier entry opportunities.
5. Decisions regarding the admission of users into the three-tier band must be
automated to reduce the transaction cost and delay, and to provide assurance of
access.
This is not to say that there cannot be useful spectrum regimes that do not include all
of these attributes. However, for the purposes of this book, we will consider this most
complete vision of three-tier spectrum sharing as the baseline from which others may
depart.
It is worth examining the impact of each of these considerations in depth. Table 1.1
shows the impact of each consideration on the usability, utility, and ﬂexibility of the
resulting spectrum management regime. Each of the ﬁve considerations above provides
signiﬁcant beneﬁts. Note that the ﬁrst principle (multiple protected tiers) could be
waived if dedicated spectrum was available, but the general approach in this work is
to address the more complex problem of sharing this tier with a protected incumbent,
since this is likely to be the most typical deployment path.
The next chapter will examine several of the current spectrum management regimes
in the context of these principles. Of course, the devil is in the details, and deﬁning
what spectrum is in use by higher tiers, and what “small” units of space and time are,
are complex problems. We will address how to deﬁne them, and the consequences of
these deﬁnitions, in later chapters.
1.7
Outline of This Book’s Treatment
Part I (Spectrum Sharing Background) of this book introduces the general problem
statement of spectrum management, including the concepts behind both traditional
4 Because of the current depth of spectrum usage, we assume that the spectrum that is used for three tier
has incumbents that are automatically granted protection. If these incumbents are not present, then this
tier is empty.
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core

1.7 Outline of This Book’s Treatment
11
Table 1.1 Consequences of three-tier spectrum regimes.
Consideration
Consequences
1
Multiple protected tiers
Enables three-tier spectrum to be implemented in bands with
an existing incumbent that continues to receive protection,
while still providing a high level of assurance to secondary
users of their right to receive signiﬁcant protection. The
middle tier(s) (Priority Access (PA)) have an explicit “Right
to Receive,” but no “Right to Exclude.”
2
Lower tier that can
share unused spectrum
A key principle is that all spectrum should be usable by
someone at all times and places. This default spectrum
sharing right provides the ﬂexibility for deployments that
can operate around any of the protected tiers. This provides
an inherent elasticity in that high demands for protected
usage cannot put lower-tier investment at risk by precluding
its access to spectrum. The lower tier also provides a
disincentive to spectrum warehousing and creation of
barriers to entry, since the spectrum is usable until an actual
local deployment occurs.
3
Lowest tier with no
protection
The lowest tier not providing protection ensures it is open to
all users, and cannot be blocked or have arbitrary
impediments to its use implied by a protection regime. This
provision assures spectrum access, although with no
assurance of the quality of that access.
4
Small units of
allocation
Small units of allocation (time and space) ensure that the
band can support unique uses from both a locality
perspective, and as the best use of the spectrum evolves over
time. For example, in one section of a metropolitan area,
outdoor small cells may be the best use, in another, backhaul,
and in a third, interior local area networks. Small allocation
units enable this mixed usage. Similarly, use of personal
wireless may move to other bands, and this spectrum will
become more useful for other applications, such as Internet
of Things (IoT).
5
Automated transactions
Low cost and time delay is essential to the spectrum
ecosystem. The number of access points will increase by
orders of magnitude (from tens of thousands to millions) as
bandwidth provision shifts from macrocell to
small/femtocell architectures. This scaling can only be
provided by an automated process that does not involve
regulatory decision-making, politics, or litigation as
elements of the process.
approaches and the three-tier framework. The material on existing spectrum practices
is provided only at the very high level of detail, and for the reader with detailed
interest in the subject, the recommended readings provide more speciﬁc detail.
Chapter 1 (Introduction to Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing), this chapter, provides a
general summary of the issues that must be addressed in any new spectrum regime.
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

12
Introduction to Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
Chapter 2 (Prior Dynamic Spectrum-Sharing Regimes) discusses spectrum sharing
models. Although these models do not have all of the features desired of the three-tier
model, they build conﬁdence in more complex and situational spectrum management
models. Experience with each of these models provided essential input to the three-tier
model, so this chapter will also discuss how the experience of each of these approaches
drove aspects of the three-tier spectrum approach. This chapter discusses speciﬁc
spectrum sharing approaches; some which are in use, and some which have been
proposed. It provides a short summary of these approaches, and is geared to understand
the concerns raised, or encountered, with each of the approaches, more than their details.
These concerns serve as criteria for sharing regimes in later chapters. Each of the sharing
proposals is evaluated against the criteria of Table 1.1.
Part II (Three-Tier Dynamic Spectrum Models) discusses the speciﬁcs of the
three-tier model from the perspective of the initial policy and regulatory deﬁnitions.
Chapter 3 (Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations) describes the principles and
arguments of the PCAST report [6] that established the initial framework of three-tier
spectrum management. This report led to a US Executive Memorandum that established
that it was the Government’s policy to share Federal spectrum widely. The study deﬁned
a three-tier framework to implement spectrum sharing of either Federal or non-Federal
spectrum. This chapter also discusses the concerns that were raised in opposition to
this approach. These are highly instructive in understanding the issues facing broader
application of such spectrum sharing. Some of the objections were valid, and had to be
reﬂected in the structure of the sharing regime.
Chapter 4 (US FCC CBRS Regulations, and Other International Activity) provides
the details on the ﬁrst regulatory implementation of many of the PCAST report
principles in establishing the rules for the US CBRS band. As in all regulatory topics, the
“devil is in the details,” so this section will describe the signiﬁcant regulatory conditions
in some detail. Many of the concerns addressed in the US adoption of these rules will
be common to other spectrum management administrations, so the speciﬁc rules may
be of interest outside of the US, as either technical or process examples.
Part III (Components of a Three-Tier Architecture) describes the components of a
three-tier spectrum sharing ecosystem. These are the basic building blocks of all of the
proposed sharing regimes. This part describes these components broadly, so that the
discussion could apply to a wide range of three-tier implementations and applications.
Part V (Example Use of Three-Tier Spectrum: Use of the 3.5 GHz CBRS Band in the
USA) will provide the speciﬁcs of the US CBRS design speciﬁcs.
Chapter 5 (Three-Tier Spectrum Admission Control Systems) speciﬁes the charac-
teristics of the central control structure, or Spectrum Access System (SAS) needed
to implement three-tier spectrum management. This section also includes a discussion
of more decentralized approaches that could supplement or replace the functions of a
central controller.
Chapter 6 (Admission Control Management of Access Point Devices and Their
Clients) describes the unique requirements of devices that can support three-tier
spectrum, beyond those that would be required for traditional spectrum occupancy.
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core

1.7 Outline of This Book’s Treatment
13
Devices addressed include peer devices, such as in point-to-point links, or access point
and client, as in Local Area Networks (LAN) architectures.
Chapter 7 (Taxonomy of Protection Methods to be Provided Across and Within
Tiers) focuses on the speciﬁc algorithmic components that may be included in various
protection modalities that three-tier regimes may require. This chapter provides a set
of algorithms that will be later assembled to address different types of protections of
incumbent or tiered users, and to provide coexistence between devices within a tier. The
control system discussion is separate from the protection discussion in order to isolate
the purely technical aspects of the control system from the policy-driven protection
criteria discussion.
Part IV (Protection Processes for Incumbents and Peers) describes the speciﬁc
protection methodologies for a wide range of potential incumbent systems that might
share spectrum in one or more tiers of a three-tier spectrum access regime. Chapter 8
(General Process for Database System Operation) describes the basic algorithmic
elements that are common to all protection situations. These are the basic elements that
all control systems will likely have to implement. Chapter 9 (Protection of Incumbent
Satellite Operations) discusses the unique aspects of protecting satellite operations from
interference from other tiers. There is a considerable amount of spectrum allocated to
satellite operation, so sharing of this spectrum is a particularly signiﬁcant opportunity,
although protection of the highly sensitive satellite receivers is an equally signiﬁcant
challenge.
We then consider speciﬁc protection cases. Chapter 10 (Protection to and From
Terrestrial Access Points and Point-to-Point Networks) discusses the protection of
terrestrial networks. Terrestrial networks typically include a number of mobile clients
which are not explicitly managed by the admission control process. This chapter
addresses the interference from lower-tier, and other protected network, users, and the
converse problem of protecting other users from terrestrial networks. This is the case
between a Priority Access (PA) and another PA, and a PA and a General Authorized
Access (GAA) in PCAST terminology.
Similarly, Chapter 11 (Protection to and From Radar Systems) discusses the speciﬁc
protection of radar systems from any of the lower tiers. Because radar protection is one
of the most complex considerations, this chapter also provides a detailed description of
the algorithms that are applicable to the other protection cases. Chapter 12 (Coexistence
Between Unprotected Peer Devices) discusses maximizing the degree of coexistence
between peer terrestrial networks, where the networks are not entitled to protection
from other peer tier networks, such as between devices in the PCAST GAA status.
Although this tier may not be afforded protection, or require admission control, it is still
desirable that the control structure provides the maximal degree of coexistence among
users in this status.
Part V (Example Use of Three-Tier Spectrum: Use of the 3.5 GHz CBRS Band in the
USA) provides a speciﬁc description of the implementation of the three-tier regime
in the USA CBRS band. This is included to provide context for the more general
discussion in earlier portions of this book, as an example of how one country applied
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

14
Introduction to Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
these principles and implemented them in one band. The basis for this discussion
is the industry consensus designs being developed through the Wireless Innovation
Forum (WinnForum) Spectrum Sharing Committee (SSC) process. These designs can
serve as a point of departure for other implementations of the three-tier principles. The
two chapters discuss the additional functionality that is required to transition designs
intended to operate in conventional, single-tier spectrum to the United States (US)
CBRS framework. The intent of these chapters is not to provide a detailed description
of how to design devices for deployment in the US CBRS band, but to illustrate some of
the challenges in developing for three-tier, and how one community chooses to address
them.
Chapter 13 (Device and Network Interaction with the Spectrum Access System)
described the design of the interface from devices to the SAS. This discussion
includes the SAS interface protocols and interaction that is required to have devices
operate in a three-tier framework. This chapter also discusses the implementation of
these controls in intermediate proxies, such as the LTE Extended Packet Core (EPC)
components. Chapter 14 (CBRS SAS Requirements) describes the speciﬁc requirements
and functions that are allocated to the SAS in the CBSD regime. This chapter also
addresses some of the constraints on the implementation of a SAS service from an
operational perspective, as well as the purely technical considerations.
The previous chapters focused on the lower levels of the networks that are supported
or potentially impacted by three-tier operation. Part VI (Future Bands, Network
Services, Business Models, and Technology) examines the future of three-tier spectrum,
and the ecosystems that it impacts. This Part looks to the future, both to how three-tier
may be conceptually enhanced, and to alternatives that could supplant this model, and
provide even more extensive access to the spectrum.
Chapter 15 (Potential Services and Business Models Enabled by Three-Tier
Spectrum) discusses the implications for new kinds of services and disruptive business
models that could emerge from the ﬂexibility of the three-tier spectrum. The chapter
discusses the creation of opportunities for innovation in the bands where spectrum is
made available. These disruptive innovations require a three-tier spectrum management
regime in order to be achievable, or economically realistic. This chapter will examine
the scalable entry of new concepts, their funding and incremental deployment,
and hypothesize some networks models that could emerge. Chapter 16 (Candidate
Incumbent Bands for Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing) develops a set of criteria that can
be used to examine the validity of a three-tier regime in the context of the current
incumbent usage. It then considers compatibility of three-tier regimes with a wide range
of incumbent systems categories, independent of the speciﬁcs of the band.
Chapter 17 (From Shared Spectrum, to Shared Infrastructure, to a New Model of 5G)
discusses the implications of shared spectrum on enabling a shared 5G infrastructure.
This chapter discusses the traditional TELCO model of infrastructure, and contrasts
it with the emerging model of shared infrastructure in the Internet. It then develops
the requirements for shared infrastructure, and the obstacles to its emergence, and
then develops the issues speciﬁc to the likely deployment of 5G unique systems above
20 GHz.
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core

1.7 Outline of This Book’s Treatment
15
Chapter 18 (Future Actions to Deploy More Three-Tier Spectrum Bands and
Nations) discusses the path to future adoption of three-tier approaches more broadly
in terms of spectrum and nations. This discussion considers the process of “top-down”
international adoption in contrast to a nation-by-nation approach, driven by local
needs and economies. It also introduces the concept of “virtualized regulation,” which
enables national administrators to tailor regulations without fragmenting the device of
access control system ecosystem. Of course, realistically, there are many considerations
(political, economic, diplomatic) that inﬂuence spectrum sharing decisions. However,
since establishing secondary allocations is not directly controlled by the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU), the considerations in this chapter may be applied on
a nation-by-nation basis, even absent worldwide consensus in the ITU World Radio
Conference (WRC) level.
Chapter 19 (Alternatives to Three-Tier Operation) discusses the possible alternatives
to three-tier spectrum that could emerge. The mere existence of three-tier spectrum
regimes will make it more practical for even more radical concepts of spectrum
management to emerge and be adopted. As the focus of the three-tier model is geared to
protection of “dumb” or legacy incumbent devices, it is reasonable to assume that these
principles can be adapted, or even deconstructed, as incumbent systems become more
sophisticated, cognitive, and, at least, more interference tolerant.
Lastly, Chapter 20 (Conclusions and a Look Ahead) will review what has been
developed in the previous chapters, and assess what has been learned, what needs to
be learned, and what are the possible outcomes, as these lessons are integrated into
innovative spectrum management and wireless technology. This chapter ends with a
discussion of concepts that could follow, and perhaps displace many of the three-tier
principles, or adopt them to be applicable to more spectrum. Some concepts developed
by the author to completely replace the protection metaphor with one focused on device
self-protection and recourse will be introduced.
Each chapter includes a set of suggested readings. The speciﬁc issues associated
with three-tier spectrum management have not yet appeared in the classic academic
literature, so many of the suggested readings are from discussion of the initial PCAST
recommendations, the regulatory positions ﬁled during the US CBRS proceedings, or
explanations of how various positions were adjudicated by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC). Hopefully, as this regime is both better understood, and some
experience is gained in its operation, a deep treatment in the academic and professional
literature will emerge.
To simplify locating many of the government and industry references, I have
organized copies and links to key documents on my web page:
www.prestonfmarshall.com/threetierdocuments.
This site also archives documents that might be lost in changes of US Presidential
Administrations, but still provide useful context on the US decision-making. As
documents are developed by the various standards groups active in three-tier spectrum
I will be adding them to this site to keep it current.
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

16
Introduction to Three-Tier Spectrum Sharing
1.8
Suggested Reading
There are a number of books that address various aspects of cognitive wireless radio
and networks that provide an overview of the ﬁeld, and its constituent technologies, as
follows:
• Martin Cave and William Webb [12] have a recent book that is an outstanding
treatment of the overall issues in spectrum management and allocation, and addresses
some of the traditional spectrum sharing methods.
• Understanding the inherent weaknesses in the current spectrum management regime
is central to appreciating any new regime. The “no winners” conﬂicts previously
mentioned regarding the NEXTEL/Public Safety and the LightSquared LTE/GPS
conﬂicts are instructive, both philosophically, and in the engineering details [4, 5].
The LightSquared/GPS conﬂict was contemporary with the development of the
PCAST report, and was inﬂuential in the development of a symmetric treatment of
receiver protection.
• A somewhat cynical look at the handling of spectrum issues (primarily in the USA)
is provided by a former FCC engineer, Mike Marcus, in his SpectrumTalk blog. It
demonstrates that the current spectrum management process is highly stressed, even
to manage ﬁxed allocations. Available at: marcus-spectrum.com/Blog/Blog.html.
• A signiﬁcant body of literature has been developed around the concept of Cognitive
Radio (CR) and Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA) by the academic community.
Some examples include: work by the author that developed concepts regarding
coexistence management, particularly as it relates to adjacent band effects [13, 2];
Fette edited a collection [14] of early work in the ﬁeld of DSA and CR; and a survey
of the ﬁeld by Doyle [15], among others.
References
1 M. McHenry, P. Tenhula, D. McCloskey, D. Roberson, and C. Hood, Chicago spectrum
occupancy measurements & analysis and a long-term studies proposal. Proceedings of the
First International Workshop on Technology and Policy for Accessing Spectrum (TAPAS)
(2006).
2 P. F. Marshall, Scaling, Density, and Decision-Making in Cognitive Wireless Networks
(Cambridge University Press, 2012).
3 Federal Communications Commission, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard
to Commercial Operation in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12-354, Order
on Reconsideration and Second Report and Order (2016). https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_
public/attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
4 L. Luna, NEXTEL interference debate rages on. Mobile Radio Technology, 21/8 (2003), 26.
5 National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Systems Engineering Forum
(NPEF), Assessment of LightSquared Terrestrial Broadband System Effects on GPS
Receivers and GPS-dependent Applications (2011). www.gps.gov/spectrum/lightsquared/
docs/2011-06-NPEF-lightsquared-report.pdf.
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core

References
17
6 President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, Report to the President:
Realizing the Full Potential of Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth
(Executive Ofﬁce of the President (EOP), Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP),
2012. http://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/microsites/ostp/pcast-stem-ed-
ﬁnal.pdf.
7 Federal Communications Commission, In the Matter of Amendment of the Commission’s
Rules with Regard to Commercial Operations in the 3550–3650 MHz Band: Further
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, no. Docket 12-354 (2014). http://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_
public/attachmatch/FCC-14-49A1.pdf.
8 ——, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to Commercial Operation
in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12-354, Report and Order and Second
Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Order (2015). http://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_
public/attachmatch/FCC-15-47A1.pdf.
9 ——, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau and Ofﬁce of Engineering and Technology
Establish Procedure and Deadline for Filing Spectrum Access System (SAS) Adminis-
trator(s) and Environmental Sensing Capability (ESC) Operator(s) Applications (2015).
http://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-15-1426A1.pdf.
10 ——, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau and Ofﬁce of Engineering and Technol-
ogy announce Methodology for Determining the Protected Contours for Grandfathered
3650–3700 MHz Band Licenses GN Docket No. 12-354. Public notice (2016).
11 European Telecommunications Standards Institute, Reconﬁgurable Radio Systems (RRS);
System Architecture and High Level Procedures for Operation of Licensed Shared Access
(LSA) in the 2,300 MHz–2,400 MHz Band. Technical report (2015).
12 M. Cave and W. Webb, Spectrum Management Using the Airwaves for Maximum Social and
Economic Beneﬁt (Cambridge University Press, 2016).
13 P. F. Marshall, Quantitative Analysis of Cognitive Radio and Network Performance (Norwood,
MA: Artech House, 2010).
14 B. A. Fette, Cognitive Radio Technology, 2nd edn. (Amsterdam: Academic Press/Elsevier,
2009).
15 L. Doyle, Essentials of Cognitive Radio (Cambridge University Press, 2009).
terms of use, 
.002
19:07:48, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

2
Prior Dynamic
Spectrum-Sharing Regimes
2.1
Introduction
This chapter discusses traditional exclusive licensing of spectrum, and some of the
current proposals that have emerged recently to address spectrum access shortfalls and
to address the improved utilization of underused spectrum. In general, these approaches
address many of the same weaknesses in the spectrum models that were discussed in
the last chapter. In this chapter, we will compare each of these approaches to the ﬁve
principles developed and justiﬁed in Chapter 1, Table 1.1.
This chapter will also discuss how each of the spectrum sharing models inﬂuenced
the development of the three-tier model. Each of these existing models contributed
experience that was central to the reﬁnement of the principles of the three-tier model.
While many commentators consider the three-tier model as a radical departure from
current practices, it was, in fact, a somewhat evolutionary response to experience with
the models described in this chapter.
2.2
Exclusive-Usage Models
Traditionally, spectrum has had to be licensed for a single usage, or a single user. There
are a number of works that provide the details of this method of spectrum management,
and these details will not be included in this chapter, except as required to develop
the concept of three-tier spectrum regimes. This discussion is thus very simplistic, and
admittedly skips over many subtle aspects of traditional spectrum management.
The spectrum that is considered for three-tier implementation is generally assigned
and managed in one of these two methods, which are signiﬁcant from the perspective of
how this regime can be instantiated.
Exclusive Usage Exclusive usage licensing dedicates spectrum to a single purpose;
broadcasting, satellite uplink or downlink, radars, etc. Users are licensed to use this
band for the exclusive purpose, but have no exclusivity, in that any other user can
use the spectrum for the same purpose. Traditionally, it has been hard for other uses
to share this spectrum, since all of the systems deployed in it were developed on
the assumption that all of the uses would be identical. In most cases, this spectrum
does not cost the user any signiﬁcant payments, and only requires some form of
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core

2.3 Unlicensed Spectrum
19
Table 2.1 Comparison of three-tier spectrum regime with an exclusive
spectrum regime.
Consideration
Consequences
1
Multiple protected tiers.
Typically only one tier.
2
Lower tier that can share unused spectrum.
No.
3
Lowest tier with no protection.
No lower tier.
4
Small units of allocation.
Metropolitan area to National scope.
5
Automated transactions.
None.
registration and perhaps coordination with other pre-existing users. The fact that this
spectrum was provided by the public without signiﬁcant cost makes such spectrum
more (politically) available for introduction of new sharing regimes.
Exclusive User Exclusive use spectrum is assigned to a single user, in a region. That
user has the right to exclusive use of this spectrum, and need not coordinate, or
consider any other user, except possibly at the boundary of their exclusivity. Since
the advent of auctions as a mechanism for assigning exclusive spectrum rights,
these rights have generally been acquired at national auctions [1], and at relatively
high cost. Although legal treatment of this spectrum is complex, license holders
consider that they have property rights as equity in the spectrum. Since there was
a considerable investment in this spectrum, most holders of auctioned, exclusive
spectrum would consider that they had all of the rights to any secondary usage. This
does not preclude them from establishing such frameworks, but most governments
would be unwilling to challenge these rights. A possible opportunity is that although
these licenses have an “expectation of renewal,” their terms could be adjusted at these
renewal time points.
In the rest of this chapter, we will compare the spectrum management principles of
shared spectrum with the criteria from Chapter 1. Table 2.1 compares exclusive rights
spectrum to the three-tier spectrum model.
2.3
Unlicensed Spectrum
Unlicensed spectrum has been one of the great wireless successes of the last decade. The
growth of Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi) has been central to meeting the increasing demand
for wireless services, which have grown beyond the scale that traditional Mobile
Network Operators (MNO) deployments can provide. Several other services also share
this class of spectrum, although Wi-Fi Local Area Networks (LAN) and Bluetooth
Personal Area Networks (PAN) are the primary applications. The hypothesized Internet
of Things (IoT) may be highly dependent on this spectrum model.
From the perspective of the three-tier model, unlicensed spectrum access has
demonstrated that spectrum that has no management, no admission control, and no
assurance of interference-free operation, has massive social, societal and economic
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

20
Prior Dynamic Spectrum-Sharing Regimes
Table 2.2 Comparison of three-tier spectrum regime with an unlicensed spectrum
regime.
Consideration
Consequences
1
Multiple protected tiers.
Unlicensed spectrum typically only provides a single tier,
which provides no protection. In the discussion of DFS in
the next section, this model will be extended slightly.
2
Lower tier that can
share unused spectrum.
Yes. The one tier provides spectrum that all users can use.
3
Lowest tier with no
protection.
Yes. The one tier is usable, regardless of interference to
other uses.
4
Small units of
allocation.
Not applicable – there is no allocation.
5
Automated
transactions.
Not applicable – there is no admission control.
value. Without the success of unlicensed spectrum, it is unlikely that the community
would ever consider the lower-tier spectrum rights in the three-tier system to have utility
or value.
Table 2.2 illustrates how unlicensed spectrum relates to the criteria we established
for three-tier regimes. The difference between a three-tier regime and an unlicensed one
comes down to:
• Unlicensed spectrum has no concept of any protected levels within the band and area
of operation.
• Unlicensed spectrum has no admission control process, thereby precluding any
protection mechanisms. If a device meets the certiﬁcation conditions, it has a right
to use the spectrum, which is inherently incompatible with admission control. In
unlicensed spectrum, devices have a right to emit, so long as they comply with the
regulations. Unlicensed operation must therefore be the sole use of the band, since no
protection can be provided.1
The absence of a protected tier in the unlicensed band has certainly had its impact on
the nature of the deployments there. The deployment model of Wi-Fi has shown great
appeal, even to the carrier-driven, MNO community. This usage model has been almost
universally driven to low cost devices, due to the interference potential, where the low
device cost, and non-existent spectrum cost, overcame any concern that interference
would cause loss of efﬁciency to access. Even if highly congested, the low cost nature
of Wi-Fi has made it highly cost competitive with traditional, higher cost, systems in
protected spectrum.
1 The inevitable exception to this statement is the Dynamic Frequency Selection (DFS) sensing in 5 GHz,
which protects certain radar operations. This protection mode is addressed in the next section.
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core

2.4 Dynamic Frequency Selection for 5 GHz
21
2.4
Dynamic Frequency Selection for 5 GHz
The DFS model is a spectrum sharing technology that was jointly developed by the
Wi-Fi industry, and a number of radar users, including the US Department of Defense
(DoD). Incumbent usage in this band includes devices operated for government weather,
civilian navigation, and maritime and military users. It is intended to protect certain
radar operations in the 5 GHz band, in order to expand the operation and power of
unlicensed devices in the range of 5250–5730 MHz.
The DFS Access Point (AP) is required to check on the detectability of a radar
signal, when ﬁrst initiating operation and periodically thereafter. If it detects a radar,
it is required to disassociate any connected devices, and move to a frequency on which
no radar is detected. It is a very speciﬁc implementation of the more general “sense and
avoid” principle of Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA). Table 2.3 assesses DFS in the
context of the ﬁve principles developed and justiﬁed in Chapter 1, Table 1.1.
DFS has a long history. It initially had an industry standard that was incomplete
in the number of protected radar signals that the DFS implementations recognized. In
order to be permitted to operate, a major effort was made by industry, the users, and
the governments to make the DFS regime effective. There are a number of issues that
arose in developing an effective sensing regime for such a wide range of victim radar
characteristics. Some details on the implementation are provided by the Wi-Fi Alliance
best practices document [2].
Table 2.3 compares DFS sharing with the three-tier regime.
The differences between a three-tier regime and the DFS one come down to:
1. It has a single protected tier, but does not have a secondary protected tier. Therefore,
from the perspective on any spectrum sharing device, it is essentially unlicensed.
2. There is no admission control, thereby limiting the protection to the incumbent. The
decision about band occupancy is solely up to the device, and even if interference is
detected, the protected user has no recourse to resolve it.
3. The range of protected users is limited. The “sense and avoid” mode can only protect
devices with high Power Spectral Density (PSD) levels so that sensing detection
can be reliable. Low power, high sensitivity, and receive only devices cannot be
protected.
The lack of an admission control process, and of methods, or recourse, to resolve
interference from DFS controlled devices was a major concern of protected users. In
developing the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST)
three-tier proposal, the concerns of these users had to be addressed in order to obtain
support for a signiﬁcant expansion of shared spectrum principles. These concerns
included:
1. The existence of the protected radar was determined solely by the device, and it may
or may not have good placement, performance, or the software integrity sufﬁcient to
accomplish this task correctly.
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

22
Prior Dynamic Spectrum-Sharing Regimes
Table 2.3 Comparison of three-tier spectrum regime with the DFS regime.
Consideration
Consequences
1
Multiple protected tiers.
There is only a single protected tier.
2
Lower tier that can
share unused spectrum.
Yes. The lower tier provides spectrum that all users can access.
3
Lowest tier with no
protection
Yes. The lower tier is usable, regardless of interference to other
users in the same tier.
4
Small units of
allocation.
Not applicable – there is no allocation.
5
Automated
transactions.
Not applicable – sensing based; there is no admission control.
2. Even if a node was identiﬁed as having caused interference, there was no mechanism
to preclude its entry into the band, as long as it implemented the designed detection
method. Even if the device has a failed or tampered protection mechanism,2 it would
still have access to the band.
3. The secondary-tier users had no incentive to make the protection of higher-tier users
effective. In fact, they had a disincentive to make sensing effective, as ineffective
sensing effectively created additional spectrum opportunities for the lower tier. DFS
was not viewed as a part of a larger cooperative effort, where both partners had an
incentive to make the protection regime effective, in order to expand future spectrum
sharing opportunities.
2.5
Television “White Space” Spectrum Sharing
The worldwide acceptance of the principles of Television White Space (TVWS) sharing
is the ﬁrst example of international acceptance of a two-tier spectrum management
regime, which is mediated by an automated admission control system. The USA Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) and the UK Ofﬁce of Communications (OFCOM)
led the efforts to establish the framework for TVWS sharing. As such, it was an
important milestone in advancing new concepts of spectrum sharing, and certainly
inﬂuenced both the development and acceptance of the more extensive and complex
proposals provided in the PCAST report.
The United States (US) FCC was the ﬁrst national administration to provide
regulations for the sharing of the Television (TV) band with wireless services. The
process involved a Senate Bill to require the FCC to consider TVWS, a suit in Federal
court, numerous FCC decisions, and several versions of the technical requirements to
operate in the band.
2 There was no requirement that the devices have software protection of the DFS functionality, so DFS
access points could have their software replaced with software that did not implement the DFS
protections. This became an issue that had to be addressed in three-tier spectrum regimes to assure
primary user conﬁdence in the protection mechanism.
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core

2.5 Television “White Space” Spectrum Sharing
23
The advocates of sharing of TV bands had initially proposed that the TVWS should
be managed through sensing by devices themselves. It might seem obvious that if a
device could not detect a signal, then a TV receiver could not receive a signal, and
therefore, there could be no harmful interference. The process of developing a proof of
the sensing ability targeted a detection level of −114 dBm. A sensor device provided by
Microsoft showed this was possible in FCC testing [3, 4].
However, even though the sensor was shown to be technically possible, the practical
protection of TV broadcasts showed the difﬁculty in using the “sense and avoid”
methodology with systems that had highly asymmetric deployments. The TV broadcast
sensor might be located in a basement, with poor propagation to the TV broadcast signal.
On the other hand, a TV receiver may be located up on a hill, and using an antenna on
a high tower, and that antenna may have high gain compared to the omnidirectional
antenna at the sensor. All of these possibilities provided issues that could be raised
to resist and discredit the concept of self-sensing in the TVWS regime. The argument
that was made that there were placements in which the sensor would not detect the TV
broadcast, but where the transmissions of the TVWS could reach the receiver’s antenna
and therefore, cause interfere to the reception of the broadcast stream.
The ﬁnal FCC decision recognized these issues. TVWS devices were required to
access a database server prior to entering the band. The database server uses the device’s
location and a database of broadcaster antenna locations to determine what channels
are available for use by the TVWS device. Interference is addressed as a one-on-one
consideration, so it is stateless. Therefore, the admission of a node is not a function
of the admission of any nodes previously. The protection contours are static. This
simpliﬁes the development of the database systems, but means that the limits on power
must reﬂect the possibility that a large number of nodes might be located in the vicinity
of any one receiver, regardless of where they actually were located.
An additional protected class in TVWS is wireless microphones that were already
operating on unused TV channels. Users can register these microphones and achieve
protection that is essentially equivalent to that of the broadcasters within the locale of
the wireless microphone.
The model of DSA that emerged from the academic3 and Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA) funded research was largely based on sensing of
the RF environment. In environments where the sensor and victim receiver have similar
placement and antenna performance, the assertion that the sensor could detect the signal
at signal levels lower than the signal level that could be reliably demodulated is a
reasonable one. The difﬁculty that the TVWS advocates had in showing that self-sensing
was a reliable mechanism arose from the vast asymmetry in possible placement and
antenna performance between the self-sensing device and victim receiver. In the use
cases, such as Land Mobile Radio (LMR), this was much less of an issue, and node
placement and antenna performance were much more symmetric.
3 For example, the IEEE Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks Conference (DYSPAN) conferences have
had a signiﬁcant academic involvement from the start of spectrum sharing research.
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

24
Prior Dynamic Spectrum-Sharing Regimes
Table 2.4 Comparison of a three-tier spectrum regime with TV white space spectrum
sharing.
Consideration
Consequences
1
Multiple protected tiers.
There is only a single protected tier, the TV Broadcaster’s,
and no process for any other type of usage to acquire
protected status.
2
Lower tier that can
share unused spectrum.
Yes. The one shared tier provides spectrum that all users can
access equally.
3
Lowest tier with no
protection.
Yes. The one tier is usable, regardless of interference to other
same tier uses.
4
Small units of
allocation.
Not applicable – there is no allocation.
5
Automated
transactions.
Admission control provided through the database system
based on the declared location of the TV broadcaster, and
regulatory coverage contours.
The TVWS regime has many similarities to the notional three-tier regime. There is
a positive admission control process, a protected tier, and unlimited rights to use the
lowest level. One difference from the three-tier model is that there is only one protected
tier. This tier is restricted to a single incumbent use. There is no opportunity for users
other than TV broadcasters or wireless microphone users to achieve protected status.
Another difference is that the TVWS admission is stateless; that is, a node entering
does not change the rights of future nodes to enter.
This is a fair regime, but it has the problem that the admission control system cannot
assure a maximum level of interference, since there could be no nodes, one node, or any
number of nodes in close proximity to a victim, all adding the interference level at a
victim. So, although there is an admission control system in this regime, the admission
decisions are based on the application of static contours. The admission control system
does not control actual interference, since it cannot control. To provide a high level of
assurance to protected users, the maximum power per device must be limited based
on an estimate of worst-case density. This is unsatisfactory to both sides. The power
for most users is reduced unnecessarily, and the protected users cannot be assured of
absolute protection, since there is no control over the density of admitted devices. The
solution to this concern, interference aggregation protection, will be discussed in more
detail in the next chapter.
An example of the spectrum availability created by this framework is shown in
Figure 2.1. The Washington DC metropolitan area is to the right of the ﬁgure, and
relatively sparsely populated areas in Virginia to the left. Although there are a large
number of channels in the rural areas, the spectrum availability in the densely populated
metro area is very restricted. This graphic points to the necessity to examine spectrum
sharing opportunities in terms of how the spectrum availability correlates with the likely
demand. In this case, spectrum sharing opportunities are inversely correlated with the
likely consumer spectrum demand.
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core

2.5 Television “White Space” Spectrum Sharing
25
Figure 2.1 TVWS spectrum availability.
The TVWS opportunity has had varied penetration in relevant markets, depending
on the availability of channels, alternative technologies, user density, and, as always,
economics. In the developed world, the deployment of TVWS devices was far below
what had been anticipated. Some of the reasons this occurred includes a number of
interlocking causes:
1. The volume of channels available in dense environments was very restricted by
the broadcast protection policies. Many potential users investigating the use of
the band through the white space database services discovered that the channel
availability was so limited that reasonably interference-free operation was unlikely.
The dense use of broadcast, plus the protection from adjacent band operation were
too restrictive to provide a viable sharing opportunity.
2. The advantage of longer operating ranges also limited the density of devices. While
Wi-Fi might have been the model for TVWS, the fact that it could communicate 20
times further also meant if could only be deployed at a density that was
1
400 of the
Wi-Fi density, on a channel basis. That precluded the high volume consumer market
that has made Wi-Fi so affordable.
3. The channels available were generally only 6 MHz wide. That was far below the
typical 802.11g channel, and consumers saw TVWS as offering much less bandwidth
than the advertised values on Wi-Fi labeling, even if these values were rarely
achieved in practice by Wi-Fi. This placed TVWS at a fundamental disadvantage
compared to its low cost alternatives.
4. The imminent incentive auction in the United States of America (USA) would likely
severely reduce the already low amount of spectrum available through auctioning of
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

26
Prior Dynamic Spectrum-Sharing Regimes
TV channels for cellular use. This created too much risk regarding future white space
availability to support reasonable investment in TVWS products.
5. Even with a large investment in low volume equipment, there was no possibility of
obtaining protection for this investment. While it might be acceptable to have a 100
USD investment at risk from interference, it was less so when the cost of equipment
was many thousands of dollars.
6. The lack of volume resulted in the availability of only high-cost products,
which further reduced the demand for devices, and so established an unattractive
environment for the non-recurring investments required to bring low cost devices to
the market. The unique aspects of the TV channels minimized the ability of industry
to leverage existing, high volume, low cost components in the development of TVWS
devices.
Many of these reasons were directly addressed in the PCAST recommendations, and
follow-on FCC proposals.
1. A large enough extent of spectrum had to be available to provide reasonable density
of use and a high likelihood of availability.
2. Higher bands with short propagation distances could support dense, high volume
ecosystems that are viable for suppliers and users.
3. Provide channel bandwidths that are effective in achieving broadband levels of
performance.
4. Provide an assured access framework that is not subject to reallocation in the near
and medium term.
5. Provide the ability to acquire protection rights in order to assure the value of
investment in the band.
6. Minimize the regulatory impacts on existing, high volume ecosystems that can
rapidly exploit the band, and do so at the cost levels of the existing bands. The
3.55 GHz regulations permitted the unaltered use of Third-Generation Partnership
(3GPP) Long-Term Evolution (LTE) Band 42 and 43 handsets with minimal
modiﬁcations.
By contrast, in the less-developed world, a number of experimental deployments
are underway using TVWS to provide wireless backhaul to under-served communities.
Technical and operational success has been achieved in many of them. In many of these
locations, the TV band is actually very unoccupied, or even vacant, so it is really not
“white space.”
Whatever the market success of TVWS turns out to be, it was instrumental in
providing arguments for acceptance by several of the features of the eventual PCAST
model, including:
1. Demonstrating the viability and use of an automated, centralized admission control
process.
2. Ability of developers to implement the admission control systems, and of regulators
to approve them.
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core

2.6 European Two-Tier Model (ASA/LSA)
27
3. Establishment of speciﬁc interference protection criteria, and regulations to enforce
them, in the sharing regime.
2.6
European Two-Tier Model (ASA/LSA)
Europe was developing a two-tier, all protected, spectrum access model at the same time
that the USA was developing its three-tier proposal in PCAST. This framework was
originally known as Authorized Shared Access (ASA), and was later titled Licensed
Shared Access (LSA) to reﬂect its licensed pedigree. From the perspective of carrier
operation, the two concepts have some similarity. US carriers actually supported the use
of ASA/LSA in the USA in preference to the PCAST approach in their initial positions
after the release of the PCAST report.
ASA/LSA provides for secondary sharing of an allocation. In Europe, it is targeted
for the 2.3 GHz band, which has many localized services in Europe. It is therefore
a good candidate for sharing with International Mobile Telecommunications (IMT)
applications. ASA/LSA would provide spatial reuse of the 2.3 GHz spectrum between
the ﬁxed incumbent operations and a dynamic IMT application. As such, it offers
extensive reuse of the otherwise sparsely utilized spectrum, and in a manner that had
minimal impact on the architecture of the cellular services.
The overall system architecture and high level procedures [5] of LSA is described
in various European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) documents. LSA
implements a sharing arrangement between two parties, a primary licensed entity
operating a mobile or ﬁxed network, which holds a licensed right to use spectrum,
and the operator of a network that will share that spectrum. The characteristics of
the spectrum which can be shared are provided by the primary licensee to the LSA
Licensee through a spectrum resource description. Individual national administrations
deﬁne the framework for this interaction, so the process is still under control of the
spectrum administration. This description includes the time/space and frequency limits
of the usage rights that are conveyed.
A comparison of the ASA/LSA regime and the three-tier structure is provided in
Table 2.5.
The ASA/LSA approach is an important alternative to the three-tier architecture,
so an in-depth discussion of it is useful at this point. The control architecture of the
ASA/LSA structure is shown in Figure 2.2.
Unlike other secondary sharing arrangements, LSA has a speciﬁc system implemen-
tation architecture prescribed. The National Regulatory Authority (NRA) block denotes
the national regulator, and the Incumbent block denotes the primary licensee of the
spectrum. This provides an explicit role for the NRA in implementing and operating the
LSA regime. Both incumbent and NRA access the Licensed Shared Access Repository
(LR). This repository provides the terms of spectrum sharing that is offered to the LSA
licensee, and receives acknowledgment and status from the LSA licensee. The LSA
licensee operates a Licensed Shared Access Controller (LC) within their own network
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

28
Prior Dynamic Spectrum-Sharing Regimes
Table 2.5 Comparison of three-tier spectrum regime with the ASA/LSA approach.
Consideration
Consequences
1
Multiple protected tiers.
Two tiers have protection: the primary incumbent, and
the geographically exclusive secondary user.
2
Lower tier that can
share unused spectrum.
Only the secondary user use of the sharing opportunity,
so there is no mechanism to share unused secondary
sharing opportunities. It is an extension of exclusive use
spectrum into a lower tier, but is not shared beyond that
user.
3
Lowest tier with no
protection.
No.
4
Small units of
allocation.
The geographic areas that are available for sharing are
quite large compared to the interference radius of a
single node.
5
Automated
transactions.
The link with the primary is automated, but interference
management within the secondary sharing is handled by
the system that is deployed there.
National
Regulatory
Authority (NRA)
LSA Repository
(LR)
Incumbent’s
Network
Manager
Incumbent
Network
Sharing
Network
Sharing Parties
Network
Manager
LSA Controller
(LC)
LSA Licensee sharing the
spectrum allocation
LSA Licensor offering
to share the spectrum
allocation
When, Where
Status
Figure 2.2 ASA/LSA control structure.
domain. The LC interrogates the LR to obtain information on spectrum availability, and
then updates the LR with its status of use by the LSA licensee.
The ASA/LSA framework was developed for a speciﬁc sharing scenario and band.
Trials are underway in Europe in 2016.
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core

2.7 Secondary Markets
29
One distinct difference between the intent of the ASA/LSA effort and the US PCAST
is in the nature of the secondary user. In ASA/LSA, the management of the shared
spectrum’s secondary usage is provided by a system internal to the sharing carrier;
depicted as the “LSA Controller” in Figure 2.2. If this carrier does not use the spectrum,
it is essentially wasted. In contrast, the US PCAST also wanted to assure that there was
no limit on the nature of the users of secondary spectrum; the democratization that had
made Wi-Fi so successful. Therefore, while ASA/LSA allocates large areas of usage to
an LSA controller (and thus a single user); the PCAST approach essentially allocates
spectrum to any user that does not interfere with a higher-tier user.
Another difference between the three-tier and LSA frameworks is in the structure
of the admission control system. In LSA, the responsibility of admission control is
split between the public LR element, which presumably is transparently implemented,
and the LC, which is within the LSA licensee’s own domain, and presumably is a
private implementation speciﬁc to the individual licensee, rather than a common facility
representing all users of the spectrum, primary or secondary.
The contrast in approach is interesting. In the three-tier framework, all spectrum is
automatically shared and usable, unless it would cause interference to a protected tier
user. In LSA, spectrum is sharable if, and only if, it is released for sharing by the
incumbent. In three-tier, usage by upper tiers constitute the exception case; in LSA
spectrum sharing, the right to share is the exception. In LSA, the incumbent controls
the availability and sharing terms of the sharable spectrum; in three-tier sharing, the
government regulator mandates the availability and terms of sharable spectrum. None of
these differences constitute correct or incorrect positions, but they do provide signiﬁcant
contrasts in both approach and objective. Simply put, three-tier shares all spectrum by
default, while LSA exclusively protects all spectrum by default.
The differences between the ASA/LSA and the PCAST approaches have profound
impacts on the nature of the deployments that occur in each regime. The ASA/LSA
approach provides existing operators with the opportunity to make use of spectrum that
would otherwise not be available for use. This is a meaningful and useful goal. The
PCAST regime enables any entity to utilize the spectrum and deploy any technology
they desire to. This feature is enabling of new network deployment concepts, such as
neutral host operation and shared infrastructure, which will be developed later in this
book.
2.7
Secondary Markets
Secondary markets may not appear on many lists of spectrum sharing techniques, but
in principle, they offer many opportunities to dynamically manage and re-allocate the
use of spectrum, to let it ﬁnd its “highest and best use,” and support the entry of new,
and even disruptive, entrants into the market place. Unfortunately, it has led to little of
these beneﬁts, to any signiﬁcant extent. In developing the three-tier spectrum model, the
issues faced by secondary markets had to be addressed structurally, and addressed to the
maximum extent possible.
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

30
Prior Dynamic Spectrum-Sharing Regimes
Secondary markets were envisioned by their advocates as the equivalent of a
commodity exchange, except trading the rights to Hertz of spectrum, rather than pork
bellies in the Chicago Board of Trade. This failure of secondary spectrum markets to
emerge as a viable and signiﬁcant mechanism is due to a number of causes including:
1. Spectrum is not really a fungible commodity. Different applications require different
spectrum characteristics, and limitations in equipment availability hinders use of
spectrum that has not been used elsewhere for the intended purpose.
2. High transaction costs and unpredictable delays.
3. The nature of traditional spectrum deployments.
Understanding these reasons for its limited impact, and addressing them in any future
regime, is important. Some works in the ﬁeld went so far as to describe spectrum
portfolio creation, as if spectrum access was a set of equities and contracts, optimal
pricing exercises, or open markets [6, 7, 8]. In these discussions, there is little treatment
of the impact of limited system frequency coverage, harmonized usage, and the impacts
to, and from, adjacent band users, among other very signiﬁcant considerations that are
often not present in the discussion.
In the 2000–2005 period, the US FCC did streamline regulations to make secondary
markets more effective and to lower the transaction cost and delay. It enabled immediate
processing of “certain qualifying” transactions, but these were generally limited to the
direct transfer of licenses, with no changes in the usage conditions, and did not support
the “repurposing” of spectrum that was envisioned by secondary market advocates. The
FCC also established rules for “private commons,” which would be a very open use of
spectrum under a secondary license. However, in the end, the lack of well-understood
rights, agreement on analytic methodology, and no-recourse decision mechanisms let
the issues that had risen in the past largely remain intact. More recently (2016),
Mexico’s regulator, the Federal Telecommunications Institute (IFT) has approved a set
of guidelines that would make secondary markets more effective. Mexico has had a
history of spectrum secondary market transactions.
The ﬁrst issue, the fact that spectrum is difﬁcult to treat as a commodity, is one of
the central issues in the lack of secondary market emergence. In some of the work
cited in the suggested reading section, the advocates of secondary markets envisioned
the application of the full range of ﬁnancial instruments, such as hedges, options, and
other derivative transactions that would be transacted in a transparent, open, and liquid
marketplace. This, of course, was dependent on the fungibility of spectrum, and other
factors that have, at the least, impeded the formation of these markets:
• Although the advocates of markets often used real estate as a model, spectrum also
inherits the “location, location, location” principle that drives market-based valuation
of real estate. Spectrum neighbors, like physical ones, have a signiﬁcant amount of
inﬂuence on the use of a band of frequencies. High power neighbors force any use
of the band to have higher cost, higher power consumption receivers. Similarly, if
the neighboring systems were designed on the assumption of low power occupants,
then an attempt to place a high power application into the band will meet resistance,
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core

2.7 Secondary Markets
31
litigation, and may fail, just as attempting to site a dump in a residential neighborhood
would. An example of this is the dispute in the USA between LightSquared and
the Global Positioning System (GPS) community. LightSquared made a secondary
market transaction with INMARSAT that would have placed high powered LTE
systems into the band where only weak satellite signals were present before. The GPS
community responded [9] by asserting GPS systems were not designed to tolerate
that much energy in an adjacent band, and that it would be highly disruptive to the
installed base of equipment. The high power deployment plan failed due to this very
strong opposition, but only after the expenditure of billions of US dollars.
• When the primary demand for spectrum was to ﬁeld networks of wide area coverage
base stations, there was a belief that lower (around 1 GHz) spectrum was the
“beachfront,” and spectrum value was reduced as the frequency was raised, similar
to a 1
f relationship. This assumption was reasonable for coverage networks, where
longer range propagation reduced the need for cellular towers. However, the use
of spectrum will become more heterogeneous. Interest in dense, capacity-focused
networks intended to address the high, and increasing, demand of nomadic users
is likely to increase. The value of spectrum is very much more contextual. Simple
models of wireless spectrum value break down when they do not reﬂect the coverage
versus capacity needs in each individual locale. This factor is likely to become
increasingly more signiﬁcant as mobile operators shift their investments between
capacity (lower frequencies) and coverage (higher frequencies) networks.
• For consumer-facing applications, the availability of high volume, low cost devices
is central to the utility of a band. Without an existing market for the band, there will
be extensive delays and signiﬁcantly increased costs for development of devices that
are unique to the band. This is a signiﬁcant disincentive to use of the spectrum that is
otherwise equivalent to bands populated with consumer equipment.
The second impediment is the high transaction cost, delay, and uncertainty in the
process of implementing secondary market transactions. This issue arises from a
number of causes:
• For all of the reasons raised in the previous paragraph, there is incentive and
opportunity for other users of the band, or adjacent bands, to raise interference
protection issues to block secondary transactions. This opportunity is particularly
likely due to the fact that existing band users and license holders have no clear
deﬁnition of what the parameters of their protection rights are, or are not. In some
cases, there are criteria for co-channel interference, but, with the exception of the
OFCOM Spectrum Usage Rights (SUR) [10] effort, no criteria for adjacent band
power levels is present in most licenses. These issues have been poorly addressed
in the regulatory process, resulting in uncertainty, delay, and cost. Any number of
positions can be argued to block secondary transactions.
• Often, secondary use is for a purpose other than that which the original license was
issued for. Therefore, changes in license terms inherently are a matter for regulator
decision-making and discretion, and it is likely to draw attempts to block the license
changes needed.
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

32
Prior Dynamic Spectrum-Sharing Regimes
Table 2.6 Comparison of three-tier spectrum regime alternative approaches.
Consideration
Unlicensed
DFS
TVWS
ASA/LSA
Secondary
Markets
1
Multiple
protected tiers
No
Just one
Just one
Yes
Possible
2
Lower tier
that can share
unused
spectrum
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
3
Lowest tier
with no
protection
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
4
Small units of
allocation
N/A
N/A
N/A
No
Possible
5
Automated
transactions
N/A
N/A
Yes
Partial
No
• The process of resolving the interference possibilities, and any license terms, creates
an opportunity for competitive considerations to be interjected into the process, with
alliances formed around the issues raised by parties blocking or supporting the
secondary market transaction.
Lastly, the nature of spectrum usage may be changing. The spectrum market has
been considered as dominated by carrier needs for spectrum for wide area coverage
networks, typiﬁed by the cellular base station and tower. Yet, the rate of growth in
wireless demand is largely indoors, driven by the need to support users who are nomadic
(rather than mobile). Additionally, the predicted massive uptake in machine to machine,
or IoT communications will add signiﬁcantly to the indoor bandwidth need. Meeting
this demand may require radical changes in how this bandwidth is deployed.
The traditional Distributed Antenna System (DAS), tied to carrier spectrum, has had
only a limited success in solving the indoor problem. Deployments by building owners,
enterprises, and tenants are the logical answer to this need, yet traditional secondary
market transactions are certainly not a practical model to enable alternative models for
this deployment on such a micro-scale.
2.8
Summary of Spectrum Sharing Concepts
This section summarizes some of the material in the previous sections. Table 2.6
depicts how the collective set of spectrum management concepts addresses the ﬁve core
principles from the three-tier spectrum model developed in Chapter 1.
These spectrum sharing efforts, in aggregate, had all of the attributes of a complete
three-tier spectrum management regime. Each of them targeted speciﬁc use cases, and
so only included the features essential for that one use case. But each of them also laid
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core

2.9 Suggested Reading
33
the groundwork for a more complete description of a sharing regime, which was band
agnostic. That is the PCAST proposal that is discussed in the next chapter.
2.9
Suggested Reading
• Martin Cave and William Webb have an excellent work [11] on modern spectrum
management that provides much of the detail that was not included in this book, and
the reader is referred to this work for information on both exclusive and non-exclusive
licensing.
• The Spectrum Policy Task Force (SPTF) report [12] was important in initiating a
rethink of spectrum policy in the USA.
• The full text of the PCAST report [13] is a highly useful reading, as much of the
detail of the proposal is beyond the scope of this book. Also, some topics, such as
urban testbeds, that were developed by PCAST, are not addressed in this book at all.
• The Presidential Memorandum [14] that followed the PCAST report was important
in providing the force of the administration support behind the sharing of Federal
spectrum, which was critical to providing a spectrum segment in which the PCAST
ideas could be implemented, as well as proving more spectrum sharing.
• The TVWS spectrum sharing was an important milestone. There are several services
that provide graphic displays of TVWS availability in a given location, including one
by Google that shows US availability at any speciﬁc area. Available at: www.google.
com/get/spectrumdatabase/channel/.
• A large amount of work has been done to provide a detailed design for the LSA/ASA
framework. These include the following ETSI documents:
– TSI TR 103 113 (V1.1.1,07/2013) – “System Reference Document for LSA:
Mobile broadband services in the 2,300 MHz–2,400 MHz frequency band under
Licensed Shared Access regime.”
– ETSI TS 103 154 (V0.0.9, Draft 01/2014) – “System requirements for operation
of Mobile Broadband Systems in the 2,300 MHz–2,400 MHz band under Licensed
Shared Access.”
– ETSI TS 103 235 (V0.0.1, Draft 01/2014) – “System architecture and high
level procedures for operation of Licensed Shared Access (LSA) in the
2,300 MHz–2,400 MHz band.”
• The Wi-Fi Alliance Best Practices document [2], previously mentioned, is a very good
discussion of the issues of implementing a “sense and avoid” regime with a number of
different incumbent user emission characteristics. The problem is even more complex
when a wide range of communications devices are included in the mix. These issues
were a strong inﬂuence on the PCAST analysis.
• There is a large volume of literature on the subject of secondary markets. Some of
the interesting work has been cited, and include Muthuswamy et al., describing the
mix of primary and secondary spectrum that would form a portfolio sufﬁcient to meet
certain demands [6]. Mutlu offers a discussion of the optimal spot pricing strategy
[7]. Jia develops concepts for auctions that optimize pricing and provide transparency
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core
www.ebook3000.com

34
Prior Dynamic Spectrum-Sharing Regimes
incentives [8]. All of these are interesting from the economics and system point of
view, but generally fail to reﬂect the practical issues of radio design, limited frequency
coverage of equipment and antennas, impact of adjacent users on the secondary users,
and impact of the secondary users on the adjacent users.
References
1 R. H. Coase, The Federal Communications Commission. The Journal of Law & Economics,
2 (1959), 1–40. www.jstor.org/stable/724927.
2 The Wi-Fi Alliance Spectrum and Regulatory Committee, Spectrum Sharing Task Group
Regulatory Task Group, Spectrum Sharing in the 5 GHz Band – DFS Best Practices, (2007).
www.ieee802.org/18/Meeting_documents/2007_Nov/WFA-DFS-Best-Practices.pdf.
3 FCC Ofﬁce of Engineering and Technology, Initial Evaluation of the Performance of
Prototype TV-Band White Space Devices, OET Report: FCC/OET 07-TR-1006 (2007).
4 ——, Evaluation of the Performance of Prototype TV-Band White Space Devices Phase II,
OET Report: FCC/OET 08-TR-1005 (2008).
5 European Telecommunications Standards Institute, Reconﬁgurable Radio Systems (RRS);
System Architecture and High Level Procedures for Operation of Licensed Shared Access
(LSA) in the 2,300 MHz–2,400 MHz Band. Technical report (2015).
6 P. K. Muthuswamy, K. Kar, A. Gupta, S. Sarkar, and G. Kasbekar, Portfolio optimization in
secondary spectrum markets. 2011 International Symposium on Modeling and Optimization
in Mobile, Ad Hoc and Wireless Networks (WiOpt) (2011), 249–256.
7 H. Mutlu, M. Alanyali, and D. Starobinski, Spot pricing of secondary spectrum access in
wireless cellular networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 17/6 (2009), 1794–1804.
doi: 10.1109/TNET.2009.2019959.
8 J. Jia, Q. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and M. Liu, Revenue generation for truthful spectrum auction
in dynamic spectrum access. Proceedings of the Tenth ACM International Symposium on
Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing (2009), 3–12. doi: 10.1145/1530748.1530751.
9 National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Systems Engineering Forum
(NPEF), Assessment of LightSquared Terrestrial Broadband System Effects on GPS Receivers
and
GPS-dependent
Applications
(2011).
www.gps.gov/spectrum/lightsquared/docs/
2011-06-NPEF-lightsquared-report.pdf.
10 Ofﬁce of Communications (Ofcom) (UK), Spectrum Usage Rights; Technology and Usage
Neutral Access to the Radio Spectrum. Consultation (2006).
11 M. Cave and W. Webb, Spectrum Management Using the Airwaves for Maximum Social and
Economic Beneﬁt (Cambridge University Press, 2016).
12 Federal Communications Commission, Spectrum Policy Task Force Report, ET Docket No.
02-135 (2002). http://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-228542A1.pdf.
13 President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, Report to the President:
Realizing the Full Potential of Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth
(Executive Ofﬁce of the President (EOP), Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP),
2012). http://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/microsites/ostp/pcast-stem-ed-
ﬁnal.pdf.
14 President of the United States, Expanding America’s Leadership in Wireless Innovation; Mem-
orandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies. Presidential memorandum
(2013).
terms of use, 
.003
19:07:44, subject to the Cambridge Core

Part II
Three-Tier Dynamic
Spectrum Models
15:59:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

15:59:55, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

3
Key Aspects of PCAST
Recommendations
3.1
Movement Towards Flexible, Dynamic Spectrum Policies
The United States (US) President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
(PCAST) is a US policy advisory board that directly advises the President and his
Executive Ofﬁce, with recommendations in science, technology and innovation. It
comprises leading scientists and engineers, and performs a number of studies each year
in a variety of topics selected by the committee. In 2011–2012, PCAST performed
a study on Federal spectrum policy and innovation, which was released in July,
2012 [1]. This report provided a broad framework for managing shared spectrum,
as well as speciﬁc recommendations for immediate policy initiatives to implement
its recommendations in Federal-controlled spectrum. The broad framework was a
fundamental departure from many of the approaches that had dominated spectrum
policy.
The PCAST report did not spring up arbitrarily, or suddenly. It was the product
of several prior evolutions of spectrum policy thinking in the United States of
America (USA), and worldwide. Some of the prior efforts that set the stage for the
development and acceptance of the PCAST recommendations include those shown in
Table 3.1. There will likely be further extensions and enhancements to the PCAST
three-tier model that will emerge, but it is an important starting point, and worth close
examination.
This book utilizes much of the PCAST report as a baseline for the three-tier concept.
However, the PCAST report is far from perfect. In part, the report is a political
document, formed through compromise and consensus-building; reﬂecting not only
technical realities, but political, and economic ones as well. Therefore, this concept of
three-tier in this book is heavily inﬂuenced by PCAST, but is not identical. It reﬂects a
further four years of industrial development, regulatory litigation, and the participation
of innumerably more insights, perspectives, and points of view, than were reﬂected in
the initial report.
3.2
PCAST Findings and Recommendations
A summary of signiﬁcant ﬁndings of the PCAST report [1] are included in a single
table in the report. This table outlines seven ﬁnding areas, and their associated
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

38
Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations
Table 3.1 Signiﬁcant prior spectrum management concept efforts.
Effort
Signiﬁcance
DARPA XG
Program
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Next
Generation Communications Program (XG) program [2, 3, 4]
produced signiﬁcant research focus on Dynamic Spectrum
Access (DSA), including performing some public demonstrations
of interference-free spectrum sharing. The XG program also
socialized spectrum sharing within the Department of
Defense (DoD) and had outreach to the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC). Much of the initial interest in the IEEE
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks Conference (DYSPAN) was
from individuals involved in this program.a
FCC Spectrum
Policy Task Force
The US FCC established the Spectrum Policy Task Force (SPTF)
[5] after the FCC Chairman received a brieﬁng from DARPA on the
plans for the XG program, and hired the DARPA Program Manager
to lead it. It proposed a number of changes to make the spectrum
management process more ﬂexible, and set the stage for
consideration of ideas, such as those of PCAST. It made a
fundamental argument against the “command and control”
approach of current spectrum management, in which the
Government regulators decide the best use of spectrum.
IEEE DYSPAN
Conference
The IEEE DYSPAN conference was central to expanding the
shared spectrum community within, and beyond, the initial DARPA
and National Science Foundation (NSF) communities, and reached
out to industry, economics, legal, and policy communities, and
broadened to include the participation of European researchers,
particularly those performing research under the European
Union (EU) Framework program sponsorship. Unique among IEEE
conferences, it included a policy track focused on the economic,
policy, and legal issues and opportunities. By the time PCAST
proposed its concepts, many of them had been extensively
discussed and vetted in this interdisciplinary venue. There is an
extensive set of writings on policy, economic and technical issues
in the proceedings of this ongoing conference series.
UK OFCOM
Usage Rights
The United Kingdom (UK) Ofﬁce of Communications (OFCOM)
developed the concept of Spectrum Usage Rights (SUR) [6] to
describe the rights of emitters and receivers, and worse-case
conditions that a receiver may be faced with. The intent of this was
to provide guidance to receiver designers about the future
environment that their systems would face, and provide the
ﬂexibility to place new applications in the spectrum without claims
of harmful impact from receiver owners who had designed to the
previous conditions only. Although it was difﬁcult to place these
principles into existing licenses, it was a framework that was
reﬂected in the PCAST developed concept. Spectrum rights
appeared to be a reasonable compromise to address receiver
assumptions without regulatory imposition of receiver standards.
a In full disclosure, the author was the Program Manager at DARPA for the XG program.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

3.2 PCAST Findings and Recommendations
39
recommendations. Some are speciﬁc to the US spectrum management and policies, but
most are inherently technical, and not nationally speciﬁc. These ﬁndings of the PCAST
report are summarized (abridged) in Table 3.2. Although these ﬁndings were focused
on US economic considerations, they are likely similar to many developed economies.
The writing is typical of a government report, and sometimes seems to hide the
implication, or the true rationale of the point the recommendation is making. Some
observations of the implications of the recommendations follow. The recommendations
that are speciﬁc to US spectrum management policy for Federal and civil users, and will
not be discussed further, as they are unique to the US regulation.
1.1 Spectrum policy should not be focused exclusively on technical aspects, but should
also reﬂect the necessity for nations to provide their industry with an opportunity to
create the technologic leadership that is essential to create new industries. An overly
narrow focus on incumbent interests may become a barrier to the introduction of
new and disruptive technologies. Spectrum policy must be more broadly integrated
with the aspirational aspects of the society and economy.
1.2 The charter of this study was limited to Federal spectrum. However, the funda-
mental observation, that clearing spectrum for exclusive use was an unsustainable
process, was equally applicable to non-Federal spectrum, just as to Federal.
2.2 Lower power, indoor, low height capacity networks will be the major tool to address
the rapidly expanding need for wireless capacity. The traditional approaches to
spectrum management have had a focus on considering the worst case conditions
when high power, high elevation base stations are a candidate for deployment.
Policies that have been effective in managing spectrum for exclusively licensed
Wide Area Network (WAN) applications may not be appropriate to the emerging
need for local capacity networks.
3.1 At the time of the execution of the PCAST study, the USA had been through
signiﬁcant conﬂict over receiver coexistence issues between cellular and public
safety [7], and was in the midst of a conﬂict between a proposed cellular
deployment and Global Positioning System (GPS) users [8]. These had reached
the level of Congressional involvement, and had presented cost implications in the
billions of US dollars. With low cost consumer devices dominating the ecosystem,
receiver protection and performance considerations needed to be more prominent
in the spectrum processes. An explicit understanding of the electromagnetic
environmental conditions under which a device must be capable of operating in
is key to ﬂexibility in spectrum management and policy.
3.3 The report praised the value of international harmonization of spectrum policies,
but did not urge harmonization of bands due to the national differences and the
ﬂexibility of modern wireless technology. Common policies were viewed as more
important than common frequencies.
5.1 Lack of incentives for spectrum sharing by Federal users could apply to most civil
incumbents, as well. Lack of monetization of spectrum efﬁciency and sharing has
resulted in no incentives for government or civil users in many bands to make best
use of allocated or assigned spectrum.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

40
Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations
Table 3.2 Summary of PCAST report policy ﬁndings (Paraphrased).
Topic
Finding
From Scarcity
to Abundance
1.1 Spectrum provides great economic opportunity for the nation, and is
a foundation for American economic and technologic leadership.
1.2 Clearing and reallocation of Federal spectrum is not a sustainable
basis for spectrum policy.
1.3 The fragmented partitioning of Federal spectrum responsibility has
led to inefﬁciency, artiﬁcial scarcity, and the usage of the spectrum by
both Federal and non-Federal spectrum users.
Policy Hurdles
to Clear
2.1 Sharing of Federal spectrum provides an opportunity to deploy a
wholly new approach to Federal spectrum architecture and policy.
2.2 Wireless architectures have evolved from a single model of
high-power, high-elevation base stations, to a mix of capacities with a
mix of power, altitude and positioning. Different usage implies
different spectrum policies.
Technology
Advances and
Challenges
3.1 Spectrum management and regulation is focused on the
characteristics of transmission, whereas receiver characteristics
increasingly constrain usage.
New
Application
Economy
4.1 Moving to a dynamic sharing model of Federal spectrum would
unlock economic beneﬁts by allowing the private sector to make
intensive use of underutilized parts of the radio spectrum.
4.2 Sharing of Federal spectrum provides an opportunity to deploy new
spectrum management principles. The Federal Government is more
likely to consider the “public good” than spectrum incumbents with
no national mission.
Starting with
Federal
Spectrum
5.1 There is no incentive system today for agencies to be efﬁcient in their
use of spectrum, or to share spectrum. Incumbents have no “upside”
from sharing spectrum.
5.2 A Public Private Partnership (PPP) is the best mechanism to ensure
optimal use of Federal spectrum and research investments. Such a
framework could provide Federal agencies with incentives for more
spectrum sharing.
5.3 International harmonization of spectrum policies is essential to
product innovation, interoperability and roaming, spectrum efﬁciency,
and cross-border coordination.
Implementation
6.1 Insufﬁcient opportunity is available to test the new architectures,
policies, and the new systems proposed in this report. More
incremental methods of providing spectrum are essential to
innovation.
Immediate
Selective GAA
Sharing
7.1 Expansion of the white space system to include certain space to
ground and radar-based Federal bands could allow immediate
General Authorized Access (GAA) device usage while other
recommendations are being enabled.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

3.3 Analysis of PCAST Recommendations
41
Federal
Incumbents
Protected
Access
General
Authorized
Access
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Unprotected, but
deconflicted from
uppertiers
Federal Users, Priority
managed by Federal
Processes
Purchased at
nanoauctions, based on
user specified protection
Figure 3.1 PCAST deﬁned general tiers.
7.1 There are some very immediate opportunities to pursue spectrum sharing that
require a minimum of regulatory action, or disruption to incumbents. These could
be pursued prior to the full recommended regime being in place. In the USA, this
led to FCC action to provide three-tier sharing of the 3.55–3.7 GHz band, and to
auction sharing rights to the 1755 MHz Advanced Wireless Services (AWS) band.
Beneath these broad, high level, policy recommendations were a number of technical
recommendations, implicit and explicit in the management regime it advocated. Some
of the major technical recommendations are shown in Table 3.3. Several of these form
the basis of the proposed three-tier spectrum sharing regime.
The auction concept of PCAST is almost diametrically opposed to the traditional
values in spectrum auctions. The PCAST argument was that spectrum policy should
attempt to make spectrum abundant and accessible for use by the wireless and sensing
community. Successful policies should result in a low cost for spectrum rights, not a
high one. Wireless innovation was of more economic advantage to a nation than a one
time windfall of funds that tied up spectrum and limited innovation for decades to come.
This is in contrast to the view that a “successful” auction was one which raised very high
bids and payments. In reality, spectrum payments are just an indirect tax on the users of
the services that pay the costs, and divert capital from investing in the infrastructure of
wireless services.
3.3
Analysis of PCAST Recommendations
PCAST proposed a three-tier structure, as shown in Figure 3.1. The PCAST report was
written to apply primarily to Federal bands so it did not address speciﬁc incumbents
in the incumbent tier. The underpinnings of the PCAST approach was an automated
admission control system, referred to as the SAS that would manage and isolate the
multiple tiers proposed in the recommendations.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

42
Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations
Table 3.3 Summary of PCAST report engineering-level recommendations.
Topic
Technical Recommendation
Protection Criteria
at the Aggregate
Interference Level
Typically, interference has been considered as a one-on-one issue.
Therefore, the power of a potential interferer had to be reduced by the
worst case density. Instead, PCAST recommended that the protection
should be established based on the aggregate interference, and the
admission control process should continuously increment the
interference conditions at each protected node, and use admission
control of new nodes to assure protection. This could enable more
power to be used by sharing nodes, and still assure incumbent
protection to any suitable criteria.
Spectrum Access
System (SAS)
Admission Control
System
Previous spectrum management had generally established ﬁxed
criteria for entry into the spectrum. PCAST recommended a dynamic
system that was stageful. Each time a device entered or left the
spectrum it would implicitly adjust the entry criteria for a new node
entering. This enables the Spectrum Access System (SAS) to offer
aggregate interference protection, transition from ﬁxed geographic
protection to dynamic device protection, and to interact with devices
to enable devices to adjust their operations to the speciﬁc location and
spectrum that they desired to operate in.
SAS-Dynamic
Market for
Spectrum Rights
Traditionally, spectrum rights are obtained in a long term process, and
are retained for a long period of time, as well. PCAST proposed that
these rights be acquired dynamically, on demand, through
“nano-auctions” (the author’s term) that would compete against other
users of the band when one device wished to acquire rights that would
be competitive with other users at that location. This process would be
triggered only by mutually exclusive demands for spectrum.
User Provided
Protection Criteria
Traditional spectrum protection is provided to levels established in
regulation. These generally stress controls on emissions, but provide
little insight into what receiver protection will be provided in the
future. PCAST proposed that requests for protection could cite
arbitrary (although realistic) protection and emission requirements.
These would include the out-of-band energy limits to be faced by the
receiver, co-channel noise, and the classic emission rights. Requesting
more than essential rights would raise the deconﬂiction distance, and
likely raise cost. This was believed to have several effects: (1) clarify
and explicitly state the environment that the receiver must tolerate;
similar in concept to the OFCOM SUR proposal [6]. (2) It would
reward technologies that were capable of increased coexistence, and
(3) it would enable market forces to create the balance between
increased device performance and the demands of speciﬁc services, in
speciﬁc locations.
The upper tier is occupied by the incumbent Federal users, whose priorities within
the tier are established through the existing Federal processes. These systems would
have no interaction with the admission control system used in the lower tier, with
the exception of possibly reporting activity status to the system. To be acceptable to
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

3.3 Analysis of PCAST Recommendations
43
most incumbents, a sharing regime must have no, or negligible, procedural impact
on the existing primary users, and no impact on the incumbent system design or
performance.
Admission to the shared tiers was to be provided by a control system, referred to as
the SAS. The middle tier, Priority Access (PA), was a protected, non-exclusive, access
layer. These licensees would offer the right to be protected from interference from the
lowest tier. The lowest tier is referred to as GAA. It is an authorized access, as compared
to unlicensed or license-exempt, since every entry into the band had to be explicitly
authorized by the SAS.
By contrast, an unlicensed device has the right to operate so long as it complies with
the rules. In the framework proposed by PCAST, devices had no such right (regardless
of whether they were second or third tier), and only had the right to emit if they were
explicitly granted and maintained the approval from an admission control system. In
terms of US regulation, it was considered “Licensed by Rule.”
The proposed PCAST mechanism for acquiring PA status was not adopted by the
FCC, but was interesting, and very ﬂexible. Some of its attributes include:
1. Auctions were continuous, and were triggered based on mutually exclusive requests
for rights. Devices or networks would request to acquire spectrum rights, and bid
against any other users whose protection requests would conﬂict with theirs.1 This
framework resembled the structure of Internet advertising, where extremely rapid
auctions determine the placement of advertisements in search results, or placement
on web pages.
2. Protection criteria and emission characteristics were speciﬁed by the user, rather than
by regulators. Requests for excessive power or receiver protection would cause more
conﬂicts with other users, and likely raise the cost of acquiring protection. The level
of the requested protection in these requests would be left to market forces to balance.
3. Receiver characteristics, such as adjacent band and channel protection requirements,
were included in the request for protection. Rather than impose receiver standards,
poor receivers would conﬂict with potential users over a greater area, and again,
raise the likely cost of obtaining protection of poorly performing devices. This would
continually incentivize improvements in receiver performance through market forces,
rather than static, regulatory decision-making.
A prime objective of deferring protection speciﬁcation to the device was to enable
market forces to balance the many considerations of device cost, spectrum cost, service
level, and other system and economic factors. PCAST rejected the concept that a single
standard across large geographic areas of uneven demand, and in bands of varying
interest, could be effective in best utilizing spectrum. Instead, it proposed that the
use of the band should be dynamic, based on unique local conditions, which would
drive cost, technical requirements and deployment. The band usage would tend to
an equilibrium state; balancing the spectrum cost, driven by its scarcity, equipment
1 A maximum percentage of the spectrum could be acquired with PA status, so a minimum amount of
spectrum was maintained as freely available to ensure the ability of GAA users to enter the band.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

44
Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations
cost, driven by its performance, and user demand for services. Instead of ﬁxed criteria,
these considerations would be adjusted as technology and demand dictated, and reach
different solutions in different locations. Essentially, the band would be self-managing.
Another key principle was to avoid any of the negative incentives or behaviors in
auctions that are perceived to be contrary to the interests of wireless users. The implicit
incentives for these behaviors were viewed as a weakness of the auction process. The
PCAST focus was to deﬁne policies that would have result in spectrum being made
available for the maximum use, and thereby create wireless capacity. As an example of
this PCAST concept, PA holders received no right to exclude other users and leave
spectrum unused. They only have the right to be protected from interference from
lower-tier users when they were actually deployed in the spectrum.
We can consider that a traditional exclusive use license provides two rights:
1. The right to be protected from interference.
2. The right to exclude other users from the band, regardless of whether it would cause
interference to the license holder.
The PCAST approach essentially split these rights. A PA holder only had the right
to be protected when a node was deployed. If they do not deploy in regions where they
have PA rights, that spectrum is essentially treated as GAA. This effectively precluded
spectrum warehousing or competitive preclusion. Anyone can purchase rights, but no
one can block the use of the spectrum through purchases of licenses. In fact, this split
was the intent of spectrum regulation from its onset, after the sinking of the ship RMS
Titanic.2 It was to ensure communications, not monopolies. The PCAST approach
merely returned to these basic intentions, based on the use of modern technology to
enable protection without exclusion.
Another issue in spectrum rights has been the duration of exclusive use licenses. The
original theory of auction proposed by Ronald Coase [9] was that competitive auctions
would result in spectrum being dedicated to the “highest and best use.” Regardless of
whether this premise (that winners of the auction had the highest and best use for the
spectrum) is true initially following an auction, after decades of spectrum renewals,3 it
is likely that new applications, services, and providers would emerge if the rights had to
continue to compete with newly emerging ones.
Yet, with the presumption of renewal, the spectrum assignments would be static after
this initial auction. Instead, PCAST proposed that the nano-auctions it contemplated
provide rights, or licenses for a very limited time duration, with no expectation of
renewal. The spectrum environment would be continuously competitive. The spectrum
rights granted would be long enough for capital recovery of reasonable investment, but
not a long-term assurance of a line of business, or protection from new entrants.
A last point is that the objective of the report was to consider how spectrum policy
could enable economic activity. In the context of this report, innovation was the key
2 International spectrum management was initiated after radio frequency interference was blamed for the
lack of rescue ships after the emergency radio alerts were sent from RMS Titanic.
3 It should be noted that most auctions carry a ﬁxed term, but have a “presumption of renewal,” that
effectively makes these licenses essentially perpetual.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

3.4 Addressing Spectrum-sharing Issues With PCAST Proposals
45
to this economic growth. The mix of GAA and PA would provide the ability for new
ventures to enter the spectrum incrementally, in a scalable growth path. For example,
if exclusive use spectrum acquired at auction was the only way to experiment with, or
deploy a new service, then no venture-funded startup could even consider it. Even if they
bought a sliver of spectrum in one region, they would face an almost insurmountable
task in expanding rapidly enough to justify the venture. These attributes might be
considered to be the elements of a “venture-friendly” spectrum policy.
The PA and GAA structure enables systems to be deployed with no spectrum
investment, or a much smaller investment to “rent” spectrum rights. If the venture works,
the same strategy can expand to more spectrum and more locations incrementally. If the
venture did not work, no capital had been tied up in spectrum rights that were not useful,
and illiquid.
It is easy to envision entrepreneurs starting a pilot project in GAA in one city, perhaps
expanding to PA after some success, and then making a decision to launch nationally, in
advance of actually obtaining the spectrum. That is not imaginable, or even possible, in
the exclusive auction market. Spectrum that is identiﬁed for clearing takes an average
of 8.4 years before it is fully usable.4 Add the time between auctions, and there is no
reasonable way to think of the current process as providing a pipeline of spectrum for
innovators.
Additionally, the only transaction possible is a perpetual purchase5 (at a cost of
billions of dollars) of a right that may or may not be needed in the future. It is the
equivalent of asking a startup enterprise to ﬁrst pay for a building, build the building,
and wait for completion before a business could be started. With these timelines, costs,
and uncertain future availability, anything requiring spectrum is essentially not able to
avail itself of the venture ecosystem that was so inﬂuential in building the Internet, and
its wide range of services.
There is a tendency by governments to consider spectrum auctions as a policy success,
or not, by the revenue raised. The opposite is true. The fact that an auction raises massive
capital is not indicative of a good spectrum policy. Instead, the policy has created a
(likely artiﬁcial) scarcity of spectrum. The capital provided in the auction will not be
available to deploy the infrastructure. The high cost of the spectrum will force the
use of higher cost technology in the infrastructure, to minimize spectrum costs. High
spectrum costs imply poor performance, or a perception of future performance, by the
governments in meeting the spectrum needs of the industries that require it.
3.4
Ability of PCAST Proposals to Address Spectrum
Sharing Issues
Chapter 1, Section 1.5 introduced a number of issues that spectrum sharing regimes
must address in order to be effective in creating disruptive change in how spectrum is
4 Based on a Table from the National Broadband Plan [10].
5 Although not legally a perpetual right, the implicit guarantee is that there is a right of renewal. This is
consistent with the view that spectrum is a property right, not a rental.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

46
Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations
managed. The discussion below characterizes how the PCAST approach addresses these
concerns raised in Chapter 1.
Revenue The auction of rights to operate in the protected second tier PA provides a
source of ongoing revenue. This revenue stream would be a periodic one, rather than
a one-time sale, but the present value of this, essentially inﬁnite, revenue stream
may be quite high. This present value may be comparable to the capital raised in the
massive auctions of the past.
Interference Assurance The second tier assures that half of the spectrum is available
on terms that are very similar to conventional exclusively licensed spectrum. There
is the possibility of the primary tier reclaiming their spectrum rights, but the
interference from other users is a condition that can be avoided, at a cost.
Localization Localization is certainly one of the virtues of the PCAST proposal. It
enables each location to have a unique cost of spectrum, technical requirements
(interference protection) and usage. In areas of low spectrum demand, technical
solutions might balance in favor of lower cost, but less efﬁcient spectrum utilization
solutions, while in dense urban areas, the demand for spectrum would price it such
that high cost, high efﬁciency technical solutions would be the most cost effective
solution.
Transaction Costs Once the framework is established, and agreements on determining
interference are speciﬁed, the system operates, allocates spectrum, executes auctions,
and manages protection rights automatically through the automated admission
control process. No human intervention or decision making is required to manage
the spectrum. Also, the transaction delay and uncertainty are essentially eliminated.
This requires that all stakeholders accept (or be compelled to accept, by regulation)
a set of rules that determine if interference could, or could not, occur with a given
situation.
Incumbent Protection Incumbents are protected in several ways. First, an explicit
admission control assures that only authorized and “white listed” devices can enter
the band. Second, if for any reason the incumbent does believe it is receiving
interference, the secondary devices are known, and can have their operation
immediately amended or terminated. Third, the protection criteria are speciﬁed at the
aggregate interference level, not solely the impact of individual emitters. Therefore,
there is no risk of higher than planned densities causing aggregate interference to a
higher-tier user, as the admission control process would block additional users from
using a frequency when aggregate total power at any protected node would exceed
the protection criteria.
Vague Rights Rights and expectations in all three tiers are so explicit that they can
be expressed in computer code, and certiﬁed. This is an extreme demonstration
of a well understood, and complete, deﬁnition of rights. The emission character-
istics, including the full range of emissions, are speciﬁed in the transmit rights
provided to the admission control system. Protection of receiver operation is
explicitly provided to protected tier users, providing a worse case co-channel noise
level.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

3.5 Incumbent Interests in Spectrum Sharing
47
3.5
Incumbent Interests in Considering Spectrum Sharing
It is a fair question as to whether any incumbent user, or user group, would be interested
in, or willing, to share its exclusive spectrum with lower-tier users. Three reasons stand
out:
1. There are no beneﬁts to the incumbent.
2. There is the risk of some failure of the protection mechanism, or of the devices in
the band, that could result in interference to the incumbent’s operation. Despite the
sharing technology, some risk of interference will always remain, due to any number
of possible conditions or failures.
3. If the technology or service that is sharing the spectrum became highly popular,
or became societally or culturally essential or critical, there would be pressure to
displace the original incumbent in order to free up spectrum for use by the more
popular service, or, at the least, place limits on the ability of the incumbent to change
characteristics or add new deployments that would displace the secondary user. At
best, the incumbent would loose the ﬂexibility they previously had to ﬂexibly use the
spectrum.
Spectrum managers in the USA refer to the third concern as the “Garage Door
Openers” problem. When the DoD deployed Land Mobile Radio (LMR) trunking
systems on military bases in Federal spectrum, it blocked, or directly interfered with,
a number of nearby unlicensed devices, such as garage door openers [11]. Although
those users legally had no rights, and were both required to accept interference from,
and to not cause interference to, the primary users, the issues with garage door openers
created signiﬁcant public pressure to halt the DoD deployment of these systems.
In the end, DoD lost no spectrum or spectrum access. The DoD systems were
deployed as planned, and the manufacturers and users of the unlicensed equipment were
forced to upgrade or replace their equipment. Despite the policy success on the part of
the DoD in protecting its rights, the issue left behind a concern that sharing spectrum
would eventually result in the primary user being displaced from that spectrum, due to
political pressure by popular secondary services, despite the formal rights of the Federal
users.
It was therefore a surprise to many that the DoD supported the recommendation to
share its spectrum. Certainly, some of this support could be attributed to the political
leadership of the administration; which supported the concept of spectrum sharing to
enhance wireless broadband availability. However, a strong DoD rejection of sharing
would have likely overcome any political desire for a different position by DoD.
Instead, it is reasonable to assume that the DoD support of the PCAST position
reﬂected a new and much more evolved spectrum incumbent strategy. In past spectrum
sharing conﬂicts, incumbents had looked at sharing as the “nose of the camel under the
tent,” and to be avoided at all costs. In the PCAST case, DoD may well have viewed
sharing spectrum as a method to acquire support for its continued control over the
spectrum because popular secondary usage would deter any attempted reallocation.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

48
Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations
This concept may appear counter-intuitive, but it is not contradictory. Spectrum
holders also fear that the spectrum will be reallocated or reassigned from their control
and use. Governments have learned that reallocating spectrum can create massive
revenue inﬂows through auctions and leases. Other spectrum “needers” will try to
get leverage to move out existing incumbents. Continued control of spectrum that is
underused, or used in ways that have little public visibility and support, is therefore
vulnerable to attack, despite the immediate regulatory protections.
Having other users share your spectrum creates support to the current status quo for
several reasons:
1. The services sharing the spectrum have an incentive to support the status quo, and
add their inﬂuence to that of the incumbents to resist any changes in allocation that
would also cause their loss of access.
2. To some shared spectrum users, the right to use the spectrum under a shared
arrangement, without the necessity to go to an exclusive perpetual-rights auction may
be very attractive; more so than having it cleared for their use, but being auctioned
with exclusive licensing.
3. It eliminates the argument that the spectrum is underutilized, and undermines the
case that the band is providing minimal societal value.
Sharing spectrum may be unattractive to spectrum holders, but it is massively more
attractive than losing the spectrum!
3.6
Criticism of PCAST Recommendations
It would be reasonable to assume that the PCAST concepts were immediately
recognized as highly desirable new approaches to spectrum management. However, the
PCAST report was met with (what seemed to be) almost universal criticism, primarily
from the wireless operators and suppliers.
There were many objections to the concepts in the PCAST report raised. Some of the
major objections included:
1. Exclusive licensed spectrum has been a highly useful tool for wireless, and has been
successful in supporting rapid wireless deployments worldwide. The PCAST report
presents an alternative to the spectrum clearing and relocation that was required for
exclusive use auctions. This is both risky and unnecessary. It diverts attention from
clearing spectrum for future auctions.
2. Without exclusive use of the spectrum, the control systems that have made modern
wireless systems so effective could not operate with the same effectiveness.
3. Without assured exclusive access, no carrier or operator will invest in systems in
shared spectrum. The PCAST approach would therefore not create any societal ben-
eﬁts through more wireless deployment, and the spectrum will remain underutilized.
The spectrum should instead be cleared and provided for exclusive use.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

3.6 Criticism of PCAST Recommendations
49
4. Europe is moving to Authorized Shared Access (ASA)/Licensed Shared Access
(LSA). This will be the standard for the wireless industry in Europe. Therefore, the
USA should adopt this as its model, if it determines Federal spectrum can be shared
with wireless services, but cannot be cleared. This would create a two-tier system,
with no open access to unused spectrum.
5. Developing and operating the control system (SAS) would be too complex for
realistic implementation and use. It will need to handle millions of devices in the
band, the adjacent bands, and all of the interactions between them.
All of these concerns have a degree of validity, with the possible exception of the last
one. Addressing them in the same order:
1. There has certainly been great success with exclusively-licensed spectrum. It is too
early to know for certain whether three-tier creates more opportunity than exclusive
spectrum. However, the PCAST report only addressed spectrum that was not a good
candidate for clearing and auctioning. This argument is likely against an issue that
had not yet arrived. It may have to be addressed when a situation arises where
spectrum suitable for exclusive licensing becomes available, and it is proposed to
instead manage it through a multi-tier framework. In effect, this is an argument
between efﬁcient, but homogeneous usage, and the more diverse, heterogeneous
usage models envisioned by PCAST.6
2. Long-Term Evolution (LTE) operation in any congested spectrum is certainly an
issue. Unlike Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi), LTE management assumes clear channels.
However, the report provided for a protected tier that would operate with protection
equivalent to exclusive spectrum, and thus should operate similarly to any other
LTE system. For GAA users who choose not to acquire protection, the overall
effectiveness would be optimized by creating coexistence between LTE systems in
the unprotected tier. Yet, this condition could only occur after all of the channels
in any given location were fully occupied, which would imply a signiﬁcant level
of success. To some extent, this argument is internally inconsistent, in that it both
argues no one will use the band, and, at the same time, argues there will be so much
use that it will have unacceptable interference. Additionally, many variants of LTE
are being proposed for operation in the unlicensed bands, such as MulteFire, LTE-U,
and LAA. The target spectrum for these technologies is more congested than the
PCAST spectrum was likely to be.
3. While it is true that LTE investment is all in exclusive, assured spectrum, Mobile
Network Operators (MNO), Mobile System Operator (MSO), enterprises and other
users have invested billions in Wi-Fi deployments. Wi-Fi operates in the most
congested spectrum that exists. Looking ahead in the story of the ﬁrst three-tier band
(3.5 GHz), there is no indication that there is any lack of investment interest, although
this could not have been foretold when the PCAST report was released.7
6 This situation does arise in Fifth-Generation Wireless Systems (5G), where there are few limitations from
incumbent use, but the use of the three-tier framework will be proposed later in Chapter 17.
7 In fact, many of the organizations that stated that no one would invest in the band have now expressed
concern that the band would become too crowded, and that coexistence agreements need to be
accelerated.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

50
Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations
4. It is certainly correct that Europe is working to develop ASA/LSA. However,
ASA/LSA does not address some of the other PCAST objectives, which include
opening up bands for innovation, rather than simply supplying more spectrum
to be used in the same manner as existing carrier spectrum. ASA/LSA is an
agreement between a single primary, and a single secondary. Nor does it provide
an opportunistic layer to assure full opportunity to use all of the available spectrum.
It implies one, or at most, several, secondary users over a large geographic area. For
spectrum that is suited to indoor use, a single controlling entity for the secondary
spectrum is not a level of allocation that is appropriate in dense, three-dimensional
urban environments, where many organizations could have control over placement
of small devices, and operation of the many networks, and where clutter losses
dominate interference considerations. The PCAST approach includes a solution to
the issue that LSA addresses (sharing spectrum with a single secondary), LSA does
not address the problem PCAST was addressing, which is to make all spectrum
sharable and usable.
5. The argument that this regime is too complex to implement is hard to understand
in this day of large-scale cloud computing. The computer analysis algorithms
required8 to implement the protection schemes are the same ones used for decades in
addressing FCC and Federal, as well as spectrum issues; they are just implemented
on a much larger scale, rather than one-on-one.
3.7
Consensus Formation Through PCAST
The issues raised by the wireless industry opposing the PCAST recommendations were
perceived to be so signiﬁcant that the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee
on Communications and Technology held a hearing “Creating Opportunities through
Improved Government Spectrum Efﬁciency” on September 13, 2012 [12].
Figure 3.2 shows the author testifying at this hearing. Although the staff summary
before the hearing was not supportive of the ideas in the PCAST report, the Congress
took no action to block the FCC from proceeding with implementing any portion of the
report.
The PCAST report came out only shortly before the FCC announcement that it
intended to move ahead on implementing many of the PCAST report recommendations.
Therefore, much of the public discussion regarding these principles was effectively
moved to the more formal FCC proceeding, and the precise mechanisms the FCC
proposed, rather than the general principles outlined by PCAST. One advantage of this
process is that this created an informative, formal public record of the dialog on all sides
of the issue.
Perhaps this shift in emphasis had an unfortunate aspect, as discussion moved to the
speciﬁc proposals of the FCC, rather than the general principles in the PCAST report.
Instead, consensus would be formed through the several-year-long process in resolving
8 In fact, the models proposed by PCAST were drawn from past FCC proceedings, in which similar
analysis was present in the record.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

3.8 Capacity Versus Coverage, and the Small Cell Model
51
Figure 3.2 The author at the house hearing.
the details of the FCC regulations for a single band, and in moving forward to develop
industry methods to exploit the new rules. However, debate on the broad principles
largely ended, and will likely be taken up outside of the USA, as other administrations
consider the framework. Interestingly, within two years a very signiﬁcant supporting
consensus had formed, including even the most ardent critics of the PCAST report.
3.8
A Note on Capacity Versus Coverage Networks, and the
Small Cell Model
One basis for the PCAST report was a fundamental belief that the necessary expansion
in wireless capacity would come about through the implementation of small, localized,
and very dense access points, rather than expansion of the traditional, wide coverage
macro networks. Traditional macro cell deployments provided coverage, but their
service was shared among a large number of users. Emerging localized capacity
networks, however, were highly limited in their coverage, but provided almost identical
bandwidth services to a much smaller area, therefore providing a much smaller number
of users with greatly increased share of the bandwidth resource.
The PCAST report provided an analytic appendix, based on the author’s capacity
model included in a book that was then being released by the author [13]. This model
argued that the measure of spectrum efﬁciency should consider the user bandwidth
density that is created by a policy, not the peak bandwidth of a single cell. Small cells
that could be spaced ten times closer than traditional macro cells, but provided only
half the user bandwidth of the macro cell, still would provide ﬁfty times the aggregate
bandwidth per area (0.5 times 102).
However, massive increases in small cell deployment would require a different
ecosystem than traditional mobile operator owned and operated macro towers. Small
cells would be located in buildings, enterprises, residences, and public venues that a
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

52
Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations
single carrier could not dominate, or anticipate achieving access to, all of the necessary
sites. A dense deployment would require the cooperation of the entities that controlled
access and infrastructure at these facilities, and could address small cell deployment
in a manner integrated with their other networking services. Therefore, more ﬂexibility
in spectrum rights was essential to enable the full range of deployment options to be
achievable.
3.9
Interference Protection Priority
The willingness to provide such extensive spectrum sharing might appear as an
abandonment of high quality protection of spectrum services on the part of the spectrum
administration. Each sharing application adds risk of interference, and a policy that has
the clear intent to maximize the utilization of the spectrum by many parties certainly
carries more risk of interference than a policy that limits use of the band to a single
party.
This move away from subjugating all other policy interests to maximize interference
protection should not be considered unique to the policy community; and being thrust on
an unwilling technical and operator community. At least in the wireless world, operators
and engineers have recognized that high levels of assured interference protection lead to
poor levels of spectrum utilization. Much of the system technology in LTE is included
to enable high levels of spectrum reuse between LTE sites. Operators desire dense
use of spectrum through their deployment, and have shown willingness to accept
some risk of interference between the devices in their networks. Regulators should
reﬂect this acceptance of interference-limited operations, and seek higher levels of
utilization across different devices from different uses. An objective LTE design was
to enable operation at “Spectrum Reuse One,” where adjoining cells could share the
same frequency assignments. Internally to cellular networks, the approach has become
to manage co-site interference, not avoid it. But regulators have not adapted external
interference protection levels to reﬂect the tolerable internal network interference levels.
This trend to compromise interference protection is immediately apparent when
one considers the interference protection that is assumed in succeeding generations
of cellular deployment technology. Succeeding generations have increased interference
tolerance in order to maximize the spectrum sharing between adjacent LTE cellular
sites. Engineers in the mobile industry have turned their attention to increasing density
by applying a number of techniques within their managed systems:
• Reducing the sensitivity to the absolute level of interference in a channel. Dynamic
management of the S (Signal) power in relation to the level of N (Noise) and I
(Interference) enables an assured
S
I + N level. This avoids the establishment of ﬁxed
levels of I, as in traditional regulation.
• Where Access Point (AP) sites are closely positioned, the systems manage time slots
between adjacent usage regions, to avoid simultaneous transmissions by the adjoining
systems.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

3.10 A Model for Spectrum Usage Through Opportunity Cost
53
• Where neither of the previous techniques are adequate alone, the systems can manage
time sub-channel usage between adjacent usage regions to avoid simultaneous signals
by the adjoining systems.
One way the PCAST recommendations might be viewed is that it creates two
interacting laboratories for experiments by industry. The PA licensing provides a
new spectrum sharing regime, which is highly dynamic, but provides ﬁxed protection
thresholds, similar to conventionally licensed bands. The GAA regime is an experiment
in coexistence. To the extent that the users of this spectrum can address interference
conditions dynamically and cooperatively, as described above, they avoid the cost and
restrictions of the PA licensing. This difference in ﬂexibility and cost in this approach is
the effective monetization of interference management replacing interference avoidance.
The end result could be a seismic shift in spectrum policy and spectrum utilization. The
dense deployments of single operator networks show that this is technically possible;
the question is whether this model can be extended across multiple deployers.
3.10
A Model for Spectrum Usage Through Opportunity Cost
The PCAST report included a quantitative analysis approach as an appendix to support
its framework of spectrum sharing. This appendix was derived from a chapter in the
author’s then most recent book (Scaling, Density, and Decision-Making in Cognitive
Wireless Networks) [13]. Because these principles are important to the three-tier regime,
an abstraction of the author’s original work is included as Appendix C for the reader
that wishes to further explore the concept of spectrum opportunity cost as the metric of
spectrum utilization.
The intent of this material was to argue that a preoccupation with only the impact of
spectrum policy on incumbent technical operation had led to rejecting options that had
signiﬁcant societal and economic value. The proposal was to examine spectrum uses
from a broader perspective:
• Receivers constrain the use of spectrum. The spectrum opportunity cost of a
given application should include assessment of the loss of spectrum utilization that
protecting that receiver required. For example, the poor ﬁltering of GPS devices is a
major consumer of spectrum, and essentially has reduced the opportunity for other
uses in the vicinity of the GPS service, well beyond their actual GPS allocation.
• Density is key to determining the aggregate bandwidth provided by networks.
Density is more important than assuring the lowest possible interference. Reducing
the protection region around a node has the most signiﬁcant impact in increasing
aggregate bandwidth.
Measuring how one use of the spectrum impacts, and denies, spectrum to other uses is
the most integrated manner in which to consider the relative impact of spectrum usage,
and much more instructive than examining just the emission allocations.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

54
Key Aspects of PCAST Recommendations
3.11
Suggested Reading
• The PCAST report [1] itself is clearly an important document in three-tier spectrum.
While the FCC has adopted rules that diverge from this vision, it still sets out ideas
that will take further development, and several years to be integrated into the spectrum
management regime.
• The SUR expression is very useful in developing an application- and technology-
neutral mechanism for describing the rights and expectations of a device in the
spectrum. Many of the concepts described here should be included in future three-tier
frameworks, even though they were not included in the initial US version.
• There was a large amount of public dialog when the PCAST report was issued,
most of it in the popular press, and accessible through the web. Some of the
opposition pieces to the band were published by CNET, Cellular Telecommunications
Industry Association (CTIA), and press releases from individual carriers. Information
Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF) opposed the report, and had a number
of press releases and events that criticized the recommendations [14]. In support of
the report, there were academic responses, such as one from Linda Doyle of Trinity
College, Dublin (TCD) [15], and the CSPAN interview with the committee co-chairs
[16], among other supporting positions.
• The House Science and Technology Subcommittee of the Energy and Commerce
Committee issued a pre-hearing statement that generally expressed opposition to the
report. The hearing video is available on YouTube [12].
• One of the interesting aspects of the PCAST process was the support the PCAST
proposals received from Jason Furman, Chairman of the Council of Economic
Advisors (CEA), President Obama’s Chief Economist, and a member of the Cabinet
[17]. His comments examined the recommendations from the economic growth
perspective, rather than the technical perspective most commentators applied.
• Nobel Prize winner Ronald Coase’s work on market-driven spectrum allocation [9],
which led to auctions, is an important work in spectrum allocation. Similarly, Tom
Hazlett’s commentary on the legacy of this work is important reading, even though it
disagrees with several of the principles in this chapter [18].
References
1 President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, Report to the President: Real-
izing the Full Potential of Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth (Executive
Ofﬁce of the President (EOP), Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), 2012).
http://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/microsites/ostp/pcast-stem-ed-ﬁnal.pdf.
2 M. McHenry, K. Steadman, A. Leu, and E. Melick, XG DSA radio system. 3rd IEEE
International Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks 3/1 (2008),
497–507.
3 McHenry, E. Livsics, N. Thao, and N. Majumdar, XG dynamic spectrum access ﬁeld test
results. IEEE Communications Magazine, 45/6 (2007), 51–57.
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
55
4 P. F. Marshall, Extending the reach of cognitive radio. Proceedings of the IEEE, 97/4 (2009),
612–625.
5 Federal Communications Commission, Spectrum Policy Task Force Report, ET Docket No.
02-135 (2002). http://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-228542A1.pdf.
6 Ofﬁce of Communications (Ofcom) (UK), Spectrum Usage Rights; Technology and Usage
Neutral Access to the Radio Spectrum. Consultation (2006).
7 L. Luna, NEXTEL interference debate rages on. Mobile Radio Technology, 21/8 (2003), 26.
8 National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Systems Engineering Forum
(NPEF), Assessment of LightSquared Terrestrial Broadband System Effects on GPS Receivers
and GPS-dependent Applications (2011). www.gps.gov/spectrum/lightsquared/docs/2011-
06-NPEF-lightsquared-report.pdf.
9 R. H. Coase, The Federal Communications Commission. The Journal of Law & Economics,
2 (1959), 1–40. www.jstor.org/stable/724927.
10 Federal Communications Commission, Connecting America: The National Broadband Plan
(2010). http://download.broadband.gov/plan/national-broadband-plan.pdf.
11 ——, Consumers May Experience Interference to Their Garage Door Opener Controls Near
Military Bases. Public Notice, 20 F.C.C.R. 3614 (2005).
12 House Energy and Commerce Committee, Communications and Technology Subcommittee
Hearing: Creating Opportunities Through Improved Government Spectrum Efﬁciency. Video
(2012). www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZvuOy_LtnUU.
13 P. F. Marshall, Scaling, Density, and Decision-Making in Cognitive Wireless Networks
(Cambridge University Press, 2012).
14 Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, ITIF’s Bennett Says PCAST Spec-
trum Report Impractical. Technical report (2012). https://itif.org/publications/2012/07/23/
itifs-bennett-says-pcast-spectrum-report-impractical.
15 L. Doyle, The Only Ones Who Will Drop Dead Are Those Who Stand Still. Blog post (2012).
ledoyle.wordpress.com/2012/07/31/the-only-ones-who-will-drop-dead-are-those-who-stand-
still/.
16 C-SPAN, Communicators with Craig Mundie and Mark Gorenberg. Video (2012).
www.c-span.org/video/?307379-1/communicators-craig-mundie-mark-gorenberg.
17 J. Furman, Remarks on Public Sector Spectrum Policy. Prepared remarks for presentation at
Brookings Institution (2014).
18 T. W. Hazlett, D. Porter, and V. Smith, Radio spectrum and the disruptive clarity of Ronald
Coase. Markets, Firms, and Property Rights: A Celebration of the Research of Ronald Coase
(University of Chicago School of Law, 2009).
.004
15:58:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

4
US FCC CBRS Regulations,
and Other International
Activity
4.1
Introduction
This chapter describes the rule-making process and formal requirements that were
established by the United States (US) Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to
implement the ﬁrst three-tier band, the Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) band
from 3.55 to 3.7 GHz [1, 2]. This chapter will describe the regulatory requirements only;
methods for implementing them, and other three-tier regimes, are provided in detail in
subsequent chapters.
The chapter closes with a discussion of movement towards three-tier spectrum
management that has occurred outside of the USA. None of these is yet as mature as the
USA regulations, but are different national approaches to creating a similar ecosystem.
This chapter is not intended to advocate for the speciﬁcs of the US three-tier
framework. It compromised some principles of the PCAST vision of three-tier; these
compromises may be undesirable, or may be improvements. They may or may not be
relevant to the issues faced by other countries, and in other bands, when adopting the
three-tier framework. Instead, the US three-tier framework is presented as a point of
departure from which it is likely that consideration of other bands, and other countries,
will depart.
Repeating a quotation cited in the ﬁrst chapter, the intent of this band was stated by
the FCC as [2]:
“The Citizens Broadband Radio Service takes advantage of advances in technology and spectrum
policy to dissolve age-old regulatory divisions between commercial and federal users, exclusive
and non-exclusive authorizations, and private and carrier networks.”
The FCC actually issued its ﬁrst interest in, and support of, the President’s Council of
Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) recommendations a few months after the
formal release of the PCAST report [3]. There was an unprecedented amount of support
in the administration, as shown in Figure 4.1. This ﬁgure shows the support for the
PCAST release event, including the Chief Information Ofﬁcer (CIO) of the Department
of Defense (DoD), Assistant Secretary of the Department of Commerce (DoC) and
Director of the National Telecommunications and Information Agency (NTIA), the
Deputy Director of the White House Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP),
the Chairman of the FCC, and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors
(CEA). This extent and level of participation demonstrated the broad agreement to both
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

4.2 Summary of FCC Actions and Timeline
57
FCC
WH
OSTP
CEA
PCAST
DoC
DoD
Figure 4.1 US Government support at PCAST report release.
share Federal spectrum and to implement the innovation-focused recommendations of
the PCAST report, as well as a broad expression of support by the administration of
President Obama. This was followed by the FCC press release stating support for the
initiative recommendations, and stating that it would pursue regulation to implement
them.
Following the PCAST report, the FCC moved ahead on two of the speciﬁc bands
proposed by the report. This included expansion of the Advanced Wireless Services
(AWS) band1 to include 1 710–1 755 MHz through spectrum sharing, and to authorize
three-tier operation in the band 3.55–3.65 GHz, with the option of extending the upper
limit to 3.7 GHz. The FCC also decided not to make this an adjustment to an existing
regulation, but instead, created a new FCC regulatory “Part” for the three-tier sharing
regime.2 Implicit in this was an expectation that more bands could be added to this
regulatory framework with reduced process.
Although this band did not end up incorporating all of the features proposed by
PCAST, it incorporates the spirit of the regime. The US regulatory process is very
transparent, so the regulatory record includes an extensive set of arguments for, and
against the three-tier regime, as well as features that were speciﬁc to the band and its
incumbents. In this chapter, we will focus on the arguments that are generally applicable
to other bands and nations, as these are most instructive to the analysis.
4.2
Summary of FCC Actions and Timeline
Table 4.1 shows the timeline of the culmination of the PCAST study period, and the
FCC process to develop the rules for the ﬁrst United States of America (USA) three-tier
spectrum band. It provides the date of each major event, and a link to the document for
readers desiring to research it in more depth than this treatment.3
1 This concept had been developed prior to the PCAST study endorsing the concept of sharing this band
under exclusive arrangements.
2 FCC Parts are major classes of regulation, such as Part 15, for low power unlicensed devices, or Part 90
for WISP services in 3 650–3 700 MHz.
3 Because of the future changes in the US Administration, several of these documents may not continue to
be available at the links provided. The author will have many of the non-copyrighted documents cited
throughout the book available on his web site at www.prestonfmarshall.com/ThreeTierReferences.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

58
US Regulations and Other International Activity
Table 4.1 Timeline of major actions for implementation of the US CBRS band.
Date
Event/Document/Location
Jul. 30, 2012
White House Release of PCAST Report: Realizing the Full Potential of
Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth
Available at: www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/microsites/ostp/
pcast_spectrum_report_ﬁnal_july_20_2012.pdf.
Sep. 12, 2012
Press Release: FCC Chairman Julius Genachowski Announces Plans to
Initiate Formal Steps on Spectrum Recommendations from the PCAST
Available at: apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-316251A1.pdf.
Dec. 12, 2012
FCC releases: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Order: Amendment of the
Commission’s Rules with Regard to Commercial Operations in the
3550–3650 MHz Band
Available at: apps.fcc.gov/ecfs/document/view?id=7022080889.
Apr. 23, 2014
FCC releases: Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: Amendment of the
Commission’s Rules with Regard to Commercial Operations in the
3550–3650 MHz Band
Available at: apps.fcc.gov/ecfs/comment/view?id=6017612779.
Apr. 17, 2015
FCC formally approves: Report and Order and Second Further Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking and Order: Amendment of the Commission’s Rules
with Regard to Commercial Operations in the 3550–3650 MHz Band
Available at: apps.fcc.gov/ecfs/comment/view?id=60001029680.
Apr. 28, 2016
FCC provides ﬁnal CBRS rules in the Order on Reconsideration and Second
Report and Order: Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to
Commercial Operations in the 3550–3650 MHz Band
Available at: apps.fcc.gov/ecfs/comment/view?id=60001696261.
Compared to past changes in spectrum regulation, the process from the release of the
PCAST report to the ﬁnalization of the two US Report and Orders was quite rapid. Some
of this can be attributed to the support by the President of United States, as exempliﬁed
by the Presidential Memorandum [4] that framed the Federal spectrum sharing policy.
Another cause of the rapid action was the cultural changes in the spectrum
management community. This included less support to incumbents attempting to
block new spectrum initiatives, and an implicit understanding that innovation not only
required spectrum, but it required “approachable,” or “Venture Friendly,” spectrum that
could be made available for new applications. Spectrum access had to be available
before these new concepts could generate the revenue streams that would make them
competitive in exclusive licensing through auctions.
The previous Spectrum Policy Task Force (SPTF) efforts had introduced the concept
of noise temperature4 as a criteria for sharing spectrum, and a quantitative metric to
provide to incumbents as guides for protection expectations. The FCC had also been
aggressive in promulgating Television White Space (TVWS) regulations. Senior staff at
the FCC had even been active in leadership roles in academic conferences, such as the
4 Noise temperature was essentially an assured level of power/Hz, expressed as the equivalent black body
radiation power.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

4.3 Comparison of FCC CBRS and Three-Tier Proposals
59
Table 4.2 Comparison of three-tier spectrum with CBRS.
Consideration
Consequences
1
Multiple protected tiers
Yes. There is a primary protected tier, and a single protected
tier available to secondary users.
2
Lower tier that can
share unused spectrum
Yes. The one tier provides access for all users.
3
Lowest tier with no
protection
Yes. The one tier is usable, regardless of interference to
other same tier uses.
4
Small units of
allocation
Somewhat. Non protected users have no allocations.
Protected users acquire protection in units of census tracts
and units of 10 MHz. Geographic units larger than proposed
by PCAST, but similar principles apply.
5
Automated transactions
Yes. Completely automated admission control, consistent
with PCAST principles.
IEEE Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks Conference (DYSPAN) conferences, and
the NTIA International Symposium on Advanced Radio Technology (ISART) events,
which feature spectrum sharing. The FCC was set for a “perfect storm” to embrace
technology-driven spectrum sharing.
Although the initiative was begun under FCC Chairman Julius Genachowski, the
incoming FCC Chairman, Tom Wheeler, announced at the FCC event “3.5 GHz
Spectrum Access System Workshop” that implementation of the PCAST report was
the item that President Obama had told him was his priority.5
4.3
Comparison of FCC CBRS and Three-Tier Proposals
In the US governance system, the FCC is an independent regulatory agency, and so
has no direct command and control relationship to the US President. Additionally,
unlike PCAST members, the FCC had to be cognizant of very real political, economic,
regulatory, and technical limitations on the ability to rapidly implement the full scope
of the PCAST proposals.
A comparison of the basic three-tier principles and the ﬁnal FCC CBRS regulations
is provided in Table 4.2.
The FCC action invoked the PCAST study as its conceptual starting point, so it is
worth a closer examination of how the CBRS regime compares to the speciﬁc PCAST
study recommendations. Table 4.3 further described some of the areas where the CBRS
differs signiﬁcantly from the PCAST approach. Section 4.9 discusses the acquisition
of protection rights in much more detail, as it is one of the most signiﬁcant differences
between CBRS regulations and PCAST, as in this area the FCC developed a unique
approach to protection acquisition.
5 Held on January 14, 2014, Materials and video are available at: fcc.gov/news-events/events/2014/01/35-
ghz-spectrum-access-system-workshop.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

60
US Regulations and Other International Activity
Table 4.3 Comparison of CBRS rules with PCAST.
Consideration
Consequences
1
Multiple protected tiers
Essentially the same.
2
Lower tier that can
share unused spectrum
Essentially the same.
3
Lowest tier with no
protection
Essentially the same.
4
Small units of
allocation
The CBRS geographic units are census tracts. These tend to
be quite a bit larger than contemplated by the PCAST report,
and their dimensions are not related to, or deﬁned by,
interference distances. Also, the FCC deﬁned a ﬁxed
protection criteria that is provided to any tier 2 (PAL) user,
rather than allow users to deﬁne the minimal protection they
required.
5
Automated transactions
Admission control process is essentially the same, but there
is no provision for real-time, or on-demand, auctions.
Instead, auctions are run on an annual basis, and have ﬁxed
terms, with some rights of renewal.
4.4
Speciﬁc Protection Provided to Incumbent Classes
Much of the attention paid to the 3.55 GHz band was focused on sharing with naval
radars, but there is a very signiﬁcant range and number of other users and system types
in the 3.55–3.7 GHz band that had to be addressed in establishing the CBRS protection
regime. In this section, we will not discuss the methods of achieving this protection;
this is covered in detail in Part IV. Instead, this section will focus on the rationale for
establishing these protections, and their implications for the band’s utility.
We will consider the CBRS protection requirements from two perspectives. First,
they do represent a very speciﬁc set of protections that were adjudicated by a major
regulatory body, and therefore, form a baseline from which other administrations will
consider in their own decision processes. Second, the concerns raised by the incumbents
(and potential protected tier users) are instructive in the issues that concerned them.
However adjudicated by the regulators, these concerns (those that were not proposed
solely to obstruct action) are signiﬁcant, at least from their perspectives, and thus are
worthy of discussion in this work. Therefore, the different positions on some of the
critical protection requirements will be discussed in more depth. More generalized
discussion is provided in the later chapters.
Table 4.4 provides a summary of the protection that is afforded to all of the protected
entities in the band. In addition to the primary user, naval radars, there are a small
number of Fixed Satellite Service (FSS) sites that operate in the international extended
C Band satellite frequencies (3 600 MHz–3 700 MHz). Additionally, there are tens of
thousands of wireless Internet service provider (WISP) and utility licenses under FCC
Part 90 in the upper 50 MHz (3 650–3 700 MHz) of the CBRS band.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

4.4 Speciﬁc Protection Provided to Incumbent Classes
61
Table 4.4 Protection criteria for occupants of the US CBRS band.
Occupant
Protection Criteria
Where Computed
Naval radars
Unspeciﬁed
Based on detection area
In-band FSS
–60 dBm blocking power
After RF ﬁlter
–129 dBm/MHz
In channel
Adjacent band,
–60 dBm blocking power
After RF ﬁlter
TT&C FSS
–129 dBm/MHz
After RF ﬁlter
Adjacent-band,
Non-TT&C FSSa
Can request interference
resolution from SAS
operator
N/A
WISP and Utilities
Grandfathered protection
zones
Base stations only, no protection
to speciﬁc subscriber units
PAL Client Areas
–96 dBm/10 MHz
Boundary of client service area
aDevices not performing FSS TT&C, as deﬁned in Part 96.
Table 4.5 Methods for determining protected receiver location.
Occupant
Location and Frequency Determination Methodology
Naval radars
No speciﬁc location is to be determined. Instead, large areas of CBRS
operations are to be excluded upon detection of naval operation on a given
frequency. In discussion with industry, the DoD has insisted that the sensor
network not have any ability to even roughly locate naval vessels.
Adjacent-band
FSS
C-Band FSS sites are already required to register their positions in order to
be protected. They are now required to also report the speciﬁc FSS slot they
are receiving.
Extended
C-Band FSS
Same as adjacent-band sites, with an added restriction on any new
registrations for protected status.
WISP and
Utilities
Part 90 base stations (location, azimuth, beam width, power) are required to
be registered. Customer Premises Equipment (CPE) do not have to be
registered, and are protected to a default range within the base station
coverage. CPE can be registered to extend the range of the base station.
PAL Service
Area
PAL users declare a Priority Access License Protection Area (PPA) that
deﬁnes the area over which its client devices may be located, and receive
protection. The general topic of service areas is discussed in Chapter 6.
The baseline premise of Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA) is to use sensing to detect
the presence of protected users, and avoid interfering with their associated receivers.
This would be accomplished without direct interaction with the protected transmitters
or receivers, or a linkage to provide awareness of their speciﬁc location. However, the
Spectrum Access System (SAS) database approach requires that the admission control
system service be aware of the location of all receivers in use by protected tier users. The
database model of three-tier spectrum is therefore dependent on a reliable mechanism
to locate protected receiver locations.
The methods to determine the location of protected receiving devices in the FCC
CBRS methodology for SAS use is provided in Table 4.5.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

62
US Regulations and Other International Activity
Detailed discussion of the speciﬁc protection established for each of the incumbent
services is provided in the following sections. A more detailed discussion of the
methodology to implement these incumbent and Priority Access License (PAL)
protections is provided in Part IV.
4.5
Protection Requirements for Naval Operations
The original PCAST assumption had been that Federal agencies would inform the
SAS operators of Federal protection needs as they occurred, and the SAS would make
the necessary adjustments in the CBRS deployments. However, it became clear that
however obvious a naval vessel might be, the policy issues associated with informing
non-classiﬁed systems of even the general location of a naval vessel made this strategy
impractical. Therefore, the sensing model was adopted. SAS operators would be
required to deploy naval radar sensing networks along the coasts in order to operate
within areas where the Federal government stated interference could be caused to naval
operations.
The regulations deﬁne two regions for protection of naval radars and the operation of
Environmental Sensing Capability (ESC) systems:
Exclusion Zones No operation in these areas is permitted unless the SAS operator
has an ESC deployed and active. The exclusion zones were extremely limiting on
Citizens Broadband Radio Service Devices (CBSD) operation, so the use of a SAS
or CBSD without an ESC capacity was greatly restricted. A graphic depiction of the
extent of these exclusion zones is shown in Figure 4.2.
Protection Zone Once a SAS operator activates ESC coverage, the detection of a naval
radar activates a Protection Zone over a large enough region to ensure protection of
the radar on the frequency range in use by the radar, and over a large enough area to
obscure the ship’s actual location.
The exclusion zones shown in Figure 4.2 are quite extensive, and essentially preclude
meaningful SAS operation in most of the populated areas of the USA. Therefore,
although the rules do not require an ESC be deployed, in practical application, an ESC
is an essential adjunct of any SAS that would operate effectively for a majority of the
US population.
The timeline for clearing of a channel used by a naval radar has three components.
Pre-Detect There is a period of time between when the radar signal is at a detectable
threshold, and the CBSD clearing is initiated. This includes the time for (1) the ESC
to detect the presence of a signal, (2) communicate it to the SAS, (3) the SAS to
process or fuse the reporting, in order to declare that a radar is present, and then (5)
to determine the CBSDs to be cleared. In the Public Notice (PN) [6] for the SAS
certiﬁcation, it is clear that the ESC is deﬁned as more than just the spectrum sensor;
its timeline includes the data fusion and processing to determine if a radar is present.
The FCC established no regulatory criteria for this, and it was left to industry and the
US Navy to determine the sensing thresholds.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

4.6 Protection Requirements for Satellite Operations
63
0 km
750 km
1500 km
Figure 4.2 Extent of ESC exclusion zones limiting CBSD operation without an ESC active
(from NTIA Quick Look Report [5]).
Notify The SAS has 300 seconds to notify the device that the radar detection has
occurred, and to vacate the channel.
Relocate The device has a further 60 seconds after acknowledging the SAS’s notiﬁca-
tion to vacate the channel. This one minute time period allows the network to perform
a more graceful relocation of client devices by temporarily handing them off to other
APs while relocating, or other technology speciﬁc measures.
Much of the speciﬁcs of the radar protection were deferred to the SAS developers’ direct
interaction with the DoD and DoN, and were not provided in the regulation.
4.6
Protection Requirements for Satellite Operations
There are several satellite sub-bands within the spectrum impacted by CBRS, and
each has unique registration and protection standards. Although the intent of the
CBRS regime was to not burden primary users with additional requirements to
support spectrum sharing, the FCC did decide to increase the reporting burden, adding
additional detail to the registration of FSS sites, and mandating annual updates, rather
than once per decade as in the previous regulations. Chapter 9 will demonstrate the
importance of this information in minimizing the exclusion footprint of an FSS site.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

64
US Regulations and Other International Activity
The newly required data included the antenna pattern, and the pointing elevation and
azimuth. No protection is afforded until these requirements are met.
The FCC established unique requirements for stations in each sub-band, and for those
performing Tracking, Telemetry and Control (TT and C). The registration protection
and operating limits imposed by the CBRS regulations include:
In Band, 3 600–3 700 No new registrations are permitted for equipment in this band
for earth stations in the range 3 600–3 700 MHz dating from the publication of the
original order. They are protected from co-channel interference in this range from
CBSDs within 150 km to a level of −129 dBm/MHz, assuming a reference antenna
system and RF ﬁlter with an insertion loss of 0.5 dB. They are protected from
blocking energy from CBSDs within 40 km to a total power level of -60 dBm Root
Mean Square (RMS), again using a reference ﬁlter and antenna, and an insertion loss
of 0.5 dB.
Non-TT & C 3 700–4 200 There are no explicit requirements for protection of non
TT&C FSS devices. Operators of these systems can request interference resolution
from SAS operators, and SAS operators are required to address these concerns in
good faith. The SAS operators may assume that the earth stations are using the
reference ﬁlter design: a high pass ﬁlter, with a sharp cutoff at 3.7 GHz. This ﬁlter is
described in detail in Chapter 9.
TTC 3 700–4 200 Sites performing TT&C are protected from blocking by CBSD
deployments within 40 km of the TT&C FSS site. The SAS is required to protect
the FSS site from adjacent band power to an RMS level of –60 dBm, assuming the
industry standard (high pass) ﬁlter with a 0.5 dB insertion loss. They are protected
from Out of Band Emissions (OOBE) from CBSDs within 40 km to an RNS level
of –129 dBm/MHz, with the reference ﬁlter, and a 0.5 dB insertion loss in the FSS
passband.
Although the FCC did not establish receiver standards in this band, the protection
levels assume that there are minimum standards of ﬁltering present in the receiver in
order for the protection provided to be meaningful. In effect, this is similar to the United
Kingdom (UK) Spectrum Usage Rights (SUR), in that it establishes an expectation of
what level of adjacent and co-channel conditions a user of the spectrum can anticipate.
Unlike passive regulation, it requires active intervention by the SAS to assure this
criteria is met.
Although the intent of the entire Part 96 framework is to provide automated
interference analysis and admission control, there is a provision for satellite operators
in the 3 700–4 200 MHz band to report interference directly to the SAS operators. This
is a “backstop” to the automated methods. The protection levels required for in-band
protection are extremely low and will be difﬁcult to validate in the ﬁeld. So, it is
reasonable to make resolution of interference claims a joint responsibility of the SAS
and receiver operator.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

4.7 Protection Requirements for WISPs and Utility Operations
65
4.7
Protection Requirements for Wireless Internet Service
Providers (WISP) and Utility Operations
The USA had authorized operation of Part 90 devices in the upper 50 MHz of the
extended C-Band. Naval radar operation in this 50 MHz was precluded when close
to shore. The primary use of this band was for Wireless Internet Service (WISP) and
electrical utilities for remote reading and control systems. These devices were to be
provided protection and continued authorization for ﬁve years. No new licensing of
devices was permitted after the ﬁrst FCC Report and Order, and existing devices had to
transition to operation under the newly established Part 96 rules.
The protection of the “grandfathered” devices was approached by incumbents and
potential users of the band from very different perspectives. The potential users of the
CBRS band proposed that the protection should be established speciﬁc to the registered
endpoints of the networks (base stations and CPE) whereas the existing Part 90 users
proposed that the protection be established as a protection zone around every registered
base station, regardless of endpoint location.
The FCC provides the protection requirements in a public notice [7]. The FCC
rejected explicitly protecting CPE, as the rules passed by the commission precluded this
protection. Instead they established two protection mechanisms; one for base stations
with registered CPE devices, and one for base stations without. Registration of CPE was
optional.
The three protection rules were:
• For Part 90 base station sectors without registered CPE devices, the protection is for
the full beam-width of the antenna, out to 5.3 km radius.
• For Part 90 sectors that have registered CPE devices are protected for their azimuth
and beam-width, out to the location of the registered CPE, a (typically) maximum
range of 18 km.
• Base station sectors that have no registered, or unregistered CPEs receive no
protection.
The protection rules provided by the FCC are stated to be conservative; one might
argue they were unrealistically conservative in providing protection.
• The FCC used line of sight path loss. At a distance of 5.4 km and at a frequency of
3.675 GHz, it is unlikely that realistic path loss will be at all close to the free-space
loss. It will likely be 10–30 dB higher, implying protection radius values that have at
least a ten-fold reduction in the protected area.
• The assumption of the lowest order modulation sensitivity values are also unrealistic
in markets where wireless services have competition from any media, even cellular
wireless.
• Even if one could argue or conceive that free-space loss was present at a distance of
5.3 km, the outer limit of a protection zone with registered CPW was set to be over
19 km. This requires that the path remain free-space for all of the 18 km range, and
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

66
US Regulations and Other International Activity
Sector for protection of registered CPE
equipment–angle determined by azimuth
and beam width of registered base station,
radius determined by location of furthest
registered CPE (normally not more than
18 km)
Sector for protection of registered CPE
equipment-angle determined by azimuth
and beam width of registered base station,
radius determined by location of furthest
registered CPE (normally not more than
18 km)
Sector with unregistered CPE
equipment receives protection
only to 5.3 km radius
Registered Base
Station Site
Sector without any registered or
unregistered CPE equipment does not
receive grandfathered  protection
Unregistered CPE
Registered CPE
Figure 4.3 The different Part 90 protection schemes for registered and unregistered CPE
devices (from [7]).
have a further reduction in path loss from the already conservative free-space model
of 5.8 dB!
This being said, the protection was only to be available for ﬁve years, so this incursion
on usable frequencies should be short-lived. If PAL use becomes popular in areas with
extensive Part 90 operations, the available GAA spectrum could be reduced to only
30 GHz (150 MHz - 50 MHz (Part 90) - 70 MHz (PAL)). The original assumption that
seven PAL channels would leave more than 50% of the band available for GAA assumed
that all 150 MHz was available for the General Authorized Access (GAA) user. In
regions with extensive Part 90 operations, this will not be true.
A depiction of the different protection zones is provided by the PN [7], and shown in
Figure 4.3.
4.8
Protection Requirements for Priority Access Operations
One of the primary features of the three-tier regime is that the middle tier (Priority
Access (PA) or PAL) users only can exclude lower-tier (GAA) users, when their
operation would cause interference to this protected use. These are designated as a PPA.
Later, we will discuss the issue of client protection in more detail. The FCC agreed
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

4.9 Second-Tier Protection Acquisition Method
67
that PAL operations received protection of client devices throughout a service area
surrounding the registered PAL device. The service area can be initially provided and
updated by the PAL holder, or computed by the SAS based on an engineering estimate
of the maximum service area. The SAS is required to assure that the operator provided
PPA does not overly restrict the sharing of spectrum by GAA by extending beyond the
geographic region in which the one Access Point (AP) could serve clients.
In keeping with the principle that protection only be provided to actual spectrum
usage, the FCC also required that PAL operators inform the SAS if the device with the
grant terminates its operation for more than seven days. The SAS can then let GAA
share the spectrum until such time as the device is reactivated. This effectively blocks
one potential strategy to “warehouse spectrum.”
It was an objective of the regulatory regime to minimize the impact of the unique
aspects of CBRS operations on client devices in order to make adoption more rapid
and cost-effective through leveraging existing semiconductor and device ecosystems.
To this end, client devices were not required to register with the SAS, as their operation
was dependent to the decisions made by the AP, and therefore the SAS. Considerable
discussion in the record pertained to how to ensure that these non-registered devices
were not interfered with, nor cause interference, since the SAS itself was not aware of
their location.
The FCC introduced the concept of a PPA, which provides the geographic contour
for clients operating under a registered PAL CBSD. This area can be self reported by
the PAL when the CBSD is registered, or, as default, computed by the SAS. The SAS
uses whichever region is smaller. The PPA concept enables client devices to be outside
of the scope of the registration process, as they were implicit in the registration of the
AP. This mode of protection is discussed with more generality, and in more detail, in
Chapter 6.
4.9
Second-Tier Protection Acquisition Method (Auction)
One of the fundamental differences between the PCAST recommendations and the
CBRS regulations that were ﬁnally adopted is in the method that devices and users
utilize to obtain protected status. Whereas the PCAST report had advocated protection
be acquired on a device-by-device basis, the FCC elected to deﬁne protection through
political geographic boundaries, rather than propagation contours.
PA protection rights are issued in individual census tracts. Census tracts comprise
a geographic region that is developed by the US Census Bureau and are “designed to
be relatively homogeneous units with respect to population characteristics, economic
status, and living conditions.” Census tracts average about 4 000 inhabitants [8]. In most
cases, this region is much larger than the implicit recommendation by PCAST.6 Some
6 The primary reason a census tract could be smaller than a PPA is when the building has extensive
three-dimensional development. Conventional spectrum practice does not reﬂect the vertical stacking of
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

68
US Regulations and Other International Activity
are very small in area, as in a dense city, and others are much larger, such as one in the
state of Alaska, which comprises one third of the area of the state.
In non-rural areas, a PAL may only be assigned if there is more than one applicant,
so a single buyer cannot buy protection without bidding against at least one other entity.
An exception is made in rural areas, where the necessity for two or more bidders is
waived due to the likelihood that demand would be much lower.
The FCC also chooses to limit the aggregation of PAL spectrum control. A given
license is permitted to control up to four PALs in any given census tracts. These limits
carry over into secondary market transactions, as well.
4.10
SAS Competition and Information Sharing
One of the central recommendations of the PCAST report was that all aspects of
three-tier spectrum should have strong competitive forces reducing costs, increasing
capacity, encouraging and rewarding innovation, and ultimately, creating transparency.
So, it is worthwhile to see how the FCC rules provide for competition in this critical
ecosystem role: the SAS operator.
The FCC was quiet on the cost of spectrum access, which is certainly pro-competition.
The FCC allowed SAS providers to make decisions regarding the scope of the rules in
which they would participate, and this is certainly competition and free entry favorable.
Propagation models are one of the fundamental weaknesses in any spectrum sharing
regime. Every participant in spectrum is aware that these models are not reﬂective of
real world conditions. The range of loss that occurs in the real world is often tens
of decibels from that predicted due to the complex relationship of the environment,
the propagation paths, local building methods, and other factors that were beyond the
ability of the developers of these models (typically in the 1960s) to incorporate into
a general framework. Proving the ﬂexibility to develop, validate, and employ new and
more detailed models would have been an opportunity that the SAS could have provided,
and monetized the beneﬁts of improved models. However, the FCC in the second order
asked industry to specify a consensus model that all SAS implementations must follow,
at least initially. Whether competitive models will be permitted later remains to be
seen, and the structure may permit anti-competitive self-interest to block competitive
evolution in this critical aspect of spectrum sharing and SAS operation.
Unfortunately, we know that the requirement to form a consensus model also tends
to be a “race to the bottom,” with the lowest common denominator, with the eventual
consensus choice being the option most readily available to all participants. It is
understandable that the regulators would ﬁnd that having each SAS produce the same
results was attractive. It might not be correct, but it would be both irrefutable by other
SASs, and it would preclude competition based on analytic models.
What remains unclear is how the FCC will respond to requests for future
enhancements to the consensus model. These models might be non-standard, and utilize
devices, with the isolation of ﬂoor construction. Units 50 ﬂoors apart might show minimal path loss if
analyzed by conventional models, such as Longley-Rice.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

4.11 Secondary Markets
69
proprietary data or methods to reach different (presumably higher minimum path loss)
answers than the consensus model. If the FCC is receptive to these proposals, then
the SAS ecosystem can evolve to reﬂect ever increasing geospatial knowledge, the
self-sensing of the SAS-controlled devices, and new experimental data that becomes
available.
4.11
Secondary Markets
Section 2.7 discussed the issues that have caused secondary markets to be less effective
in many situations where they would appear to have viability. Since a dynamic
environment was one of the objectives of three-tier management, and also one of the
claimed beneﬁts of secondary markets, it is worth examining how secondary markets
are enabled in the CBRS regulations.
There were those that believe that secondary markets encourage speculation and
spectrum warehousing. It was an important question as to whether secondary markets
in the CBRS band would encourage, or discourage, these less desirable practices. The
short license period and assured availability of GAA spectrum make warehousing much
less attractive than in longer term licenses.
Because the intent of the band was to foster innovation and dynamic uses of
the spectrum, the FCC also decided to permit the sub-licensing process to proceed
without prior commission approval of the transfer. The only requirements for secondary
transfers are:
• The lessee informs the FCC that it is qualiﬁed to hold a PAL license, and provides the
supporting material.
• The original PAL license holder notiﬁes the SAS operator(s) of the arrangement.
• The SAS conﬁrms that the lessee has provided notice to the FCC, that aggregation
limits are not exceeded, and that the lease area is within the PAL, and does not
encroach any existing PAL protection area.
• The SAS, rather than either of the parties to the transaction, reports the transaction to
the commission daily.
This is an extremely lightweight or “Light-Touch” regime. The National Regulatory
Authority (NRA) is monitoring the situation, but is not in-line to the operation, and has
no prior item-by-item review, although it reserved the right to reverse such agreements
within 40 days. This is consistent with the concept of automated admission control.
The FCC also decided to neither require nor prohibit spectrum exchanges. This leaves
it open to either SAS operators or exchange operators to establish markets that could
offer price discovery, transparency, and facilitate the broader objectives of dynamics in
spectrum usage. The secondary markets that could emerge may more closely resemble
the dynamic nano-transactions originally envisioned by the PCAST report.
Although the FCC is very prescriptive of the exact nature of SAS processing
and decision-making, it has provided no direction on the operation of the spectrum
marketplaces that could emerge, either within or external to the SAS services. Its
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

70
US Regulations and Other International Activity
regulations may therefore be considered to be enabling of a wide range of innovations
in creating secondary markets. Presumably, market forces, rather than regulators, will
determine the shape of these markets.
4.12
Spectrum Access System Operational Considerations
The entire regulatory framework is dependent on a new entity in spectrum management:
a SAS, or an ecosystem of SAS operators. The SAS ecosystem is essentially delegated
with the control of admission into the Federal spectrum. This is a unique aspect of this
regime, and is a very signiﬁcant extension of a classical band manager. Non-interference
related considerations that are imposed on the SAS system and the SAS operator
included:
• The SAS is responsible for authenticating that devices interacting with the SAS be
devices that were actually certiﬁed with the FCC under Part 96 CBRS regulations.
Industry made this requirement symmetric by also requiring that devices authenticate
that they were interacting with an FCC-approved SAS. It might be argued that this
(device authentication) requirement in some cases is counterproductive, in that if
devices were illegal in the band, then it might be best if they used the SAS, rather
than blindly transmit. However, if the SAS concept becomes more international, then
NRA-by-NRA controls will be important.
• SAS administrators have a requirement to provide the public with information
regarding the devices that are authorized in the band, similar to public licensing. This
is a controversial requirement, in that cellular operators using exclusive spectrum are
generally private with their speciﬁc deployments.
• There is a general obligation to maximize the opportunity for spectrum use by GAA
and to ensure that the GAA operation has a maximum degree of coexistence. Speciﬁc
powers of the SAS to implement these principles are not prescribed.
• Much of the speciﬁc design of SAS-to-SAS exchanges, PAL frequency assignments,
authentication mechanisms and other implementing processes are implicitly and
explicitly delegated, or assumed to be performed by industry organizations.
4.13
Device Classes
It was clear that the CBRS model had several potential deployment models. At one
end, there were traditionally and professionally deployed outdoor small cells, with high
Equivalent Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP) and conducted power devices, and at the
other end, consumer and enterprise devices that were like Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi)
boxes, and deployed by consumers. The FCC established a set of device classes in order
to differentiate between simple, low power and non-directive applications, and the high
power, outdoor and likely directional deployments. The following Table (Table 4.6) is
adapted from the second order §96.41.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

4.14 Proposals for Three-Tier Outside of the USA
71
Table 4.6 Categories.
Category
Maximum EIRP
(dBm/10 MHz)
Maximum
PSD
(dBm/MHz)
Notes
End User
Device
23
n/a
Must be under control of a CBSD.
Does not require SAS registration.
Category A
30
20
Requires functioning self-location
capability. Must be deployed indoors.
Otherwise the device must be
registered as Category B, and be
installed by a professional installer.
Category B
47
37
Only permitted after an ESC is
approved and deployed. Requires
professional installer installation.
4.14
Proposals for Three-Tier Outside of the USA
On April 14, 2016, the UK OFCOM issued a call for input titled “3.8 GHz to 4.2 GHz
band: Opportunities for Innovation” [9]. Paragraph 1.10 of the inquiry clearly states a
three-tier framework, with assured quality and access along with opportunistic access
in the same band.
“Given the characteristics of use of incumbent Fixed and Fixed Satellite Services, as set out in
Section 2, we believe the 3.8 GHz to 4.2 GHz band has the potential to be accessed on a more
intense shared basis by innovative applications with different requirements. In particular, some
innovative applications might be able to use the spectrum on an opportunistic basis while other
applications might, for example, require a deﬁned quality of service but within a discrete area.”
OFCOM provides a graphic of the current deployment of ﬁxed wireless and satellite
sites in the 3.8–4.2 GHz band, as shown in Figure 4.4.
The density of FSS use is similar to that in the USA, on a site/km2 basis. The structure
that OFCOM proposed to manage the band closely resembles the US CBRS tiers. The
document (para 3.7) describes that as:
Tier 1 / Existing License Classes would comprise the bands’ incumbent services. Tier
1 licenses holders’ spectrum access rights would fall within a given range of
frequencies and geographic areas not accessed by the other tiers. Fixed and Fixed
Satellite licenses would continue to be available on a ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-served basis,
subject to OFCOM’s established coordination procedures, and UK Broadband would
continue to access spectrum according to the coordination mechanism in which it
avoids causing undue interference to the Fixed and Fixed Satellite services.
Tier 2 / New Geographic License Layer would comprise geographic licenses, as
described in Section 3.3.1. Once a geographic license has been acquired, future Tier
1 licenses would need to be coordinated around these licenses.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

72
US Regulations and Other International Activity
Fixed Links
(in Dark)
Satellite Sites
(in Dark)
Figure 4.4 OFCOM provided UK ﬁxed and satellite sites in 3.8–4.2 GHz.
Tier 3 / New Opportunistic Access Layer would comprise a rules-based opportunis-
tic access mechanism to the spectrum in a given geographic area. Stakeholders
operating in this tier would need to not cause undue interference to both Tier 1 and
Tier 2 licenses on a dynamic basis, possibly through a geolocation database or other
technology enabler, and would not be able to claim protection from any other tier, or
from each other.
Beyond the obvious similarities in the US regime and the possible framework of an
OFCOM regime, there are some signiﬁcant differences in the relative rights of the tiers.
• Tier 1 is not completely superior to Tier 2. In the OFCOM proposals, future Tier 1
licenses would have to coordinate with Tier 2. In the USA regime, Tier 1 has complete
freedom to deploy, and Tier 2 is responsible for not interfering with the new Tier 1
usage and must adapt its usage if possible. Tier 2 has a ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst-served right
over Tier 1 apparently.
• The US regime requires a database solution for protection of Tier 3, whereas the
Ofﬁce of Communications (OFCOM) framework appears open to other solutions.
• The primacy of Tier 1 users results in a US requirement for Tier 2 to use the database
service. Since OFCOM requires new Tier 1 entrants to coordinate with existing Tier
2 users, there is no apparent requirement for Tier 2 to utilize the database system.
The public process to establish the UK rules is ongoing so we cannot judge what
changes, if any, might occur as the concept becomes deﬁned in regulation. The ﬁrst
difference (new Tier 1 use must be coordinated with existing Tier 2 users) signiﬁcantly
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

4.16 Suggested Reading
73
changes the Tier 1 rights. This was explicitly rejected in the US framework, due to likely
opposition from these users.7
4.15
Summary
The US implementation of regulations for the CBRS band provides validation that the
PCAST three-tier framework is capable of implementation in terms of discrete policy
requirements, and can achieve general acceptance by both the potential user community
and the band incumbents. There are certainly aspects of this regulation that can be
challenged, and individual points of view would probably disagree with one or more of
the regulatory requirements. However, none of this takes away from the accomplishment
of creating the ﬁrst viable regulatory structure for three-tier spectrum.
There are a number of references (such as §197, which discuss congestion
management of GAA users. The FCC rules require that a SAS provide coexistence
services to minimize density impacts on GAA users. The technology to do this, without
discouraging innovation, creating implicit rights for interference free operation, and
undoing the objectives of the entire regime is a challenge that three-tier spectrum sharing
will have to address as it succeeds.
4.16
Suggested Reading
• The FCC documents, and the community comments on them, provide fundamental
readings on the issues involved in three-tier spectrum sharing from the perspective of
non-Federal incumbents, traditional spectrum exclusive rights users, and the potential
users of the three-tier band framework. The two FCC Report and Orders [1, 2] deﬁne
the regulations in this band. They not only provide the regulatory text, but also a very
detailed summary of the positions of the responding community on the issues, and
the rationale for the FCC’s ultimate decision in each issue.
Many comments on the ﬁrst order opposed the entire concept, so subtle issues were
not developed to the depths that were addressed between the ﬁrst and second orders.
Therefore the second Order discussion has another level of detail and nuance beyond
the discussion provided in the ﬁrst Order, but less of the fundamental opposition
arguments.
• One of the topics that emerged in the community leading up to the second Report and
Order was the subject of secondary markets in protected licenses. This discussion
extends to forty paragraphs in the ﬁnal order, but still only captures summaries of the
arguments made by various parties. Positions ﬁled by Cellular Telecommunications
Industry Association (CTIA), AT&T, Cantor Telecom, Federated Wireless, and
7 The FCC did block new deployments of extended C-Band sites, and additional Part 90 base station
licenses, but these were secondary in the band already. So the USA did limit incumbent rights, but not the
primary users.
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

74
US Regulations and Other International Activity
Google, among others, provide different views regarding how secondary markets
might emerge in dynamically allocated spectrum, and what the consequences of this
emergence would be. These source documents are available at the FCC Electronic
Comment Filing System (ECFS) (available at: apps.fcc.gov/ecfs/comment_search_
solr/search) under proceeding 12-354.
• The NTIA Quick Look Report [5] provides analysis of the opportunities for clearing
or sharing a number of bands, including 3 550–3 560 MHz. It includes an extensive
discussion of the primary spectrum holders, perception of spectrum sharing and the
issues associated with reducing the risk of such sharing. This report was instrumental
in both the PCAST recommendations and the subsequent FCC regulatory actions.
• The process for certifying a SAS is laid out in a PN [6] that includes the scope of
the approval process. Also, each potential SAS operator applicant had to respond to
this PN with a description of how they designed their SAS, and how they intended to
operate it. Both the PN and industry responses contain interesting material on SAS
requirements and design.
• The Wireless Innovation Forum (WinnForum) is continuing to derive and evolve
requirements for the implementation of the CBRS. This includes the SAS, the devices
(CBSDs) and operational procedures. These documents are constantly evolving, so
no speciﬁc document will be cited, and instead the entire directory of approved
documents is suggested to the reader. These are generally accessible at: groups.
winnforum.org/Reports. Some topics of interest include:
– SAS-to-SAS Coordination [10].
– SAS-to-CBSD Protocol [11].
– SAS Architecture [12].
– CBRS Threat Model [13].
• The record created by the UK OFCOM proposal to share the 3.6–4.2 GHz band
is important reading to generalize the otherwise USA-dominated discussion of the
regulatory concept. The original inquiry posting [9] provides documents summarizing
the stakeholder positions.
References
1 Federal Communications Commission, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard
to Commercial Operation in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12-354, Report
and Order and Second Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Order (2015).
http://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-15-47A1.pdf.
2 ——, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to Commercial Operation in the
3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12-354, Order on Reconsideration and Second Report and
Order (2016). https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
3 ——, FCC Chairman Julius Genachowski Announces Plans to Initiate Formal Steps on
Spectrum Recommendations from the PCAST. Press release (2012).
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
75
4 President of the United States, Expanding America’s Leadership in Wireless Innovation; Mem-
orandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies. Presidential memorandum
(2013).
5 US Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information Agency
(NTIA), An Assessment of the Near Term Viability of Accommodating Wireless Broadband
Systems in the 1675–1710 MHz, 1755–1780 MHz, 3500–3650 MHz, and 4200–4220 MHz,
4380–4400 MHz bands. Technical report (2010).
6 Federal Communications Commission, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau and Ofﬁce of
Engineering and Technology Establish Procedure and Deadline for Filing Spectrum Access
System (SAS) Administrator(s) and Environmental Sensing Capability (ESC) Operator(s)
Applications (2015). http://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-15-1426A1.pdf.
7 ——, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau and Ofﬁce of Engineering and Technol-
ogy announce Methodology for Determining the Protected Contours for Grandfathered
3650–3700 MHz Band Licenses GN Docket No. 12-354. Public notice (2016).
8 United States Census Bureau, Census Tracts and Block Numbering Areas. Technical Report
(2000).
9 Ofﬁce of Communications (Ofcom) (UK), 3.8 GHz to 4.2 GHz band: Opportu-
nities for innovation (2016). http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/consultations/opportunities-
for-spectrum-sharing-innovation.
10 Spectrum
Sharing
Committee
(SSC),
SAS–SAS
Protocol
Technical
Speciﬁcation,
WINNF-16-S-0096-V1.0.0 (Wireless Innovation Forum, 2016).
11 ——, SAS to CBSD Technical Speciﬁcation, WINNF-16-S-0016-V1.0.0 (Wireless Innovation
Forum, 2016).
12 ——, SAS Functional Architecture. WINNF-15-P-0047-V1.0.0 (Wireless Innovation Forum,
2015).
13 ——, CBRS Threat Model, WINNF-15-P-0089-V1.0.0 (Wireless Innovation Forum, 2016).
.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

.005
15:58:46, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Part III
Components of a Three-Tier
Architecture
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

5
Three-Tier Spectrum
Admission Control Systems
5.1
Database-driven Spectrum Management Framework
This chapter will develop the basic building blocks from which various forms of
three-tier spectrum management systems can be constructed. The technical building
blocks are based on physics and fact, and therefore are not sensitive to nations or
policies. The decision-making is nation- and frequency-dependent, and therefore is
addressed separately from the technical tools that provide it with the basis for its
decisions. This chapter is not intended to delve into speciﬁc algorithms or protection
rules in detail. These will be addressed in later chapters speciﬁc to the issues involved
in each.
It is easy to view each possible spectrum management regime as having unique
requirements for the database system that implements its rule structure. This chapter
instead will develop a set of constructs from which various spectrum management
regimes can be constructed. In this way, we can readily focus on the common elements
of all systems, and lead to common components. A common model of the technical
infrastructure can make the construction of new regimes more practical to implement,
effective, and veriﬁable.
In this chapter, we will use the general term of “admission control system.” This
is the general nomenclature for the functionality that is provided by the United States
(US) Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Citizens Broadband Radio Service
(CBRS) Spectrum Access System (SAS). Throughout this book, the term SAS will only
be used for requirements that are speciﬁc to this US implementation.
Before going into other details, we can ﬁrst broadly classify database systems into
two classes:
Stateful Admission of nodes into the ecosystem changes the entry conditions for future
entrants. The database system must be updated to reﬂect each admission decision or
status change, and the sequencing of processing must ensure that decisions do not
interact. Microwave coordination is an example of such regimes.
Stateless Admission of nodes into the ecosystem has no impact on the admission of
future entrants, once the regulatory criteria is established. The system can make
future decisions without regard to its own previous decisions. An example of this
is determination of ﬁxed contour based admission, such as ﬁxed exclusion zones, or
the Television White Space (TVWS) regime.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

80
Three-Tier Spectrum Admission Control Systems
Next we consider the fundamental functionality of any database-driven admission
control system. There are likely many possible organizations of these functions, and not
all systems may require all of them. The partitioning used in the rest of book is shown
below:
Awareness The database system will require knowledge of the characteristics of
protected nodes, rights information, geographic restrictions, and other data that
is ﬁxed, at least in relation to entrants into lower tiers. The information can be
declarative (facts through other sources), or organically sensed by dedicated or
collaterally assigned devices. Additionally, if the system is stateful, it will have to
update this awareness to reﬂect previous admission decisions it has made.
Analysis The database system will require analytic methods to analyze the impact
of emissions. This will include tools such as propagation models, along with any
supporting data, interference models, usage models and whatever considerations the
database system is intended to implement.
Decision Making We separate the decision-making from the models that create the
input to the decisions in order to isolate the purely technical considerations from
those driven by policy.
Interaction The database system will require some method to interact with devices,
collect information on their requests, and communicate results of analysis and
any subsequent changes in their authorizations after their initial issuance. This has
implications for the nature of the networks that can operate in these tiers.
Coexistence In addition to protection functions, the same database system may be
tasked to also coordinate usage characteristics within tiers to minimize interference
among tier users with peer rights.
There are many ways in which these components could be conﬁgured. Figure 5.1
illustrates a notional database access control system.
A summary of the principal transaction ﬂow for providing spectrum to a three-tier
user or device is described below. This is a very simpliﬁed model, but is the general
Multi-Tier
Devices
Device/Net
Interaction
Analysis
Algorithms
Tier 1
Protected
Users
Modeling
Data
Policy
Constraints
Technology
Awareness
Coexistence
Decision-
Making
Ecosystem
Awareness
GAA
PA
Figure 5.1 Notional arrangement of database system components.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

5.1 Database-driven Spectrum Management Framework
81
schema that will be examined in more detail later. Also, some steps may not be
applicable to all regimes. For example, providing a coexistence service is not mandatory
in a three-tier regime.
• The device or network requests a frequency assignment, or grant. This is either an
explicit request for a speciﬁc frequency range, or a description of the bandwidth
required. This grant request also includes the emission characteristics, and optionally
the receiver environment constraints, antenna characteristics and other information
needed to assess the interference potential of the grant, and if it is in a protected tier,
the requirements for protection.
• The request is analyzed to determine the impact at any protected node within its area
of inﬂuence. Depending on the policy, this could be a one-on-one analysis, or could
aggregate multiple sources of interference at protected tier nodes.
• The policy constraints speciﬁc to the location and frequency are applied to determine
if the grant request can be issued. This decision making function assures policy
compliance. This includes (1) assuring that the entry will not violate any protection
rights to higher or peer tier devices, (2) that the device, and the grant it requests,
is compliant with the regulations in the band, and (3) that the device is authorized
to make the grant request it has issued. An example of this last veriﬁcation is
whether the node that requests Priority Access (PA) protection is authorized to
request it. In a complex environment, this process might have a ripple effect on other
devices, if they must be relocated to avoid interference to an entering PA node, for
example.
• If the request is for protected status, presumably the node will not receive interference,
and will request a speciﬁc frequency, and follow the path to communicate the grant
to the device.
• If the request was for a usable frequency, but it was not speciﬁed, such as in the lowest
(General Authorized Access (GAA)) tier, some mechanism to maximize coexistence
could be involved. This could be technology agnostic, such as de-conﬂicting channel
assignments, or technology speciﬁc in aligning time slots, or sub-channel usage.
The basis for decision-making by an admission control system cannot be completely
self-contained, and is dependent on a number of external sources, generally described
below, and elaborated in later sections and chapters.
Protected Users One of the principles of spectrum sharing is that the sharing process
should be minimally invasive on incumbent systems. Therefore, it is assumed that
they are not required to develop new functionality to report status to an admission
control system, but either statically declare their positions and characteristics or
are dynamically detected. This data source reﬂects any information regarding their
presence, either provided by the incumbent or detected dynamically.
Modeling Data Modeling data is used by the analysis algorithms, and may include
terrain, structures, material, and other physics and geographic information. Data spe-
ciﬁc to regulatory limitations on operation are included in the policy considerations
data source.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

82
Three-Tier Spectrum Admission Control Systems
Policy Constraints Policy constraints deﬁne the speciﬁc rules used to make grant
decisions in a given location and band. In this framework, they are isolated from the
fact-based analysis process which provided the input values required by the policy
regime, which does not reﬂect the regime criteria. Separation of policy constraints
from analysis algorithms also enables the maximal reuse of components across
regulatory regimes; reducing cost for each unique implementation.
Technology Awareness Technology awareness information extends generic channel
deconﬂiction algorithms to reﬂect the speciﬁc capabilities of individual technologies.
For example, Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi) spectrum sharing effectiveness is driven by
the duty cycle of the usage, while Long-Term Evolution (LTE) is not. Time Division
Long Term Evolution (TD-LTE) is capable of time alignment among access points,
so long as they have high-quality time-of-day information available.
Each of these mechanisms is discussed in greater detail in the following sections.
5.2
Ecosystem Awareness
We have hypothesized that in our initial baseline concept of spectrum sharing, the
sharing operation and mechanism will be invisible to the current users of the spectrum
being shared. This is accomplished in two ways: assuring no interference technically,
and minimal or no impacts operationally. Therefore, there are provisions to inform the
admission control system and therefore, spectrum sharing devices of the existence of
these primary users. The two default methods are:
• The protected tier user informs the admission control system of their location,
transmitter, receiver, and antenna characteristics in advance. This is often information
that exists in the licensing records currently managed by spectrum administrations.
• Sensing of the protected node operation by either nodes or dedicated sensors that
inform the admission control system of the detections, and thereby invoke protection
of the operation. This is appropriate when the usage is not ﬁxed, or is intermittent.
Additional sensing may also be used as an adjunct to intra-tier coexistence to estimate
actual path losses, duty cycles and other aspects of tier incumbents.
Hybrid operation is also possible. For example, in the US CBRS rules (to be discussed
in more detail in later chapters) the protected users include naval radars, which are to
be sensed by sensors associated with the SAS, ﬁxed C-Band satellite downlinks, whose
location is already in databases, and Part 90 operations (such as wireless Internet service
provider (WISP) base stations), which are also in regulatory databases. The Dynamic
Frequency Selection (DFS) regime is another example. Although it does not comply
with our criteria for a three-tier regime, it has an ecosystem awareness function for
sensing of the many types of radars in the band, and alerting a local decision element.
The TVWS system is all declarative by incumbent users, through registration of the
broadcast station with regulators, or per-use registration of wireless microphones that
use Television (TV) frequencies.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

5.3 Analysis Algorithms
83
Another source of ecosystem awareness is the activity of the admission control
system itself. The stateful admission control system is the competent authority for the
location of all nodes that were permitted entry under the three-tier regime. Within the
admission control system, a protected node is essentially the same regardless of its
tier, so the awareness function can be abstracted independently from the method by
which this awareness is granted. Each spectrum grant that is approved, expires, or is
relinquished changes the state of the ecosystem.
Another practical consideration in the awareness function is the degree of deployment
information that must be disclosed to have a viable sharing regime. In the US CBRS
proceedings, this has been a subject of considerable controversy. Government users
are very sensitive to having to disclose details of their operation. Public safety users
fear disclosing investigations. Militaries are protective of their deployments and usage
patterns. Commercial operators desire to keep deployment speciﬁcs conﬁdential as
proprietary business information.
All of these concerns make the technical process of organizing the ecosystem
awareness more complex due to the competing requirements for accurate analysis of
interference, and the maintenance of user conﬁdentiality. In the case of the US CBRS
band, the military users were given very wide protection areas to reduce the need
for accurate admission control system location data,1 while civil users of the shared
spectrum were required to disclose Global Positioning System (GPS) accurate location
information.
For now, we will maintain a very broad deﬁnition of ecosystem awareness. It is likely
that these concepts will have to be expanded to include use cases that are speciﬁc
to nations and bands that have not yet been examined for inclusion in a three-tier
framework.
5.3
Analysis Algorithms
The analysis tasks of an admission control system are driven by the physics, not the
regulations, so this element of the admission control system can be quite generalized
in application to bands and locations. Speciﬁc algorithms will be discussed in a
later chapter, but the components of the analysis component include models for the
following:
Device Characteristics Detailed device characteristics are essential to the accurate
estimation of interference conditions. For example, ﬁlter characteristics are critical
to analyzing adjacent band and channel effects, out of band emission masks are
essential to extending beyond co-channel users.
Antenna Patterns At higher frequencies, directional antennas become more common,
and signiﬁcantly impact the interference analysis. Antennas may reduce or enhance
1 In fact, the sensing system is prohibited from computing the location of naval vessels, recording accurate
detection times, recording spectral signatures, or retaining the information about usage for more than the
minimum needed to accomplish the protection process.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

84
Three-Tier Spectrum Admission Control Systems
sensitivity. Satellite antennas operate in three dimensions, so they may have a very
different response on the horizon than they do in the direction of the orbits or
deep-space locations.
Propagation Propagation is one of the most signiﬁcant factors in interference analysis.
At the frequencies typically available for sharing, purely distance based loss models
are overly conservative in estimating path loss.2 Actual losses are driven by the
obstructions in the path, more than the distance of the path. These models will be
discussed in more depth later in this book.
5.4
Device/Network Interaction
In this section we will lay out a very general set of functions that are inherent in the
operation of a three-tier admission control system. Different systems may arrange these
in various schemes, but the essential elements are likely to be common across designs.
Spectrum Inquiry A spectrum sharing regime offers devices a large number of
options. These options are very situational, as well. Therefore, it is important that
the admission control system provide devices with the ability to inquire about what
spectrum resources are (potentially) available to the device. This will be particularly
important as more nations adopt three-tier spectrum, and do so in more bands, in
order that devices, or device designs, can roam freely around the world and obtain
availability information, without dependence on nation-by-nation, and regulation,
programming. Wherever possible, policy should be implemented centrally in the
access control system, not the devices.
Device Registration Device registration provides the static information regarding the
device’s identity, location and other information that is not impacted by the strategy
implicit in its later grant request. This information could be integrated with a grant
request. But, since a device may have many grants in its lifetime yet need only
register once, it makes sense to treat this as a separate transaction.
Grant Request Grant requests are issued by devices and networks to obtain the right
to use spectrum. Grant requests can be for a speciﬁc frequency or frequencies, or an
amount of bandwidth. Grant requests result in either a grant being issued or rejected.
Grant Relinquishment Devices may relinquish a grant when no longer required, such
as when the device wants to move frequency or terminate operation, among other
reasons.
Directed Relinquishment/Relocation Since higher-tier users may enter the band, or
change frequencies, the admission control system must have the ability to direct
lower-tier devices to change frequencies to avoid interfering with these users.
Depending on national regulations, devices would have to accept these relocation
directives, or relinquish the grant it held and obtain another.
2 This is conservative from the perspective of interference calculation, in that they provide estimates of
path loss that are typically much lower than the observed values. These models would be considered
optimistic from the perspective of communication link analysis.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

5.6 Coexistence Optimizations
85
Grant Termination Grants may need to be terminated in their entirety. Higher-tier
users could utilize all of the spectrum, individual devices could be determined to
be operating out of tolerance, interference events could be detected, or other reasons
could result in a device being directed to completely terminate operations.
5.5
Protection Decision-making
Protection decision-making is abstracted as operating on the output of the various
analytic tools. This can be considered the single-node-on-single-node interaction, or
the more complex and meaningful many-on-one interactions, where the consequences
of the entire ecosystem on each protected node are determined, and used, as the basis of
decisions.
We abstract the decision-making from the analysis because we imagine a common set
of analytic tools that are independent of the speciﬁc band and national administration.
The decision-making component carries the administration-speciﬁc protection criteria,
geographic constraints, and other limitations. Of course, this is an over simpliﬁcation,
but it is a starting point to avoid looking at each nation and each band as a unique
situation for three-tier spectrum sharing. The commonalities likely outweigh the
differences.
Protection decisions may impact more than just the node that initiated the transaction.
The entry of a protected node, whether as a primary, or a secondary, can force
relocations or removal of nodes in lower tiers. For example, the “Use it or Share it”
principle permits a GAA to occupy spectrum to which a PA holder has rights, if the PA
is not actually utilizing the spectrum. However, when the PA elects to exercise its rights,
the lower-tier GAA must be relocated to spectrum that would not cause interference.
So this is not a simple transaction model; one entrant could cause any number of
chain reactions that might disrupt many other nodes operation, particularly in dense
environments.
In Chapter 7, we will develop more detailed models of how the protection criteria
that drive these decisions are, or could be, expressed.
5.6
Coexistence Optimizations
The admission control system could have the mission of assuring compliance with the
interference protection rules. A well-functioning ecosystem requires an additional layer
of services to assist devices in making decisions that result in the least interference
impact. Although these services might be integrated into an admission control system
product, they are essentially different from other aspects of the admission control system
in a number of ways:
• The operation of the coexistence layer is not deciding the legality of operation, as in
incumbent protection. It considers a number of alternatives, all of which are compliant
with the regulations.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

86
Three-Tier Spectrum Admission Control Systems
• The coexistence layer rules are likely developed by the members of the ecosystem,
rather than national administrators.
• The coexistence layer may reﬂect technology-speciﬁc features of devices. Most
regulations are technology neutral.
The coexistence function is not essential to the basic spectrum management regime,
as it does not function in the interference protection of higher-tier nodes. However, it
is highly beneﬁcial to the lowest tier in distributing the use of the spectrum resource as
evenly as possible across these users. Although it cannot create spectrum where there is
none, it can provide more conﬁdence that a reasonable level of service can be assured
within a given spectrum, and minimize any “gamesmanship” in the use of the spectrum.
This function is particularly useful with technologies that have coexistence features
inherent in their operation. For example, LTE was designed to operate effectively in
“Re-use One” conditions where spectrum is shared between adjacent access points.
However, these mechanisms were designed to operate within monolithic carrier
infrastructures, with a single, fully coordinated, and connected Extended Packet Core
(EPC), tightly coordinating the nodes operation.
However, in the use case we envision in the shared bands, there is not a single
monolithic management layer, but a number of independent networks operated
independently. These are not just one LTE network on a given frequency, but instead
many. To mutually beneﬁt from the coexistence capabilities of LTE, it is necessary
to provide some coordination across these networks. This principle, “Federated LTE”
provides a degree of coordination between sovereign network operators. Examples
include: neighboring enterprises in an ofﬁce building, adjoining network operators,
apartment units, stores in a shopping venue, and the like.
At ﬁrst glance, coexistence might appear to be relevant only to the protected (GAA)
tier. However, it has utility in any tier to reduce interference between peers. For example,
unless spectrum and area are set aside for guard bands, spectrally and physically
adjacent PA users will have interference due to adjacent channel and co-channel
interference. The same techniques that would enable mixed GAA users to operate in
close proximity to each other will also be highly useful to enable PA operations to
coexist along PA boundaries, or in adjacent channels.
5.7
Example Implementations of Database Systems
This section will discuss the two instantiations of database controlled spectrum
management regimes. The ﬁrst (TVWS) is not a three-tier management regime, but
was one of the important precursors to the three-tier approach. The second is the US
CBRS implementation of the structure. Each of these represents a deployed spectrum
management admission control system that represents successful speciﬁcation of the
regulations, development of the software and its operation, development of devices to
utilize the services, and validation sufﬁcient for regulators to approve them for use.
The speciﬁcs of the representative CBRS implementation of three-tier spectrum will be
discussed in later chapters.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

5.7 Example Implementations of Database Systems
87
5.7.1
Television White Space Database Service
The architecture of the TVWS admission control system is shown in Figure 5.2,
in the context of the components of Figure
5.1. The drawing shows the reduced
complexity of not addressing aggregate interference protection, and not providing a
protected secondary user tier. Essentially, admission is pre-computable statically, and
admission requests can be compared to these pre-computed values. The ecosystem also
is simpliﬁed by having all of the awareness of protection from the declared existence of
TV broadcasters and wireless microphones.
• The TVWS regime does not consider aggregate interference. Therefore, there is no
requirement to update the ecosystem as nodes are admitted to the band. Instead, the
rules can be predetermined once the protected nodes are identiﬁed.
• There is no coexistence management services, so this function, and the supporting
technology-speciﬁc models, are not required. Coexistence is deferred to the devices
and networks to be accomplished, if at all.
• There is only one shared tier, so there is no requirement for multiple grant paths.
• All of the ecosystem knowledge required is provided by the registration of broadcast
stations and microphones.
This architecture might be considered to be the simplest form of an automated
admission control system. It has all of the essential elements of moving from manual
determination of sharing opportunities to an automated transaction.
5.7.2
CBRS Spectrum Access System
The architecture of the three-tier CBRS [1, 2] SAS admission control system is shown
in Figure 5.3, in the context of the components of Figure 5.1. The CBRS management
fully implements all of the functionality of the model framework, with minor departures
in implementation.
TV and
Microphone
Registration
Ecosystem
Awareness
Device/Net
Interaction
Analysis
Algorithms
Decision-
Making
Policy
Constraints
Modeling
Data
TVWS
Devices
Figure 5.2 Simpliﬁed depiction of the Television White Space admission control system
architecture.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

88
Three-Tier Spectrum Admission Control Systems
Propagation
Geo Data
Radar
Sensing
FCC
Registrations
WinnForum
Messaging
Analysis
Algorithms
CBRS
Rules
TD-LTE,
Wi-Fi
Decision-
Making
PA
GAA
Ecosystem
Awareness
Coexistence
CBRS
Devices
Satellite Rcvrs,
WISPS
Naval Ships
Figure 5.3 CBRS admission control system architecture.
• The ecosystem has two sources of incumbent information. Radar sensing is used to
create awareness of naval ship operations, and the existing regulatory regime provides
records of Part 90 and Fixed Satellite Service (FSS) deployments.
• It is anticipated that there will be heavy band usage by TD-LTE technology, and it is
possible that Wi-Fi and proprietary standards may be introduced, so the coexistence
process is being tailored to support multiple technologies. This process is not a
regulatory mandate, but is provided due to its utility and to reduce risk to users.
• The primary database supporting analysis is the geographic terrain data that is used
in the propagation modeling, such as terrain, building structures, and attenuative
materials.
• The speciﬁc device interactions are deﬁned by the Wireless Innovation Forum
(WinnForum) standards.
• The rule set is from the US FCC Part 96. These are complex rules due to the infancy
of the technology, lack of operational experience with operating these systems, and
protection of the incumbent users. The CBRS rules include a number of geographic
considerations, so this regulatory data also includes a number of geographic products,
such as census tract boundaries, urban/rural designations, etc.
5.8
Suggested Reading
This chapter introduced many broad concepts, but did not develop them into detail, as
this is provided in the speciﬁc chapters later in this book. There are interesting works
in each of the ﬁve functional partitions from Section 5.1. More speciﬁc readings are
provided in the individual book chapters.
Awareness There has been a signiﬁcant effort in the academic and regulatory
communities to understand the capabilities and limitations of sensing by Dynamic
Spectrum Access (DSA) and TVWS systems.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
89
• The US FCC has provided some analysis results of the testing of TV sensors
[3, 4].
• There has been a signiﬁcant effort in the academic community to understand
the capabilities and limitations of sensing by DSA and Cognitive Radio (CR)
systems [5, 6, 7].
• The sensing of radars was central to the DFS regime [8].
Analysis Analysis considerations largely revolve around propagation models and their
application to speciﬁc situations. There is an extensive literature regarding these
models, most of which demonstrates why no model can be depended on in more than
a few cases. The application of these models thus must be either highly conservative,
or highly situational [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14].
Decision-making There are several sources that begin the deﬁnition of the
decision-making of an admission control system, including:
• The only regulator input on admission control system requirements is provided
by the FCC regulations for Part 96. These include two orders from the FCC
[1, 2].
• The President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST)
report [15] provides a somewhat more expansive, if less speciﬁc vision of an
admission control system.
Interaction The WinnForum has developed a set of requirements for all of the
functions within the CBRS ecosystem. Speciﬁc requirement documents have been
developed for the admission control system, or SAS at several levels of generality
[16, 17, 18, 19, 20].
Coexistence Most of the available literature addresses the coexistence of uncoordi-
nated Media Access Layer (MAC) layers using Listen Before Talk (LBT), such as
Wi-Fi [21], or the coexistence of Wi-Fi and non-LBT technologies, such as LTE or
Long-Term Evolution Unlicensed (LTE-U) [22, 23].
References
1 Federal Communications Commission, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to
Commercial Operation in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354, Report and Order
and Second Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Order (2015). http://apps.fcc.gov/
edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-15-47A1.pdf.
2 ——, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to Commercial Operation in
the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354 (2016). https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/
attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
3 FCC Ofﬁce of Engineering and Technology, Initial Evaluation of the Performance of
Prototype TV-Band White Space Devices, OET Report: FCC/OET 07-TR-1006 (2007).
4 ——, Evaluation of the Performance of Prototype TV-Band White Space Devices Phase II,
OET Report: FCC/OET 08-TR-1005 (2008).
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

90
Three-Tier Spectrum Admission Control Systems
5 K. Sithamparanathan and A. Giorgett, Cognitive Radio Techniques: Spectrum Sensing,
Interference Mitigation, and Localization (Artech House, 2012).
6 T. S. Dhope, Cognitive Radio Networks Optimization with Spectrum Sensing Algorithms
(River Publications, 2015).
7 T. Yucek and H. Arslan, A survey of spectrum sensing algorithms for cognitive radio
applications. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, 11/1 (2009), 116–130.
8 The Wi-Fi Alliance Spectrum and Regulatory Committee, Spectrum Sharing Task Group
Regulatory Task Group, Spectrum Sharing in the 5 GHz Band - DFS Best Practices, (2007).
www.ieee802.org/18/Meeting_documents/2007_Nov/WFA-DFS-Best-Practices.pdf.
9 A. G. Longley and P. L. Rice, Prediction of Tropospheric Radio Transmission Loss over
Irregular Terrain: A Computer Method - 1968. Technical report, ESSA ERL 79-ITS 67
(Washington, DC: US Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1968).
10 A. Molisch, L. Greenstein, and M. Shaﬁ, Propagation issues for cognitive radio. Proceedings
of the IEEE, 97/5 (2009), 787–804.
11 H. Zhao, R. Mayzus, S. Sun, M. Samimi, J. K. Schulz, Y. Azar, K.Wang, G. N. Wong,
F. Gutierrez, and T. S. Rappaport, 28 GHz millimeter wave cellular communication
measurements for reﬂection and penetration loss in and around buildings in New York city.
2013 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC) (2013), 5163–5167.
12 J. Lu, D. Steinbach, P. Cabrol, P. Pietraski, and R. V. Pragada, Propagation characterization
of an ofﬁce building in the 60 GHz band. The 8th European Conference on Antennas and
Propagation (EuCAP 2014) (2014), 809–813.
13 C. Haslett, Essentials of Radio Wave Propagation (Cambridge University Press, 2008).
14 J. B. Andersen, T. S. Rappaport, and S. Yoshida, Propagation measurements and models for
wireless communications channels. IEEE Communications Magazine 33/1 (1995), 42–49.
15 President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, Report to the President:
Realizing the Full Potential of Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth
(Executive Ofﬁce of the President (EOP), Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP), 2012). http://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/microsites/ostp/pcast-
stem-ed-ﬁnal.pdf.
16 Spectrum
Sharing
Committee
(SSC),
SAS
Functional
Architecture.
WINNF-15-
P-0047-V1.0.0 (Wireless Innovation Forum, 2015).
17 ——, CBRS Communications Security Technical Speciﬁcation, 1st edn (Wireless Innovation
Forum, 2016).
18 ——, CBRS Operational Security Technical Speciﬁcation, WINNF-15-S-0071-V1.0.0 (Wire-
less Innovation Forum, 2016).
19 ——, CBRS Operational and Functional Requirements, WINNF-15-S-0112 (Wireless
Innovation Forum, 2016).
20 ——, Spectrum Access System Requirements (Wireless Innovation Forum, 2016).
21 N. Rupasinghe and ˙I Güvenç, Licensed-assisted access for WiFi-LTE coexistence in the
unlicensed spectrum. IEEE Globecom Workshops (2014), 894–899.
22 C. Chen, R. Ratasuk, and A. Ghosh, Downlink performance analysis of LTE and WiFi
coexistence in unlicensed bands with a simple listen-before-talk scheme. IEEE 81st Vehicular
Technology Conference (2015), 1–5.
23 A. Mukherjee, J. F. Cheng, S. Falahati, L. Falconetti, A. Furuskär, B. Godana, D. H. Kang,
H. Koorapaty, D. Larsson, and Y. Yang, System architecture and coexistence evaluation of
licensed-assisted access LTE with IEEE 802.11. 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Communication Workshop (2015), 2350–2355.
.006
16:02:37, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

6
Admission Control
Management of Access Point
Devices and Their Clients
6.1
Introduction
An important consideration in the spectrum management regime is the impact that the
spectrum regime has on the ﬂexibility of devices that would utilize it. If the constraints
of accommodating the unique constraints of operating within the regime are too great,
the beneﬁts of spectrum ﬂexibility will not be realized. In this chapter, we examine
the impact of a three-tier regime on the range of devices that populate the secondary
ecosystem in a client/Access Point (AP) network mode. In particular, we contrast
standalone, independent endpoints, and those that are architecturally dependent on a
“superior” node for operation and are therefore subservient to the spectrum decisions of
the master (access point) node.
This hierarchal arrangement of access point and client is the fundamental design
concept behind most of the current wireless Local Area Networks (LAN) and Wide
Area Network (WAN) architectures, such as 2G, 3G, and 4G technologies, such as
Long-Term Evolution (LTE), as well as Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi). In this chapter, we
examine the implications of this architecture on three-tier regimes, and vice versa.
6.2
Management of Different Connectivity Models
It might appear that the secondary spectrum regime controls would have to be accessed
by all of the devices that operate in a secondary status. In this section, we will examine
at what level of the network to apply these requirements at, and therefore the ability to
operate devices that are not three-tier aware in the three-tier ecosystem. The question
is at what level of the network to apply these spectrum management techniques? The
question of what is a controlled device, and what is not, is an important consideration
and is not as obvious as it would appear.
We consider two treatments that can be applied:
Endpoints Link with ﬁxed, independent endpoints of operation, either of which could
transmit independently, or that have unique interference regions, such as with high
gain antennas.
Access Points Links that may have more than one client device, when the clients
cannot operate independently of the AP, and have overlapping interference regions,
or whose locations would not be ﬁxed, or knowable.
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

92
Admission Control Management
The endpoint case is relatively simple in the three-tier spectrum model. Each endpoint
is an independent node in the admission control system. This matches the simple
reference model. Unfortunately, AP networks are most complex.
A simpliﬁed representation of an AP deployment is shown in Figure 6.1. In this case,
the access point is typically higher powered and better positioned in the center of an
area. There is a service area in which mobile devices (clients) can roam and in which
the AP can maintain control in terms of spectrum and mode decision-making. Since we
are protecting this AP from interference, we are implicitly protecting each of its clients.
Similarly, adjoining users are being protected from interference from the AP, and any
of its clients.
For this reason, the admission control system must consider not only the location
of the access point, but also all of the possible positions of clients, and the outgoing
interference they could cause, and/or the incoming interference they would be subjected
to. The logical extent of the AP protection is therefore not the Access Point Protection
Area of Figure 6.1, but the Service Area Protection Area in the ﬁgure. This avoids
the necessity of tracking each mobile client’s location and making rapid changes in
spectrum allocations, at the cost of likely protecting from conditions (device presence
and positions) that do not exist at most points in time.
The maximum device density can only be reached with the exact protection provided
by the end point protection model. This protection can be tailored to protect only the
immediate region of each actual end point, and for certain directions of use in the path
between the nodes. However, the AP model offers ﬂexibility to accommodate mobile
patterns of use with movement and variable usage density, using the AP service as a
surrogate for the location of the mobiles.
Access Point
Protection Radius
Service Area Protection 
Radius
Service
Area
Access
Point
Clients
Clients
Figure 6.1 Relationship of protection and service ares around access regions.
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

6.2 Management of Different Connectivity Models
93
In the United States (US) Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) proceeding, the
“deﬁnition of use” was a contentious issue. Some of those who believed they would
likely be purchasing Priority Access License (PAL) rights, argued that the dimensions
of use should match the geometry of their protection rights. Others, attempting to
maximize the amount of sharable spectrum, argued for a minimal deﬁnition. In the
end, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules allowed the PAL owner to
declare a dimension (a Priority Access License Protection Area (PPA)), but capped
at the maximum radius that the node could serve, as determined by the admission
control system. This is a plausible engineering deﬁnition of use, as compared to a
policy-driven one.
Neither the AP nor point-to-point modes are explicit in the initial three-tier literature.
In fact, there is implicit focus on AP operation in the US CBRS regulations, and it is
clearly the reference model. Protection cases are shown in Figure 6.2.
Protection of AP operation is different from protection of client operation, and
different yet again from protection of client devices from other client devices. Clients
may be much closer to the potential protected victim, clients typically operate at lower
transmit power when working with small cells, and they have less antenna gain, among
other differences with the treatment of the AP.
In case 1, we protect the APs only; the clients are assumed to be close enough that
the protection of the AP is sufﬁcient to protect the client. In case 2, we protect the
Clients
Clients
Clients
Clients
Clients
Clients
Access
Access
Point
Point
Access
Access
Point
Point
Access
Access
Point
Point
Access
Access
Point
Point
Access
Access
Point
Point
Access
Access
Point
Point
Client
Client
Protection
Protection
Radius
Radius
Access Point
Protection Radius
Access Point
Protection Radius
Access Point
Protection Radius
Access Point
Protection Radius
Case 2: Access Points are
 
Protected from
 
Other Access Point
 
Clients
Case 3: Clients are
 
Protected from
 
Other Access
 
Point Clients
Case 1: Access Points
 
are Protected
 
from Each Other
Access
Point
Access
Point
Access
Point
Access
Point
Access
Point
Access
Point
Client
Protection
Radius
Figure 6.2 Options for AP and client protection.
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

94
Admission Control Management
Table 6.1 Client interference analysis variables.
Variable
Meaning
PAP
Access Point EIRP (in dBm).
PUE
Client EIRP (in dBm).
RAP-AP
Range from AP to its closest permitted AP (in meters).
RAP-UE
Range from AP to its farthest client (in meters). This is the AP service area in
this model.
RUE-UE
Range from a client on one AP to a client on an adjoining one (in meters).
α
Propagation exponent (as in LP ∝rα).
RAP-AP
Distance between Access Points (in meters).
Pprot
Maximum interference permitted at AP or client node (in dBm).
f
Operating frequency (in MHz).
client at the edge of a service area from interference by another AP, but the client is
subject to interference from the clients associated with any other access point. This can
be effective if a timing protocol can avoid these close proximity clients receiving and
transmitting at the same interval. The most extreme protection is provided in case 3,
where the admission control system enforces client separation sufﬁcient to isolate client
transmissions.
To analyze the consequences of these approaches, we will develop a closed-form
model. Table 6.1 provides the variables that deﬁne the localized environment. For
simplicity in this discussion, we will consider a constant propagation exponent,
and symmetric AP nodes and clients, even though actual admission control system
implementations would have to address heterogeneous device populations.
We know that for all of the protection cases, the path loss (Lp) must equal the
difference between their EIRP (PAP or PUE) and Pprot. A simple model of path loss over
a distance d in meters, frequency f in MHz, and propagation exponent α is provided by
Eq. (6.1).
Lp(d) = 10α log10(d) + 20log10(f) −27.55
(in dB)
(6.1)
We can compute the required path loss between the node pairs to determine the path
loss which must be achieved between these pairs. This also provides the AP density in
this simplistic case. Eq. (6.2) provides the conditions that each case must meet.
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
Lp(RAP-AP) = PAP −Pprot
for Case 1
Lp(RAP-UE + RUE-UE) = PAP −Pprot
for Case 2
Lp(RAP-AP) = PAP −Pprot
Lp(RUE-UE) = PUE −Pprot
for Case 3
Lp(RAP-UE + RUE-UE) = PAP −Pprot
Lp(RAP-AP) = PAP −Pprot
(6.2)
Note that case 2 and 3 have multiple conditions that must be met. Case 2 and 3 must
meet the conditions of the prior cases, as well as the additional constraints, so only the
ﬁrst equation in each case is unique to the case and needs to be developed. These cases
are inherently hierarchical.
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

6.2 Management of Different Connectivity Models
95
The impact of the case 3 protection discipline varies greatly depending on the
relationship of client power (PUE) and AP power (PAP). In case 1, the path loss for
the AP power must occur over a path length of RAP-AP. In case 2, this same loss must
occur over the range of its own cloud, and the cloud to cloud spacing (RAP-UE +RUE-UE).
Since these two distances must be the same (in the limiting case), we can see that the
clouds cannot be allowed to overlap. This situation has a number of solutions, but the
most obvious one is that RUE-UE = 0, and that RAP-UE = DAP-AP
2
. The actual dimensions
of these distances are strongly inﬂuenced by the propagation exponent (α), but the
relationship among them is not α sensitive.
The case 3 conditions are obviously the most restrictive due to the condition that
RUE-UE > 0, since the UE power must be reduced to the Pprot value across this range.
Whereas case 2 allowed the maximum service area to be adjacent to another cell, case
3 requires that this loss be accomplished between the two service areas.
We can normalize the relationship of client and AP power by creating a variable
Rclient-loss that is the distance for the client power to be reduced from PUE to the value
of Pprot, and similarly RAP-loss, which is the range for the AP power to be reduced from
PAP to the value of Pprot.
We can express these two distance variables in terms of each other, and the
propagation constant, as shown in Eq. (6.3).
Rclient-loss
RAP-loss
=
pUE
pAP
−α
(6.3)
For example, if we had clients with a peak of 20 dBm, and APs with 30 dBm, in a
close, free-space environment where α was around 2, the client-to-client spacing can
be around 3 times less than the AP to AP spacing. We will normalize our results to the
RAP-loss unit distance. The comparison is shown in Eq. (6.4).
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
RAP-AP = RAP-loss
for Case 1
RAP-AP = 2RAP-loss
for Case 2
RAP-AP =

2 +
PUE
PAP
−α	
RAP-loss
for Case 3
(6.4)
Case 3 is interesting in considering client protection strategies. If the ratio
PUE
PAP

is small (clients have much lower EIRP than APs), client-to-client protection is not
expensive, and almost reverts to case 2 in terms of spectrum density cost. However,
when the EIRP is equivalent, then the spacing is three times that of case 1, and the
density is reduced as the square of spacing. The density is less than half of what is
achievable in the assumptions of case 2. There are very signiﬁcant beneﬁts in techniques,
such as time alignment that avoids the necessity to protect clients from clients. A two
times increase in spectrum effectiveness does not come this easily in other aspects of
wireless design!
The protection of devices within secondary tiers has some ﬂexibility. Table 6.2
illustrates the relationship of protection criteria, achievable density, and the methods
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

96
Admission Control Management
Table 6.2 Density impacts of client protection.
Case
Density
Impact
Mitigation
1
9
Clients are highly likely to
be interfered with by
adjoining APs. APs are
protected.
Some timesharing of the band would
be required to create the equivalent of
a Media Access Layer (MAC) layer
among adjoining devices.
2
4
Operation of clients will
interfere with other clients
far from the AP.
Time coordination to set agreed to
client and AP transmit windows, in
common across all of the devices.
3
1
Complete protection of
clients and APs, with no
constraints on their
operation.
None needed.
needed to ensure client reliability. In the analysis we assume clients and AP have same
rights, they are in close proximity (free-space propagation) and the density is compared
to case 3 protection.
Aggregate outbound interference is another issue that can introduce non-trivial
considerations. The source of interference from the composite of the AP and its clients
could be driven from the AP itself, or a closer client device, or it could come from a
wide range of user devices, depending on the MAC layer.
• If the MAC layer is Time Division Duplex (TDD), then it is a reasonable assumption
that the AP and the clients do not transmit simultaneously, so they do not need to be
aggregated. If the power limits are identical, then the closest possible position to the
victim is the location of the emitter, for purposes of outbound interference analysis.
The AP can be ignored. This is typical of Wi-Fi.
• If the MAC layer is TDD (as above) and there is the possibility that multiple clients
can transmit simultaneously, the problem is more complex. For example, LTE allows
the AP to direct subcarriers (resources in LTE terminology), and therefore it could
have multiple clients transmitting at the maximum power in the same channel.1
Treatment of this has to be tailored to the operating concept of the network, and other
than prescribing worst case, there is no single analytic treatment.
• If the MAC layer is Listen Before Talk (LBT), then it has the idealized behavior
that is similar to TDD. If a node successfully senses that the channel is busy, it will
not transmit on top of the existing transmission. There is a ﬁnite error rate in this
detection.
• If the system uses Frequency Division Duplex (FDD), then each link has to be
addressed differently. The downlink is the AP itself, and the uplink is presumably
the same as the TDD case, with either a single or multiple devices utilizing a channel,
per the two cases above.
1 The assumption is that there is a power, rather than Power Spectral Density (PSD), limit. If there is a PSD
limit, this is not a concern.
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

6.3 Device Considerations in Three-Tier Spectrum Management Regimes
97
6.3
Device Considerations in Three-Tier Spectrum
Management Regimes
The focus of most spectrum policy discussions are on the impacts of various policies
on spectrum management structures. In three-tier spectrum management, there are
signiﬁcant impacts on the devices themselves. Some new software control functions
are mandatory, such as the interaction with the admission control system. Others are
desirable in order to provide high reliability operation in statistically available spectrum.
The device must include functionality that would not typically be included in a
communications device, at least in a non-Cognitive Radio (CR). These include the
following functional additions:
Interaction The admission control system imposes a new functionality onto devices.
They must be capable of a new set of interactions to negotiate spectrum. Speciﬁc
interaction requirements may vary by regime, but some sort of near-realtime
interaction is required for admission control functionality.
Sensing Sensing provides the device (and through the device, the admission control
process) with the ability to self-protect by being aware of the local environment. The
admission control system is aware of all device positions, but it is not able to know
the exact materials between devices, additionally, it does not even know if the nodes
that might interfere are active. Local awareness is likely to be superior to global
predictions, whether implemented locally or globally.
Self-optimization Spectrum decisions have previously been provided to devices. The
CR ﬁeld has researched how devices might make their own decisions, but there
are few environments in which these technologies can be deployed. However, in
an environment where a device might have multiple bands and channels available
from an admission control system, the device must have the ability to match its
mission to the spectrum that was available. This implies that the device be much
more mission-aware than a “dumb box,” so that it can make these decisions in an
informed manner.
Frequency coverage Frequency coverage provides ﬂexibility to the device to accept a
wide range of grants, and ensure that it has the coverage to match the range spectrum
the admission control system can provide access to. In the CBRS rules, devices
are required to have coverage of the full CBRS band to avoid being unnecessarily
restricted in spectrum access. As the amount of spectrum provided through an
admission control system increases, device economics may restrict the range of
coverage, and will be a strategic factor that is not present today.
Recourse The device will be faced with a unique number of situations. The admission
control system may cancel a grant, and the device will have to decide if, and where,
to ask for another grant. It should sense the environment, decide what channel is
best in its local environment, and ask for a grant, rather than just use the frequency
that was loaded by some external agent. The access control system may offer
noncontiguous spectrum, none at all, or less than asked for. The more ﬂexible the
available frequency coverage and modes, the more recourse the device will have to
provide high assurance operation in dense and constrained environments.
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

98
Admission Control Management
6.4
Database Interaction Capability
A requirement levied on a three-tier spectrum device is some mechanism to commu-
nicate with the admission control system in order to initiate operation. Fortunately,
many of the applications for wireless involve backhaul to the Internet, so this capability
is often inherent in both the device, and its deployment. However, there are other
applications, such as public safety, Combat Net Radio (CNR), aviation air-to-air, and
others where the use of backhaul Internet for authorization is not possible.
An example of an intermediate case is point-to-point microwave links. Typically,
these links are set to a ﬁxed frequency, and connect based on this installation parameter.
In three-tier spectrum, this would not be possible. There are workarounds. One such
workaround is for the Internet-connected endpoint to request its own channel, and
then make a request as a proxy for the endpoint (which presumably has no Internet
connectivity available). The ﬁrst endpoint would have to obtain a compatible set of
grants for each endpoint before it could initiate transmission and inform the other end
of the link of its grant. If the link operates in TDD, the fact that the ﬁrst node was
present might be sufﬁcient to indicate that it too had a grant for the same channel. If it
operates in FDD, the far end would have to receive the grant over the ﬁrst link, and then
use that grant channel for its link transmit. In that way, it would never operate without a
grant, and would have a mechanism to provide assured control over its operation. Proxy
operation is required for this mode of access.
Another connectivity consideration is the control of a device after it receives a grant.
There are any number of conditions that could cause the admission control system to
alter or terminate the operation of a node during its grant period, unless it is in the
highest tier. A higher-tier user could enter the band, and would be interfered with by the
continuing operation of the node using its current assignment, an interference complaint
may have been received, and changes may be either diagnostic or remedial.2
Higher-tier users are likely to insist that the framework provide for some form of
positive control over the operation of lower-tier users that could cause interference
to their operations. This could be provided through a number of mechanisms: push
messages, pull authorizations, loss of duplex carrier, etc. The speciﬁcation for this will
consist of some speciﬁed time to terminate transmission, initiated from some triggering
event, such as shown in Table 6.3.
In implementation, the cause of the abandonment requirement is probably not
relevant. The design of the interaction between the device and the admission control
system will be driven by the most stressing channel abandonment time requirement.
Since the device is not aware of why it might be told to abandon the channel, a common
mechanism can support all of the abandonment causes. Assuring the response times are
imposed is a signiﬁcant constraint on the device, and the topologies in which it can be
deployed.
2 Diagnostic changes would be to test and determine if changing this nodes operation changed the
interference condition if there was some question regarding the source. Remedial changes would be for
the purposes of resolving interference, when there was high conﬁdence the node was responsible.
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

6.5 Frequency Flexibility and Client Control
99
Table 6.3 Example end-to-end channel abandonment time requirements.
Event
Time
Allowed
Abandonment Time Measured From
Detection of Fixed Location
Primary Signal
120 seconds
From transmit signal imitation.
Detection of Mobile Primary
Signal
120 seconds
From time signal is detected above
abandonment threshold for 10 percent of any
5-second period.
Registration of PA in Same
Channel
30 minutes
Measured from admission control system
grant issuance to PA node.
Interference Report
300 seconds
Registered from admission control system
Operator direction to terminate/change
operation.
The methods used in the US CBRS design are described in Chapter 13. The US design
was driven by a very stringent abandonment time to protect naval radars, and may not
be representative of other situations, of other applications.
6.5
Frequency Flexibility and Client Control
One key difference of a three-tier device from a conventionally managed one is that a
three-tier device has no expectation of any speciﬁc frequency of operation. The wider
the range of operating frequencies it has available, the more likely it is that it will be able
to receive a grant. It is particularly useful if the available frequencies are not associated
with correlated activity in higher-level tier spectrum users.
For example, if spectrum were shared with a forestry ﬁre department, it might have a
high availability percentage, but it would be completely unavailable at times and places
with forest ﬁres. It would have been better to share some frequencies with the forestry
ﬁre department and some with the ﬂood control ofﬁce, as these two demand events
would be unlikely to occur simultaneously, and are probably decorrelated.
Implicit in the concept of operating in shared band is the requirement that devices
have recourse to multiple options to connect. If the model is that shared spectrum is used
as an ofﬂoad network, then end user devices have recourse to some other method if a
given channel is reclaimed. Devices intended to use shared spectrum have an obligation
to be more ﬂexible in band and/or service support.
This is not just an idealistic position. Spectrum incumbents have a well founded
fear that users of the shared spectrum will become dependent on this access, and
create political pressure anytime it is denied, as in the garage door scenario discussed
previously [1, 2]. Even worse, there might be a willingness to utilize secondary spectrum
for safety-of-life applications that create even more pressure on incumbents not to
exercise their full rights. This issue was raised often in the discussion in the United
States of America (USA) regarding the CBRS band.
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

100
Admission Control Management
The solution is that devices that utilize shared spectrum have an implicit requirement
to support more connectivity options, implying more channels and bands, at the very
least. Cellular ofﬂoad is a very practical use of shared spectrum, as if spectrum is
unavailable locally, the other cellular channels automatically are available and utilized,
without any user involvement, or even awareness. Non-cellular applications need to
have some equivalent methodology to assure that the devices can provide at least an
adequate level of service in the absence of an available shared spectrum grant on any
single band.
Band coverage is not enough. In dedicated spectrum, there are well understood limits
on incumbent usages of adjoining bands and channels.3 To use a US term, the shared
spectrum might be the “Wild, Wild West,” not one of the regimented environments.
Receiver analog performance, such as the linearity of the front end, ﬁlter width,
tunablility, and selectability are much more important for shared spectrum devices than
those intended for traditional, well-regulated spectrum.
6.6
Access Point Access Constraints
Previously in this chapter, there was a discussion of treating client devices of an access
point as a “cloud” of devices, with no speciﬁc location, or even density. This is based
on an assumption that client devices can ﬁnd the AP channel and mimic it, and be
compliant with the grant issued to the AP. Conditions for nodes to operate subservient
to AP and under grant issues by the AP are:
• Make no emissions until able to validate that their controlling AP is emitting.
• Use the same frequency and less than the power limits permitted to the AP. If the AP
receives a grant that is less than the power assumed by clients, it cannot utilize it, as
the clients would violate the grant when they emitted.
• Have characteristics, such as EIRP and receiver protection, that are consistent with the
grant requested by, and issued to, the AP. Typically, this would mean TDD operation.
• Immediately terminate operations if the AP terminates transmission.
• The reduction in maximum density caused by the lack of knowledge of the actual
client node placement is acceptable to the network application. The alternative is
100% emitter registration.
There is a signiﬁcant advantage to operating in the AP mode. The client need have
no awareness that it is operating in the three-tier framework. Since it is likely that
regulations differ in different countries, regions, and bands, having clients that do not
implement each of these variants is highly effective. For example, in the US CBRS band,
it is possible to use unmodiﬁed LTE band 42 and 43 User Equipment (UE) devices.4
3 The emphasis here is on current issues, such as raised by NEXTEL Personal Communications
Service (PCS) deployment and the proposed LightSquared LTE deployment. These demonstrate that
there is inadequate design awareness and consideration of what might be in the adjoining spectrum
segments in the future.
4 With the possible exception of management by the AP to assure that the Out of Band Emissions (OOBE)
are maintained below the regulatory limits.
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

6.8 Suggested Reading
101
The cost and complexity of implementing the unique aspects of the three-tier regime is
therefore limited to the presumably less numerous AP devices. The speed of deployment
of the US CBRS band will be greatly increased by the fact that this new band straddles
Third-Generation Partnership (3GPP) band 42 and 43, and existing UE products could
be planned for the band.
6.7
Point-to-Point and Multipoint Model
When the conditions described in the previous section (6.6) cannot be met, each network
endpoint must register with the admission control system and receive grants individually.
This mode has some advantages to the network:
• Each node can have characteristics that are unique from each other, and select unique
grant conditions.
• Full registration can support more complex networking modes, such as FDD.
• Point-to-multipoint and mesh networks that have overlapping coverage can be
supported, whereas overlapping mesh networks cannot be supported in access point
mode, if deconﬂiction is required.
• Operation of each node is independent. If one node has its grant terminated, the other
nodes are not impacted.
• The admission control system can be more exact in calculating protection implica-
tions, so a higher density can be achieved.
The disadvantages that arise include:
• The network operator must assure that the two endpoints receive the same frequency
assignment, even before they can perform two-way communication. This assurance
can be provided by the admission control system or the device registration message
contents.
• Twice as many admission control system transactions are involved.
• Endpoints must be capable of the admission control system interaction directly or
through a proxy prior to entry into the band.5
6.8
Suggested Reading
• There are an incredible number of subtle issues that arise when integrating the
non-symmetric usage, such as AP-client networked, into a three-tier structure that
is intended to be technology neutral, and thus open to innovation. Individual
technologies, such as Time Division Long Term Evolution (TD-LTE) have developed
a large amount of standard material on sharing of spectrum across AP devices, yet this
cannot be directly applied to three-tier without violating core principles. Methods
of voluntary compliance with industry regimes appear to be a logical extension
5 The FCC has language that requires authorization before beginning “service transmissions.” The
implication is that it may be permissible to make the registration and grant transaction over the air.
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

102
Admission Control Management
of the concept of an admission control system. Readings on LTE, and particularly
TD-LTE provide considerable background on how such coexistence features could be
implemented. Suggested readings are numerous, including many recent works [3, 4].
• The contradictory literature that has developed in the ongoing discussion over the
proposals for Long-Term Evolution Unlicensed (LTE-U) and Licensed Assisted
Access (LAA) highlight the issues involved in incompatible MAC layer concepts
in a shared band. Whatever ones opinion is on the topic, the positions presented by
all sides of this discussion are instructive in providing the maximal use of band with
varying network concepts of operation [5, 6].
• Two previous books by the author addressed the issues of ﬁlter and Low Noise
Ampliﬁer (LNA) performance in the context of dynamic spectrum access systems
[7, 8].
References
1 Federal Communications Commission, Consumers May Experience Interference to Their
Garage Door Opener Controls Near Military Bases. Public Notice, 20 F.C.C.R. 3614 (2005).
2 L. Luna, NEXTEL interference debate rages on. Mobile Radio Technology, 21/8 (2003), 26.
3 A. Ghosh, J. Zhang, J. G. Andrews, and R. Muhamed, Fundamentals of LTE (NJ: Prentice Hall,
2011).
4 A. Ghosh and R. Ratasuk, Essentials of LTE and LTE-A (Cambridge University Press, 2011).
5 N. Rupasinghe and ˙I Güvenç, Licensed-assisted access for WiFi-LTE coexistence in the
unlicensed spectrum. IEEE Globecom Workshops (2014), 894–899.
6 C. Chen, R. Ratasuk, and A. Ghosh, Downlink performance analysis of LTE and WiFi
coexistence in unlicensed bands with a simple listen-before-talk scheme. IEEE 81st Vehicular
Technology Conference (2015), 1–5.
7 P. F. Marshall, Quantitative Analysis of Cognitive Radio and Network Performance (Norwood,
MA: Artech House, 2010).
8 ——, Scaling, Density, and Decision-Making in Cognitive Wireless Networks (Cambridge
University Press, 2012).
.007
14:55:16, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

7
Taxonomy of Protection
Methods to Be Provided
Across and Within Tiers
7.1
Introduction to Three-Tier Analytic Components
This chapter focuses on the speciﬁc algorithmic components that may be included in
protection modes that three-tier regimes may implement. It provides a set of basic
methods that will later be integrated to address different types of incumbent or tiered
user protection, and to provide coexistence between peer devices within a tier.
The topics of this chapter are dealt with in great detail by a number of works, and a
very detailed description of any of these topics is beyond the scope of a single chapter.
This chapter will instead focus on the unique aspects of the use of these approaches in
three-tier spectrum management. The reader is referred to the section on further readings
for more detailed background and more extensive and detailed science on the topics.
The use of an automated admission control system opens up opportunities for
much more sophisticated methods to simultaneously improve interference avoidance
and density of use. The decision system discussion is addressed separately from the
protection discussion in order to isolate the purely technical aspects of the control
system from the policy-driven protection criteria discussion. This chapter will focus on
developing a basic set of analytic tools that are applicable to all spectrum management
regimes, independent of their structure.
7.2
Challenges in Ecosystem Interference Protection
Our traditional approaches to interference protection have generally focused on
extensive and detailed analysis of the worst case conditions between a small number
of possibly interfering nodes, and a small number of victim nodes. The results of this
analysis are then generalized to more complex deployments of both interfering and
victim nodes. In a three-tier regime, it is desired to change this analytic process in many
ways:
Ecosystem The interaction of all of the nodes in the ecosystem must be considered.
The interactions of all nodes upon all other nodes must be considered, rather than
extend one simple case.
Automated Analysis The analysis performed in the conventional process may be based
on science and physics, but the selection of cases and interpretation of results is
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

104
Taxonomy of Protection Methods to Be Provided Across and Within Tiers
a human process, and less scientiﬁc. For a three-tier system to operate effectively
and ﬂexibly, these decisions must be made automatically, and not be challengeable
individually.
Scale The solution to not selecting single cases, and then generalizing them, is
to consider all of the ecosystem simultaneously. This results in a computational
problem of signiﬁcant scale. For example, in the US Citizens Broadband Radio
Service (CBRS) deployment, if we assume 10 million devices, then the number of
possible interactions is 1014,1 and assuming an entry rate of 1 node per 10 seconds,
the admission control process must consider 1013 interactions (of varying complexity,
as we will see) every second.
This chapter will discuss the analytic challenges in constructing a three-tier admission
control system, but will not address the computational ones, such as algorithm selection,
processing architecture or other internal features of such a system.
7.3
Propagation Modeling
The science of a three-tier spectrum regime is based on propagation estimates of the
interfering paths. Most spectrum management approaches, including three-tier, focus on
prediction, and avoidance, of possible interference, rather than detecting and mitigating
the conditions. Spectrum management use of propagation tools is thus conservative by
nature, since the incentive structure provides regret from being overly cautious, but
signiﬁcant regret from being overly aggressive.
Propagation loss has been studied extensively, and a large number of models
have been developed of varying complexities, targeted environments, and frequency
applicability, among other differences. These have been applied for interference
analysis. However, it should be noted that these models were typically developed to
perform communications link analysis.
There are fundamental differences between the modeling characteristics used for link
closure and interference. In communications link analysis, the propagation estimate
is intended to provide the maximum path loss that could occur to a given conﬁdence
probability. This is the maximum loss that could be anticipated. In contrast, determining
if one node will interfere with another requires estimating the minimum loss that might
occur between these nodes. These are not symmetric considerations.
Figure 7.1 illustrates the differences in communications and interference estimation
in terms of the propagation loss curve. Communications analysis focuses on cumulative
probabilities approaching unity, while interference avoidance focuses on extremely low
probability regions of the curve. Whereas the possible loss is essentially inﬁnite, the
minimum loss is bound by the free-space path loss.2 Assuming that the losses are
1 Some of these node pairs may be too distant from each other to require extensive analysis, but must be at
least explicitly excluded from analysis.
2 This discussion does ignore any ducting of the high frequencies, which can occasionally result in path
losses that are less than free space.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

7.3 Propagation Modeling
105
Loss
Cumulative Probability
of  Lower Loss
Minimum Path Loss (r2)
1.0
0
Link Performance
Interest
Interference
Interest
Figure 7.1 The propagation loss curve.
distributed in any statistical manner around the mean loss is not effective, and, typically,
underestimates the actual path loss signiﬁcantly.
To build a classiﬁcation system for propagation models, we can consider three
fundamental levels of analysis
Free Space Most conservative approach, applicable to direct paths with no blockage or
reﬂective surfaces along the path. Applicable to most ground to space, and elevated
links.
Terrain Terrain models reﬂect the impact of terrain obstructions, curved earth,
diffracted paths, and often troposcatter. The Longley-Rice model is one of the
principle models of this category. This is the model most commonly used in spectrum
management.
Site Speciﬁc Site speciﬁc models reﬂect the local scattering environment around the
nodes in the path. The example in the next section would be an example of how
site-speciﬁc data could be developed. The ITU-R P452 model allows for extension
through site-speciﬁc scattering augmentation of the terrain-based analysis.
Path Speciﬁc Path speciﬁc models estimate the loss due to all of the items along the
path, such as trees, buildings and structures, and any other sources of blockage.
Ray Tracing Ray tracing attempts to analyze all of the reﬂective and diffractive
elements in the vicinity of the interference path. Ray tracing is particularly useful
for estimating the time delays of the reﬂective paths, which is generally not an issue
in interference analysis. For accurate estimates of path loss, ray tracing requires
accurate models of objects at the level of resolution in the range of a wavelength, so
large scale application in spectrum management has signiﬁcant practical limitations.
The lack of realism of terrain-based modeling in urban environments is best
exempliﬁed by a metaphor proposed by Dr. Andrew Clegg (Alphabet)3 who points
out that the terrain-based models view Manhattan Island as unchanged from the 1400s
3 Google Inc. at the time he made this suggestion.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

106
Taxonomy of Protection Methods to Be Provided Across and Within Tiers
As the Longley-Rice Model Considers Manhattan Island
As Manhattan Island Really is Today
From Library of Congress
Courtesy of Google Inc.
Figure 7.2 Terrain-based propagation model, and actual RF propagation view of Manhattan
Island.
to today. Figure 7.2 illustrates the lack of realism in viewing terrain as the dominant
factor in propagation. Propagation at the higher frequencies in use, in most settings, for
wireless is dominated by the scatter loss along the path, not the terrain or even the length
of the path!
It is clear that the propagation models available to us today are based on data
points that were collected decades ago. The models were developed with relatively
few data points and limited computation resources. They were typically developed by
collecting data at much lower frequencies than are used and contemplated today. Yet
these models still dictate spectrum availability, even though their results do not reﬂect
the environment of many uses.
7.3.1
The Importance of Scatter Loss Modeling
An example of the impact of clutter or scattering on real propagation losses in the
United States (US) CBRS band was provided in an ex-parte ﬁling [1] by Google Inc.
to the US Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Figure 7.3 illustrates the path
loss measured over at least 1 000 000 unique paths in the Mountain View, CA area.
Mountain View is a typically low-rise commercial area in a suburban setting. It is not
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

7.3 Propagation Modeling
107
Free-Space Estimate (L-R)
Additional Scattering Loss
Additional Scattering Loss
Measured Path Loss
Lost Opportunity for
Spectrum Sharing
Loss (dB)
200
150
100
143 dB
136 dB
126 dB
50
0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Distance (m)
Additional Scattering Loss
Figure 7.3 Scatter loss measurements in Mountain View, CA (from Google ex parte ﬁling on
February 16, 2016 [1]).
dense or vertically developed as in a city center. It is an intermediate case in analyzing
propagation, perhaps a bit more loss than a suburb, but much less than a dense city.
The upper distribution curve is the measured path loss over the distances on the
horizontal axis. The intermediate line is the free-space (r2) loss, which at distances
less than one kilometer are similar to those of Longley-Rice in ﬂat terrain. The lower
distribution is the path loss that exceeds the Longley-Rice estimate.
For example, in Figure 7.3, the path loss at 400 meters does not have a single
collection point with less than 30 dB of additional loss above the estimates provided by
the Longley-Rice model, and typically is 50 dB more loss than the r2 computation. In
terms of range, use of this actual data would decrease required node spacing by a factor
of 32.4 In terms of density, this is approximately 1 000 times more devices! The region
between the estimated path loss and the lowest value of measured path loss constitutes
lost opportunities for spectrum sharing due simply to unrealistically conservative, and
demonstrably incorrect, models.
There is no excuse for spectrum regulations to specify generalized, and high level
terrain-based models in the day of high resolution models of most urban environments
and accessible geographic databases, such as Google Earth. This is a legacy of
developing speciﬁc rules for interference protection that had to be applicable in any
environment. Therefore, any tool whose results were speciﬁc to an environment, such
as clutter loss, could not be applied. However, when moving to an admission control
system, such as a Spectrum Access System (SAS), every decision is situational, and
4 In free-space propagation (r2), each range doubling or halving accounts for 6 dB; –30 dB corresponds to
a 25 decrease in range.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

108
Taxonomy of Protection Methods to Be Provided Across and Within Tiers
therefore there is no reason not to include the situation speciﬁc aspects of the decision.
We no longer need rely on “one size ﬁts all” geographic protections.
7.4
Three-Dimensional Propagation
Traditional communications networks are two dimensional; they communicate over
the land, and the bulk of their path is horizontal. In deployments that are enterprise,
residential and indoor focused, many of their interference paths will be vertical, rather
than horizontal. An admission control system that has almost identical lat, long
pairs (and thus a distance of only meters between them) may in fact be hundreds
of meters apart vertically, and have thirty 15 cm concrete ﬂoors between the nodes,
as well.
Conventional models might show almost no path loss between these locations, but
they will have so much loss between them that they may as well be on different planets.
Vertical path loss is typically not driven by distance, but by the material loss along the
paths. Two residential ﬂoors may have slight loss through wood-based ﬂoors, while the
same distance in commercial spaces would have 50 dB of loss per intervening ﬂoor, due
to the mineral-based material used.5
7.5
Density Modeling
One beneﬁt of the use of an admission control is a much more precise determination
of device density. Traditionally, if a given amount of interference power is acceptable
at a given point, then the power permitted if one interfering node was present must be
reduced by a factor reﬂecting the worse case density. In most cases, this density will
not be present, and the use of the band will be reduced by this unnecessary level. With
admission control, we can almost completely discard the necessity to estimate density.
For nodes that are admitted as point-to-point, where every node is registered with the
SAS, there is absolutely no need to estimate density.
The question of density estimation arises with the admission of nodes as Access
Point (AP) networks. As discussed, the AP mode includes an assumed client area of
operation and operating mode. Assuming that all of the nodes operating under an AP
registration are on a common range of frequencies, it is reasonable to assume that the
network is operating in Time Division Duplex (TDD) mode. Presumably the network
has some mechanism to avoid collisions in time,6 therefore only one node would be
transmitting at a time. The issue of density therefore does not arise.7
5 The representative losses at 3.5 GHz are discussed in detail in Chapter 12 and millimeter wave losses in
Chapter 12 and Chapter 17.
6 An example of this might be Media Access Layer (MAC) layer techniques such as ﬁxed time slots, or use
of Request to Send (RTS)/Clear to Send (CTS).
7 The complication of sub-channel allocations, such as Long-Term Evolution (LTE) resource blocks is
dealt with in later chapters.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

7.6 Modeling Interference Aggregation
109
7.6
Modeling Interference Aggregation
One of the unique aspects of the admission control system is that it can control
admission to a channel based on the estimated aggregation of interference sources
in order to assure a maximum interference level in protected receivers. Instead of
“guessing” at the necessary restrictions on transmission rights in an attempt to limit
interference, the admission control system estimates the impact of each individual
emitter in the ecosystem and aggregates the total emissions of each of the emitters. This
provides assurances to protected users that total interference will not exceed a speciﬁed
threshold.
When we consider propagation, there is a probabilistic element. No analysis can
estimate propagation exactly. Instead, they bound the possible range of path loss
estimates to a given conﬁdence. In a one-on-one analysis, assured protection requires
that the path loss be determined with a very low probability that the actual interference
path loss could be less than the estimate.
The logical way to perform aggregation would be to sum the interference power
values that were determined in the one-on-one analysis. However, this runs the
risk of being overly conservative. If we assume that there are n independent
and equal contributors to the aggregate emissions, then the probability that the
aggregate emission level will be greater than the estimate will have a distribution
δ of δn.
We know from probability theory that if the power distribution i were equal, normal,
independent, and characterized by N(μx,σ 2), then the aggregate of n equal distributions
would be N(nμx,( √nσ)2). Of course, none of these conditions are true, but even this
simplistic case shows that addition of low probability points on the distribution is not a
suitable methodology.
On the other end of the complexity scale, one could model the discrete distribution
of each emitter path to the victim receiver. There is quite an extensive literature that
addresses the distribution of path loss around the mean values form propagation models.
A Normal (Gaussian) distribution is computationally convenient, but has probability
tails at both end of its distribution. Barring the existence of a ducting or highly
reinforcing multi-path condition (which is rare), the minimum path loss is the r2
free-space loss. Using a Beta distribution above this minimum loss assures there is zero
probability below this free-space loss level, and allows for the possibility of almost
unlimited loss due to high clutter loss paths. This high-loss end of the distribution
is of interest to the communications community, but not relevant to interference
computation.
We will assume the loss is distributed between the losses associated with a
propagation α that is in the range 2.0 ≤α ≤4.5, for purposes of this example. The
distribution parameters used are β(α,β). Using this model, Figure 7.4 illustrates the
density distribution of a single path of 500 meters. The minimum path loss is 153.8 dB,
the maximum loss is 220.3 dB, and the 3% bound (no more than 3 % chance of less path
loss) is 159.8 dB.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

110
Taxonomy of Protection Methods to Be Provided Across and Within Tiers
0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
140
160
180
220
Path Loss (dB)
Probability Density (%/dBm unit)
220
240
Figure 7.4 Path loss probability density function distribution.
Range = 300m
Range = 1300m
0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
140
160
180
220
Path Loss (dB)
Probability Density (%/dBm unit)
220
240
Figure 7.5 Path loss distribution and corresponding power distribution.
If we consider a set of ten identical nodes uniformly distrusted at a range from 300
to 1 300 meters from a potential victim, we obtain a set of individual interference path
loss (and thus interference power) distributions, as shown in Figure 7.5.
The power distribution can be determined from these path losses through aggregation.
They create the probability distribution of the interference power that could be expected
at the victim receiver. Figure 7.6 illustrates the Probability Density Function (PDF)
of the aggregate interference. Figure 7.7 provides the corresponding Cumulative
Distribution Function (CDF).
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

7.6 Modeling Interference Aggregation
111
0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
–100
–120
–140
–160
Interference EIRP (dBW)
Probability Density (%/dBm unit)
–180
–200
–220
Figure 7.6 Interference power probability distribution of a distributed set of nodes at a victim.
97% Confidence
At -130 dBm
–100
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
–120
–140
–160
Interference EIRP (dBW)
–180
–200
–220
Cumulative Probability
Figure 7.7 Cumulative distribution of the interference power distribution shown in Figure 7.6.
When we compare the potential interference power at a given conﬁdence to the
same conﬁdence level across the aggregated distribution, the difference is approximately
10 dB, as shown below:
Sum of the 97% conﬁdence values:
–120 dBm
Enumerative determination of the 97% conﬁdence:
–130 dBm
A 10 dB reduction in aggregated interference can provide signiﬁcantly increased
device density, and is a signiﬁcant reduction in overly conservative interference
practices. The increase in density is linear with the reduction in the interference estimate.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

112
Taxonomy of Protection Methods to Be Provided Across and Within Tiers
Therefore, ten times more devices could be admitted into the same region, using
statistical aggregation rather than the standalone, worst case estimates.
The assumption of independence is particularly important. We can consider that
propagation has a correlation distance, which is the distance out to where the land usage
impact on propagation is independent. For example, if one path into a victim is over farm
ﬁelds, it is likely that most paths will be over farmland. Similarly, if one path is urban,
then in a capacity network, it is likely that the other paths are also urban, as well.
This enumerative approach is a computationally intense (although not complex)
approach to aggregation. The use of closed form distributions, on the other hand, is
not computationally intense, but makes assumptions about independence, distribution
shape and other factors that are clearly not realistic.
However complex, the beneﬁts of aggregation are signiﬁcant in terms of opening up
opportunities for sharing and for relaxing limitations on devices that share spectrum.
The allowable increase in power is the difference between actual density to the
worst-case, which was the basis for regulation typically more than an order of
magnitude.
7.7
The Protection of Receiver Linearity
When the subject of interference is raised, the ﬁrst reaction is to assume it means
interference by two systems occupying the same frequency. If so, then a simple
spreadsheet could just cross off frequencies as they are used. However, as the spectrum
is used more densely, the interference is often not because of common frequency use,
but from the impact of stronger than anticipated signals being processed by the front
end Low Noise Ampliﬁer (LNA).
The gain of an ampliﬁer stage is given by Eq. (7.1) [2].8
Vout = GLNAvin + −2G2
LNA
IIP2volts
v2
in + −4G2
LNA
IIP3volts
v3
in
(7.1)
where vout is the output of the ampliﬁer stage, GLNA is the gain of the ampliﬁer stage in
volts, IIP2volts is the Second-Order Input Intercept Point, IIP3volts is Third-Order Input
Intercept Point, and vin is the input voltage to the ampliﬁer.
The non-linear nature of this non-linear distortion response is obvious when
examining the exponents of the voltage terms in the higher order intermodulation terms.
Figure 7.8 illustrates the effect of intermodulation distortion. This input is a set
of signals with multiple frequency components, and with a total power equal to the
Third-Order Input Intercept Point (IIP3) power. These effects are not subtle, and have
had the effect of causing complete failures of otherwise effective communications
systems. One example of this was in the United States of America (USA), where the
effect of adjacent channel NEXTEL cellular systems caused localized failure of public
safety radio systems, when they were in the proximity of these cellular systems [3].
8 The ﬁrst two distortion orders are shown here.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

7.8 Specifying Receiver Protection Thresholds
113
600
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
–80
–70
–60
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
600
800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Perceived Signal Level (dBm)
–80
–70
–60
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
Perceived Signal Level (dBm)
Frequency (MHz)
Frequency (MHz)
Amplifier Output
Amplifier Output
Figure 7.8 Overloaded ampliﬁer input and output frequency domain illustration (from [6]).
More recently a controversy arose over the use of spectrum adjacent to the Global
Positioning System (GPS) spectrum, due to the effect on receiver operation [4, 5].
Intermodulation in the frequency domain is the mixing of signals, which creates the
sum and difference of the signals. The second-order response is generally not a factor in
receivers, since the sum of the input frequencies is twice the frequency of the signals. If
f1 and f2 are the input frequencies, the intermodulation products are at frequencies f1±f2.
Assuming receive ﬁlters that are less than an octave, second-order distortion is not often
an issue. However, the third order response of f1 and f2 are the same inputs mixed
twice, or a series of responses including 2f1 ± f2 and 2f2 ± f1. If f1 and f2 are close in
frequency (as when they would pass a bandpass ﬁlter), these intermodulation products
appear on, or close to, the original input frequencies, and thus are a very signiﬁcant
cause of receiver failure.
The order of the non-linear effect is also signiﬁcant. The third-order products increase
at the third power of the input energy. A 10 dB increase in input energy creates a 30 dB
increase in intermodulation products. So, if the receiver is close to compromise, even a
small increase in input energy can make it completely fail. Accuracy in managing this
interference is thus more of a challenge to spectrum management of blocking power
than the traditional management of co-channel power.
Another consideration in non-linear response is the shift from narrowband to broad-
band waveforms. Two mixing narrowband waveforms create a relatively narrowband
product. Two 6.5 kHz narrowband audio signals create a product that is 19.5 kHz. It is
likely that this product may not impinge on the channel being used. On the other hand,
two 20 MHz channels mixing create a 60 MHz wide mixing product; one much more
likely to fall onto a channel in use.
7.8
Methods for Specifying Receiver Protection Thresholds
Typically, spectrum regulation is performed by establishing limits on the rights of
transmitters, such as power, out of band emissions, etc. This is the only practical manner
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

114
Taxonomy of Protection Methods to Be Provided Across and Within Tiers
in which to establish rules that are common to all applications and locations. The intent
was to protect receivers from interference, but the approach was indirect. However, with
admission control, it is now possible to directly implement the management structure
by starting with what the original intent was; to assure a given set of protections that
receivers can assume to be present, regardless of how transmitters are used, deployed,
or designed.
Interference threshold establishment is the basis for quantifying the protection
methods. To some extent, it is inherently adversarial, as incumbents desire maximal
protection from interference, and secondary users desire maximum spectrum opportu-
nities. The methods differ in the degree that they require the knowledge of receiver
installation characteristics.
In this section we will address three questions:
• What are the types of protections that should be provided? Typically, protection of the
receiver could include the co-channel noise, and many variants of adjacent channel
and band protection.
• Where at the receiving location, or within the receiving system, is the criteria to be
met?
• How are the protections to be speciﬁed?
7.8.1
Types of Receiver Protections
We will investigate methods to specify two broad classes of receiver protection:
Co-channel Co-channel interference is other signals or unintended emissions raising
the noise ﬂoor of the receiver in the range of frequencies that the receiver is operating
on.
Adjacent Channel/Band Adjacent channel or band protection limits the amount of
power in frequencies that are adjacent to the intended receiver operating range, or
channel.
The criteria for co-channel interference is the impact on the ability of the demodulator
to recover the transmitted information as if the interference was not present. All
receivers have a natural noise ﬂoor which serves as a reference for additional
interference noise. Typical terrestrial systems point at the horizon, and their antenna
noise temperatures are generally driven by the equivalent black body radiation from the
ground and objects in their ﬁeld of view; a temperature that is typically in the range
of room temperature, or about 290 K. The spectral noise density (N0) that is created
by any body is given by the thermal noise equation, shown in Eq. (7.2), where T is
the temperature in Kelvin, B is the bandwidth in Hz, and k is the Boltzmann constant,
approximately 1.38x10−23 W
HzK. Eq. (7.2) computes the thermal noise level.
N0 = kTB
(7.2)
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

7.8 Specifying Receiver Protection Thresholds
115
The permitted elevation of noise can be expressed as a ratio of this natural noise
level, or Interference-to-Noise ratio (I/N), which equates to a power spectral density.
The computation of this density (Pint) for a given I/N ratio is provided by Eq. (7.3).
Pint =
 I
N

kTB
(7.3)
Protection of receivers from adjacent band power is speciﬁed as the maximum power
in a range of adjacent frequencies. Determining a speciﬁc value is difﬁcult, as the signal
characteristics have a signiﬁcant impact on how the intermodulation noise is distributed
across the receiver’s spectrum.
As an example, in the US CBRS proceeding a technical analysis provided by Alion
Science and Technology [7] proposed a blocking, large-signal limit of –80 dBm. This
equated to an intermodulation noise ﬂoor elevation of 0.1 I/N for an assumed IIP3 level.
This is a reasonable value, and will be used in the satellite receiver protection examples
in this book. Assuming a satellite system noise temperature of 78 K, the thermal noise
equivalent of a 0.1 I/N ratio is a noise temperature elevation of 7.8 K.
7.8.2
Location of Protection Application
The location at which the receiver protection criteria must be met is itself a signiﬁcant
question.
Flux in Space Flux in space is the most natural expression of protection because it is
independent of the receiver system design, and can be applied.
LNA Input The actual impact of noise is at the ﬁrst active stage of the receiver.
Specifying this location accounts for the impact of antenna pointing, front end
ﬁltering, as well as the ﬂux in space values.
Flux in space is the basic building block for each of these options. Flux in space is
simply the amount of power ﬂowing through a given area of the sphere surrounding
the transmitter, at the receiver location. Typically, it is speciﬁed in relation to an
omnidirectional (zero gain) antenna across a range of frequencies.9 This value is readily
determined using transmitter characteristics and a path loss model.
The problem with the ﬂux in space criterion is that it fails to recognize the impact
of the receiving system on the occurrence of interference. An antenna may have 30 dB
of gain in one narrow direction, and –10 dB in all others. Establishing a ﬁxed ﬂux in
space criteria inherently reﬂects the worst-case situation, with the antenna pointed at the
secondary transmitter. This would reduce the allowable power by 10 000 times, in the
cases where the antenna was pointed away from the potentially interfering node, or the
protected node antenna was pointed away from the interferer, which is the most likely
case. Using knowledge of the antenna pointing and antenna gain curves, the admission
control system can compute the energy in the LNA, and assure it is protected.
9 As an example, the US CBRS regulations deﬁne the protection criteria for a Priority Access
License (PAL) as –90 dBm per 10 MHz channel.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

116
Taxonomy of Protection Methods to Be Provided Across and Within Tiers
Another, and more complex, rationale for this criteria is when there is necessity to
protect the receiver from overload or blocking, and the receiver has ﬁltering in some
of the band of concern. In this case, the admission control system needs to know the
frequency domain characteristics of the ﬁlter, and can convolve these with the frequency
domain emission, determine the total energy that will pass through the ﬁlter, and assure
the performance of the total system of transmit and receive antenna, Radio Frequency
(RF) ﬁltering, and feed performance is all reﬂected in the protection regimes decisions
to both maximize sharing and assure protection.
RF component speciﬁcations (or at least the mechanism to establish their provenance)
must be included in the interference analysis methodology provided by the regulator.
The US CBRS regulations specify:
“The aggregate passband RF power spectral density at the output of a reference RF ﬁlter
...calculate antenna gain using §25.209(a)(1) and §25.209(a)(4) and a reference RF ﬁlter
between the feed-horn and LNA/LNB10 with 0.5 dB insertion loss in the passband.”
This regulation requires the admission control system to calculate the combined
response of the antenna (in spatial gain, and frequency), the ﬁlter response and loss,
applying the industry standard product, characteristics, to determine the predicted Power
Spectral Density (PSD) provided to the LNA/LNB ﬁrst transistor. Rather than regulate
cause (power), the regulation deﬁnes the results (received interference and blocking
levels).
Traditionally, spectrum regulations have mandated some level of protection that was
constant across a large range of spectrum. In reality, the receiver response to signals
is quite different when the signals are adjacent to the received frequency or are further
away. By using the actual response of the entire RF system, it is possible to both best
protect the receiver, and to maximize the use of the spectrum.
The processing ﬂow of this model is shown in Figure 7.9. This shows a frequency
domain representation of the requested emissions, including all of its emissions, even
unattended ones as the start of a process. This is then processed through the antenna
response curve, which includes the actual gain in the speciﬁc direction of the emitter,
and the frequency response of the antenna, and the response curve of the receive ﬁlter.
Co-Channel
Interference
Path Loss
Model
Antenna
Filter
Requested
Emission
Adjacent
Channel
Blocking
Provides
signal power
across
frequencies
Provides
path loss
across
frequencies
Provides
gain/loss
across
frequencies
Provides loss
across
frequencies
Provides
signal within
Receiver
Figure 7.9 End-to-end processing of a complete receiver model.
10 A Low Noise Block Converter (LNB) is a device which combines an LNA stage and a down converter
stage to an Intermediate Frequency (IF), such as the 900 MHz typically used in satellite systems.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

7.10 Suggested Reading
117
At the completion of this process, the admission control system is able to predict the
maximum power across all of the range of frequencies that were modeled. This then
yields the in-channel power, which elevates the noise ﬂoor, and the total energy in
adjacent frequencies, the sum of which might drive the receiver LNA into non-linear
operation, and therefore also raise the perceived channel noise ﬂoor.
These approaches will be quantitatively applied in Chapter 9, when we examine the
satellite receiver protection process in detail. This chapter will examine its impact on
acceptable densities in a ﬁxed transmit criteria and a receiver LNA admission control
policy.
7.9
Summary
The adoption of three-tier spectrum management does not simplify the nature of
interference protection. In fact, it makes it somewhat more complex, as the regulator is
now shifting from expressing constraints on the use of the spectrum, to providing limits
on the impacts of this use. This approach has been embedded in spectrum management
analysis since its inception, but has not been the expression of the resulting policy, as
there was no means to operationalize these limits, as is now possible with an admission
control system.
The situational nature of admission control system processing provides a number of
new methods to express regulatory requirements for protection within the spectrum tiers.
These are new options for regulation and coexistence that can be invoked in a three-tier
admission controlled regime. They include:
• Interference protection can now be based on path loss estimates that are speciﬁc to
each individual propagation path considered by the admission control system, rather
than generic, and worst-case paths, as in past practice.
• Density can be managed explicitly through admission control, permitting control over
aggregation of interference.
• Probability of interference can be managed directly through understanding of the path
loss probability distribution of each individual contributor to interference at protected
nodes.
• The same techniques used to provide co-channel protection can also address
non-linear receiver response, and the resulting issues with receiver blocking and
reduction in sensitivity.
• Interference impacts can be expressed at any point in the receiver signal processing
chain, enabling the impact of ﬁlters, antenna directionality, and front end response to
be incorporated into a protection scheme.
7.10
Suggested Reading
There is an extensive body of scientiﬁc work that has been done to evolve the physics
principles of spectrum management. A deep understanding of these principles is not
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

118
Taxonomy of Protection Methods to Be Provided Across and Within Tiers
essential to understanding and implementing the ecosystem of three-tier spectrum, but
is useful to understand the weakness of the current regime.
• The starting point in any spectrum occupancy and interference analysis technology is
an effective propagation estimation tool.
– The Longley-Rice Model is used extensively in regulatory activities [8].
– Several of the communities within the International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) utilize the ITU P452 Propagation Model [9].
– There are many closed-form models proposed, such as the Hatta, and Extended
Hatta model for use in wireless planning. These models tend to be tailored to the
deployment of macro-scale networks.
• The United Kingdom (UK) Ofﬁce of Communications (OFCOM) Spectrum Usage
Rights (SUR) concept was described previously. This developed a formal description
of license rights in their proposal for explicitly including rights statements in licenses
[10]. This is one of the ﬁrst regulator proposals for a standard expression of rights, and
particularly the adjacent signal environment which has created so much controversy
in the past.
• The clutter loss example was derived from an ex parte ﬁling by Google in the CBRS
proceeding. A complete description of the experimental design and processing is
provided in the Google ﬁling [1], available from the FCC website.
• The details of the operation of receiver components are certainly an important
consideration in the development of spectrum management regimes. There is an
extensive set of books on circuits and design. The design material in this section
is largely covered in Ulrik Rhode’s circuit book description [2].
• An illustrative interference analysis for multi-tier spectrum interference to Fixed
Satellite Service (FSS) sites is provided in a report by Alion Science and Technology
[7] which was submitted to the FCC in support of a ﬁling by a number of content
companies essentially opposing the CBRS rulemaking. The report was submitted
to argue there were almost insurmountable issues with strong-signal overload in
the adjacent band. It also demonstrates that a high pass ﬁlter would be effective in
protecting the FSS receivers. This was the solution the FCC eventually chose in the
rules.11
References
1 Google Inc., Ex Parte Filing: Amendment to the Commission’s rules with Regard to
Commercial Operations in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket No. 12–354 (2016). http://
fcc.gov/ecfs/document/view?id=60001462642.
11 The FCC did not mandate [11] that FSS operators install the ﬁlters, but it did deﬁne the protection
provided to them was to assume the existence of a reference ﬁlter, Therefore the FSS operators would be
at risk of interference if they did not install the ﬁlters, and had no recourse against the CBRS operation.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
119
2 U. L. Rhode and D. P. Newkirk, RF/Microwave Circuit Design for Wireless Applications
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000).
3 L. Luna, NEXTEL interference debate rages on. Mobile Radio Technology, 21/8 (2003), 26.
4 Federal Communications Commission, Comment Deadlines Established Regarding the
LightSquared Technical Working Group Report. Technical report, DA 11–1133 (2011). http://
apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-11-1133A1.txt.
5 National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Systems Engineering Forum
(NPEF), Assessment of LightSquared Terrestrial Broadband System Effects on GPS Receivers
and GPS-dependent Applications (2011). www.gps.gov/spectrum/lightsquared/docs/2011-
06-NPEF-lightsquared-report.pdf.
6 P. F. Marshall, Scaling, Density, and Decision-Making in Cognitive Wireless Networks
(Cambridge University Press, 2012).
7 Alion Science and Technology, Effects of the Proposed Citizens Broadband Service to CBand
DOMSAT Earth Stations. Attachment to ﬁling by the Content Industries to the FCC on
Proceeding 12–354 (CBRS), Consulting Report ESO-13-011-v3 (2013).
8 A. G. Longley and P. L. Rice, Prediction of Tropospheric Radio Transmission Loss over
Irregular Terrain: A Computer Method – 1968. Technical report, ESSA ERL 79-ITS 67
(Washington, DC: US Government Printing Ofﬁce, 1968).
9 Radiocommunication Sector, Prediction Procedure for the Evaluation of Interference
Between Stations on the Surface of the Earth at Frequencies above about 0.1 GHz
(International Telecommunication Union, 2015).
10 Ofﬁce of Communications (Ofcom) (UK), Spectrum Usage Rights; Technology and Usage
Neutral Access to the Radio Spectrum. Consultation (2006).
11 Federal Communications Commission, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard
to Commercial Operation in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354 (2016). https://
apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

.008
14:55:15, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Part IV
Protection Processes for
Incumbents and Peers
14:58:03, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

14:58:03, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

8
General Process for Database
System Operation
8.1
Introduction
This chapter will describe how the tools and models discussed in the last chapters
are collected and organized to develop a comprehensive admission control process for
three-tier spectrum bands, such as a Spectrum Access System (SAS). This will include
an inventory of the models needed to construct an admission control system, and a
high level description of the stateful information needed to perform the functions that
are required to support the spectrum management regime. By necessity and for clarity,
there will be some overlap with the discussion of methods in prior chapters.
The concept of the admission control system is a simple transaction processing
system with a persistent state. The main transactions processed by the admission control
system are described in more detail in other chapters. In this chapter, we will examine
the fundamental functions of any admission control system that supports three-tier
spectrum, and make this discussion as independent of the speciﬁc regime as possible.
Also, we will abstract the complex algorithms that are the heart of the admission control
system processing and only consider their functionality, not their internal design or level
of implementation.
Later in this book (Chapter 13), the speciﬁcs of the admission control system for the
US implementation of the Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) SAS and rules
will be developed in detail, on a message by message, and object by object basis. This
design is only one possible implementation of the fundamental interaction needs that
are developed in this chapter.
8.2
Major Admission Control System and Device Transactions
The transactions that are described in this chapter generally mirror those that will be
described in greater detail in Chapter 13. The functional grouping of the admission
control system device transactions capabilities are:
Inquiry Provide device with information regarding spectrum environment, but make
no changes to spectrum usage.
Grant Request Request a spectrum grant, and make any necessary adjustments to peer
or lower-tier users.
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

124
General Process for Database System Operation
Authorization Provide continued authorization to utilize a spectrum grant for a ﬁxed
duration of time.
Relinquish Relinquish a spectrum grant, and adjust the aggregate interference to reﬂect
this removal of a node.
Reclaim A higher-tier user declares right to spectrum, or is detected, and that right is
invoked.
In presenting these transactions, we will adopt a standard graphic representation. In
some cases, the processing is quite simple, in others it interacts extensively with a large
number of entities. The emphasis in the following sections is on the general strategy for
the interaction, and the decision-making on both sides of the interface. The speciﬁcs of
the interfaces themselves are discussed in more detail in Chapters 13 and 14.
8.3
Admission Control System Persistent State
The heart of the admission control system algorithms is the persistent store that
maintains the state of the devices that have been authorized in the band, and the
existence and interference conditions of each of the protected devices (regardless of
their tier) that are registered and/or active in the band.
For purposes of this discussion, we consider that the admission control system
has two categories of persistence. The ﬁrst, static data, is provided externally to the
admission control system, and includes awareness of devices that have achieved a
protected status through some means other than the admission control system. For
example, existing licenses, geographic boundaries, terrain features, and regulatory
mandates. The second is the dynamic data that is created and maintained by the
admission control system as a consequence of its device authorization/deauthorization
and sensing processes. The dynamic data essentially constitutes an inventory of the
devices under management by the admission control system, and their interference
consequences. A summary of some of these information categories is shown in
Table 8.1.
We can envision the admission control system transactions as having some interaction
with each of these persistent data sets, and abstract away the speciﬁcs of the algorithms
used. These will be addressed in later chapters, especially Chapters 13 and 14.
8.4
Admission Control System Initiation With Static
Data Process
There are a number of different static data sets that an admission control system will
require in order to perform its protection mission, such as those in Table 8.1. Although
the dynamic processes are the most visible admission control system processes, the
success of the admission control system is dependent on accurate awareness of many
environmental aspects and detail regarding the entities to be protected. The process for
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

8.5 Logical Flow of an Admission Control Process
125
Table 8.1 Categories of admission control system persistent data retention.
Consideration
Explanation
Static
Geographic
Terrain data regarding terrain height, clutter, and other
physical world representations for propagation loss
estimation.
Deﬁned protection or exclusion zones, regions,
borders, and other geographic features.
Protected
Entities
Deﬁnition of all entities that entered other than
through the admission control system, or regions that
are provided protection. This is linked to the dynamic
data associated with each of these entities.
Dynamic
Interference
State
Emissions are aggregated for each protected node.
The basis of these aggregations is also maintained, as
it is necessary to remove interference from nodes that
leave the channel. This can be a list of contributors to
the aggregate, or sufﬁcient information to recreate the
same values identically as when they were
incremented into the aggregate.
Device State
Registration data that describes the node, its location,
capabilities, owner, and ﬁxed rights.
Grant data that describes the spectrum grant that was
issued to the node (one or more).
Authorization data to maintain track of the expiration
time on the current reauthorization (if any).
acquiring this information is likely speciﬁc to the National Regulatory Authority (NRA)
implementing the regime, and the existence and organization of the incumbent records,
or the methods for obtaining them.
Different three-tier regimes may have very different methods of being informed
of incumbent activity. The United States (US) CBRS band has passive sensing of
naval radars, and static reporting of Fixed Satellite Service (FSS) sites and wireless
Internet service provider (WISP) positions. Other regimes may have active reporting by
protected primary users of their location and usage characteristics.
Although protected incumbents’ data is considered to be static in this model, it does
have dynamic implications. Lower-tier nodes may have to be dynamically cleared from
the spectrum. This is addressed through the continuation authorization of devices, and
is addressed in Section 8.6.
8.5
Logical Flow of an Admission Control Process
The admission control process has two considerations: one to determine the node that
can be entered, consistent with the protection of peer and higher-tier users, and the
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

126
General Process for Database System Operation
second to determine any adjustments in lower-tier usage to both protect the entering
node and to reconcile any aggregation interference issues. This consists of two phases:
Interference Analysis Before committing to the entry of a node, ensuring that the
admission can be performed without causing interference to a higher or peer tier
protected node.1 This phase determines that the node has, or does not have, the right
to enter the spectrum.
Interference Elimination After committing to the entry: (1) assure that the entry does
not create aggregate interference to other protected nodes, which is resolved by
terminating grants to other nodes or adjusting power limits or other aspects of
existing grants; and (2) if the node is entitled to protection, ensure that any nodes
that would cause interference to it have their grants terminated.2 This function is
also performed when the admission control system is notiﬁed of the presence of a
protected incumbent by any of the external notiﬁcation processes, such as through
regulatory databases or sensing. This process, for both entry through, or external to,
the admission control system is addressed in the next section, 8.6.
Both the inquiry, registration, and grant process require signiﬁcant amounts of data on
the device location, capability, and intent. This can be provided before an inquiry/grant
request, as in the US CBRS implementation, or after the inquiry/grant request but before,
or with, the grant request. Figure 8.1 shows how these functions are sequenced for a
grant, with the phase two processing continued in Figure 8.2. The sequencing of grant
and inquiry data provision is arbitrary.
The admission control system needs to determine if the aggregate emissions limits to
a higher or peer incumbent is exceeded. If it is, the admission control system needs to
determine if this is solely due to the new node, plus its tier peers. If the tier peers and
the new node do not exceed the interference protection criteria, then the node can be
admitted, although lower-tier nodes may need to be terminated.
Another way of viewing this transaction ﬂow is to consider it as restricted or divided
into two phases: pre-commit and post-commit. Pre-commit activities include all of the
analysis performed on the assumption that a grant can be issued. The post-commit phase
performs the accounting to reﬂect the issuance of the grant, and any other action that is
taken to resolve interference conditions that the admission creates.
The grant process interference analysis is partitioned into two phases:
1. Before committing to the entry of a node, ensuring that the admission would not
cause interference to a higher (or possibly peer) tier protected node. This phase
determines that the node has the right to enter the spectrum. If this phase has
no conﬂict, entry is assured. This analysis is a one-on-one analysis, and need not
consider aggregation, unless the policy provides superior rights to nodes that had
already entered the tier.
1 This entry may require removal of lower-tier nodes in order to meet aggregation limits.
2 An effective admission control system would also provide new, non-interfering grants in the event of
relocation.
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

8.5 Logical Flow of an Admission Control Process
127
Request
Heartbeat
(Para 8.6)
Reformulate
Grant Request
Reject Grant
Request
Check Lower-Tier
Impacts (Para 8.6)
Issue Grant
And Record
Impacts?
Examine
Higher-Tier Impacts
Examine
Regulatory
Compliance
Make Grant
Request
Make Channel
Selections
Provide Device
Info & Inquire
User/Device
Admission Control
System
Provide Inquiry
Response
No
Yes
Figure 8.1 Logical ﬂow of spectrum grants three-tier admission control process.
2. After committing to the entry: (1) assure that the entry does not create aggregate
interference to other nodes, which is resolved by terminating or adjusting grants to
other nodes; and (2) if the node is entitled to protection, ensue that any nodes that
would cause interference to it have their grants adjusted or terminated.
Grant status is maintained persistently, and now permits the device to request
authorization to actually emit (next section). The persistent store is the linkage between
these two processes. Grant issuance also must be synchronized with any other system
that has a requirement to be aware of the ecosystem in this location and band. This could
be a regulator, or another admission control system, and is discussed later.
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

128
General Process for Database System Operation
Higher-Tier
Device/User/Sensor
Admission Control
System
If  Tightly Coupled
Lower-Tier
Device/User
Reclaim
Spectrum Event
Determine if
Grants Must Be
Amended
Mark Grants With
Amended Terms
Mark Grants With
Amended Terms
Grant
Changed?
Provide
Continued
Authorization
Provide Revised
Grant
Reflect Changes
or Terminate
Continue Without
Changes
Request
Continued Grant
Authorization
No
Yes
Figure 8.2 Logical ﬂow of authorization to continue to emit process.
8.6
Logical Flow of the Interference Resolution, Incumbent
Notiﬁcation, and Continued Authorization
The logical ﬂow of the process of addressing protected node entry, or reports of
incumbent activity, is shown in Figure 8.2. Different three-tier regimes may have very
different methods of being informed of incumbent activity. The US CBRS band has
passive sensing of naval radars, and static reporting of FSS sites and WISP positions.
Other regimes may have active reporting by protected primary users of their location
and usage characteristics.
Higher-tier devices and sensing informs the admission control system there has been
some action to potentially reclaim spectrum by a higher-tier user. The system determines
if this usage conﬂicts with any existing lower-tier grants. This is depicted by the block
titled “Determine If Grants Must be Amended.” We do not consider the case that
the notiﬁcation might impact a higher-tier user, since that condition would have been
recognized prior to the notifying event grant being accepted. We only have to consider
the “trickle down” impacts.
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

8.6 Logical Flow of the Interference Resolution
129
Regardless of whether the transaction was initiated external to the access control
system (such as registration of a tier 1 incumbent user through a regulatory process),
or through a protected tier registration, the process is similar. The activity is reported
through a transaction that ensures interference protection to the newly entered protected
node. The admission control system needs to determine if the aggregate emissions
limits to the protected node is exceeded. If it is, the admission control system must
decide which nodes have their grants amended or terminated. There is no technical
basis for deciding which grants are to be amended or terminated, but the most logical
sequence is to terminate the nodes that have the highest level of interference power into
the incumbent. Whether there is a preference between the second and third tier in this
process is a question for regulator policy.
It should be noted that if preference is given to any one tier in his removal process,
it can essentially preclude operation of lower tiers over a wide area. If a node, or set of
nodes, in the preferred tier uses most of the interference margin into the protected node,
then the lower tier may be starved, and have very little interference margin to work with,
and even insigniﬁcant amounts of interference may be the cause for removal or denial,
as the admission control system seeks to bring the interference below the limits. The
impact on these tiers can be quite substantial.
The logical ﬂow has two options: a closely coupled mode, and a loosely coupled
mode. In closely coupled, all devices have continuous and reliable connectivity with
the admission control system so that the admission control process can reliably push
a change in grant status to the device. In the case of the loosely coupled process,
the contact is intermittent (such as polling or operation behind a ﬁrewall or Network
Address Translation (NAT) proxy) and the device asks for authorization for continued
operation.
If any grants are impacted, such as a requirement to terminate, lower power, give
up some of the grant spectrum, or other changes in their terms, the admission control
system must inform these devices and requires them to accept these revised terms, or
terminate operation. If the device is closely coupled, the change can be immediately
sent to the device. If the device is loosely coupled, the changes in the grant must be
marked in the persistent store. When the device requests periodic reauthorization, it is
provided with the revised grant terms. If no grant changes have occurred since the last
reauthorization, the device is reauthorized under the existing terms of the grant.
When provided with a revised grant, the device has essentially two options. It can
accept the terms of the grant, which may also include suspension. It can decide to not
accept them, which means it must shutdown when the current authorization expires,
and during that period, may attempt to obtain a new grant from the admission control
process. If the process of providing reauthorization fails for any reason, such as loss
of connectivity or admission control system failure, the device must consider that
the authorization has expired, and must suspend use of the grant until it can obtain
reauthorization
The continued authorization process can be adapted depending on the technology, and
the need for rapid clearing due to incumbent activity. This is likely to be a local decision
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

130
General Process for Database System Operation
based on protected incumbents. However, the general problem is the same regardless of
time limits for clearing.
8.7
Logical Flow of the Database Synchronization Process
One of the three-tier principles is that competition beneﬁts all participants in an
ecosystem by encouraging innovation and cost effectiveness, and it creates conﬁdence
in the viability of its use. The admission control system should be no exception. It is
certainly more convenient to anoint a favored supplier with the right or duty to provide
this service, but history has shown that few monopolies innovate and improve cost
effectiveness, particularly with government-assured monopolies.
It is certainly inconvenient to distribute admission control functions among not only
multiple computers or data centers, but among different operating entities. However,
the advantages are readily apparent. In the USA, early in the President’s Council of
Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) consideration, there were those that
suggested a “Federal SAS” to manage the spectrum. Fortunately for the spectrum
community,3 the perceived failure of a government-directed Information Technology
(IT) staff to develop a nationwide health insurance registration website (www.healthcare.
gov) compellingly argued for the private development and operation of the SAS service,
and precluded a government monopoly on its operation.
The market-driven decision to permit multiple service operators creates a requirement
to synchronize grant data among operators. The synchronization is driven by a number
of considerations, but one of the most signiﬁcant is that likely interference protections
are based on aggregate interference. This implies that all system operators must
accumulate interference to all protected nodes, regardless of whether they were the
admission control system that admitted the node or not.
The exact design of multiple data center/multiple operator services is beyond the
scope of this book, and not relevant to the design of spectrum management regimes, so
we will not develop the speciﬁcs of the design, except to provide some principles that
should be reﬂected in whatever design and synchronization structure emerge.
• The failure of any one database system should not block performance by the others.
Each admission control system must be capable of performing basic grant and
handshake processing autonomously.
• Provision should be made to enable new entrants to “catch up” with established
services at any time. Established services should be able to resynchronize after
catastrophic events.
• The distributed nature of the service should not diminish the accountability of service
providers for the grants they issue and continue to authorize.
The implementation of the database synchronization is a matter of computer science,
not wireless or spectrum engineering. Any number of methods can be utilized so long
3 Perhaps not so fortunate for those who tried to use the healthcare.gov site.
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

8.7 Logical Flow of Database Synchronization Process
131
Table 8.2 Probability of synchronization-induced collisions in independent admission
control system operation, using the US CBRS as an example.
ASSUMPTIONS
Factor
Value
Units
Notes
Area of USA
107
km2
Area with CBSDs
10
%
Areas with sufﬁcient population
density to justify deployments
Registrations
3 · 106
/year
Estimated third year deployments over
12 months
Active time of day
12
hour
Registrations at any one region will
generally be within working hours
Impacted area
0.09
km2
Typical area impacted by a single
CBSD in typical environments
Synch time
2
sec
Time delay to synch grants between
admission control systems
COMPUTATIONS
Factor
Value
Units
Notes
Arrival rate
0.19
/sec
Estimated based on 3 million devices
in last year, concentrated in 12 hours.
Deployed area
106
km2
Area with devices deployed
Probability of impact
0.9 · 10−8
Any two random grants being within
same impact area
Prob unsynched entries
0.38
New admission request occurring
while synch of previous registrations
pending
Prob synch impact
3.4
Probability of unsynchronized grant in
new registration impact area
Synch failure rate
0.10
/year
Synch failure rate per year
as they assure a very low probability of assignments being made in the absence of
awareness of actions by other admission control systems. Using the US CBRS band
as an example, the probability that two admission control systems make uninformed
decisions regarding potentially impacting assignments can be computed as shown in
Table 8.2.4
In most cases, a synchronization failure will have no impact, as it is largely irrelevant
for General Authorized Access (GAA) grants, and PAL owners are likely to utilize a
single admission control service, which would inherently be up-to-date. But even in
the extreme case, the likelihood of impact is very small compared to the variances
4 The numbers used in this computation are examples, and have no empirical validation. Additionally, the
assumption of even distribution within usage areas and over time is probably not valid, but serves as an
example.
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

132
General Process for Database System Operation
of propagation, location measurement, azimuth estimates and all of the other factors
that impact the assignment process. For example, the propagation estimates used in
computing interference are typically in the range of 10−2 to 10−3 likelihood, so the
probability of not recognizing an interference condition may be another two or three
orders of magnitude less than even the low estimate (one per ten years) provided in
Table 8.2.
8.8
Computational Consistency and Admission
Decision Correctness
In this section, we examine the question:
“If two admission control systems reach different decisions about admitting a node, must one of
them be wrong?”
The answer to this question is one of policy, not of science. The admission
control system is essentially answering the question: “Can the system assure that no
interference to protected nodes will be caused by this admission?” If they have a
different basis for making decisions, then it is not unreasonable that one could provide
the assurance, while another could not. The admission control system is not determining
if interference will, or will not, occur. The system does not know this. It only knows if
it can assure non-interference.
One way to consider this decision is as a logical proposition. We let admission be the
decision (true or false) to let a node enter, and interference be the resulting, real-world,
measurable occurrence of interference. It might be obvious to consider the decision of
the system to be equivalent to the existence of interference, as shown in the logical
proposition in Eq. (8.1).
admission = interference
(8.1)
In this case, it is clear that any difference in admission control decisions would mean
that one was in error, as the value of interference is a measurable fact; as if we can
perform an experiment with exactly these conditions present.
The correct manner in which to view the assertion made by an admission control
system admission decision is better expressed as the implications shown in Eq. (8.2).
admission ⇒interference
(8.2)
Since this relationship is an implication of not causing interference, but not
equivalence to interference itself, the converse assertion need not be true. It is therefore
also correct to make the assertion in Eq (8.3). This is due to the fact that implication is
not a symmetric relationship, like equivalence.
admission
̸⇒interference
(8.3)
Not admitting a node does not imply that the admission would cause interference, it
only implies that the admission control process could not ensure that it would not cause
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

8.9 Logical Flow of a Spectrum Inquiry Process
133
interference. It does not imply that it would deﬁnitely cause interference. This is a very
weak assertion, and driven by knowledge of the environment, as much as the physics of
the node placement.
It is worth considering why two different admission control processes would come to
different conclusions about their ability to assure non-interference.
Propagation Model Propagation models vary in their realism. More complex models
typically can create high loss estimates at equivalent conﬁdence levels than lower
complexity ones. Free-space models typically create the lowest estimates of loss,
and site-speciﬁc clutter loss models generally result in much higher estimates.
Propagation Data The level of propagation data, such as terrain resolution can yield
better, and less conservative, estimates for path loss, as an example.
Clutter Data Transitioning from general clutter models to data that is speciﬁc to each
site, and even each path, can increase estimated path loss very signiﬁcantly.
Usage Data Understanding the statistics of usage may enable the admission decision
to be based on more exact statistics of usage, particularly when aggregating a number
of emitters, and where statistical treatment of a large number can be utilized.
We can consider that in each category (such as propagation estimation) there is
a hierarchy of awareness detail that can be provided to the algorithm. With little
information, assumptions must be close to the worst-case values. As detail is provided,
these assumptions can be either conﬁrmed, or relaxed. When relaxed, they should
increase the loss lower bound estimates, and therefore permit more entry into the band.
It is an essential test that estimates are monotonic with detail awareness.5 Assuming loss
is monotonic with additional awareness, the additional information should never cause
a node to be rejected. If an ignorant algorithm would admit a node that a more informed
one would not permit, it is indicative that the ignorant algorithm was not appropriately
conservative in its assumptions.
The idea that the admission control decisions could differ is potentially bothersome
to many. It precludes cross-checking systems, and means each must be individually, and
independently, validated. It runs the risk that the competition among systems becomes
a “race to the bottom” sacriﬁcing protection mechanisms for customer adoption due to
higher admission rates. It provides (invalid) arguments for protected users to claim the
admission decisions were clearly wrong, since another admission control system had
said so.
8.9
Logical Flow of a Spectrum Inquiry Process
Figure 8.1 illustrated the role of the spectrum inquiry process in the overall strategy
of a device or user to obtain a spectrum grant. The spectrum inquiry transaction is
5 By this we mean that if the algorithm was provided with more information, its estimates of the lowest
possible path loss or similar metrics also increase, or at least do not decrease.
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

134
General Process for Database System Operation
Table 8.3 Levels of complexity and utility in spectrum availability inquiries.
Attribute
Level
Content
Coverage
One Nation/
One Band
The entire admission control system can only address one
band, and all responses are implicitly from one rule set,
and from one country.
One Nation/
Many Bands
The admission control system can address operation in
more than one band, and informs the device of the rule set
for each of the multiple bands. The device can then select
the bands/rules in which it decides to operate using this
regulatory information.
International/
One Band
A single, normalized, band coverage, with the likelihood
that the admission control system will inform the device of
speciﬁc rules in the location it reports.
International/
Many Band
The admission control system provides the device
appropriate sets of band rules and options in any country
supporting at least one three-tier band.
Depth
Status Only
The admission control system informs the device of the
rules at the location and range of frequencies indicated,
and the status of the spectrum in any of the included bands
(Priority Access (PA), GAA, protected, excluded, etc.).
Availability
The admission control system provides the previous entry
response, but also analyzes the ability of the device to
actually receive a grant, given the current usage of the
band.
Coexistence
The admission control system provides the previous two
entries’ responses, but also suggests the choices that it
determines to be most likely to be usable by the device.
Secondary
Market
Offer of spectrum access, protection, or other increased
rights by spectrum license holders as a secondary market
for access.
not essential to any of the interference protection missions of the admission control
system, but is highly useful to devices, particularly when there are opportunities for
three-tier spectrum worldwide, and/or in multiple bands. For purposes of discussion we
can consider several levels of inquiry, which are a function of both the service, and the
international context.
Table 8.3 illustrates levels of spectrum inquiry in terms of both coverage, and of depth
of analysis.
It is unlikely that all of the worldwide NRA processes will, or should, agree
on a common set of rules, and it is improbable that a single set of rules will
work in many different bands of spectrum, with different incumbents. Therefore, the
spectrum inquiry provides the bridge between a worldwide ecosystem of devices, and
a nation and band-speciﬁc approach to spectrum management. It is the alternative to
harmonizing spectrum sharing, which is likely a challenge well beyond the technical
ones.
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

8.9 Logical Flow of a Spectrum Inquiry Process
135
So long as there is general agreement on a naming system for spectrum rules, and a
standard for authenticating the compliance of a document with a speciﬁc rule set, we
can envision an ecosystem with a number of rules and bands, mixed in arbitrary ways.
One possible logical ﬂow of the process for a device to perform an inquiry and use
the information to select its method of grant acquisition is shown in Figure 8.3. The
process depicted here essentially works through layers of the decision-making process.
It is initiated at the highest level, with the admission control system providing a list
of bands and required credentials (licensing approvals) for each band and regulatory
regime. The device ﬁlters these by matching licensing credentials it is compliant with,
prioritizes these by the utility of each of the viable options to meet its mission needs.
User/Device
Admission Control
System
Device Powers
Up, Locates Self
Makes Initial
Inquiry
Examines
Certifications it
Holds
Licensed
?
No Options
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Orders Bands by
Desirability
Eliminate Band
from Candidacy
Performs Detailed
Band Inquiry
Candidates
?
Request Grant
Received
Grant
Operate
Execute Grant
Process
Provide Possible
Channels of
Operation and
Limitations
Provides
Candidate Bands
and Regulatory
Requirements
Figure 8.3 Logical ﬂow of an inquiry transaction process.
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

136
General Process for Database System Operation
The device can then perform a detailed, band-speciﬁc inquiry. This might yield no
channel options, or unacceptable ones, in which case the band is eliminated from
candidacy, and the next one is considered. If the results are favorable in a band, the
device performs the grant request process, and either receives a grant, or reiterates the
process for a new band. Options certainly exist. The device could run through all of
the bands and identify options in each before considering which to request, and other
devices may only have one band or national certiﬁcation, in which case it can enter the
band speciﬁc process immediately.
Different vendors would select the bands they thought were most useful to cover,
and the rule set(s) for which they would seek regulatory compliance/certiﬁcation.
Some might be NRA speciﬁc, such as the US CBRS Part 96, and others might be
internationally recognized, such as an European Union (EU) rule set. Vendors could also
differentiate their products by the sophistication of their algorithms to select candidates
for consideration.
Since it is our goal to automate the spectrum process, and make it invisible to the
user, we assume no human interaction with the device. The device would appear at
some location and be turned on. It has geolocation ability, so it can determine its
location. With that, and an available Internet connection, it contacts whatever admission
control system it has authority to use. The device need not authenticate itself, but it
does authenticate that it is communicating with an approved admission control system
through the admission control system certiﬁcate. In Chapter 18, Figures 18.1 and 18.2
provide examples of how such information might be provided by a world-aware
admission control system in support of internationally roaming three-tier devices, and
is used in this example.
The inquiry function provides the device with a list of bands, and the operating
authority required for operation in each band. Along with this information, it might
also provide the actual availability of spectrum, and recommendations on coexistence,
if its inquiry function had the depth of processing. The device would compare the
speciﬁc bands available and the certiﬁcations needed to utilize the bands, and select the
intersection of its capabilities and certiﬁcations and the available bands and required
certiﬁcates. It would then enter the process described earlier to register and obtain a
grant, presenting the certiﬁcate appropriate to its selection.
A reasonable extension of this model is to not limit the spectrum choices to
Government-provided access. The admission control system could provide the same
inquiry functionality to also access private secondary sharing markets, using the same
models as for Government-provided rights. The authentication in these cases would
be a pre-existing agreement regarding ordering terms and conditions which would
provide assurance to the spectrum holder offering the sublease. In this case the inquiry
functionality would include the contractual and ﬁnancial terms and conditions, as well
as the technical ones.
Harmonizing spectrum access has been a major goal of spectrum management,
but it has severe challenges in a nationalistic world in which wireless technology
is so key to national interests, and where spectrum usage often reﬂects local, rather
than global needs. Automated admission control addresses many of the drivers for
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

8.11 Statistical Considerations
137
harmonization without impacting the sovereignty of national decisions. As band
coverage is less of a technical obstacle, regulatory compliance complexities will become
the barrier to device roaming the world. The use of automated admission control
system becomes an attractive alternative to disruptive, and increasingly impractical
international harmonization. Harmonizing admission control frameworks may be more
attractive than harmonizing the band usage itself.
8.10
Absolute Versus Relative Protection Criteria
The traditional approach to interference management has been to focus on the level
of interference relative to the noise ﬂoor. This is certainly a reasonable approach in
macro networks, where the devices are operating at the range of the lower power uplink,
and at the very range of the cell. Since such cell towers are extremely expensive, any
degradation in range of coverage has signiﬁcant impact on the network operator.
However, in capacity focused small cell operations, particularly when indoors, or
with overlaid macros coverage, these conditions are not present. Since operation at the
noise ﬂoor is not the objective of (or necessary to) many of these deployments, a better
measure of tolerable interference is the worst case ratio of the intended signal (S) to
the aggregate interference noise interference (I) plus receiver noise (N). Establishing a
minimum assured threshold for
S
I + N assures the network operator of operation, and
maximizes the ability to utilize the spectrum. This measure may be particularly relevant
in establishing methods for coexistence among devices in peer tiers. In a dense network,
with S
N rations that are 40 dB or more, this metric could enable interference levels that
were tens of dB higher than noise ﬂoor relative criteria would permit.
Another rationale for this metric is that the coverage of capacity networks tends to
be constrained by clutter loss of buildings and other obstructions, rather than r2 path
loss. The gradual reduction in range at edges of a lower frequency macro network does
not occur. Instead, the boundary of network coverage is more likely to be a wall! A
6 dB increase in the noise ﬂoor of a coverage network would reduce range by half, and
coverage by 75%, whereas it might have no impact on the utility of a capacity network
at all. Capacity networks tend to operate at high values of S
N , or not at all.
8.11
Statistical Considerations
The reliability of communications is inherently a statistical consideration. Links are
not designed to certainty of operation, they are designed to achieve a reliability and
a maximum error rate. Packet processing on the Internet is not designed for absolute
reliability, but to achieve a certain probability of delivery of individual packets. Yet, the
interference components of this reliability have generally been approached as if it was
possible to achieve certainty. This has the effect of shifting unnecessary cost and other
burdens onto the spectrum users.
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

138
General Process for Database System Operation
Table 8.4 Example statistical considerations in probabilistic interference determination.
Consideration
Explanation
Power Level
Many modern wireless networking technologies effectively
manage device power to minimize interference. This is
particularly true for client devices of an Access Point (AP).
Network Usage
Duty Cycle
The usage of network is not always 100 percent of capacity,
and a mix of networks can be anticipated to have a range of
demands, which is reﬂected in the duty cycle of their
emissions. Note: design induced duty factor limits are in the
last item.
Transmit Antenna
Orientation/Gain
Transmit antennas are often poorly positioned to cause
interference. This is particularly true for User Equipment (UE),
which is handheld, and often not on its optimal axis.
Path Loss
This was addressed extensively in Chapter 7.
Receive Antenna
Orientation/Gain
Same as the transmit antenna. Applicable to interference into
mobile devices.
MAC Layer
Correlations
The operation of most networks is not just random
transmissions by devices. The Listen Before Talk (LBT) and
Time Division Duplex (TDD) Media Access Layer (MAC)
layers do not transmit 100 percent of the time. Across a large
number of nodes, it is unlikely that all, or even more than one,
transmit at once. Client devices do not overlap with AP
transmissions in many protocols. Clients do not overlap other
clients in LBT, as examples.
Chapter 7 introduced the concept that interference aggregation of propagation
estimates of a given cumulative probability of occurrence did not preserve that
probability, but resulted in increasingly more conservative estimates. In this section,
we will expand that concept to include a wide range of other statistical factors that can
impact the likelihood of any given estimate of interference actually occurring. There are
any number of factors that could be considered in an analysis.
Typically, interference analysis has considered only the worst case of each distribu-
tion, since in a one on one analysis, this is the only assumption that can provide any
assurance of non-interference. But in a regime where many interference impacts are
aggregated, a more sophisticated analysis is justiﬁed. While it is possible that any one
possibly interfering node may be in its worst-case conﬁguration, it is much less likely
that all sources of interference will be in their worst-case conditions.
Some of the more probabilistic contributors to interference are shown in Table 8.4.
These considerations are highly dynamic, and not correlated, across users, so they form
a valid set of assumptions for a statistical treatment of likelihood based on their nature
as independent events.
It should be noted that the US CBRS rules consider none of these factors, with the
possible exception of MAC layer correlations, which is implicit in the rules permitting
unregistered UE devices. The ﬁrst implementation of the regime is likely too soon to
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

8.13 Apportionment of Interference Margins
139
also move to a more statistical treatment of interference. However, as conﬁdence in the
regime itself is gained, this is the next challenge.
Although acceptance of a statistical model may be a signiﬁcant departure from more
risk averse models, management of risks is a more appropriate metaphor for spectrum
management. A cursory examination of many of the parameters indicates some may
not be statistical in a one-on-one analysis, but in a many-on-one analysis, the statistical
assumptions may be signiﬁcant with an impact of 10 dB or more.
For example, if we make the following assumptions for the UE outbound side of the
interference case:
Power Level -10 dB, typical power control conditions in average range networking.
Network Usage -3 dB, typical networks are efﬁcient only if typical offered load is
below 50%.
Transmit Antenna Orientation -3 dB, typical antenna response in most of the
omnidirectional positions.
Path Loss Statistical considerations of propagation estimation were addressed
previously.
A mean aggregate interference power reduction of 16 dB equates to a range reduction
of 2
16
6 = 22.67, or a density increase of a factor of over 40. This is an important factor to
be considered in planning density constrained deployments.
8.12
Site- and Path-Speciﬁc Considerations
The performance of an admission control system can be greatly augmented with
localized knowledge of the deployment area. For example, how much attenuation is
present between ﬂoors in an ofﬁce building. Similarly, very detailed geo-information
on individual building entrances, exits, interior space, and outdoor features (open ﬁeld,
deciduous forest, coniferous forest, etc.).
Figure 8.4 illustrates the analysis of propagation loss using a geo-aware data set that
can decompose the path into its constituent path components.
The distribution of typical site-speciﬁc path loss was discussed in Chapter 7, and
illustrated in the additional site-speciﬁc path loss shown in Figure 7.3. A one-on-one
analysis might have to use the lowest sound of the path-speciﬁc loss model, but
an aggregation analysis can utilize the distribution of losses shown in experimental
collections across a wide range of interference contributors.
8.13
Apportionment of Interference Margins
The SAS process could be viewed as a distributed (multiple SAS service providers)
system that allocates portions of the interference permitted to protected nodes. There
are issues of ongoing protection, adaption, and fairness that can arise through this
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

140
General Process for Database System Operation
X meters
clear
path
2 building entry/
exits
n meters through
commercial space
m meters through
foliage in summer
Figure 8.4 Geo-informed, site-speciﬁc propagation estimation.
aggregated model of interference protection. Examples of conﬂicts that can arise
include:
Admission Sequence We consider that there is a pool of interference margin that is
“consumed” as three-tier devices enter the ecosystem. At some point this “pool” is
consumed. The admission control system has essentially two choices: block any new
entrants that would exceed the interference limits, or admit the new node, but reduce
the power permitted by the existing grants to limit aggregation. If the admission
control process does not permit entry, it has essentially established a new right: that
of ﬁrst entry. Even if the decision is made to reduce existing grants, it leads to the
question of whether to reduce each by a ﬁxed ratio, or lower the maximum power
across all contributing grants.
Changes in Protection Incumbents protection requirements may change after nodes
have been admitted to the sharing regime. A satellite antenna may change its pointing
(elevation and azimuth) that would increase its susceptibility to interference from
existing grants. Similar to the new entrant problem discussed above, this may require
the admission control to either rescind existing grants and terminate nodes in the
band, or to proportionately reduce power to all of the nodes that contribute to the
interference.
Interference Resolution Even after nodes admissions have been analyzed through
whatever algorithms are approved, there is a possibility that higher-tier users would
report interference, and whether true or false, it is likely that the admission control
system would have to take notice of these reports, and implement mitigation action.
This again forces a choice between removing devices, or reducing the power to
multiple devices.
The US CBRS rules are quiet on these issues. These situations may not arise in the
speciﬁc structure of the rules in that band. However, a general regime for three-tier
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

8.14 Suggested Reading
141
must provide explicit direction to the admission control systems on the treatment of
these conﬂicts. Creation of “ﬁrst-in” rights is a policy, and not technical concern.
It is useful to consider scenarios in which these conﬂicts may occur. We imagine an
FSS site has an allowance of a certain interference power level, and that limit is reached
by twenty distant nodes, each evenly contributing to the aggregate that is just short of
this limit. A single, very close device requests entry. This device would almost reach the
interference power limit by itself. When all 21 nodes are in the band, the interference
limit would be exceeded. The admission control system would face a decision on how
to address the admission of a complaint single node, that results in a non-compliant
aggregation of nodes.
• If the 20 distant nodes were in the band ﬁrst, it would be the most natural, and
simplest, decision to not permit the close node to enter at all. There would be no
impact on the existing node grants.
• If the grant was rejected, and the interference was co-channel, then the close node
would have the option to attempt to request a grant on another channel. The success
of this would be dependent on the speciﬁcs of the emission masks, other users, etc.
• In the same conditions, the policy could state that all nodes have a right to be admitted.
In this case, the channel with the least aggregate total emissions would be selected,
and would require that the power levels (or at least EIRP in the direction of the FSS
site) be reduced by 3 dB, including the grant request of the close device.
• The most complex approach would be to hold the initial grant power limits intact,
and treat reduction in the aggregate emission as a coexistence issue, and collectively
manage the duty cycle of the devices to avoid instantaneous violations of the
interference threshold. This would be a technology-speciﬁc approach.
In these examples, the same process can be used, even if the initial grant of the close
node would exceed the threshold, it would just increase the level of power reduction
required by all of the nodes that contributed to the aggregate interference.
None of these choices is particularly attractive. However, this is apparently the cost
of sharing spectrum in a three-tier framework. There is apparently some inherent loss
of certainty whatever mechanism is selected. This is a trade of certainty for capacity. It
is the cost, of massively increased spectrum opportunities.
8.14
Suggested Reading
• There is an extensive discussion of potential admission control system algorithms
applicable to the SAS algorithms in the US CBRS proceeding [1, 2]. In many cases,
the discussion leads to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rejecting the
complexity, but even the rejection has interesting background on the rationale for
limiting SAS complexity in this ﬁrst implementation.
• The Wireless Innovation Forum (WinnForum) developed a consensus document
describing the requirements for the operation of both a SAS [3] and a Citizens
Broadband Radio Service Devices (CBSD) [4] in the US CBRS band. Requirements
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

142
General Process for Database System Operation
for operational security protection [5] of sensitive operations, and supporting commu-
nications security (including authentication mechanisms) [6] are also documented in
WinnForum documents. These documents are publicly available.
References
1 Federal Communications Commission, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to
Commercial Operation in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354, Report and Order
and Second Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Order (2015). http://apps.fcc.gov/
edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-15-47A1.pdf.
2 ——, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to Commercial Operation in
the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354 (2016). https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/
attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
3 Spectrum Sharing Committee (SSC), Spectrum Access System Requirements (Wireless
Innovation Forum, 2016).
4 ——, CBRS Operational and Functional Requirements, WINNF-15-S-0112 (Wireless Innova-
tion Forum, 2016).
5 ——, CBRS Operational Security Technical Speciﬁcation, WINNF-15-S-0071-V1.0.0 (Wire-
less Innovation Forum, 2016).
6 ——, CBRS Communications Security Technical Speciﬁcation, 1st edn (Wireless Innovation
Forum, 2016).
.009
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

9
Protection of Incumbent
Satellite Operations
9.1
Introduction
This section describes the methodology to protect one of the most sensitive incumbents
in the spectrum community, satellite up links and downlinks.1 This chapter also serves
as the computational exercise to demonstrate the process used in performing the
admission control system process quantitatively using the most complex protection case
in the three-tier ecosystem.
This detailed analysis is included in this book for a number of reasons.
1. It serves as the computational exercise to demonstrate the process used in performing
the admission control system process quantitatively using the most complex
protection case in the three-tier ecosystem.
2. Satellite receivers are extremely complex, so they require a richer set of protection
features than can be applied for protecting other systems.
3. The computational model is not speciﬁc to satellite protection, and aspects of it are
applicable to the other protection requirements.
4. Since questions have been raised about the practicality of constructing the admission
control system engine, this most stressing case is a good working example of the
process used to protect all types of protected nodes.
The stressing nature of satellite receiver protection arises for a number of causes:
1. Satellite receivers are extremely sensitive, so they require a rich set of analytic
features to assure protection.
2. They typically utilize highly directional antennas, and so provide signiﬁcant spatial
sharing opportunities, but also require complex consideration of each potentially
interfering path.
3. Many of the uses of ﬁxed satellite services are such that interference to a single
downlink node or uplink channel would have signiﬁcant impact to a large number of
individuals, even if they did not utilize the satellite service directly.2
1 Radio astronomy is even more sensitive to interference, but protection of radio astronomy is a unique
challenge, and not addressed in this work, as it is typically performed through regulatory and
administrative process, and is not as dynamic.
2 An example is video distribution to individual cable providers, where all of the customers of the provider
would be impacted by interference to the downlink site.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

144
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
Questions have been raised about the practicality of constructing the admission
control system engine. An exercise that emulates the processing of an admission control
system therefore also serves to address the complexity concern. Since questions have
been raised about the practicality of constructing the admission control system engine,
an exercise that emulates the processing of an admission control system may also serve
to address the complexity concern.
The reader more interested in the policy, commercial, or economic aspects of
three-tier spectrum sharing can skip the detailed algorithms and equations without loss
of context, with the assurance that they are available for implementation as needed.
9.2
Unique Aspects of Satellite Uplink and Downlink Protection
Satellite receivers pose unique technical challenges to protect:
1. Satellite receivers have a deep space thermal noise background at most times,3 so
the noise ﬂoor that they can achieve is much lower than the noise ﬂoor of terrestrial
aligned devices, by at least a factor of ten.
2. The very low noise, high gain front end ampliﬁers, or Low Noise Ampliﬁer (LNA)
stages have a relatively low dynamic range. They were designed to receive 24 equal
channels that are tightly balanced, so do not have the 70 dB or more dynamic range
common in terrestrial applications.
3. The typical use is with high gain antennas. This creates very high gain towards a
limited ﬁeld of regard, and at least 10 dB of loss in most of the others. These patterns
are also knowable a-priori, as the geometry from a given location on the earth to a
given orbital slot is readily computable.
An extensive allocation of spectrum has been agreed to internationally, to support
satellite operations and communications services. It is therefore an attractive candidate
incumbent for spectrum sharing. It also poses some unique, and instructive, challenges
in spectrum sharing. There have been a large number of proposals to share this spectrum,
including a proposal at several of the World Radio Conference (WRC) conferences to
allow International Mobile Telecommunications (IMT) operations in the band, and the
ill-fated United States (US) initiative to share some spectrum between INMARSAT and
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) operations by LightSquared.
It is worth examining the extent of the spectrum that is currently allocated exclusively
or primarily to ﬁxed geosynchronous satellite operations. Some of the major allocations
to these services is shown in Table 9.1.4
It is obvious from Table 9.1 that a very signiﬁcant amount of spectrum is used for
satellite purposes, both below 6 GHz and below 35 GHz. Therefore, sharing of satellite
spectrum is certainly an attractive opportunity, at least from the perspective of secondary
3 Exceptions are solar or lunar backgrounds that occur occasionally, raising the noise temperature of
receivers and the physical temperature of dishes.
4 International military primary spectrum allocations are not shown.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

9.3 Antenna Pointing and Gain Models
145
Table 9.1 Key international satellite spectrum allocations.
Band Name
Use
Range (MHz)
Notes
C-Band
Downlink
3700−4200
Uplink
5925−6425
Extended C-Band
Downlink
3400−3700
Grandfathered use only in USA
Uplink
6425−6725
Ku-Band
Downlink
12200−12700
Uplink
17300−17800
Ka-Band
Downlink
27500−31000
Uplink
17700−21200
users. In this chapter, we will examine the unique protection requirements of satellite
service protection, and then relate it to the opportunities for three-tier sharing.
9.3
Antenna Pointing and Gain Models
Geosynchronous satellites are all positioned over the equator, and are spaced in
positions separated by (typically) two degrees of longitude. All satellites’ ground
terminals point to the equator. If they are in northern latitudes, or are located at
signiﬁcantly different longitudes, the patterns point very low on the horizon. If they are
in more southern latitudes, and close in longitude to the satellite’s slot, their elevation
angle to point at the satellite is much higher. This is important, because it greatly
inﬂuences the gain or loss of the antenna dish to terrestrial sources.
Computation of the elevation and look angles for a geosynchronous ground terminal
located at latitude lat and longitude long to a geosynchronous satellite at longitude slot
is given by Eq. (9.1) and (9.2).5 The direction along the ground is given by azimuth, and
elevation angle of the antenna is given by elevation. All units are in degrees and true
north.
elevation = arctan

tan(slot −long)cos(lat) −0.1512

1 −cos2(slot −long)cos2(lat)
	
(9.1)
azimuth = 180 + arctan
tan(slot −long)
sin(lat)

(9.2)
The antenna gain/loss is a function of the angle to the antenna boresight. It is
symmetric around the boresight, so a single angle represents this angular displacement.
In most cases the emitter does not lie directly under the main beam, so spherical
geometry is needed to determine the angle of the emitter to the boresight of the antenna.
This uses the difference in the antenna azimuth and the bearing (bearing) from the
5 A good derivation of these equations is provided by the US Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
in their Appendix D supporting the sharing of 3 650–3 700 MHz [1].
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

146
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
315°
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
–20 –100
10 20
Figure 9.1 Satellite antenna gain as a function of boresight angle (θ) using US CBRS criteria
(FCC rule 209(a)(4)).
satellite receiver to the emitter, and the elevation angle to compute the angle from the
emitter to the antenna boresight. This conversion is shown in Eq. (9.3).
θ = arccos(cos(elevation)cos(azimuth −bearing))
(9.3)
The θ value is used to derive the gain along any axis from the earth station. This
gain (gain) is given by Eq. (9.4)6 for protection of C-Band downlink receivers. This
computation is band speciﬁc. This computation of antenna gain (in dB) is shown in
Eq. (9.4).
Gant =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
32
for 0° ≤θ ≤3°
32 −25log(θ)
for 3° < θ ≤48°
−10
for 48° < θ ≤180°
(9.4)
This gain is highest in the azimuth direction, if the elevation (or θ) is less than 48°,
the peak gain in the boresight of the antenna is given by Gint. If the elevation is more
than 48°, then the antenna gain is modeled as constant in all directions, and is the worst
case front-to-back ratio of the antenna, which is highly variable outside the main gain
beam.7
Graphs of typical values of antenna performance are useful. These all utilize the
internationally used C-Band downlink (3 700–4 200 MHz) band. Figure 9.1 illustrates
the peak gain of the antenna as a function of the boresight angle (θ). Antenna response
6 There are several equations for this calculation. This is the version invoked in the US Citizens Broadband
Radio Service (CBRS) regulations.
7 Worst-case for interference is the least front-to-back ratio across the back side of the antenna.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

9.3 Antenna Pointing and Gain Models
147
5 Degree Elevation
10 Degree Elevation
20 Degree Elevation
30 Degree Elevation
315°
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
–20 –10
0
10
20
315°
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
–20 –10
0
10
20
315°
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
–20 –10
0
10
20
315°
0°
45°
90°
135°
180°
225°
270°
–20 –10
0
10
20
Figure 9.2 Ground antenna pattern for elevation angles of 5°, 10°, 20°, and 30°.
must ﬁt within this mask, so the mask represents the worst-case interference reception
conditions.
The combination of elevation look angle and off-axis position plays an important role
in the actual gain footprint of an antenna along the ground. Figure 9.1 illustrated the
regulatory model of the direct gain of an antenna, essentially at a zero-degree elevation.
Figure 9.2 illustrates the actual ground pattern of the same C-Band antenna when it has
been elevated through a range of typical elevation angles; in this case 5°, 10°, 20°, and
30°. Even the 5◦elevation angle, which is the lowest reasonable viewing geometry, has
a gain reduction of almost 20 dB. As the elevation angle increases towards 30°, the gain
rapidly is diminished towards the default front to back ratio of –10 dB.
It is important to understand and reﬂect the wide range of potential satellite
geometries and visibility that can occur over a large land mass. This discussion uses
the Continental United States of America (CONUS) land mass as an example.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

148
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
Figure 9.3 is a map of the United States of America (USA) that depicts several
locations in extreme north/south and east/west positions in CONUS. Table 9.2 provides
the Fixed Satellite Service (FSS) visibility and geometry for the east- and western-most
visible USA domestic satellites that are visible to these sites. The range of US domestic
satellites licenses is from 72° to 139° west longitude.
Some general conclusions can be reached by inspection:
• Locations that are in the more southern areas have essentially the ﬁxed front-to-back
ratio gain (a loss) pointing at all satellite slots that are somewhat close to the ground
site’s longitude.
• Locations that are on the side of the ground station further from the equator operate
in the front-to-back gain region. This is the northern side in the northern hemisphere,
and the reverse in the southern hemisphere.
• The worse case is when a satellite is close to the horizon, regardless of the receiver’s
longitude or latitude.
• Not all domestic satellites are visible throughout the USA at reasonable (> 5°) look
angles.
In the case of the USA, the fact that the domestic satellites are only present in the arc
from 72° to 139° west longitude means that the lower latitude sites have full visibility
to any of the orbital positions, and have look angles that are high enough to have their
effective gain at, or near, the front-to-back ratio gain level for all domestic services. The
site at the very tip of the State of Maine (far-northeastern corner of the USA) has an
elevation angle of 4.3° when pointed at the far western domestic orbital position (139°
west longitude), so the ﬁrst viewable satellite (deﬁned as above a 5° elevation angle) is
the orbital slot at 137° west longitude. This is an almost unique case in the USA. It is
important, but not the case that should drive spectrum protection.
1
2
3
Frenchville, Maine
Key West, FL
Blaine, Washington
San Diego, California
4
Figure 9.3 US positions used for antenna gain and look angle analysis.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

9.4 Satellite Receiver Characteristics
149
Table 9.2 C-band satellite geometry in US corner positions (west longitudes are
negative).
Location
Frenchville,
Key West,
Blaine,
San Diego,
ME
Fl
WA
CA
Latitude (°)
47.28
24.56
48.99
32.55
Longitude (°)
−68.36
−81.71
−122.74
−117.06
Eastern-most Slot
FSS Slot (°)
−72
−72
−72
−72
Elevation (°)
35.5
59.3
16.2
28.9
Azimuth (°)
185
158
122
118
Gain (dB)
−6.77
−10.00
1.77
−4.54
Southern-most Slot
FSS Slot (°)
−68
−82
−123
−117
Elevation (°)
35.7
61.3
33.8
52.1
Azimuth (°)
180
180
180
180
Gain (dB)
−6.81
−10.00
−6.22
−10.00
Western-most Slot
FSS Slot (°)
−137
−139
−139
−139
Elevation (°)
5.7
21.3
31.6
45.3
Azimuth (°)
254
255
201
217
Gain (dB)
10.20
−1.23
−5.51
−9.41
9.4
Satellite Receiver Characteristics
Satellite receivers also have unique characteristics. The spectral noise density (N0)
that is created by any passive radiating body was previously provided in Eq. (7.2).
Typical terrestrial systems point at the horizon, and their antenna noise temperatures
are generally driven by the equivalent black body radiation from the ground and objects
in their ﬁeld of view; an effective noise temperature that is in the range of room
temperature, or about 290 K.
However, the antennas for satellite receivers point towards what is considered empty
space. Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson won the 1978 Nobel prize for showing that the
temperature of empty space (the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation (CMBR)) in
the cosmos was 2.8 K. Given the losses, internal noise, imperfect antenna illumination,
and other causes, the typical satellite receiver (with highly directional antennas) has
a system noise temperature around 78 K. This is approximately one third of the noise
level of a typical receiver.
One other consideration in satellite receivers is the nature of satellite link dynamics,
or lack of them. Because the normal causes of link uncertainty, such as weather,
blockage, multi-path, and Fresnel effect impacts are not present, or as signiﬁcant, on
satellite links, they tend to be designed to operate very close to the link margin. For this
reason, the interference speciﬁcation for satellite receivers are very close to the noise
ﬂoor level. In the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) recommendations, they
are typically one tenth of the system noise temperature. The worst-case interference
constraints compound a very low acceptable interference noise level, made more
constraining by the possible high antenna gain values.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

150
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
The large difference in allowable signal level between the best and worst case
geometry demonstrated the advantage of situational and case-by-case admission control,
as provided by the three-tier admission control system. Establishing a ﬁxed level of
power would have to be established based on the worst-case conditions, which are the
low noise levels, and the high antenna gain at low angles of elevation. The range of
worst case to best case is the difference between the lowest performance level of the
antenna and its highest gain positioning. From Eq. (9.4), this is a range of 42 dB.
9.5
Frequency Domain Analysis
The previous chapter’s discussion focused on the propagation of power across the
environment. This is reasonably insensitive to frequency. We now consider aspects
of the receiving and transmitting systems that are frequency dependent. We consider
frequency-dependent characteristics in the following components of an end-to-end
system:
Transmitted Signal This emission mask reﬂects the power spectral density of the
conducted signal presented to the antenna.
Transmit Antenna This gain/loss mask reﬂects the gain and frequency-dependent
performance of the antenna.
Propagation Path This analysis provides the path loss across the range of spectrum
being managed or protected.
Receive Antenna Receive antenna characteristics reﬂect the gain/loss at the receiver
location at each frequency.
Receive Filter In some applications, very high-performance ﬁltering is essential to
protect from adjacent band operation. The admission control system must reﬂect
the performance of these ﬁlters to ensure protection of the receiver.
These receive chain blocks essentially correspond to an interference margin
computation. One fundamental difference is in the selection of uncertainty regions.
In communications link analysis, we select values deliberately reﬂecting the set of
worst-case (highest-loss) conditions that the designer anticipated. In performing inter-
ference protection, the access control system must consider the best-case (least-loss)
conditions that might occur.
One other distinction from traditional link interference analysis is that the admission
control system has to concern itself with many types of protection, on many different
frequencies. Therefore, the model is for the full range of the spectrum addressed by the
admission control process. What is out-of-band emissions to one device is co-channel
noise to another, and blocking energy to yet another. For this reason, the data needed
to support the interference analysis is considerably more detailed than that used for
single-channel link margin analysis.
The example analysis will use several typical small cell Access Point (AP) devices as
the potentially interfering nodes. We will walk through the entire process of computing
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

9.5 Frequency Domain Analysis
151
the aggregate interference, and applying protection criteria for in-band devices and
a satellite receiver in an adjacent band. The interference conditions are shown in
Figure 9.4.
This chapter will ﬁrst develop the one-on-one case analysis shown in Figure 9.4, and
then develop the aggregate response from the entire set of nodes. There are several nodes
that aggregate to potentially cause interference to the downlink receiver. The example
in this text will show the details of the calculations for AP1 only, and then extend to
determine the impacts of AP1 through AP8.
For simplicity in demonstration, we will consider them as point sources, and not
model a usage region for the User Equipment (UE) cloud. The protected receiver node
is modeled as located at the upper northeastern corner of the USA. It is sited at location:
38.66° north latitude, 77.25° west longitude. The elevation is set to 5.2°, the minimum
elevation angle necessary to view the western-most domestic FSS C-Band satellite slot
(139° west longitude). For analytic convenience, the azimuth is set to point directly at
AP1, to reﬂect the worst case geometry that can occur in the USA. If on an earth map,
zero degrees in this graphic example would be approximately an azimuth of 254° true.
9.5.1
Interfering node transmission frequency response
Figure 9.5 illustrates a typical transmission frequency domain mask, in this case a
speciﬁc LTE mode. Because what may be an out-of-band signal to the emitter may be
co-channel to some other protected node, the emission mask must reﬂect worse-case
emissions throughout the range of spectrum considered by the admission control
system.
2
2
1
1
0
0
Kilometers
Kilometers
–1
–1
–2
–2
AP #8
3.625
AP #1
3.625
AP #7
3.675
AP #3
3.665
AP #5
3.605
AP #4
3.685
AP #6
3.595
FSS
3.720
AP #2
3.645
Antenna
Azimuth
Figure 9.4 Example node placement for computation of aggregated interference to satellite
downlink receiver, oriented to the FSS antenna aperture.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

152
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
Frequency (GHz)
–50
–60
–70
–80
Power Spectral Density (dBm/Hz)
–90
–100
3.70
Figure 9.5 Frequency domain characteristics of typical emitter (Wi-Max) in 3.55–3.7 GHz
band.
This data is available for most waveforms and modem implementations. In the case
when it is not available, the worst case, regulation-permitted emission mask can be used
as a default, with any additional information improving the performance outside of the
occupied channel.8
The model reﬂects both the channel-speciﬁc and ﬁxed-frequency responses. Typ-
ically, the baseband element has a distribution around the center frequency, which
translates with the center frequency. Many devices also have ﬁxed bandpass, or high-
and low-pass ﬁlters, whose response is not responsive to the center frequency. The
admission control system should be provided with the composite of the channel-speciﬁc
and ﬁxed frequency response elements.
9.5.2
Transmit antenna frequency response
Figure 9.6 shows the frequency response of a typical, omnidirectional small cell AP
antenna. Such an antenna is typically reasonably ﬂat in its spectral response. However,
antennas that have signiﬁcant directionality are typically also more frequency selective,
and this may be a factor in their performance, and interference, potential. Poor antenna
performance at a frequency somewhat mitigates the interference potential at that
frequency.
The important aspect of the antenna frequency response is that it can offer some
additional ﬁltering of out-of-band emissions when the devices being protected are far
from the emitting node’s own operating frequency. In the absence of spectrum response
data, the admission control process can base its decisions on the assumption that antenna
response is ﬂat across all frequencies.
8 We assume that use of the actual data would not make the performance worse, as it would no longer be
compliant for operation.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

9.5 Frequency Domain Analysis
153
10
8
6
4
2
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
3.70
Frequency (GHz)
Gain/Loss (dB)
Figure 9.6 Example of transmit frequency response of a typical access point antenna.
Devices may choose to provide the admission control system with a composite of
the baseband and Radio Frequency (RF) sections of the device. In this case, a single
mask can be provided, in lieu of individual ones. The admission control system can
compute this given reference information provided prior to the grant request, as these
two models are channel independent, or the admission control system can permit the
device to compute it and include it with the grant request. The results are technically
identical. A more complex device may change ampliﬁer modes and linearity, in which
case it would beneﬁt from dynamic computation of this mask.
9.5.3
Propagation path frequency response
Figure 9.7 illustrates a sample path loss analysis. In this case, it is a 500 meter path that
is modeled as free space.
Most path loss determinations are fairly frequency independent, at least over narrow
bands of interest. The models adjust the results appropriately using the effective capture
area (λ2) of the reference isotropic receive antenna for which the path loss models
normalize using the λ2 term. The path loss increases 6 dB for each octave. Within a
given small band, there is relatively little variation in path loss across an operating
range.9
9.5.4
Receive antenna frequency response
Receive antenna response is an analog of the transmit frequency response. In AP
applications, the antenna in the end user device is constrained in form factor and
ability to control orientation. In the case of satellite installations, the dish itself is
9 The path loss is particularly small when compared to the uncertainty of the estimate as a whole.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

154
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
3.70
Frequency (GHz)
Gain/Loss (dB)
–165
–155
–160
–170
Figure 9.7 Example of signal path frequency response for a simple free-space link.
essentially frequency independent, other than the λ2 term. In other antenna designs,
such as omni-directional antennas with gain, the receive antenna may have a signiﬁcant
impact on the performance of the receiving system.
The packaging of antennas in devices often results in highly variable spatial
performance. Coupling into other antennas, circuit components, and blockage by
closely located components, such as batteries and humans, creates highly variable
and unpredictable spatial patterns. So the frequency mask must reﬂect the worse case
response. In the case of interference protection, the worst case is actually the highest
performance level (maximum gain at any frequency).
9.5.5
Receiver Frequency Response
High performance devices will typically include ﬁxed or tunable ﬁlters that protect the
receiver front end from overload conditions that would otherwise drive a non-linear
response. As shown by Eq. (7.1), the non-linearity is responsive to voltage, not
frequency, so limiting power input into the LNA/Low Noise Block Converter (LNB)
stage is critical for low-linearity or low-noise receivers. The frequency response of a
typical C-Band LNB, without any additional ﬁltering, is shown in Figure 9.8.
Many of these devices are marketed as international, and thus have frequency
response that go well beyond the domestic US band. This creates a high potential for
blocking due to strong signals in this adjacent band, when it is not restricted to low
signal strength satellite reception. In the Citizens Broadband Radio Service Devices
(CBSD) proceeding in the US, LNA response data was presented [2] in opposition to
sharing the spectrum, by Alion Science and Technology, on behalf of a ﬁling by Content
Interests. This data showed that C-Band LNA model had essentially ﬂat response from
2 600 MHz to 4 900 MHz; almost an octave of susceptibility. Implicit in this data was an
argument that any of this range of frequencies would block the C-Band receivers. This
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

9.5 Frequency Domain Analysis
155
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
3.70
Frequency (GHz)
Filter Attenuation (dB)
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
2
4
–10
–12
Figure 9.8 Example of US C-Band receiver unﬁltered frequency response.
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
3.70
Frequency (GHz)
Filter Attenuation (dB)
–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
0
–60
–70
Figure 9.9 Example of US C-Band receive high pass ﬁlter frequency response (example
performance data from Microwave Filter Corporation).
is not an unusual claim by an incumbent; poor performance receivers are an effective
tool for blocking other uses of spectrum.10
Due to this wideband response, many FSS sites add high pass ﬁlters to the receiving
chain. An example of this ﬁltering is the frequency response shown in Figure 9.9. This
is a representative product already sold in the US to protect C-band operators from
interference from a number of sources, such as radar altimeters. The example in this
ﬁgure is the Microwave Filter Corporation (MFC) model 13961W.
10 The LightSquared conﬂict with the Global Positioning System (GPS) community is another example.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

156
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
9.5.6
Composite received signal
The ultimate product of this process is to understand the Power Spectral Density (PSD)
across the band of regard. This is the product of the masks described previously. The
ﬁrst mask (Transmission Frequency Response) has units of power per frequency range.
The other masks are all gain/loss multipliers (or addition in dB units), so the resulting
product has the units of a power spectral density. The spatial gain model from section 9.3
provides the directionality characteristics, and is also included in this computation.
Figure 9.10 illustrates the signal that arrives at the C-band receiver, and is presented
by the antenna. All of the power below 3.7 GHz is considered to be blocking power.
This power level is computed by integrating the PSD in this band of regard. In this case,
the total power is -67.2 dBm, so the admission control system must conclude that the
satellite receiver is considered to be effectively blocked, and thus would be interfered
with if entry of the node was permitted.
Figure 9.11 illustrates the signal after it is processed through the high pass ﬁlter, (if
present) and is presented to the LNA/LNB. Since all of the energy below 3.7 GHz is
typically reduced by a value of almost 50 dB, the power is approximately this level
below that shown in Figure 9.10. The ﬁlter effectively reduces the adjacent band energy
to below the level at which intermodulation energy would signiﬁcantly raise the noise
ﬁgure of the satellite receiver. In this example, the third-order intermodulation noise
level would be 150 dB lower than in the no-ﬁlter case, and far below any impact on
receiver operation.
In this analysis we consider two protection criteria that the admission control system
could be directed to implement. These two independent coexistence considerations are
shown in Table 9.3. Each requires different treatment by the admission control system.
Table 9.4 illustrates the actual criteria measurements that would be created in our
sample example. The 0.1 Interference to Noise (I/N) ratio is at a system noise (N)
temperature of 78 K, or –179.7 dBm/Hz. This equates to a total interference power level
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
3.70
Frequency (GHz)
Power Spectral Density (dBm/Hz)
–180
–170
–160
–150
–140
–190
–200
Figure 9.10 Pre-ﬁlter received signal at a C-band downlink receiver.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

9.5 Frequency Domain Analysis
157
Table 9.3 Example satellite protection criteria.
Criteria
Deﬁnition
Level
Blocking Power
Total power outside of the operating band
caused by devices controlled by the admission
control system.
−80 dBm
Co-Channel
Interference
Average power spectral density in any single
channel in the protected service.
7.8 K noise
temperature
Table 9.4 Example satellite protection criteria satisfaction for a single possibly
interfering node.
Criteria
Level
Before Filter
After Filter
Blocking Power
−80 dBm
−67.6 dBm
−112.5 dBm
Co-Channel Interference
−103 dBm/Chan
−114.3 dBm
−113.8 dBm
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
3.70
Frequency (GHz)
Power Spectral Density (dBm/Hz)
–240
–230
–220
–210
–200
–190
–250
–260
Figure 9.11 Composite received signal at a C-band downlink receiver.
of –103.7 dBm for a single C-Band transponder channel. The slightly lower co-channel
noise reﬂects the slight loss induced by the high-pass ﬁlter. In this particular scenario,
the high-pass ﬁltering is so effective in protecting from blocking power that 1 000
more devices could be deployed in similar geometries. On the other hand, there is only
approximately a 10 dB margin in the co-channel interference margin, so the density of
devices could only be increased by 10 times without exceeding this limit. More devices
could be admitted if the out-of-band emissions level for these devices was reduced.
Without the high-pass ﬁlter, only very limited deployments could be achieved. This
same constraint informs us about the issues in sharing spectrum with FSS sites that are
co-channel with the sharing devices. Even when frequencies are deconﬂicted so that
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

158
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
the secondary devices are not using the same frequencies that are in active use by the
receivers (speciﬁc transponder channels), the total energy that reaches the receiver must
be controlled. Unless the power of devices is to be greatly constrained, this implies that
spatial directionality management, along with frequency management, is key to any
such spectrum sharing regime.
9.6
Aggregate Emissions Into FSS Receivers
The same process can now be extended to address the aggregate emissions into the
receiver from all of the devices shown in Figure 9.4. Figure 9.12 illustrates the aggregate
emissions into a non-ﬁltered receiver. In this case, there is a very signiﬁcant amount of
energy in the shared band below the FSS band, and the blocking energy is much higher
than in the one-on-one case. However, the ﬁltering is effective in eliminating even this
high density of usage to below the blocking power limit.
The post-ﬁlter energy is shown in Figure 9.13. The co-channel noise is not
signiﬁcantly increased, as the one source (AP1) was in the main beam of the dish, and
all other sources were angularly far from this beam.
Table 9.5 illustrates the numeric results of this analysis. Even though the number of
nodes is greatly increased, the co-channel noise is still within the protection criteria.
Comparison of Figure 9.10 (just AP1) with Figure 9.12 illustrates that although seven
additional nodes were introduced into the region around the FSS site, the signal at
the receiver is dominated by AP1, which is located in the direct path of the antenna’s
maximum gain. The high directionality of FSS sites creates very signiﬁcant differences
in impact among devices at different locations and directions.
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
3.70
Frequency (GHz)
Power Spectral Density (dBm/Hz)
–180
–170
–160
–150
–140
–190
–200
Figure 9.12 Aggregate received signal at a C-band downlink receiver before high-pass ﬁltering
from AP1 to AP8.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

9.6 Aggregate Emissions Into FSS Receivers
159
3.50
3.55
3.60
3.65
3.70
Frequency (GHz)
Power Spectral Density (dBm/Hz)
–180
–200
–220
–240
–260
Figure 9.13 Aggregate received signal at a C-band downlink receiver after ﬁltering from
AP1 to AP8.
Table 9.5 Example satellite protection criteria satisfaction for multiple possibly
interfering nodes.
Criteria
Level
Before Filter
After Filter
Blocking Power
−80 dBm
−67.6 dBm
−107.0 dBm
Co-Channel Interference
−103 dBm/Chan
−114.4 dBm
−113.7 dBm
In this case, the co-channel noise is within the acceptable criteria in both of the
ﬁltering cases (before and after front end ﬁlter). This is reasonable, as the ﬁlter has
negligible impact within the satellite’s operating spectrum. The blocking power criteria
is signiﬁcantly exceeded before the high-pass ﬁlter, but is well within the criteria
after the ﬁlter. With this analysis, the admission control system can be assured that
interference levels into a ﬁlter-protected receiver would exceed the protection criteria
levels.
This process is computationally intense, as compared to a traditional link analysis,
but it is not algorithmically any more complex. The data required is typically supported
by device vendors, both in their own literature, and in the compliance documentation
provided to regulators. The most ﬂexible method would be to enable both preloaded
device characteristics for devices that have limited control over their operating modes,
but provide the ﬂexibility for devices to include “replacement” data when the device
can adjust these characteristics dynamically. For example, if power control was used in
the device, it is likely that the Out of Band Emissions (OOBE) levels would be reduced
if the channel power was reduced.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

160
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
9.7
Other Possible Satellite Spectrum Sharing Scenarios
The previous example has focused on sharing of the FSS downlink. Other possible
sharing scenarios that must be considered include:
• Sharing of the FSS uplink band
• Sharing with non ﬁxed services
• Sharing with non-geosynchronous satellite services
Sharing with the uplink band of the satellite’s transponder is constrained by several
factors:
• The receiver antenna coverage is quite wide. In the case of C-Band, it is almost
hemispheric; Ku- and Ka-bands have smaller spots, but they are still typically
1 000 km2 or more in area. Therefore, any device in that area would be received at
the satellite.
• The wide area of earth coverage, or spot beam coverage, results in many devices
aggregating energy into the uplink.
• The operation of C-Band, Ku-Band and some Ka satellites is to function as a “bent
pipe,” in which the received energy at the transponder is transverted to the downlink
frequency and re-radiated without processing. This noise on the uplink is additive to
the noise introduced in the terrestrial downlink receiver.
• The link from the ground to the orbital position is line of sight, and has only
r2 propagation loss. For example, from the ground to a C-Band GEO satellite at
40 000 km altitude has only a propagation loss of 200.3 dB, and has typically around
28 dB of receive antenna gain on the satellite. Considering that the Google clutter loss
measurements shown in Figure 7.3 performed at 3.65 GHz indicated that terrestrial
links had measured losses of 180 dB over just 1 km. The loss to a satellite is much
less than might be thought. If these effects are aggregated across thousands, tens
of thousands, or millions of devices within the uplink footprint, the aggregation
increases of 30, 40 or 60 dB would raise the noise ﬂoor, even 40 000 km away. Since a
typical uplink operates under 60 dBW, the aggregation of devices on this order could
signiﬁcantly impact the noise level at the satellite.
• The uplink spot sizes are typically larger than the control of any one National
Regulatory Authority (NRA). In the downlink case, the possible interference was
local to the ground site, and thus an appropriate decision on an NRA-by-NRA basis.
However, interference to the uplink would cause disruption to ITU protected primary
services, in violation of the United Nations (UN) ITU treaty obligations.
There is a considerable spectrum resource committed essentially exclusively to
satellite uplink, as was shown in Table 9.1. However, the limited antenna performance
of the in-orbit systems minimizes the ability to effectively share that spectrum without
a risk of interference to the ongoing operations of the communications system. Reuse
of this spectrum may be dependent on a policy decision regarding the transition of FSS
from RF media to terrestrial mechanisms, such as the increasingly pervasive ﬁber and
internet connectivity.
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
161
Sharing with non-ﬁxed services, such as mobile services from both geosynchronous,
as well as low and medium earth orbit, satellites provides several challenges:
• Mobile users are likely to be anywhere! Tracking them has privacy issues, operational
complications, and would likely be disruptive to practical use of the band, unless
there is some geographic segmentation of the services provided by the satellite.
Fixed geographic segmentation protection of the downlink is similar to the previous
discussion in this chapter. However, providing protection of a large number of mobile,
partially connected, user terminals is a signiﬁcant operational challenge.
• Mobile terminals have much less control over antenna gain, and will not provide the
predictable and ﬁxed antenna patterns which makes sharing with FSS terminals so
practical.
• Non-geosynchronous satellites typically use orbits with signiﬁcant inclination to the
equator. As such, they may be located in any possible alignment to a user terminal.
Except at attitudes above their inclination, they could be located to the north or south
of the terminal, or to the east or west, as well.
• The protection of the FSS satellites that were in-band to the CBRS band in the
USA, and the impact on devices above 3 700 MHz was one of the major, and most
contentious, issues in the US FCC CBRS proceeding. The two FCC reports and
orders [3, 4] have a considerable discussion of the FCC analysis of the discussion
on all sides of the issue, and provide an extensive summary of all of the positions that
were presented. The proceeding [1] to authorize Part 90 usage in 3 650–3 700 MHz
also has an extensive discussion of the regulator’s view of this sharing.
• The ITU has developed extensive material on the protection of satellite operation. As
in most ITU processes, the recommendations are largely driven from the perspective
of the incumbent users, and tend to be driven by worst-case interference possibilities,
and do not reﬂect the views of other spectrum users, or the opportunity cost of the
recommendations they impart [5].
• An example of spectrum sharing analysis is provided in the US FCC proceeding
to share 3 650–3 700 MHz. The proceeding includes an appendix that provides the
regulator’s analysis on the shared spectrum in this range of spectrum. The analysis
methods in Appendix D of this document is consistent with the ones in this chapter.
References
1 Federal Communications Commission, Report and Order and Memorandum Opinion and
Order: In the Matter of Wireless Operations in the 3650–3700MHz Band, FCC 05–56
(Washington, DC: 2005). http://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-05-56A1.pdf.
2 Alion Science and Technology, Effects of the Proposed Citizens Broadband Service to CBand
DOMSAT Earth Stations. Attachment to ﬁling by the Content Industries to the FCC on
Proceeding 12–354 (CBRS), Consulting Report ESO-13-011-v3 (2013).
3 Federal Communications Commission, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to
Commercial Operation in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354, Report and Order
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

162
Protection of Incumbent Satellite Operations
and Second Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Order (2015). http://apps.fcc.gov/
edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-15-47A1.pdf.
4 ——, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to Commercial Operation in
the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354 (2016). https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/
attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
5 International Telecommunications Union, Radio Regulations International Telecommunica-
tions Union Radio Regulations, Volume 1 (2012).
.010
14:57:36, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

10
Protection to and From
Terrestrial Access Points and
Point-to-Point Networks
10.1
Unique Aspects of Terrestrial Protection
In this chapter, we consider the protection of terrestrial networks from other sources
of interference and the reverse problem: how to characterize the aggregate ecosystem
impact of terrestrial networks on other terrestrial, space, or sensor networks. Much of
the necessary material has been developed in the prior chapters, so this chapter will only
introduce, or further reﬁne, the additional elements of interference analysis necessary to
fully integrate terrestrial network protection into a fully functional three-tier spectrum
regime.
We differentiate access point protection1 from other point-to-point protection
mechanisms because an access point implies that the access point node itself is not
the sole protected entity; it also implies a potential cloud of user devices, or clients, that
must be protected from interference. Similarly, if an Access Point (AP) is a potential
source of interference, the AP is not the sole source of the network’s interference, as the
cloud of devices that surrounds it may be sources of interference, as well as the access
point itself.
In the case of point-to-point networks, we assume a (typically) directional antenna at
each endpoint, and protection driven by the angular susceptibility of the receive systems
in use. Of course, these two are the notional, but not the only, cases, and some network
architectures may make use of hybrids between these two alternatives which will require
some integration of both of these “pure” cases.
There are a very wide range of technologies in use in terrestrial networks, and it
is likely as networks move from 4th-Generation Wireless (4G) to Fifth-Generation
Wireless Systems (5G) technology (whatever 5G turns out to be), and from networks
typically below 6 GHz to networks above 20 GHz. There are a wide range of potential
topologies that will have to be introduced into the model. Ten years from now, the simple
model laid out in earlier chapters will have to be signiﬁcantly extended, and made more
complicated, to address these emerging topologies and the adaptive nature of many of
these technologies.
1 We consider these are typically going to be Local Area Networks (LAN) due to the lower power and
higher frequencies typically in use in shared spectrum. However the principles apply equally to higher
power, lower frequencies, such as in Wide Area Network (WAN) applications.
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

164
Protection to and From Terrestrial Access Points
Table 10.1 Terrestrial Network Characterization.
Access Point
Point-to-Point
Technical Characteristics
Directionality
Assumed to be
omnidirectional in
horizontal plane, or a large
ﬁeld of regard
Assumed to be highly
directional in 2 or 3
dimensions
Protected Area
Deﬁnition
Region around the AP, out
to a service area
End points of the link, and
locations within the
transmitter and receiver
antenna regard
Separation
Methodology
Path loss (distance) from the
AP and clients
Deconﬂicting antenna gain
azimuth alignment
Regulatory Examples
Non-Part 96
Television White
Space (TVWS)
Microwave Coordination
Part 96
Priority Access License
Protection Area (PPA)
Fixed Satellite Service (FSS)
Protection(s)
Part 90 Wireless Service
Protection Areas
But in the near term, we have two widely deployed models of terrestrial networks:
AP-based, and point-to-point. Table 10.1 illustrates the major differences between the
pure access point model, and the pure point-to-point model, as they are deﬁned for
purposes of this chapter.
10.2
Implications of Sub-channeling of Access Point
or its Clients
A reasonable assumption in the AP model is that the AP and the client have a symmetric
spectrum usage, even if their power distribution might be different (as is the case in the
United States (US) Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) regulations. Different
power level ceilings are readily incorporated into this model.
A more complex situation is when the spectrum channel used by the AP is
sub-channeled and assigned dynamically to one or more of the client devices associated
with the AP. There are several interference conditions that can arise:
Spectral Power Even if only one device is operating as a client, if it only uses a portion
of the AP channel, but uses its full power level, it will create a Power Spectral
Density (PSD) that is much higher than if the whole channel was utilized. This is not
an unlikely condition. The lower power limits of the client may make partial band
operation similar in power with the AP. If these assignments are made dynamically,
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

10.3 Implications of MAC Layer, TDD, and FDD
165
any PSD sensitive interference protections will have to be made highly restrictive
around worst-case conditions.
Total Power Extending the example above, in this case the AP assigns sub-channels to
multiple clients, but also allows the devices to transmit in the same slot. Each device
might be limited by the power limit of client devices, but the aggregate emission
level is the sum of all of the devices, and therefore is linearly increased.
When we consider both of these, the possibility is that both the total power in the
band and the individual sub-channel PSD increases. For example, Long-Term Evolution
(LTE) permits allocation of 50 individual resource blocks (sub-channels) per 10 MHz
channel. Since the regulatory limits are on a per User Equipment (UE) basis, resource
block scheduling enables multiple UEs to emit at their full power limits simultaneously.
This increases the total aggregate emissions by 17 dB when the maximum of ﬁfty
individual devices are allocated their full power by the AP, each in a single resource
block. The total aggregate channel emission level is increased by 17 dB compared to
operation by a single UE.
The US CBRS regulations establish different power levels and PSD limits for
clients.2 UE devices are allowed only 10 dB less power than the AP in all cases, which
comes close to addressing the 17 dB possible (but unlikely) impact of simultaneous
sub-channel operations. Although it establishes limits on the PSD of the AP, it
establishes no speciﬁc level for clients. In fact, the maximum PSD for a client of
any category AP is actually 27 dBm/10 MHz, well above a “Category A” AP, which
is limited to 20 dBm/10 MHz, but below the “Category B” limit of 37 dBm/10 MHz.
10.3
Implications of MAC layer, TDD, and FDD operation
The interference environment created by a network of nodes is determined by more than
just the radios themselves, but also the impact of the upper layer processes, particularly
the Media Access Layer (MAC), which controls access to the channel. How the MAC
layer manages resources is key to the design of an interference management regime.
The previous section described methods that a MAC or Radio Resource Management
(RRM) agent might use to control access by multiple devices to a single channel
simultaneously. In this section we consider distribution in time, or the allocation of
channels into independent uplinks or downlinks. These processes address the scheduling
and deconﬂiction of the clients and AP transmissions.
The simplest case to analyze is that of Frequency Division Duplex (FDD). FDD
essentially is two independent radio systems, with one operating as an uplink (client
to AP), and one operating as a downlink (AP to client). Spectrum used in this way
is considered to be “paired.” This has been the most common approach in modern
commercial (cellular 2G, 3G, and 4G technology) wireless practice, but is becoming
difﬁcult to achieve, as pairable spectrum is exhausted. Unpaired operation in Time
2 The regulations actually invoke the LTE “User Equipment” nomenclature for the clients.
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

166
Protection to and From Terrestrial Access Points
Division Duplex (TDD) mode is becoming the only option to exploit available spectrum
opportunities.
It should be noted that the use of FDD in three-tier spectrum is likely to be rare, if
ever present. There are a number of engineering reasons for this:
1. FDD operation requires signiﬁcant frequency separation between the uplink and
downlink channels. A minimum of 30 to 100 MHz separation is typical. Locating
uplink and downlink channels that are available for use, and appropriately separated,
will be a challenge in a constrained, shared band with dynamic access.
2. The diplexer component is very frequency speciﬁc. The diplexer separates the
antenna signal to, and from, the receive and transmit ports of the radio. The current
technology has a ﬁxed demarcation between these two ports, greatly constraining the
choice of spectrum.
3. Pairing is typically predeﬁned between the receive and transmit frequencies. In TDD,
the client can recognize a beacon or other signature of its associated AP and then
utilize the same channel. With FDD, the knowledge of the receive channel does not
inform the device of what is expected on its uplink channel. It cannot be ﬁxed in
advance with certainty.
10.4
Impact of Network Client Device Clouds on
External Networks
Section 6.2 provides a general analytic framework for deﬁning the protected area of
a network, which drives the protection of the network from external networks. In that
chapter, the interest was in understanding the theoretical density implications of various
network client protection strategies in a homogeneous network.
This was a suitable treatment to determine the protection of clients within the network,
as only the most impacted protected device had to be considered. It did not develop a
model for how the aggregation of this network should be considered as a source of
interference to other networks, which we will now develop. In this development, we
will consider all the non-theoretical aspects of real MAC layers, resource scheduling and
other aspects of modern wireless design that were introduced in the previous sections.
Different regimes may choose to reﬂect, or abstract, these considerations differently.
How detailed or abstract does not change the nature of the three-tier regime. It will
impact either the density it can achieve, or the level of protection assurance it can
provide.
Statistical assumptions and conﬁdence levels can play an important role if there is the
possibility of multiple client transmissions occurring. First, we examine the worst case
for a single client transmission. For simplicity in expression, we imagine that we have
a single propagation model that provides a loss value between any point separated by
distance d at frequency f as LP(d).
Since all of these examples are co-channel, we will ignore the f term. Client devices
have a PSD of PC and AP PSD as PAP. For convenience, all are in dBm. This simple
lay-down is shown in Figure 10.1, showing the location of the client, the AP, and the
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

10.4 Impact of Client Device Clouds on External Networks
167
dAP-C
dAP-V
dC-V
Closest
Client to
Victim
Access Point
AP
Service
Area
Potential
Victim
Figure 10.1 Single client transmission worst case positioning.
potential victim of their interference. They are in the worst-case alignment, for a locally
ﬂat earth.
If we assume a Listen Before Talk (LBT) and/or a simple TDD model, then only one
of these nodes can be transmitting in any single channel, so the interference at the victim
is given by Eq. (10.1).
max(PAP −LP(dAP-V),PC −LP(dC-V))
(10.1)
Since LP(dC-V) ≤LP(dAP-V), if PAP ≈PC then the client dominates the worst
case interference estimate external to the AP service area in simple TDD mode. The
domination of the client or AP is a function of the relative power allowed to each, and
the distance from the victim to the AP service area. Speciﬁcally, the AP dominates the
interference when PAP −PV > LP(dAP-V) −LP(dC-V). So, if the victim is far from the
service area, the two propagation loss estimates converge (LP(dAP-V) ≈LP(dC-V)). This
is due to the convergence of the limit of the ratio of the propagation losses, as shown in
Eq. (10.2).
lim
dC-V→∞

dC-V
dC−V + dAP-C
αp
= 1
(10.2)
where αp is the propagation exponent. At distance, the more powerful AP dominates
the worst-case interference estimate. We can further characterize the ratio of these two
distances by considering the relative signal level that deﬁnes the boundary of the AP ser-
vice area, and the protection afforded the victim. Typically, the receiver requires that the
S
N ratio be signiﬁcantly above 1 to support meaningful operations of the network. This
deﬁnes the maximum size of the AP service area, and thus the maximum value of dAP-C.
The allowable interference level at a victim is typically limited to some fraction of the
thermal noise level (N) in order to ensure meaningful operation of the network links. We
consider the deﬁnition of the AP service area boundary is the interior of a region deﬁned
by having a signal level of at least PSAB. Similarly, we protect victims to an interference
level of Pint. The ratio of PSAB
Pint
establishes the ratio of dAP-C to dC-V + dAP-C.
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

168
Protection to and From Terrestrial Access Points
We know that the relationship of the ranges, transmit power, and interference limits
is given by Eqs. (10.3) and (10.4).
LP(dAP-C) = PAP/PSAB
(10.3)
LP(dC-V) = PC/Pint
(10.4)
We know that LP ∝d−α. In dB units, LP ∝−10α log10(d). The ratio of these distances
is therefore given by Eq. (10.5).
LP(dAP-C)
LP(dC-V) ∝PAP/PSAB
PC/Pint
= PAPPint
PSAB/PC
(10.5)
In dB terms, Eq. (10.5) becomes as shown in Eq. (10.6).
LP(dAP-C) −LP(dC-V) ∝PAP −PSAB −PC + Pint
(10.6)
The difference in the path loss permitted between AP and client compared to the
client and the victim is directly related to the differences in the size of the service area,
and the protection limits of the devices.
Solving Eq. (10.6) for the ratio of these distances yields Eqs. (10.7) and (10.8), which
provides the relative size of the service area and the excluded region around the service
area. This is based on the fact that LP(d) ∝10α log10(d).
LP(dAP-C) −LP(dC-V) ∝PAP −PSAB −PC + Pint
(10.7)
10α log10
LP(dAP-C)
LP(dC-V) ∝PAP −PSAB −PC + Pint
(10.8)
We can consider this analysis using the speciﬁc values established in the US CBRS
regulations. The CBRS equivalent of the AP service area is a PPA, which is deﬁned
as out to a distance where the signal level is –96 dBm/10 MHz. The protection of an
adjoining PPA is at a level of –80 dBm/10 MHz. The Equivalent Isotropic Radiated
Power (EIRP) permitted to an indoor access point is 30 dBm/10 MHz, and an outdoor
one is permitted 47 dBm/10 MHz. Similarly, a typical client device (not requiring
registration, but permitted to be mobile) is allowed an EIRP of 23 dBm/10 MHz.
The indoor and outdoor relative ranges of the service area and exclusion zone are
shown in Table 10.2 for a propagation exponent (α) of 2 indoors, and both 2 and 4
outdoors, as might be typical.
This model works for technologies that have either an AP transmitting or a single
client. This includes Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi), Bluetooth and most LBT systems. It
does not address the situation when the LTE network allocates resource blocks to
multiple clients within a single time slot. In that case, we need to consider the much
more complex conditions that multiple-clients transmission raise.
Some conclusions from this table include:
• The propagation model drives everything in considering the dimensions of the
protected service areas and the protection region. With unrealistic propagation, the
zones are extensive. With reasonable assumptions about outdoor propagation, the
zones shrink dramatically. The indoor size is quite large, but a 30 dB loss in the
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

10.5 Point-to-Point Protection
169
Table 10.2 PA Service Area and Protection Zone relationships.
Indoor
Outdoors
Parameter
Symbol
α = 2
α = 2
α = 3
Maximum AP EIRP
(dBm/10 MHz)
PAP
30
47
47
Maximum Client EIRP
(dBm/10 MHz)
PC
23
23
23
AP Protection Level
(dBm/10 MHz)
Pint
–80
–80
–80
AP Service Area Level
(dBm/10 MHz)
PSAB
–96
–96
–96
Service Area Loss (dB)
PAP −PSAB
110
127
127
AP-to-Victim Loss (dB)
PAP −Pint
126
143
143
Client-to-Victim Loss (dB)
PC −Pint
119
119
119
Radius of Service Area (m)
dAP-C
2,08
14,763
112
Distance: AP-Victim (m)
dAP-V
13,158
93,154
385
Distance: UE-Victim (m)
dC-V
5,877
5,877
61
exterior wall would reduce this range by a factor of 25, or a 32 times reduction in the
range of all areas.
• Clients are an important consideration in interference to and from the access point
service area only if the power levels are similar. With high power, or high EIRP, the
AP dominates all of the interference considerations.
• The area tied up in service areas is a function of propagation model. With high loss
models, the service area dominates, while with low power APs, and clear propagation,
the protection zone around the service area is the dominant driver in density.
10.5
Point-to-Point Protection
Most of the methodology for point-to-point protection has already been developed in
the more complex, three-dimensional case of FSS protection in Chapter 9, and will not
be repeated. The computation of terrestrial point-to-point paths is a simpler process,
since the projection of the gain pattern on the earth is identical to the gain pattern of the
antenna, as if the elevation angle was zero.
The differences arise from the diversity of antenna performance and characteristics.
While most of the FSS receivers utilize prime focus dishes, the antenna designs
deployed above 2 GHz typically have a wider range of technologies, including the
conventional dishes and horns, but also planar arrays, phased arrays, increasingly
beam-forming, and soon, massive Multiple Input/Multiple Output (MIMO). Each of
these antenna types poses unique challenges in performing effective and spectrally
efﬁcient point-to-point protection.
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

170
Protection to and From Terrestrial Access Points
Focused Dish The model for dish antennas is similar to that outlined in the FSS case.
In the case of FSS operations, the antenna pattern, and thus gain, is dictated by the
necessity to separate adjacent orbital slots. They are regulated by most, if not all,
National Regulatory Authority (NRA) regulations. An admission control system can
assume the worst-case (maximum possible gain) perimeter of the three-dimensional
pattern. However, the antennas used in terrestrial point-to-point links are dictated by
the economics of the deployment and the need for antenna gain and pattern control.
Therefore, the admission control system cannot assume any speciﬁc de facto antenna
characteristics, and these must be uniquely provided and validated for each receiver
and uplink deployment, and maintained throughout the lifetime of that deployment.
Technically, this is not a challenge for the control system operator, but it is a signiﬁcant
operational challenge to assure this discipline is maintained in the ﬁeld.
Planar Array Planar arrays are similar in their challenges to dish antennas, but
introduce the additional consideration that planar arrays often have relatively high,
almost random, angles of relatively high gain, referred to as grating lobes. The
grating lobe angular positions can be highly variable by frequency, so they are hard
to characterize in advance. They impact both the transmitted pattern and the receiver
susceptibility to interference. Since the grating lobes are highly frequency dependent,
they may be difﬁcult to map for interference analysis, so the antenna pattern may
have to be an enclosing perimeter, that may signiﬁcantly overstate antenna gain by
tens of dB in most directions.
Phased Arrays Phased array antennas introduce all of the issues associated with
the planar antenna case, but introduce their own, as well. A phased array is
presumably deployed because the antenna will serve devices on more than one
azimuth. Therefore, the admission control system must either be aware of all of the
node locations (and assume they are ﬁxed), or assume that the phased array could
be in any setting within the ﬁeld of regard of the array, typically from ±30° to
±60° from the angle perpendicular to the array face. Phased arrays have known (and
speciﬁc) directionally/directionalities, and must be explicitly pointed by varying the
time delay in the antenna elements. A system operator should be able to inform the
admission control system of the speciﬁc angles, or range of angles, over which the
antenna will operate.
Beam-forming Beam-forming antennas function similarly to the phased array anten-
nas, except instead of being programmed to speciﬁc directions, they adapt the
beam to optimize the signal by controlling gain and nulling across the ﬁeld of
regard. Many of the uses of beam-forming antennas are distinct from phased arrays.
Whereas phased arrays are effective in line-of-sight, beam-forming is often effective
in exploiting non-line-of-sight paths through dynamically focusing on the multi-path,
and simultaneously nulling other interfering signals. Therefore, it is unreasonable to
make any assumptions regarding the actual antenna pattern of such devices, and they
have to be considered to have emissions at peak focus in any azimuth in their ﬁeld
of regard, with an understanding that the beam direction cannot be predicted, even
if the endpoint is known. In some applications, beam-forming is utilized to provide
multiple independent beams, in the same spectrum, but in different directions. In
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

10.6 Three-Dimensional Considerations
171
this case, the peak gain will be reduced from the maximum focused EIPR, but the
angle of regard will be maximized. The total emission model from such antennas
may exceed unity gain when integrated spherically.
Massive MIMO Massive MIMO or, space-time coding, is increasingly viewed as one
of the key technologies in expanding wireless capacity within very constrained
spectrum availability. However, although it includes a large number of antennas,
it focuses information, not energy, so the far ﬁeld of the device is not predictably
focused in the same manner as a beam-formed device. We must consider the gain
pattern as typically Gaussian around the ﬁeld of regard of the array or MIMO
elements.
The previous description of FSS protection is applicable to point-to-point network
outbound and inbound interference, once the adjustments for the antenna characteristics
at both ends of the link are reﬂected in the analysis. Typically, isolation is less of an issue
for terrestrial applications than for FSS, due to a number of factors:
• The antenna gain achieved by point-to-point antennas is typically less than that
generated by the 3.3 to 8 m diameter dishes in use for C-Band, as an example. They
therefore are a less stressing case.
• The noise ﬂoor of the terrestrial applications is at least 6 dB higher, due to the earth
temperature rather than deep-space background.
• Terrestrial receivers are typically more robust to blocking power due to higher
Third-Order Input Intercept Point (IIP3) dynamic range of signals in mixed-usage
bands, with a wide range of emitter power, EIRP and path losses.
10.6
Three-Dimensional Considerations
The traditional network planning has treated propagation analysis as a set of points
along a two-dimensional surface. The distance between two points was considered
to be the surface difference between their latitude and longitude points. This was
certainly a valid approach for frequencies below 1 GHz. It might even have been
correct for high-power elevated base stations at frequencies below 2 GHz. However, in
lower-powered, indoor or outdoor, networks, the two-dimensional assumption is worth
examining.
The One World Trade Center building (without considering antennas) is 417 m above
the ground. Although two lat, long points may be almost adjacent, the actual distance
could be greater than 417 m. The free-space path loss for points 10 m (at 3.62 GHz) is
not 64 dB, but over 96 dB including the vertical distance. There is a 33 dB additional
path loss. If the path is through building materials, the additional loss could be literally
hundreds of dB more, considering that the per ﬂoor loss can exceed 50 dB.
Concepts such as a client service area, the US CBRS regulations PPA, or census
tracts are not meaningful in a three-dimensional environment. There is no technical
reason that devices on ﬂoors above a protected network cannot share the same spectrum
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

172
Protection to and From Terrestrial Access Points
without interference to the protected network. This three-dimensional environment is
not addressed by extending traditional methods of spectrum management.
An interesting consideration is what is actually provided by a protected license. The
protection level of the US CBRS regulations PPA is deﬁned at a height of 1.5 m. So,
a node sufﬁciently high may be quite close in horizontal distance, but with sufﬁcient
path loss (due to vertical distance and clutter loss) to not violate the Priority Access
License (PAL) criteria. Even if the building was not as tall as the World Trade Center, the
loss through numerous concrete ﬂoors with up to 50 dB loss per ﬂoor,3 would provide
sufﬁcient protection even a few ﬂoors away.
It is a matter for the policy community to determine how to address the vertical aspect
of protection rights. There are no clearly absolutely correct engineering options that do
not have some regrets, or opportunity for “gaming.”
• If the protected network can deﬁne the elevation at which the protection is provided,
it can create excessive protected regions. Higher elevations would transition the path
loss from terrain-driven to free-space, greatly expanding the size of the exclusion
zone. The temptation will be for PA users to claim these higher elevations as the basis
for protection.
• If a ﬁxed elevation is established by default for the second tier (as is provided in the
US CBRS regulations), then they will be inappropriate to many of the use cases that
appear.
The need for more advanced concepts than protected regions is driven by several
considerations. These include the high material loss at frequencies above 2–3 GHz,
the transition from outdoor to indoor coverage, and the low-powered nature of likely
shared-spectrum deployments.
10.7
Suggested Reading
There are a wide range of readings that can contribute to an understanding of current
and future technologies in terrestrial networking.
• An understanding of the antennas in use in point-to-point systems is essential to
development of the wide range of models needed to represent the wide range of
architectures used in this application.
– MIMO systems are likely to emerge in both point-to-point and AP architectures.
The original papers on this technology [1] have been extended to much more
complex, highly scaled applications. Examples of critical work in massive MIMO
have a fundamentally different impact on architectures than the original work did.
– It is likely that adaptive beam-forming will also play a big part in future wireless
systems.
3 A table showing a range of loss through building materials is provided in Table 12.1.
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
173
• It is desirable to abstract the speciﬁc details of the wireless protocols in developing
an interference protection regime. Technologies in use do change, and inclusion of
technology speciﬁc features can tend to create technology favoritism in the regula-
tions. However, the subtleties of these technologies are important considerations. The
prevalence of both Wi-Fi and LTE in current usage certainly implies that any regime
reﬂect their subtleties, as a minimum. There are a wide range of works describing
both of these physical and MAC layer designs.
• The US CBRS regulations [2] include an appendix that describes the PPA protection
(the CBRS implementation of AP service areas) with drawings of each scenario and
how protection is to be afforded. Similarly, a Public Notice (PN) was issued by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) [3] to deﬁne the protection rights of the
grandfathered Part 90 devices; primarily wireless Internet service provider (WISP)
and utility networks.
References
1 G. J. Foschini, Layered space time architecture for wireless communications in a fading
environment using multiple antennas. Bell Labs Technical Journal, 1/2, (1996) 41–59.
2 Federal Communications Commission, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to
Commercial Operation in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354 (2016). https://apps.
fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
3 ——, Wireless Telecommunications Bureau and Ofﬁce of Engineering and Technol-
ogy announce Methodology for Determining the Protected Contours for Grandfathered
3650–3700 MHz Band Licenses GN Docket No. 12-354. Public notice (2016).
.011
14:57:21, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

11
Protection to and From
Radar Systems
11.1
Unique Aspects of Radar Systems
Although most spectrum sharing discussion revolves around communications services
sharing with communications services, radars consume massive amounts of spectrum,
and meaningful spectrum sharing will require that this spectrum be meaningfully shared.
Technical and operational issues impacting consideration and implementation of radar
and communications spectrum sharing are many, including:
• Radars have very high peak power, and also very high gain antennas, so their
interference potential could appear to be quite signiﬁcant over an extensive region.
• Radars are often used for safety of life (aviation, maritime) or national security
(military) related applications, so the tolerance for interference is low or non-existent.
• The emission characteristics of some radars are not publicly available from the
Government or military users, and thus sensing design for detecting some radars is
difﬁcult. Others are so variable in pulse structure and scanning patterns that they are
essentially random to the sensor designer. Similarly, the interference susceptibility of
these radars is also not publicly available for use in determining protection modalities.
• Military radar users are concerned about the detection of some of their operations and
characteristics.
• Although the transmission duty cycle for a radar is very low, the radar is “using” the
spectrum while it is listening for a return signal, and is impacted by interference for a
period twice the time it takes light to reach the outer radius of the radar.
• Bi-static radars have receivers that are not located at the same location as the
transmitters (the illuminator), and therefore the angle or distance to these radar
receivers cannot be determined by a sensing regime.
For these reasons, other than the Dynamic Frequency Selection (DFS) band at 5 GHz,
there are few success stories for radar spectrum sharing.
11.2
A General Model of Radar System Design and Performance
This section introduces some basic parameters of radar operation, with only the
factors related to the detection, protection, and mitigation of interference from radars
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

11.2 A Model of Radar System Design and Performance
175
considered. In most cases, the models are fairly simple radar modes of operation.
Specialized military and space-borne radars have typically much more complex
operational modes, but still have the basic characteristics provided in this discussion.
The challenges in radar spectrum sensing derive from their high power and high
antenna gain. These features are necessary to overcome the very challenging link budget,
which is expressed as the radar range equation, shown in Eq. (11.1). Rmax is the idealized
range of the radar, while PS is the transmitted power, Gant is the antenna gain (absolute,
not dB), λ is the wavelength, σ is the target’s effective radar cross section (typically in
m2), and PEmin is the minimum power to declare a detection.
Rmax =
 PS G2
ant λ2σ
PEmin (4π)3
1/4
(11.1)
Several factors that drive radar design are apparent in this equation. Communications
in free space follows the r2 law. However, because radar signals must traverse the path
twice, they follow an r4 relationship. For a radar to double its range requires 16 times
more power, rather than 4 times, as in the case of communications. Also, antenna gain
is squared for radars, as the antenna functions at both ends of the link.1 These factors
drive the fundamental differences between communications systems and radar systems.
Radar systems have very unique emission characteristics compared to communi-
cations systems, and equally so, compared to each other. There are a number of
characteristics of radar emissions that are fundamental to the sensing and protection
of radars, and the mitigation of radar interference into the communication systems.
The most signiﬁcant ones from the spectrum sharing perspective include:
Pulse Width The Pulse Width (PW) is the time interval in which the radar actively
emits the pulse. Typically measured in nano-, micro-, or milli-seconds.
Pulse Repetition Pulse Repetition Frequency (PRF) is the rate at which the radar emits
pulses. Typically measured in Hz.
Pulse Bandwidth The spectral bandwidth of an individual pulse. Radar range resolu-
tion is directly related to the pulse bandwidth, so accurate ranging requires signiﬁcant
bandwidth.
Operating Range The frequency range of the radar within which the pulse frequency
can be selected.
Peak Power The peak power during the transmission of the pulse. Measured in watts,
or dBW.
Frequency Agility Some radars will vary the frequency of the radar, possibly on a
pulse-by-pulse basis.
Beam Agility Electronically Steerable Array/Antenna (ESA) provides the radar with
the capability to radiate each pulse in arbitrary directions, rather than a ﬁxed rotation.
This makes the radar appear to a sensor as if it was a random impulsive noise event,
rather than an intentional emission.
1 This is applicable to monostatic radars only.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

176
Protection to and From Radar Systems
Rotational Period For radars that have rotating, mechanical antennas, this is the time
it takes for the antenna to make one full rotation. Rotation is measured in seconds.
Beamwidth (H) Horizontal beam width proving the angular range of maximal gain.
Most radars have asymmetric patterns to maximize resolution in the intended
dimension. Typically measured in degrees.
Beamwidth (V) Same as above for the vertical dimension.
Main Beam Gain Maximum gain within the main beam of the radar. Typically
measured in dB.
Front to Back Ratio The difference in antenna gain between the main beam (front)
and the least gain region (backside) of the antenna pattern.2
Elevation Angle Aircraft tracking radars may slightly elevate their beam to avoid
illuminating excessive ground terrain, and deduce the stationary ground return
component.
Chirping Some radar waveforms sweep through a set of frequencies within a single
pulse. The apparent pulse on any one sub-channel is therefore shorter than the actual
pulse width.
Some generalizations can be made. Solid-state and vacuum-tube radars deliver
similar energy per pulse, but solid-state radars tend to have lower power and longer
pulses than similar vacuum-tube designs, thus often have higher duty cycles. Modern
military radars typically have agile beam directionality (phased arrays), while civil
radars remain mechanical. Military radars are typically agile in frequency, while civil
radars are typically ﬁxed. There are more radical deployments of radars, such as bistatic
radars, where the transmitter and receiver are at different locations,3 passive radars,
which use environmental energy for detection, and Ultra Wideband (UWB) radars that
do not have conventional frequency assignments.
The impact of the radar on communications systems is driven by both the peak and
average power. The peak Equivalent Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP) of the radar is
given by: Main Beam Gain + Peak Power in dB units. The average EIRP is computed
by Eq. (11.2).
Average EIRP = EIRP + 10Log10(Pulse Width ∗Pulse Repetition).
(11.2)
A simpliﬁed version of the time signature of a traditional mechanical rotating radar is
shown in Figure 11.1. Some military radars have multiple modes of operation (such as
search, acquisition, ﬁre control, counter-countermeasures, etc.) that may modify these
characteristics rapidly; even on a pulse-by-pulse basis.
A representative set of values for some common radars, and radar types, is shown in
Table 11.1. The ﬁrst radar (USA AN/SPN-43C) is the radar that is incumbent in the band
the United States (US) Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) is sharing. Although
2 Small grating nulls that create very low gain nulls in the pattern are generally not considered in this
measure.
3 Bistatic radars are primarily for military applications to preclude using the direction of arrival of the
transmission to jam the receiver.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

11.3 Interference to Radar and Space Sensor Systems
177
Table 11.1 Example radar characteristics.
Measure
USA
3 GHz Maritime
Meterological
AN/SPN-43Ca
Radar [1]
ITU Radar G [2]
Pulse Width (μsec)
0.95
0.05–1.2
1.6, 4.7
PRF (kHz)
1
0.375–4.0
318–1 304
Pulse Bandwidth (MHz)
1.6
Unspeciﬁed
0.6
Peak Pulse Power (dBW)
60
≈45–48
57
Frequency Agility
Tunable, Fixed
Tunable, Fixed
Tunable, Fixed
Operating Range (MHz)
3 500–3 700
3 020–3 080
2 700–3 000
Beam Agility
No
No
No
Rotational Period (sec)
4
1.0–3.0
20
Beam Width (H) (°)
1.75
1.0–4.0
0.92
Beam Width (V) (°)
4.4
24–30
0.92
Main Beam Gain (dB)
43
26–28
45.7
Elevation Angle (°)
3
Not Speciﬁed
0.5–20
Chirped
No
No
No
a Source: http://spectrumwiki.com/wiki/DisplayEntry.aspx?DisplyId=225
Rotational Period
1
PRF
Pulse Width
Amplitude
Time
Front-to-
Back Ratio
Figure 11.1 Simpliﬁed time-sequence of a radar signal.
operated on modern naval carriers for air trafﬁc control purposes, it is more typical of a
civil air trafﬁc control radar than a tactical military one.
11.3
Interference to Radar and Space Sensor Systems
Demonstrating that a given spectrum sharing regime will avoid interference to radar
system operation is a nontrivial challenge. The communities that operate radars are
generally extremely conservative, and point to the safety of ﬂight, national security and
other protection requirements that they can argue mandate a zero-risk approach to any
spectrum sharing regime.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

178
Protection to and From Radar Systems
There are several radar modes of operation we can consider:
Ground-to-Air Radars that search for airborne or weather targets often have slightly
elevated antenna orientation. This is intended to reduce the amount of ground clutter,
but also reduces the susceptibility of the radar to terrestrial sources somewhat.
Air-to-Ground Air-to-ground radars typically can scan large areas and have relatively
small apertures, so have large spot sizes when projected onto the ground. An
additional complexity is that the sources move rapidly, making the detection of the
radars harder, since listening to them cannot preclude the sudden appearance and
need for protection.
Air-to-Air Air-to-air radars typically have one of two purposes. Military users use
these radars for search and weapons ﬁre control, and both civil and military users
utilize these radars for in-ﬂight weather detection. The radar waveforms for search,
ﬁre-control, and weather are very different, and must be addressed individually.
Ground-to-Ground Terrestrial-to-terrestrial radars are typically short range, and
often Continuous Wave (CW). The principles of this radar are similar to the
communications sharing examples in other chapters, rather than a typical pulse radar.
Space-to-Ground This category includes look down radars, as well as passive sensing
using the Radio Frequency (RF) spectrum. The spot size of a receiving antenna from
reasonable orbits is quite large, so local protection is less practical than with ground-
or air-based radars. Instead, orbital mechanics can inform users of the potentially
interfering conditions based on projecting satellite positions. This is well suited for
implementation by a three-tier admission control system.
The CW case we will not consider further. CW transmissions do not have the pulse
characteristic, and appear to be, and are detectable by, the same techniques as for
detecting communications systems, with the possible exception of high chirp rates and
ranges. This has been extensively researched in the Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA)
community.
We will consider the impact of interference on the radars’ effective search area.
Search area is proportional to the square of range, so it is much more sensitive to
interference than the range metric, but reﬂects the use of radars more effectively, even
if it magniﬁes the impact of interference.
Air-to-ground and air-to-air are challenging cases due to a combination of location
ambiguity, the reaction time to sensing requirements, and their long range due to
the height at which they may operate. Consider an aircraft ﬂying at a ground speed
of 270 m/sec (972 km/hr or 600 mph). If ﬂying at 10 km altitude, it has a range
to the horizon of 357 km, or a total line-of-sight area (ignoring antenna height) of
approximately 400 000 km2. Just one aircraft has line of sight to four percent of
the Continental United States of America (CONUS), or around nine percent of the
European Union (EU). And these paths are line of sight, so the path loss from the ground
to the aircraft may be less than the path loss in 0.5 km over an urban environments! Of
course, this range is for a zero degree look angle from the ground, which is unlikely,4 but
4 Possible if the antenna is highly elevated compared to the local environment.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

11.3 Interference to Radar and Space Sensor Systems
179
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Time from Appearance of Radar in LOS to Shutdown
of Devices (Seconds)
Percentage of Search Area Lost
Figure 11.2 Shutdown time impact on airborne radar search area.
it is the type of “corner case” which all interference issues appear to end up revolving
around.
A more realistic scenario is that the slant angle limits the effective horizon to half of
the distance (180 km) of the previous example. The aircraft is moving at 0.27 km/sec.
If (as the radar community will argue) a device emitting interferes with the radar,
then the search radius, and thus search area of the radar, will be reduced due to
the interference, until interfering source(s) are shutdown. Figure 11.2 illustrates the
worst-case relationship of the shutdown time to the search area from the aircraft.
It is clear that even a minimal delay in detection and shutdown would have signiﬁcant
impact on the possible search area. The 300 sec shutdown time in the US CBRS
regulations would potentially cause interference to 30 percent of the search area. To
reduce the potentially lost search area to ﬁve percent would require a shutdown interval
from appearance on the horizon to device termination, of less than 17 seconds. “Fast
Movers” are a challenge!
The opportunity in ground-to-air is not symmetric with air-to-ground. Ignoring any
possible reﬂection onto the airborne platform, the interference path is all terrestrial, so
it is subject to all of the losses along the ground, and becomes a diffractive path rapidly,
with path loss approaching r4. It is subject to additional clutter loss along the terrestrial
path.
We should consider the impact of interference on the range the sensing range radar
can achieve. We derive this by differentiating the radar range equation in Eq. (11.1)5
in terms of changes in the detection threshold. Since the threshold is in terms of noise,
changes in noise level are linear with changes in this threshold. Doubling of the noise
ﬂoor essentially doubles the received pulse energy PEmin required to achieve the same
5 Note: differentiation of the radar range equation provides the impact on the range due to a change in the
energy level required to identify a radar pulse.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

180
Protection to and From Radar Systems
target signal to noise ratio. The derivative of Eq. (11.1) with respect to PEmin is given by
Eq. (11.3).
δRmax
δPEmin
= k1
4(PEmin)−3/4
(11.3)
The impact of an increase of the typical threshold level of 0.1 interference to noise
ratio is a reduction in the radar’s range of 1
4(0.1), or about 2.35 percent. The impact of
doubling of the noise level is a reduction in range of 1
41−3/4, or about 16 percent. In
terms of search area, the impacts are essentially double this, in other words 4.5 and 29
percent respectively.
11.4
Detection of Radar System Presence
Detection of radar spectrum usage would appear to be a relatively simple task. Radars
have a very high power signal, they have detectable pulses, and in many cases, they are
not mobile. So detecting radar signals would appear to be a solid basis for spectrum
sharing. In fact, detection of a single, simple radar waveform is a straightforward
engineering challenge. However, there are a number of problems when designing
a generalized radar detection capability, or to detect more complex, or variable
waveforms.
• Radar detection algorithms must be designed to detect speciﬁc ranges of radar
characteristics, and may have very poor performance when attempting to detect other
characteristics. In some bands, there is a wide range of radar pulse characteristics in
use, each of which must be considered individually.
• High probability of detection necessarily and inherently implies a higher probability
of false alarms, as well as the converse. A “perfect” sensor is impossible to implement,
so compromise in protection assurance, or in usage assurance, is inevitable.
• Radars have a very low duty cycle, so detection methods must have a high sensing
presence on any possible channel.
In considering the performance of a radar detection regime, there are three overall
considerations that compound to determine the effectiveness of the regime, and its
impact on sharing users:
• The ability of the detector to detect the radar in the absence of any other signal.
• The ability to not report radar detections in a typically crowded band, in the absence
of any radar signal.
• The ability to detect the radar at low signal levels, in the presence of typical, crowded
band, non-radar signals.
There is an inherent relationship between the likelihood of detection (PD), and the
corresponding likelihood that the sensor will declare a radar is detected, when one is not
actually present (PFA). The different curves represent different thresholds of detection.
Lower thresholds increase the probability of detection, but create false alarms. Higher
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

11.4 Detection of Radar System Presence
181
detection thresholds reduce the false alarm rate, but also decrease the probability of
detection.
This is a fundamental constraint from detection theory that must be addressed in
designing detection approaches. There is no closed-form model for these relationships,
but they can be readily computed numerically. There exists a fundamental conceptual
relationship of signal level and the probability of false alarm (PFA) and of detection
(PD). This is depicted as a Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC).
For a given radar signal to noise level, there is a deﬁned curve for the achievable PD
and PFA. The designer has the ﬂexibility to improve one or the other, but improvement in
one must result in reduction in the quality of the other. At the extreme, a system with no
signal input could achieve PD = 1.0 by always indicating a detection, although it would
also have a PFA = 1.0. Alternatively, it could never report any detection, and achieve
a perfect false alarm rate (PFA = 0.0), but at the cost of a PD = 0.0. Detection energy
improves these trades, but ﬁnite energy can never achieve a sensor that achieves PFA =
0.0 and PD = 1.0 simultaneously. Therefore any sensor-based spectrum sharing regime
must be resilient to some sensing errors. It can shift this burden between disruption
of secondary usage or incumbent radars (or other incumbent uses), but it cannot avoid
some compromises.
As an example, a signal level of almost 40 times (15 dB) higher than the noise level
is required to obtain high conﬁdence detection at a reasonable false alarm rate (PFA =
10−8, PD = 0.99). It is important to recognize that the PFA value is in terms of sensing
epochs, which for radars is quite short; on the order of several the inverse of the PRF. A
PFA of 10−8 might appear to be minimally disruptive, but for a PRF of 103 per second,
and single pulse detection, it equates to a false alarm every 105 seconds, or about one
false event every day.
The noise signal seen by the detector is Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN)
only if it is thermal, such as natural background or equipment front end temperature.
If the noise level is from signals, then there will be some correlation within this noise,
and the AWGN assumption will be invalid, typically raising PFA and/or lowering PD.
Any cyclo-stationary behavior in the waveform will resemble a ﬁxed PRF radar signal,
for example. For example, the Long-Term Evolution (LTE) waveform has slotting
periods that are identical to the SPN-43C radar that must be detected in the US CBRS
band.
In discussing the considerations that are practical issues in the design of a generalized
sensing regime, we will refer back to some of the examples in Table 11.1 to quantify
the impacts on realizable systems.
Integration Time How long the sensor integrates the signals and noise in a given
sensing channel.
Sensing Presence The ratio of time the sensor device is sensitive to signals in a
monitored channel. This reﬂects time processing, and receiving other channels.
PFA and PD Trades Threshold settings, and criteria for declaring a detection involve
making trades between high probability of detection and low false alarm rates. At a
given signal level, in a Gaussian environment, these two measures are directly linked.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

182
Protection to and From Radar Systems
If a sensor integrates a sensed channel for tsense and a radar has a pulse width of
tpulse, then the effective noise elevation (Ninteg in dB) is given by Eq. (11.4). Noise is
integrated linearly with time, but the radar signal has ﬁxed energy.
Ninteg =
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
0
for tsense ≤tpulse
10log10
tsense
tpulse

for tsense > tpulse
(11.4)
For example, we consider a sensor with an integration time that was a compromise
among many radars of 1 000 μsec. When applied to sense a radar with a pulse width
of 100 μsec, it would integrate 10 dB of additional noise above the actual noise level
(assuming AWGN noise) when the radar actually transmitted.
Another consideration of integration time is how the timing in the sensor impacts the
detection probability of a single pulse. If our sensor has an integration time of tsense out
of a total sense scan time (sense start time to the next sense start time) interval of tscan,
then Eq. (11.5) shows the sensor system’s probability of sensing on the radar’s channel
(PDscan) during any given pulse, for the full duration of the pulse.
PDscan =
⎧
⎨
⎩
1
for tsense = tscan and tsense << tpulse
tsense
tscan

for tsense < tscan and tsense << tpulse
(11.5)
The ﬁrst case in Eq. (11.5) represents a staring receiver that is continually scanning
the channel(s). The second case could represent a scanning receiver, or a Fast Fourier
Transform (FFT) based sampling, with a period for processing.
The last trade space to be introduced is in the channel scanning and bandwidth
coverage. The previous two equations showed that a sensor needs to be present on a
channel with a high probability, and that the scan time has to be closely matched to the
pulse width in time. That would motivate design decisions towards use of a wideband
detector if the noise integration was acceptable.
Eq. (11.6) shows how the noise (Nbandwidth) is impacted by integrating across wider
bandwidths than that occupied by the radar. The relationship of the radar bandwidth
(Bradar) and the sensed bandwidth (Bsensed) is critical in establishing the effective noise
ﬂoor of the detection system.
Nbandwidth =
⎧
⎨
⎩
0
for Bradar ≥Bsensed
10log10
Bsensed
Bradar

for Bradar < Bsensed
(11.6)
These equations are quite idealistic, as in many cases the channel noise is not AWGN,
but is highly correlated as the band achieves usage. In the case of the US CBRS band,
the radars are mostly at sea, so the sensors can use directional antennas to restrict their
ﬁeld of regard to the ocean. In a more typical setting, where radars could be located
on any azimuth, the noise background will not be the thermal noise of the receiver, but
the interference from other users of the band. This greatly increases the false alarm
probability over the Gaussian statistics.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

11.4 Detection of Radar System Presence
183
Eqs. (11.4), (11.5), and (11.6) constrain choices. Narrow sensing bandwidth reduces
noise, but cuts down the scan rate. Wideband sensing provides more scan time, but at
a higher noise ﬂoor level. Additional noise levels reduce the probability of detection.
Since most sharing regimes will have a stressing requirement to detect the incumbent
radar, the likelihood is that the shortfall in noise reduction will have to come at the
expense of the false alarm rate, which is at least an inconvenience to users, if not a
negative factor in band adoption.
It is likely that the criteria for radar sensor performance will establish minimum
probability of detection in a given time, at a speciﬁed signal level. The users of the
band also have an implicit false alarm rate constraint. Using the AN/SPN-43C example,
the sensor has 103 detection opportunities every second. If a maximum of one false
alarm event is allowed per 24 hours (86 400 seconds), the maximum false alarm rate is
1 per 8.64 · 107 seconds, or a rate of 1.1 · 10−8.
The detection threshold has to be extremely high to achieve this extremely low rate
of false alarms. In practice, most sensors have criteria for declaring a detection, such
as two consecutive pulses, or two out of three predicted pulse times.6 This shifts the
stress onto the detection algorithm, as it must now achieve a much higher single pulse
probability of detection in order to meet this criteria. Requiring n successive pulse
detections effectively lowers PD to PDn. The PD can only be determined for the intervals
when the radar is actually within the sensor’s ﬁeld of regard and when radiating towards
the sensor, while the PFA is applicable to all times at which the sensor is working.
One other factor is that for mechanically steered radars, the pulse occurrence is far
from Gaussian. The radar swings through the ﬁeld of regard of the sensor periodically,
and only a few pulses are emitted in the direction of the sensor.7 If the radar is not
detected during that sweep, the next opportunity is during the next sweep of the antenna.
So the time to detect is granular, not continuous. Again, using the AN/SPN-43C as an
example, approximately 20 pulses are sent to a sensor during each sweep, and if the
sensor does not declare a detection, it is 4 seconds until the next opportunity to detect
occurs.
The PD can only be determined for the intervals when the radar is actually within
the sensor’s ﬁeld of regard, and when radiating towards the sensor, while the PFA is
applicable to all times at which the sensor is working. A radar with a 1.75° beamwidth
(such as the AN/SPY-43C) has an opportunity to detect the radar at only 0.5% of the
time the sensor operates, essentially reducing the quality metric of PD
PFA
by 200 times.
Table 11.2 illustrates some sensor designs that could be considered for a radar sensing
system. The wideband sensing approach implements a single receiver that covers the
entire band simultaneously. The stepped channel detector has a narrowband receiver
that samples each possible radar channel individually. The parallel FFT version has one
6 This approach only works with known and ﬁxed PRF radars, and when the antenna is not agile between
pulses.
7 These are non-Gaussian, since if there is one pulse at a given time, the likelihood of one immediately
before or after it is much higher than average, and if none was received, the likelihood of one in the next
slot is lower than average. Rotating radar pulses are not independent in time.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

184
Protection to and From Radar Systems
Table 11.2 Radar sensor implementation approaches.
Design Approach
Advantages
Disadvantages
Wideband
scanning
Simple, and potentially inexpensive.
Could have rapid time to detect.
Reduced sensitivity due to
noise integration across such a
wide band. Potential impact of
dense secondary sharing
signals throughout the wide
band of coverage. May also be
vulnerable to overload by any
signal in the sensed range.
Stepped Channel
Can achieve maximum sensitivity.
Very reduced detection
probability in a given time
window.
Parallel FFT
Can achieve maximum sensitivity.
FFT processing likely means
the spectrum is not being
monitored at all times (tscan),
which implies reduced
probability of detection,
similar to the stepped model.
Parallel Channels
Achieves maximum sensitivity,
probability of detection, and time to
detect. Simplicity of operation and
high performance may allow some of
the analog and digital requirements to
be relaxed, decreasing cost of
implementation.
Highly duplicated and
redundant hardware may
increase cost unless per
channel performance can be
relaxed signiﬁcantly.
wideband FFT that is subsampled for each possible radar channel. The parallel channel
detector has multiple receiver chains that operate on each channel independently.
The point of this table is not to argue for or against any sensor design. They each have
signiﬁcant implementation advantages and performance disadvantages. Even sensing
a simple, legacy design, non-tactical radar, such as the AN/SPY-43C is a signiﬁcant
challenge, even though its waveform is simple, and well known; it has no frequency or
beam agility; and its operator is cooperative in the effort to deploy detection capabilities.
11.5
Interference From Radar Systems to Communications
Systems
Some in the radar community have stated that even if it was shown that communications
devices would not interfere with radars, the high power radars would be highly
disruptive to the communications service. By this view, they are, in fact, doing a favor
for the communications community in avoiding disappointment, or even disaster, if
investment in such communications devices was contemplated. An example of this
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

11.5 Interference From Radar to Communications Systems
185
argument is the exclusion zones that are shown in Figure 4.2. These limitations were
intended to protect the communications usage from the gigawatt EIRP AN/SPN-43C
radar, and are provided in the National Telecommunications and Information Agency
(NTIA) Quick Look Report [4].
Before addressing this topic analytically, an anecdotal piece of evidence is useful.
In the United States of America (USA) CBRS proceeding, Google staff reported that
they decided to experiment with the actual service quality impact of interference from
the incumbent CBRS band radar into LTE. This was reported in two ex parte ﬁlings
by Google, and in more detail in a paper coauthored with Virginia Tech [5]. In the
experiment they reported, that they rented time on a test AN/SPN-43C at Naval Air
Station, Patuxent River in Maryland, USA. The TD-LTE devices operated co-channel
with the radar with no detectable degradation at a distance of only 4 km from the radar,
and in the adjacent channel of the radar at a distance of 1 km. This is approximately 100
times less protection distance than in the NTIA analysis shown in Figure 4.2.
The values from Table 11.1 are the key to understanding the 100-fold reduction in the
actual in-bound protection operation distances. They provide the basis for analysis of
how a communications system can operate co-channel with a gigawatt radar! We con-
sider two broad categories of impacts: time and power. In this discussion, we consider
a speciﬁc interference target, TD-LTE. The numerical aspects of the conclusion are
speciﬁc to the AN/SPN-43C Radar and LTE, but the general principles are applicable
to pulse (non-CW) radars and packet radios with reasonable error handling, in general.
Time Table 11.1 shows that the AN/SPC-43C radar PW is only 95 μsec in duration, and
has a duty cycle less than 1 percent. An LTE subframe (an uplink or downlink slot) is
1 000 μsec long. A subframe can only be interfered with by at most one radar pulse,
which could be present for 9.5 percent of the subframe. LTE operates at a variable code
rate,butistypicallyintheneighborhoodof0.4,socorrectionofaburstysubframeblock
is within its capacity. Also, the number of blocks impacted is quite small. Table 11.1
shows that the horizontal dimension of the main beam is 1.75° wide. The main beam
points at the victim for only 0.49 percent (4.9 · 10−3) of the time. The victim is not in
the main beam for the remaining 99.5 percent of time, and receives much less impact.
The radar transmission duty cycle is 0.095%
 0.95μs
1000μs

= 9.5 · 10−4, so the actual
duty cycle of the radar at the receiver is 4.6x10−6. A few subframes might be impacted
during each radar rotation, out of a total of 40 000.
Power Table 11.1 shows that the vertical half beam width is 2.2°. However, the radar
has an elevation angle of 3°, so the main beam is above the ground height at all
locations around the radar site. Added to this consideration, the radar is mounted
150 feet above the water line, so the main beam encroaches even less on the ground.
Adding to the interference tolerance is the contribution of Media Access Layer
(MAC) and transport layer error control. Even if the subframes are uncorrectable,
both the LTE and the upper layer of the transport layer (if using Transport Control
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

186
Protection to and From Radar Systems
Protocol (TCP), or an application that is packet loss tolerant using User Datagram
Protocol (UDP)) would address the lost packet at very low system cost.
Although it is hard to generalize interference analysis and policies, a baseline
assumption should be that communications systems should be afforded the right to share
spectrum with radar systems, without restrictions due to concerns over interference
to the communications applications. Most commercially viable communications
technologies can probably inherently operate reasonably in the presence of pulse radars.
In the worst case, tailoring of PHY layer features, such as interleaving, coding, and Error
Detection and Control (EDAC) strategies can likely assure operation even in highly
stressing environments.
Yet another reason for reducing concern about interference from radars, at least in
urban, small cell deployment, is that measured clutter losses are quite high. Figure 7.3
showed an additional 40 dB loss over 1 km in even moderate density commercial areas.
Although a 90 dBW EIRP, such as in the AN/SPN-43C radar, would appear to be
intimidating, when you adjust to reﬂect operation below the antenna main beam (43 dB),
add a typical minimum of 40 dB clutter loss per kilometer, then the effective power left
is only 7 dBW EIRP at 1 km. The average effective power is reduced a further 57 dB due
to the duty cycle at the receiver, The average effective EIRP is in the microwatt range!
11.6
Future Technology to Increase Radar and Communications
System Coexistence
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Shared Spectrum Access
for Radar and Communications (SSPARC) program performed extensive research
on improving coexistence and spectrum sharing between radars and communications
systems. The DARPA web site states its goals as:8
• Spectrum sharing between military radars and military communications systems
(“military/military sharing”) increases both capabilities simultaneously when oper-
ating in congested and contested spectral environments.
• Spectrum sharing between military radars and commercial communications systems
(“military/commercial sharing”) preserves radar capability, while meeting national
and international needs for increased commercial communications spectrum, without
incurring the high cost of relocating radars to new frequency bands.
Everything in this chapter changes if, and when, radars coordinate with commu-
nication users at very granular levels of time. Certainly, civil radars could inform a
coordination agent of their frequency and azimuth continuously, which could allow
users in the vicinity of the radar to subscribe to the feed, and be agile in their use of the
spectrum. Coordination of pulse epochs could even be established based on common
Global Positioning System (GPS) time references, similar to how transmit and receive
slots are coordinated in TD-LTE.
8 From: www.darpa.mil/program/shared-spectrum-access-for-radar-and-communications.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

11.8 Suggested Reading
187
These sharing techniques are not ones that are likely to be retroﬁtted into existing
radars, but they are not included in the design of any future radars either. The problem
is not technical, but a matter of incentives. If spectrum protection is granted to users
for exclusive use for one application, there is little incentive to share that spectrum with
others. Creation of that incentive is a challenge for policy makers, not engineers.
11.7
Radars in a Three-Tier Framework
Sharing radar bands is certainly consistent with the principles of the three-tier
framework presented in this book. The ﬁrst application, the US CBRS band has
the objective of sharing with a single type of radar, which has absolute priority.
An interesting extension of this is to operate at least private, and non-safety-of-life,
government radars, as tenants within the three-tier framework, rather than as primary
incumbents. This approach has several advantages:
• It encourages the radar community to share the burden of spectrum scarcity by
reducing the extent of the protection it seeks from the spectrum management regime.
• It encourages, and monetizes the implementation of the coordination features
discussed in the last section, and in the DARPA SSPARC program, as examples. By
coordinating with other users, the radars reduce their footprint, and thus spectrum
protection costs.
• It encourages future radar designs to be interference tolerant, rather than depending on
regulator protection. Radar designs often have a zero budget for interference, which
is unrealistic for any participant using such a scarce resource as spectrum.
It should be clear that sharing of radar spectrum is an issue that will require some
additional communications technology, but more so, cooperation on the side of the radar
community. It is likely that this may require some changes in the incentive structure of
the spectrum ecosystem in regard to the protection of radars, and their obligations to
share the spectrum on reasonable terms.
11.8
Suggested Reading
The technology and engineering of radars is addressed extensively in the literature, and
other than suggesting Skolnik’s classic work on radars, the reader will ﬁnd a rich set of
sources at all levels of discussion. The subject of sharing with radars is addressed much
less in the literature, so the reader will ﬁnd that a more varied source of material will
have to be sought.
• The essential reference standard of radar technology is by Skolnik [6], whose work
has been updated may times over the decades.
• Some DARPA SSPARC material has appeared in academic publications [7, 8,
9]. Information on this program is available at: www.darpa.mil/program/shared-
spectrum-access-for-radar-and-communications.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

188
Protection to and From Radar Systems
• There is an evolving ﬁeld of cognitive radar [10] that is addressing many of the
challenges in this chapter, and in recent publications on cooperative communication-
s/radar operation, such as [11].
• Google reported experimentation with the interference caused to TD-LTE operation
in the proximity of the AN-SPN-43C. The US Naval Academy and Virginia
Polytechnic University collaborated in these experiments [5]. This is anecdotal
evidence, but instructive in the impact of real radar operation on real TD-LTE
operation (and likely be extrapolated, to some degree, to other similar wireless
protocols). The experiment showed only a minimal impact on TD-LTE error rates,
even in close proximity to the radar.
References
1 International Telecommunications Union, Technical Characteristics of Maritime Radionaviga-
tion RADARS, Recommendation ITU-R M.1313 (1997).
2 ——, Characteristics of Radiolocation Radars, and Characteristics and Protection Criteria for
Sharing Studies for Aeronautical Radionavigation and Meteorological Radars in the Radiode-
termination Service Operating in the Frequency Band 2700–2900 MHz, Recommendation
ITU-R M.1464-1 (2003).
3 G. Brooker, Sensors and Signals (Sydney: Australian Centre for Field Robotics, 2009).
4 US Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information Agency (NTIA),
An Assessment of the Near Term Viability of Accommodating Wireless Broadband Systems in
the 1675–1710 MHz, 1755–1780 MHz, 3500–3650 MHz, and 4200–4220 MHz, 4380–4400
MHz bands. Technical report (2010).
5 J. H. Reed, A.W. Clegg, A. V. Padaki, T. Yang, R. Nealy, C. Dietrich, C. R. Anderson, and D. M.
Mearns, On the co-existence of TD-LTE and Radar over 3.5 GHz band: An experimental study.
IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, 5/4 (2016) 368–371.
6 M. Skolnik, Introduction to Radar Systems, 2nd edn (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980).
7 A. Khawar, A. Abdelhadi, and T. C. Clancy, Coexistence analysis between radar and cellular
system in LoS channel. IEEE Antennas and wireless propagation letters, 15 (2016).
8 G. M. Jacyna, B. Fell, and D. McLemore, A high-level overview of fundamental limits studies
for the DARPA SSPARC program. 2016 IEEE Radar Conference (2016), 1–6.
9 M. P. Fitz, T. R. Halford, I. Hossain, and S. W. Enserink, Towards simultaneous radar and
spectral sensing. 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks
(2014), 15–19.
10 J. Guerci, Cognitive Radar: The Knowledge-Aided Fully Adaptive Approach (Norwood, MA:
Artech House, 2010).
11 J. R. Guerci, R. M. Guerci, A. Lackpour, and D. Moskowitz, Joint design and operation of
shared spectrum access for radar and communications. 2015 IEEE Radar Conference (2015)
761–766.
.012
14:57:20, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

12
Coexistence Between
Unprotected Peer Devices
12.1
The Role of Coexistence in Spectrum Protection Systems
One of the desirable features of the three-tier regime is that it offers the opportunity for
network operators to acquire protection of their nodes from interference. This feature is
judged to be essential to creating conﬁdence in the investment in these bands. However,
it is not clear that paying for protection in small segments of the spectrum is a superior
solution to other methods of assuring a dependable level of service. In this chapter,
we will investigate the conceptual basis of alternatives to protected mid-tier status, and
investigate methods of implementing them.
Use of protected status has a number of disadvantages:
• The amount of spectrum that can be acquired in a protected status may be relatively
small compared to the spectral bandwidth that is available in the sharable band.
• The cost of the protection may be high compared to the access devices, and may
create signiﬁcant disadvantages to the economics of the deployment.
• The use of a speciﬁc frequency that is accorded protection might limit the ﬂexibility of
the network to deal with conditions such as strong adjacent channel signals, primary
spectrum reclaiming events, and network spectrum reuse strategies.
• Protection of large areas is inappropriate for many small/femto cell deployment
cases, such as indoor and three-dimensional deployments. It adds an unnecessary cost
burden to the second tier, and limits access to spectrum by the third tier.
For these reasons, this chapter will investigate methods of achieving high levels of
predictability in spectrum access effectiveness that do not require explicit grants of
protection or elevation in rights, and minimize the extent of spectrum that is committed
to elevated rights usage.
12.2
Model for Coexistence Services
Our model for coexistence has two possible levels of operation.
Partitioning Partitioned use divides the available spectrum resources in a given
location between a number of networks that desire spectrum, and are willing to enter
into an agreement to coexist with each other. This sharing makes no assumptions
on the technology used, or on the operation of the technology within the allocated
channels.
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

190
Coexistence Between Unprotected Peer Devices
Technology Neutral Techniques
….
Technology-specific
Technique
Technology-specific
Technique
Technology-specific
Technique
TD-LTE
Wi-Fi
Wi-Max
Figure 12.1 Relationships of technology-neutral and speciﬁc coexistence techniques.
Integrated Sharing Integrated sharing enables multiple users of the spectrum, as
above, to share more extensive spectrum resources, but with some control over
network operation and technology selection.
The ﬁrst level (partitioning) is technology neutral; it divides the available resources
in some previously agreed to framework, and assures separation of the operation of
networks. In the second level (integrated sharing), the speciﬁc nature of the technology
common to contending users is considered and utilized to maximize the access by each
of the cooperating parties.
The hierarchal relationship among these techniques is shown in Figure 12.1.
12.3
Indoor Coexistence Analysis with Realistic Environments
It is relatively easy to become concerned about coexistence in unprotected spectrum.
Many locations have the unlicensed spectrum crowded with tens of individual Wireless
Fidelity (Wi-Fi) Service Set Identiﬁer (SSID) broadcasts; rapidly scrolling off the screen
when attempting to select one. Wi-Fi is a very “polite” protocol, and one Wi-Fi device
will not transmit when it detects that the channel is occupied, even if the signal is very
weak, and would not interfere with its own operation. The threshold for a channel
to be declared busy by the Listen Before Talk (LBT) algorithm is -62 dBm. Because
of the LBT algorithms, all users of a Wi-Fi frequency essentially share one common
channel, and its aggregate network bandwidth is at best shared by all of these users. In
reality, more users reduce the aggregate channel capacity. Wi-Fi therefore attempts to
handle coexistence by ensuring that interference does not occur, but does so at the cost
of reducing the possibility of dense spectrum reuse when strong signal conditions are
present.1
1 We consider spectrum reuse in this context to be simultaneous use of a frequency, not time-shared access.
LBT time-shares, but does not reuse. Operation at high interference to noise (I/N) levels has the potential
to enable reuse.
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

12.3 Indoor Coexistence Analysis
191
Table 12.1 Measured propagation clutter loss from building materials at 2, 3, 3.5 and
5 GHz (from [1]).
Propogation Loss (dB)
Material
2.0 GHz
3.0 GHz
3.5 GHz
5.0 GHz
No rebar, concrete wall, 203 mm
34.6
50.0
51.0
53.0
1% Steel rebar concrete wall, 203 mm
32.0
51.2
51.5
55.0
2% Steel rebar concrete wall, 203 mm
36.8
52.6
54.0
57.2
Wallboard Wall
Negligible
Brick Wall, 89 mm
5.4
15.0
15.2
15.2
Brick Wall, 178 mm
7.6
15.9
20.2
30.6
Brick Wall, 267 mm
10.6
26.8
29.2
31.4
Masonry Wall, 203 mm
11.2
12.5
12.5
12.5
Masonry Wall, 406 mm
17.9
24.2
25.2
28.5
Masonry Wall, 610 mm
30.0
34.2
34.0
39.2
Brick Faced Concrete Wall, 90 mm brick
plus 102 mm of concrete
16.8
32.8
33.4
40.5
Brick Faced Concrete Wall, 90 mm brick
plus 203 mm of concrete
32.8
58.4
60.3
69.7
Brick Faced Masonry Wall, 90 mm brick
plus 194 mm block
11.6
28.9
30.2
32.8
Glass Panels, 6 mm thickness
1.4
0.5
0.2
0.1
Glass Panels, 13 mm thickness
3.4
1.5
1.1
0.5
Glass Panels, 19 mm thickness
3.9
1.9
1.5
1.0
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) is designed to operate with high levels of spectrum
reuse, and therefore high I/N conditions. The criteria for LTE operation is that there
be a sufﬁcient ratio of signal-to-noise-plus-interference
S
I + N to ensure reliable link
operation. This approach places no absolute limit on the value of I, so long as S is
signiﬁcantly higher than the sum of I and noise N, referred to as Signal to Interference
and Noise Ratio (SINR).
A signiﬁcant factor in managing true spectrum reuse is understanding the impact of
clutter losses. A number of organizations have reported the collection of external and
interior clutter data. Figure 7.3 illustrated the exterior clutter losses reported by Google.
These losses were at 3.62 GHz center frequency, but are similar to those in the range of
spectrum that would be considered in spectrum sharing.
Unfortunately, there is no single, curated, source for building loss measurements and
models. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) performed an extensive
study of the losses in some typical building materials and construction methods in 1997,
which covered a wide range of frequencies [1]. Some of the common materials in use
in commercial and Multi-Dwelling Unit (MDU) construction are shown in Table 12.1,
which illustrates the propagation loss of interior and exterior building features in both
a residential MDU and commercial building construction. The values shown are for
2.0, 3.0, 3.5, and 5 GHz, and estimated from the graphic plots in the report, which
include this frequency range. The 3.5 GHz is included to be directly applicable to the
US Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) band coexistence analysis.
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

192
Coexistence Between Unprotected Peer Devices
Table 12.2 Measured propagation clutter loss from window designs at 2, 3, 3.5 and
5 GHz (from [2]).
Propagation Loss (dB)
Material
2.0 GHz
3.0 GHz
3.5 GHz
5.0 GHz
2-Layer Energy Efﬁcient Window, Metal Frame
18
23
25
27
3-Layer Energy Efﬁcient Door, Metal Frame
30
34
33
33
2-Layer Energy Efﬁcient Window, Wooden Frame
20
19
23
31
3-Layer Energy Efﬁcient Window (Finland)
33
35
36
41
1-Layer Glass Window, Wooden Frame
3
2.5
2.4
4
The baseline values of loss function as viable lower bounds of the estimated loss,
which is sufﬁcient for use in estimating worst case interference conditions, if not for
communications link availability. The internal structure of the wall can apparently create
very frequency dependent loss peaks, but these are all perturbations with additional loss
on top of a baseline loss value. The same behaviors are evident in concrete masonry
blocks, which show high frequency dependence when constructed in multiple block
depth walls. Materials with minimal internal structure (such as concrete) generally show
monotonic behavior, with loss increasing with frequency (with the exception of glass).
The data provided by the NIST report, summarized in Table 12.1, considers only
traditional plain silica window materials. In modern commercial and MDU structures,
window treatment typically utilizes leaded or thermal materials, rather than pure silica.
Another source of information speciﬁc to the loss that occurs in modern window
construction is provided by Rodrigues, et al., [2]. The window-related material is
provided in Table 12.2 in a similar format as Table 12.1. Note that the advanced window
design (the line titled “3-Layer Energy Efﬁcient Window (Finland)” has losses that are
close to the equivalent masonry construction.
With these measurements, one can examine the likelihood of interference to a given
absolute power, and the impact on the required
S
I + N ratio, which is the more signiﬁcant
criterion, from the perspective of network operation. To perform this analysis, we
consider several ﬂoors of a commercial facility, all with access to the same extent of
spectrum, and determine where coexistence is required and where it is not, and the
impact on spectrum availability when it is required. Propagation within the facilities
is mostly free-space, with the additional clutter loss of any intervening structures on
the path. Each location will be assessed for both the noise ﬂoor elevation, and the
likely signal to external network interference plus noise of a network within that space.
These discussions are anecdotal, but are intended to provide a framework from which
to identify the most critical challenges in achieving indoor peer coexistence.
There are some immediate hypotheses that are plausible by inspection:
1. The through-ﬂoor loss of a concrete, or concrete plus steel reinforcing, bar is 50+ dB
of additional path loss. It is reasonable to assume that in most cases, frequencies can
be reused vertically in a commercial or MDU residential building. The latitude and
longitude of the nodes may be identical, but the path loss between them is at least
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

12.3 Indoor Coexistence Analysis
193
50 dB, if not much more. Three-dimensional reuse should be feasible, even without
coexistence methods for buildings with commercial concrete ﬂoors.
2. Building exterior walls have high loss. The exterior energy penetration will likely
be driven by the construction and the area of the windows. For buildings with any
appreciable window area, the through-window signal entry path will be the dominant
source of external interference. For plate glass, the loss is insigniﬁcant. However,
for multilayer energy-efﬁcient windows, as in most modern construction, the loss
through the windows is high enough to often enable operation without coexistence
features, even in a 100 percent reuse of spectrum environment.
3. Networks on the same ﬂoor of a commercial building can likely coexist on the same
frequencies if they are isolated through mineral materials, such as concrete block,
and most certainly if they are isolated by solid concrete walls. If they are isolated
by only wallboard or wooden construction, then coexistence in at least the boundary
locations will be required.
4. In a shared-ﬂoor situation, the worst-case partitioning of the spectrum will be the
number of tenants where the additional range-driven path loss, plus any obstructions,
is under 20–30 dB. In most cases, this will still leave full carrier aggregation channels
available even without coexistence features, and considerably more with them.
5. Single-family home construction methods, such as wood frame, plywood, wallboard,
and brick veneer do not provide sufﬁcient attenuation to enable operation in
a shared-frequency environment without coexistence. If these networks are not
spatially separated, they will require the use of coexistence features.
In the previous discussion, the most obvious, and simplest, coexistence feature is the
simple assignment of separate channels of operation.
To verify these hypotheses empirically and quantitatively, consider three ﬂoors of
a building, as shown in Figure 12.2. There are so many possible arrangements that a
general proof is not practical, so we instead provide an analysis of a typical indoor
enterprise deployment. The building has an external access point, with 10 dB more EIRP,
in front of the building that has emissions that enter the building through thermally
treated glass windows in the adjoining side. The loss in any paths through the wall
material is ignored in this analysis, and all of the energy is assumed to enter through the
window path, which is assumed to be visible to all locations on the interior.
Using these locations, free-space propagation, and the obstacle clutter losses from
Table 12.1, the values of interference (I), signal (S), signal-to-noise-plus-interference
ratio

S
I + N

, and signal-to-noise ratio
 S
N

are shown in Table 12.3 for a range of
locations within the space.2 Some of the analytic assumptions in this analysis are:
• Deconﬂiction between the interior networks devices of a single tenant is addressed by
the management system managing these devices. Each ﬂoor has a unique tenant, and
the third ﬂoor has two tenants that adjoin through wallboard.
• Center frequency of 3.62 GHz.
2 Interference within the private network is not considered, as it is likely that the network handles its own
coexistence, such as provided by LTE.
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

194
Coexistence Between Unprotected Peer Devices
55 m
22 m
Exterior AP
30 dBm
10 m from Building
Network 3
Network 4
3rd Floor
2nd Floor
Ground Floor
Network 2
Network 1
AP1
AP2
AP3
AP4
AP5
AP6
AP7
AP1
AP2
AP3
AP4
AP5
AP6
AP1
AP2
AP3
AP4
AP1
AP2
AP3
AP4
Figure 12.2 Example interior layout for coexistence analysis.
• Free-space propagation dominates internal to the structure.
• No consideration of ducting and diffractive effects.
• Multiple enterprises are present, and they manage interference within their networks,
such as with LTE Radio Resource Management (RRM). We consider them as all
sharing one set of channels, with a Power Spectral Density (PSD) of 10 dBm/MHz,
and perfect isotropic antennas. Since the example is interference limited, the absolute
value of the power is not relevant.
• The outdoor small cell (30 dBm/10 MHz) propagated indoors to the second ﬂoor
through a two-pane energy-efﬁcient window, with 23 dB of loss in the least loss
case. In most cases it will have higher loss, but the worst case is used for the
example. The performance of this node is not modeled, so there are no signal strength
estimates.
• Interference is computed by aggregating the 100% duty cycle of all emitters from
other networks. This is the worst case assumption that an admission control system
would have to make.
• The system noise temperature of the receiver is computed at 720 K.
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

12.3 Indoor Coexistence Analysis
195
Table 12.3 Interference and signal to noise ratio in sample enterprise building at
3.62 GHz.
Network
Node
Interference
Signal
SINR
SNR
(dBm/MHz)
(dBm/MHz)
(dB)
(dB)
Net 1
AP 1
−83.23
−59.20
24.04
50.83
AP 2
−86.16
−59.20
26.96
50.83
AP 3
−75.89
−57.37
18.52
52.65
AP 4
−84.25
−57.71
26.54
52.32
AP 5
−83.51
−57.37
26.13
52.65
AP 6
−86.28
−57.71
28.57
52.32
AP 7
−82.53
−57.37
25.15
52.65
Net 2
AP 1
−91.62
−59.20
32.42
50.83
AP 2
−91.62
−59.20
32.42
50.83
AP 3
−90.11
−59.20
30.91
50.83
AP 4
−90.11
−59.20
30.91
50.83
AP 5
−91.56
−59.20
32.36
50.83
AP 6
−91.57
−59.20
32.37
50.83
Net 3
AP 1
−58.32
−59.20
−0.88
50.83
AP 2
−58.32
−59.20
−0.88
50.83
AP 3
−39.55
−59.20
−19.64
50.83
AP 4
−39.55
−59.20
−19.64
50.83
Net 4
AP 1
−39.55
−59.20
−19.65
50.83
AP 2
−39.55
−59.20
−19.65
50.83
AP 3
−58.54
−59.20
−0.66
50.83
AP 4
−58.54
−59.20
−0.66
50.83
Outdoor
30 dBm unit
−83.28
N/A
−N/A
N/A
The results of this example lead to several conclusions, that are example-speciﬁc, but
probably have more general applicability:
• The free-space communications paths dominate over any of the interference paths
through major attentive materials, such as exterior walls. The aggregate interference
may rise to the level of –75 dBm in this example, but even in this worst case on the
second ﬂoor (AP 3, Net 1), the SINR was over 18 dB, so the interference would have
little impact on the operation of the deployment.
• Shared spaces which are not isolated have essentially zero chance of operating
without interference. Active coexistence methods, such as frequency separation,
timing, resource block scheduling or LBT would be required in these cases.
• The operation of an outdoor, higher-power Access Point (AP) had impact on the
networks operating in the interior (AP3, Net 1) and did increase the interference level,
but the modern, energy-efﬁcient windows reduced this signal level sufﬁciently to not
cause a signiﬁcant reduction in the link throughput due to reduced SINR. The impact
on higher ﬂoors was greatly reduced by the added loss of the through ﬂoor attenuation,
and the reduced penetration due to the higher arrival angles in the through-window
attenuation.
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

196
Coexistence Between Unprotected Peer Devices
The message from this analysis is that coexistence may not be a major consideration
in many deployments that are isolated by distance or highly attenuating materials.
However, for networks without such isolation, coexistence will be essential to effective
operations, unless spectrum is simply partitioned. Such coexistence may be trivial, such
as isolated frequencies, and will still not consume all spectrum resources. Or, it will be
more effective through tighter integration of the coexisting networks, up to the level of
integration that is present within carrier LTE networks operating in high spectrum reuse
conditions, requiring high levels of awareness and control over all member node status
and operation. The technology to provide this exists; it is a business and policy issue
about how much information and control is shared, and therefore how much sovereignty
is compromised in the operation of the jointly managed systems.
12.4
Listen Before Talk MAC Layer Coexistence
The LBT Media Access Layer (MAC) layer creates a time partitioning of a single
channel for use by multiple, uncoordinated networks that share it. LBT is the mechanism
for several of the popular Local Area Networks (LAN) technologies, such as Wi-Fi and
Bluetooth. The advantages of LBT include:
• There is no coordination or collaboration required between the sharing devices or
networks. No interconnect between devices in the band or any third party agent is
required to provide coexistence between users and networks. The only coordination
between nodes is the sensing of energy in the channel.
• There is no requirement for any common technology, channel framework, cryptog-
raphy, or other limits on the scope of devices that can participate. The framework
is inherently technology neutral, once basic channel boundaries are established. An
example of this is the Multeﬁre technology that plans to provide LBT for Time
Division Long Term Evolution (TD-LTE) in order to coexist with the dominant Wi-Fi
use in the unlicensed bands.3
The disadvantages to LBT revolve around how conditions of channel congestion
are determined and managed. As the density of channel usage increases, devices are
required to increase the time that they wait to reenter the channel through an exponential
back-off principle.4 This impacts both throughput and latency of the data stream.
Depending on the mixture of devices and trafﬁc loads, the throughput efﬁciency of
LBT varies, but the aggregate throughput is typically well below that of the channel if
there was no device sharing occurring. This is the system cost of the simplicity of the
LBT mechanism.
The distinction between an absolute measure of interference and a signal referenced
one is signiﬁcant in examining the channel usage characteristics of LBT and non-LBT
MAC layers. LBT has a ﬁxed threshold at which all devices must consider the channel
3 MulteﬁreTM is a registered trademark of the MulteﬁreTM Alliance.
4 This requires an increasing delay in reentering the channel as congestion is perceived to increase.
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

12.5 Lessons Learned From Conﬂicts
197
as occupied. For Wi-Fi, the standards state that all devices must consider the channel
occupied if the device detects a signal level typically more than 10 dB above the noise
ﬂoor. For a 20 MHz channel, this is –75 dBm.
In free space, this is a separation of around 500 m at 2.4 GHz and a typical antenna.
So, any Wi-Fi access point at this distance will cause another device to consider the
channel occupied and back-off.5 A Wi-Fi access point at 6 m distance will have a signal
strength of around –43 dBm, 32 dB above the occupied threshold. Several devices could
be present and transmitting at this range with Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) of at least
43 dB, which is a strong Wi-Fi signal. However, the distant node at the 500 m distance
would cause the device to consider the channel busy, and not utilize an otherwise
highly usable channel. Of course, real propagation loss is much greater than free-space
propagation loss, but the relationships described here are maintained.
The use of LBT divides the aggregate capacity of the channel among any nodes with
less than this implicit path loss, even if many of these networks would have sufﬁcient
signal to operate simultaneously, even in the presence of each other. If the network
wanted to operate at an SNR above 12 dB, and at range of 6 m, the networks could be
spaced at a range of 30 m. Idealized positioning could enable a 1 000 times increase in
density over LBT.
12.5
Lessons Learned From LTE-U/LAA and Wi-Fi Conﬂicts
The proposal to introduce LTE-based technologies into spectrum that has traditionally
been primarily utilized for Wi-Fi and Bluetooth technologies has created extensive
controversy, largely due to the initial lack of coexistence of these technologies and
potential impact on the existing uses, even though these uses were not entitled to
protection. The technologies proposed included a variant of LTE, Long Term Evolution
Unlicensed (LTE-U). Signiﬁcant studies, analyses, and experiments were reported,
typically by advocates for, or against, the proposed use. Advocates on any side are not
generally the best source of impartial science, but some broad principles can be gleaned
from the record.
• LBT MAC layers must detect the channel being busy at very low levels of signal,
so the LBT devices will go into exponential back-off6 and delay their access to the
channel. Operation of a continuous source, such as a non-LBT protocol, even at low
levels, may cause the LBT systems to not have opportunities to enter the channel at
all, even though the level of signal would be quite low, and might not have caused
interference to the LBT network.
• Continuously operating systems have very signiﬁcant negative impacts on each other,
when they operate at similar levels. Their performance is much worse than an LBT
MAC in the same conditions.
5 For a client with 0 dB gain, the range would be more like 200 m.
6 The exponential back-off behavior increases the time between channel access on the assumption that the
high rate of channel busy sensing indicates congestion on the channel.
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

198
Coexistence Between Unprotected Peer Devices
Because of these issues, the LTE community appeared to decide that it could not
(technically or politically) prevail in using unmodiﬁed LTE in the same bands that
incumbent usage was dominated by LBT systems. Various proposals, such as Multeﬁre
and Licensed Assisted Access (LAA) are being proposed to introduce LBT into the
baseline LTE protocols to coexist with the currently dominant LBT usage in the
unlicensed bands.
12.6
Hybrid Strategies that Integrate Protected and
Unprotected Spectrum
The previous discussion has treated the alternatives of protected access and some level
of coexistence as discrete and exclusive options. It is important to recognize that this
need not be so, and that network strategies can utilize both protected and unprotected
spectrum access to operate networks effectively. Hybrid strategies that utilize some
amount of protected spectrum and some amount of unprotected spectrum are a viable,
and attractive alternative.
A speciﬁc example of this is the evolving LAA standard for LTE. This was, to
some extent, a follow-on from the initial proposals for LTE-U. The initial concept for
LAA was LTE operation in typical exclusive licensed carrier bands, and a supplemental
downlink operation in 5 GHz unlicensed spectrum that was compatible with LBT. Thus,
one set of channels was protected, and the unlicensed one was not.
Such strategies reduce the required reliability and predictability of the secondary
channel, as it is ofﬂoad trafﬁc, and the network can allocate high reliability trafﬁc to the
assured access spectrum, and use the contended spectrum for less time critical or Quality
of Service (QoS)-sensitive trafﬁc. This spectrum is a good candidate for integrated
sharing, so long as the technology can support this systems engineering framework.
12.7
An Integrated Framework for Technology-Neutral and
Technology-Speciﬁc Coexistence
Technology-neutral coexistence is constrained to the very “crude” aspects of the
channel, in which the orthogonal aspects of the spectrum usage, such as time and
frequency can be used to isolate users from each other. LBT does this inherently
for devices that share this methodology. We assume that a three-tier framework must
provide some mandatory or optional mechanism to deconﬂict devices from each other,
without any awareness of, or constraints on, their speciﬁc technology capabilities.
We consider frequency allocation as either static or dynamic in time. In this context,
static-frequency coexistence provides spectrum for longer term usage, such as the
unitary (not subdivided) channel in use.
Dynamic frequency coexistence manages speciﬁc sub-channel usage on a highly
variable manner, on a short time-scale, such as LTE resource blocks, which can
be adjusted on a slot by slot basis. The coexistence can manage time at the level
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

12.7 An Integrated Framework for Coexistence
199
of a channel grant, which is a long term commitment in a technology-independent
manner. Alternatively, a technology such as LTE can allocate time slots on a
millisecond-by-millisecond basis. Longer-term time and frequency assignments can be
made in a technology-neutral basis, while short-term allocations require technology
assumptions, and thus are technology-speciﬁc.
Using the framework of Figure 12.1, the top-tier technology-neutral layer partitions
the spectrum resource using the orthogonal dimensions of time and frequency. In most
optimization problems, partitioning does not create an efﬁcient use of resources. There is
no reason to believe spectrum is any different. The internal design of LTE reﬂects detailed
understanding of very efﬁcient use of spectrum resources, and its approach to dense
spectrum resource is a very tight, technology-speciﬁc integration of adjoining devices.
In the operational concept, devices register with a coexistence service and express the
technologies that they have available and are willing to utilize to achieve coexistence.
The coexistence service determines the common elements between adjoining networks,
and utilizes the lowest common level of techniques available to each, and for which they
have expressed a willingness to employ them.
It is useful to consider some use-case scenarios. In these scenarios, we consider the
unit of management is networks, not devices. We assume networks provide control
over the coexistence of devices within the individual networks. Therefore, we think
of coexistence as an inter-network service, not an inter-device one. The responsibility
for interference management among cooperating devices is provided by the system
managing that cooperation, such as the components of an Extended Packet Core (EPC),
cluster controller, or Self-Organizing Network (SON).
• A set of devices that have no coexistence features register with the coexistence
service. The only choice the coexistence service has is to partition the available
spectrum resources between the devices or networks using some predetermined ratio.
Each device has access to interference-free and uncontended spectrum, although the
extent of this spectrum is reduced proportional to the number of devices or networks
accessing it.
• A set of devices that all have, and are willing to use, LBT MAC layers for coexistence
with other LBT devices register with the coexistence service. The coexistence server
can allocate the maximum extent of available spectrum to all of the devices in
common. Each device would have access to a large extent of spectrum, although
this access would be contended. Assuming that there was some statistical variation in
demand, each device can achieve much higher peak access to the spectrum, at least in
relation to the previous example. These devices need not have a common technology,
but could, for example, be a mix of Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and Multeﬁre.
• A set of TD-LTE devices register with the coexistence service. Again, the service can
allocate a large extent of spectrum to these devices/networks, or could partition it as
if they had no common coexistence technology. The difference is the degree to which
they are willing to exchange information, such as timing, conﬁguration, aggregate
demand data, and the topology of the networks, and comply with coexistence manager
direction. For example, if the networks are signiﬁcant in extent, and coexistence is
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

200
Coexistence Between Unprotected Peer Devices
only needed in small boundary regions, then a large spectrum extent, with time-slot or
resource-block sharing on the edges would be highly effective in optimizing capacity
in the interior, and avoid interference at the edges. Even if the allocation of time slots
and resource blocks was ﬁxed, and not demand-based, the beneﬁts of a large spectrum
extent in the interior of the network would be beneﬁcial to all users.
• A number of devices with a mix of LBT and LTE register with the service. In this
case, a hybrid strategy has to be invoked. The LBT and LTE users are partitioned into
separate spectrum, and the LTE-speciﬁc sharing methods are further applied within
that partition, similar to illustration in Figure 12.1.
• Other technologies are likely to emerge and create new coexistence methods
that will create new segmentations of this coexistence service. For example, a
technology could develop that shared spectrum via a Code Division Multiple Access
(CDMA)-like framework using Pseudo Noise Spread Spectrum (PNSS) to isolate
users. In that case, the coexistence service would have to be extended to manage
sets of codes, and maximize the orthogonality of neighboring networks’ code
assignments.
12.8
Suggested Reading
• The proposals for enhancing the compatibility of LTE with LBT systems have
resulted in several proposals that are instructive in their approach to coexistence. The
consortium is developing a technology, Multeﬁre, that provides LBT functionality
using the LBT MAC layer framework. Intended for compatibility and spectrum
sharing with Wi-Fi dominated bands, it is proposed by some as a method to
create coexistence among users in the lower tier, without any necessity to have
any coordination, other than the in-channel sensing. Detailed technical material on
Multeﬁre is not available outside of the Multeﬁre community at this time, but will
likely be more publicly available in the future as its proponents move to adoption.
• LTE internal features are critical to the implementation of many of the coexistence
features that will be required in rich three-tier spectrum regimes. There are a number
of good reference sources on LTE [3, 4].
• The performance of LBT as a spectrum-sharing and coexistence mechanism is central
to the choice of three-tier spectrum regimes. There are a number of readings that
present some of the performance characteristics of LBT [5, 6, 7].
• There has not been very much research on the coexistence of widely different
protocols. One example where this issue was studied was when the use of LTE in
the unlicensed 5 GHz band was proposed in LTE-U. A number of experiments were
reported in public ﬁlings with the US Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
These results were typically arguing for, or against, permitting LTE in the traditional
Wi-Fi band. Therefore, the results have to be viewed with some discretion. But, even
with that caveat, they remain instructive in the issues of such coexistence.7
7 In full disclosure, the author was one of the opponents of permitting unmodiﬁed LTE to be permitted in
this band.
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
201
References
1 National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST Construction Automation Program
Report No. 3 Electromagnetic Signal Attenuation in Construction Materials, NISTIR 6055
(Gaithersburg, MD, 1997). ﬁre.nist.gov/bfrlpubs/build97/PDF/b97123.pdf.
2 I. N. Rodriguez, H. Cong, N. T. Jørgensen, T. Sørensen, B. Mogensen, and P. Elgaard, Radio
propagation into modern buildings. IEEE 80th Vehicular Technology Conference (Aalborg
Universitet, 2014), 1–5.
3 E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Skold, 4G: LTE/LTE-Advanced for Mobile Broadband
(Amsterdam: Academic Press/Elsevier, 2011).
4 A. Ghosh, J. Zhang, J. G. Andrews, and R. Muhamed, Fundamentals of LTE (NJ: Prentice Hall,
2011).
5 C. Chen, R. Ratasuk, and A. Ghosh, Downlink performance analysis of LTE and WiFi
coexistence in unlicensed bands with a simple listen-before-talk scheme. IEEE 81st Vehicular
Technology Conference (2015), 1–5.
6 A. Mukherjee, J. F. Cheng, S. Falahati, L. Falconetti, A. Furuskär, B. Godana, D. H. Kang,
H. Koorapaty, D. Larsson, and Y. Yang, System architecture and coexistence evaluation of
licensed-assisted access LTE with IEEE 802.11. 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Communication Workshop (2015), 2350–2355.
7 N. Rupasinghe and ˙I Güvenç, Licensed-assisted access for WiFi-LTE coexistence in the
unlicensed spectrum. IEEE Globecom Workshops (2014), 894–899.
.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

.013
14:57:18, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Part V
Example Use of Three-Tier
Spectrum: Use of the
3.5 GHz CBRS Band
in the USA
15:03:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

15:03:30, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

13
Device and Network
Interaction with the
Spectrum Access System
13.1
Introduction
This chapter summarizes the design of the United States (US) Citizens Broadband
Radio Service (CBRS) device to Spectrum Access System (SAS) interaction. The US
standards have been developed by the Wireless Innovation Forum (WinnForum) through
collaboration between its membership, including Mobile Network Operators (MNO),
Mobile System Operator (MSO), equipment suppliers, SAS operators, and incumbent
system users.
This discussion is not intended as a recipe for how three-tier regimes must be
implemented. Instead, it is presented as a starting point for other implementations to
consider this design, and, hopefully, further extend it, or adapt it to meet different
objectives. Certainly, there are cost advantages if, all things being equal, there is a
degree of harmonization of these mechanisms internationally. It will also serve to make
the more general or abstract discussions more concrete and explicit.
This chapter will summarize the design, and the rationale for this design. However,
it is not intended to be sufﬁcient for CBRS design or development, and is intended to
familiarize the reader with the frameworks selected for this ﬁrst implementation of the
three-tier concept. The complete hierarchy of objects and containers is not represented
fully, but abstracted to discuss the information content of the exchanges, rather than
their implementation.
It is also worth noting that all of these interfaces are deﬁned consistent with Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF) internet standards, including the Internet Protocol (IP)
standard. Rather than utilize any speciﬁc wireless technology standard, such as the
Third-Generation Partnership (3GPP) Long-Term Evolution (LTE) layer 2 interfaces,
the three-tier devices, or their proxies, operate on IP network backhaul. This supports
operation over any public or private IP network. Similarly, the upper layer security
protocols are speciﬁc to IP Transport Layer Security (TLS)/Secure Socket Layer (SSL).
This is a signiﬁcant departure from past telecommunications practice, which typically
deployed access point networks over unique layer 2 interfaces.
As the design evolved, the CBRS community implicitly established a consensus
around the following list of design objectives:
1. Assured device shutdown, or relocation, when directed, was essential to assure
protected users of the integrity of the protection methodology.
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

206
Device and Network Interaction
2. SAS interaction must be technology neutral, and capable of supporting any
reasonable technology in the band, and not limit future innovation.
3. Avoid requiring any substantial changes in the design of the Radio Access Network
(RAN) or upper layers, in order to fully exploit the existing high-volume commercial
products.
4. Be extensible to enable technology-speciﬁc optimizations and coexistence features.
The immediate focus of this was for Time Division Long Term Evolution
(TD-LTE)-speciﬁc extension to provide additional coexistence features.
5. Support multiple competitive, but cooperative, SAS suppliers, with no loss of
protection methodology integrity.
6. Provide authentication and non-repudiation to ensure that devices, SAS, and
installers were appropriately certiﬁed and accountable.
7. Enable SAS interaction on behalf of CBSDs by network management functions, such
as those provided within the LTE Extended Packet Core (EPC).
13.2
CBSD Shutdown and Relocation Assurance
The key requirement for the Citizens Broadband Radio Service Devices (CBSD)
ecosystem from a protected user’s perspective is assured shutdown and relocation of
devices that could cause them interference. Since there was (and still is) incumbent
resistance to this regime, the shutdown mechanism had to be demonstrably reliable
despite a wide range of conditions, such as:
• The SAS could fail and leave devices authorized to emit with no ongoing protection
mechanism.
• The communications path between the SAS and the CBSD could fail, leaving the
devices authorized to emit.
• Many enterprise and consumer devices would be positioned behind ﬁrewalls, where
a Network Address Translation (NAT) service is used with Dynamic Host Control
Protocol (DHCP) to dynamically assign IP addresses, and this address could change
during operation, leaving the device unreachable by the SAS, and therefore not
capable of receiving shutdown messages.
• Firewall policies, or overloaded DHCP networks, may preclude incoming connec-
tions to devices located within perimeter defenses.
There are two modes of operation between the SAS and the individual CBSD. A
CBSD can access the SAS directly, or through a proxy, such as the control system used
in LTE. The proxy interface is both more complex, and is technology speciﬁc, so the
discussion in this chapter will focus on the direct, standalone SAS to CBSD interface.
This interface implements a “pull” from the SAS by the CBSD for all interaction
between them.
The CBSD is required to continuously request permission to continue operating
under a spectrum grant. It does this by requesting a “heartbeat” periodically in order
to continue to emit. If for any reason it is not granted permission, or cannot contact the
SAS, the CBSD must terminate operation when the current authorization expires.
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

13.2 CBSD Shutdown and Relocation Assurance
207
Table 13.1 Typical shutdown/relocation time intervals that establish heartbeat intervals.
Shutdown Event
Time Allowed
Applicable in Locations
Naval Radar Operation
300 seconds
Naval Protection Zones
FSS TT&C Site Registration
Unspeciﬁed
All CBSDs
PAL Licensee Deployment
Unspeciﬁed
In PAL-licensed census tract and on PAL
frequency
Government Directed Shutdown
Under Discussion
All CBSDs
Why have continual operation require a short time interval authorization when the
spectrum grant may be valid for a much longer period? Spectrum grants provide stability
and the reasonable expectation of the right to continue operation under the grant until
its expiration. Grants provide stability in spectrum assignments over long periods of
time. Systems that have complex spectrum management strategies can therefore perform
planning and management.
Failure to receive continued authorization in response to a heartbeat request is
an exceptional condition. It should be uncommon for most devices. The heartbeat
process operates independently of the grant process, and addresses only the requirement
to provide protection when protected devices enter the spectrum. The grant and
authorization process maximizes long-term frequency stability, while still assuring that
arbitrary spectrum clearing times can be achieved with 100 percent conﬁdence.
The SAS computes a heartbeat interval dynamically based on the most constraining
spectrum recovery time for any possible protected node that might register or be
detected. The lowest applicable exit time is used to set the reauthorization time when
the grant is initially issued, and may be updated in subsequent heartbeat messages, if
needed. Table 13.1 illustrates the exit, or clearing, time for possible entries into the
CBRS band.
The SAS response to a heartbeat request can consist of:
• Continuation of the authorization to use the grant, with no change in the grant
conditions.
• Continuation of the authorization to use the grant, with a change in the valid period,
power or other grant conditions.
• A message that informs the device that the authorization is not provided.
• No response at all, which essentially has the same effect as informing the device that
the authorization is not to be provided.
The CBSD is free to request reauthorization at any time it decides is appropriate. It is
aware of the quality of the path from it to the SAS, so it can balance the transaction rate
and the risk of not obtaining reauthorization.
This interface may appear to be overly burdensome. Certainly for devices that
are located in frequencies and regions where there are short clearing times, there
will be a relatively high heartbeat rate. The virtue of this interface is that it ensures
that devices do not exceed the shutdown time allowed, under any possible failure
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

208
Device and Network Interaction
condition. Regardless of what component of the ecosystem fails, the device will behave
properly, if inconveniently. Spectrum sharing is about incumbent trust, and creating a
high assurance shutdown was believed to be important in this ﬁrst implementation of
three-tier spectrum.
13.3
General Principles of Device Interaction with the SAS
Figure 13.1 illustrates the valid CBSD states, the messages that cause transitions
between these states. Note that in the US CBRS implementation, the ﬁrst state is
divided into two substates, “Not Registered” and “Registered.” This is a convenience
for making the registration transaction independent of the grant, so that location
information and other invariant data need only be provided once. This is particularly
convenient for professional installation, where the installer can cryptographically sign
the initial registration. However, from the perspective of interference management, these
two states are not distinguishable, or signiﬁcant. In the later sections, the transactions
speciﬁc to each of these two states will be described.
No Grant The device has no valid spectrum grant (and therefore no authorization to
radiate). This is the initial state of a device. It may or may not be registered with the
SAS in this state. Registered, or not registered, could be considered sub-states of this
state.
Granted The device has received a spectrum grant. The grant is typically good for a
long period. The device has not been authorized to actually radiate.
Authorized The device has a valid grant, and has been authorized to radiate.
The transitions between these states are described in more detail in Table 13.2.
13.4
SAS, CBSD, and Installer Authentication
Trust in the spectrum-sharing regime implies that the system has several attributes:
Inquiry
Grant Request
Rejected
No Grant
Granted
Authorized
Receive
Heartbeat
Receive
Heartbeat
Not Receive
Heartbeat
Grant
Rescinded/
Relinquished
Grant
Rescinded/
Relinquished
Receive
Grant
Figure 13.1 CBSD authorization states and permitted transitions.
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

13.4 SAS, CBSD, and Installer Authentication
209
Table 13.2 Valid CBSD states and actions.
State
Valid Actions
Received from SAS
Next State
No Grant
Inquiry Request
Inquiry Response
No Grant
Grant Request
Grant Issuance
Granted
Grant Rejection
No Grant
Granted
Request Heartbeat
Receive Continued Authorization
Authorized
Not Receive Authorization
Granted
Relinquish Grant
Relinquishment Conﬁrmation
No Grant
Authorized
Request Heartbeat
Receive Continued Authorization
Authorized
Not Receive Authorization
Granted
Relinquish Grant
Relinquishment Conﬁrmation
No Grant
• Participants in the ecosystem are accountable for their actions, and the system can
assure knowledge of the identity of all parties involved in decisions or actions.
• The only participants in the ecosystem are ones that have agreed to the terms
of use, been validated through an independent review of their performance, or
qualiﬁcations.
• No party can impersonate any other entity in the ecosystem without the explicit
support of the impersonated party.
The authentication process veriﬁes the identity of any party (device, person, or cloud
service, as examples) that asserts identity or compliance with the rules. The WinnForum
industry group decided to adopt the current public/private key structure that is used for
many computer authentication applications, most commonly in the identity of web sites
through their SSL certiﬁcates.
The optimal method would be to have a single root Certiﬁcate Authority (CA) that
was the sole issuer of all of the certiﬁcates used in the ecosystem. However, any sole
source, non-competitive role certainly violates many of the CBRS principles, so it was
decided to have a set of certiﬁcate issuers that were “trusted” to issue each of the speciﬁc
certiﬁcate types. This also integrated more efﬁciently with the manufacturing process
used by some of the ecosystem suppliers. They issued their own certiﬁcates that were
not tied to a root that would likely be the one jointly selected. This enabled Part 96
manufacturers to issue their own device certiﬁcates.
The other advantage of modeling the authentication on SSL/TLS certiﬁcates was
that any participant in the community could validate these certiﬁcates. Devices,
installers, and Priority Access License (PAL) owners could therefore move between
SAS providers without having to re-establish their credentials with the new SAS
supplier. This approach made trust a property between the CBRS community, as a
whole, and the SAS providers, not just bilateral with a between a single SAS operator
and a single device manufacturer or operator.
The range of authenticated identity information required for CBRS included the
following categories:
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

210
Device and Network Interaction
Device The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations require that the
SAS verify that any device that receives a spectrum grant is authorized to operate in
the band. This certiﬁcate would be only issued to manufacturers that held at least one
Part 96 device certiﬁcation.
SAS SAS operations have several authentication needs. SAS interfaces must be able
to assure CBSD accesses that they are, in fact, a SAS. Otherwise, SAS emulators
could impersonate SAS operators and permit unlawful entry of devices, shut down
networks, and generally wreak havoc on the operations in the ecosystem. Also, the
exchange of SAS data requires that the receiving SAS be assured that the information
that it is receiving is from a true SAS, and not an attempt to corrupt the regime.
PAL Owner A PAL grant request asserts that operator of the device is the PAL licensee.
The SAS needs to be able to validate that the node requesting PAL protection is
entitled to ask for that.
Trusted Installer Trusted installers are allowed to state the location of devices in
conditions where Global Positioning System (GPS) location cannot be determined,
or where the functionality was not present. These installers are the only individuals
authorized to provide the SAS registration data on outdoor CBSDs. This ensures that
only installers who have been trained in the installation and applicable regulations
are certiﬁcated. A CA issuing this certiﬁcate would have to verify the completion
of a program that was recognized as having an acceptable syllabus and completion
criteria.
In addition, it is likely that the SAS operators will utilize certiﬁcates for internal uses,
such as validating that sensor and health and status reports are coming from the intended
device.
13.5
Device Interaction with the SAS
13.5.1
Device and proxy interaction
The simpliﬁed model for a SAS-controlled CBSD ecosystem is direct interaction
between a SAS and a CBSD. For standalone devices, such as a typical Wireless
Fidelity (Wi-Fi) Access Point (AP) this is the typical model for deployment without
SAS services, and can be directly carried over into the SAS-controlled model.
However, for more complex, network-oriented technologies, such as small cell LTE
and its variants, there is an intermediate layer of management. LTE refers to this
as the various elements within the EPC, including the Radio Resource Management
(RRM) and Mobility Management Entity (MME), which directly manage the resource
(spectrum and time resources) use by the controlled eNodeB devices. For technology
generality, the SAS refers to these as “proxies,” as they interact on behalf of their
controlled devices.
Interaction with the SAS by proxies is similar to the interaction of an individual
CBSD. The message designs provide for request messages to provide arrays of one
or more request objects to the SAS, and for the SAS to reply with an array of response
objects, in the identical sequence as provided by the request. This enables a single proxy
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

13.5 Device Interaction with the SAS
211
to interact on behalf of a network of CBSDs. This is not the most sophisticated imple-
mentation of a proxy in that much of the material may be common across the devices
managed by the proxies. It has the virtue of a common structure with the standalone
version of the interface, and its certiﬁcation need make no assumption about the reliabil-
ity of the proxy or any of the intervening communications systems. Note that the proxy
now takes on the responsibility to assure CBSD shutdown through its own mechanisms.
13.5.2
Spectrum Measurement by CBSDs
It is obvious that the SAS can make better coexistence decisions when it is provided
with measurements of the environment. These measurements can serve a number of
purposes within the CBRS ecosystem, including:
Coexistence The measurements indicate the actual conditions at a site. While the
SAS may not know the duty cycle of potential interferers, the use of measurements
overcomes many of the challenges due to the lack of knowledge of building materials,
foliage and other factors that might cause greatly increased path loss.
Building Speciﬁcs Indoor propagation in a given building is probably quite similar
between ﬂoors and across major areas of the building. As soon as a few deployments
in a building occur, the SAS will be in a position to develop building-speciﬁc models
of the paths within the structure and more aggressively pack devices, with high
conﬁdence in achieving acceptable interference levels.
Diagnostics If the measurements reported exceed the worst case estimate prepared by
the SAS, then there is a serious error in its algorithms, or there is some emitters that
were not accounted for, or not accounted for properly.
Enforcement If the additional interference levels are not explainable by errors in the
SAS computations, or by mis-registered CBSDs or User Equipment (UE) devices,
then the logical conclusion is that there are devices present that are not operating in
accordance with the regulations, and some enforcement action may be justiﬁed. The
measurements may support such an action, or assist in its execution.
The SAS can request measurements by including a measurement request in many of
its responses. The device then includes the measurement data in its next message to the
SAS. The US CBSD community has currently only deﬁned one type of measurement,
which is an LTE Received Signal Strength Indication (RSSI) measurement. The set of
measurements is anticipated to expand as different technologies enter the band, and
CBRS-speciﬁc implementations emerge. The LTE RSSI measurement type is shown in
the tables and ﬁgures as an example.
13.5.3
Transactions between the SAS and CBSDs
The following subsections describe the major SAS to CBSD transactions in some
detail. They describe the current US CBSD and SAS interaction. This design is still
very early in its evolution; there has been little experience with it in actual operation;
and it has features that were included to facilitate certiﬁcation, rather than because
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

212
Device and Network Interaction
they were optimal. Nonetheless, it is a useful point of departure that any subsequent
implementation is likely to draw from.
Each transaction is characterized by a drawing of the message hierarchy, indicating
which items are arrays in which a list of one or more values can be provided. Each object
or data item is noted as being Required, Optional, or Conditional. Conditional items are
required to be included in the message depending on the success of the transaction, or
the other content in the message, or the preceding one. A list of the message objects and
data items is provided in Table 13.3.
13.5.4
Device Inquiry Requests
Device software must be aware of the rules of the national regulatory regime in which
they operate, but they cannot be aware of local conditions and spectrum availability
until they are deployed. The inquiry transaction provides this awareness, but does not
provide any spectrum rights. The device can examine the options provided, sense the
spectrum to detect the levels of interference to which it would be subject, and trade the
possibility of disruption against the local environment present in each channel.
Knowledge of the other uses, and the regulatory constraints on a given band, is
highly useful to the device in performing channel selection. A device that is examining
spectrum for use as General Authorized Access (GAA) might interpret the band status
impact on its operations as follows:
GAA No constraints, and not likely to be disrupted once a GAA grant is received.
PAL A PAL is licensed in this channel at this location, although it may not be present
at this time. Deployment of this PAL might force relocation of GAA devices, even if
the GAA assignment was possible at the GAA device entry time.
The SAS inquiry transaction processing does not examine the possibility of the
device to cause interference to other protected entities, such as wireless Internet service
provider (WISP) or Fixed Satellite Service (FSS) operation. Therefore the results of an
inquiry are not an assurance of a spectrum grant, they are only indicative of the status
of the channel.
Note that this inquiry object is very parochial to the US CBRS implementation. It
does not provide many of the features that would be required in a much more extensive
three-tier framework, including more bands, more nations, and more rule sets, such as
will be described in Chapter 18. This function will need to be signiﬁcantly extended when
additional countries and bands are added to the spectrum regime. A device might have
multiple bands available at a location. The inquiry function would let it inquire at a band
level before addressing the speciﬁcs of any given band. This would provide a strategic
level of band selection interaction to supplement the tactical nature of channel selection.
Similarly, a three-tier device should be able to roam the world and discover the
speciﬁc rules in whatever location it found itself. This would include the list of bands,
and also the certiﬁcation that the device would have to meet in order to be authorized to
use each one. The device could then select its credentials for any band to which it held
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

13.5 Device Interaction with the SAS
213
Table 13.3 CBSD to SAS messaging data and object items.
Item
Object/
Content
Data
Air Inter.
Object
Description of the air interface to used by the CBSD.
Ant. Gain
Data
Maximum antenna main beam gain, in dB units. Required
for category B CBSD registrations.
Ant. Model
Data
Name of a model that provides a more detailed antenna
pattern characterization.a
Ant. Azimuth
Data
Boresight azimuth, 0 is true north. Required for Category
B CBSD registrations.
Ant. Downtilt
Data
In degrees. A negative value indicates the antenna is
pointed upwards from the horizontal.
Avail. Channel
Object
List of channel (frequency range), their type, and the rule
base that authorized them.
Beamwidth
Data
Angle (in degrees) between the antenna’s 3 dB horizontal
pattern points.
Call Sign
Data
Identiﬁer assigned by the FCC.b
CBSD Category
Data
Device category, implying limitations on conducted
power, EIRP, location and installation authentication. Part
96 establishes two categories, A and B.
CBSD ID
Data
String providing the globally-unique identiﬁer of a CBSD.
Assigned by the SAS after successful registration.
CBSD Info
Object
Data describing the CBSD model and conﬁguration.
CBSD Serial
No.
Data
Unique identiﬁer within a given FCC ID, assigned by
manufacturer.
Channel Type
Data
GAA or PAL showing channel status.
EIRP Cap.
Data
Maximum EIRP, required for category B CBSD
registration.
EutraRssiReport
Object
A list of LTE RSSI reports, as deﬁned by 3GPP.
FCC ID
Data
The US FCC identiﬁer assigned during certiﬁcation.
Required to be validated by the SAS before a grant is
issued.
Firmware Ver.
Data
Firmware software version.
Freq. Range
Object
Provides an upper and lower frequency limit for an
inquiry, channel, or grant.
Grant Expire
Data
Grant expiration date/time in UTC.
Grant ID
Data
Unique identiﬁer of each SAS grant.
Grant Request
Object
Provides all of the information required to specify a grant
request by a CBSD to the SAS.
Grant Renew
Data
Logical; true, if the request is to renew the current grant.
Group ID
Data
Group ID establishes membership in a particular CBSD
group. The SAS can make assumptions about the
management of the members of a single Group ID, but not
across Group IDs.
Group Params
Object
Array of CBSD grouping parameters.
Group Type
Data
Deﬁnes the type of group that the associated Group ID
belongs. Currently, only an interference-coordination
group is deﬁned, but additional group types are likely to
be established to reﬂect different coordination schemes to
which the SAS must be aware in making deconﬂiction
decisions.
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

214
Device and Network Interaction
Table 13.3 (cont.)
Item
Object/
Content
Data
Hardware
Data
Applicable revision or version of the FCC ID.
HB Interval
Data
Time in seconds after which an authorization is invalid.
This is essentially the maximum heartbeat interval the
CBSD should use.
Height Type
Data
Type of altitude: Above Ground Level (AGL) or Above
Mean Sea Level (AMSL).
Height
Data
Altitude of the CBSD in meters. The reference for this is
provided in Height Type.
High Freq.
Data
Highest Frequency in Range.
Horiz. Accuracy
Data
Accuracy of the measurement horizontal position.
Indoor
Data
Logical; true if the CBSD is deployed indoors.
InquiredSpectrum
Data
A list of frequency range objects that enumerate the range
of spectrum that is being inquired.
Install Params.
Object
Provides all of the information regarding the actual
placement of the CBSD.
Latitude
Data
CBSD location. Latitude in WGS84 reference.
Longitude
Data
CBSD location. Longitude in WGS84 reference.
Low Freq.
Data
Lowest Frequency in Range.
Max. EIRP
Data
Maximum EIRP requested by the CBSD, or granted by
the SAS.
Measure Rpt.
Object
List of individual measurements.
Measure Rpt.
Conﬁg.
Data
Array of strings that enumerate the measurement
capabilities of the CBSD.
Measured
Bandwidth
Data
Bandwidth in Hz above the value provided in the ﬁeld
Measured Frequency.
Measurement
Cap.
Data
Array containing a list of measurement capabilities.
Measured
Frequency
Data
Lowest Frequency in Range.
Measured RSSI
Data
Carrier RSSI as measured in accordance with 3GPP
criteria.
Model
Data
Model number/identiﬁcation.
Oper. Params.
Object
Provides the speciﬁc radiation request to the SAS, or
grant from the SAS.
OperationState
Data
Response to the previous heartbeat response’s request for
CBSD operational state. Has values of “Authorized” or
“Granted.”
Radio Tech.
Data
Speciﬁes the technology the CBSD can support. Currently
only an LTE value is deﬁned.
Resp. Code
Data
Success/Failure code.
Resp. Data
Data
Undeﬁned contents. Will contain information provided by
the SAS to assist the CBSD in responding to the status
code.
Resp. Msg.
Data
Textual description of the result status.
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

13.5 Device Interaction with the SAS
215
Table 13.3 (cont.)
Item
Object/
Content
Data
Response
Object
SAS message success response, providing status code and
optional description.
Rule Applied
Data
The FCC Rule used to generate the response. For CBSD
devices, this is the literal string FCC Part 96.
Software Ver.
Data
Software revision level.
Support Spec.
Data
Which modes of the technology speciﬁed in the Radio
Technology ﬁeld.
User ID
Data
Identity of a speciﬁc CBSD user organization,
pre-established with the SAS.
User Key
Data
Optional, pre-established credential from the SAS to be
used to verify the association of CBSDs and the user.
Vendor
MData
Manufacturer name.
Vert. Accuracy
Data
Accuracy of the measurement vertical position.
Xmit. Expire
Data
Transmit authorization date/time in UTC.
a A logical extension of this ﬁeld is to enable the antenna pattern to be computed by the CBSD and provided
dynamically to the SAS through this interface. This would accommodate electronically steerable and multiple
beam antennas that would not have a single, static pattern.
b The meaning of a call sign in the context of an automated licensing regime is not apparent, or the mechanism
for this assignment to be made. It may have been required for legacy tracking purposes.
Inquiry Response
Inquiry
CBSD ID
Frequency Range
Measurement Report
High Freq.
Low Freq.
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Conditional
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Object
Object
Measured Freq.
Bandwidth
RSSI Report
RSSI Report
Figure 13.2 CBSD SAS inquiry request object.
a matching certiﬁcate, and proceed to operate. This would enable an internationally
harmonized framework for sharing spectrum, even in the absence of internationally
harmonized band choices and rule structures.
A spectrum inquiry transaction consists of an array of SpectrumInquiryRequest
objects. Each of these objects includes the information in Figure 13.2.
The inquiry transaction includes not only the status of the SAS perception of
the interference analysis, but also provides the ability of the device to respond to
measurement requests with channel measurement data.
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

216
Device and Network Interaction
The response is a channelized list of candidate bands and the regulatory authority the
SAS used to make each determination. The response object is shown in Figure 13.3.
13.5.5
Registration Requests
Grant requests can only be issued following successful device registration. A device can
be registered and the information can remain dormant until the device is operated. For
example, a professional installer might make a network deployment without activating
the boxes, but would register each one as it was deployed. Alternatively, the node can
be registered, before immediately requesting a grant. A registration request consists of
an array of GrantRequest objects. Each of these objects includes the information in
Figure 13.4, with the detail on the very important CBSD deployment data provided in
Figure 13.5.
The response to a registration request basically indicates that the request was
successful or not, as well as an optional measurement request from the SAS. The SAS
also provides the CBSD ID, which is a unique identiﬁer that is used in all subsequent
interaction with the SAS. This response message is shown in Figure 13.6.
13.5.6
Grant requests
Grant requests typically follow CBSD registration. They can be made at any time, and
might be useful if a GAA channel became congested, or the device was forced off
an existing grant. A given request message can include multiple GrantRequest objects.
Each requested grant is for a speciﬁc CBSD ID and contiguous frequency range. There
is no constraint on a given CBSD requesting multiple grants in order to obtain the right
to use non-contiguous blocks of spectrum.
The grant request message structure is shown in Figure 13.7. The CBSD can respond
to a previous SAS measurement request in this response message.
A grant response provides a set of GrantResponse objects in the same sequence as
provided in the grant request message. Successful grant issuance is provided with an
Responses
Response
Inquiry Response
CBSD ID
Available Channels
Frequency Range
Channel Type
Rule Applied
High Freq.
Low Freq.
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Conditional
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance
Maximum
Object
Object
Figure 13.3 CBSD SAS inquiry response object.
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

13.5 Device Interaction with the SAS
217
expiration of the grant, as well as the heartbeat interval that is required to maintain
current authorization to use the grant. The message also provides for the provision
of a modiﬁed set of operational parameters if the SAS cannot provide a grant for the
requested parameters, but could provide a subset, or alternative, to the requested grant.
The grant request response message is shown in Figure 13.8. As in all SAS to CBSD
messages, this one can include a measurement request.
13.5.7
Continued Authorization to Operate Requests
Spectrum grants are for an extended period of time, and it may be necessary to
terminate or suspend the right to transmit at some period in the life of the grant.
This can be due to the deployment of a higher priority device, or by direct command
of the government authorities. Therefore, devices are required to periodically request
continued authorizations, or heartbeats, during the use of a grant. If a device holds
more than one grant, it must renew each grant individually, although the requests can
be included in a single message. This message can also include a measurement report,
if one was requested in the last SAS interaction. The SAS can also request the device
to provide its status and operational parameters to the SAS in the next heartbeat request.
The request for continued authorization to operate message is shown in Figure 13.9.
Required
Required
Required
Conditional
Required
Required
Required
Optional
Optional
Optional
Optional
Optional
Optional
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
See Separate Figure for
Detail on this Object
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
Optional
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Reg. Requests
Reg. Requests
Vendor
Model
Software Ver.
Hardware Ver.
Firmware Ver.
Radio Tech.
Support Spec.
User ID
User Key
FCC ID
CBSD Serial No.
Call Sign
CBSD Category
CBSD Info.
Air Interface
Installation Par.
Group ID
Group Type
Installation Par.
Meas. Cap.
Grouping
Object
Object
Figure 13.4 CBSD SAS registration request object (part 1).
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

218
Device and Network Interaction
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Installation Par.
Latitude
Longitude
Height
Height Type
Horiz. Accuracy
Vert. Accuracy
Indoor
Ant. Azimuth
Ant. Downtilt
Ant. Gain
EIRP Cap.
Beamwidth
Ant. Model
Required
Optional
Optional/Conditional
Optional/Conditional
Optional/Conditional
Optional/Conditional
Optional/Conditional
Conditional
Optional
Optional
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
Object
Object
Figure 13.5 CBSD SAS registration request object (part 2).
Reg. Response
Reg. Responses
Response
Meas. Report
Resp. Code
Resp. Msg.
Resp. Data
Conditional
Optional
CBSD ID
Required
Optional
Required
Conditional
Required
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Object
Object
Figure 13.6 CBSD SAS registration request response object.
The response to a heartbeat renewal request is a new expiration time, assuming the
authorization is continued. The SAS can also use this response to change the heartbeat
interval or request a measurement be included in the next heartbeat request. The SAS
can also provide a new set of operational parameters to the device if it is necessary
to modify power or frequency. The continued authorization message is shown in
Figure 13.10.
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

13.5 Device Interaction with the SAS
219
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Object
Measure Rpt.
Oper. Params.
Max EIRP
Freq. Range
RSSI Report
RSSI Report
Bandwidth
Measured Freq.
High Freq.
Low Freq.
CBSD ID
Requests
Grant Request
Object
Required
Required
Required
Conditional
Required
Required
Optional
Required
Required
Required
Required
Figure 13.7 CBSD SAS grant request.
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Object
Object
High Freq.
Low Freq.
Resp. Msg.
Resp. Data
Resp. Code
Freq. Range
Max EIRP
Response
Channel Type
Oper. Params.
Meas Rpt. Conf
HB Interval
Expiration Time
Grant ID
CBSD
Grant Resp.
Grant Response
Required
Required
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
Conditional
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Optional
Optional
Optional
Optional
Figure 13.8 CBSD SAS grant response.
13.5.8
Grant relinquishment requests
One of the principles of three-tier spectrum is avoid spectrum warehousing. A device
accumulating spectrum grants is a violation of this principle. Even if the authorizations
are GAA, holding spectrum grants can impact other users. One of the protection
modalities provided by a SAS is to protect higher tiers by estimating the aggregate
interference from all sources of interference from the sharing devices into the protected
receiver. The SAS cannot be aware of the instantaneous usage of any of these grants, so
is forced to assume that all grants are being used fully. A device that holds unneeded
grants is therefore improperly raising the estimate of aggregate emissions, and may
therefore preclude other users from entry into the band.
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

220
Device and Network Interaction
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Object
Object
RSSI Report
Required
Required
Required
Conditional
Conditional
Required
Required
Required
Optional
Required
Required
Bandwidth
Meas. Freq.
RSSI Report
Meas. Report
Oper. State
Grant Renew
Grant Renew
Grant ID
CBSD ID
HB Requests
HB Requests
Figure 13.9 CBSD SAS heartbeat request.
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Object
Object
Response
HB Response
HB Responses
CBSD ID
Grant ID
Xmit. Expire
Grant Expire
HB Interval
OP Params.
Msr. Rpt. Conf.
Resp. Data
Resp. Msg.
Resp. Code
Freq. Range
Max EIRP
High Freq.
Low Freq.
Required
Required
Conditional
Conditional
Optional
Optional
Optional
Optional
Optional
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Figure 13.10
CBSD SAS heartbeat response.
The grant relinquishment is therefore imposed as a precursor to any subsequent grant
request. A device can only have one grant at a time. A grant could be for multiple
channels, and even discontinuous spectrum, but it is a single grant.1 The relinquishment
is a precursor to requesting new channels. The relinquishment request message is simply
the CBSD ID and the Grant ID. The grant relinquishment request message is shown in
Figure 13.11.
1 This does not preclude one grant that is noncontiguous, nor having more than one CBSD contained in a
single “box.”
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

13.5 Device Interaction with the SAS
221
Deregister
Deregister Req.
CBSD ID
Grant ID
Required
Required
Optional
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Object
Object
Figure 13.11
CBSD SAS grant relinquish request.
Relinquish.
Responses
Response
Grant ID
Resp. Code
Resp. Msg.
Resp. Data
Optional
Optional
CBSD ID
Required
Required
Required
Required
Required
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Object
Object
Figure 13.12
CBSD SAS grant relinquish response.
Deregister
Deregister Req.
CBSD ID
Required
Required
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Object
Object
Figure 13.13
CBSD SAS deregistration request.
The grant relinquishment request response message is similarly simple, and provides
the status of each relinquishment request. This message is shown in Figure 13.12.
13.5.9
CBSD Deregistration Requests
Devices can be removed from SAS registration by deregistering them from the SAS.
This is a simple transaction of providing one or more CBSD IDs. The deregistration
request message structure is shown in Figure 13.13.
The response is a set of response codes for each of the CBSD IDs that were
deregistered. The deregistration request response message structure is shown in
Figure 13.14.
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

222
Device and Network Interaction
Deregister Resp.
Responses
Response
Resp. Code
Resp. Msg.
Resp. Data
Optional
Optional
CBSD ID
Required
Required
Required
Required
Multiple Instances
Permitted
One Instance Maximum
Object
Object
Figure 13.14
CBSD SAS deregistration response.
13.6
Extensibility of the Interface
There are likely to be several motivations for extensions of this interface framework.
• There are going to be signiﬁcant “lessons learned” from trials and early deployment
experience. These will have to be introduced into an ecosystem that will already be
populated with devices.
• There will be technology-speciﬁc extensions needed to support technology-speciﬁc
capabilities, such as coexistence methods and measurement capabilities.
• Technology-speciﬁc coexistence services will likely overload these messages with
ﬁelds providing the technology-speciﬁc coexistence parameters from CBSDs to the
service, and from the service to the CBSDs.
• Extension of the CBRS framework to additional spectrum bands and nations will
require unique information be provided to the SAS, and may require unique
information from the SAS.
As examples of the second of these drivers, at the time of this writing, only one mea-
surement request for the measurement request object (SpectrumInquiryRequest) there
is only one deﬁned measurement type, which is an LTE-speciﬁc MeasReportConﬁg,
which is deﬁned as the 3GPP RSSI measurement, and currently only has one possible
value, EutraCarrierRssi. A number of new measurement types are anticipated to be
proposed to measure path losses, temporal characteristics of interference, and other
vendor-speciﬁc methods. Similarly, the technology-speciﬁc response object, EutraCar-
rierRssiRpt could have parallel response objects to carry different measurement
results.
13.7
Suggested Reading
• The details on the message design for these interactions is provided in the WinnForum
Technical Speciﬁcation for the SAS-to-SAS Protocol. It provides the speciﬁc message
formats and semantics for these exchanges, and extends the general concepts of the
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
223
Technical Requirements A and B Level documents to the speciﬁc implementation.
The details of the interface are provided in a technical speciﬁcation [1].
References
1 Spectrum
Sharing
Committee
(SSC),
SAS
to
CBSD
Technical
Speciﬁcation,
WINNF-16-S-0016-V1.0.0 (Wireless Innovation Forum, 2016).
.014
15:02:48, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

14
CBRS SAS Requirements
14.1
Introduction to the SAS Design
This chapter will discuss the design of a speciﬁc implementation of a three-tier
admission control system; in this example, the United States (US) Citizens Broadband
Radio Service (CBRS) Spectrum Access System (SAS). The SAS discussed in this
chapter is very much an image of the Citizens Broadband Radio Service Devices
(CBSD) interface design described in the previous chapter. That chapter outlines
the operation of the SAS in responding to an access point or point-to-point end
node under the CBRS regulations. Much of this chapter parallels the interface
discussion in the previous chapter, except from the perspective of the SAS side of the
transaction.
The US implementation of a three-tier admission control system is the ﬁrst ever
speciﬁed through regulation, or implemented. The emphasis is therefore heavily biased
towards protection of the current incumbents in the band, and the assurance of no bad
outcomes as initial experience is gained in the band. It can be anticipated to mature, and
relax, some of the extremely low-risk control speciﬁcations that are currently in place.
Nevertheless, it is the best current example of such a system, and worth examination in
detail.
For this reason, the US design of the CBRS SAS should not be considered an example
that is universal. It is the best point of departure to examine the design and functionality
consequences of one set of regulations for three-tier spectrum. Where speciﬁc features
might be unique to the US regulations, they are noted in the text.
Although it is not explicit in the regulations, the presumed model of the SAS
implementation is an application on one of the large-scale public or private cloud com-
puting infrastructures, such as operated by Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft
Azure, or Google Cloud Platform (GCP). Such services provide redundant processing
and communications capacity, internet exchange services, and failover. Therefore, the
computer science related aspects of the design, such as backup, reliability, database
management, and the like will not be further discussed here, as they are speciﬁc to the
cloud service that would be selected, have been addressed in much more complex and
stressed applications, and are not unique to the SAS functionality.
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

14.3 Authentication and Protection of Data from Corruption
225
14.2
CBRS SAS Departures from the Reference Three-Tier Model
The major difference between the baseline three-tier regime and the US SAS is the lack
of a dynamic spectrum marketplace for spectrum rights. The CBRS regime provides for
annual auctions that are executed similarly to how traditional spectrum auctions have
been held. These are executed independently of the SAS, on an annual basis. The results
of this ofﬂine auction, and renewals of previous licenses, are sent to the SAS for use over
the next annual period. The SAS does implement a number of features to support a more
dynamic secondary market, which are discussed in a section later in this chapter.
14.3
Authentication and Protection of Data from Corruption
Spectrum sharing is dependent on trust between all of the parties in the sharing
regime, particularly by participants in the protected tiers. This trust has to extend
to the individual devices and systems that provide whatever protection methods are
afforded. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requires that the SAS
systems verify the certiﬁcation status of CBSDs. The choice of this mechanism
and other authentication requirements was implicitly delegated to industry deﬁnition.
The Wireless Innovation Forum (WinnForum) established industry requirements for
communications security in a Communications Security (COMSEC) [1] document that
established common methods for authentication that would be implemented by all SAS
operators and CBSD devices so that SASs, devices, and installers could interoperate
across the CBRS ecosystem.
The WinnForum established a process to approve speciﬁc Certiﬁcate Authority (CA)
organizations to issue one or more of the CBRS certiﬁcates. Individual CAs would
provide an approved process used to validate each certiﬁcate type, similar to the
extended Secure Socket Layer (SSL) certiﬁcate process. Certiﬁcates would be provided
through the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol. The certiﬁcates types that provide
the mandatory authentication are shown in Table 14.1.
In addition to these ecosystem-wide certiﬁcates, individual SAS operators who
employed Environmental Sensing Capability (ESC) networks were also required by the
WinnForum practices to issue and validate certiﬁcates. Certiﬁcates between the ESC
sensors and the SAS ensures both that the ESC status and reporting were received from
the certiﬁed ESCs, without corruption, and that the ESC only reported band occupancy
data to an authorized SAS. This precludes the ESC being used by imposters in order to
detect naval operations, or to cause interference to the naval radar by falsely reporting
no detections. There is no requirement that ESC certiﬁcates be globally recognized, or
provided through the same CA as the ecosystem certiﬁcates.
The use of the TLS protocol also provides protection of data from corruption, a
speciﬁc Part 96 requirement. Any intervening node that modiﬁed content, or any loss of
data in the messages, would be detected as a signature error, and the message would be
discarded or re-transmitted until corrected.
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

226
CBRS SAS Requirements
Table 14.1 Authentication of Part 96 CBRS ecosystem interactions.
Certiﬁcate
Usage
Protection provided
Professional
Installer
Registration of all Category
B (outdoor, or high power),
and CBSDs without position
detection
Assures that data is provided by a certiﬁed
professional installer, and that there is
non-repudiation for the data in the
transaction. Issued to professional installers
who successfully complete a compliant
installers’ curriculum, and have not had the
privileges revoked.
CBSD
Required for all CBSD
interaction with the SAS
Ensure that the SAS is interacting with an
approved CBSD and the Part 96 certiﬁed
CBSD software.
SAS
Required for all
SAS-to-SAS interaction
Ensure that SAS-to-SAS exchanges are only
performed with authorized SASs. Avoids
insertion of fraudulent data into the SAS
ecosystem through an imposter SAS
performing SAS-to-SAS synchronization, or
obtaining direct access to SAS database
content.
Required for SAS-to-CBSD
interactions
Avoid CBSD contacting or being directed by
a fraudulent SAS. Precludes unauthorized
SASs that might not implement the
regulatory protections.
The FCC did not explicitly discuss the authentication of professional installer
certiﬁcations in the regulations. However, the National Association of Broadcasters
(NAB) pointed out in several regulatory and court ﬁlings that there were obvious
location errors in the Television White Space (TVWS) databases. These were
attributed to a number of causes, including lack of discipline and accountability for
self-certiﬁed professional installers. This, it was argued, created a weakness in the
protection scheme for broadcast transmissions. To avoid this possibility, the CBRS
industry (via WinnForum) decided to enforce the cryptographic authentication and
consequent non-repudiation provided by having each professional installer demonstrate
its qualiﬁcations, register with a CA, and obtain a unique certiﬁcate.
14.4
PA Protection Requirements
Priority Access License (PAL) protection is provided by declaring a Priority Access
License Protection Area (PPA) around the deployed node. A PPA is not associated with
a census tract license, but only exists after the PAL node receives a grant. Speciﬁc
features of a PPA include:
• The service area boundary is deﬁned as the region that can receive a signal at a level
of –90 dBm/10 MHz at a height of 1.5 m.
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

14.6 Secondary Market in CBRS
227
• The registration of each device can declare a PPA, but the SAS must assure it does
not exceed the signal level deﬁned dimensions (above).
• The extent of the PPA cannot exceed the dimension of the PAL license.
• The aggregate interference permitted at this boundary, or interior, of a PAL service
area is –80 dBm/10 MHz. This is computed at a height above the ground of 1.5 m.
14.5
Naval Radar Protection Requirements
Naval radar protection in the US CBRS framework is relatively crude, as it is a ﬁxed
geographic exclusion, rather than an actual interference protection. This framework
obscures the actual location of the naval radar, at the price of likely overprotection of
the radar by excluding more area than necessary to ensure protection.
Each ESC sensor location has an associated protection zone, which represents the
region from which nodes could interfere with the radar, assuming the radar could be in
any of the possible locations from which it could be detected. The operation of devices
in any channel occupied by the radar is suspended. The devices can request another
channel from the SAS, or remain suspended.
Suspension is accomplished by waiting for the next heartbeat request from each of
the nodes in the protection area, and informing them of the suspension.1 They must
terminate their operation when their current authorization expires. Even if no heartbeat
request is received, or replied to, the device will terminate its operation when the
existing authorization expires.
The heartbeat authorization time is set to ensure that the device authorization
will expire within the time period permitted from radar detection by the ESC to
device shutdown. The regulator established time limit is 300 seconds. The device has
60 seconds to perform its shutdown after being suspended, or when not receiving a
heartbeat at all. The device could increase its warning time by requesting heartbeats
more frequently, since the authorizations are for a ﬁxed period from the reply. Asking
for a heartbeat at 150 seconds would provide at least 150 seconds of warning about
shutdown, since the authorization that was issued would be good for 300 seconds, and
would have 150 seconds remaining, even if a radar was detected on the device’s grant
frequency.
14.6
Secondary Market in CBRS
One of the major additions in the second FCC report and order [2] was inclusion of
secondary market rules to enable secondary markets as an optional feature. Some SAS
operators may choose to offer support to this market, while others may elect to not
support entry of devices under the terms of secondary licenses. In any case, it would not
preclude the SAS from providing entry of devices from the primary licensee.
1 A non-response is adequate to implement suspension. The device need not be explicitly informed.
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

228
CBRS SAS Requirements
An additional consideration in secondary licensing is the operation of a marketplace
for secondary spectrum rights. Although the FCC did not adopt the very dynamic
nano-market that the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
(PCAST) proposed, the secondary market provides an opportunity to create such
markets with whatever spectrum rights PAL holders are willing to submit for secondary
market access. This is essentially a two-sided market. The market-maker sells spectrum
access to device operators that require protection by transferring rights from unused
PALs to temporary holders. Since the market has not yet appeared, we have no sense
of how it will emerge; what are time scales in which spectrum will be offered; what
premium licensees will receive (if any); whether they will be used for sustained
operation, or as “gap ﬁllers”; and other details that will emerge as operators gain
experience.
Execution of the SAS responsibilities for devices registered under a secondary license
is very similar to the process for a PAL. The secondary registration cannot conﬂict with a
PPA already registered, so the SAS is not only protecting a PAL holder against General
Authorized Access (GAA) uses, it is protecting the PAL holder against interference
from its own sub-licensee. A PAL holder can waive protection of its own devices from
its own devices, as in a dense Long-Term Evolution (LTE), since it is assumed that
the interference management functions of the Radio Resource Management (RRM)
will manage this contention. In traditional secondary markets, the licensee has the
responsibility to validate the interference impact of the secondary usage it is licensing.
However, in the case of the CBRS secondary users, the FCC has allocated protection to
the SAS, rather than the licensee.
14.7
Transparency and Visibility Requirements, and
SAS-to-SAS Coordination
Communications providers (TELCOs) are historically very private about their infras-
tructure, access point hosting arrangements, siting, and vulnerabilities. Users of these
services are private about their network choices, and the detailed data regarding its
usage. Yet, spectrum sharing is dependent on awareness of all of the location, operation,
usage, and sensitivities of the devices in the band. These are inherently conﬂicting
objectives. In implementing the US rules, this subject was highly contentious. Beyond
the minimum regulatory requirements, the implementation of the coexistence service
requires even more awareness of device position and operating characteristics.
We consider the requirement for transparency as serving several purposes within the
ecosystem:
Protection One of the key purposes of exchanging registration and grant data is to
assure that the protection mission of the SAS is met. Information on all CBRS
entities is required in order to compute aggregate interference into protected nodes,
and information regarding any additional protected nodes (such as PAL entries) must
be added to the list of nodes protected locations.
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

14.7 Transparency and Visibility Requirements
229
Coexistence Determination of potentially interfering nodes, and plans for mitigating
or eliminating this interference, require precise knowledge of node positioning.
Vertical placement within a building, at least as it relates to ﬂoor levels, is critical
in three-dimensional deployments, as well. Not only is the emission Power Spectral
Density (PSD) essential, but fairly granular knowledge of the capability of the
node to implement coexistence techniques, such as alignment of timing, allocation
of sub-channels, sensing of the channel occupancy, or other technology-speciﬁc
features is also required.
Diagnostics Protected and unprotected users encounter system issues often during the
operation of a communications or sensor system, and interference is one of the
ﬁrst causes to be considered. In order to meaningfully consider whether there is a
possibility of interference, the operator needs to know what devices are present that
could be the cause of the disruption. In the case of CBRS, this could be a peer node, a
protected CBRS node, a radar, a Fixed Satellite Service (FSS) site, or protected Part
90 (wireless Internet service provider (WISP) or Utility) operator. When competitive
SAS operators are present, it is important that all SASs have sufﬁcient visibility of
all other SAS-managed nodes, in order to support protected user diagnosis without
forcing these users to go to each SAS operator individually.
Resolution Knowledge of node positions is critical to resolving interference issues that
are shown to arise after whatever diagnostic process in use is executed. At this point,
resolution is a matter between the SAS operator, the protected tier user, and the owner
of the device causing interference.
To understand the information exchange requirements, the following taxonomy of
exchangeable information is useful.
Public The regulatory policy mandates that some information regarding licenses be
made public. In the case of the CBRS band, the FCC mandates that location, device
characteristics, grant information, and related data be public. The release of this
public data was required to have personally identiﬁable information obscured for
individual privacy. This information is required to be exchanged without limitations.
SAS-Enabling Information that is not required to be public, but is needed by other SAS
operators to implement the regulatory requirements for the SAS. Exchange of this
information is mandatory, but may be provided with limitations on use for purposes
other than SAS operation. For example, the SAS may provide other SAS operators
with the name of the device owner, but the other SAS operators would be prohibited
from using this contact information for any other purpose than SAS operation, such
as marketing their services to these device owners, seeking competitive advantage,
or further distributing it.
Proprietary SAS operators will have contractual arrangements with device operators.
Device operators will have technical operating data on how they have conﬁgured
their physical and Media Access Layer (MAC) layers, and may have actual usage
statistics. This data is not required for the baseline functions of a SAS, and therefore
is not required to be exchanged. However, cooperation between SAS operations may
be enhanced by the shared access to this information, and SAS operators are free
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

230
CBRS SAS Requirements
to make arrangements to exchange this information with other SASs under bilateral
agreements. The device owner or user may also be a party to these agreements, in
addition to the SAS operator. An example of this is information on network usage
that is used by the coexistence layer, if present.
14.8
Implementation of SAS Synchronization
The information in the previous section is especially signiﬁcant when one considers a
multi-SAS regime. Multiple SAS operators are certainly desirable from a competition
point of view. It provides some level of cost control, increases the likelihood of
continued availability of SAS services, and creates incentives for innovation and cost
reduction on the part of the SAS operator(s). However, it does require some mechanism
of coordination between SAS operators authorized to make assignments that could
either interfere with each other, or aggregate to interfere with other protected parties.
Several approaches to synchronizing SAS operations emerged in the CBRS SAS
design process, but they ﬁt broadly into three classes:
Truth SAS operators exchange the identical, interference-related information used in
the registration and grant transactions. This includes the exact location of the node
(latitude, longitude, and elevation), antenna data, device class, installer identiﬁcation
(if present), and the speciﬁcs of the eventual grant. The receiving SAS can therefore
apply the same processes it used to admit its own nodes to determine the aggregation
impacts of the nodes provided by the interfacing SAS. Nodes synchronized, or nodes
admitted, are treated symmetrically.
Abstracted It was proposed that SAS operators could “hide” the actual network’s
deployments by abstracting the aggregate emissions and protection boundaries (the
PPA in CBRS terminology) and only provide this abstraction to other SAS operators.
The most natural abstraction model is a “heat map” of points outside of the PPA
boundaries, supplemented by speciﬁc records required to address directionality.
Allocation SAS operators agree on an allocation of interference into all protected
nodes, and to new protected nodes as they enter. Each SAS would manage within its
own allocation of interference, with no coordination necessary. Although this model
was not fully developed, one could imagine an extension to the interfaces that created
a market for interference rights between the SAS operators as market-makers for
their customers. This could essentially form a two-sided market, with SAS operators
acting as the middle agent.
There is no question that the approach of exchanging truth data is sufﬁcient to assure
synchronization. This is the same data that the original SAS used to perform the analysis
itself. The adequacy of the abstraction approach is more complex, largely due to the
difﬁculties introduced by the directionality of both receive and transmit antennas.2
2 In reading this, the reader is informed that the author was an opponent of introducing any abstractions
into the synchronization model, due to his belief that it unnecessarily complicated the SAS, violated the
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

14.9 Impacts of SAS Differentiation
231
Consideration of a ﬁxed allocation between SASs was not pursued due to concerns
that such agreements might constitute an allocation of the market, since, on a large scale,
there is a monotonic relationship between the number of nodes that can be registered
and the allocation of interference. This approach would reduce competitive pressures
and advantages in areas of dense spectrum usage, where the interference ceilings were
a constraint.
Another driver for the full disclosure of truth data is in the necessity for very detailed
data to support the coexistence of peer devices. The FCC established an arbitrary
interference limit at the boundary of a PPA, and deﬁned that it was determined at a
height of 1.6 m above ground level. This is reasonable from a regulatory perspective,
but it is not a sufﬁcient framework for coexistence. Small cell, or Access Point (AP)
focused bands will likely have their densest deployment occur vertically, in ofﬁces and
Multi-Dwelling Unit (MDU) buildings. Interference levels at the street height (where
PPAs are determined) and vertically above the clutter may be (and are likely to be) very
different. This requires much more precise data than required for protecting the arbitrary
contour of a PPA.
While the USA went down a path of full disclosure of registration data, there is no
reason that these alternatives could not be pursued in other situations.
The eventual SAS-to-SAS synchronization design is provided in WinnForum
documentation. The details of that interface’s implementation will not be discussed
here. It essentially serializes all of the registration and related data to a set of JavaScript
Object Notation (JSON) objects. SAS synchronization provides for exchange of public,
private and proprietary data, subject to bilateral agreements between the synchronizing
SAS operators, and customers of the providing SAS. The data blocks for exchange are
shown in Table 14.2.
14.9
Impacts of SAS Differentiation
The logical argument that SAS differentiation is an acceptable and consistent option was
provided in Section 8.8. In this section, we consider the impact of SAS differentiation
on the implementation of SAS implementations. Some general principles apply:
• Collaborating SAS operators must not be forced to accept computations that are
dependent on path loss calculations. For example, this would preclude the “heat map”
approach of SAS coordination, since it would not provide the details needed by the
receiving SAS to apply its own models.
• It is desirable that SASs using more than the least sophisticated model inform other
SASs of their path loss determination for nearby nodes that receive protection from
aggregate interference for nodes they enter. Other SASs can compute their own path
loss estimate and select the highest of the two. This avoids excessively penalizing
principle of shared spectrum transparency, and limited the ability to provide device coexistence as the
band becomes more crowded. It is included in this book due to it being an option that was proposed by a
number of participants in the standards process, and therefore should be considered by other regimes.
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

232
CBRS SAS Requirements
Table 14.2 SAS-to-SAS synchronization exchange.
Data Record
Treatment
Usage
SAS Administrator
Record
Public
SAS identiﬁcation, point of contact, public
key(s).
ESC Administrator
Record
Proprietary
ESC naming and operator identiﬁcation. Only
exchanged if parties have bilateral agreement
to share ESC data.
ESC Sensor Locations
SAS Essential
or Proprietary
ESC Siting and Installation data only
exchanged if: (1) parties have bilateral
agreement to share ESC data, or (2) SAS
operators require that the ESC locations be
protected from emissions from CBSD
deployments.
CBSD Registration
Record
Public, SAS
Essential, or
Proprietary
Data deﬁned by the FCC is public. CBSD
installation parameters and grant information
(e.g., BW, power, etc.) are SAS Essential.
Usage, network speciﬁc or extensions beyond
Part 96 protections are proprietary.
CBSD Operator Record
Proprietary
Data regarding interconnection of CBSDs
such as proxy arrangements not related to
interference. Exchanged under restrictions,
and under mutual agreements, for the
purposes of scenarios such as exception
handling, etc. Includes Mobile Network
Operators (MNO), Mobile System
Operator (MSO) or neutral hosts, or enterprise
identity, as examples.
CBSD Measurement
Record
Proprietary
Any measurements of interference, signal or
other signal levels.
Domain Proxy
Registration Record(s)
Proprietary
Similar to CBSD Operator record, providing
proxy ownership data on the network
operators. Exchanged under restrictions, and
under mutual agreements, for the purposes of
scenarios such as exception handling, etc.
Includes Mobile Network Operators (MNO),
Mobile System Operator (MSO) or neutral
hosts, or enterprise identity, as examples.
Professional Installer
Record
Proprietary
Exchanged under restrictions, and mutual
agreements, for the purposes of scenarios
such as exception handling, etc. Association
of professional installer with a given CBSD
record is included in the CBSD registration
data.
PAL Census Tracts
Area
Public
All PPAs must be declared to other SASs.
Secondary Market
License
Agreement (SMLA)
Proprietary,
licensee can
determine
Must be exchanged if secondary licensee
might use a different SAS operator than the
primary license holder is using so they can
process the possible conﬂict in the PAL PPA.
PPA
Public
All PPAs must be declared to other SASs to
ensure protection.
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
233
SAS with less sophisticated algorithms. Otherwise, a 10 dB difference in propagation
loss estimates could result in admissions by the high performance SAS, effectively
precluding less sophisticated SASs from making any assignments at all, even though
adequate interference margin might be present.
• The documentation on all non-baseline propagation models should be publicly
available for both science validation, and challenges to its application.
A differentiated SAS environment would have to add a record type to Table 14.2
to provide propagation loss estimates to a list of nodes with propagation less than a
certain threshold. SAS exchange would have the exchange of this data to be optional, as
determined by the receiving SAS.
14.10
Suggested Reading
• The FCC Report and Orders [2, 3] for the CBRS band are clearly one of the major
references in the subject, and deﬁne in detail aspects of how this ﬁrst admission
control system must operate.
• The WinnForum has developed a set of baseline and derived requirements for the SAS
required by the FCC regulations. Current versions of these documents are available
from the Forum web site [1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8].
• The process to obtain regulatory authority to operate an approved SAS must disclose
many of the design and operating policies of the proposed SAS systems. These
documents, as well as the entire certiﬁcation proceeding, are publicly available,
and instructive in how different organizations chose to implement the necessary
techniques.
References
1 Spectrum Sharing Committee (SSC), CBRS Communications Security Technical Speciﬁcation,
1st edn (Wireless Innovation Forum, 2016).
2 Federal Communications Commission, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to
Commercial Operation in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354 (2016). https://apps.
fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
3 ——, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to Commercial Operation in the
3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354, Order on Reconsideration and Second Report and
Order (2016). https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
4 Spectrum Sharing Committee (SSC), CBRS Operational Security Technical Speciﬁcation,
WINNF-15-S-0071-V1.0.0 (Wireless Innovation Forum, 2016).
5 ——, CBRS Operational and Functional Requirements, WINNF-15-S-0112 (Wireless Innova-
tion Forum, 2016).
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

234
CBRS SAS Requirements
6 ——, SAS–SAS Protocol Technical Speciﬁcation, WINNF-16-S-0096-V1.0.0 (Wireless Inno-
vation Forum, 2016).
7 ——, SAS to CBSD Technical Speciﬁcation, WINNF-16-S-0016-V1.0.0 (Wireless Innovation
Forum, 2016).
8 ——, Spectrum Access System Requirements (Wireless Innovation Forum, 2016).
.015
15:02:53, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Part VI
Future Bands, Network
Services, Business Models,
and Technology
15:05:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

15:05:33, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

15
Potential Services and
Business Models Enabled by
Three-Tier Spectrum
15.1
Introduction
Although much of the emphasis in the discussion of three-tier has been focused
on spectrum sharing, the innovation will arise from a shared band and a shared
technology that is usable by both traditional mobile operators, and non-operators, such
as venues, enterprises, and even residences. Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi) created a common
“Lingua Franca” among a wide range of deployers (mobile operators, residences,
enterprises, venues, etc.), but the technology partitioned service quality, security,
assured connectivity, and other highly desirable, and often necessary features, Assured
quality was only available (or at least promised) through mobile operator technology
and services. The use of the three-tier common band removes this partitioning between
services, and can enable all wireless suppliers to offer identical technology, and
equivalent, or differentiated, services.
Spectrum policy discussions tend to focus on the impact of spectrum regimes on
band usage and technology. It is perhaps even more important to examine the impact of
spectrum policy on the cycle of innovation. Wireless is facing a challenge to double
bandwidth every year. Yet the current architecture took from ﬁve years to decades
to deploy, little new spectrum is available, and the technology is approaching the
theoretical link capacity asymptotically. In situations where linear advances are not
adequate, innovation is essential.
From an economic perspective, we have learned certain truths. One of them is that
domestic markets strongly support, and often lead to, leadership in international markets.
Europe led national deployment of Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM),
and ended up dominating handsets for a decade. The United States of America (USA)
created the ﬁrst unlicensed band, and US companies dominate much of the Wi-Fi
industry.
This section will have an emphasis on mobile wireless services, since this is the
major source of new spectrum demand. However, the same rationales as presented here
should be applicable to new spectrum uses that emerge in the “post-cellular” world, as
that evolves! This includes wireless ﬁxed services, as well as fully integrated wireless
ﬁxed/mobile services, such as contemplated in 5G.
.016
15:04:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

238
Potential Services and Business Models
15.2
Opportunities Introduced by Common Shared Spectrum
The whole effort of developing a three-tier spectrum structure would not have as much
value if it did not create new opportunities, both to extend current enterprises and to
create new ones. In this chapter, we investigate the new opportunities that can emerge
due to the availability of three-tier spectrum. The focus will be on the more disruptive
opportunities that may address some of the structural issues with existing wireless
services, such as cost, coverage, and competition.
One of the fundamental problems with the wireless ecosystem is the difﬁculty in
entering the industry and offering a unique technological or service model product.
Traditionally, the only viable wireless enterprises were those that had dedicated,
exclusive spectrum access that in many countries is only obtainable through the
spectrum auction process. This process is incredibly venture- or startup-unfriendly. In
the USA, the National Broadband Plan [1] provides a history of spectrum auctions that
shows the time from identifying spectrum for use, to the ability to actually use the
spectrum was a delay of 8.4 years. A delay of 8.4 years hardly supports the “innovation
economy” that is heralded as the future.
We need to deﬁne what scalable entry means for a spectrum regime. The deﬁnition
applied here is that the regime enables spectrum access at costs and availability that are
near linear with the extent of spectrum access obtained, in terms of frequency range,
geographic coverage, and duration of rights. The acquisition of these rights through
scalable means should not be at a signiﬁcant cost disadvantage over the less scalable
mechanisms.
An example best demonstrates why spectrum scalability is enabling to innovation in
spectrum-dependent services. We consider a startup venture that desires to experiment
with the market acceptance of a new technology. In the current exclusive-use paradigm,
with long-term licensing, the company would have to purchase perpetually renewable
rights throughout its potential deployment area in auctions. Or the company could
purchase the perpetual rights to a limited area, but would then have to hope another
auction would come along for compatible spectrum, and then bid in that auction in
order to deploy their technology. This is an unattractive investment, regardless of the
technology:
• At most times, no spectrum is available for auction at any price.
• If an auction was pending, it would typically require massive amounts of capital
to purchase exclusive spectrum licenses. This capital investment likely dwarfs the
expenses of developing and deploying the technology at small scale.
• Auctioned spectrum typically has to be cleared before use, a process that takes from
5 to 10 years typically.
• If the concept is successful, there is no assured method to expand it in current or
new markets with additional spectrum. Expansion of the product would depend on
regulatory action, not market acceptance.
In the three-tier regime, the same business plan might require no spectrum acquisition
at all (if operated in General Authorized Access (GAA)), but at the most would require
.016
15:04:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

15.3 Venture Funding Friendly Innovation
239
only a one year Priority Access License (PAL) auction success in whatever geographic
areas the initial trial was to occur in. After that, the footprint could be expanded at will
annually, into only those areas where operation would be initiated within each auction
interval. If the business plan was not successful, the spectrum cost would likely have
been a small consumer of resources. If the plan works, the company is set to acquire
protected spectrum in whatever regions it wishes to operate.
Some attributes of a regime that supports scalable entry include:
• There is no necessity to acquire more spectrum rights than necessary because they
will not (or might not) be available in the future.
• Spectrum rights can be acquired granularly for the range of time when they are
required. An innovation, new market, or new business model that cannot have its
deployment footprint expanded has limited value, and acquiring all of the necessary
rights in advance will limit consideration to only low risk, and thus less innovative,
opportunities. Longer term arrangements, such as perpetual right of renewal, inﬂate
the costs and constitute barriers to entry.
• Spectrum rights can be acquired that are very granular in space. Forcing large areas
to be licensed raises costs and is a barrier to entry.
• Spectrum rights can be acquired that are very granular in frequency. Deployments
must be able to start with the minimal spectrum needed, but be able to compete with
other uses to acquire spectrum rights as market demand dictates.
Scalable entry removed the necessity for regulators to judge the best use of spectrum.
Instead of predicting market needs, the markets can be allowed to form, verify the
existence of demand and the degree of cost elasticity, and then naturally cannibalize
less popular (as measured in ability to maintain spectrum rights) services, displacing
them in the spectrum.
With scalable entry, there is less need for us to consider the possible markets that
might evolve in a three-tier spectrum regime. However, to justify the disruption that
this regime might be considered to cause, it is worthwhile to examine some of the new
models that are already being pursued, or seriously contemplated.
15.3
Venture Funding Friendly Innovation
Venture capital funding has been a primary driver for many of the disruptive
technologies that have arisen in the communications, networking, and applications
markets. To see continued innovation, it is important that the spectrum regime enable
innovation to occur with a ﬁnancial pace that matches how new ventures are funded,
and roll out innovations to the marketplace. Venture funded efforts do not go full scale
at the start. They do not invest billions into purchasing non-expendable resources, such
as building a factory, or an ofﬁce building. Similarly, investing the bulk of the capital
into spectrum is not attractive and inherently limits innovation in any product that is
spectrum access dependent.
.016
15:04:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

240
Potential Services and Business Models
The venture capital funding proﬁle requires a scalable process for initially rolling out
and market testing a service. This is the rationale for arguing for a spectrum regime that
is itself, scalable. If we want an innovation economy, we want spectrum to not constrain
the types of innovation that can be explored. This is not to say that spectrum should be
free or not at a market rate, but the access to the spectrum must be ﬂexible and scalable.
15.4
Private Network Opportunity
Traditionally, network technology, business models, and deployment methods are
partitioned between unlicensed and exclusively licensed models. Unlicensed spectrum
currently is dominated by self-deployed Wi-Fi networks that are rarely monetized.
Exclusive use spectrum is held by traditional Mobile Network Operators (MNO)
service providers, uses Third-Generation Partnership (3GPP) technologies, such as
Long-Term Evolution (LTE), and is heavily monetized. While MNOs have deployed
some unlicensed Wi-Fi, they have not generally monetized these deployments, or fully
integrated them into their service architecture. Spectrum has partitioned the technology
and business models arbitrarily, even when the technology objectives are very
similar.
One of the unique aspects of three-tier spectrum regimes is that they provide spectrum
bands that are accessible to any organization, and under a wide range of licensing
terms. Technologies developed by any community in this band become available to
all communities that can access the band. In the current mix of technologies, this would
provide the ability for a MNO to acquire protection rights for a Wi-Fi network, and
for an individual enterprise, venue owner, or even residence owner, to deploy a private
LTE network. Perhaps more important, they would be assured of the right to acquire
protection, even if this need was unlikely to actually occur.
In the US Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS), one (at least initial) emphasis
has been on making Time Division Long Term Evolution (TD-LTE) available for
enterprise and venue operation as private networks, supplementing traditional Wi-Fi
applications. The author’s mantra to small cell suppliers has been to ask “Would you
rather sell ten thousand boxes to a carrier, or ten million to enterprises?1 The fact that
the CBRS band was already a 3GPP standard2 band made the rapid development of
products possible. The US regulations required that all devices in the band cover the
full range of the band, so equipment sold for carrier use would inherently operate with
the private networks, so long as authentication was provided.
One could imagine a hospital that used a common network technology to integrate
secure medical telemetry and internal paging, and to offer cellular services to visitors,
charged back to their MNO or Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO). Within the
building, there might be no interference from external uses, due to the spatial offset of
the building, and the path loss in the walls and interior, so (assuming the protection
1 As an example, the International Wireless Communications Expo (IWCE) Dynamic Spectrum
Summit [2].
2 The CBRS band overlaps the upper portion of the 3GPP Band 42, and the lower portion of band 43.
.016
15:04:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

15.5 Neutral Host Services in Common Spectrum
241
models recognized scatter loss), the hospital could use most, if not all, of the sharable
spectrum. Because a mobile Access Point (AP) is not permitted, they could ensure that
no other devices were on these frequencies, due to their control over the physical space.
At higher frequencies, such as above 3 GHz, physical control over a space is a more
meaningful consideration than spectrum rights in that space.
The same model can be used for any number of applications where a single entity
controls the physical placement of nodes. Even if a protected-tier license exists in the
area, it cannot deploy in the spaces to which it has no access. Therefore, the lower-tier
spectrum usage in many locations is unconstrained by the existence of the protected
license. Sports venues, reﬁneries, factories, shopping centers, race tracks, and other
venues all have this attribute.
A ﬁnal consideration is that the consumer mobile equipment is a mass market,
with highly competitive, commodity-priced products. Wi-Fi equipment has similar cost
pressure, due to high volume supporting many competitive options, and openness of
standards. Cellular infrastructure, on the other hand suffers from lower-volume, closed
management protocols, and much less price competition. The creation of a market
that both the operator and non-operator communities supports will beneﬁt operators
in creating volume, and beneﬁt non-operators in creating opportunities for a much
wider range of technology and infrastructure options. Increased volume and more open
markets will be more supportive of innovation and the entry of new concepts, again
beneﬁting operators.
15.5
Neutral Host Services in Common Spectrum
Neutral host services where one network can serve multiple MNO services can become
an attractive opportunity to reduce duplication of network resources, particularly
indoors, or in venues with limited accessibility for MNO deployments. In most cases,
what are proffered as neutral host systems are really a collection of operator-speciﬁc
Radio Frequency (RF) systems, operating in exclusive spectrum, and sharing backhaul
and some of the infrastructure.
We might consider these multiple RF systems to be “aggregated host,” rather than
neutral host. True neutral host operation is not possible in spectrum that is exclusively
licensed to a single operator, and may have limited coverage in other MNO handsets.
True neutral host would not have proprietary MNO or MVNO network control over the
access service, and could be ﬂexibly utilized by any operator without explicit licensing
of exclusive spectrum from the supported operator. At the same time that spectrum
limits the implementation of true neutral host services, the growth in user bandwidth
demand has continued unabated, and is particularly focused on indoor environments
that are not served well by traditional outdoor operator solutions. To provide the dense,
indoor networks needed to address this demand, several conditions must be met:
• Deployments must be simpliﬁed and inherently operable on all carriers, without
complex carrier relationships.
.016
15:04:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

242
Potential Services and Business Models
• The costs of deployment should be recoverable from the carriers whose trafﬁc is
ofﬂoaded by the systems. It is unreasonable for the carriers to shift the burden for
providing solutions to this bandwidth demand onto the owners of interior spaces
without compensation, such as Distributed Antenna System (DAS) solutions.
• The integration of neutral host services into an existing Information Technology (IT)
structure should be scalable and consistent with the rest of the IT infrastructure, and
maximally leverage wiring, backhaul, and layer 3 services. Dark ﬁber, and unique
layer 2 interconnects are cost and complexity drivers.
We can consider this in contrast to the obviously competitive technology DAS. For
those not familiar with it, DAS is a network of antennas connected to a common RF
section. The DAS system divides its power across the many antennas, so that it creates
high-reliability coverage, but has the minimal radiation out of the local environment,
and thus minimizes impact on any macrocell usage of the same channels. Some issues
with DAS that we will consider include:
1. DAS must operate on the carrier’s exclusively licensed spectrum. Therefore, any
DAS deployment is carrier-speciﬁc,3 so the DAS installation is effectively the
carrier’s, not the DAS owner’s.
2. Many DAS are deployed to improve the wireless experience in a building, and are
installed by building owners or tenants as a service to building occupants. Typically,
they are not reimbursed for this cost, and cannot collect revenue from the usage of the
DAS. Building owners have little incentive to deploy this capacity. The penetration
of DAS indoors is very low.
3. The purpose of a DAS is to improve coverage, not capacity. The multiple antennas
all operate as one site, and are not accretive of capacity. No matter how many DAS
antenna heads are present, the aggregate capacity is the same, since they are just one
cell site, regardless of antenna count.
4. DAS cable signaling from the RF section is unique to the DAS system, and not
consistent with the cabling, Ethernet, and Internet Protocol (IP) networking in a
typical building or enterprise.
By contrast, the same deployment made using independent small cells resolves many
of these issues. By comparison with the previous list:
1. The private network need not operate on spectrum that is licensed to a carrier. As
such, the owner of the network is free to operate, manage, and use the network in any
manner they desire. The network can be internal to the enterprise security perimeter.
2. Each small cell AP deployed provides additional bandwidth. Assuming the access
points are not interfering, the aggregate bandwidth is linear with the number of
access points. Independent AP devices provide capacity; DAS provides coverage.
Such deployments may have so much physical layer connectivity that they are
backaul-limited, even with multi-gigabit ﬁber connectivity.
3 Some DAS deployments are multi-carrier, but this is essentially multiple RF access systems in one
package.
.016
15:04:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

15.6 Third-Party Ofﬂoad Opportunity
243
3. The private network is free to make any ﬁnancial arrangements it wishes to make, and
can make them with any of the possible MNO or MVNO that offers to make such
arrangements attractive. There is no coupling of spectrum use and network charging.
4. The backhaul of the network operates over conventional IP and ethernet networks, so
the private network can be expanded and scaled as needed using the same network
installation as used for all of the other enterprise IT services. Deploying additional
small cells is similar to deploying additional Wi-Fi AP devices.
There are several models for how neutral host systems might be operated. They might
be deployed directly by the MNO, selectively by an MVNO, or through private networks
operated by building owners and tenants. The next section discusses this last option.
15.6
Third-Party Ofﬂoad Opportunity
The advent of true neutral host services, and the ability to deploy wireless technology
that is scalable and based on low cost, is a recent opportunity. It made sense for
wireless carriers to be the providers for outdoor wireless services. There was no
existing infrastructure available to support this deployment. New towers, backhaul,
power sources, and equipment were required, so no one community was better suited to
perform this deployment.
When we consider indoor deployment, most of these conditions do not apply. The
owner and tenants of building space have superior access to the premises; they already
have had to invest in backhaul and power for their own operations and use, and they
have built out cabling plants and internal connectivity solutions throughout their interior
spaces. The marginal cost of adding an LTE band to an existing Wi-Fi deployment is
low, particularly compared to standalone deployment of an LTE small cell network.
There is reason to believe that a decentralized architecture for providing indoor
coverage is an attractive option that can be enabled by three-tier spectrum. The capital
cost per unit of capacity for such deployment should be much less than macro services
or a DAS alternative. It is true that such a network may not have the same reliability or
Quality of Service (QoS) of a carrier standards deployment but there are several reasons
why this may be less of a concern:
• This network is an ofﬂoad network, and there is likely still a macro cell network that
can back up the ofﬂoad network in the case of localized outages. As more trafﬁc is
diverted to the ofﬂoad network, macro capacity may be a surplus, and available as
backup to the localized networks Reliability investment can be gauged to the degree
of macro and small cell overlap.
• Dense deployment within a given locale will typically have overlapping coverage,
since there is sufﬁcient spectrum to not require spacing appropriate to the reuse of
one channel.
• The same model can also create abundance of access, and thus localized redundancy
between peer providers.
.016
15:04:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

244
Potential Services and Business Models
• Trafﬁc growth of wireless systems is tied to Internet access, not conventional voice.
This trafﬁc is more tolerant of disruption and lower QoS than the voice application
that drove the speciﬁcations for current wireless systems.
15.7
Potential Enhancements to Three-Tier Concept to
Increase Innovation Friendliness
It is worth considering what enhancements could be made to the three-tier regime
that would make it even more effective in encouraging innovation in wireless- and
spectrum-dependent services, business models, and technology. There has been no
meaningful experience with this regime, so no “lessons learned” have appeared,
therefore the topics to follow are largely speculative.
One obvious solution is to lower the cost of spectrum, but that would only distort the
market towards innovations that could not scale once they were burdened with the full
market prince of the spectrum they required. The objective should be to assure that the
small unit cost of spectrum is not appreciably greater than “bulk” purchases of spectrum
rights.
An effective secondary model for spectrum is not precluded by the three-tier model,
but it is not mandated either. Integration of a secondary market could result in even
more ﬂexible spectrum access as very short-term dynamics, and localization, could be
exploited, and spectrum licenses that were no longer required, or completely utilized,
could be monetized. This would enable them to retain an asset value for the duration of
their validity.
A secondary market for spectrum would reduce the risk of acquiring licenses that
would be excessive if the innovation or market was abandoned. It might provide a level
of liquidity that can be used to reduce the cost of deployments by utilizing “distressed”
secondary-market spectrum at rates below the market price.
It can be argued that some protected tier 1 user’s are not effective uses of the spectrum.
In effect, the opportunity cost of their use is greater than the value of the service they
are providing. While useful to the operators of the incumbent systems in the spectrum,
they fail to fully capture the opportunity cost of that spectrum to other applications.
For example, in the USA there are several dozen legacy Fixed Satellite Service (FSS)
sites below 3 700 MHz. These are limited by regulation to point-to-point services, so
are less than the optimal use of satellite services, as the service they are providing is
one that ﬁber-optic can provide, without the spectrum opportunity cost. However, the
spectrum resource is free to them, and a ﬁber alternative would have cost, so they have
no incentive to migrate technologies. Such a situation challenges us to ﬁnd a spectrum
regime that beneﬁts both the incumbent user, and the community sharing the spectrum.
In this case, the FSS operators might beneﬁt from a ﬁber solution. It would free up
considerable square miles of spectrum usage; enough to position thousands of small
cells. However if one party could make a deal with the FSS operator to provide them
with the ﬁber alternative, that party would receive no more consideration in the use of
the spectrum than any other user of the band. Therefore, no single party has an incentive
.016
15:04:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
245
to make such an arrangement, even though the beneﬁts overall would be signiﬁcant, and
beneﬁcial, for all involved.
It may be that a right of interference protection needs to be made transferable so that
legacy uses can be “bought” out of the spectrum. Secondary markets have focused on
the transfer of a “Right to Transmit,” but an equally important right to monetize and
transfer is the “Right to Receive.” The three-tier framework provides an exceptional
framework to enable this to occur on a case-by-case (rather than band-by-band) basis.
The US Incentive Auction is a special case of such a rights transfer, although it was for
transmission rights, rather than receive-only rights.
The three-tier framework provides a unique mechanism to clear spectrum on an
incumbent-by-incumbent basis. There is no need to clear entire bands. As speciﬁc
incumbents leave the spectrum, their spectrum footprint can be “returned” to the SAS
and then issued to new users. This process can be adjusted to the life cycle of the
systems, to economic drivers, private investment, or any other mechanism. Different
mechanisms can be even used for different incumbent uses.
15.8
Suggested Reading
• The author has done a number of talks in industry seminars in order to describe the
opportunity that the new band would create for innovation and new markets [2].
• Although the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST)
report [3] did not want to threaten existing interests, it did hint on the types of
innovation that could be encouraged by the three-tier regime, and argued for spectrum
policies that were explicitly focused on promoting innovation.
References
1 Federal Communications Commission, Connecting America: The National Broadband Plan
(2010). http://download.broadband.gov/plan/national-broadband-plan.pdf.
2 P. F. Marshall, History and opportunities of 3.5 GHz, three tier spectrum. Video in International
Wireless Communications Expo (IWCE) Dynamic Spectrum Summit (2016). www.youtube.
com/watch?v=Ky1_SVDDang.
3 President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, Report to the President: Realizing
the Full Potential of Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth (Executive Ofﬁce
of the President (EOP), Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), 2012). http://
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/microsites/ostp/pcast-stem-ed-ﬁnal.pdf.
.016
15:04:44, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

16
Candidate Incumbent Bands
for Three-Tier Spectrum
Sharing
16.1
Introduction
This chapter will survey a number of spectrum bands for their applicability to the
three-tier spectrum sharing regime developed earlier in this book, and in terms of the
incumbent usage. Some of the bands are not apparent candidates for sharing, but are
included for purposes of discussion, and to demonstrate methodology.
The complexity of a generalized approach to three-tier spectrum is apparent when
one considers the balkanized nature of primary and secondary national spectrum
assignments. The National Telecommunications and Information Agency (NTIA) map
of these assignments [1] in the United States of America (USA) is shown in Figure 16.1.
Although it is hard to read in this book’s reduced, gray-scale printing, the complexity
of the chart, the division of spectrum into uniquely managed spectrum slivers, and the
range of uses of most of the individual frequencies is readily apparent. Undoing this
legacy of partitioning and stacking of ﬁxed rights to spectrum access is not a trivial
challenge, particularly when, in most cases, the existing structure must continue to
operate, even in the presence of the new regime.
Because of the myriad of unique bands, and primary/secondary/tertiary usage permu-
tations, the discussion in this chapter will initially focus mostly on the characteristics of
different allocation categories and usage, rather than speciﬁc bands. With the discussion
of speciﬁc sharing and protection constraints completed, the results will then be mapped
to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) international allocations.
Even with this structure, individual National Regulatory Authority (NRA) decisions
have established unique national primary and secondary allocations in many bands,
so the results of this chapter must be further reconciled with national practices. For
example, many countries do not use several of these allocation types at all. International
agreement on reallocation may not be possible, but might not be required for action by
individual nations, so long as not interfering with international commitments.
16.2
Evaluation Criteria for Considering Opportunities for
Three-Tier Spectrum
It is necessary to have a scientiﬁc, evidence-based process to determine what bands
are good candidates for three-tier spectrum, and which ones are really unsuited to such
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

16.2 Evaluation Criteria for Considering Opportunity
247
Figure 16.1 2016 US spectrum allocation map (from NTIA [1]).
a regime. Spectrum politics often obscures the fundamental technical issues, and the
basis and outcomes of decision-making are not always driven by the scientiﬁc reality,
unfortunately.
The following criteria will be used to consider the entire set of ITU deﬁned primary
allocations.
Incumbent Awareness The three-tier regime is dependent on accurate awareness of
the primary protected incumbents, as well as the participants in the three-tier
regime. It is possible to enforce this on the participants in the lower tiers. However,
the incumbent tier is what it is, and the characteristics of these systems must
be accommodated. The difﬁculties in the primary awareness could be due to
excessive mobility, such as airborne services, location privacy, such as either
commercial proprietary or national security concerns, or such dense operation that
the information needed cannot practically be collected and managed, among other
reasons. A special case in this concern is the existence of passive receivers, such as
Television, Receive Only (TVRO) stations, Global Positioning System (GPS), radio
astronomy, other navigations services, and similar uni-directional uses.
Meaningful Bandwidth Unfortunately, spectrum has been extensively “balkanized”
into small, special purpose allocations as small as 5 MHz, or less than 0.05% of
the frequency. Although all spectrum is valuable, there is a minimum amount of
bandwidth necessary to create a meaningful opportunity for wireless innovation.
Unless small allocations can be aggregated into meaningful bands, the small
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

248
Candidate Incumbent Bands for Spectrum Sharing
orphaned blocks of spectrum are not a high priority for transition to a three-tier
regime. The Television White Space (TVWS) suffered from the likely channel
availability of only 6 MHz-wide channels.
Meaningful Opportunities The likely spectrum availability in any resulting regime
is important in considering a band for three-tier management. A band that might
meet the other criteria, but is so densely used, or has such restrictive protection,
that there will be few opportunities for lower-tier sharing, is not attractive to users
or investment. The lack of uptake of the TVWS opportunity was also due to the
perception that the available opportunities in populated areas were not sufﬁcient to
create enough usage to justify sufﬁcient investment in the necessary technology.
Opposition Effectiveness The reality is that typical band users do not desire to have
“their” band shared. However, some band operators may be in a stronger position to
resist sharing than others. For example, the aviation community has a record of being
successful in resisting spectrum encroachment by presenting possible interference
issues and consequences. Other band operators may view sharing as an opportunity
to avoid a much more disruptive reallocation that would result in a total loss of
spectrum access, or greatly increase its cost.
National Scope The impact of three-tier sharing may be limited to the region within the
NRA boundaries, minus any border accommodations, or may have impact beyond
the borders, and require regional or international agreement. Since nation-by-nation
is a more rapid path to adoption, the level of necessary agreement is an important
factor. On the other hand, national deployments may not create the scale of market
opportunities to exploit the opportunity.
Some other criteria that might be considered would reﬂect the suitability of the
spectrum, and the availability of equipment in the shared band. These obstacles to
exploitation of the band are not considered here, as these can be overcome with a
suitable opportunity and as technology advances. In fact, implementation in less dense
spectrum may be much less contentious.
Regulators should not prejudge the utility of the spectrum. An anecdotal example of
the utility of an allocation was in the establishment of the unlicensed spectrum now
used for Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi). Although this band was considered a “garbage band”
[2], it became one of the engines of innovation, initially in the USA, and eventually
world wide. One should never prejudge the power of innovation, once you are given an
opportunity, is the clear message of this experience.
16.3
Introduction to Usage-by-Usage Analysis
The previous section (16.2) provided ﬁve criteria for considering a band for management
and sharing under a three-tier regime. Tables 16.5–16.7 (at the end of the chapter)
provides a list of the ITU allocation categories present between 1 and 6 GHz; the
possible candidates for near- and mid-term sharing under a three-tier framework. It
provides a summary of the evaluation of each against the criteria of Section 16.2,
summarizing the analysis of Sections 16.4–16.11. These allocation can be mapped to
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

16.4 Satellite Uplinks and Downlinks
249
the many ITU allocations that permit that usage for a more detailed assessment. A list
of the speciﬁc allocations is provided in the ITU Radio Regulations Articles [3].
This analysis illustrates several strong candidate bands. It is likely that incumbents
might disagree with this analysis, but several of these bands appear to be candidates
for national or international consideration. The following sections discuss some of the
major categories that have an appearance of viability. The text that follows discusses the
speciﬁcs of three-tier sharing of many of the ITU allocations. Tables 16.5–16.7 provide
a cross reference from the ITU allocation in the table, and the text discussion speciﬁc
to the speciﬁc allocation, if any. In many cases, a single ITU allocation is replicated
across a wide range of spectrum, and the range usage and spectrum characteristics are
unique enough that sharing is quite different in each of these instances. These details
are provided in the following text.
16.4
Satellite Uplinks and Downlinks
There is an extensive inventory of spectrum that is allocated and used primarily for
satellite operations. In most cases, they are partitioned between uplink and downlink
operations, with unique bands for each. Satellite cross-links typically share spectrum
with the terrestrial links, but highly directional antennas minimize interference from
terrestrial sources.
C-band was once the dominant satellite service, but has lost many of its commercial
mission areas to competitive technologies such as ﬁber, and its consumer market to the
Direct Broadcast Satellite (DBS) Ku-band services. Fixed, point-to-point data transfer
has largely migrated to lower cost ﬁber-optic and Internet connectivity. These avoid
the bandwidth limits of individual C-band transponders, and are essentially inﬁnitely
scalable.1 Direct-to-customer C-band Television (TV) services have migrated to the
increasingly pervasive cable services, or to Ku-band DBS (designated as Broadcasting
Satellite Service (BSS) by the ITU). This migration off of C-band has been particularly
true in the northern hemisphere. C-band maintains an advantage over Ku- and Ka-band
services due to its reduced sensitivity to rain fade; a more signiﬁcant factor in the
southern hemisphere.
The fundamental differences in usage between the northern and southern hemispheres
are signiﬁcant. As an example, in the Intelsat Licensee LLC ﬁling regarding the US
position on FCC Docket 04-286, Intelsat advised the FCC that:
“Intelsat has global operations that utilize C-band differently domestically and abroad, and that
rain fade, which degrades Ku- and Ka-band signals, is not an issue within the United States. By
contrast, in many areas of the world, such as the tropics, rain fade makes C-band the preferred
method of satellite communications. Accordingly, C-band use is much more prevalent – and
critical to communications ... in other parts of the world ... Given the different nature of C-band
1 Scalability for video distribution is an increasingly valuable attribute as the number of video resolutions
increases, and size of the most demanding one increases, such as the increasing demand for 4K video, or
Ultra-High Deﬁnition Television (UHD), resolutions.
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

250
Candidate Incumbent Bands for Spectrum Sharing
satellite use in different parts of the world, protection mechanisms proposed domestically will not
necessarily work globally.”
C-band dishes are quite large (typically over 3.3 m in diameter), so their use is largely
in ﬁxed sites, such as cable operator antenna farms, temporary uplink trucks used for
broadcast backhaul, or industrial facilities where other forms of data service are not
available. The ﬁxed, or at least scheduled, nature of C-band usage is a fundamental
factor in its suitability for sharing. To some extent, it resembles the TVWS sharing;
with the bulk of protected users using ﬁxed installations and a few “pop-up uses,” such
as wireless microphones that are known and scheduled.
Ku- and Ka-band satellite services are much more diverse than in C-band. This is
largely due to the small size of uplink and downlink aperture. These are sufﬁcient to
close the links, and to resolve the orbital slots to avoid interference between adjacent
satellite orbital positions. The sharing of spectrum with these satellites is a tension
between the smaller size of the up and downlink spot sizes, and the very signiﬁcant
differences in the usage characteristics.
16.4.1
C-band FSS Uplink
Sharing of the C-band satellite uplink is constrained by the relatively large earth
surface footprint of the uplink receive beams of the space segment. They typically are
continental or more in their patterns; covering from near the poles in latitude, and up
to ±80° in longitude. Even if the energy is not directed to the satellite, the aggregation
of energy from many devices will raise the noise ﬂoor that is received by this uplink.
C-band satellites operate on the “bent pipe” principle, so any noise received by the
space segment is radiated, along with the intended signal, and therefore impacts the
downlink reception across the entire region that is served by any transponder. Uplink
interference is additive to the noise inherent in the downlink. With typical 2° spacing,
omni-directional interference could degrade the performance of up to 80 satellites’
slots, over ±80° of longitude. For this reason, the sharing of the uplink requires an
international action, and may not be possible to accomplish in a shared environment,
without reallocation of the Fixed Satellite Service (FSS) operations. Table 16.1 provides
additional detail regarding three-tier application to the C-band uplink.
The inability to isolate use of the band from the earth coverage uplink antennas,
and the consequential impact worldwide, makes this band a poor choice for spectrum
sharing, without a fundamental change in spectrum allocations at the ITU, resolution of
the users of the band, and disposition of the space segment assets.
16.4.2
C-band FSS Downlink
C-band downlink sharing is an essentially local decision. The operation of each receiver
is independent. The downlink band already is allocated for ﬁxed wireless, on the
assumption that NRA processes can protect the ﬁxed receivers. Table 16.2 provides
additional detail regarding three-tier application to the C-band downlink.
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

16.4 Satellite Uplinks and Downlinks
251
Table 16.1 C-band FSS uplink sharing analysis.
Criteria
Analysis
Incumbent Awareness
FSS sites are registered for protection, and, at least in the USA,
under the FCC’s second Part 96 order [4] are required to register
the speciﬁc elevation/azimuth angles in use (equivalent to satellite
slot). This information is not very volatile. Similar registration
information is available in most nations, or could be obtained.
Secondary ﬁxed services have been coordinated, and this
information is also available.
Meaningful Bandwidth
The band provides from 500 to 800 MHz of contiguous spectrum,
with few sharing complexities other than the protection of C-Band
operations and some directional ﬁxed wireless links.
Meaningful Opportunities
While the density of C-band FSS sites is quite low, in terms of sites
per km2, the effective density is the coverage patterns of the
C-band uplink antennas in the space segment. These antennas
essentially cover the entire occupied earth, so the effective density
of usage is 100%.
Opposition Effectiveness
Use of the uplink would essentially limit use of C-band throughout
the world, at least with the current space segment assets. Although
use of C-band is declining in ﬁber-rich regions, the impact on less
ﬁber-intensive nations, who are more dependent on C-band usage,
would be considered to be highly disruptive.
National Scope
The international coverage of the uplink antennas would require an
international, multi-region consensus at the ITU to effectively
terminate the C-band allocations, at least in the spectrum segments
that were to be shared.
While there would likely be opposition from the FSS community, the C-band
downlink meets the criteria for being shared in a three-tier regime. It is already allocated
for ﬁxed wireless, and the USA will be gaining valuable experience in managing a
three-tier regime in downlink spectrum.
It should also be noted that three-tier spectrum solves many of the issues in sharing
this band. Less sophisticated approaches would risk interference by devices that could
roam into positions that would result in interference to FSS downlinks. The absolute
control over device and network admission that is provided by the three-tier regime
would enable the sharing regime to preclude entry of Access Point (AP) deployment
in any location where the associated client devices could cause interference in any of
their antenna conﬁgurations. In some locations, the only devices permitted entry might
be point-to-point links, with tight control over their directional characteristics. Such a
highly situational decision-making structure is ideally suited to the three-tier admission
process.
16.4.3
Ka- and Ku-band FSS Uplink
Ku- and Ka-band satellite services are much more diverse than in C-band. This
ﬂexibility is largely due to the small size of uplink and downlink apertures that are
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

252
Candidate Incumbent Bands for Spectrum Sharing
Table 16.2 C-Band FSS downlink sharing analysis.
Criteria
Analysis
Incumbent
Awareness
FSS sites are registered for protection, and, at least in the US, under the
FCC’s second Part 96 order [4] are required to register the speciﬁc
elevation/azimuth angles in use (equivalent to satellite slot). This information
is not very volatile. The ﬁxed wireless usage, if present, is also regulated and
coordinated, so the information on these deployments is available for an
admission control system, as well.
Meaningful
Bandwidth
The band provides from 500 to 800 MHz of contiguous spectrum, with few
sharing complexities other than the protection of C-band operations, and
some point-to-point usage, which is similar in character.
Meaningful
Opportunities
The density of C-band FSS sites is quite low, in terms of sites per km2, so
relatively short distance devices can share the spaces in between these sites,
and can even locate in close proximity to them if appropriate control over
beam orientation is provided.
Opposition
Effectiveness
Some types of sharing of this band has been proposed in many recent World
Radio Conference (WRC) agenda items. It has not been adopted, but the
band has been increasingly subject to sharing rights, including the national
control over the extended C-band frequencies, licensing of ﬁxed services,
and the recent US Part 90 and Part 96 Citizens Broadband Radio
Service (CBRS) rules, which establish sharing of the extended C-band, and
dynamic interference management to incumbents above 3.7 GHz.
National Scope
Downlink sharing has no impact outside of the immediate vicinity of the
sharing device. There would be no international consequences, other than the
typical coordination close to NRA borders.
sufﬁcient to close the links, and to resolve the signal from a much smaller aperture.
This has created a large demand for small aperture services that provide Internet and
data communications services for low volume uses, in addition to the traditional ﬁxed
uplink stations used for high data rate video and data services.
The mobile, transportable, and dynamic nature of these applications makes Ku- and
Ka-band uplink sharing difﬁcult. The beneﬁts of more directional uplink antennas in
the space segment are more than counterbalanced by the much greater diversity of the
uplink sources.
16.4.4
Ka- and Ku-band FSS Downlink
Sharing of the Ka- and Ku-band downlinks is driven by the same considerations
as the uplink; a very diverse, and relatively dynamic, ground segment (in terms of
location), and a wide range of usage use-cases. These inherently constrain the uplink
sharing opportunity. Although Ka- and Ku-band spot beams are quite small, and should
enable sharing, they do not always partition along national borders, and many of the
applications utilize much wider-coverage antennas.
Although individual Ku- and Ka-band services are increasingly sophisticated, and
make greater usage of spectrum sharing across their own footprint, these are a minority
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

16.5 Ground-Based Radar Bands
253
Table 16.3 Ku- and Ka-band FSS downlink sharing analysis.
Criteria
Analysis
Incumbent Awareness
These bands have very signiﬁcant consumer use for
receive-only applications, primarily for DBS TV. These devices
are widespread, which reduces opportunity for sharing, and
have a signiﬁcant mobile, or highly transient, component.
Creating protection for each of these receivers would be a
challenge many orders of magnitude beyond that of the C-Band
downlink sharing.
Meaningful Bandwidth
The Ku- and Ka-band bandwidth available for sharing is
extensive, and would enable many wideband (gigabit level)
service models.
Meaningful Opportunities
The extensive consumer use of devices likely reduces the extent
of sharing in this band. This would be a signiﬁcant impediment
to any business case that was not a limited use product.
Opposition Effectiveness
This sharing would likely be opposed by the satellite industry,
but would also be presented as a threat to individual consumers.
National Scope
This bandwidth would be available on a nationwide, and
international scale.
of the satellites on orbit. With 2° spacing, the worst case (in terms of interference)
conditions constrain the spectrum sharing opportunity, rather than the most advanced
one.
Table 16.3 provides additional detail regarding three-tier application to the Ku- and
Ka-band downlink.
16.5
Ground-Based Radar Bands
Ground-Based Radar (GBR) deployments are largely for weather, aviation positioning,
or military uses. Radars vary in frequency depending on their mission. Weather radars
are typically lower in frequency, as are long-range surveillance. Doppler weather radars
are higher in frequency, as are military tracking and ﬁre control. For example, the
high-accuracy tracing and ﬁre-control radars within the US Terminal High Altitude Area
Defense (THAAD) and Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) GBR missile defense radars,
operate in the X-Band allocation. For North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), this
is 8.5–10 GHz.
The considerations of sharing spectrum with this mix of uses are highly varied. The
air-trafﬁc control, approach, and related radars are relatively large, ﬁxed installations.
Similarly, weather radars are also typically large and ﬁxed enough that their location
should not be considered as sensitive. Large, ﬁxed military radars may have their
location hard to disguise. The portable or transportable radars, such as used in
air defense, can be rapidly positioned, and their operational status may itself be
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

254
Candidate Incumbent Bands for Spectrum Sharing
Table 16.4 Ground-based radar (radio location) sharing analysis.
Criteria
Analysis
Incumbent Awareness
Depends on radar type. Weather and air trafﬁc control radars
should be readily available. Some mobile military radars may
not have location data available. Sensing may be acceptable in
these cases, as in the US CBRS Environmental Sensing
Capability (ESC) framework, or the Dynamic Frequency
Selection (DFS) approach.
Meaningful Bandwidth
The radar bands typically have large contiguous bandwidth
available for use.
Meaningful Opportunities
High altitude radars are typically spaced at large distances, and
have a limited view of ground level once beyond (below) their
line of sight. There will be large areas of exclusion on
occupied frequencies, but meaningful opportunities should
exist in most places and channels.
Opposition Effectiveness
The aviation and military communities have been highly
resistant to any sharing of their spectrum.a
National Scope
This sharing can be best accomplished at the national level,
since each country has a different mix of systems deployed,
and therefore less resistance to sharing may occur.
a There are major exceptions in the case of militaries, some of which seek a new relationship with civil
users. The US CBRS effort in 3.5 GHz is an example of this movement. The same is not true of the aviation
community.
considered sensitive. Therefore, sharing with military radars will be highly country-
and band-speciﬁc.
Table 16.4 provides additional detail regarding three-tier application to ground-based
radar bands.
16.6
Non-Communications Satellite Space Allocations
This section provides a more abbreviated discussion of several of the non-
communications satellite allocations that support space science and operations.
16.6.1
Space Research
Few countries in the world perform space research, although some others do host ground
stations for sensing, control stations, and tracking services for other nations. This is
another case where sharing of the band nationally may be consistent with the ITU
treaty terms, if used on the uplink or sensing frequencies, but not if performed on the
frequencies that are listened to by the space segment.
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Table 16.5 Analysis of selected ITU allocations in terms of three-tier spectrum criteria (page 1).
Usage
Prim
Sec
Text Para
Incumbent
Awareness
Meaningful
Bandwidth
Meaningful
Opportunities
Opposition
Effectiveness
National
Scope
Satellite Services
Aeronautical Mobile
X
16.8
Poor for air
platforms
Minimal
Signiﬁcant
Extremely
High
International
Broadcasting
X
X
16.4.3, 16.4.4
Difﬁcult
Yes
No
High
International
Earth Exploration (passive)
X
Orbital
Yes
Yes
High
International
Earth Exploration (active)
X
X
Orbital
Yes
Yes
High
International
Earth Exploration (Uplink,
Crosslink)
X
16.4.1, 16.4.3
Orbital
Yes
Yes
High
International
Earth Exploration
(Downlink, Crosslink)
X
16.4.2, 16.4.4
Yes
Yes
Yes
High
National
Fixed (Uplink)
C-band
X
16.4.2
Available
Yes
Yes
Signiﬁcant
International
Ku- and Ka-band
X
16.4.4
Poor for mobile
Yes
Yes
Signiﬁcant
International
Fixed (Downlink)
C-band
X
16.4.2
Available
Yes
Yes
Signiﬁcant
Localized
Ku- and Ka-band
X
16.4.4
Poor for mobile
Yes
Yes
Signiﬁcant
Localized
Meteorological (Downlink)
X
16.4.2, 16.4.4
Yes
Yes
Yes
High
National
Mobile (Downlink)
X
X
16.4.2, 16.4.4
Not available
Yes
Limited
Moderate
National
Mobile (Uplink)
X
X
16.4.3, 16.4.4
Not available
Yes
Limited
Moderate
International
Radio Navigation (Uplink)
X
16.4.1, 16.4.3
High
Minimal
Yes
High
National
Radio Navigation
(Downlink)
X
Not available
No
No
High
International
Radio Navigation
(Crosslink)
X
High
Yes
None on
Ground
High
International
Radiodetermination
X
X
Not available
No
No
High
International
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

Table 16.6 Analysis of selected ITU allocations in terms of three-tier spectrum criteria (page 2).
Usage
Prim
Sec
Text Para
Incumbent
Awareness
Meaningful
Bandwidth
Meaningful
Opportunities
Opposition
Effectiveness
National
Scope
Space Operations
Uplink, Space-Space
X
16.6.2
Yes, for
uplink
No
Yes
High
International
Downlink
X
16.6.2
Yes
No
Yes
Variable
National
Downlink, Space-Space
X
16.6.2
Yes, for
downlink
No
Yes
Depends
National
Space Research
Active
X
X
16.6.1
Yes
No
No
High
International
Deep Space, Uplink
X
16.6.1
Yes
No
Yes
High
International
Deep Space, Downlink
X
16.6.1
Yes
No
Yes
Variable
National
Deep Space, Uplink,
Space-Space
X
16.6.1
Yes
No
Yes
High
International
Deep Space, Downlink,
Space -Space
X
16.6.1
Yes
No
Yes
Varies
National
Passive
X
X
16.6.1
Yes
No
No
High
International
Aeronautical
Unspeciﬁed
X
16.8
No
No
No
Very high
International
Mobile
X
16.8
No
No
No
Very high
International
Radio Navigation
X
16.8
No
No
No
Very high
International
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Table 16.7 Analysis of selected ITU allocations in terms of three-tier spectrum criteria (page 3).
Usage
Prim
Sec
Text Para
Incumbent
Awareness
Meaningful
Bandwidth
Meaningful
Opportunities
Opposition
Effectiveness
National
Scope
Location/Navigation
Radionavigation
X
16.11
No
No
No
Very high
International
Radiolocation
X
X
16.5
Military an
issue
Yes
Yes
Military
National
Maritime Navigation
X
No
No
No
High
International
Miscellaneous
Amateur
X
16.7
None
Yes
Poor
High
Yes
Aeronautical
X
16.8
Poor for air
platforms
Minimal
Signiﬁcant
Extremely
high
International
Fixed
X
X
16.8.1
High
High
High
Technical
National
Mobile
X
X
16.9
Proprietary
issues
Yes
Yes
Very high
National
Radio Astronomy
X
X
High
Limited
Yes
High
International
Meteorological Aide
X
No
No
No
High
International
Broadcasting
X
16.10
Yes
Yes, typically
6 MHz
High in some
areas
Signiﬁcant
National
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

258
Candidate Incumbent Bands for Spectrum Sharing
For spacecraft-focused activity, the range of distance to the spacecraft is critical
to establishing the potential for interference. If the spacecraft is at low or medium
altitude, then many earth locations do not have simultaneous visibility to the spacecraft
control or payload functions. Therefore, there is no practical interference to the craft.
At higher orbits, such as geosynchronous orbits or deep space, the spacecraft antenna
is likely to have a large spot size on the earth, and the distance separation required
to isolate interference becomes continental to hemispheric; therefore sharing of bands
used for these systems is not practical, except with tight coordination with the using
organizations.
Most space research facilities are publicly identiﬁed, and are non-military and
non-proprietary. The research spacecraft orbital or deep space positions are generally
well known, and highly predictable on reasonable time frames.
16.6.2
Space Operations
Space operations has a similar usage footprint to space research. Few countries in the
world perform space operations, although some that do not perform space operations
do host ground stations for sensing or tracking. These provide control stations, tracking
services, and downlink for other nations. This is another case where sharing of the
band nationally may be consistent with the ITU treaty terms, if used on the uplink or
sensing frequencies, but not if performed on the frequencies that are listened to by the
space segment. Another consideration is the possible use of mobile control terminals
that might be on ships or temporarily hosted.
This determination is a case-by-case one. Well-designed spacecraft should not
respond to transmissions that are not authenticated through the command authenticator.
Therefore, emissions on the control or downlink frequencies should not hinder the
operation of the satellites when they are over regions sharing the spectrum, with no
visibility to spacecraft that also have visibility to their control or payload ground
sites or other control resources. A special case that must be considered is the space
operations, control, and communications functions that might be relayed through other
space vehicles, such as the USA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS)
system.
16.7
Amateur
Amateur usage is essentially uncoordinated within the bands it is authorized in. There
is essentially no way to be aware of this incumbent class’s usage. There are no enforced
emission types, or equipment classes, so there is no way to recognize signals as speciﬁc
to amateur operation. It is a shared service, but it would be difﬁcult to implement
a protected tier in a band also assigned an amateur allocation. Amateur usage does
not receive protection, so it need not be protected from the three-tier usage. The
amateur community is very consistent in defending the rights to meaningful spectrum
access. So, despite their secondary status, they would probably strongly (reasonably
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

16.8 Aeronautical Services
259
and successfully) resist any attempt to locate a high density application within their
spectrum allocations.
16.8
Aeronautical Services
Sharing of aeronautical spectrum (in any form) has three fundamental challenges:
• The platforms (at least one end of most links) are highly mobile, and therefore provide
little incumbent awareness. While the ﬁxed side of these links is typically well known
(radar sites, air trafﬁc control transmitter and control facilities, navigation stations,
such as Instrument Landing System (ILS), Microwave Landing System (MLS) VHF
Omnirange/Tactical Area Navigation (VORTAC), or Distance Measuring Equipment
(DME) sites) the airborne components are typically rapidly moving platforms.
• The operators of the aeronautical systems (typically national regulatory organizations
and aircraft operators) claim that the systems are extremely fragile to interference,
and that any additional energy in these allocations would have safety-of-life impacts.
• Public concern over the sensitivity of aeronautical systems to interference would
make sharing of these, and adjacent bands, highly unpopular. This was one of the
reasons that the LightSquared/GPS issue [5] was decided against the interests of
LightSquared, even though LightSquared was not operating in an aviation band!
• There are additional treaty considerations in the United Nations (UN) treaty obliga-
tions under the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), which generally
assure international operation of aviation-related electronics and non-interference.
These are in addition to the ITU obligations.
16.8.1
Fixed Services
The ﬁxed wireless community has managed spectrum through coordination processes
for an extensive period. This process is not essentially different than the processes in
an admission control system, except it is executed by humans through a regulatory
mandate or arbitration, rather than automated as in the three-tier model. It has many
of the elements of a sharing candidate. A problem with sharing with ﬁxed bands is
that many of them also have allocations for mobile and other uses, which includes
incumbents that are less practical sharing partners.
There is extensive spectrum that is used for ﬁxed wireless, and in many locations, it
is not fully utilized and could provide spectrum access to uses that were deconﬂicted
with the incumbent usage.2 Of course, any attempt to share spectrum creates a reaction
from the incumbent users and band managers, but the arguments in this case would have
to be much more technical, as the framework of the three-tier model closely resembles
that of the current approach to deconﬂiction.
2 Fixed wireless usage is as much in angle space (direction) as it is in location. Deconﬂiction is typically a
matter of frequency and direction, rather than assuring separation distance.
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

260
Candidate Incumbent Bands for Spectrum Sharing
16.9
Mobile Services
Mobile uses span a wide range; from high frequency radios that can operate on a
continental scale, to short range cellular devices. To provide consistency, and focus
on possible spectrum sharing candidates, we will only consider the applications above
1 GHZ, which are dominated by cellular (or International Mobile Telecommunications
(IMT) in ITU terms).
Cellular mobiles do not have their locations typically (or at least publicly) tracked.
The base stations are a different case. Since a cellular device cannot operate outside of
a base station service area, the base stations are a proxy for the possible locations of the
handsets.
Obtaining awareness of base stations, or small cells, or any type of access point is not
a technical issue, but a policy one. ITU obligations are quiet on the speciﬁcs of national
licensing, so some nations may treat the siting of IMT capacity as public, while others
might treat it as proprietary. Particularly in exclusive-use spectrum, the presumption
has favored proprietary. Previous chapters have discussed the issues regarding this
disclosure even in shared bands, such as the United States (US) CBRS band.
Objections to this sharing might arise from three considerations:
• Existing mobile operators would resist the sharing of their deployment data with
competitors or the public. Without this data, it would be difﬁcult to implement the
range of protections to User Equipment (UE) and AP devices.
• The likely users of the spectrum might/would be competitive to the primary user’s
interests and business.
• No matter how rigorous the sharing regime, there is always the possibility of it
generating interference, for which the primary user received no premium for risk
acceptance.
• There is legal ambiguity regarding the scope of the rights obtained by cellular
operators in their spectrum acquisition, and any forced sharing could be resisted in
the appropriate courts.
The use of cellular spectrum is driven largely by population, or subscriber, density.
Therefore, there is a shortage of spectrum in densely populated regions, and likely,
a surplus of spectrum in less dense areas. Therefore, there are opportunities for
sharing spectrum in rural and possibly suburban regions, if there is a business case
for deployments that are counter-correlated with population density.
16.10
Broadcast Services
One of the ﬁrst examples of database driven spectrum sharing is the opportunity to
share unused TV spectrum; an option that is available in many countries throughout
the globe is TVWS. TVWS represents the largest block of spectrum currently suitable
for multi-tier sharing. Other broadcast spectrum allocations would only be suitable for
relatively narrowband uses.3
3 Satellite broadcast is not considered here, it is addressed in the Ku- and Ka-band up and downlink
analysis section.
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
261
The nature of broadcast regulation and commercialization assures a high level of
incumbent awareness; this is the basis of the TVWS database solution. The conse-
quences of inadvertent interference are inconvenient, but not on the scale of aeronautical
or space control. The opportunities for sharing are quite extensive in less developed
regions (even within the developed world). The future of sharing in this band might
be challenged or signiﬁcantly reduced by government desire to monetize the unused
spectrum through the “digital dividend,” or incentive auction, such as in the USA.
16.11
Radio Navigation
Radio navigation includes the non-radar positioning services, such as LORAN and GPS.
The criticality, and political support for these types of services was apparent in the USA
when the proposed LightSquared use of INMARSAT spectrum was effectively denied
by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) [5]. Older narrowband systems,
such as LORAN are seeing decreasing use and support. Aviation services, such as MLS,
ILS, DME, and the like, are necessary to the continued operation of the international
airspace system, and will be difﬁcult to share spectrum with. The spectrum used by
these systems is not extensive. The issue they raise is more on compatibility (such as
LightSquared), rather than direct band sharing.
16.12
Suggested Reading
• There is a good summary of how to read the ITU allocation tables available at the
SpectrumWiki site. The pdf of this document is available at: www.spectrumwiki.com/
wp/allocations101.pdf.
• The last several ITU WRC agendas have had items addressing mobile use of
C-Band spectrum. This has developed a considerable literature about the relative
beneﬁts of C-Band spectrum, from both its supporters and detractors. Some of the
proceedings ﬁled to inﬂuence the US position on the WRC agenda formulation
include submissions by Intelsat LLC (already quoted).
• The ITU Radio Regulations [3] provide all of the speciﬁc allocations to which the
analysis in this chapter is applicable, as well as the “ﬁne print” that deﬁne these
usages, both as primary and secondary usage.
• The issues that were raised in the LightSquared [5] proceeding in the USA are
instructive of impact of popular support on spectrum decisions. Regardless of the
merit of the positions on those in favor, and those opposed, the result reﬂected a
number of non-technical concerns and issues, along with the technical ones.
References
1 National Telecommunications and Information Administration, United States Frequency
Allocations: The Radio Spectrum Chart. Consultation (2016). www.ntia.doc.gov/page/2011/
united-states-frequency-allocation-chart.
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

262
Candidate Incumbent Bands for Spectrum Sharing
2 The Economist, A brief history of Wi-Fi. Technology Quarterly, 2Q (2004). www.economist.
com/node/2724397.
3 International Telecommunications Union, Radio Regulations International Telecommunica-
tions Union Radio Regulations, Volume 1 (2012).
4 Federal Communications Commission, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to
Commercial Operation in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354 (2016). https://apps.
fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
5 National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Systems Engineering Forum
(NPEF), Assessment of LightSquared Terrestrial Broadband System Effects on GPS Receivers
and GPS-dependent Applications (2011). www.gps.gov/spectrum/lightsquared/docs/2011-06-
NPEF-lightsquared-report.pdf.
.017
15:04:51, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

17
From Shared Spectrum, to
Shared Infrastructure, to a
New Model of 5G
17.1
Introduction
This chapter will explore the changes in the deployment model for the continued
deployment of 4G technology, and to meet the unique challenges of Fifth-Generation
Wireless Systems (5G) deployment. While the speciﬁcs of 5G deployment are not yet
ﬁnalized, there is general agreement on many aspects of this transition, and these areas
of agreement are sufﬁciently converged to provide a solid foundation for considering
how three-tier spectrum could be a signiﬁcant factor in this evolution,.
Previous chapters in this book have emphasized shared, three-tier spectrum as a
potential disruptive technology in spectrum management. In this chapter, we extend
this to consider one of the consequences of that disruption, the viability of an extensive
shared 5G infrastructure, and new business models in the wireless communications
industry. If these paradigm changes do emerge, they will require new technology to
link less vertically integrated telecommunications services, new methods to differentiate
operator offerings, and a new industry to deploy these solutions, similar, but more
expansive than the current Distributed Antenna System (DAS) industry.
As discussed in the introduction to Chapter 15, this opportunity arises from spectrum
sharing between carriers and non-carriers, and the creation of a common band. The
question is whether this becomes an interesting aspect of one band, or the ﬁrst in a
series of fundamental adaptations of the wireless service model.
17.2
The Traditional TELCO Model of Infrastructure
Although the spectrum community focuses on exclusive spectrum as one of the core
tenants of TELCO approaches, spectrum is not the sole resource that is managed
primarily as an exclusive asset. It would be a mistake to approach the concept of
exclusive-use spectrum without considering it in the context of all of the other resources
that make up a TELCO network.
Traditionally, the entire TELCO infrastructure has been owned and operated
exclusively by one or more TELCOs. Exclusive, absolute control over the components
of the network has evolved as the standard practice for a number of reasons:
• It was the sole means to control the network and assure the Quality of Service (QoS)
provided under various Service Level Agreement (SLA) terms.
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

264
From Shared Spectrum, to Shared Infrastructure
• Many TELCOs were national monopolies, or quasi-monopolies, and therefore had no
natural sharing partner for most resources.
• The speciﬁcations for TELCO standard interconnections are hostile to shared
technologies. For example, the backhaul for Long-Term Evolution (LTE) eNodeB’s
is speciﬁed, at layer 2, and is likely to be dedicated to a single use, and is typically
incompatible with the Internet Protocol (IP) networks that dominate commercial
networking.
• Until recently, few industries were potential partners in sharing resources, or
creating third party suppliers, because TELCO technology was not shared by other
enterprises, unlike today’s extensive enterprise networking, cloud computing, and
uniﬁed networking.
Business realities have made some impact on the “exclusive-everything” model. In
the USA, several operators divested their tower holdings, and space on these towers is
now leased by a third party to all-comers. The ﬁber trunks used for backhaul to/from
macrocell sites may not be carrier owned; but the individual strands used for the dark
ﬁber connections are typically exclusively dedicated to a single operator. Sharing of the
macrocell, antennas and other air interfaces has typically not been present.
17.3
The Internet Model of Infrastructure
The contrast to the TELCO model is the one inherent in the Internet. The Internet is
shared between billions of devices, servers, services, providers, and applications. Cloud
computing has extended that sharing into the compute fabric, where even competitive
products share the same cloud computing resources.1
The basic infrastructure standards of the Internet have remained quite stable over
the four decades of its operation. In less time, the wireless industry has gone through
several incompatible generations of infrastructure design and standardization.2 It is a
reasonable question to consider why one set of standards has been massively resilient,
even in the face of changes in bandwidth capability of over 106 (from kilobits per second
to tens of gigabits), and the other has been redesigned under the pressure of less than an
order of magnitude increase between technology generations.
Perhaps the reason that the Internet has been so resilient to technology change, while
the carrier systems have not, is the level of abstraction that is inherent in the Internet
design. Devices on the Internet do not know, or care, if they are connected by a slow
1 For example, competitive video streaming services Netﬂix™and Amazon Prime™both run on the same
Amazon Advanced Wireless Services (AWS) infrastructure.
2 In both cases, edge equipment technology transitions are essentially ignored. The edge itself is quite
technology-sensitive, and advances rapidly. The core technology of the Internet infrastructure (Boundary
Gateway Protocol (BGP), Exterior Gateway Protocol (EGP), Open Shortest Path First Protocol (OSPF),
IP, User Datagram Protocol (UDP), Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), and Transport Control
Protocol (TCP) have advanced, but evolutionarily. On the other hand, the cellular network infrastructure
for the various generations, such as Advanced Mobile Phone System (AMPS), Global System for Mobile
Communications (GSM) and now LTE, are fundamentally different from each other.
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

17.4 Issues in Deploying 5G Above 6 GHz
265
speed Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) line, or a 10 Gbps ﬁber optic strand. The layers are
isolated by very generalized abstractions of the pipes and protocols that operate over the
network. Products such as Transport Layer Security (TLS), Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP), Secure Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTPS), and even Network Address
Translation (NAT), have been overlaid on the foundational design with no disruption of
the underlying systems. The abstraction framework has enabled the Internet design to
meet emerging challenges almost entirely by enhancements in individual layers, with
no disruption to other layers. Not only has this reduced cost, it has enabled the network
to upgrades asynchronously, as each layer can be enhanced independently.
Most important, the level of abstraction in the Internet has allowed for the emergence
of widely different implementations of its core functions. Google search can be used by
users connected with dialup modems, or with the emerging gigabit Fiber to the Home
(FTTH) connections. A laptop that works on one Internet Service Provider (ISP) is
highly likely to work on any other ISP. Applications developed for ten-year-old devices
run on the new devices (often). Few Internet companies are as vertically integrated as
TELCOs; they pick only the portion of the network where they have unique skills or
technology, and share the rest of the network, leaving it to other specialists.
In the following sections, we will consider how three-tier spectrum can be
instrumental in providing new opportunities for wireless networks to achieve the
beneﬁts of shared infrastructure.
Abstractions that “hide” the speciﬁcs of network operators, infrastructure suppliers,
spectrum usage, and other temporal or situational aspects are the key to evolution to
shared networks. These abstractions must provide the ﬂexibility required to be ﬂexibly
integrated into personal, enterprise, or mobile operator networks with ﬂexibility and
scalability. In Section 17.9, a potentially signiﬁcant new TELCO network abstraction
will be discussed.
17.4
Issues in Deploying 5G Above 6 GHz
5G is proposed to provide deployment both below and above 6 GHz as options. The
proposals for 5G below 6 GHz are a more incremental extension of the current LTE
technology already in use in that frequency range, with a signiﬁcant increase in antenna
processing to increase bits per Hertz and provide signiﬁcantly more bandwidth. The
disruptive opportunity in 5G lies in the use of frequencies above 6 GHz; most likely
above 20 GHz. These bands offer the wide spectrum extents that can support gigabit
speeds. The short wavelength, highly directional beam patterns reduce energy demands,
provide high data rates, and enable these next generation antennas to ﬁt into a form
factor consistent with current User Equipment (UE) concepts.
The rest of this chapter’s discussion will therefore concentrate on the use case above
20 GHz. This is not to say that a three-tier, or neutral, host, has no role below 6 GHz. The
previous chapters, and particularly Section 15.5, described the contribution three-tier
spectrum can make to the deployment of the current generation of wireless technologies,
and these points are equally applicable to 5G. However, it is when we consider systems
above 20 GHz that the three-tier model becomes an enabler of fundamentally different
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

266
From Shared Spectrum, to Shared Infrastructure
Table 17.1 Propagation loss at the millimeter wave frequencies.
Material
Approx. 20 GHz
60 GHz
Wall Board
6.8 [1]
0.7 [4]
Brick Masonry Wall
28.3 [1]
25.3 [3], 135 [4]
Cinderblock Wall
218 [4]
Wooden Cabinet
35.3 [3]
Untreated Glass Pane
4.0 [1]
5.5 [4]
Tinted Glass
24.5–40.1 [1]
1/8′′ Aluminum Sheet
46.0 [2]
Plywood. 0.75′′, Dry
4.0 [2]
Plywood. 0.75′′, Wet
32.0 [2]
models of wireless deployment, in the cases where traditional models of mobile operator
deployment appear to be highly unattractive to both users and operators.
The impacts of the propagation loss, and material attenuation, both of which increase
with frequency, is an important consideration in 5G above 20 GHz. Not only does it
impact the speciﬁcs of the network design, it has implications that go far beyond the
technology; the challenges it poses signiﬁcantly changes the deployment strategy that
has remained essentially static through the ﬁrst four generations of commercial wireless
systems.
Table 17.1 provides some reported signal attenuation of common materials in the
range contemplated for the high-bandwidth 5G millimeter wave band deployments
[1, 2, 3, 4]. Note that there are some materials that have a wide range of reported
attenuation, but they are all consistently high loss.
This attenuation loss is an addition to the increase in the path loss of at least
20 dB. The difference between dry and wet plywood in the 20 GHz band is particularly
indicative of the challenges in creating high reliability, predictable services in an outdoor
environment, when operating above 20 GHz. Unfortunately, there is no consistent
source of millimeter wave measurements, such as was cited [5] in support of Table 12.1,
so the values in this table are from multiple sources, and have signiﬁcant differences
in methodology. Not surprisingly, there are signiﬁcant inconsistencies when they are
aggregated, but the trends are clear despite these methodological differences.
Some of this path loss can be reclaimed by antenna beam-forming at either end of
the path, but the very high material scattering losses have a fundamental impact on
the nature of 5G deployments. Millimeter wave signals will typically be restricted to
open areas. Passage through walls, even human bodies, will so reduce signal strength
that each space within a building will often require several access points to ensure
coverage. We can see the scope of access point deployment in Table 17.2, which depicts
some typical deployment scales for various categories of macro and small cell. Actual
deployments vary widely, but the trends in Table 17.2 are indicative.
The likely coverage scope of an above 20 GHz Access Point (AP) has implications
for its deployment. One or more AP installations per room is a signiﬁcant challenge;
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

17.5 Neutral-Host/Shared-Infrastructure Model for 5G
267
Table 17.2 Geographic scope of cellular frequencies and access point
category.
Deployment
Typical Freq.
Scope
Area
Macrocell
700 MHz
10 km radius
300 km2
Macrocell
1 700 MHz
3 km radius
27 km2
Small Cell
1 700 MHz
An outdoor urban block
< 1 km2
DAS
1 700 MHz
A single building
0.1 km2
Femtocell
1 700 MHz
A single ﬂoor and region
within a building
0.01 km2
Millimeter Wave AP
30 GHz
Some, or all, of a single
room
0.001 km2
multiplying this by the number of competitive operators in an area makes a difﬁcult
problem become impractical and uneconomic, if not impossible.
17.5
Neutral-Host/Shared-Infrastructure Model for 5G Deployment
Section 15.5 introduced the concept of private, carrier-grade networks offering
connectivity services to mobile operators on a neutral-host basis. This model is attractive
for 4G, or more speciﬁcally, for below 6 GHz deployments, but is much more so when
contemplating deployments above 20 GHz. The discussion in this section was focused
around the progress in commercializing the ﬁrst three-tier band. In this chapter, we now
consider if this model can be translated to the millimeter wave region above 20 GHz,
with economic beneﬁts to operators, deployers, and users.
If the above-20 GHz deployment is to be a room-by-room, or space-by-space
endeavor, it is worth considering what organizations are in the best positions to perform
this deployment. Traditional carrier infrastructure was deployed by each carrier, in
parallel. It is the premise of this section that this model is not applicable to many of
the deployment situations that will arise in 5G deployment. Some of the advantages that
a premises owner/tenant has in performing this deployment include:
• The venue owner is often in the best position to install the necessary infrastructure
as the building is constructed or renovated, when integrated into other Information
Technology (IT) infrastructure.
• The networking backhaul and other resources can be integrated into the same
infrastructure that is shared by users in the space. Enterprise networks now provide
bandwidth on a par with that of the carrier networks, and are capable of supplying
support to the devices.
• The building facility can provide many of the support utilities, such as uninterrupted
power, from on-site capabilities that will be required to support other building and
enterprise functions, such as servers, emergency lighting, and the like.
• The deployment of the devices can be performed integrally with other enterprise
services, such as enterprise Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi), telephony, and Internet of
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

268
From Shared Spectrum, to Shared Infrastructure
Things (IoT), and even provided in the same deployed edge equipment. The effective
cost of this deployment would be the marginal cost of the additional 5G circuitry in
the AP node, rather than the complete cost of a stand-alone deployment.
• The building or enterprise can use the same wireless network for internal uses, such
as Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN), IoT, telephony, and other internal uses.
• Building operators would ﬁnd this more attractive than DAS. DAS requires unique
spectrum arrangement with each carrier, typically, requires multiple bands, and
requires unique ﬁber-optic connectivity that cannot be shared with the other IP-based
services.
These are signiﬁcant advantages for a premise-based deployment. However, without
operator involvement, there is no ﬁnancial incentive for the building operator to
cooperate in the deployment. If operators do not deploy their own networks, then there is
no reason for UE manufacturers to include the band coverage, or even for chip suppliers
to offer it. However, there are good reasons to believe that operators would ﬁnd the use
of a shared infrastructure attractive, once they have overcome any reluctance to operate
exclusively over infrastructure that they did not own or operate exclusively.
• The carrier has no equivalent opportunity to deploy 5G within a building. The
“outside-in” strategy of lower bands is not practical, due to the high loss in the
building structure.
• The operator obtains capacity with no requirement for capital investment.
• Presumably the operator can acquire access to the interior at a much lower cost per
unit of capacity than other deployment alternatives. Even if there are no cost savings
by having the deployment integrated with other building construction and operations,
the cost of deployment is being shared by multiple operators. So long as 5G provides
excess capacity, there is no cost disadvantage in the relationship, and considerable
upside.
• The cost of the network capacity is linear with use, proportional to the actual use, with
limited ﬁxed cost. The otherwise ﬁxed depreciation and maintenance cost, which is
insensitive to trafﬁc or revenue, is not present on the balance sheet.
17.6
Barriers to Shared Infrastructure Model
The transition to signiﬁcant adoption and use of a shared infrastructure will face
signiﬁcant challenges. Some of these are technical and economic barriers to adoption,
and others are cultural.
1. Building operators may not ﬁnd the economic advantages of this model sufﬁciently
attractive to deploy sufﬁcient 5G capacity to be economic for inclusion in UE and
other devices.
2. Operators may not want to lose the ability to differentiate their product due to
much of their indoor service being offered through a common infrastructure. Many
industries have created differentiation even though using common elements (trucking
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

17.6 Barriers to Shared Infrastructure Model
269
companies use the same roads, internet applications use the same Internet, airlines
use the same airports).
3. Operators may not be comfortable in adopting a new model that reduces their
ownership of the critical infrastructure for their service. It signiﬁcantly reduces
the distinction between a Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO) and a
Mobile Network Operators (MNO), opening up the traditional operators to direct
competition from non-operators with strong consumer or business marketing,
sourcing or ﬁnancial capabilities.
4. New mechanisms for integrating the dedicated operator core networks with the
emerging shared infrastructure will be required. These networks must be usable by
multiple operators, and will be under the physical control and operation of a third
party.
The question is the extent to which these barriers might impede, or even negate, a
shared infrastructure deployment.
The ﬁrst issue (economics from the perspective of a building owner) is driven by the
level of carrier payment for trafﬁc carriage. There are still considerable unknowns in
this question, but there are good reasons to believe that a reasonable charge-back rate
is feasible from both the venue and MNO, MVNO, or even Mobile System Operator
(MSO) perspectives.
As previously mentioned, the installation of 4G or 5G infrastructure may be less
costly for a building or enterprise that can integrate it into other build-out costs.
Additionally, the cost of deployment is shared among the operators; so the cost of this
capacity to an operator should be signiﬁcantly less than exclusive use deployment. The
barrier to operator adoption of the model may be driven by the indoor demand level. If
demand is not present, than this model will not succeed, but that is really saying that
operator-driven, indoor 5G is not viable; an assumption few have suggested.
The second concern is certainly fundamental. It is necessary to determine how
operators will differentiate services in the 5G timeframe. The advertising the operators
are using may be highly instructive in their private perceptions of buying behavior and
differentiation. In the United States of America (USA), one of the major wireless carri-
ers had a motto “Can You Hear Me Now?,” intended to emphasize its voice quality as a
service differentiator. This motto is no longer used, perhaps reﬂecting that data is a com-
modity product. Another advertisement by a different operator, with less network cov-
erage than the dominant operator, states that they are only 1% poorer than the dominant
carrier in a metric of quality, and claimed that they had price and capacity advantages.
This campaign would imply that they perceive customers are less interested in a highly
reliable dial tone, but instead are interested in video streaming quality access and price.
If bandwidth is a commodity, and customer interest is in capacity and price, then the
opportunity to acquire high bandwidth indoors at lower cost per bit in Operational Cost
(OPEX), and with no Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) may be an attractive proposition,
even though it reﬂects the loss of some product differentiation.
The third issue, that operators will not be willing to utilize an infrastructure that
they do not own and operate, is certainly both a cultural and technical barrier. Yet,
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

270
From Shared Spectrum, to Shared Infrastructure
this model does have precedent in the operators’ use of independent shared DAS
suppliers in locations that they cannot physically or economically deploy. With the
right economics, the cultural barrier appears to be capable of being overcome. The
issue of lack of technical control over the service quality and security of the link
is an important consideration, but one that can be overcome by sufﬁcient economic
advantage. The Internet approach of over-provisioning bandwidth and using abundance
instead of complex management has not been applicable to highly spectrum- and
bandwidth-constrained wireless networks in the past, but could become effective in 5G,
simplifying the service architectures.
Security from the AP to the operator can be provided through secure tunnels to
operator infrastructure, but that does create a point of vulnerability at the AP site itself.
With increased use of higher-level encryption, such as Secure Socket Layer (SSL)
and TLS, this vulnerability is increasingly being mitigated, but it certainly is real.
Behaviorally, the widespread use of “Open” Wi-Fi hubs would support the argument
that it is not a signiﬁcant behavioral concern by consumers, as operators deploy ofﬂoad
services, and users search for open access points seemingly without regard for security.
The loss of control over network service quality is a factor that is very likely to
concern operators. The TELCO culture is still very rooted in the issues of voice trafﬁc,
with very high standards for latency, reliability, drop out periods, etc. In a digital
world, it is not clear that these metrics are as important to the user experience as they
were with voice. Certainly, the trend has been for application designers to address the
shortfalls in internet data services. This has been accomplished through techniques such
as buffering content, channel adaptive resolution and compression, more extensive edge
device processing, and IP address insensitivity, to reduce impact on the user experience
caused by latency, packet loss, drop outs, and other imperfections in the end-to-end
service. The willingness of users to use Wi-Fi in dense, congested, and high packet loss
conditions indicate that these measures have generally been successful. The tight control
over network service quality may be a diminished concern as voice services recede as a
major application of these emerging networks.
17.7
Abstraction of Heterogeneous Network Technologies
and Deployments
The last of the potential barriers raises the issue of developing a new model for the
relationship of these edge networks to the operator’s core network. A new deﬁnition of
how the premise-based network deployment is presented to the operator infrastructure,
and integrated into the functionality of the operators core networks is required. Certainly,
one option is to provide access to devices similarly to how they are represented within
the exclusive use infrastructure today. In the case of LTE, this is a complex system
within the Extended Packet Core (EPC), including Mobility Management Entity (MME)
and Serving Gateway (SGW) components that manage the mobility of UE devices, and
routing of trafﬁc. While LTE is the ﬁrst TELCO system that is IP-based, it has a unique
protocol to move data from the UE to the exit point of the TELCO network. By contrast,
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

17.8 Implications for the 5G Spectrum Policy
271
Wi-Fi operates entirely in the IP space, and does not require that trafﬁc be managed by
unique protocols as it transits the intermediate IP network(s).
Architecturally, there are signiﬁcant differences in the delivery architecture of LTE
and Wi-Fi. In the LTE model, trafﬁc from an endpoint transits the interior of the EPC
(carrier network) in a star network to the core, and then is interconnected to internet
exchange points, or peering arrangements. These points concentrate the trafﬁc from all
users to one or more central interchange points. By contrast, Wi-Fi networks typically
have no core, and “breakout” trafﬁc at the nearest exchange, interconnect, or peering
location. The internet application has no visibility into the network design, topology
or performance. Each element of the delivery path is independent, and the interaction
between them follows a common abstraction, deﬁned by the internet standards.
Although the shared infrastructure is a signiﬁcant change in the TELCO business
model, it has a parallel, but lesser impact on the technical interactions between the
TELCO operator and the shared infrastructure provider.
• Devices must serve multiple operators, so no operator can have sole control over the
device.
• Enterprises may operate the access devices within ﬁre-walled networks in order
to host high security applications over their wireless networks. This implies that
the device control functions are likely to be unreachable through a strict ﬁre-wall
policy. The TELCO will receive an IP stream, but may have to delegate decisions
such as mobility to the shared network, rather than the central management of the
EPC functions. Fortunately, levels of this abstracted delegation of authority to local
networks is evolving under the general framework of LTE Self-Organizing Network
(SON) concepts.
• Device and network identity and authentication may become more complex. Is the
enterprise device “owned” by the enterprise, and then roaming onto an operator
network, or the reverse? Are there tens of thousands of operators, or are they
aggregated? There are an entirely new set of challenges in scaling the existing
authentication framework into the shared infrastructure regime.
There are some exciting concepts that could evolve in this model. With signiﬁcant
levels of abstraction, aggregators mobile operators could essentially operate two-sided
models, when multiple shared infrastructure has overlaps in coverage. They are selling
an integrated network service to their subscribers, but can acquire the capacity through
any number of unique market models, timeframes, and QoS levels. Price transparency
has the advantage that it would encourage deployment in underserved locations due to
the visible premium that these locations achieve.
17.8
Implications for the 5G Spectrum Policy
There have been some interest in communities that have advocated for increased
spectrum sharing, either as unrestricted unlicensed, such as used in Wi-Fi, or as the
three-tier framework, as advocated by President’s Council of Advisors on Science and
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

272
From Shared Spectrum, to Shared Infrastructure
Technology (PCAST), and implemented by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC). On the other hand, the US FCC has proposed [6] an allocation of spectrum
that has approximately 4 GHz in the 27.5–28.35 GHz and 37–40 GHz bands for
exclusive use through licensing (presumably) by auction, and an additional 7 GHz for
unlicensed usage in the 57–71 GHz band [6]. This is a considerable additional allocation
of unlicensed spectrum, but the approach does not appear to reﬂect the emergence of
shared infrastructure, neutral host services, and the very progressive ideas in their own
Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) rules.
The issues with this allocation are numerous, including:
• Although a considerable extent of spectrum is made available for unlicensed usage, it
is at a very high frequency band, and affordable user equipment technology will likely
lag the availability of the 20 and 40 GHz technology. Although all of these bands have
technology challenges, achieving operation at 70 GHz will likely be delayed until
long after the 20 and 40 GHz technology has matured.
• The lesson from the early CBRS thinking is that carrier-grade technology should be
deployable by both operators and by third parties. It is in all parties’ interests that the
capacity deployment be possible by the party in the best position (control of backhaul
bandwidth, access, power, etc.) to perform this deployment economically. The
innovation in the CBRS band is the access to common spectrum by the widest range
of users. Common user- and customer-premises equipment is best achieved when the
bands are in common usage. Exclusive-use spectrum essentially precludes any shared
infrastructure, since such infrastructure could not be shared in a predictable manner.
And yet, deployments that are on the scale of individual rooms and spaces is not
likely to be performed exclusively by any one operator, nor used exclusively by one
operator.
Traditionally, operators have argued to regulators that they required exclusive-use
spectrum in order to protect their expansive networks from interference, to protect their
investment, and to incentivize them to deploy capacity. It is worth examining how the
emergence of shared infrastructure, and neutral host, impacts these rationale, and how
that might impact both political considerations and spectrum buying behaviors.
The exclusive licensing model was well suited to towers that typically had up to
100 km2 of coverage. Elevated towers made them vulnerable to interference from any
emissions in the band, and the propagation on these frequencies was favorable. This
meant that exclusive use over large areas was required to have practical deployment
engineering. While there are certainly policy arguments regarding exclusive spectrum,
there is no question that it has signiﬁcant beneﬁts to the operators in terms of reliability
and consistency. However, above 3 GHz, and certainly above 20 GHz, it is unlikely that
macrocells will be the dominant deployment, and the argument for exclusive spectrum
becomes moot.
The massive Multiple Input/Multiple Output (MIMO) and beam-forming planned
for these frequency ranges may be highly beneﬁcial, but the high scattering losses will
likely limit this use of macrocells in these bands. If true, then the deployment model may
be more like that planned for 3.5 GHz. The same cost and deployment drivers of 3.5 GHz
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

17.8 Implications for the 5G Spectrum Policy
273
band will apply to 5G, probably more so. These strongly favor the shared-infrastructure
model.
If shared infrastructure becomes an important aspect of the 5G deployment, then the
role of shared spectrum is an obvious issue that requires re-examination. The issues we
have to consider are:
1. Is the exclusive-use model still appropriate to networks that have a typical service
area of under 0.001 km2, and may also be deployed vertically?
2. If the exclusive model is not appropriate, what model is appropriate?
3. If there is a better model, will it be politically, ﬁnancially (from a government
perspective) and commercially sufﬁciently acceptable to the stakeholders to be
adopted?
First,
it
is
unclear
that
an
exclusive-spectrum
regime
is
optimal
for
a
shared-infrastructure deployment. It would have several impacts.
• Making extensive regions of the spectrum available only to single operators would
block shared-infrastructure suppliers from deploying the capacity that the operators
would ﬁnd useful to utilize. It would force deployment of dedicated infrastructure,
often contrary to operator best interests.
• Reduced sharable spectrum will similarly reduce the opportunity for third parties to
deploy sharable infrastructure. In turn, this reduces the capacity available to operators,
and likely reduces the competition in supplying this sharable infrastructure. Loss of
competition will lead to higher marginal costs to the operators because they tied up
the spectrum exclusively.
• Exclusive licensing causes the handset ecosystem to fragment. One of the reasons
Wi-Fi is successful is that all devices can share the spectrum, and therefore all devices
include the full band coverage. In contrast, typical LTE UE devices support only
a small selection of bands. This limits the devices mobility to other operators, or
to shared infrastructure. If one operator has exclusive use of a band segment, it is
likely that other operators phones will not support it. This increases cost, and reduces
ﬂexibility for both operators and users.3
Second, there are only three models of spectrum commonly made available
and well-understood: exclusive, shared three-tier, and unlicensed. We have already
considered the exclusive model, whether applied at a primary or secondary level (such
as in Authorized Shared Access (ASA)/Licensed Shared Access (LSA). The other
alternative to three-tier is the unlicensed, unprotected model. Even in the three-tier
model, it is likely that most of the spectrum usage will be in the unprotected tier. In
these cases, there is no substantive difference between unlicensed and three-tier General
Authorized Access (GAA). However, the three-tier model has several advantages over
the pure unlicensed.
3 In the US CBRS band, the regulation requires devices to cover the entire band in order to preclude this
very situation, but this is unique in this band.
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

274
From Shared Spectrum, to Shared Infrastructure
• The spectrum need not be occupied solely by the 5G applications, and some degree of
legacy usage can continue in the band, and receive whatever protections the regulators
deﬁne. That reduces cost, and increases the availability of spectrum for 5G.
• The ability to acquire protection, whether actually required or not, is important
to many investors in the band. Certain high-cost investments may not be possible
without recourse to protected spectrum.
• There likely will be situations where usage demand is so dense that the protection
provided by the protected tier is necessary to assure good order in the band, and
enable operators to assure QoS levels.
Considering the last question, there is deﬁnitely a trend by governments to exploit
spectrum licensing revenues as revenue sources, rather than as marketplace arbitrators.
Some have referred to this reliance on spectrum auction revenue as “Auction Addiction.”
The three-tier model offers a revenue stream, but it is not yet known how signiﬁcant
the revenue will be, and it does not provide the “instant gratiﬁcation” that an auction
provides.4
However, the revenue from spectrum was driven by two spectrum auction bidder
perceptions. The ﬁrst was that there was some linear relationship between spectrum
holdings and bandwidth capability. Therefore, operators were perceived to believe (and
might have believed) that there was no alternative but to pay whatever was necessary
to acquire rights to use a suitable portion of the available spectrum. Since densifying
low-band spectrum is difﬁcult, due to the high cost of the infrastructure and the long
range of the signals, this perception had considerable truth.
The second perception was of spectrum scarcity. At least initially, the signiﬁcant
amount of spectrum being proposed for 5G above 20 GHz would not appear to be
“scarce.” The amount of spectrum proposed to be offered for 5G is an order of magnitude
more than all of the spectrum auctioned to date in the USA. Considering that the
possible coverage in the 5G bands is 105 (10 to the ﬁfth) that of the same spectrum
in the traditional 4G bands, and more of it is available, it is quite abundant in terms of
the aggregated capacity that can be offered.
This linear relationship between spectrum bandwidth and digital service bandwidth
does not apply to deployments in the higher frequencies. Clutter losses, not free-space
losses, dominate, and infrastructure deployment is often limited by backhaul, rather
than spectral density. Spectrum bandwidth is required to achieve peak capacity, but
not to create aggregate capacity. Therefore, despite the wishes of governments, the
windfall from the “spectrum addiction” may be coming to an end due to physics,
regardless of policy. Further accelerating this loss of revenue is that the operators
might be de-appetized because of the inapplicability of exclusive spectrum to support a
shared-infrastructure model.
The answer is not to believe that any policy-maker or regulator can determine the
right mix of shared and exclusive spectrum. Neither the advocates for unlicensed, nor
the ones advocating exclusive licensing, have sufﬁcient knowledge of how this band
4 For example, in the USA, spectrum revenue is estimated and “scored” when auctions are authorized.
These funds are available to Congress for spending immediately, even if the auction is years away, and
independent of the actual revenue raised.
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

17.9 Impacts on Infrastructure and Virtualization
275
will evolve or deploy. The uncertainties in the technology, use cases, cost and service
models, and customer demand, are all massive. No informed decision is possible at this
time. However, the three-tier structure provides a mechanism to balance the demand for
both categories of spectrum dynamically and locally.
Dense urban areas with high clutter losses may be dominated by small cells that rely
on scattering loss to isolate their operations, and can readily operate in shared spectrum.
Operators in less urban low-band areas may utilize regulatory protection through
second-tier rights to assure protection. Three-tier spectrum management enables a
market-driven solution to spectrum allocation. There is no need for regulators to make
arbitrary and uninformed decisions. In fact, there is every reason to not make them.
Policy-driven allocations of spectrum must be performed many years ahead of usage,
in order to provide the ecosystem stability required to develop the equipment. The
use of the three-tier (or the lower tiers in unused spectrum) provides a mechanism to
both provide industry guidance on the spectrum that will be available, and to defer the
binding of that spectrum to speciﬁc regulatory categories. The US 5G policy statement
for above 20 GHz spectrum could have instead stated that:
“We will commit to 11 GHz of additional spectrum to be available for protected and unprotected
tiers, with some amount across all bands, to be available as non-exclusive, with annual auctions
for limited period protection rights, and some spectrum assured for unprotected, general access.”
This policy would fully abandon the command-and-control mentality of spectrum
regulations, and enable the transition to a number of different spectrum rights models,
driven by market realities, rather than rapidly obsolete regulatory decisions.
17.9
Impacts on Infrastructure and Virtualization
One issue that might constrain the growth of access points from the tens of thousands
to the tens of millions is the inherent inﬂexibility of the TELCOM infrastructure, and
practical ability to extend it these three orders of magnitude required to integrate the
access networks into the existing TELCO networks. Even without the consideration of
neutral-host networking, many participants in the TELCO world had recognized the
need to re-imagine the central ofﬁce, and how equipment is integrated into networks.
One result of this recognition is the emergence of a large-scale project to develop a
virtualized, commodity, open-source framework for managing central ofﬁces with the
same level of abstraction and virtualization as is present in datacenter management. This
industry program, Central Ofﬁce Re-architected as a Datacenter (CORD), is attempting
to develop such a framework. Its objectives are stated to be:
“Our mission is to bring datacenter economies and cloud agility to service providers for their
residential, enterprise, and mobile customers using an open reference implementation of CORD
with an active participation of the community. The reference implementation of CORD will be
built from commodity servers, white-box switches, disaggregated access technologies (e.g., vOLT,
vBBU, vDOCSIS),5 and open source software (e.g., OpenStack, ONOS, XOS).”
5 Virtual Optical Line Termination (vOLT), Virtual Baseband Unit (vBBU), and Virtual Data Over Cable
Service Interface Speciﬁcation (vDOCSIS)
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

276
From Shared Spectrum, to Shared Infrastructure
This development of a community-accepted, scalable, and broadly-based infrastruc-
ture model, and even implementation, is key to scaling the number of access points
supporting individual TELCO networks upwards by two to three orders of magnitude.
CORD may lead to that answer, or at least indicates that there is recognition of the need
for such scalable architectures. That recognition should lead to a solution, whether it
is CORD or not. It would appear to follow the same path as the scalable computing
fabric projects, such as OpenStack have successfully followed, and has a similar scale
of technical complexity.
17.10
Suggested Reading
The emergence of a shared-infrastructure model is fairly recent. However, many of the
basic concepts are well developed in more general literature, and many can be directly
extrapolated to wireless applications.
• There is extensive literature regarding 5G wireless. By nature, much of the speciﬁcs
are speculative, or even wishful thinking on the part of advocates, for one or more of
the technologies, but there is a common consensus that is useful and well documented
in these works. One recent work is by Osseiran [7].
• There has not yet been extensive peer-reviewed studies of propagation above 20 GHz
to the same extent as below 3 or 6 GHz. Some data has been published, and is
instructive in considering realistic options of the use of this band in cellular systems
[1, 2, 3, 4].
• This chapter raises questions regarding the US FCC action on 5G allocation above
20 GHz. This policy is provided in the FCC Report and Order [6].
• Introduction of two-sided markets is a logical consequence of the transition to shared
infrastructure. There is considerable literature on this subject in scholarly work,
including one book by Zhao [8].
• There is an extensive set of material describing, and implementing the CORD project,
including a fairly extensive wiki [9].
References
1 H. Zhao, R. Mayzus, S. Sun, M. Samimi, J. K. Schulz, Y. Azar, K. Wang, G. N.
Wong, F. Gutierrez, and T. S. Rappaport, 28 GHz millimeter wave cellular communication
measurements for reﬂection and penetration loss in and around buildings in New York city.
2013 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC) (2013), 5163–5167.
2 E. Violette, R. Espeland, and G. Hand, Millimeter-wave Urban and Suburban Propagation
Measurements Using Narrow and Wide Bandwidth Channel Probes. National Telecommunica-
tions and Information Agency, Technical report. NTIA Report 85–184 (1985).
3 F. Fuschini, S. Häfner, M. Zoli, R. MÃijller, E. M. Vitucci, D. Dupleich, M. Barbiroli, J. Luo,
E. Schulz, V. Degli-Esposti, and R. S. Thomä, Item level characterization of mm-wave indoor
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
277
propagation. EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 1 (2016), 1–12.
doi: 10.1186/s13638-015-0502-3.
4 J. Lu, D. Steinbach, P. Cabrol, P. Pietraski, and R. V. Pragada, Propagation characterization
of an ofﬁce building in the 60 GHz band. The 8th European Conference on Antennas and
Propagation (EuCAP 2014) (2014), 809–813.
5 National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST Construction Automation Program
Report No. 3 Electromagnetic Signal Attenuation in Construction Materials, NISTIR 6055
(Gaithersburg, MD, 1997). ﬁre.nist.gov/bfrlpubs/build97/PDF/b97123.pdf.
6 Federal Communications Commission, Use of Spectrum Bands Above 24 GHz for Mobile
Radio Services, GN Docket No. 14–177; Establishing a More Flexible Framework to Facilitate
Satellite Operations in the 27.5–28.35 GHz and 37.5–40 GHz Bands, IB Docket No. 15–256;
Petition for Rulemaking of the Fixed Wireless Communications Coalition to Create Service
Rules for the 42–43.5 GHz Band, RM–11664; Amendment of Parts 1, 22, 24, 27, 74,
80, 90, 95, and 101 to Establish Uniform License Renewal, Discontinuance of Operation,
and Geographic Partitioning and Spectrum Disaggregation Rules and Policies for Certain
Wireless Radio Services, WT Docket No. 10–112; Allocation and Designation of Spectrum for
Fixed – Satellite Services in the 37.5–38.5 GHz, 40.5–41.5 GHz and 48.2–50.2 GHz Frequency
Bands; Allocation of Spectrum to Upgrade Fixed and Mobile Allocations in the 40.5–42.5 GHz
Frequency Band; Allocation of Spectrum in the 46.9–47.0 GHz Frequency Band for Wireless
Services; and Allocation of Spectrum in the 37.0–38.0 GHz and 40.0–40.5 GHz for Government
Operations, IB Docket No. 97–95, (2016). http://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-
16-89A1.pdf.
7 A. Osseiran, J. F. Monserrat, and P. Marsch, eds., 5G Mobile and Wireless Communications
Technology (Cambridge University Press, 2016).
8 W. Zhao, Two-sided markets model and its applications. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Stanford
University (2011).
9 Central Ofﬁce Re-architected as a Datacenter (CORD), Wiki Home. wiki.opencord.org/
display/CORD.
.018
15:04:50, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

18
Future Actions to Deploy
More Three-Tier Spectrum
Bands and Nations
18.1
Issues for International Expansion
It might be considered that spectrum policies are developed through a common
process that is similar throughout the world, and standardized. However, spectrum
policies have generally followed one of two alternative paths in their development and
implementation:
ITU Down An International Telecommunication Union (ITU)-Down strategy focuses
on achieving international, or at least ITU regional, acceptance of establishing
three-tier spectrum policies. The process of achieving agreement at the periodic
World Radio Conference (WRC) events is at least a long process. It typically
addresses band-speciﬁc policies, rather than policies that are band-independent. And
as will be discussed later, such international harmonization is not necessary for the
adoption of three-tier spectrum.
Nations-Up Nation-by-nation approaches focus on developing support in typically
early-adopter nations as a secondary allocation. The regulations would need to
protect ITU-compliant uses, but these are typically incumbents in the band that are
protected under the three-tier concept in any case. For example, in the USA, the
Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) band is the extended C-Band satellite
downlink. The rules protect the international activity in the band, and therefore
comply with ITU treaties.
The strategy for introducing three-tier into National Regulatory Authority (NRA)
regimes is signiﬁcantly aided by a factor the author has referred to as “regulatory vir-
tualization.” This provides the ﬂexibility to adopt these regulations on a band-by-band,
and nation-by-nation process that requires no coordination across borders, and can be
adopted to suit localized, rather than international, needs.
18.2
Regulatory Virtualization
One of the constraints of spectrum policy has been that device manufacturers have
“baked in” most of the regulatory limits imposed by national and international regimes.
This has limited the ﬂexibility of nations to manage spectrum in unique ways, since they
.019
15:04:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

18.3 Device Commonality
279
would be forcing a fragmented market, and higher costs. They would be vulnerable to
an inﬂow of non-conforming devices due to device purchase in other countries, as roam
the world. Similarly, the rules, once established, cannot be readily updated to either
restrict or open up the rights regime.
To the extent that band rules are implemented in the access control system, national
administrations are free to establish unique rules and bands without any impact on,
or fragmentation of, the device ecosystem. Devices need not even be aware of these
national differences, as they are inherently reﬂected in the acquisition of spectrum rights
through the admission control process. Examples of spectrum regime features that can
be addressed and adjusted through the admission process include:
• Adjust the types of devices that receive protection.
• Adjust allowable power limits, bandwidth, channelization, and modulation types.
• Create markets and structures for rights acquisition.
• Notiﬁcation methods for incumbent protection.
• Selection of speciﬁc bands and frequency ranges.
• Limitations on type of usage (ﬁxed, mobile, etc.).
We consider this virtualization because the individual devices and operators are in
fact, ignorant, or at least could be ignorant, of the regime. A device can be sold anywhere
in the world, and be ignorant of the rules in any speciﬁc country, and yet operate in
accordance with any regime that is imposed in the location in which it registers with
the admission control system. Not only can a device roam geographically, it can roam
in terms of the regulatory regime in which it operates.
The virtualization of regulation should enable worldwide adoption of the three-tier
model relatively unsynchronized, reducing the necessity for an “ITU-Down” approach.
The ITU is not necessary to a nation-by-nation rollout, and is not necessary if worldwide,
or regional, band, usage and interference criteria protects the primary allocation in the
three-tier regimes. This approach is a signiﬁcant departure from traditional spectrum
policy making, but is uniquely enabled by the addition of the admission control
component to the policy tool set.
18.3
Device Commonality
The economics of modern consumer wireless is in use of high volume to reduce
consumer and infrastructure costs. This has been achieved through international
cooperation in terms of broadband standards, and international, harmonized standard-
ized band assignments. An example of this is the rapid near-universal adoption of
the Third-Generation Partnership (3GPP) standards for Long-Term Evolution (LTE)
[1, 2, 3] for standard band deﬁnitions.
An objective of any implementing NRA should be to avoid impacting the device
ecosystem, and limit the unique aspects of their regime to the admission control system
wherever possible. Unique devices, and unique device software, partition markets, limit
entry and competition, and reduce beneﬁts to both operators and consumers. In the ﬁrst
.019
15:04:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

280
Future Actions to Deploy More Three-Tier Bands
implementation of the principles in the US CBRS band, it was obviously necessary to
make changes to the Access Point (AP) software to add the Spectrum Access System
(SAS) interface and interaction. Signiﬁcant effort went into assuring that unmodiﬁed
LTE User Equipment (UE) devices developed for 3GPP band 42 and 43 could operate
without modiﬁcation. This preserved the economics of the high volume UE ecosystem,
even if it forced some unique development of the less numerous AP equipment in the
band.
18.4
Admission Control System Commonality
Similar principles apply to the software and hosting that make up the admission control
system. There are a signiﬁcant number of algorithms and methods that make up the
system. While large, developed markets might be able to support extensive development
of unique system software, smaller markets would ﬁnd such development a burden, and
might slow, or even block, the use of the regime.
The United States of America (USA) has deﬁned one set of regulations. It is likely
that the next administration that adopts three-tier will require changes in algorithms
as well as rules. However, as the number of administrations and bands increases, the
viability of the regime will be optimized in the basic framework of the protections and
limitations that are consistent with a template of national rules and a band-by-band basis.
The number of variants should converge, and not grow linearly with adoption rates.
Non-recurring development costs for each incremental national or band-speciﬁc addi-
tion to the regime should decrease over time. Eventually, the number of permutations
should converge to where the introduction of additional bands and regions would equate
to more of a template ﬁlling-out operation, rather than a unique software development.
18.5
A Model for International Three-Tier Multi-Band Roaming
The following discussion is not intended to provide, or advocate, for any speciﬁc design
of a device-to-admission-control-system interface, but to show how one such design
could enable worldwide mobility, support multiple numerous regulatory regimes, and
operate across a wide range of non-harmonized frequencies.
There are a number of aspects that impact a device’s ability to utilize spectrum that
is available through a three-tier regime. These include:
Locally Available Bands Three-tier spectrum is unlikely to be available on an
internationally harmonized basis, so the expectation is that different local NRA
may elect to make different bands available on a nation-by-nation basis. These
rules may be more dynamic than traditional bands, so it is best that the admission
control system inform the devices about spectrum availability and the regulatory
requirements for use.
.019
15:04:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

18.5 A Model for International Three-Tier Roaming
281
Required Certiﬁcations Each NRA will likely require that devices operating in their
spectrum have some level of regulatory approval. Presumably, the admission control
system will inform the device of the speciﬁc certiﬁcation(s) that are required for
each spectrum segment. These could be national, reciprocal, or collateral with other
countries. Devices will be capable of holding multiple certiﬁcates, potentially for
different bands, and different countries, and would offer these in the registration of,
the device, instead of the ﬁxed certiﬁcate in the CBRS regime.
Device Capability Three-tier spectrum principles can be applied to a wide range of
spectrum with fairly localized propagation, from the region from 1 GHz, up to the
millimeter wavelength bands. Single devices will likely not be able to operate across
the full range of possible spectrum. Devices must have algorithms to select among
the available bands, associate them with the certiﬁcations required to operate in
them, and hardware limitations, and negotiate with the appropriate admission control
system to reﬂect the intersection of the opportunities and the device capability.
Protection Licenses Devices may hold rights to utilize mid-tier spectrum, which is
afforded protection or usage rights. The admission control system must inform
devices of what licenses are required to access which spectrum channels, and devices
need to assert their rights under these licenses.
Marketplace Identity The initial US CBRS band has no dynamic markets, but the
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) proposal
provided a very dynamic, nano-marketplace, and the US CBRS regulations do
provide for secondary markets, from which dynamic markets could emerge.
Admission control systems may offer such services, or they could point to the
marketplace. Similarly, devices would need to retain identity in order to enter into
transactions in such markets.
Figure 18.1 illustrates a generalized interaction with an admission control system and
a device when it ﬁrst contacts the system and performs an inquiry. Interaction with an
admission control system would not be in clear text, obviously, and would use Exten-
sible Markup Language (XML) or JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), and would be
processed automatically by the device with no, or limited, human-decision interaction.
In this ﬁrst interaction, the admission control system provides an inventory of the
spectrum that is available. Just for completeness, other unlicensed, but not three-tier
spectrum is included in the menu to reﬂect the differences that are emerging in even
unlicensed spectrum.
In this example, we assume some of the existing unlicensed and lightly licensed
methods into the admission-control inquiry functionality. This provides the ability to not
only virtualize the three-tier regime, but to utilize the same mechanism for informing
devices of opportunities in other bands, as well. In this case, the opportunity to share
Television White Space (TVWS), and to apply Dynamic Frequency Selection (DFS)
in the 5 GHz band [4]. If no radars required protection within a region, the DFS
requirement could be removed from one or all of the channels in which radar protection
was no longer required.
.019
15:04:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

282
Future Actions to Deploy More Three-Tier Bands
Spectrum Access System Inquiry
Inquiry Range
500 MHz to 6,000 GHz
Location: USA
Administration: USA
Band
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
From
614
2 400
3 550
3 650
5 170
5 250
5 735
To: Nomenclature
698
2 464
3 650
3 700
5 250
5 730
5 835
TVWS
ISM
CBRS
CBRS
ISM
ISM:DFS
ISM
Regulation
US:Part15
USA:Part15
USA:Part96
USA:Part96
USA:Part15
USA:Part15:DFS
USA:Part15
Certificate
N/A
N/A
USA:CBSD
USA:CBSD
N/A
N/A
N/A
Access System
tvws.google.com:80
N.A
self
self
N/A
N/A
N/A
Figure 18.1 Notional display of a notional spectrum admission control system inventory.
CBRS Channel Occupancy and Availability Inquiry
PAL
Holder
Channel
From
To
From
Location Specifics
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
3 550
3 560
3 570
3 580
3 590
3 600
3 610
3 620
3 630
3 640
3 650
3 660
3 670
3 680
3 690
3 560
3 570
3 580
3 590
3 600
3 610
3 620
3 630
3 640
3 650
3 660
3 670
3 680
3 690
3 700
PAL
PAL
PAL
PAL
PAL
PAL
PAL
GAA
GAA
GAA
GAA
GAA
GAA
GAA
GAA
Verizon
Verizon
AT&T
Sprint
Google
N/A
N/A
Unavail
Unavail
Unavail
Unavail
In PPA
In PPA
PPA Near
Naval Radar
Naval Radar
WISP Protection
WISP Protection
Figure 18.2 Notional display of a notional spectrum admission control system band detail.
The device can scan this list (depicted in Figure 18.1), and then select a speciﬁc band
to perform a detailed availability inquiry. In this case, the graphic depicts the response to
an inquiry in the US CBRS band where there are several Priority Access License (PAL)
licensed, but with only several occupied: a naval radar in two channels, and several
non-interfering General Authorized Access (GAA) channels. The logical contents of
this interaction are shown in Figure 18.2.
In this example, the device is informed about the channels that are available for PAL
use. If it requests channels 1 or 2, the request will be rejected because the device is
within a PAL Priority Access License Protection Area (PPA), and must be rejected.
In channel 3, it is near a PPA. This is a hint that this request may be rejected, but
.019
15:04:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

18.7 US Experience as Conﬁdence Building
283
that decision depends on what the request speciﬁcs are. Channels 4 and 5 are PAL
channels that have PAL licenses, but no PPA is present in the vicinity. These channels
can probably be used by a GAA device, but they may be forced to relocate if the PAL
holder registers a device and associated PPA.
Channels 6 and 7 are available in future auctions for PAL licenses, and so a device
might be relocated after these auctions occur, but no PAL holder could displace the node
at this time. Channels 9 and 10 are not available due to naval radar operation that were
detected. Similarly, channels 14 and 15 are unavailable due to the requirement to protect
WISP operation over the ﬁve-year grandfathering period.
This framework avoids the requirement for internally recognized bands or regulations.
Commonality has advantages in lower cost through reduced fragmentation of markets,
but it is not essential to the regime, and market forces will inherently correct against
an overly fragmented international regime through the cost advantages of high-volume
commodity parts, and code-base reuse across bands and national regulations.
18.6
Dynamic Markets
The PCAST report proposed a nano-market that would enable escalated spectrum rights
to be exchanges on a dynamic marketplace that would be ﬂexible in terms of the rights
that were sold, the time duration, and the geographic extent [5]. The market established
by the CBRS rules did not include this within the PAL structure [6]. However, the
second order generally described the regulations for a secondary market for the PAL
spectrum rights that were acquired at the more static, annual PAL auction [7].
Other nations may adopt a more PCAST-like market framework; but even in the
absence of such government-executed markets, the secondary markets may create a
dynamic exchange for spot-market acquisition of spectrum rights from holders of
the longer-term licenses. At an extreme, the annual markets for government rights
could become a wholesale market, with the secondary market supporting end users in
managing the dynamic nature of their trafﬁc delivery, without a planning or investment
in full time, prediction-based commitments.
18.7
US Experience as Conﬁdence Building
The US CBRS will be the ﬁrst implementation of a three-tier regime, even though
several features were not incorporated in the initial band regulations. For this regime
to be attractive to the rest of the world, or to advocates for additional bands, the band
must demonstrate its attributes to three communities:
Consumers and Users There should be demonstrable increases in available bandwidth
or a reduction in the cost of bandwidth that can be explicitly traced to the capacity
introduced by the regime. Alternatively, it may turn out that the band introduces a
.019
15:04:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

284
Future Actions to Deploy More Three-Tier Bands
new modality that could not be supported through existing spectrum models, such as
for Internet of Things (IoT).
Industry and Operators One of the core arguments of the regime is that it will create
new investments and innovative products. The USA experience should demonstrate
that this investment occurs, even though its scope is initially constrained by the single
market and single band.
Incumbents A core tenant of the three-tier regime is that incumbents are protected
from interference from the secondary users managed by the three-tier regime. The
US experience must demonstrate that this commitment is met. There will likely be
claims of disrupted operation, but these must be either shown to not be due to the
three-tier regime, or to have been rapidly resolved, and the regime updated, to avoid
recurrence.
At this point in the deployment process, it is premature to evaluate the ﬁrst and third of
these criteria. However, some initial indications are apparent in regards to satisfaction of
the second criteria. The Wireless Innovation Forum (WinnForum) process has attracted
over 50 organizations and companies who perceive an interest in the band, including the
major chip and system manufacturers, and all four of the US major cellular operators.1
To address the technology-speciﬁc application of Time Division Long Term Evolu-
tion (TD-LTE), the CBRS Alliance industry organization was formed by Qualcomm,
Nokia, Alphabet Access, Intel, Ruckas, and Federated Wireless to promote the use
of TD-LTE in the band. A more important object, from the innovation and capacity
perspective is the development of neutral-host networks in partnership with the Mobile
Network Operators (MNO) community.
None of these events by themselves satisﬁes the second criterion. However, they do
show the investment is widely perceived to have value, and that a business opportunity
is very possible. At this point in the evolution of the band, it is a positive sign.
18.8
Suggested Reading
• Many of the techniques discussed in Cognitive Radio (CR) research would be
highly useful when a range of spectrum is made available to devices. Device
decision-making would be able to trade range, power limits, bandwidth, propagation
and interference conditions dynamically. Work in this ﬁeld includes two books by
the author [8, 9], the ﬁrst of which focuses on algorithms to perform this kind of
decision-making. A number of works with material that may be relevant to strategic
management of spectrum decisions include a number of works in CR [10, 11, 12, 13].
• Dynamic secondary markets may emerge as a natural consequence of the diversity
of spectrum that becomes available in three-tier regimes. These should encourage the
dynamics and transparency that would maximize the beneﬁt to all of the users. These
1 This includes Qualcomm and Intel on the chip side, Nokia, Ericsson, Ruckas, and Huawei on the
system-infrastructure side.
.019
15:04:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
285
holdings are not standalone, as in multi-billion investments, but can be highly linked,
as described in terms of a portfolio [14], and with dynamic pricing that minimizes the
incentives to overly restrict spectrum access [15].
• The industry progress is an indication of the investment in the band, and therefore
industrial estimates of its economic opportunity the band affords. Progress in both
the WinnForum and CBRS Alliance is indicative of this. These organizations have
web pages accessible at www.wirelessinnovation.org and www.CBRSAlliance.org,
respectively.
References
1 E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Skold, 4G: LTE/LTE-Advanced for Mobile Broadband
(Amsterdam: Academic Press/Elsevier, 2011).
2 A. Ghosh, J. Zhang, J. G. Andrews, and R. Muhamed, Fundamentals of LTE (NJ: Prentice
Hall, 2011).
3 A. Ghosh and R. Ratasuk, Essentials of LTE and LTE-A (Cambridge University Press,
2011).
4 The Wi-Fi Alliance Spectrum and Regulatory Committee, Spectrum Sharing Task Group
Regulatory Task Group, Spectrum Sharing in the 5 GHz Band – DFS Best Practices, (2007).
www.ieee802.org/18/Meeting_documents/2007_Nov/WFA-DFS-Best-Practices.pdf.
5 President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, Report to the President:
Realizing the Full Potential of Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth
(Executive Ofﬁce of the President (EOP), Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP), 2012). http://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/microsites/ostp/pcast-
stem-ed-ﬁnal.pdf.
6 Federal Communications Commission, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to
Commercial Operation in the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354, Report and Order
and Second Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Order (2015). http://apps.fcc.gov/
edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-15-47A1.pdf.
7 ——, Amendment of the Commission’s Rules with Regard to Commercial Operation in
the 3550–3650 MHz Band, GN Docket 12–354 (2016). https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/
attachmatch/FCC-16-55A1.pdf.
8 P. F. Marshall, Scaling, Density, and Decision-Making in Cognitive Wireless Networks
(Cambridge University Press, 2012).
9 ——, Quantitative Analysis of Cognitive Radio and Network Performance (Norwood, MA:
Artech House, 2010).
10 L. Doyle, Essentials of Cognitive Radio (Cambridge University Press, 2009).
11 Federal Communications Commission, Facilitating Opportunities for Flexible, Efﬁcient, and
Reliable Spectrum Use Employing Cognitive Radio Technologies, ET Docket No. 03–108
(2003).
12 M. P. Fitz, T. R. Halford, I. Hossain, and S. W. Enserink, Towards simultaneous radar
and spectral sensing. 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access
Networks (2014), 15–19.
13 QinetiQ, Cognitive Radio Technology: A Study for OFCOM – Summary Report (2007). www.
ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_ﬁle/0017/40364/cograd_summary.pdf.
.019
15:04:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

286
Future Actions to Deploy More Three-Tier Bands
14 P. K. Muthuswamy, K. Kar, A. Gupta, S. Sarkar, and G. Kasbekar, Portfolio optimization in
secondary spectrum markets. 2011 International Symposium on Modeling and Optimization
in Mobile, Ad Hoc and Wireless Networks (WiOpt) (2011), 249–256.
15 H. Mutlu, M. Alanyali, and D. Starobinski, Spot pricing of secondary spectrum access in
wireless cellular networks. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 17/6 (2009), 1794–1804.
doi: 10.1109/TNET.2009.2019959.
.019
15:04:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

19
Alternatives to Three-Tier
Operation
19.1
Introduction
This chapter considers some of the alternative future concepts and approaches that can
serve as alternatives to the three-tier approach. They are considered in the context of the
evaluation criteria used in Chapters 3 and 4. Where there are shortfalls in our three-tier
criteria, methods of resolving them without the implementation of a three-tier regime
will be explored.
19.2
Cognitive Radio
Cognitive Radio (CR) has been a concept that has had considerable research performed
in the academic community, and has achieved some interest in the commercial world,
as well. There are signiﬁcant overlaps between the three-tier concept and CR. The
fundamental difference in the academic CR research is that the CR device makes
spectrum decisions based on its perception of conditions, and in three-tier, it is
centralized in a database-driven process, with very little spectrum decision-making
performed by the radio.
It should be noted that many of the participants in the President’s Council of Advisors
on Science and Technology (PCAST) study were active researchers in the ﬁeld of CR.
It is instructive to consider why the PCAST recommendations did not include more of
the CR fundamental concepts. Some of the reticence to advocate for CR principles is
undoubtedly to create a lower risk set of proposals, and thus increase the likelihood
that the recommendations could not be effectively challenged. But there were also
challenges that current CR technology could not address, as well.
Sensing As discussed in the section on Television White Space (TVWS), there are
difﬁculties in relying on sensing as a mechanism to create awareness of other devices
operating in the band, unless the uses are consistent with sensing, which many
existing uses are not.
Tier Detection Even if the sensing problem is solved, the ability to determine the
status of the tier they are operating in is difﬁcult, if not impossible, if multiple
tiers have common technologies. In the band considered by the United States (US)
PCAST study, the primary incumbent is a radar with a single set of operating
characteristics and is always the primary, so there is no difﬁculty in detecting
the radar, and determining its tier. However, the second and third tiers have no
technology limitations, and cannot be differentiated through sensing methods.
.020
15:07:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

288
Alternatives to Three-Tier Operation
Receive Only The assumption in most CR discussion (including by this author) is that
protected users can be detected by their emissions. While the item above raises
questions about that premise, there is no doubt that receive only devices, such as
satellite and broadcast receivers cannot be detected. A similar argument can be made
for systems that operate in some variant of Frequency Division Duplex (FDD) Media
Access Layer (MAC) layers.
Rights Acquisition Rights acquisition through some intermediary, or even one-on-one,
implies common brokers or other interconnection that may involve nodes that are
in range, or have common protocols, cryptographic material, and policies that can
enable a self-forming market, that is not reliant on non-automated intermediary
facilitators.
It is a fair question if one or more of these constraints can be remediated in order that
the centralized functions in the three-tier framework can be devolved to execution by the
devicesthemselves.Adistributed,autonomousapproachwouldappeartobeneﬁtanetwork
thatwasevolvingtowardsanedge-focus,suchasisbeingimplementedinsmallcellsusing
Long-TermEvolution(LTE)Self-OrganizingNetwork(SON)technology.Certainlysome
of these individual issues may not be constraining in speciﬁc band applications.
The objectives of the three-tier regime can be at least partially achieved by mitigating
the issues described above:
Sensing The general framework of the three-tier regime was not based on the use of
self-sensing due to the number of special and corner cases that could create, or be
perceived to create, vulnerabilities in the ability of the admission control system to
be fully aware of protected nodes. The United States of America (USA) Citizens
Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) has a hybrid approach, that uses sensing for the
naval radars, promulgated by a database system, and declared locations for Fixed
Satellite Service (FSS) and Part 90 users. It is possible that a speciﬁc implementation
of three-tier could depend on sensing for some, or even all, of the protected node
detection.
Tier Detection A more subtle spectrum sensing question is the ability to determine
if a node that is sensed has superior, equal, or inferior rights to spectrum access.
If the use of each tier has unique and distinguishable technology to a sensor, then
it might be possible for all of the devices in an area to organize themselves in a
manner that is appropriate to the rights structure. A radar is distinguishable from a
communications device. However, within a class of devices, it will be difﬁcult for a
sensor to tell the rights of the devices it detects. PCAST and the FCC proposed that
the use of Tier 2 and Tier 3 had no differences in the emission rights, and therefore
could not only be similar technologies, they could be identical equipment. Therefore,
a sensor could not determine which tier a signal was associated with. However, if the
technology was detectably unique in each tier, the sensing of a CR could be effective
in managing the hierarchy of tiers.
Receive Only The premise of cognitive radio is the awareness of the environment, so
detecting devices that have no signature is probably not an option. However, for
bands with no FDD or receive-only operating modes, this would not be an issue.
.020
15:07:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

19.3 Market-based Alternative
289
Rights Acquisition There may be methods for devices to negotiate some rights
between themselves if they share a common channel, waveform, and crypto, but
the number of conditions in which this could be performed is limited. It is certainly
not a general approach, and is not technology neutral. Decisions about rights can be
made through cognitive radio, but the coordination of this is likely to be performed
through some out of band mechanism.
The introduction of self-sensing in a three-tier device hybridizes these approaches.
In a hybrid regime, the admission control system provides a range of “legal” spectrum
choices, and the device uses CR techniques to select the best option among these choices.
This approach may be adopted to address some of the peer coexistence requirements that
will emerge as the band becomes fully occupied.
19.3
Market-based Alternative
The three-tier proposal presented in the early chapters implicitly was an offer by a
National Regulatory Authority (NRA) to share spectrum that was unused by the primary
licensee of the spectrum, and an offer to acquire privileges over other users that have
accepted this offer. It is certainly possible that this same offer could be made by a
licensee that has sufﬁciently ﬂexible rights under its license with the NRA.
There may be objections to letting a primary licensee generate revenue from
secondary licensing. This use was presumably not contemplated when the license
was issued. If it was purchased at auction, the valuation likely did not reﬂect its
secondary-use value. If the spectrum was licensed for a speciﬁc use without charge,
such as satellite and broadcast spectrum, there may be issues with private income being
derived from this public grant. This last consideration was certainly an issue when the
USA proposed to allow broadcasters to beneﬁt from the repurposing of their spectrum
in the incentive auction. In this case, the decision essentially shares the revenue from
reduced broadcast spectrum between the stations relinquishing the spectrum, and the
Federal government.
However, if these objections can be overcome, these are advantages to enabling
incumbents to form such markets:
• One of the major obstacles to spectrum sharing is resistance to sharing by the
incumbents. However, if the incumbent has a vested interest in the success of the
sharing regime (such as income), it is reasonable to assume that their support will be
more forthcoming.
• The incumbent best understands their operating concept, actual link margin, weather
conditions, etc. Use of this insight into the incumbent operation is invaluable in
maximizing the degree of sharing that is possible.
• The incumbent may have greater ﬂexibility to set up and operate the sharing regime
without the more extensive processes that are required when similar regulations are
developed and implemented by governments.
.020
15:07:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

290
Alternatives to Three-Tier Operation
Markets established by current spectrum incumbents would operate similarly to those
established by NRA organizations. The enforcement capability of a privately operated
three-tier market may require some recognition in national regulations. Assertions made
about device operation and compliance with licensing conditions is typically a legal
violation (of variable signiﬁcance) when these assertions are made to governments, and
the conditions issued by governments. However, the status of the same violations when
linked to a private sharing arrangement is less clear, and may not provide sufﬁcient
disincentives to malicious or fraudulent behaviors.
The PCAST and CBRS proposals implied that General Authorized Access (GAA)
(unprotected) access was free of any charge, and that the protected middle-tier Priority
Access (PA) or Priority Access License (PAL), respectively, had a cost that was
established by auction. However, to incentivize commercial offering of sharing, there
is no reason that a three-tier system must offer a “free” tier that mimics traditional
unlicensed spectrum. For example, it would not be unreasonable that there be a
larger fee for protection, and a lesser fee for unprotected access. This is the spectrum
equivalent of “reserved seating” and “general admission.”
It may be that the private sector opportunity in three-tier management is so attractive
that this is the most effective way to recapture the opportunity cost of underused
spectrum. It may not have been the intent of these licenses, but it may be a pragmatic
means to overcome the typical incumbent resistance to any spectrum.
19.4
Management and Allocation by Regulators
In this implementation, we consider the same spectrum policies that were presented
in the three-tier spectrum model, but that they were instead implemented through a
manually executed, regulatory process. This process is presumably similar to licensing
in the current regime, except permitting the third-tier usage. Therefore, the spectrum
management beneﬁts would be essentially the same as our three-tier baseline, with
the exception of an automated admission control process. In practice, techniques such
as aggregation into thousands of nodes would be hard to implement, unless it was so
automated as to be the functional equivalent of a SAS admission control system.
It is possible that the same framework that allocates spectrum could allocate any
number of tiers manually through a similar process to that used by the automated
process. Consider the possibility of errors. In the case of the USA, it is estimated
that ten million access points could be deployed over the ﬁrst three years, with half
of this deployment occurring in the third year. Assuming it took one hour for a human
to process a request completely, and 1 860 work hours a year, it would take a staff 2 688
employees in the third year. Even if the volume enabled a four times increase in speed
of processing the staff needed would still be 672 employees. Anyone who has worked
with regulators would ﬁnd the idea of an answer in one hour to be quite unrealistically
optimistic, much less the 15 minute estimate!
This option becomes even more unrealistic when we consider any level of higher-tier
spectrum reclaiming activity. If half of the transactions are for protected tier entry, and
.020
15:07:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

19.7 Reallocation as an Alternative
291
each entry impacts three existing nodes, the volume of transactions increases from ﬁve
million to over twelve million, with a linear increase in workload.
The conclusion is that a three-tier regime is dependent on an automated admission
control system that is empowered to execute interference analysis and to perform the
admission decisions independently of direct human intervention.
19.5
Removal of PA Rights Tier
Removal of the PA layer creates effectively an exclusive tier, and a tier resembling
unlicensed. The question this approach would raise is whether suitable investment will
be made if the option to acquire protection is removed. The PCAST argument was that
protected access was an essential aspect of a regime that desired to attract infrastructure
investment. While it was not clear that protection was, or is, a superior approach assured
operation for performance-sensitive users, the right to obtain it, if needed, assured that
the effectiveness of their investments in infrastructure could be protected.
Experience with the three-tier regime is required before the necessity of a protected
tier can be deﬁnitely determined. However, communications services providers are
inherently conservative, due to their traditional emphasis on reliability and predictable
performance. The goal of the admission control system is to minimize the extent to
which such protections deny useful access to other users. If successful, this minimizes
the imposition on access by other users. And, so long as the protected tiers are populated
with devices to the carrying capacity of the band, the objectives of the regime are still
fulﬁlled.
19.6
Removal of GAA Rights Tier
Removal of the GAA tier essentially reverts the three-tier framework to a set of
primary and secondary exclusive licenses, similar in effect to Authorized Shared Access
(ASA)/Licensed Shared Access (LSA). It undercuts the fundamental principle that all
spectrum should be usable by someone at all times and places. As such, it fails to
be disruptive to the existing structure of wireless services. Although such regimes do
have value, they are not relevant to the innovation objectives of three-tier spectrum
management.
19.7
Reallocation as an Alternative
The PCAST study proposed the three-tier framework because it viewed the option of
clearing and reallocation of many of the (even lightly used) Federal spectrum bands
was not practical. Therefore, three-tier spectrum management appeared to be a more
effective use of the spectrum than the exclusive use by the less densely deployed Federal
agencies. The signiﬁcant interest in developing systems for this band would appear to
.020
15:07:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

292
Alternatives to Three-Tier Operation
support this belief, although it is too early to know how the band will evolve over the
next decade.
Whether this assumption was right or wrong, it is a different question than whether
three-tier can produce greater value from the spectrum than relocating the incumbents,
in those situations when reallocation is a practical option. A fair question is: “should
two- or three-tier models1 replace exclusive, effectively one-tier, licensing?”
Technically, it is hard to argue that a single tier model can achieve the density of use
that the three-tier model achieves. Any spectrum not used by the sole licensee would be
effectively wasted. So, if any area was not fully deployed, the case for three-tier is valid.
Effective 100% coverage might be possible at lower frequencies, but it is not likely in
the higher frequency spectrum that is typically used in small cell deployments. Even if
the spectrum is used extensively in two dimensions, it is likely that it will not be fully
exploited in all three dimensions.
The question of the value of this lower-tier use could be open to question. However,
if the three-tier interference protection is effective, then whatever beneﬁt is achieved
is at least a societal beneﬁt, and comes at no cost except the complexity of the
regime. Establishing the value of this spectrum access is a question for economists,
not engineers!
19.8
Summary
Table 19.1 summarizes the degree to which these alternative mechanisms achieve
the objectives established in Chapters 1 and 3. The objectives of three-tier can be
achieved to a signiﬁcant extent with different approaches, depending on the speciﬁc
characteristics of the incumbents of the band.
Perhaps the most important, and differentiating, feature in the multi-stakeholder
framework is the use of an automated admission control system. This enables the
use of complex algorithms, ﬁne-resolution spectrum and spatial extents, with the
corresponding high number of unique transactions.
The mix of protected and unprotected users (ﬁrst and third tier) may make the middle
tier meaningless if they are effective in the spectrum. In this case, the intent is met.
However, it is more likely that different locations will have different usage mixes, with
a PA tier being maximally occupied in some regions, and the lower tier the dominant
usage in others.
19.9
Suggested Reading
Most of the appropriate readings have already been suggested in previous chapters:
1 Since the spectrum is being reallocated, it implies that the ﬁrst tier is being relocated, leaving the
three-tier model operating only the lower two tiers.
.020
15:07:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Table 19.1 Satisfaction of three-tier objectives by alternative approaches to its implementation.
Approach
Multiple Protected Tiers
Lower Tier Shared
Lowest Tier Without
Protection
Small Allocations
(Frequency and Spatial)
Automated Transactions
Cognitive
Radio
Difﬁcult to isolate tier
users, unless there is a
forced differentiation in
the air interface
appearance to receivers.
Tiering difﬁcult to
establish among
homogeneous users.
Possible.
No allocations used.
A central admission
control system is not
needed due to
autonomous nature of
decision-making.
Market-based
Could be provided by the
market maker.
Assumed that the rights
owner would require
compensation.
Could be provided by the
market maker.
Could be provided by the
market maker.
Could be provided by the
market maker.
Regulator
Allocation
YES, manually.
Possible, but may be
impractical due to
volume limit of
regulatory transaction
rate and cost.
Possible, but may be
impractical due to
volume limit of
regulatory transaction
rate and cost.
Small allocations would
drive transaction volume
beyond practical limits.
No, relies on regulatory
interaction for allocation
and assignment.
Remove PA
No non-incumbent
protection available.
YES
YES
YES
YES
Remove GAA
Tier
YES
YES
There is no lower tier
that is available for
unprotected use,
therefore all spectrum
carries some exclusive
rights.
YES
YES
Reallocation
Would only establish a
single tier.
Only if no protected tier
was created.
Only if no protected tier
was created.
Possible, but traditional
exclusive licenses have
been for large regions.
Not applicable.
.020
15:07:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

294
Alternatives to Three-Tier Operation
• There is extensive literature investigating cognitive radio technology that has emerged
over the last two decades. Clearly, some fusion of the principles of CR and of
three-tier spectrum will occur in the future, and they will no longer be distinct
alternatives. In addition to two books by the author [1, 2], other readings include
books focusing on cognitive networks [3], and broader surveys of the ﬁeld of
cognitive radio [4, 5].
• The more traditional approaches discussed here have close analogs in traditional
spectrum management. Understanding of these is certainly useful in interpreting
more deeply on how the three-tier regime can coexist in these regimes. The work
by Cave and Webb is a good resource on the current practices and issues in spectrum
management practice and issues [6].
References
1 P. F. Marshall, Quantitative Analysis of Cognitive Radio and Network Performance (Norwood,
MA: Artech House, 2010).
2 ——, Scaling, Density, and Decision-Making in Cognitive Wireless Networks (Cambridge
University Press, 2012).
3 Q. Mahmoud, Cognitive Networks: Towards Self-Aware Networks (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 2007).
4 S. Haykin, Fundamental issues in cognitive radio. In Cognitive Radio Networks (New York:
Springer-Verlag, 2007).
5 L. Doyle, Essentials of Cognitive Radio (Cambridge University Press, 2009).
6 M. Cave and W. Webb, Spectrum Management Using the Airwaves for Maximum Social and
Economic Beneﬁt (Cambridge University Press, 2016).
.020
15:07:29, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

20
Conclusions and a
Look Ahead
20.1
Beneﬁts and Roadmap of a Transition to Three-Tier
The future of three-tier spectrum is likely in the hands of the industry and operator
communities that are engaged in its deployment. The regulators have created an
opportunity for a new ecosystem; its success will be evaluated from the outcome of
several deployment thrusts, such as the neutral-host model, enterprise, and Internet
of Things (IoT), among others. It is not necessary that all succeed; one “killer app”
is probably sufﬁcient for an ecosystem to expand beyond the shores of the United
States (US), and the 3.55 GHz band. It is not just that the US Citizens Broadband
Radio Service (CBRS) is particularly important by itself; but, that a failure in the
ﬁrst deployment would certainly support and empower the opponents of any adoption
anywhere, regardless of the reason for failure in the USA.
The rest of this section will address the scenario in which the US deployment is at
least a partial success, and has sufﬁcient economic and societal beneﬁt that other nations
have a desire to achieve at least these beneﬁts, and maybe to tailor the regime to make
it even more effective than the case in the USA.
On the other hand, if the US deployment is perceived to be a failure, then much of
this material is irrelevant. The material in Section 20.5 may be of some use in resolving
the perceived ﬂaws in the three-tier regime.
20.2
Technology and Policy
Much of the discussion of this book has centered on spectrum-sharing technology;
technology that is not speciﬁc to three-tier spectrum management regimes. The
difference between general spectrum sharing and the speciﬁc three-tier model is that
the three-tier model uses spectrum-sharing technology as a necessary enabler of a
new, innovative, and potentially transformative regime, rather than an augmentation
of current spectrum policies into a two-party sharing regime. Spectrum sharing is an
admirable goal, but it is not equivalent to three-tier in terms of enabling ease of entry,
of innovation, scalable deployment, and the maximum utilization of the spectrum.
There are many technical obstacles to freeing up spectrum access, and incumbents
deploy them against any threats to either their use of the spectrum, or the business model
which they practice, and depend on. It is the job of the policy community to balance
.021
15:07:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

296
Conclusions and a Look Ahead
these very immediate interests of vocal critics of any increased access to spectrum
against the opportunity cost of precluding not-yet-existing, not-yet-vocally-supported,
and somewhat vague opportunities.
However, it can be argued that these are the same innovations, technologies, and new
business models that produce economic growth, and value to consumers and societies.
At least, spectrum policy should be neutral to the forces of creative destruction, rather
than a protector of the status quo. The forces of creative destruction have shown
themselves to be inevitable; but, it has also shown that they beneﬁt the early adopters,
and punish those that cling to old models, in the belief that these models can be saved.
20.3
National Activities
The previous chapters showed that opportunities to establish three-tier spectrum sharing
through national policy had the most potential for immediate action. Such action would
be secondary to international treaty obligations. Further, it had the greatest extent of
spectrum that could be repurposed or shared, in the near- and mid-term timeframe.
There are two paths that nations may consider:
• Alliances with spectrum holders that may ﬁnd their current allocations vulnerable
to reallocation, and might view sharing with a broad constituency as providing the
support needed to continued retention of their access rights. To some extent, this is
the case with the US CBRS band, in that the Department of Defense (DoD) had only
very low-density usage of the band. Sharing the band would create a community that
has a vested interest in maintaining the Federal allocation for this band, and resist any
reallocation of the band.
• Forcible establishment of three-tier regimes. This is most likely in the exclusive usage
bands that have been allocated to a single use, but not to a single user. This is the
case in bands allocated to broadcast, many of the satellite services, government, and
general commercial use. The extended C-band satellite incumbents in 3 600–3 700
MHz in the United States of America (USA) would consider this the case in the
CBRS implementation.
20.4
International Activities
International activity should have two goals: one focused on achieving the maximum
amount of common three-tier spectrum, and one aiming to maximize the harmonization
of the sharing principles (even if the bands themselves are not harmonized) in order
to achieve the beneﬁts of high-volume devices and access control software. Creating
success in making speciﬁc allocations to three-tier spectrum across a wide range of
interests, as are involved in the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and
World Radio Conference (WRC) processes would be a signiﬁcant, and unnecessary
challenge. Since the premise of three-tier spectrum management is to protect the
.021
15:07:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

20.4 International Activities
297
rights of the incumbent, primary tier, explicit WRC or ITU action is not required for
individual nations to proceed. That said, establishing realistic and balanced protection
expectations for the services protected under ITU regulations would be highly useful
to all nations, and even to incumbents. The harmonization of many of the three-tier
spectrum access principles would beneﬁt both the device and spectrum admission
control system communities.
The international approach should focus on principles for both the general framework
of three-tier rules, and on establishing balanced protection expectations for incumbent
systems. Speciﬁcally:
• ITU interference recommendations are developed by working groups with common
interests in the protected service. The process for their development is expensive
to the participants in terms of time and travel, and therefore the participation tends
to consist of organizations with a vested interest in the protection of their speciﬁc
spectrum allocations. If there was no tension between the uses of the spectrum, this
would be a reasonable process. However, it has no balancing force to represent the
interests of a future in which this spectrum might have to be shared. The protection
criteria should be a balance, or compromise, between many competing interests, not
just the incumbent’s. All of the interference protection recommendations should be
revalidated, with a process that provides a balance between the incumbent interests,
and the new uses that can be provided in the same spectrum.
• Harmonization of spectrum has been a focus of the ITU. New devices are much more
ﬂexible, and strict harmonization is no longer as critical as it once was. Harmonizing
the rules (rather than speciﬁc band allocations) for devices to operate worldwide
is critical to economically viable markets. Harmonization of core spectrum sharing
principles and methods will be highly beneﬁcial. Examples include extensions to
propagation models to account for clutter loss, methods of interference aggregation,
registration, privacy expectations, and other aspects that transcend the individual band
allocations, but would comprise the “virtual regulations” discussed previously.
These objectives, while not essential to three-tier spectrum management would
signiﬁcantly beneﬁt all parties. It would reduce regulatory complexity for national
adoption, reduce costs to all participants though the largest compatible markets, and
provide smaller National Regulatory Authority (NRA) organizations with a practical
path to adoption.
As an example, the Third-Generation Partnership (3GPP) Long-Term Evolution
(LTE) speciﬁcations are far from harmonized in terms of frequency and band plans (43
are deﬁned as of this writing). But they provide a common control system, physical
and Media Access Layer (MAC) layer design, and other band-independent aspects
of the design. This harmonized technology framework has been readily extended
into many internationally harmonized, and nation-speciﬁc spectrum bands, as needed.
There are massive cost savings from replicating this functional core, even if the Radio
Frequency (RF) elements of the design are unique to each band. The same principles
can be applied to three-tier spectrum. Some broad international principles can be
.021
15:07:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

298
Conclusions and a Look Ahead
developed on common, international platforms, and then localized through development
of frequency-speciﬁc implementations.
20.5
What Might Come After the Three-Tier Spectrum Regimes
This book has largely looked to a transition from single-tier spectrum management to
three-tier. However, it is worthwhile to begin the process of looking beyond the adoption
of three-tier in the bands in which it is appropriate, to spectrum regimes that might
supplant it, and create even greater spectrum utilization, and ﬂexibility. Two thrusts
present themselves:
• Section 16.2 introduced a number of constraints on the application of three-tier
spectrum. A regime that did not inherit these restrictions could be applied more
broadly, and would have beneﬁts beyond the current three-tier model.
• The three-tier regime continues an implicit mission to avoid interference to devices.
There are alternative approaches that can assure high-conﬁdence communications
without the massive loss of spectrum utility that is required to assure interference-free
operation on speciﬁc and ﬁxed channels.
The next two subsections explore each of these alternatives.
20.5.1
Removal of Three-Tier Spectrum Management Application Limitations
We will review the constrains to adoption of three-tier that were provided in
Section 16.2, and consider how these limitations could be eliminated if the framework
of the three-tier regime was modiﬁed, or abandoned.
Incumbent Awareness The question is whether an enhanced regime could avoid the
necessity to have detailed awareness of protected incumbents. This implies that
either the awareness is not needed, or can be obtained through other means. The
next section addresses eliminating the need for proactive protection of incumbents
through interference tolerance or avoidance. The other alternative is to rely on
sensing of these incumbents. The Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA) community has
developed a number of concepts, prototypes, and executed experiments on the “sense
and avoid” principle. There are some fundamental limits in the relative EIRP of the
incumbent and sharing device [1, 2].
Meaningful Bandwidth The question of bandwidth availability is driven by the
technology that will utilize the band. The emphasis today is on mobile wireless,
which, even with Long-Term Evolution Carrier Aggregation (LTE-CA), requires
meaningful segments of contiguous spectrum. Other applications may emerge that
need less bandwidth, such as for the hypothesized IoT networks, or systems that
can use a large number of independent carriers effectively. The requirement for
contiguous spectrum may be much less important in future years if the spectrum
is made available on reasonable terms. Contiguous spectrum is important today, but
.021
15:07:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

20.5 What Might Come After the Three-Tier Spectrum
299
need not be an obstacle in the near future. History has shown that when spectrum is
available on advantageous terms, innovation occurs.
Opposition Effectiveness The question would be if an enhanced version of three-tier
spectrum could be more acceptable to incumbents, and could this model therefore
be more successful than the three-tier model, as it is framed today? Resistance to the
implementation of spectrum sharing would require that the risks to incumbents be
further reduced below the level of risk of the three-tier regime. The three-tier regime
is quite conservative, and is likely as low risk as any follow-on approach. The risk to
incumbents can only be reduced by changes in the incumbent system’s vulnerability
to interference, as discussed in the next section.
National Scope The question here is if a follow-on to the three-tier regime could
be more rapidly adopted on an international basis, and therefore avoid achieving
independent decisions by each nation. This question may be independent of the
regime that is adopted, whether it is three-tier, or another technology.
20.5.2
Transition to a New Set of Objectives for Spectrum Management
The advocates of DSA spectrum management have generally accepted the premise that
the goal of the alternative regimes they propose is to emulate the existing processes, in
holding the avoidance of interference as a key organizing principle. This is true for the
US President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) and CBRS
proposals, as well as the vast majority of material presented in academic conferences on
DSA, such as the IEEE Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks Conference (DYSPAN)
and Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM).
The author has proposed two alternative approaches to the enablement of highly
dynamic wireless systems. Both of these proposals challenge the concept that spectrum
management should focus on assuring clear channels, and the essentially isolated
operation of protected devices. In both of them, the spectrum management regime works
with devices cooperatively to meet their needs, or supports their independent recourse
actions. In both cases, devices have to be sufﬁciently “smart,” or more appropriately,
“cognitive.”
The ﬁrst proposed principle addresses the issue from the perspective of receiver
protection. The author has proposed this approach in several publications and papers
[3, 4, 5], including Dynamic Spectrum Management of Front-End Linearity and
Dynamic Range that appeared in IEEE Communications magazine.
This analysis demonstrated that with typical spectrum densities, devices with even
poor front-end linearity and reasonable tunable/selectable ﬁlters could locate spectrum
and operate at the same front-end overload probability as devices with 20 dB more
front-end linearity,1 with the consequent reduction in power required by the stage,
thermal load, and more ﬂexibility in device substrate and fabrication. Reducing the
requirement for front-end protection can enable the spectrum to be used much more
densely.
1 As measured by the Third-Order Input Intercept Point (IIP3) of the ﬁrst stage.
.021
15:07:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

300
Conclusions and a Look Ahead
The previous concept removed the necessity for the spectrum management regime to
manage the environment of the front-end outside of the signaling channel. The second
concept addresses the management of the signaling channel.
The author proposed [6] in a paper titled ”Dynamic Spectrum Access as a Mechanism
for Transition to Interference-Tolerant Systems” that the DSA objective of using sensing
to avoid interference to other nodes had inherent limitations on the density it could
achieve (similar to those of an admission control system). The very conservative
assumptions of propagation loss inherently reduces the effective density far below the
actual density that could be achieved with the closest possible non-interfering spacing.
Instead of the prediction-based interference avoidance process, the author proposed
that the sensing mission should focus on self-protection and channel selection by the
device itself. In this framework, channel selection should be based on the device’s
own sensing. The devices would be interference tolerant because they would have
the ﬂexibility, and the right, to select other channels that were superior by whatever
measure they chose to apply. No protection would be offered. This approach achieves
signiﬁcantly more density that prediction-based interference avoidance. However, like
any spectrum allocation scheme, it eventually could reach a point of saturation.
However, it would reach this true interference-limited condition after admitting many
more nodes than could be admitted in a risk-averse interference-avoidance-driven
process. Devices with the technical capability, and regulatory authorization to make
these decisions would be considered to have “Recourse,” and would be allowed to
operate ﬂexibly in bands shared with other similarly qualiﬁed devices.
This approach requires that the devices in the band are sufﬁciently cognitive and
have sufﬁcient ﬂexibility to not be dependent on an external agent to select and protect
a channel for them. The beneﬁts in spectrum density arise from eliminating many of the
uncertainties that an admission control system must address with the most conservative
assumptions. The admission control system is still needed to inform devices of the range
of frequencies that they were permitted to utilize. A spectrum regime could position
devices that have these recourse features in a shared band, while segregating devices
that required an external agent to prevent them from interference into separate, and
tiered spectrum.
Some of these uncertainties that self-protection through sensing can minimize include
the following:
• Is the device even transmitting? A sensor will detect this dynamically. Users
of devices are unlikely to inform an admission control system of such dynamic
information. Devices can decide the timescale in which they are willing to move
frequencies.
• Propagation loss is always a guess, at best. For any path, there is generally a
signiﬁcant (tens of dB) difference between the median path loss, mean path loss, and
the low-risk path loss estimates. However, the low-risk one is the one that must be
utilized in spectrum management. The device sensing can determine if a signal is
actually present at a level that would cause interference. The ecosystem will operate
at the density permitted by the average path loss, not the worst-case one.
.021
15:07:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

20.6 Summary
301
• Placement within a location has a major impact on path loss. A ﬁrewall in a building
might have 50 dB of loss, which an admission control system could never be aware
of, or assume is present, without undue risk of permitting interference. Particularly
when considering indoor deployments, these scatter loss impacts probably drive the
achievable density, yet cannot be included in the estimates by an admission control
system.
• The interference level that is tolerable is highly variable. An indoor system may
have strong signal levels in its free-space propagation conditions, and could operate
effectively, even if there was a signiﬁcant level of interference power. An outdoor
system might be attempting to maximize range in a free-space environment, in which
case even low levels of noise-ﬂoor elevation would severely degrade the coverage area.
Different applications have different Signal to Interference and Noise Ratio (SINR)
tolerance. There is no absolute standard for this metric.
In this model, we fundamentally shift the responsibility for channel quality from the
admission control system to the device. The admission control system is still critical to
this regime as it retains several missions, including:
• It segregates the devices that do not have the technical, or operational, ﬂexibility to
dynamically select frequencies. The spectrum that they do not block are then available
for the “free for all” usage by the highly dynamic devices this section contemplates.
• It protects receive-only users, such as frequency-translated services, radio astronomy
and other passive sensing, satellite uplinks and downlinks, and other uses that cannot
be sensed.
• The admission control system would still have to have a high level of interaction
with the dynamic device. They would still require awareness of what spectrum they
would be authorized to use at one time and place. This could be dynamic, as the
admission-control-system-managed assignments to non-recourse-protected devices,
and relocated the partition between the two ecosystems (interference-tolerant and
non-interference-tolerant) dynamically.
Although this section proposes these methods as alternatives to three-tier regimes,
in fact they would be complementary, and would likely coexist for many years, if not
forever. The three-tier regime is an essential precursor for the dynamic regime, as it
cannot exist without the partitioning provided through an admission control system.
20.6
Summary
The three-tier spectrum model is a signiﬁcant advance in the management of spectrum,
enabled by recently available tools, such as cloud computing, embedded processing, and
much more ﬂexible RF and baseband systems. It addresses many of the structural weak-
ness of the current one- or two-tier spectrum allocation models, and is fundamentally
unique in its ability to foster innovation in wireless technology and markets.
.021
15:07:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

302
Conclusions and a Look Ahead
However, it should be recognized as a milestone, not an endpoint. Abandoning the
“right to exclude” is fundamental to any advanced spectrum regime, and essential to
any of the possible successor regimes. As it stands, the three-tier model is the most
conservative of the approaches to eliminate this necessity for this right, so is a necessary
ﬁrst step in whatever ultimate regime is desired.
We only need to look at the dynamic, competitive, and creative ecosystem that has
formed in the Internet space to see the beneﬁts of an ecosystem that fosters innovation,
enables ﬂexible and scalable entry, and is based on a premise of abundance, rather than
scarcity.
20.7
Suggested Reading
Most of the appropriate readings have already been suggested in previous chapters:
• Radars are a major, and highly inﬂexible, user of spectrum. The approach at the
end of this chapter could be applied to radar systems, similarly to the discussion
of communications systems. There is very limited literature in the area of cognitive
radar, but at least one book has appeared [7].
• The previous chapter discussed ways in which Cognitive Radio (CR) approaches did
not address many of the needs of an alternative framework for spectrum management.
In this chapter we considered a hybrid approach that leverages many of the concepts
in CR, but utilizes them in different ways than classical DSA. The readings from that
chapter are very applicable to this topic, as well as the last chapter’s. This includes
the books by the author [3, 4], and others focusing on cognitive networks [8], and
broader surveys of the ﬁeld of cognitive radio [9, 10].
References
1 R. Chen, J. M. Park, Y. T. Hou, and J. H. Reed, Toward secure distributed spectrum sensing
in cognitive radio networks. IEEE Communications Magazine, 46/4 (2008), 50–55.
2 D. A. Roberson, C. S. Hood, J. L. LoCicero, and J. T. MacDonald, Spectral occupancy and
interference studies in support of cognitive radio technology deployment. 1st IEEE Workshop
on Networking Technologies for Software Deﬁned Radio Networks, 2006 (2006), 26–35.
3 P. F. Marshall, Quantitative Analysis of Cognitive Radio and Network Performance (Norwood,
MA: Artech House, 2010).
4 ——, Scaling, Density, and Decision-Making in Cognitive Wireless Networks (Cambridge
University Press, 2012).
5 ——, Cognitive Radio as a mechanism to manage front-end linearity and dynamic range.
IEEE Communications Magazine, 47/3 (2008) 81–87.
6 ——, Dynamic Spectrum Access as a Mechanism for Transition to Interference Tolerant
Systems. IEEE 4th International Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access
Networks (Singapore, 2010).
.021
15:07:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
303
7 J. Guerci, Cognitive Radar: The Knowledge-Aided Fully Adaptive Approach (Norwood, MA:
Artech House, 2010).
8 Q. Mahmoud, Cognitive Networks: Towards Self-Aware Networks (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 2007).
9 S. Haykin, Fundamental issues in cognitive radio. In Cognitive Radio Networks (New York:
Springer-Verlag, 2007).
10 L. Doyle, Essentials of Cognitive Radio (Cambridge University Press, 2009).
.021
15:07:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

.021
15:07:09, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Part VII
Appendices
15:09:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

15:09:25, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Appendix A Terms and
Acronyms
3GPP
Third-Generation Partnership
4G
4th-Generation Wireless
5G
Fifth-Generation Wireless Systems
AGL
Above Ground Level
AMPS
Advanced Mobile Phone System
AMSL
Above Mean Sea Level
AP
Access Point
ARP
Address Resolution Protocol
ASA
Authorized Shared Access
AWGN
Additive White Gaussian Noise
AWS
Advanced Wireless Services
BGP
Boundary Gateway Protocol
BMD
Ballistic Missile Defense
BSS
Broadcasting Satellite Service
CA
Certiﬁcate Authority
CAPEX
Capital Expenditure
CMBR
Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation
CBRS
Citizens Broadband Radio Service
CBSD
Citizens Broadband Radio Service Devices
CDF
Cumulative Distribution Function
CDMA
Code Division Multiple Access
CEA
Council of Economic Advisors
CIO
Chief Information Ofﬁcer
CNR
Combat Net Radio
COMSEC
Communications Security
CONUS
Continental United States of America
CORD
Central Ofﬁce Re-architected as a Datacenter
CPE
Customer Premises Equipment
CR
Cognitive Radio
CTIA
Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association
CTS
Clear to Send
CW
Continuous Wave
DARPA
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DAS
Distributed Antenna System
.022
15:08:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

308
Appendix A Terms and Acronyms
DBS
Direct Broadcast Satellite
DFS
Dynamic Frequency Selection
DHCP
Dynamic Host Control Protocol
DME
Distance Measuring Equipment
DNS
Domain Name Service
DoC
Department of Commerce
DoD
Department of Defense
DSA
Dynamic Spectrum Access
DSL
Digital Subscriber Line
DYSPAN
IEEE Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks Conference
EC2
Elastic Computing Cloud
ECFS
Electronic Comment Filing System
EDAC
Error Detection and Control
EGP
Exterior Gateway Protocol
EIRP
Equivalent Isotropic Radiated Power
ENG
Electronic New Gathering
EPC
Extended Packet Core
ESA
Electronically Steerable Array/Antenna
ESC
Environmental Sensing Capability
ETSI
European Telecommunications Standards Institute
EU
European Union
FCC
Federal Communications Commission
FDD
Frequency Division Duplex
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
FSS
Fixed Satellite Service
FTTH
Fiber to the Home
GAA
General Authorized Access
GBR
Ground-Based Radar
GCP
Google Cloud Platform
GLOBECOM
Global Communications Conference
GPS
Global Positioning System
GSM
Global System for Mobile Communications
HAAT
High Above Average Terrain
HTTP
Hypertext Transfer Protocol
HTTPS
Secure Hypertext Transfer Protocol
I/N
Interference to Noise
ICAO
International Civil Aviation Organization
IETF
Internet Engineering Task Force
IF
Intermediate Frequency
IFT
Federal Telecommunications Institute
IIP2
Second-Order Input Intercept Point
IIP3
Third-Order Input Intercept Point
IIT
Illinois Institute of Technology
ILS
Instrument Landing System
.022
15:08:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Appendix A Terms and Acronyms
309
IMT
International Mobile Telecommunications
IoT
Internet of Things
IP
Internet Protocol
ISART
International Symposium on Advanced Radio Technology
ISP
Internet Service Provider
IT
Information Technology
ITIF
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation
ITU
International Telecommunication Union
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation
LAA
Licensed Assisted Access
LAN
Local Area Networks
LBT
Listen Before Talk
LC
Licensed Shared Access Controller
LMR
Land Mobile Radio
LNA
Low Noise Ampliﬁer
LNB
Low Noise Block Converter
LR
Licensed Shared Access Repository
LSA
Licensed Shared Access
LTE-A
Long-Term Evolution Advanced
LTE-CA
Long-Term Evolution Carrier Aggregation
LTE-U
Long-Term Evolution Unlicensed
LTE
Long-Term Evolution
MAC
Media Access Control Layer
MDU
Multi-Dwelling Unit
MFC
Microwave Filter Corporation
MIMO
Multiple Input/Multiple Output
MLS
Microwave Landing System
MME
Mobility Management Entity
MNO
Mobile Network Operators
MSO
Mobile System Operator
MVNO
Mobile Virtual Network Operator
NAB
National Association of Broadcasters
NAT
Network Address Translation
NATO
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NEC
National Economic Council
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
NOI
Notice of Inquiry
NRA
National Regulatory Authority
NSF
National Science Foundation
NTIA
National Telecommunications and Information Agency
OFCOM
Ofﬁce of Communications
OSPF
Open Shortest Path First Protocol
OOBE
Out of Band Emissions
OPEX
Operational Cost
.022
15:08:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

310
Appendix A Terms and Acronyms
OSTP
Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy
PA
Priority Access
PAL
Priority Access License
PAN
Personal Area Networks
PCAST
President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
PCS
Personal Communications Service
PDF
Probability Density Function
PN
Public Notice
PNSS
Pseudo Noise Spread Spectrum
PPA
Priority Access License Protection Area
PPP
Public Private Partnership
PRF
Pulse Repetition Frequency
PSD
Power Spectral Density
PW
Pulse Width
QoS
Quality of Service
RAN
Radio Access Network
RF
Radio Frequency
RMS
Root Mean Square
ROC
Receiver Operating Characteristics
RRM
Radio Resource Management
RSSI
Received Signal Strength Indication
RTS
Request to Send
SAS
Spectrum Access System
SGW
Serving Gateway
SIA
Satellite Industry Association
SINR
Signal to Interference and Noise Ratio
SLA
Service Level Agreement
SMLA
Secondary Market License Agreement
SNR
Signal to Noise Ratio
SON
Self-Organizing Network
SPTF
Spectrum Policy Task Force
SSC
Spectrum Sharing Committee
SSID
Service Set Identiﬁer
SSL
Secure Socket Layer
SSPARC
Shared Spectrum Access for Radar and Communications
SUR
Spectrum Usage Rights
TCD
Trinity College, Dublin
TCP
Transport Control Protocol
TD-LTE
Time Division Long-Term Evolution
TDD
Time Division Duplex
TDRSS
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System
THAAD
Terminal High Altitude Area Defense
TLS
Transport Layer Security
TT and C
Tracking, Telemetry and Control
.022
15:08:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Appendix A Terms and Acronyms
311
TV
Television
TVRO
Television, Receive Only
TVWS
Television White Space
UDP
User Datagram Protocol
UE
User Equipment
UHD
Ultra-High Deﬁnition Television
UK
United Kingdom
UN
United Nations
USA
United States of America
US
United States
UWB
Ultra Wideband
VORTAC
VHF Omnirange/Tactical Area Navigation
WAN
Wide Area Network
Wi-Fi
Wireless Fidelity
WiMax
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access
WinnForum
Wireless Innovation Forum
WISP
Wireless Internet service provider
WLAN
Wireless Local Area Network
WRC
World Radio Conference
XG
Next Generation Communications Program
XML
Extensible Markup Language
.022
15:08:49, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix B Symbols
Variable
Meaning
α
Propagation exponent (as in rα).
λ
Signal wavelength.
σ
Radar cross section (in same units as λ and Rmax).
θ
Angle from earth station to antenna boresight.
admission
Logical variable indicating whether an admission control
system issues a grant to a device, or not.
Bradar
Radar emission bandwidth.
Bsensed
Instantaneous sensed bandwidth.
B
Bandwidth in Hz.
bearing
View angle from earth station to interference source.
Cnet
Capacity of the network to deliver information.
C0
Mean transmission capacity.
dB
dB(x) = 10log10(x).
D(n)
Quantity of data delivered for user n.
dAP-C
Distance from an access point to the most distant client that
can be serviced.
dAP-V
Distance from an access point to the closest interference
victim that might be impacted by the AP or one of its clients.
dC-C
Distance from an access point’s client to the closest interfer-
ence victim that might be impacted by the AP or one of its
clients.
EffArchitecture
Architecture effectiveness metric, in terms of data capacity,
over the spectrum and area whose usage was precluded.
EffSpectrum
Spectrum effectiveness, in terms of data delivered across a
range, over the spectrum, area, and time whose usage is
precluded.
elevation
Angle to satellite above the horizon.
.023
15:08:57, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Appendix B Symbols
313
f
Operating frequency (in MHz).
Gant
Antenna gain over isotropic (in dB units).
GLNA
Gain of the ampliﬁer stage in volts.
I
Interference power.
I0
Worst-case interference range, out to where other uses of the
spectrum are precluded.
I(n)
User n’s interference range, out to a range where other users
of the spectrum are precluded.
IIP2volts
Second-order intercept point in volts.
IIP3volts
Third-order intercept point in volts.
interference
Logical variable indicating whether a grant issued by an
admission control system issues will actually cause interfer-
ence to a protected node or network.
k
Boltzmann constant.
k
Range ratio, namely the mean ratio of actual to maximum
communications range.
LP
Path loss over a general distance (d), or between two speciﬁc
points (x, y).
lat
Earth station latitude.
long
Earth station longitude.
N
Noise power.
n
Number of nodes, indicating network scalability.
nd
Node density (n over area).
Nbandwidth
Sensed bandwidth induced noise elevation.
PDscan
Probability of sensor scan occurring during a radar pulse
permitting detection.
Ninteg
Noise energy from integration over time.
P(C)
Network delivery reliability.
PAP
Access Point EIRP (in dBm).
PD
Probability of Detection.
PEmin
Radar detection energy threshold.
PFA
Probability of False Alarm.
Pprot
Maximum interference permitted at an AP or client node (in
dBm).
PS
Radar pules (peak) power.
PUE
Client EIRP (in dBm).
R0
Maximum possible communications range.
.023
15:08:57, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

314
Appendix B Symbols
Rmax
Radar maximum range.
R(n)
User n’s actual communications range.
RAP-AP
Range from an Access Point (AP) to its closest protected AP
(in meters).
RAP-loss
Distance for the client power to be reduced from PUE to the
value of PAP.
RAP-UE
Shortest distance from AP to its farthest client. This is the AP
service area in this model (in meters).
Rclient-loss
Distance for the AP power to be reduced from PAP to the
value of PAP.
RUE-UE
Range from a client on one AP to a client on an adjoining one
(in meters).
slot
Satellite equatorial (geosynchronous) orbital slot (degrees
longitude).
S
Signal Power.
S0
Mean amount of spectrum denied to other users.
S(n)
Actual spectrum precluded to other users by user n’s activity.
T
Temperature in Kelvin.
T(n)
Quantity of data actually provided to user n.
tpulse
Radar pulse duration.
tsense
Sensor scan duration on any given frequency.
vout
Output voltage of the ampliﬁer stage.
vin
Input voltage to the ampliﬁer.
.023
15:08:57, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Appendix C Opportunity Cost
Model of Spectrum Utilization
The following material is abridged and slightly modiﬁed content from Chapter 4 of a
previous book (Scaling, Density, and Decision-Making in Cognitive Wireless Networks)
by the author [1]. It was published in 2012, also by Cambridge University Press. One
of the book’s premises was that spectrum utilization should be considered to be the
quantiﬁcation of the lost opportunity cost resulting from one user’s application on all
other users of the same spectrum, and it treated receiver protection and emitter impacts
symmetrically. This model was adopted in the President’s Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology (PCAST) report [2], Appendix B (Proposed New Metric for
Spectrum Use) to explain the focus on reducing default receiver protection, or at least
reﬂecting it in the cost charged to spectrum users for the protection.
C.1
Key Objectives for Introducing Cognitive Processes to
Wireless Systems
When communications engineering and operations was dominated by individual links,
the evaluation and optimization of these links was relatively scalar; maximize the link
performance, or minimize the resources required, to achieve a given link performance.
As wireless has moved from wireless access to wireless networking, the evaluation
process is much less scalar, and the objectives of optimization are often competing. We
will examine four metrics of the aggregate effect of network decision-making. We will
see that these metrics are not independent or orthogonal, but approaching them with this
assumption is convenient to the early analysis steps, before they are “entangled.”
Capability (Cnet): We will consider capability to be from the demand to the source of
information for the mean request. This metric is therefore not just a metric of the
packet network, but also includes the consequences of content location.
Reliability (P(C)): The network reliability is considered in the context of the other
three metrics. It is the probability of achieving a given capacity in a network of given
total membership (scalability) and mean density. We express this as a function of the
capacity.
Scalability (n): The total number of nodes forming a single address space and for
which all other nodes must be sufﬁciently aware of their location, reachability, or
address to communicate.
.024
15:08:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

316
Appendix C Opportunity Cost Model of Spectrum Utilization
Density (nd): The physical density of network nodes. This is measured in nodes per
unit area, or nd = n
a, where a is the area over which the n nodes are deployed.
The purpose of this book is not to be a design text, so our interest is not to
determine speciﬁc values for each of the variables, but to understand the effect of
network decisions on each of the variables. Therefore, the focus will typically be on
the derivatives of each variable. That will lead us to understand the sensitivity of the
network’s performance to each possible operational parameter and condition, and thus
each possible decision that can be made about its operation.
C.2
Metrics for Wireless Network Effectiveness
C.2.1
Spectrum Usage Effectiveness Metric
There is no shortage of metrics for reﬂecting different aspects of wireless network effec-
tiveness. Some of these assess physical layer efﬁciency, as in bits/Hertz, others assess
the range achieved, and still others assess capacity, as examples. Unfortunately, none
of these reﬂect the fundamental trades that must be made to operate wireless systems
in conditions of high density, spectrum scarcity, and inadequate capacity. Measures of
spectrum efﬁciency fail to reﬂect the complex trade space of wireless design, and very
different mission needs. Additionally, since there is no standard for 100% effective use
of spectrum, or most aspects of wireless capacity, the concept of efﬁciency cannot be
applied, since a ratio of actual to perfect is not a meaningful comparison. Instead, we
will develop a concept of effectiveness, which is an unbounded metric.
For example, it will be shown later that increasing bits/Hertz is desirable for a single
user in the spectrum, but is highly detrimental when users must be densely packed into
spectrum, with adjacent interference regions. Similarly, capacity is readily increased
with additional spectrum or power, but this mechanism implies that the network is not
in any sense more effective or efﬁcient in its use of these resources. In this work, we will
consider spectrum not from the perspective of what is used, but from the degree to which
its use is precluded to other uses of the spectrum. It therefore reﬂects the opportunity
cost of the spectrum. It makes no difference if the user of the spectrum considers his
range to be distance r, when the spectral power density precludes meaningful operation
out to a range many times that.
Also, we wish to see a metric that “rewards” systems that recognize and leverage the
actual range of their users from the closest network node. Shouting at a great volume
to a user that is ten times closer than the limit of the communications is wasteful of
spectrum resources, and denies other uses of the spectrum.
From the network layer perspective, we consider a link from user B to k other users,
denoted as a1,a2,...ak. Transmissions from and to each user ak utilize spectrum S(k),
occur at a range of R(k), and preclude other users of the spectrum out to a range of I(k).
The amount of time taken for a block of data is T(k), and provides a set of data of D(k)
bits.
.024
15:08:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

C.2 Metrics for Wireless Network Effectiveness
317
The beneﬁt from this metric system is the distance over which the communication
is provided (R), and the volume of data (D). The cost of the delivery operation is the
time (T) over which the spectrum is utilized, the distance over which the spectrum is
precluded (I2), and, of course, the amount of spectrum (S) that is not available to other
users. It is important to recognize that this metric applies to systems of transmitter and
receivers. A poor receiver that has signiﬁcant response, or susceptibility, to adjacent
channel signals effectively increases S (lowers the Effectiveness metric) because the
receiver requires some form of protection through reduced usage of these guard bands.
Spectrum is “consumed” by receivers, as well as by transmitters.
EffSpectrum =
k

n=1
R(n) D(n)
I2(n) T(n) S(n)
(C.1)
where EffSpectrum is the spectrum effectiveness in terms of data delivered across a range,
over the spectrum, area, and time whose usage is precluded. R(n) is user n’s actual
communications range; D(n) is the quantity of data delivered for user n; I(n) is user
n’s interference range, out to a range where other users of the spectrum are precluded;
T(n) is the quantity of data actually provided to user n; and S(n) is the actual spectrum
precluded to other users by user n’s activity.
The units of this measure are in
bits
distance Hertz seconds, which is intuitively pleasing,
but reﬂective of a much more complex set of relationships than the modulation order of
the signal. Importantly, it is not the standard licensing metric of spectrum alone, but
reﬂects the possible sharing of time, and the extent over which the spectrum cannot be
used by others. This is the metric needed for shared spectrum.
For static systems,1 such as some cellular downlinks, we can simplify the equation to
the steady state value by:
• Replacing the “time and data delivered” term with a general expression of peak
capacity, C0.
• Considering the denied area to be constant at I2
0.
• Considering that users are distributed across a range of 0 to R0, with a mean of k R0.
The effectiveness measure of Equation (C.1) becomes:
EffSpectrum = k R0 C0
I2
0 S0
(C.2)
where k is the range ratio, namely the mean ratio of actual to maximum communications
range; R0 is the maximum possible communications range; C0 is the mean transmission
capacity; I0 is the worst-case interference range, out to where other uses of the spectrum
are precluded, and S0 is the mean amount of spectrum denied to other users.
We can examine how this metric behaves with the introduction of various
system-architecture features:
1 Meaning systems with ﬁxed coverage, bandwidth, modulation characteristics, etc.
.024
15:08:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

318
Appendix C Opportunity Cost Model of Spectrum Utilization
Interference Tolerance: Interference tolerance is strongly rewarded. Any measure that
reduces the interference range has a square relationship to the metric. If a given
approach reduces the interference range by 44%, the value of the metric is doubled.
Similarly, if a given system design can tolerate interference and enables it to operate
closer to another system by the same 44%, the metric is doubled.
Matching Range and Usage: Communications is most effective if the range of the
system is matched to the range of the users. If many downlinks are in range of a
handset, then it is likely that the range being provided exceeds that is needed, and
the mean range will be far less than a k of 0.5. The metric is optimized when the
communications is tailored to the actual user range dynamically.
Power Management with Dynamic Usage: Power control is certainly useful, and
would be reﬂected in the dynamic values of I(n), but only if there are provisions
to either coordinate the opportunities with other systems in the spectrum, or where
the interference caused by high-power operation can be tolerated by other systems,
and thus not cause the value of I0 to be established at the maximal, or worst case
range.
Higher Frequencies: Propagation loss typically is increased for communications links
at higher frequencies. However, the increase in loss is generally even higher for
the path to possible victims of interference. Therefore, use of higher frequencies
often is highly beneﬁcial in terms of the possible density, even if it increases the
power requirement for the transmissions. Dense spectrum operation beneﬁts from
the availability of a wide range of frequencies, in order to maximize the ratio of R0
I0
.
Receiver Performance: Poor receiver performance reﬂects in this metric by forcing
more distance between nodes (and thus increasing I, and in increasing the amount of
spectrum that is required for a service, using that receiver; increasing S). For example,
the Global Positioning System (GPS) adjacent-channel interference issue with the
proposed LightSquared service [3, 4] reﬂects that the true value of S for GPS is much
higher than the GPS waveform bandwidth, as the design of the receivers signiﬁcantly
precludes meaningful usage of additional spectrum, beyond that of the emitted signal.
The spectrum needed to provide guard bands to protect the receivers effectively adds
to the S value.
C.2.2
Architecture Effectiveness Metric
A similar measure can be developed to consider the density effects of different system
architectures. In this case, we ignore the range term, since we would be considering
comparisons of alternative methods to accomplish identical communications tasks. If
we examine the effectiveness of different architectures to deliver service to the same set
of nodes.
If the serviced set of nodes is equivalent in two architectures, the effectiveness of this
architecture (EffArchitecture ) reduces Equation (C.2) further to:
EffArchitecture = C0
I2
0 S0
(C.3)
.024
15:08:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

References
319
where EffArchitecture is the architecture effectiveness metric, in terms of data capacity,
over the spectrum and area whose usage was precluded. This metric has units of:
bits
area Hertz.
For example, this measure is appropriate to compare the effectiveness of a
cellular-tower-provided service, or a Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi)-provided one (of
equivalent character) to the same set of candidate nodes. This measure may explain why
Wi-Fi is so effective, and that this small slice of spectrum was reported to ofﬂoad over
40% of one carrier’s smartphone trafﬁc [5], despite its limited coverage or availability.
Given the fundamental limits of communication theory, the only viable method to
achieve density of information, is to assure locality of communications.
References
1 P. F. Marshall, Scaling, Density, and Decision-Making in Cognitive Wireless Networks
(Cambridge University Press, 2012).
2 President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, Report to the President: Realizing
the Full Potential of Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth (Executive Ofﬁce
of the President (EOP), Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), 2012. http://
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/microsites/ostp/pcast-stem-ed-ﬁnal.pdf.
3 National Space-Based Positioning, Navigation, and Timing Systems Engineering Forum
(NPEF), Assessment of LightSquared Terrestrial Broadband System Effects on GPS Receivers
and GPS-dependent Applications (2011). www.gps.gov/spectrum/lightsquared/docs/2011-06-
NPEF-lightsquared-report.pdf.
4 Federal Communications Commission, Comment Deadlines Established Regarding the
LightSquared Technical Working Group Report. Technical report, DA 11–1133 (2011). http://
apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-11-1133A1.txt.
5 AT&T Inc., AT&T Wi-Fi network usage soars to more than 53 million connections in the ﬁrst
Quarter. Press release (2010).
.024
15:08:59, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

Index
2G, 91, 165
3G, 91, 165
4G Technology, 91, 263
4K video, 249
Fifth Generation Wireless Systems (5G),
263–276
Access Point (AP), 21, 52, 67, 91–102, 108,
138, 150, 152, 153, 163–173, 195, 210,
231, 241–243, 251, 260, 266, 268, 270,
280, 315
Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN), 181,
182
Address Resolution Protocol, see Protocol,
Address Resolution
admission control system, 21–33, 79–118,
123–142, 280–283, 300, 318, see also
Spectrum Access System (SAS)
inquiry, 133–137
synchronization, 130–133
transactions, 123–142, see also Spectrum
Access System, transactions
continued authorization heartbeat, 85
Genera, 85
grant request, 81, 84
Transactions
Genera, 80
Advanced Mobile Phone System (AMPS), 264
Advanced Wireless Services (AWS), 41, 57,
264
Alaska, 68
Alion Science and Technology, 115, 118, 154
Alphabet, Inc., 105
Amazon Prime, 264
Amazon Web Services (AWS), 224
AN/SPN-43C radar, 177, 183–185
antenna
beam agility, 176, 177
beam forming, 169–171, 266
beam pattern, 138, 265
beamwidth, 176, 177
capture area, 153
directional, 4, 143
dish, 169, 170
frequency response, 153–155
gain, 115, 116, 145–148
grating lobes, 170
massive MIMO, 169
multi-beam, 265
patterns, 84
phased array, 169, 170
planar, 169, 170
satellite spot beam, 160
AT&T, 73
Auction
Incentive, 7, 25, 245
Auction Addiction, 274
authentication, 136, 225–226
authentication certiﬁcates, 281
Authorized Shared Access (ASA), 27–29, 33,
49, 50, 273, 291
backhaul, 11
Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD), 253
Beta Distribution, see Distribution, Beta
Bluetooth, 168, 196, 197, 199
broadcasters, 23
Broadcasting Satellite Service (BSS), 249
Cantor Telecom, 73
capacity networks, 32
Capital Expenditure (CAPEX), 269
CBRS Alliance, xv, 284, 285
cellular infrastructure, 241
Cellular Telecommunications Industry
Association (CTIA), 54, 73
census tract, 60, 68, 88
Central Ofﬁce Re-architected as a Datacenter
(CORD), 275, 276
Certiﬁcate Authority (CA), 209, 210, 225, 226
Chicago Board of Trade, 30
Chicago, IL, 4
15:12:19, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Index
321
Chief Information Ofﬁcer (CIO), see US
Government, Chief Information Ofﬁcer
Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS),
xv, 6, 12–15, 56–74, 79, 82, 83, 86–89,
93, 97, 99–101, 104, 106, 115, 116, 118,
123, 125, 126, 128, 131, 136, 138, 140,
141, 146, 161, 164, 165, 168, 171–173,
176, 179, 182, 185, 191, 205–299
Citizens Broadband Radio Service Device
(CBSD), 62, 64, 141, 154, 205–233
Proxy Operation, 210–221
Clegg, Andrew, 105
cloud computing, 50, 224, 264
Coase, Ronald, 19, 44, 54
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA), 200
coexistence, 53, 189–200
Cognitive Radio (CR), xii, 16, 89, 97, 102,
188, 284, 287–289, 294, 302
Combat Net Radio (CNR), 98
Communications Security (COMSEC),
225–226
computational consistency, 132–133
Content Interests, 154
Continental United States of America
(CONUS), 147, 148, 178
Continuous Wave (CW), 178, 185
Council of Economic Advisors (CEA), see US
Government, Council of Economic
Advisors
creative destruction, 296
Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF), 110
Customer Premises Equipment (CPE), 61, 65
dark ﬁber, 264
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA), see US Government, Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency
deﬁnition of use, 93
density modeling, 108
Department of Commerce (DoC), see US
Government, Department of Commerce
Department of Defense (DoD), see US
Government, Department of Defense
derivative transactions , 30
detection theory, 181
device recourse, 15, 21, 97, 99, 299–301
Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), 265
diplexer, 166
Direct Broadcast Satellite (DBS), 249, 253
Distance Measuring Equipment (DME), 259,
261
Distributed Antenna System (DAS), 32, 242,
243, 263, 267, 268, 270
distribution
Gaussian, 109
beta, 109
standard deviation of, 109
Dynamic Frequency Selection (DFS), 20–22,
82, 89, 174, 254, 281
Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA), xii, 16,
18–34, 38, 61, 88, 89, 178, 298–300, 302,
see also spectrum
Electronic Comment Filing System (ECFS),
74
Electronically Steerable Array/Antenna
(ESA),
175
eNodeB, 210
Environmental Sensing Capability (ESC), 62,
71, 225, 227, 254
Equivalent Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP),
70, 71, 168, 171, 176, 185, 186
Error Detection and Control (EDAC), 186
Europe, 27, 28
European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI), 27
European Union (EU), 38, 136, 178
European Union Framework Research
Program, 38
exponential back-off, 196, 197
Extended Packet Core (EPC), 14, 86, 199, 206,
210, 270, 271
Extensible Markup Language (XML), 281
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), 182, 183
Federal Communications Commission (FCC),
see US Government, Federal
Communications Commission
Federal SAS, 130
Federal Telecommunications Institute (IFT),
30
Federated Wireless, 73
ﬁber-optic communications, 6
Fiber to the Home (FTTH), 265
ﬁlter
front end, 150, 155, 159
high pass, 156
Fixed Satellite Service (FSS), 4, 60, 61, 63, 64,
71, 88, 118, 125, 128, 141, 148, 155, 157,
158, 160, 161, 164, 169–171, 212, 229,
244, 250–252, 288, see also satellite
Frequency Division Duplex (FDD), 96, 98,
101, 165, 166, 288
front end linearity, 299
front end overload, 299
15:12:19, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

322
Index
garage door openers, 47, 99
Gaussian Distribution, see Distribution,
Gaussian
Genachowski, Julius, 58, 59
General Authorized Access (GAA), 13, 40,
43–45, 49, 53, 66, 67, 69, 70, 73, 81, 85,
86, 131, 134, 212, 219, 228, 238, 273,
282, 290, 291
geographic exclusivity, 6
Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), 299
Global Positioning System (GPS), 7, 9, 16, 31,
39, 53, 83, 113, 155, 186, 210, 247, 261,
319
Global System for Mobile Communications
(GSM), 237, 264
Google Cloud Platform (GCP), 224
Google Earth, 107
Google Inc., xii, 33, 74, 105, 106, 118, 160,
185, 188, 191
Gorenberg, Mark, xii
Ground-based Radar (GBR), 253
guard band, 318
Hazlett, Thomas, 54
Healthcare.gov, 130
Hypertext Transfer Protocol, see Protocol,
Hypertext
Hypertext Transfer Protocol, Secure, see
Protocol, Hypertext Transfer–Secure
IEEE Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks
Conference (DYSPAN), 23, 38, 59, 299
Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), 4
Incentive Auction, 261, 289
incumbent awareness, 247
incumbent protection, 9
Industrial, Scientiﬁc, and Medical Band
(ISM), see also Unlicensed Spectrum,
Wireless Fidelity & Municipal Wi-Fi
Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation (ITIF), 54
INMARSAT, 7, 31, 144, 261
Input Intercept Point
Second-Order (IIP2), 112
Third-Order (IIP3), 112
Instrument Landing System (ILS), 259, 261
interference
aggregate, 42
aggregation, 109–112, 127, 129, 139–141,
158–160, 194, 297
blocking, 156
models, 80
protection criteria, 27
resolution, 140
tolerance, 298, 300–301
Intermediate Frequency (IF), 116
intermodulation, 112, 113, see also Input
Intercept Point
International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), 259
international harmonization, 278
International Mobile Telecommunications
(IMT), 27, 144, 260
International Symposium on Advanced Radio
Technology (ISART), 59
International Telecommunication Union
(ITU), 15, 118, 149, 160, 161, 246,
248–251, 259–261, 278, 279, 296, 297
Internet, xv, 98, 244, 264–265
Engineering Task Force (IETF), 205
peering, 271
Protocol (IP), see Protocol, Internet (IP)
Service Provider (ISP), 265
internet, 271
internet exchange services, 224
Internet of Things (IoT), 11, 19, 32, 268, 284,
295, 298
Internet Protocol, see Protocol, Internet (IP)
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), 231, 281
Land Mobile Radio (LMR), 6, 23, 47
Leibowitz, John, xii
license renewal, 19
Licensed by Rule, 43
Licensed Shared Access (LSA), 27–29, 33, 49,
50, 273, 291
Licensed Shared Access Controller (LC), 27,
29
Licensed Shared Access Repository (LR),
27–29
Licensed-Assisted Access (LAA), 102, 198
LightSquared, 7, 9, 16, 31, 39, 100, 144, 319
Listen Before Talk (LBT), 89, 96, 138, 167,
168, 190, 195–200
Local Area Network (LAN), see also Wireless
Local Area Network
Local Area Networks, see networks, Local
Area (LAN)
Long-Term Evolution (LTE), 7, 9, 14, 16, 26,
31, 49, 52, 82, 86, 89, 91, 96, 100, 102,
108, 144, 151, 165, 168, 173, 181, 185,
191, 194, 196–200, 205, 206, 210, 211,
228, 240, 243, 264, 265, 270, 271, 273,
279, 280, 288, 297
15:12:19, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Index
323
Carrier Aggregation (LTE-CA), 298
frame structure, 185
resource blocks, 199
Unlicensed (LTE-U), 89, 102, 197, 198, 200
LORAN, 261
Low Noise Ampliﬁer (LNA), 102, 112,
115–117, 144, 154, 156
Low Noise Block Converter (LNB), 116, 154,
156
Manhattan Island, New York, NY., 105, 106
Marcus, Michael, 16
markets
secondary, 228
two-sided, 228, 230, 276
Media Access Layer (MAC), 89, 96, 102, 108,
138, 165, 166, 173, 185, 196, 197, 200,
229, 288, 297
Medin. Milo, xii
Mexico, 30
Microsoft, 23
Microsoft Azure, 224
Microwave Filter Corporation (MFC), 155
Microwave Landing System (MLS), 259, 261
millimeter wave, 108, 265–268, 271–273,
275–276
Mobile Network Operator (MNO), 8, 19, 20,
49, 205, 232, 240, 241, 243, 269,
284
Mobile System Operator (MSO), 8, 49, 205,
232, 269
Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO), 8,
240, 241, 243, 269
Mobility Management Entity (MME), 210,
270
models, see propagation, models
Mountain View, CA, 106
MulteﬁreTM, 196, 198, 200
MulteﬁreTM Alliance, 196
Multi-Dwelling Unit (MDU), 191, 192, 231
Multiple Input/Multiple Output (MIMO), 169,
171, 172, 272
national administrations, 22, 27
National Association of Broadcasters (NAB),
226
National Economic Council (NEC), see US
Government, National Economic Council
National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), 191, 192, see US
Government, National Institute of
Standards and Technology
National Regulatory Authority (NRA), 27, 69,
70, 125, 134, 136, 160, 170, 246, 248,
250, 252, 278–281, 289, 290, 297
National Telecommunications and
Information Agency (NTIA), see US
Government, National
Telecommunications and Information
Agency
Naval Air Station (NAS), Patuxent River, 185
naval radar, 227
naval radar exclusion zones, 62–63
navigation radar, 21
navigations services, 247
Netﬂix, 264
Network Address Translation, see Protocol,
Network Address Translation
networks
Fifth-Generation Wireless Systems (5G), 3,
8, 14, 49, 163, 263, 265–269, 273–276
capacity, 31, 51, 137
coverage, 31, 51, 137
Fourth-Generation Wireless (4G), 163, 165
Local Area (LAN), 13, 19, 91, 163–172,
196
macro cellular, 137
neutral host, xv, xvi, 241–244, 266–273
point-to-point, 163–173
private, 240–244
usage duty cycle, 138
Wide Area (WAN), xv, 32, 39, 51, 91, 163
neutral host, see networks, neutral host
Next Generation Communications Program
(XG), 38
NEXTEL, 7, 9, 16, 39, 112
Nobel Prize, 149
noise
co-channel, 159
Gaussian, 182
thermal, 114
noise temperature, 58
non-linear responses, 112–113
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
253
Ofﬁce of Communications (OFCOM), 22, 31,
38, 42, 72, 74, 118
Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP), see US Government, Ofﬁce of
Science and Technology Policy
Open Network Operating System (ONOS),
275
Open Shortest Path First Protocol, see
Protocol, Open Shortest Path First
OpenStack, 275, 276
15:12:19, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

324
Index
Operational Cost (OPEX), 269
Opportunistic Spectrum Access, see Dynamic
Spectrum Access
Out of Band Emissions (OOBE), 64, 100, 159
packet loss, 270
Part 90, 65
Part 96, 56–74, 88, see also Citizens
Broadband Radio Service Devices
(CBSD)
passive receivers, 247
Penzias, Arno, 149
persistent data, 124
Personal Area Networks (PAN), 19
Personal Communications Service (PCS), 100
Piccadilly Circus, London, xvi
point-to-point, 91–102, 108
Power Spectral Density (PSD), 21, 96, 116,
156, 164–166, 194, 229
President’s Council of Advisors on Science
and Technology (PCAST), see US
Government, President’s Council of
Advisors on Science and Technology
Presidential Memorandum, 58
presumption of renewal, 44
Priority Access License (PAL), 62, 66–68, 70,
93, 115, 172, 209, 210, 212, 226–228,
232, 239, 282, 283, 290, see also
Protected Access (PA)
Priority Access License Protection Area
(PPA), 61, 66, 67, 93, 164, 168, 171–173,
226–228, 230–232, 282
private commons, 30
probability
Density Function (PDF), 110
detection, 180–181
false alarm, 180–181
professional installer, 71, 206, 208–211, 225,
226, 232
propagation
clutter loss, 106, 190–196, 297, 301
loss, 94–96, 109, 115, 117, 138, 150,
153–155, 266
loss through building materials, 171–172,
190–196, 266–267
loss through windows, 192
models, 80, 84, 88, 89, 104–112, 133,
153–155, 166, 211, 297, 300
Extended Hatta model, 118
Hatta model, 118
ITU-R P452, 105, 118
Longley-Rice, 67, 105, 107, 118
terrain, 105, 106
site aware, 139
three dimensional, 108, 171–172
troposcatter, 105
Protected Access (PA), 13, 43–46, 53, 66, 81,
85, 86, 134, 290–292, see also Priority
Access License
protection methodology, 13
Protocol
Address Resolution (ARP), 264
Boundary Gateway (BGP), 264
Clear to Send (CTS), 108
Dynamic Host Control (DHCP), 206
Exterior Gateway (EGP), 264
Hypertext Transfer (HTTP), 265
Hypertext Transfer, Secure (HTTPS), 265
Internet (IP), 205, 242, 243, 264, 268, 270,
271
Network Address Translation (NAT), 129,
206, 265
Open Shortest Path First (OSPF), 264
Request to Send (RTS), 108
Secure Socket Layer (SSL), 205, 209, 225,
270
Transport Control (TCP), 186, 264
Transport Layer Security (TLS), 205, 209,
225, 265, 270
User Datagram (UDP), 186, 264
Pseudo Noise Spread Spectrum (PNSS),
200
Public Notice (PN), 62, 74, 173
Public Private Partnership (PPP), 40
public safety, 7, 16, 98, 112
Quality of Service (QoS), 8, 198, 243, 244,
263, 271, 274
Quick Look Report (NTIA), 185
radar
altimeter, 155
AN/SPN-43C, 183, 184, 186
bi-static, 174, 176
chirped, 176, 178
cross section, 175
interference from, 184–186
interference to, 177–180
naval, 82
passive, 176
protection, 21–22
pulse bandwidth, 177
Pulse Repetition Frequency (PRF), 175,
177, 181, 183
Pulse Width (PW), 4, 175, 177, 185
range equation, 175, 180
rotational period, 176, 177, 184, 185
15:12:19, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Index
325
sensing, 82, 174–176, 180–184
side lobes, 185
systems, 174–188
radio access, 163–173
Radio Access Network (RAN), 206
radio astronomy, 247
Radio Frequency (RF), 8, 116, 153, 160, 178,
241, 242, 297
Radio Resource Management (RRM), 165,
194, 210, 228
ray tracing, 105
Received Signal Strength Indication (RSSI),
211, 222
receiver
ﬁlter, 116, 117
performance, 100
protection, 113–299
sensitivity, 117
standards, 38, 39
susceptibility, 318
Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC),
181
resource blocks, 108
Rhode, Ulrik, 118
right to exclude, 11, 302
right to receive, 11
RMS Titanic, 44
Root Mean Square (RMS), 64
satellite, 4, 143–161
antenna positioning, 145–148
bent pipe transponder, 160
C-Band, 145, 146, 150–161, 249
domestic, 148
downlink, 144–145, 149–151, 153–161,
278
Ka-Band, 145, 160, 251–253, 255–257
Ku-Band, 145, 160, 249, 251–253, 255–257
protection, 31, 143–161
receivers, 13, 143–161
services, 296
spectrum, 19, 82
spectrum (general), 249–253, 255–257
spectrum allocations, 144–145
spot beam, 160
uplink, 144–145, 160–161
Schmidt, Eric, xii
Secondary Market License Agreement
(SMLA), 232
secondary markets, 29–32, 289–290
Secondary Spectrum Sharing, see Dynamic
Spectrum Access
Self-Organizing Network (SON), 199, 271,
288
Senate (US), 22
service area, 92–96
Service Level Agreement (SLA), 263
Service Set Identiﬁer (SSID), 190
Serving Gateway (SGW), 270
Shared Spectrum Access for Radar and
Communications (SSPARC), 186, 187
Signal to Interference and Noise Ratio (SINR),
191, 195, 301
Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR), 197
software protection, 22
space thermal background, 144
space-time coding, 171
spectrum
adjacent band users, 30
aeronautical, 255–257, 259
allocations, 6, 7, 14
amateur radio, 255–257, 259
auction, 19, 25, 41, 44, 46, 225
aviation, 98, 248
beachfront, 31
broadcast, 7, 19, 82, 87, 255–257, 260–261
coexistence, 13, 16, 80, 85–87, 89
contiguous, 299
cost, 45
effectiveness, 95
exclusive, 6, 18–19, 263
Federal, 12, 37–54, 57
ﬁxed services, 255–257, 259
Government, 7
Ground-based Radar (GBR), 254, 255–257
guard bands, 319
harmonization, 296–298
incumbents, 47, 48
inquiry, 133
international allocations, 246–254
licensing, 9
management, xiv–xvii, 16, 18, 37–54,
79–89, 91–118, 299–301
markets, 30, 225, 281, 283
measurements, 4, 211
mobile services, 255–257, 260
paired, 165, 166
policy, xv, 40, 97, 144, 237–245, 275,
295–301
property rights, 19
protection criteria, 137, 141
radio astronomy, 143
radio navigation, 255–257, 261
re-farming, 7
reallocation, 48
regulators, 8, 12
reuse, 52, 86
revenue, 274
15:12:19, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

326
Index
spectrum (cont.)
rights, 9, 46, 118
scalability, 238–239
secondary markets, 6, 69–70, 134, 227–228
sensing, 21–27, 83, 88, 89, 97, 124, 128,
181–301
sharing, 8–11, 15, 16, 18–28, 32–34, 37–54,
295
site statistics, 138–139
space research and operations, 254–258
United States of allocations, 246, 247
unlicensed, 18–27, 34
Usage Rights (SUR), 31, 38, 42, 54, 64, 118
usage statistics, 137–139
venture friendly policy, 45
warehousing, 67
Spectrum Access System (SAS), 12, 14,
41–43, 49, 59–74, 79, 82, 87, 89, 107,
108, 123–142, see also admission control
system, 205–320
differentiation, 230–233
synchronization, 228–231
transactions, see also admission control
system, transactions
continued authorization heartbeat,
206–208, 217, 218, 220, 227
deregistration, 221–222
grant relinquishment, 219–221
grant request, 216–217, 219
inquiry, 212–216
registration, 216–218
SAS to SAS coordination, 228–231
Spectrum Policy Task Force (SPTF), 33, 38,
58, see US Government, Spectrum Policy
Task Force
Spectrum Sharing Committee (SSC), xiii, 14,
see also Wireless Innovation Forum
(WinnForum)
SpectrumTalk blog, 16
Technology Innovation, 237–245
Television (TV), 22–24, 26, 82, 87, 89, 249,
253, 260
Receive Only Stations (TVRO), 247
White Space (TVWS), 22–26, 33, 58, 79,
82, 86–88, 164, 226, 248, 250, 260,
281, 287
protection contours, 23
sensor, 23
Terminal High Altitude Area Defense
(THAAD), 253
terrain, 124
terrain data bases, 88
Third-Generation Partnership (3GPP), 26, 101,
205, 213, 222, 240, 279, 280, 297
Third-Order Input Intercept Point (IIP3), 115,
171, 299
Time Division Duplex (TDD), 96, 98, 100,
108, 138, 166, 167
Time-Division Long-Term Evolution
(TD-LTE), 82, 88, 101, 102, 185, 186,
188, 196, 199, 206, 240, 284
Times Square, New York, xvi
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System
(TDRSS), 258
transaction costs, 9, 29–32, 46
transactions, see also Spectrum Access
System, transactions
Transport Layer Security, see Protocol,
Transport Layer Security (TLS)
Trinity College, Dublin (TCD), 54
Ultra Wideband (UWB), 176
Ultra-High Deﬁnition Television (UHD), 249
United Kingdom (UK), 38, 64, 74, 118
United Nations (UN), 160, 259
United States Government
Chief Information Ofﬁcer (CIO), 56
Council of Economic Advisors (CEA), 54,
56
Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA), xiii, 23, 38, 186,
187
Department of Commerce (DoC), 56
Department of Defense (DoD), xii, 21, 38,
47, 56, 63, 296
Executive Ofﬁce of the President, 37
Federal Communications Commission
(FCC), xii, 15, 16, 22, 23, 30, 38, 41,
43, 50, 56–74, 79, 88, 89, 93, 106, 118,
141, 145, 161, 173, 200, 210, 213, 225,
227, 233, 261, 272, 276
House Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee, 50
National Science Foundation (NSF), 38
National Telecommunications and
Information Agency (NTIA), 56, 59,
74, 185, 246
Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy
(OSTP), xii, 56
President’s Council of Advisors on Science
and Technology (PCAST), xii, xv, xvi,
9, 12, 13, 15, 16, 21, 22, 26, 27, 29, 33,
37–54, 56–74, 89, 130, 228, 245, 272,
281, 283, 287, 288, 290, 291, 299, 316
15:12:19, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,

Index
327
Unlicensed Spectrum, see also Industrial,
Scientiﬁc, and Medical Band & Wireless
Fidelity, see also Industrial, Scientiﬁc,
and Medical Band, Wireless Fidelity &
Municipal Wi-Fi
US Naval Academy, 188
usage exclusivity, 6
Use It or Share It Principle, 85
User Equipment (UE), 100, 101, 138, 139,
151, 165, 211, 260, 265, 268, 270, 273,
280
venture capital, xv
venture funding, 238–240
VHF Omnirange/Tactical Area Navigation
(VORTAC), 259
video distribution, 143
Virginia Polytechnic University, 188
Virtual Optical Line Termination (vOLT), 275
Virtual Baseband Unit (vBBU), 275
Virtual Data Over Cable Service Interface
Speciﬁcation (vDOCSIS), 275
voice services, 270
Washington DC, 24
weather radar, 21
Wi-Fi Alliance, 21, 33
Wide Area Networks, see Networks, Wide
Area (WAN)
Wilson, Robert, 149
wireless backhaul, 26
Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi), xv, 6, 19–21, 25, 29,
49, 70, 82, 88, 89, 91, 96, 168, 173, 190,
196, 197, 199, 200, 210, 237, 240, 241,
243, 248, 267, 270, 271, 273, see also
Industrial, Scientiﬁc, and Medical Band
& Unlicensed Spectrum, 320
Wireless Innovation Forum (WinnForum), xiii,
14, 74, 88, 89, 141, 142, 205, 209, 222,
225, 231, 233, 284, 285, see also
Spectrum Sharing Committee (SSC)
Wireless Internet Service Provider (WISP), 60,
65, 82, 125, 128, 173, 212, 229
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN), 268,
see also Local Area Network; Wireless
Fidelity (Wi-Fi)
wireless microphones, 23, 87
World Radio Conference (WRC), 15, 144,
252, 261, 278, 296, 297
World Trade Center, 171, 172
XaaS Operating System (XOS), 275
15:12:19, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use,
www.ebook3000.com

