www.allitebooks.com

TIBCO Spotfire for Developers
Create, manipulate, and deploy rich analytical 
visualizations using the TIBCO Spotfire platform
Manuel Xavier
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

TIBCO Spotfire for Developers
Copyright © 2013 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: October 2013
Production Reference: 1171013
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78217-983-2
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Suresh Mogre (suresh.mogre.99@gmail.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Manuel Xavier
Reviewer
Sri Prakash
Acquisition Editor
Usha Iyer
James Jones
Commissioning Editor
Govindan K.
Technical Editors
Iram Malik
Shali Sasidharan
Project Coordinator
Romal Karani
Proofreader
Chris Smith
Indexer
Tejal Soni
Graphics
Abhinash Sahu
Production Coordinator
Melwyn D'sa
Cover Work
Melwyn D'sa
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Manuel Xavier is an experienced IT Architect (certified SOA Architect and  
TOGAF 9), specialized in the creation of business-driven and vendor-neutral Service 
Oriented Architectures (SOA) and Business Process Management (BPM) solutions.
He has been in IT for over 10 years, having participated in many high-profile projects 
across several countries, namely Portugal, Egypt, UAE, and the Netherlands. His 
experience was accumulated in distinct vertical markets, from Financial Services  
and Insurance to Telecommunications, Energy, and Utilities.
Besides SOA and BPM, other reference areas for Manuel are Complex Event 
Processing (CEP), Case Management, Business Activity Monitoring (BAM),  
and Visual Analytics.
Throughout his career, he has employed Analytics in multiple scenarios, the most 
relevant being: measurement of process performance, monitoring of Service Level 
Agreement expiration, and inspection and evaluation of product sales.
Regarding technologies, he has know-how in several platforms, such as Tibco, 
Oracle, webMethods, and Progress.
I would like to thank Romal Karani, Govindan Kurumangattu, and 
Meeta Rajani for all the help and assistance they gave me during the 
writing process.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewer
Sri Prakash is a successful Management Consultant and Project Manager 
who heads E-Com Canada Inc., a company dedicated to providing Information 
Technology consulting services in Canada. He has an MBA from the Schulich School 
of Business in Toronto and also a Master's Degree in Information Systems.
He brings to the table leadership earned in global giants, such as General Electric, 
EDS, Rogers-AT&T, and the Provincial Government of Ontario. He has personally 
led multi-million dollar projects for these organizations and believes in leadership  
by example.
Under his leadership, E-Com Canada has successfully grown over the years to deliver 
large and medium projects for reputed companies in and around the Greater Toronto 
Area. Its clients include the Ontario Real Estate Association (OREA), Stelco (US Steel), 
Canadian Red Cross, and the Healthcare of Ontario Pension Plan (HOOPP) to name  
a few.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers 
and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support files and downloads related to  
your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub 
files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print 
book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at 
service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a 
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com 
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book 
library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib 
today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for immediate access.
Instant Updates on New Packt Books
Get notified! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on 
Twitter, or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: The Spotfire Architecture Overview	
5
TIBCO Spotfire	
5
Spotfire platform 5.x	
7
Summary	
9
Chapter 2: Setting Up a Development Environment	
11
Installation prerequisites	
11
Hardware	
11
Software	
12
Installing the Spotfire environment	
13
TIBCO Spotfire Server	
13
Verifying the DB installation	
13
Downloading Spotfire Server	
14
Preparing the server database	
15
Installing Spotfire Server	
17
Installing database vendor drivers	
21
Configuring Spotfire Server	
21
TIBCO Spotfire Professional	
28
Downloading Spotfire Professional	
28
Installing Spotfire Server client packages	
28
Installing Spotfire Professional	
30
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server	
33
Configuring Microsoft IIS	
33
Downloading Spotfire Web Player Server	
35
Installing Spotfire Web Player Server	
35
Final installation status	
40
Configuration and administration post installation	
41
TIBCO Spotfire Server	
41
Configuration	
41
Administration	
41
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server	
46
Configuration	
46
Diagnostics	
46
Logging and monitoring	
47
Summary	
47
Chapter 3: Creating Visualizations	
49
Data	
52
Data loading	
54
Loading a text file	
54
Loading an Excel file	
58
Loading from databases	
60
Visualization types	
64
Tables	
64
Bar Charts	
70
Line Charts	
78
Pie Charts	
80
Scatter Plots	
81
Box Plots	
84
The text area	
87
Details visualizations	
89
Summary	
92
Chapter 4: Mastering Visualizations	
93
Filtering	
93
Filter types	
96
Customizing the filters	
98
Filtering schemes	
99
Applying filters	
101
Hierarchies	
102
Marking and Details-on-Demand	
105
Preparing and transforming the data	
106
Adding a data table	
107
Inserting data table columns	
107
Inserting data table rows	
110
Data transformation	
111
Pivoting data	
112
Unpivoting data	
113
Calculating and replacing a column	
115
Calculating a new column	
116
Changing the column name	
116
Changing the column data type	
117
Replacing the data table	
118
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Column matches	
119
The automatic mode	
119
The manual mode	
120
Relations	
121
Multiple data tables in one visualization	
123
The visualization layout	
126
Pages	
127
Libraries	
128
Web Player Server	
131
Computational analytics	
132
Regression modeling/the linear regression model	
133
Information designer	
139
Summary	
144
Index	
145
www.allitebooks.com


Preface
In 2012, 2.5 quintillion bytes of data were produced each day. Much of it has the 
potential to guide corporations and businesses to improve the offered services and 
to better focus on customer satisfaction by helping to understand behaviors and 
patterns, to identify and minimize waste, and to have process visibility. However, 
the analysis of such large chunks of data, known as Big Data, is a huge challenge for 
the IT world, and only recently have hardware and software started to offer options 
for such burdensome tasks.
Visual Analytics tools rose as a partial solution for this complex Big Data problem, 
allowing humans to have a better insight into their owned data. The TIBCO Spotfire 
platform is one of the pioneers of this world, very well known as a reference in the 
market. This platform is a leader in both Gartner 2013 Magic Quadrant for Business 
Intelligence and Analytics Platforms and Forrester WaveTM: Big Data Predictive 
Analytics Solutions, Q1 2013.
Unfortunately, there are few publications about such an essential tool, whether from 
TIBCO or others. This book is an opportunity to challenge this fact. I hope it not only 
fulfills its purpose as a fast-paced introduction to the platform, but also serves as a 
trigger for the publication of more TIBCO software books.
I sincerely hope the chosen topics and content simplicity make this book mandatory 
reading for anyone wishing to triumph with such a fabulous tool, and I wish all 
readers may reach the end of the book with a positive outlook and with enough 
knowledge to embrace new challenges in the world of TIBCO Spotfire.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, The Spotfire Architecture Overview introduces the Spotfire Platform 
products, defining their independent roles in the platform's architecture.  
The platform's main features are also described in this chapter.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 2, Setting Up a Development Environment covers the installation pre-requisites, 
the installation process, and the post-installation tasks for the creation of a local 
standalone environment, with the capability for creation and deployment of 
meaningful visualizations.
Chapter 3, Creating Visualizations details the processes of loading external data in  
the Spotfire Platform and of creating visualizations. Several visualization types  
are presented, such as Bar Chart, Pie Chart, and Scatter Plot.
Chapter 4, Mastering Visualizations deepens the knowledge of the previous chapter, 
by introducing the concepts of filtering, data preparation and transformation, and 
libraries. This chapter closes with an introduction to the displaying of visualizations 
through Spotfire Web Player Server.
What you need for this book
The following software are required to build the examples presented in this book:
•	
Microsoft Windows 2008 64 bit, with Microsoft IIS
•	
Oracle XE 11g Database
•	
Oracle Data Provider for .NET (ODP.NET)
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Server 5.5
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Professional 5.5
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server 5.5
Who this book is for
This book is intended for everybody who is interested in Visual Analytics and in one 
of the best Analytics platforms available—TIBCO Spotfire.
Although TIBCO tools have a tendency to be intended for users with a technical 
background (from Information Technology), the Spotfire Platform is a positive 
exception, expanding the range of possible clients to other areas and backgrounds, 
such as Statistics, Science, Banking, and Pharmaceuticals. The installation process 
and the creation of visualizations (graphs) are very straightforward and should not 
impose any major difficulties to common users.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "First, confirm sqlplus is in the 
environment %PATH%."
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
sqlplus is not recognized as an internal or external command, operable 
program or batch file
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on 
the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: 
"Alternatively, the menu option File | Add Data Tables or the Add Data Tables 
button in the toolbar can be used".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Downloading the color images of  
this book
We also provide you a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams 
used in this book. The color images will help you better understand the changes in 
the output. You can download this file from: http://www.packtpub.com/sites/
default/files/downloads/9832EN_ColoredImages.pdf
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, 
and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list of 
existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed 
by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

The Spotfire Architecture 
Overview
The companies of today face innumerable market challenges due to the ferocious 
competition of a globalized economy. Hence, providing excellent service and having 
customer loyalty are the priorities for their survival.
In order to best achieve both goals and have a competitive edge, companies can resort 
to the information generated by their digitalized systems, their IT. All the recorded 
events from Human Resources (HR) to Customer Relationship Management (CRM), 
Billing, and so on, can be leveraged to better understand the health of a business.
The purpose of this book is to present a tool that behaves as a digital event analysis 
enabler, the TIBCO Spotfire platform. In this first chapter, we will list the main 
characteristics of this platform, while also presenting its architecture and describing 
its components.
TIBCO Spotfire
Spotfire is a visual analytics and business intelligence platform from TIBCO 
software. It is a part of new breed of tools created to bridge the gap between the 
massive amount of data that the corporations produce today and the business users 
who need to interpret this data in order to have the best foundation for the decisions 
they make.

The Spotfire Architecture Overview
[ 6 ]
In my opinion, there is no better description of what TIBCO Spotfire delivers than 
the definition of visual analytics made in the publication named Illuminating the Path: 
The Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics.
"Visual analytics is the science of analytical reasoning facilitated by interactive 
visual interfaces".
                                                       –Illuminating the Path: The Research and Development  
                                                        Agenda for Visual Analytics, James J. Thomas and  
                                                       Kristin A. Cook, IEEE Computer Society Press
The TIBCO Spotfire platform offers the possibility of creating very powerful  
(yet easy to interpret and interact) data visualizations. From real-time Business 
Activity Monitoring (BAM) to Big Data, data-based decision making becomes  
easy – the what, the why, and the how becomes evident.
Spotfire definitely allowed TIBCO to establish itself in an area where until recently  
it had very little experience and no sought-after products.
The main features of this platform are:
•	
More than 30 different data sources to choose from: Several databases 
(including Big Data Teradata), web services, files, and legacy applications.
•	
Big Data analysis: Spotfire delivers the power of MapReduce to regular users.
•	
Database analysis: Data visualizations can be built on top of databases 
using information links. There is no need to pull the analyzed data into the 
platform, as a live link is maintained between Spotfire and the database.
•	
Visual join: Capability of merging data from several distinct sources into  
a single visualization.
•	
Rule-based visualizations: The platform enables the creation and tailoring 
of rules, and the filtering of data. These features facilitate emphasizing of 
outliers and foster management by exception. It is also possible to highlight 
other important features, such as commonalities and anomalies.
•	
Data drill-down: For data visualizations it is possible to create one (or many) 
details visualization(s). This drill-down can be performed in multiple steps as 
drill-down of drill-down of drill-down and so on.
•	
Real-time integration with other TIBCO tools.

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
Spotfire platform 5.x
The platform is composed of several intercommunicating components, each one 
with its own responsibilities (with clear separation of concerns) enabling a clustered 
deployment. As this is an introductory book, we will not dive deep into all the 
components, but we will identify the main ones and the underlying architecture.
A depiction the platform's components is shown in the following diagram:
TIBCO Spotfire Web
Player Client
TIBCO Spotfire
Professional
TIBCO Spotfire Server
TIBCO Spotfire Web
Player Server
TIBCO Spotfire Platform
Server Database
Spotfire
R
Spotfire
R
Spotfire
R
Spotfire
R
Persistence
layer
Server layer
Fat Client
layer
Thin Client
layer
The descriptions of each of the components in the preceding diagram are as follows:
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Server: The Spotfire server makes a set of services available 
to the analytics clients (TIBCO Spotfire Professional and TIBCO Spotfire 
Web Player Server):
°°
User services: It is responsible for authentication and authorization
°°
Deployment services: It handles the consistent upgrade of  
Spotfire clients
°°
Library services: It manages the repository of analysis files
°°
Information services: It  persists information links to external  
data sources
The Server component is available for several operating systems, such as 
Linux, Solaris, and Windows.

The Spotfire Architecture Overview
[ 8 ]
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Professional: This is a client application (fat client) that 
focuses on the creation of data visualizations, taking advantage of all of 
the platform's features. This is the main client application, and because of 
that, it has enabled all the data manipulation functionalities such as use 
of data filters, drill down, working online and offline (working offline 
allows embedding data in the visualizations for use in limited connectivity 
environments), and exporting visualizations to MS PowerPoint, PDF, and 
HTML. It is only available for Windows environment.
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server: This offers users the possibility of 
accessing and interacting with visualizations created in TIBCO Spotfire 
Professional. The existence of this web application enables the usage of 
an Internet browser as a client, allowing for thin client access where no 
software has to be installed on the user's machine. Please be aware that the 
visualizations cannot be created or altered this way. They can only be accessed 
in a read-only mode, where all rules are enabled, as well as data is drill down. 
Since it is developed in ASP.NET, this server must be deployed in a Microsoft 
IIS server, and so it is restricted to Microsoft Windows environments.
•	
Server Database: This database is accessed by the TIBCO Spotfire Server for 
storage of server information. It should not be confused with the data stores 
that the platform can access to fetch data from, and build visualizations.  
Only two vendor databases are supported for this role: Oracle Database  
and Microsoft SQL Server.
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Client: These are thin clients to the Web Player 
Server. Several Internet browsers can be used on various operating systems 
(Microsoft Internet Explorer on Windows, Mozilla Firefox on Windows and 
Mac OS, Google Chrome on Windows and Android, and so on). TIBCO has 
also made available an application for iPad, which is available in iTunes.
For more details on the iPad client application, please navigate to: 
https://itunes.apple.com/en/app/spotfire-analytics/
id417436823?mt=8

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we introduced the main attributes of the Spotfire platform in the 
scope of visual analytics, and we detailed the platform's underlying architecture.  
We will now proceed to the next chapter, where you will learn the steps to install 
and configure a development environment.
www.allitebooks.com


Setting Up a Development 
Environment
This chapter details the steps for the creation of a TIBCO Spotfire 5.5 development 
environment. It will focus solely on the installation of the components presented in 
the previous chapter, in a single standalone Windows environment.
Installation prerequisites
Next we will present the main hardware and software installation prerequisites 
according to what is specified by TIBCO. If you require a more extensive and 
detailed list, please navigate to the following location: http://support.spotfire.
com/sr.asp.
The requisite values presented for hardware are to be considered for multiuser 
environments, such as test and production. For local development environments,  
less powerful configurations can be used.
Hardware
Following are the hardware requirements for the three Spotfire platform components 
covered in this chapter. All the values were defined by TIBCO, and are available at 
the following location: http://support.spotfire.com/sr_spotfire55.asp
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Server: The requirements for this component are:
°°
Processor: Intel Pentium 4 or equivalent, 2 GHz or higher
°°
RAM: 4 GB recommended (2 GB minimum)
°°
Hard disk: 1.5 GB

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 12 ]
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Professional: The requirements for this component are:
°°
Processor: 2 GHz, Multicore, 64-bit (1 GHz, 32 or 64-bit minimum)
°°
RAM: 4 GB recommended (2 GB minimum)
°°
Hard disk: 1.4 GB
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server: The requirements for this  
component are:
°°
Processor: 2 GHz, 6 physical cores or more, 64-bit  
(2 GHz, 64-bit minimum)
°°
RAM: 12 GB recommended (6 GB minimum)
°°
Hard disk: 1.2 GB
Software
Following are the software requirements for the three Spotfire platform components 
covered in this chapter. Just like the hardware requirements, all the values were 
defined by TIBCO, and are available at the following location: http://support.
spotfire.com/sr_spotfire55.asp
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Server: The requirements are as follows:
°°
Operating system: Microsoft Windows Server 2012; Microsoft 
Windows Server 2008 R2; Microsoft Windows Server 2008; Oracle 
(Sun) Solaris 10; Oracle (Sun) Solaris 9; Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6; 
Red Hat Enterprise Linux 5; SUSE Linux Enterprise Server 11
°°
Server database: Oracle 11g Release 2 (11.2.0.x); Oracle 11g Release 
1 (11.1.0.x); Oracle 10g Release 2 (10.2.0.x); Oracle 10g Release 1 
(10.1.0.x); Oracle 10g XE (for development environments); Microsoft 
SQL Server 2012 (Datacenter, Parallel Data Warehouse, Enterprise, 
Standard, Workgroup, Express, Developer); Microsoft SQL Server 
2008 R2 (Datacenter, Parallel Data Warehouse, Enterprise, Standard, 
Workgroup, Express, Developer); Microsoft SQL Server 2008 
(Enterprise, Standard, Workgroup, Express, Developer); Microsoft 
SQL Server 2005 SP2 and higher (Enterprise, Standard, Workgroup, 
Express, Developer)
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Professional: The requirements are as follows:
°°
Operating system: Microsoft Windows 8; Microsoft Windows 7; 
Microsoft Windows Vista SP2; Microsoft Windows XP SP3; XP x64 
Edition SP2
°°
.NET framework: Microsoft .NET Framework version 4.x

Chapter 2
[ 13 ]
•	
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server: The requirements are as follows:
°°
Operating system: Microsoft Windows Server 2012; Microsoft 
Windows Server 2008 R2; Microsoft Windows Server 2008 (64-bit 
versions required)
°°
.NET framework: Microsoft .NET Framework version 4.x
°°
Web server: Microsoft Internet Information Services Versions 7.0 
through 8.0, with ASP.NET 4.x enabled
Installing the Spotfire environment
The step-by-step installation of a Spotfire platform environment presented in this 
chapter, is an example of Spotfire 5.5.0 installed in Windows 2008 64 bit (on the 
C: drive), and using a local Oracle 11g XE database (previously installed in C:\
oraclexe\app). Please note that components can also be installed in separate 
machines, as long as the software and hardware prerequisites are respected.
For this book, a standalone Windows environment was chosen, not only because it 
is the simplest environment to configure and use, but also because of the operating 
system requirements for two of the TIBCO Spotfire components, TIBCO Spotfire 
Professional and TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server.
TIBCO Spotfire Server
We will start by describing the installation process for Spotfire server, which will 
include the verification of the setup of the supporting database, and an overview  
of the product's main configuration tasks.
Verifying the DB installation
Before starting with the installation of the server, we must make sure the server 
database is correctly installed and configured.

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 14 ]
Because Oracle XE is not supported in 64-bit Windows environments, 
you might encounter some issues during the installation process. Two 
workarounds to overcome this limitation are:
•	
During the installation, open SQLNET.ORA (located in $ORACLE_
HOME/network/admin), and change the parameter SQLNET.
AUTHENTICATION_SERVICES to NONE.
•	
Ignore any error related to the registry, as the installation will 
succeed anyway.
When the installation process finishes, Oracle XE will start and function 
correctly.
First, confirm sqlplus is in the environment %PATH%. This can be done by opening  
a command line and typing the following command followed by Enter:
sqlplus
If you get a result as the one presented next, then please make sure you add sqlplus 
to the %PATH%:
sqlplus is not recognized as an internal or external command, operable 
program or batch file.
As we opted for using Oracle XE, we must first tune the database to cope with 
the load generated by the Spotfire server. We must execute the following SQL 
instructions as SYSDBA:
alter system set processes=150 scope=spfile;
alter system set sessions=300 scope=spfile;
alter system set transactions=330 scope=spfile;
Shutdown immediate;
Startup;
A user guide for SQL*Plus can be found at: http://docs.oracle.
com/cd/B19306_01/server.102/b14357/toc.htm.
Among others, it contains instructions of how to connect to a 
database as SYSDBA.
Downloading Spotfire Server
Now that we have confirmed that our database is configured and running properly, 
we will proceed with the installation of the Spotfire server.

Chapter 2
[ 15 ]
Start by downloading the server installer TIB_ss_5.5.0_win.zip from the TIBCO 
download site (http://download.tibco.com, Products Home | TIBCO Spotfire 
Server-5.5.0 | TIBCO Spotfire Server Software 5.5.0) and unpack it to C:\temp\
TIB_ss_5.5.0_win.
Preparing the server database
Before actually installing the Spotfire Server software, we need to prepare the 
server database by creating all the required server objects. For that, we will copy 
the database creation scripts of C:\temp\TIB_ss_5.5.0_win\scripts\oracle_
install to a temporary folder for update and execution. We can use the folder C:\
temp\oracle_install.
Open the script C:\temp\oracle_install\create_databases.bat in a text editor, 
and locate the following section:
rem Set these variable to reflect the local environment:
set ROOTFOLDER=<ROOTFOLDER>
set CONNECTIDENTIFIER=<SID>
set ADMINNAME=system
set ADMINPASSWORD=<ADMINPASSWORD>
set SERVERDB_USER=<SERVERDB_USER>
set SERVERDB_PASSWORD=<SERVERDB_PASSWORD>
set SERVER_DATA_TABLESPACE=SPOTFIRE_DATA
set SERVER_TEMP_TABLESPACE=SPOTFIRE_TEMP
We must perform several configuration changes, by replacing the current values:
•	
set ROOTFOLDER=C:\oraclexe\app\oracle\oradata\XE: It sets the 
location for the creation of Spotfire Server tablespace files
•	
set CONNECTIDENTIFIER=XE: Here, we set the System Identifier for the 
Database instance (SID) of the database
•	
set ADMINNAME=system: Here, we set the Database Administrator (DBA) 
user. We will leave it as it is
•	
set ADMINPASSWORD=spotfire: Here, we set the DBA user password.  
My SYSTEM user has password spotfire
•	
set SERVERDB_USER=spotfire: Here, we set the schema (user) to create 
TIBCO Spotfire Server
•	
set SERVERDB_PASSWORD=spotfire: Here, we set the password of TIBCO 
Spotfire Server user
•	
set SERVER_DATA_TABLESPACE=SPOTFIRE_DATA: Here, we set the name of 
tablespace to be created

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 16 ]
•	
set SERVER_TEMP_TABLESPACE=SPOTFIRE_TEMP: Here, we set the name of 
the temporary tablespace to be created
There is also a special configuration to set up the demo data, but as we have no 
intention to install it, we will not update the following section:
rem Demo data parameters
set INSTALL_DEMODATA=no
set DEMODB_USER=spotfire_demodata
set DEMODB_PASSWORD=spotfire_demodata
We will leave INSTALL_DEMODATA with the value no.
Now, we will save and close the script, and thus the changes are complete.  
To execute it, please use a command line for the following commands:
cd C:\temp\oracle_install
create_databases.bat
During execution and on completion, the following output will be presented:
Creating Spotfire Server table spaces and user
Creating Spotfire Server tables
Populating Spotfire Server tables
Spotfire Server demo database user and data will not be created
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Please review the log file (log.txt) for any errors or warnings!
After the script terminates its execution, we should make sure it succeeded.  
We will do this by logging into the newly created schema, validating the presence  
of the new tablespaces, and checking the script log.
•	
You can log in into the database with the new spotfire user through 
SQL*Plus  
(or another tool).
•	
After logging in, you can list the database tablespaces with the SQL 
command SELECT * FROM user_tablespaces;. Tablespaces SPOTFIRE_
DATA and SPOTFIRE_TEMP must be listed.
•	
Finally, you will find the script log under C:\temp\oracle_install\log.
txt. Check it for errors.
If all three validation steps were successful, the Spotfire Server database is now 
prepared. As we will not require the database creation scripts again, we can remove 
C:\temp\oracle_install.

Chapter 2
[ 17 ]
Installing Spotfire Server
The easiest installation mode for TIBCO products in Windows development 
machines tends to be the interactive one. To trigger it, double-click on C:\temp\TIB_
ss_5.5.0_win\setup-win64.exe (or setup-win32.exe for 32-bit OS).
The following dialog box will be presented:
Click on Next >. The license agreement will be displayed, as shown in the  
following screenshot:

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 18 ]
Read the conditions, accept them, and click on Next >. The Third Party Components 
screen will be pop up, as shown in the following screenshot:
The third-party components are required solely for configuring NT LAN Manager 
(NTLM). As we will not use this authentication mode, we can skip this installation 
step. Select Do not download third party components and click on Next >.
The screen for installation location will be presented, as shown in the  
following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 19 ]
We will keep the default installation path. Click on Next, and the following 
screenshot appears:
Keep the option Create Windows Service selected and click on Next >. The Spotfire 
Server Port selection screen will pop up, as shown in the following screenshot:
www.allitebooks.com

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 20 ]
Please change the Spotfire Server Port value to 9090.
Another free port can also be used. Just make sure that you do not choose port 80,  
as it belongs to Microsoft IIS (used later for TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server).  
Also, be aware that Oracle XE uses port 8080 for its TNS listener.
When you are done, click on Next >. You will be presented with an installation 
confirmation screen, as shown in the following screenshot:
The installation configuration has been set. Proceed by clicking on Install.
When the installation concludes, you will be shown the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
The installation is now complete. Select Exit the installation wizard as we will 
explicitly launch the configuration tool later. Click on Finish.
After installation completion, the TIBCO provided server installation 
manual can be found under C:\tibco\tss\5.5.0\tomcat\
webapps\spotfire\support\manuals\TIB_SSDoc_
ServerInstallationManual.pdf.
The Launch the upgrade tool option is used for upgrading existing Spotfire versions. 
This is out of the scope of this book and will not be discussed further.
Here is a neat trick to force the installed Spotfire Windows service to 
start automatically only after the database startup completes. Our XE 
database also has a Windows service with automatic startup. We will 
create a startup dependency between both services.
Run (as administrator) the following command in the command prompt:
sc config Tss550 depend= OracleServiceXE
The server is now installed, so we can remove C:\temp\TIB_ss_5.5.0_win.
Installing database vendor drivers
TIBCO recommends users to install the JDBC drivers of the vendor database 
(although DataDirect drivers are embedded in the Spotfire product).
The Oracle XE installation already contains the required JDBC drivers to access it. 
You can find ojdbc6.jar at: C:\oraclexe\app\oracle\product\11.2.0\server\
jdbc\lib. 
As an alternative, you can download it from http://www.oracle.com/
technetwork/database/features/jdbc/index-091264.html.
Place the JAR file in the C:\tibco\tss\5.5.0\tomcat\lib folder.
Configuring Spotfire Server
Even though the Spotfire Server software was correctly installed, we are still unable 
to start it. It will fail with an error.
This is due to the lack of server configuration, as we only performed a few 
configuration tasks during the installation. The bulk of configuration must  
be done after installation, through the server configuration tool.

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 22 ]
To start this configuration tool, run C:\tibco\tss\5.5.0\tomcat\bin\uiconfig.
bat. The following console is started:
As an alternative, C:\tibco\tss\5.5.0\tomcat\bin\config.
bat can be used. But please keep in mind that this alternative is script 
oriented.
The first configuration must be the creation of a bootstrap file. As specified in 
configuration console, the bootstrap file specifies connection details to the Spotfire 
database and is needed for further configuration.

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
Start by selecting the option Create new bootstrap file. When configuring this  
file (bootstrap.xml stored in the XML format), please pay attention to the  
following settings:
•	
JDBC driver: Replace Bundled DataDirect with Oracle thin (which we 
installed before)
•	
Database username and password: these will be respectively SERVERDB_USER 
and SERVERDB_PASSWORD from the schema creation scripts. In our case, it is 
spotfire for both
•	
Hostname: Local database, so localhost is fine
•	
SID: XE, our local database is SID
•	
Configuration tool password: Select a password to protect the configuration. 
In our case it will be spotfire again
•	
Server name: Select a name for the server. In our case, it will be named 
SpotfireDev
After filling in all the required values, click on the button Create Bootstrap.
A success pop up will be displayed, as shown in the following screenshot, and 
the following three tabs will become enabled in the configuration tool: Bootstrap, 
Configuration, and XML View. We will now focus on the Configuration tab.

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 24 ]
The simplest alternative for authentication mode is BASIC Database, and that is the 
one we will use. This means Spotfire Server credentials will be stored in the Spotfire 
Server database.
For our development environment, all other default configuration settings  
are suitable.
Click on the Save configuration button, and then select Database as destination for 
these configurations.
For any configuration changes to become active we must restart our server manually 
(this can be changed using the tab Configuration | Restart Policy). As our server is 
still not running, we will not worry about this now.
If we go back to the System Status tab in the server configuration tool, we will see 
the following status:

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
We are still missing the creation of a Spotfire Server administrator and we are still 
required to deploy the client packages in the server (for the client updates mentioned 
in the previous chapter).
For the creation of an administrator user, we need to go to the Administration 
tab and create a user. For simplicity reasons, we will create a user with the same 
credentials as our Spotfire Server DB schema (user spotfire), as shown in the 
following screenshot:
After defining spotfire as username and password, click on Create.

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 26 ]
Now select the newly created user and promote it to an administrator. You will end 
up with a configuration as shown in the following screenshot:
Our changes were persisted to the server database, and if we once again navigate 
to the System Status tab, we have one less issue, that is we now have a server 
administrator. Your configuration will now be similar to the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
We will deal with the missing Client Packages Displayed on Default Area during 
the installation of the next component – TIBCO Spotfire Professional. This is the only 
server configuration activity that we will pick up later.
We have to handle the installation of the client packages during the 
installation of Spotfire Professional, because the client packages' 
source binary comes bundled with the source binary of Spotfire 
Professional.

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 28 ]
You should now be able to successfully start the TIBCO Spotfire 5.5 Windows 
service. For 32 bit environments, some adjustments might be required on the JVM 
settings (such as reducing the 1536 MB memory allocation to 1024 MB). For detailed 
instructions, refer to page 138 of the tool's installation manual under Chapter 11.3, 
Modifying the Virtual Memory, TIB_SSDoc_ServerInstallationManual.pdf.
In case of any errors on service startup, check the logs under C:\tibco\tss\5.5.0\
tomcat\logs.
TIBCO Spotfire Professional
Spotfire Server is installed, and we will now proceed with the installation  
of Spotfire Professional.
Downloading Spotfire Professional
Download the Spotfire Professional installer TIB_spotdeploy_5.5.0_win.zip from 
the TIBCO download (http://download.tibco.com, Products Home | TIBCO 
Spotfire Professional-5.5.0 | TIBCO Spotfire Deployment Kit Software 5.5.0) and 
extract it to C:\temp\TIB_spotdeploy_5.5.0_win.
The TIBCO provided deployment administration manual can be found 
under C:\temp\TIB_spotdeploy_5.5.0_win\Documentation\
TIB_SpotDeploy_5.5.0_DeployAdminManual.pdf. Please move 
it to a different directory as you might need to refer to it in the future.
Installing Spotfire Server client packages
The second step in the fat client installation is the wrap up of server installation  
(as stated in a previous section). We still have a pending task to complete, which is 
the deployment of client packages on the default area (work area).
If you have closed the server configuration console, open it again, switch to the 
System Status tab, and select the option Deploy client packages....
On the pop up, click on the Browse button and navigate to C:\temp\TIB_
spotdeploy_5.5.0_win\Products\TIBCO Spotfire Distribution\Spotfire.
Dxp.sdn.
Leave Production as work area—we will rename it later, when we approach the 
subject of Server Administration. Click on Deploy.

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
The System Status window on the Spotfire Server configuration console should now 
look as the following screenshot:
The Server configuration has been finished; we will now proceed with the 
installation of Spotfire Professional.
For an alternative mode of deploying the client packages (using the 
Server Administration console), please refer to page 8 of Chapter 3.2, 
TIB_SpotDeploy_5.5.0_DeployAdminManual.pdf
www.allitebooks.com

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 30 ]
Installing Spotfire Professional
To trigger the installation of Spotfire Professional, double-click on C:\temp\TIB_
spotdeploy_5.5.0_win\Products\TIBCO Spotfire Installer\setup-5.5.0.exe. 
This will begin the procedure, and the following screenshot will be presented:
Click on Next >. The license agreement will be displayed, as shown in the  
following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
Read the conditions, accept them, and click on Next >. The Spotfire Server URL 
configuration screen will pop up, as shown in the following screenshot:
Fill the Server URL field with http://127.0.0.1:9090 or http://
localhost:9090, and click on Next >. You will be presented with an installation 
confirmation screen, as shown in the following screenshot:

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 32 ]
Proceed by clicking on Install.
When installation concludes, you will be shown the following screenshot:
You can now click on Finish to exit the installation wizard.
Spotfire Professional is now installed. Since we will not need it anymore, we can 
remove C:\temp\TIB_spotdeploy_5.5.0_win.
The best way to test the installation is to start the Spotfire Professional tool.  
There should be one shortcut on the Desktop, and one in the Windows Start menu.
For logging in, make sure that the selected server has URL 
http://127.0.0.1:9090 (or http://localhost:9090). If it is 
set to a different value, use the option Manage Servers to change it 
to the correct one.
If you get any pop ups suggesting updates, proceed by clicking on Update Now. 
They will be related to the client packages existing on the server, which are newer 
versions than the software we just installed.

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
An update pop-up looks similar to the following screenshot:
The installation procedure of TIBCO Spotfire  Professional — the fat client — is  
now finished.
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server
Since Spotfire Professional installation is concluded, we can now proceed with 
Spotfire Web Player Server.
Configuring Microsoft IIS
The Spotfire Web Payer Server will be deployed in Microsoft IIS; so before 
proceeding with this task, we must make sure that the IIS is configured according  
to the requirements of TIBCO.
The first configuration task consists of enabling the active scripting. For this,  
open Local Group Policy Editor and run gpedit.msc. Navigate to Local Computer 
Policy | Computer Configuration | Administrative Templates | Windows 
Components | Internet Explorer | Internet Control Panel | Security Page | 
Internet Zone, right-click on Allow active scripting, and click on Edit.

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 34 ]
You will be presented with a pop up as shown in the following screenshot:
Select the Enabled option and also change the Allow active scripting option to 
Enable. Complete the step by clicking on OK.
With active scripting enabled, we just need to enable IIS. Commence by starting 
Windows 2008 Server Manager. When it is running, right-click on Roles and then 
click on Add Roles. Click on Next on the Before you begin screen.
In the Select Server Roles screen, select Web Server (IIS). Click on Next twice.
In the Select Role Services screen, besides the default selections, also select  
the following:
•	
ASP.NET
•	
.NET Extensibility
•	
ISAPI Extensions
•	
ISAPI Filters
•	
Basic Authentication
•	
Windows Authentication
•	
IIS Management Scripts and Tools
•	
IIS 6 Metabase Compatibility
•	
IIS 6 WMI Compatibility
•	
IIS 6 Scripting Tools
Click on Next, followed by Install. Finally, when done, click on Close.

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
For other operating systems, please refer to the product's documentation  
TIB_SpotWebPlay_5.5.0_InstallationManual.pdf for the instructions  
related to installation.
Downloading Spotfire Web Player Server
Download the Spotfire Web Player Server installer TIB_spotwebplay_5.5.0_win.
zip from the TIBCO download site (http://download.tibco.com, navigate to 
Products Home | TIBCO Spotfire Web Player-5.5.0 | TIBCO Spotfire Web Player 
Software 5.5.0) and extract it to C:\temp\TIB_spotwebplay_5.5.0_win.
The TIBCO provided Web Player Server installation manual 
can be found under C:\temp\TIB_spotwebplay_5.5.0_
win\Documentation\TIB_SpotWebPlay_5.5.0_
InstallationManual.pdf. Please move it to a different 
directory as you might need to refer to it in the future.
Installing Spotfire Web Player Server
Double-click on C:\temp\TIB_spotwebplay_5.5.0_win\Products\TIBCO 
Spotfire Web Player Installer\setup-5.5.0.exe. This will trigger the 
installation procedure.
The following screenshot will be presented:

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 36 ]
Click on Next >. The license agreement will be displayed, as shown in the  
following screenshot:
Read the conditions, accept them, and click on Next >. The installation location 
screen, as shown in the following screenshot, will then be presented:

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
We will maintain the default installation path, so click on Next >. The screen for IIS 
configuration will be displayed as shown in the following screenshot:
We will keep the default Application Name (which is recommended by TIBCO)  
and IIS is using port 80, so we will keep the value of Web Site Port as well. Click  
on Next >.
The Spotfire Server URL configuration screen will pop up, as shown in the  
following screenshot:

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 38 ]
Fill the TIBCO Spotfire Server URL field (with the value http://127.0.0.1:9090 
or http://localhost:9090) and click on Next >. The Spotfire Server Administrator 
Email configuration screen will pop up, as shown in the following screenshot:
We will not configure an e-mail account for the Spotfire Administrator, so you can 
leave the configuration the way it is and click on Next >.
You will be presented with an installation confirmation screen, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
The installation configuration has been set. Proceed by clicking on Install.
When installation concludes, you will be shown the following screenshot:
The installation is now complete; click on Finish to terminate the installer.
At this point, the TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server is installed in the machine, 
configured with username and password authentication type. Although this 
is enough for our development environment, for a live environment, other 
alternatives should be used (please refer page 27 of TIB_SpotWebPlay_5.5.0_
InstallationManual.pdf for more on the options available to you).
To test the installation, open a web browser and access the following URL:  
http://localhost/SpotfireWeb. A Spotfire Web Server login page should  
be displayed.
Since we no longer require C:\temp\TIB_spotwebplay_5.5.0_win, we can  
remove it.
www.allitebooks.com

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 40 ]
If you get an HTTP error while accessing http://localhost/
SpotfireWeb, you may require to perform an extra step to complete 
the ASP.NET installation.
Please run the following command at the command prompt, as 
administrator:
C:\Windows\Microsoft.NET\Framework64\v4.0.30319\aspnet_
regiis.exe /i
Final installation status
If you followed the previous recommended installation configuration, then your 
environment should have the following characteristics:
•	
Oracle XE:
°°
Connection details: server = localhost; port = 1521; SID = XE
°°
System users: SYS [password = spotfire]; SYSTEM [password = 
spotfire]
°°
Spotfire Server user = spotfire [password = spotfire]
•	
Spotfire Server:
°°
URL: http://localhost:9090
°°
Administration user: spotfire [password = spotfire]
°°
Bootstrap configuration file password: spotfire
°°
Administration console: http://localhost:9090/spotfire/
•	
Spotfire Web Player Server:
°°
URL: http://localhost/SpotfireWeb/ [port 80]

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
Configuration and administration  
post installation
Now that we have finished the installation process for the platform components,  
we will move on to configuration and administration tasks.
We will only focus on Spotfire Server and Spotfire Web Player Server configuration, 
as only these offer an extended range of options.
TIBCO Spotfire Server
Focusing on the server, we will now look at the topics of extra configuration steps, 
startup administration, and logging.
Configuration
The topic of server configuration already came up during the installation. In my 
opinion, it is an intrinsic part of the server installation procedure and this is why 
I placed it in that section of the book. Just keep in mind how to start the server 
configuration console:
•	
Method 1: Executing (double-clicking) C:\tibco\tss\5.5.0\tomcat\bin\
uiconfig.bat
•	
Method 2: Navigating to the Windows Start menu: Start | All Programs | 
TIBCO Sportire Server 5.5 | Configure TIBCO Spotfire Server
Administration
You might remember that during the installation of the Spotfire Server, we opted 
for the creation of a Server Windows service. You may use it to start and stop the 
Spotfire Server (named as Tss550). Also, beware that it was created with Startup 
type as Automatic, so it will start up whenever you boot your PC.
However, if you want to manually start up the application, you have the alternative 
of executing the server's Tomcat start-up script C:\tibco\tss\5.5.0\tomcat\bin\
startuptomcat.

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 42 ]
After starting the server, to access its Administration console, navigate to  
http://localhost:9090/spotfire, and the following screenshot will be shown:
The user is presented with two distinct options: Open Administration Console or 
Open Logs and Diagnostics.
By selecting any of these options, you will be requested to log in. Feel free to do so, 
resorting to the created administration user: spotfire.
Administration console
The direct link for this option is http://localhost:9090/spotfire/
administration/, and after logging in, you will be presented with the menu shown 
in the following screenshot:
Three distinct operations can be performed in the administration console: user 
management, group management, and deployment management.

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Try out the process of creating a user by clicking on New User. Create a user named 
testUser with the password testUser. The result will be the displayed as shown in 
the following screenshot:
You can also manage the group to which a user belongs; to try it out, click on the 
Edit button. When done, close the Edit Groups dialog box in order to return to the 
main screen.
Now focusing on group management, this feature allows Spotfire Server 
administrators to bundle Spotfire permissions (also known as licenses)  
into new applicable sets (or groups).
To add a group, please select the Groups tab and click on New Group. Create a 
group named testGroup, at the top level. Click on OK when done, and then try to 
add our testUser to the newly created group. You can do so by using the Add Users 
button at the bottom of the Members of Group list. Do not forget to assign the 
user to a deployment area by clicking on the Assign Deployment Area button and 
selecting an available area from the dialog box shown. The topic of deployment areas 
will be explained later.
The result should be similar to what is shown in the following screenshot:

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 44 ]
For more information on how to manage users and groups, refer to 
document TIB_SSDoc_ServerInstallationManual.pdf, or 
document admin.chm (which you can download from: https://
docs.tibco.com/products/tibco-spotfire-5-5-0). By 
default, only the group Administrator has access permission (license) 
for Spotfire Professional and Spotfire Web Player Server. Users 
belonging to other groups will not be able to use both the tools.
The management of licenses (assignment to groups) can only be done 
in Spotfire Professional, in a special dialog box named Administration 
Manager. For more information about this topic, please refer to the 
Help documentation of Spotfire Professional.
Accessing the Deployment tab will allow us to manage Deployment areas  
and Software packages. After selecting this tab, you will be presented with  
the following screenshot:
You might have noticed we already have one deployment area (which was created 
by default during the installation process). This area is named Production.
The procedure for creating new areas is pretty straightforward—we only need to 
make sure the client packages are installed in the new area.

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
Since ours is a development environment, we will not do it; we will only rename  
the current Production area to Development. To rename the area, select it and click 
on Rename.
Regarding Software Packages, the presented list is related to the client packages we 
installed earlier; we do not have much to do here.
Opening logs and diagnostics
The direct link for log files and diagnostics option is http://localhost:9090/
spotfire/console/admin.jsp. After accessing it, you will be presented with the 
following screenshot:
There are two tabs in the console: Server Log Files and Diagnostics.
The Server Log Files option allows you to access the Spotfire Server's logs through 
a web user interface. All logs presented in the list of possible logs to choose from for 
display are fetched from C:\tibco\tss\5.5.0\tomcat\logs, and can be accessed 
directly with any text editor.
Some examples of these selectable/viewable logs are: catalina.log, server.log, 
startup.log, and tss550-stderr.*.log.
The Diagnostics option allows you to access the server environment diagnostics, for 
instance database server, operating system, hardware and hardware configuration, 
and so on.

Setting Up a Development Environment
[ 46 ]
For more information on monitoring, refer to page 109 of Chapter 6, Monitoring 
TIB_SSDoc_ServerInstallationManual.pdf. It explains how to configure 
and use JMX and TIBCO Hawk. For more advanced logging options, you 
should also refer to page 113 of Chapter 7, Log User Action TIB_SSDoc_
ServerInstallationManual.pdf. It explains how to configure and enable the new 
Log User Action feature of Spotfire, which is basically a centralized log for all the 
platform's components log events, which can be stored in file, database, or both.
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server
Regarding the Web Player, we will now focus on the topics of configuration, 
diagnostics, logging, and monitoring.
Configuration
You may find the application's configuration file Web.config under the directory 
C:\Program Files\TIBCO\Spotfire Web Player\5.5.0\webroot. In this file 
you can set the authentication mode and more advanced features such as enabling 
JavaScript API, Spotfire administrator e-mail address, Spotfire Server URL, and 
so on. For a full list of settings, please refer to Chapter 6.2, Advanced Web.Config 
settings TIB_SpotWebPlay_5.5.0_InstallationManual.pdf.
Diagnostics
To access the Web Player Diagnostics console, open a browser window and navigate 
to http://localhost/SpotfireWeb/Administration/Diagnostics.aspx.  
After logging in (with an Administrator group user), the following tabs will  
become available: 
•	
Spotfire Server: Displays information about Spotfire Server and the machine 
where it is installed (hardware, operating system, and other software)
•	
Web Server: Displays information about the IIS server, including operating 
system, hardware status, and so on
•	
Web Application: Displays information about the Spotfire Web Player 
configuration; these configuration items are fetched from the application's 
Web.config file
•	
Loaded Assemblies: Lists the .dll (assemblies) loaded by the  
web application
•	
Site: Displays statistics concerning the accesses to the Spotfire Web Player 
web application

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
•	
Web Server Log: Displays the Web Server Player log entries. The log file 
used as source can be found here: C:\Program Files\TIBCO\Spotfire  
Web Player\5.5.0\Logfiles\Spotfire.Dxp.Web.log
Logging and monitoring
To alter the logging level of Spotfire.Dxp.Web.log, you can edit the XML tag 
level (<level value="INFO"/>) of file C:\Program Files\TIBCO\Spotfire 
Web Player\5.5.0\webroot\app_data\log4net.config. This file contains 
the configuration of the log4net of the web application; the following levels are 
available: DEBUG, INFO, WARN, ERROR, and FATAL.
For more information on log4net and the logging levels, visit http://logging.
apache.org/log4net/ and refer to page 101 of Chapter 6.12 Logging and Monitoring, 
TIB_SpotWebPlay_5.5.0_InstallationManual.pdf.
Also, be aware that it is possible to enable performance trackers for the Web 
Player Server. For Performance monitoring using the management console of 
Windows, refer to page 111 of Chapter 6.1.3, Performance, TIB_SpotWebPlay_5.5.0_
InstallationManual.pdf.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to create a Spotfire development environment, by 
installing the following TIBCO Spotfire platform products: TIBCO Spotfire Server, 
TIBCO Spotfire Professional, and TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server.
All the components were installed in a single machine, where a database instance 
(for the server) was previously installed and configured, enabling the creation of an 
environment without any external dependencies.
After the installation procedure, we focused on the subjects of environment 
configuration, administration, and management.
In the next chapter, we will begin using our environment to explore the creation  
and manipulation of rich data visualizations using Spotfire Professional.


Creating Visualizations
This chapter provides a how-to for the creation of Spotfire Professional 
Visualizations. By the end of it, the reader should be an independent user of 
the Spotfire platform, having the required skills to create meaningful Analytics 
visualizations. However, before actually diving deep into the usage of Spotfire 
Professional, I would like to emphasize the purpose of Analytics tools.
The discipline of Visual Analytics allows us to understand the what, the why,  
and the how of raw data. It does so by fostering intuitive data representations,  
where the multiple dimensions of data are reduced and simplified.
The power and success of Analytics tools is closely related to their capability  
to summarize big chunks of data, providing interactive visualizations, where  
filters, rules, and data drill-down can be applied, always in a very attractive and 
captivating environment.
Users from many disciplines (IT, Scientists, and Statisticians) are allowed to find the 
correct answers for their most challenging questions, and complex data becomes 
understandable through analysis, integrated with computational analytics and 
statistical tools. Reports can be quickly created and distributed, being available  
on the Web, ready for access from several device types, including mobile.
To demonstrate the power of Visual Analytics, I will now provide an example where 
a set of data becomes dissectible through the creation of visualizations. This will 
reinforce the idea of the benefits of Visual Analytics.
www.allitebooks.com

Creating Visualizations
[ 50 ]
The next screenshot is of a Microsoft Excel file containing sales information.  
The records contain data, such as customer age, customer gender, city, number  
of purchases, total spent in purchases, and type of goods.
To the human eye, this raw data is readable, but further analysis would be complex 
and lengthy. However, importing it to Spotfire Professional allows me to generate in 
a very short amount of time a set of three visualizations (displayed in the next three 
screenshots), where distinct trends can easily be identified. These are as follows:
•	
Which city has the biggest spender? Is this a man or woman?

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
We can clearly see the biggest spender was a man from Los Angeles—top-
right corner of the screenshot. He was not only the biggest spender, but he 
also did the most purchases (this is clearly the case of an outlier).
•	
Who buys more often—men or women?
Segregating by gender, we realize we have more records from  
women—women bought more often. This conclusion is true for the  
four analyzed locations.
Please also note that although women bought more often, this does not 
necessarily mean they spent more as well.

Creating Visualizations
[ 52 ]
•	
Which age group spends the most?
This pie chart shows the distribution of expenditure between the different 
age groups. The groups that spend the most are 50s and 60s. Respectively, 
these groups spent 27.7% and 27.1% of the total spent.
These three visualizations will be recreated in the Visualization types section so the 
reader can realize how simple their creation was.
I hope that the examples shown here have increased your appetite for the tool, as we 
will now start with the technical details behind the creation of visualizations. In the 
next section, we will focus on data sources—which ones can we access and how do 
we do it?
Data
The first step to start working with Spotfire Professional consists of the loading of 
data into the application. This data will be fetched from an external data source, and 
internally (in Spotfire), it will be defined and known as a data table.
Spotfire can create data tables by accessing several types of external data sources:
•	
Clipboard: Performed through copy and paste operations.

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
•	
Text files: These could be plain text (.txt), comma separated (.csv),  
or fixed format.
•	
MS Excel files: The supported versions are MS Excel 2000 or later, with 
extensions xslx and xls.
•	
SAS files: File extensions for SAS files are sas7bdat and sd2.
•	
Database: Database tables or views, represented by an SQL query (in SQL-92). 
Columns can be filtered, and tables joined, allowing for a prehandling of data 
before the loading. The following vendor databases are supported:
°°
Microsoft SQL Server
°°
Microsoft SQL Server Analysis Services
°°
Oracle
°°
Teradata
°°
ADS Composite Information Server
°°
IBM Netezza
°°
Oracle MySQL
°°
PostgreSQL
°°
SAP® Business Information Warehouse (SAP BW)
•	
Information link: This consists of a database query, specifying tables, 
columns, and filters, created in the tool Information Designer (from the 
Tools menu of Spotfire Professional). The queries are created visually,  
as opposed to the programmatically in SQL.
•	
Custom file type: An example of this is XML. Spotfire can be configured to 
open custom file types.
Please note that to connect to an Oracle Database, TIBCO 
recommends users should have installed the Oracle Data Provider 
for .NET (ODP.NET). To connect to an SQL database, users should 
have installed the SqlClient Data Provider.
Also, if using a Windows machine, users can create an ODBC data 
sources in the Windows ODBC Data Source Administrator.
It is also important to differentiate between the the two modes in which Spotfire 
Professional internally handles the loaded data:
•	
In-Memory data: In this mode, the tool will load all the data into the working 
memory, allowing for quicker (and independent) access.

Creating Visualizations
[ 54 ]
•	
In-Database data: In this mode, Spotfire Professional does not load all the 
data into the working memory, but takes advantage of the system that owns 
this data for processing power (all queries will be run in the source system). 
This mode should be used in scenarios where there are extremely large data 
sets, too big to fit into the application's working memory (with this mode, 
data loading into Spotfire becomes virtually unlimited).
In-Database data mode has a few inherent limitations. For more 
details, please refer to the page Data | Data in Spotfire | Working 
With In-Database Data of Spotfire Professional's Help.
Data loading
In this section, examples of data loading will be provided. The following data 
sources will be used: text file, MS Excel file, and database table.
Loading a text file
There are two different ways to load the data of a text file into Spotfire. The first 
consists of using the menu option File | Open or the Open button in the toolbar. 
Alternatively, the menu option File | Add Data Tables or the Add Data Tables 
button in the toolbar can be used.
To exemplify, we will load the file C:\Program Files (x86)\TIBCO\
Spotfire\5.5.0\Example Data\StoreSales\StoreSales.txt. We will start by 
clicking on the Add Data Tables toolbar button. A dialog box named Add Data 
Tables will be opened; this dialog box is presented in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
There are several examples of data files and related visualizations 
in the directory C:\Program Files (x86)\TIBCO\
Spotfire\5.5.0\Example Data. These come bundled with the 
product Spotfire Professional.
Navigate to Add | Files. In the file selection window, navigate to C:\Program 
Files (x86)\TIBCO\Spotfire\5.5.0\Example Data\StoreSales\StoreSales.
txt and click on Open.

Creating Visualizations
[ 56 ]
The Import Settings dialog box will be presented as shown in the  
following screenshot:
All the contents of the file will be displayed in the section named Data preview:,  
and several options will be available to the user:
•	
Defining the separator character (manageable in the Separator character 
section). This is a generic customization.
•	
Defining the file encoding (manageable in the Format section). This is a 
generic customization.
•	
Defining the data types of the columns. The default data type of a column 
can be redefined by the user. To apply any change, the user must click 
on the button Refresh; if there are any issues, such as the impossibility of 
application of a new data type, an error will be displayed in the problematic 
records. This is a column related customization. The following screenshot 
lists the available types to choose from and associate with a column:

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
•	
Deciding on the inclusion of a column (manageable in the checkbox on top of 
each column). This is a column related customization.
•	
Choosing the definition of the row content. It is manageable in the first 
column of the Data preview: section. This is a row related customization.  
The following screenshot lists the available types:
Their meaning is the following:
°°
Ignore: This means do not include the row in the data table.
°°
Name row: This indicates that the row content is part of the  
column name.
°°
Type row: This indicates that the row content defines the type  
of the column.
°°
Data row: This indicates that the  row content is actual loadable data.
By clicking on Advanced... (on the top-right corner of the Import Setting dialog box), 
the user can access the advanced import settings, as for instance, the definition of null 
values and the first row to read from.
Please leave all the default options and click on OK. A new dialog box will appear, 
allowing for the setting of a name for this new data table. This is shown in the 
following screenshot:

Creating Visualizations
[ 58 ]
Please leave the default name StoreSales and click on OK. Immediately, a Scatter 
Plot visualization will be generated; this graph can be altered or replaced with a 
different chart type.
The following screenshot presents this initial default graph:
Visualizations generated from the loaded data are created in a new page with a 
default name (each page is a tab below the toolbar). To rename a page, right-click  
on top of its name.
In this example, the new page has name Page; rename it to StoreSales.
Please save the visualization and the data table, as we will continue building it  
on later. You can save it by navigating to the menu option File | Save or the Save 
button in the toolbar.
TIBCO Spotfire Professional generates by default a Scatter 
Plot for each added data table.
Loading an Excel file
Start by preparing an Excel worksheet similar to the one presented in the following 
screenshot. Name it Performance.xslx.

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
Loading the data from an Excel sheet works in a similar way to loading a plain text 
file (using the option Add Data Tables). Taking this into consideration, please load 
the data.
You may notice the pop-up is now named Excel Import, and one of the import  
options available is that the user can now select the worksheet to import. Please  
see the following screenshot for example:
www.allitebooks.com

Creating Visualizations
[ 60 ]
Click on OK, and next, accept the default name for the data table by clicking on OK 
again. Once again, a default Scatter Plot visualization will be automatically generated 
for us. Please rename the created page to Performance.
Save the visualization and the data table, as we will continue building it on later.
Loading from databases
To be able to load data from a database, you will need to have the right connectors. 
In this example, we will connect to our local Oracle XE instance, so we will need 
to have the Oracle Client ODP.NET installed. The 64-bit version installer can 
be downloaded from http://download.oracle.com/otn/other/ole-oo4o/
ODAC1120320Xcopy_x64.zip.
For this example, we will need to have some loadable data in our local 
XE database. For simplicity, we will use the Human Resources (HR) 
example, which comes bundled with the Oracle XE installation (the 
demo setup scripts can be found at C:\oraclexe\app\oracle\
product\11.2.0\server\demo\schema\human_resources).
Although there are many scripts at the specified location, users are 
solely required to run hr_main.sql. Please make sure that the 
database objects are created in a schema other than the one created for 
the Spotfire Server: spotfire schema.
The following screenshot presents the input values that should be used 
in the dialog generated while running the script hr_main.sql.
If you used this configuration, a new database user named hr will be 
created (with the password spotfire). All the demo objects will be 
created in this user's schema.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
To trigger the loading of the data from the database, please click on the Add Data 
Tables toolbar button. You will be presented with the dialog box Add Data Tables. 
Navigate to Add | Database. The dialog box Open Database, as shown in the 
following screenshot, will be presented.
Three drivers will be available for accessing Oracle:
•	
ODBC Data Provider: Windows configured ODBC System or 
User data sources.
•	
OracleClient Data Provider: Oracle client driver.
•	
Oracle Data Provider for .NET: ODP .NET driver, which is 
faster and more suitable to use with Spotfire.
In certain Windows versions, the ODP for .NET driver will be listed as 
ODP .NET, Managed Driver. Please see the following screenshot:

Creating Visualizations
[ 62 ]
Choose Oracle Data Provider for .NET, and click on Configure.... A pop-up,  
named Configure Data Source Connection, will be shown. This is presented  
in the following screenshot:
Fill in the following parameters:
•	
DATA SOURCE: XE
•	
USER ID: hr
•	
PASSWORD: spotfire
Tick Allow saving credentials and click on OK.
The dialog box will close and focus will return to the Open Database dialog.  
You can push OK.
A dialog box named Specify Tables and Columns will be presented; see the 
following screenshot. This will allow us to choose which database tables or views  
we want to load into Spotfire.

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
Drill down HR and select EMPLOYEES (we will load all the columns from the 
table). Name the data source as Employees, and click on OK.
Once again, a default Scatter Plot visualization will be automatically generated. 
Please rename the new page to Employees.
Please save the visualization, so we can build it on later.
Saving an analysis project does not save the underlying data (this 
data is not embedded in the project). Users have, however, the option 
to embed it explicitly while saving.
The impacts of non-embedding (or linking) data are related to the fact 
that, for visualizations to be available, the underlying data sources 
also have to be available (this also applies to the system files).
So far we loaded three distinct sources of data into Spotfire Professional, and we 
made no changes to the default visualizations generated. In the next section, we will 
start working with several visualization types and we will leverage these default 
Scatter Plots that we have.

Creating Visualizations
[ 64 ]
Visualization types
We will now look at the topic of visualizations creation. We will start with the type 
Table, and we will then look at other types, such as Bar Chart, Pie Chart, Line Chart, 
and Scatter Plot. All the presented theory will be accompanied by illustrations and 
instructions for the reader to achieve the same end result.
Tables
As stated previously, for the three data tables we created, the default Scatter Plot 
visualizations were created. This is a default characteristic of Spotfire Professional; 
however, a Table visualization should be the best place to start looking at the data.
Tables present the records of the underlying data tables, where each table row 
corresponds to a data table record.
In order to study this type of visualization, our first task will be to create a Table. 
Since the type of all created visualizations can be changed at any point in time, 
we can leverage one of the Scatter Plots created earlier; we will use Scatter Plot 
generated when we created the StoreSales data table.
Please access the analysis project and select the page StoreSales. Then right-click 
on the Scatter plot, select Switch Visualization To and select Table. A table, as 
displayed in the following screenshot, will be presented:
As you can confirm, the records shown correspond to the lines of the file that 
generated the StoreSales data table (it contains customer sales records).

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
To verify and manipulate the visualization's properties, right-click (with the mouse) 
on top of the table and select Properties. This will bring up a dialog box with the title 
Data Table name Properties. The dialog box is shown in the following screenshot:
For tables, several customizations can be achieved in this dialog box, including:
•	
Data: The data table associated with the visualization can be swapped.
•	
Columns: The columns selected to be displayed as part of the table can be 
changed, allowing for the hiding of data. In our example, we can remove the 
columns Electronics, Furniture, Garden, Groceries, and Toys. The result 
will be the following (see following screenshot):

Creating Visualizations
[ 66 ]
The order of display of the columns and the rendering can also be changed.
The Renderer: option allows for the loading of images 
as a replacement for the data. The options available to 
the user are: Link, Text, Image from URL.
•	
Colors: Color schemes can be defined for a table. The schemes can be defined 
with multiple color modes: Gradient, Segments, Fixed, and Unique values. 
The following two screenshots display the definition of the Unique values 
scheme for the Age group and the Gradient scheme for Number  
of purchases.
The coloring modes available for a certain column will depend on the 
data type of the column. Integers have selectable Gradient, Segments, 
Fixed, and Unique values, while strings have selectable Fixed and 
Unique values.

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
For the Gradient and Segments color modes, points can be defined to  
better emphasize a coloring scale. The following screenshot shows the 
definition of a middle point, and redefined coloring from red (low number  
of purchases), to yellow (medium number of purchases), and to green  
(high number of purchases).

Creating Visualizations
[ 68 ]
To achieve the same result, please click on the  button Add Point. Colors can 
be changed by clicking on the colored squares.
For all the color modes, coloring rules can be created. By clicking on Add 
Rule in the dialog, we can create a rule to mark all the values greater than 
105 as blue; this is shown in the following screenshot:
•	
Sorting: Here we can select the column to sort by a parameter. In our 
example, we can sort the table by age group. Select Age group in the Sort 
by: drop-down list and leave the default selection Ascending. The following 
screenshot is the example of this:

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
•	
Show/Hide items: Custom filters can also be applied to the existing records, 
showing or hiding data accordingly. In our example, we can create a rule that 
shows all the records where the customer's age is greater than or equal to 16. 
Please see the following screenshot:
The end result table (after all the manipulated properties) is presented in the 
following screenshot:

Creating Visualizations
[ 70 ]
Feel free to navigate through the table and analyze the presented data, especially 
when it comes to the shown data, the sorting, the coloring, and the filtering in/out.
Please save the analysis project.
Bar Charts
The Bar Chart is one of the most common forms of visualization, where values are 
represented by the height of a bar, which can symbolize many distinct summarized 
values, such as averages and counts.
Bar Charts also offer the possibility of having side-by-side bars (where several series 
are examined side-by-side in multiple bars) and stacked bars (where several series 
are arranged vertically in a single bar).
To create a Bar Chart, we can switch the type of the visualization existing in the 
Performance page to Bar Chart; this page contains a Scatter Plot analysis generated 
when we created the Performance data table. The procedure is similar to what was 
done for the Table. A defaulted Bar Chart graph is created, where the displayed 
information is not meaningful, but which will be the base for our work.
Please change the x axis to variable Race and y axis to variable Avg(Time) (with the 
function Average). Finally, change Color by: to Gender.
These customizations will give us a stacked bar chart (having the stack categories 
as male and female gender (from Color by:)), where the average times per race are 
displayed . This is shown in the following screenshot, where the red arrows indicate 
the place to switch the variables.

Chapter 3
[ 71 ]
To view the details of any chart element, whether it is a bar, a 
dot, or a line, you only have to place your mouse cursor over 
the element.
Often, stacked columns are not the best way to compare categories as the series of 
the stack have different starting points. Visually, the series sizes become increasingly 
difficult to compare.
The solution for these cases can be the use of side-by-side bar charts, which is what 
we will now demonstrate. Start by right-clicking with the mouse cursor on top of the 
new visualization and choose the option Duplicate Visualization. You will end up 
with a horizontally split screen, containing two identical charts. We will leave the 
one on top as it is, and we will focus on the one beneath.

Creating Visualizations
[ 72 ]
Right-click (with the mouse) on top of the chart and select Side-by-Side Bars.  
At this point, your visualization should be similar to the one presented in the 
following screenshot:
From the previous task, you probably realized Spotfire bar charts offer several 
display possibilities, such as Vertical Bars or Horizontal Bars, and Side-by-Side 
Bars, Stacked Bars or 100% Stacked Bars. To switch between any of these, the 
procedure will always be the same—right-click on top of a bar chart.
The following screenshot displays these available options:

Chapter 3
[ 73 ]
Regarding the available properties of Bar Charts, besides the graph appearance, 
formatting, fonts, colors, and show/hide, one can also manipulate the axis  
(for instance, by incorporating sliders and gridlines) and trellis.
A trellis fosters the breaking of categories into separate mini charts. This allows  
for a better separation of data when too much of it is available. This type of display 
represents a big improvement, especially when compared to stacked bar charts, 
where, as explained previously, if many segments (or series) are available, visual 
comparison becomes challenging.

Creating Visualizations
[ 74 ]
To add a gender trellis to our Stacked Bars graph, access the properties of the page's 
top graph and select the option Trellis. Then, select Gender as a columns trellis. 
Please see the following screenshot:
The end result should be similar to the one displayed in the following screenshot 
(there are now separate graphs for female and male).

Chapter 3
[ 75 ]
Other types of trellis can also be selected, such as Rows:, Pages:, and Panels.
So far, we have worked solely with one variable per axis, but there is no such 
restriction in Spotfire Professional. The addition of variables to both the axes helps 
to create analysis categories, but it will have an impact in the number of displayed 
columns. This means there is a tradeoff between the available information and the 
chart complexity.
Focusing again on the following chart of the Performance page, we can add the 
gender as a second variable on the x axis—click on the plus (+) button in the x axis 
variables and select Gender. Afterwards, click on Gender and move it before Race. 
This way, the first category displayed becomes Gender and the second one becomes 
Race. Your visualization should now look like the following  screenshot:
The previous screenshot represents the average times, categorized first by gender 
and then by race number.

Creating Visualizations
[ 76 ]
You may have noticed that the visualizations are interactive and chart components 
are selectable (in the case of this example, chart bars are selectable (individually or 
by group)). Selecting a bar will display the related data table records in an auxiliary 
view named Details-on-Demand. Please see the following sample screenshot:
Selection is a great usability feature, which is available in both modes, single and 
multiple. This feature will be fully described further ahead in the book.
To recap, the y axis of bar charts has to display a summarized (aggregated) variable. 
In our examples so far, we always used Average (of race times), however, Spotfire 
offers an extensive list of aggregation functions.
Besides Avg (Average), the user can choose Sum, Count, UniqueCount, Min,  
Max, Median, StdDev (Standard Deviation), and so on. A complete list can be 
found in Spotfire Professional's Help Topics documentation on the Aggregations 
Overview page.
The tool offers extra flexibility by not restricting users to the listed aggregations 
and allowing them to build their own expressions. The following screenshot is an 
example of a custom-built aggregation expression:

Chapter 3
[ 77 ]
Please note aggregation functions are only available for numeric 
variables. For string variables, the possible aggregation functions are 
Count, UniqueCount, and CountBig. An example of this limitation is 
shown in the following screenshot:
Please save the analysis project.

Creating Visualizations
[ 78 ]
Line Charts
The Line Chart connects data points together, forming a line. They are used 
massively in finance, fostering the visualization of trends over periods of time.
In terms of configuration, these graphs are very similar to the Bar Charts, allowing 
the definition of multiple variables on the x axis, and of multiple aggregated 
variables on the y axis.
To create Line Chart, start by switching the Employee Scatter Plot visualization  
of the page Employees to Line Chart.
The Employees data table contains information about employees, namely the hire 
date, their salary, and their department—one good analysis to create would be the 
distribution of new hire salaries through the timeline, segregated by department.  
For this, make sure the following configuration is used:
•	
The variable on the x axis is chosen by navigating to HIRE_DATE | Year >> 
Month (see the following screenshot for details)
•	
The variable on the y axis is Sum(SALARY)
•	
Set Line by: as DEPARTMENT_ID
•	
Set Color by: as DEPARTMENT_ID

Chapter 3
[ 79 ]
The resulting graph still needs some work as DEPARTMENT_ID is defined as an 
integer and Spotfire colors integers using a gradient interval. Because we did not 
import this column as a string, we will have to work around it. Please open the 
chart's Properties, navigate to Colors, click on Settings, and change the Axis mode 
from Continuous to Categorical. The integer value will now be interpreted as a 
category instead of an interval.
The created Line Chart should look like the following screenshot:
We can finally visualize the sum of the salaries paid to new hires, distributed by 
department, and month. One spike is noticeable, which is in March 2005; five new 
sales employees with high salaries joined the company.
Regarding the topic of customization, several chart property values can be 
manipulated in the chart's Properties dialog box. Besides the changes in the x axis, 
y axis, Line by:, and Color by:, users can also manipulate Appearance, Formatting, 
Fonts, Labels, Legend, Trellis, Show/Hide Items, and so on.
Please save the analysis project.

Creating Visualizations
[ 80 ]
Pie Charts
A Pie Chart is a circular graph divided into sections (or sectors), where the  
size of a section in comparison to the size of the other sections represents the  
relative quantity.
This type of chart is named pie due to its similarities 
with a sliced pie.
To create a Pie Chart, please navigate to the page StoreSales of you Spotfire 
Professional analysis and switch the visualization type to Pie Chart.
Regarding the displayed data, we will create a simple example: we will display  
the total purchases per business location. For that, we are required to configure  
the following:
•	
Define variable Color by: with value Business location
•	
Define variable Sector size by: with variable Sum(Total)
As stated in the Bar Chart section, the graph is interactive and 
single or multiple sections can be selected for the Details-On-
Demand visualization.
Once again, there are several available properties for users to customize. More 
information can be found in Spotfire Professional's Help Topics documentation.
To improve the chart using properties, we can, for instance, define the following:
•	
Pie size by Sum(Total) (size properties)
•	
Gender as Columns Trellis (trellis properties)
This will give us a notion of the sales split not only per city, but also per gender: 
Gender Trellis.

Chapter 3
[ 81 ]
The resulting visualization will be similar to the following screenshot:
There is a somewhat similar sales distribution through the analyzed cities, although 
men spend significantly less than women. This difference is depicted due to the Pie 
Size by property setting. Further effort could be placed in realizing why Seattle 
attracts significantly less spending by men than other cities.
Also, it is clear that men spent about a third of what women spent. Extra work could 
also be placed in understanding why this happens and what can be done to change it.
Please save the analysis project.
Scatter Plots
The Scatter Plots are built to correlate two variables by plotting their distribution. 
A straight line is often included in the charts to help identify the distribution's 
correlation—this line is named the best fit line.

Creating Visualizations
[ 82 ]
A set of plotted data can have the following distribution types:
•	
If the points are distributed from the lower left corner to the 
upper right corner (X increases and Y increases), there is a 
positive correlation
•	
If the points are distributed from the upper left corner to the 
lower right corner (X increases and Y decreases), there is a 
negative correlation
•	
If it is hard to draw a line following the distribution of points, 
then the variables are probably not correlated
To create a Scatter plot, we are going to create a new graph in a new page. Follow the 
following instructions to do so:
1.	 Right-click on the page bar (beneath the toolbar) and select the option  
New Page.
2.	 On the toolbar, click on the button New Scatter Plot.
3.	 Place the new page Page in the last position, done by dragging and dropping 
the page to the last position.
4.	 Rename the Page page to StoreSales - Total Sales.
Our aim will be to create the Scatter Plot visualization from the beginning of the 
chapter, where we identify the city with the biggest spender. To achieve this, please 
perform the following actions:
1.	 Select Total as variable for the y axis.
2.	 Select Number of purchases as x axis.
3.	 Leave Color by: with the default value of Business Location.
4.	 Select Gender as Shape by; records will be depicted according to the gender.
5.	 Select Age group as Size; the older the group, the bigger the graph element.
To add a best fit line, please access the Properties dialog box, and in property Lines 
& Curves, check the box Straight Line Fit.

Chapter 3
[ 83 ]
If all steps were executed, the resulting visualization should be similar to the one in 
the following screenshot:
To view the correlation equation and coefficient, please place your mouse cursor 
over the best fit line.
Correlation (r) varies between -1 (negative correlation) and 1 (positive correlation). 
The squared correlation coefficient (r²) (also known as the coefficient of 
determination) is one of the best means for evaluating the strength of a relationship; 
in our case Spotfire gives us r² = 0.677, so r is 0.823. Because r² = 0.677, 68 percent of 
our records are directly correlated.
To further investigate the usage of correlation, we will now create a second 
visualization using uncorrelated variables to generate the points:
1.	 Please duplicate the plot just created, by right-clicking on top of it and 
selecting Duplicate Visualization.
2.	 Change the x axis variable to Customer Age.
3.	 Change the y axis variable to Receipt average.
The new coefficient of determination is zero. This means the selected data variables 
are not related at all.

Creating Visualizations
[ 84 ]
The following screenshot contains both the created scatter plots, side-by-side:
Please save the analysis project.
Box Plots
The Box Plot is a graph used to evaluate the variation of a variable amongst different 
sets of data. It is formed by three values:
•	
Upper quartile (Q3)
•	
Lower quartile (Q1)
•	
Median
There are also two extra values depicted in each set:
•	
Upper adjacent value
•	
Lower adjacent value

Chapter 3
[ 85 ]
The lines from the Upper adjacent value to the Upper quartile and from the Lower 
adjacent value to the Lower quartile are calculated in the following manner:
Upper adjacent value = Q3 - 1.5 (Q3 - Q1)
Lower adjacent value = Q1 - 1.5 (Q3 - Q1)
Values greater than the Upper adjacent value and values lower than Lower adjacent 
value are considered Outside values.
The size of each box (boxing Q1 to Q3) depicts the variation of data, so bigger boxes 
have more varied data.
To create a Box Plot chart, please create a new page named StoreSales - Age 
Group comparison and add to it one chart of type Box Plot with the following 
characteristics:
•	
The underlying data table must be StoreSales.
•	
The x axis must be configured to variable Age group.
•	
The y axis must be configured to variable Total.
•	
Color by: must be configured to Age group.
In the Properties dialog box, property group Lines & Curves, select the checkbox 
Horizontal Line: Avg(Y). This will display a horizontal line with the average.
In the Properties dialog box, select the property group Appearance, and then select 
the checkbox show 95% confidence interval of the mean—it is 95 percent certain 
that the actual mean for the underlying data is actually within the black line next to 
the box.
In the Properties dialog box, select the property group Appearance, and then select 
the checkbox show comparison circles—the circles have their centers corresponding 
to the mean value of the box to which they belong. Overlapping circles mean the 
relative boxes are similar.

Creating Visualizations
[ 86 ]
The resulting graph should look similar to the one shown in the following screenshot:
All the outside values are independently depicted as dots. We are also presented 
with a table listing the Count, Median, and Outliers of each plotted box. This table 
is named statistics table and more data can be displayed in this table, as it is 
customizable. To access its configuration, please go to the visualization's Properties 
dialog box, property group Statistics Table.
To demonstrate the table's customization, we will add the following properties:
•	
StdDev (standard deviation)
•	
L95 (lower endpoint of 95 percent confidence interval)
•	
U95 (upper endpoint of 95 percent confidence interval)
•	
P10 (tenth percentile)
•	
P90 (ninetieth percentile)
The resulting table will be similar to the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 87 ]
For a full list of available statistical values and their meanings, please consult the 
Spotfire Professional's Help Topics documentation, page Box Plot Properties – 
Statistics Table.
Please save the analysis project.
The text area
As the name indicates, the text area is not a graph per se. Its purpose is to provide 
users with customization capabilities, such as text, buttons, and images.
Text areas can be created just like regular graphs, and can occupy a full page  
or just a section of it.
The Text Area palette contains the following items:
•	
Text: This is the main focus of the text area. Text can be added and formatted 
just as in a regular word processing tool: font, color, alignment, lists, 
indentation, and so on.
•	
Image: Images (in the formats bmp, jpg, gif, and png) can also be added to 
the text layout.
•	
Web links: These links the URLs to outside web content.
•	
Filters: The existing filter configurations from all available filtering schemes 
can be a part of the text area layout.
•	
Action control: This allows the association of actions to three control types: 
Button, Link, and Image.
•	
Property control: This allows the association of controls to property values. 
Property controls can be of the following types: Label, Input field, Input 
field (multiple lines), Drop-down list, List box, List box (multiple select), 
and Slider.
•	
Dynamic items: These are simplified visualizations to be embedded in the 
text area. The following types are available to users: Sparkline, Calculated 
value, Icon, and Bullet Graph.
Text areas have two display modes: selected Edit Text Area (visualization will be  
in edit mode) and not selected Edit Text Area (visualization will be in view mode). 
To toggle between modes, please right-click on top of the visualization name bar  
and select Edit Text Area.

Creating Visualizations
[ 88 ]
The following screenshot presents an example of a text area visualization with one 
image, one filter, and one dynamic item. This Text Area is in view mode.
Any changes to the embedded filter will update all visualizations that depend on the 
filtered data, including any dynamic item.
The steps for replicating it are very simple.
Start by making sure you have an image of one of the compatible types. From the 
palette, select the button Insert Image; a dialog box for selecting the image file will 
be presented. Select your image and click on Open. If the image is too big, it can be 
resized using the mouse.
To add the filter, select the button Insert Filter from the palette; a dialog box for the 
filter selection will be presented. Please choose Filter Business location from the 
data table StoreSales.

Chapter 3
[ 89 ]
Finally, for the creation of the dynamic item, select the button Insert Dynamic  
Item | Sparkline; a dialog box for graph property selection will be presented.  
In the Appearance properties, select Start point and End point (their purpose is  
to display the x axis value at the beginning and end of the depicted line). In the  
Axes properties, for the x axis, select Recency | Year >> Quarter, and for the y axis, 
select Sum(Total). This chart displays the total sales per quarter.
Text can be added where the user sees it fit, and it can be formatted with the palette 
formatting options.
If you followed the previously listed steps, please do not forget to save the  
analysis project.
Details visualizations
Details visualizations are a great feature available in Spotfire. They act as daughter 
visualizations of one or more parent graphs, where the displayed data will have,  
as source, the marked (Marking) data of the parent(s). The details visualization  
data table will be the subset of data of the parent's data table selected by the user, 
which in turn will correspond to the records available to the users in the  
Details-on-Demand view.
Users can derive details visualizations from other details visualizations in a 
theoretically unlimited cascade.
We will create one details visualization for the StoreSales page pie chart. This chart 
displays the percentage of total spending in each location, segregated by men and 
women. This new graph will also be a pie chart, and will further drill down in to the 
spending details, by providing information about the customer's age group.
To create the details graph, please follow the following instructions:
1.	 Right-click on top of the Pie Chart visualization and navigate to Create 
Details Visualization | Pie Chart. We will create a details pie chart.
2.	 Change Color by: to Age group. Drill down on age group.
3.	 Access the chart's Properties dialog box, select the property group Data, 
and select the value Empty visualization in If no items are marked in the 
master visualizations, show. With this option, the details table is filled only 
if there is marked data in the parent visualization (the default option shows 
all available data if nothing is marked).

Creating Visualizations
[ 90 ]
4.	 Access the chart's Properties dialog box, select the property group Labels, 
and then select the checkbox Show in labels under Sector category, in order 
to display the Color by: category value in the pie slices.
5.	 Access the chart's Properties dialog box, property group Size, and set the Pie 
size to the maximum, to maximize the chart's size.
If you followed all indications, your visualization should be similar to the one in then 
select following screenshot:
This detailed visualization displays the total spent by the different age groups, solely 
for the females from Seattle.
To demonstrate the cascading details, we will now create one details visualization for 
the just created details visualization. It will be a combination chart with the purpose 
of counting the number of records for each customer age. This chart will be rendered 
individually for each age group, as it will be a detailed visualization of it.
To create the graph, please follow the following instructions:
1.	 Create a new page to host the new chart as adding a chart to the page 
StoreSales would make it too confusing. Rename it to StoreSales – Age 
Details.

Chapter 3
[ 91 ]
2.	 Back on the StoreSales page, create a details visualization (of type 
Combination) for the details pie chart. This new chart will be placed  
under the parent one.
3.	 Drag the new details chart to the created page (StoreSales - Age Details) 
and drop it there (charts are dragged by the bar where the chart name is 
displayed).
4.	 For the x axis, select the variable Customer age.
5.	 For the y axis, select the variable (Row Count).
6.	 Define Customer age as Series by:. This assigns a different color to each age 
of the age group.
If you followed all indications, your visualization should be similar to the  
following screenshot:
Please note that this chart will only present data if there are markings in its  
parent chart, which in its turn will also only present data if there are markings  
in its parent chart.
This details visualization corresponds to the males from Boston marking of the 
grandparent visualization, and the age group 40 of the parent visualization.
Please save the analysis project.

Creating Visualizations
[ 92 ]
Summary
We have now reached the end of this chapter. Its intent was to introduce the main 
capabilities of Spotfire as a tool to create analysis projects. We saw how to load data 
in the platform, how to create several visualization types (Tables, Bar Charts, Line 
Charts, Pie Charts, and so on), and how to customize existing visualizations.
Finally, we learned what a details visualization is and how it can be configured.
In the next chapter, we will continue to build up our Spotfire knowledge, by looking 
at more advanced features, such as filtering, data preparation and transformation, 
and Spotfire Web Player usage.

Mastering Visualizations
In this chapter, we will continue improving our Spotfire skills. We will focus on 
activities such as data filtering, data manipulation, and library creation.
We will also focus on analysis visualization and interaction, resorting to Spotfire  
Web Player Server — the reader will become familiarized with the tool's main features. 
We will focus a bit on this product, as it is a great tool to share analysis with others.
Filtering
The function of filters is to restrict the data shown in visualizations. This means  
that the users can limit the records of the visualization's data table that are displayed 
or used in the visualization itself. The filtering out of data has an impact on 
visualization aggregations and axis scales, and its application is immediate,  
as any selection/deselection will be rendered without any delays.
By default, a filter is created by Spotfire for each column of each existing data table, 
and all filters are available in a panel named Filters, that is presented on the top-right 
corner of the Spotfire Professional display.
Filters are grouped by data table, and these tables will be sorted chronologically 
by ascending creation date. Focus will be on the first data table that is used in a 
visualization of the current page.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 94 ]
The following screenshot is an example of the Filters panel for the visualization of 
the page Store Sales - Total Sales – StoreSales data table.
This panel also has a search field to allow a quicker finding of filters by their name.
Filter names not matching with the search keyword will be hidden from the user and 
cannot be applied. To display all filters again, the user must remove all the keywords 
from the search box.

Chapter 4
[ 95 ]
The following screenshot displays a filter search for the keyword gender.
Two distinct filters were found which match the keyword: one from the data table 
StoreSales and the other from the data table Performance.
The Filters panel can be moved, closed, and opened. To open and close the panel, users 
can navigate to the View | Filters menu, or the Filters button on the toolbar. Both the 
enumerated options are presented in the following two screenshots respectively:

Mastering Visualizations
[ 96 ]
Filter types
Just as the data columns have an underlying data type, filters also make available 
several interaction types to improve and facilitate usage. Spotfire offers the following 
filter types:
•	
Item filter: This is represented by a slider, which allows the user to select 
one, none, or all the values. When the slider is on the left, all values are 
displayed; when the slider is on the right, no values are displayed; and when 
it is in between, unique values are displayed. The next screenshot presents an 
example of such a filter type:
•	
Checkboxes: There is a set of checkboxes, one for each value of the filter.  
A user can select none or more checkboxes to filter the displayed values.  
If there are empty values in the column, an (Empty) checkbox will be available 
as well. The following screenshot presents an example of such a filter type:
•	
Radio buttons: These buttons have the same behavior as an item filter, but 
the display is different. Because radio buttons allow only one choice, the user 
will also have (All) and (None) options. The following screenshot presents an 
example of such a filter type:

Chapter 4
[ 97 ]
•	
Range filter: This type of filter operates with a slider, where two handles 
exist: one on the left corner and other on the right corner. These handles 
allow the user to set the ranges that are being filtered. Because this filter type 
involves the setting of an interval with minimum and maximum value, it is 
best suited for columns of the type integer or date(time). The label values 
above the slider (that represent the interval limits) can be double-clicked and 
set manually (for date formats, users can simply click on the calendar icon 
and choose the date from the pop up). The following screenshot presents an 
example of such a filter type:
•	
Text filter: This type of filter allows the user to type in a string, which will be 
used for matching with filter values. Values that do not match will be filtered 
out. This search is non-case sensitive, white spaces will filter out values 
without all search strings (OR can also be used for disjunction), and the 
wildcard * can also be used. The following screenshot presents an example  
of such a filter type:
This filtering will filter out the records with Business locations other than 
Boston and Los Angeles, as only these two match with the expression *os* 
(only these two contain os somewhere in their value).
•	
Listbox filter: This allows the selection of filter values to apply from a list of 
values contained in a column box. Multiple selections can be made at a time 
using the Shift and Ctrl keys. This type of filter also contains an input search 
field that allows the user to filter the values displayed in the box.  
The following screenshot presents an example of such a filter type:

Mastering Visualizations
[ 98 ]
The initial type of a filter is defined by Spotfire Professional, based 
on the number of records of the underlying data table and the data 
type of the related column.
Customizing the filters
By right-clicking on a filter, the user is presented with a filter options menu, which 
allows manipulation of filters.
The following options are available:
•	
Filter type: For a certain filter, we can toggle between different filter types.
•	
Reset Filter/Reset all Filters: It includes options to reset the filters.
•	
Rename: It is used to change the name of a filter.
•	
Hide Filter: This option allows the user to temporarily remove unnecessary 
filters, in order to reduce the amount of data shown in the Filters panel. If 
this option is used, a warning will appear in the Filters panel as Some filters 
are hidden. Show all. Clicking on Show all will unhide all the filters. For a 
finer-grained hiding/showing, users should use the option Organize Filters.
•	
New Group: Users can create groups to better organize the existing filters. 
Hierarchically, groups can only be created under data tables, which means 
each group can only organize filters of one data table.
•	
Move to Group: This allows the moving of a filter to an existing group.
•	
Organize Filters:  This is a dialog box, which hierarchically displays the data 
tables, groups, and filters of the analysis, and allows the user to set their 
sorting and visibility settings. Group creation and deletion are also possible 
here (although it is not possible to add filters to groups). The following 
screenshot displays such a dialog box:

Chapter 4
[ 99 ]
The order in which the data tables should be sorted 
can also be set within this dialog.
Filtering schemes
Spotfire places a lot of emphasis on its data filtering capabilities.
For increased flexibility, users can create their own schemes, where filters can be 
applied independently of other schemes.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 100 ]
All schemes will always contain all available filters. It is the application of filters that 
is independent between the schemes. The following two screenshots demonstrate 
this independent behavior; although the scheme Filtering scheme 1 has values 10, 
20, 30, and 40 filtered out from the filter Age group (of the data table StoreSales),  
the scheme Filtering scheme 2 has all the values included.
Any change between schemes has an immediate impact on the  
displayed visualizations.

Chapter 4
[ 101 ]
To add filtering schemes, please navigate to the menu Edit | 
Document Properties, and click on the Filtering schemes tab.
To make a drop down available in the Filters panel that allows 
selection of a scheme, the checkbox Show filtering menu in Filters 
panel must be selected.
Applying filters
To illustrate the application of filters, we will now see the difference between 
two visualizations with and without filters. The following two screenshots will 
demonstrate this.
The first screenshot contains the visualizations of the page Store Sales - Total Sales 
without any filtering:

Mastering Visualizations
[ 102 ]
The following screenshot presents the same visualizations with the following  
filters applied:
•	
Age group: 50
•	
Business location: Seattle
It is curious to realize that the correlation between the variables Total and Number 
of purchases increases with the application of these filters. With the filtered out data, 
the direct correlation is of 83 percent.
Hierarchies
Hierarchies are a special type of filter, where the filter itself is displayed in a 
hierarchical format. Conceptually, these filters behave as data trees.
An example of a hierarchy is the definition of a Calendar, divided into years, 
quarters, months, weeks, and days.
The simplest way to demonstrate this Spotfire feature is to create Date Hierarchy 
Filter from a Date Range filter type. We will use the Date joined filter from the 
StoreSales data table.

Chapter 4
[ 103 ]
Right-clicking on the Date joined filter, and then selecting the Insert Hierarchy 
option, will present a dialog box as shown in the following screenshot:
The default selected columns for hierarchy creation are Year, Month, and Day of 
Month. The remaining selectable columns are Quarter, Week, Day of Year, and Day 
of Week. We can add the Quarter column and move it up between Year and Month. 
The hierarchy configuration will look similar to the following screenshot:

Mastering Visualizations
[ 104 ]
The addition of a column can be done by selecting the column and clicking on Add, 
and shifting of the column through the hierarchy can be done using the buttons 
Move Up and Move Down.
Hierarchies also have a name, which can be set during the creation process  
(in the dialog box) or changed later (by right-clicking on top of the hierarchy).
The created hierarchical filter does not replace the original one. Both will coexist in 
the analysis. In our example, both the Date joined filter and the hierarchy named 
Date Joined Hierarchy will be shown to the user.
The following screenshot presents the created hierarchy:
Hierarchies can also be created using two or more data table columns. The only 
existing limitation is related to the fact that only one data table can be used in  
one hierarchy.

Chapter 4
[ 105 ]
Marking and Details-on-Demand
As already specified, graph elements (displayed data) can be selected, and this 
is called marking. This action has several purposes, such as updating the details 
visualization (in the Details-on-Demand panel), copying records, and so on.
The user has a varied set of options available for marking: click on the item,  
Ctrl + click on the item, Shift + click, Ctrl + Shift + click, Alt + click, and so on.  
A complete list with detailed descriptions can be found in the Spotfire Professional's 
Help Topics documentation page, Marking in Visualizations.
To unmark a selection, users must right-click on the top of the visualization and 
select Marked Rows | Unmark. Other options will also be offered to the user such as 
Invert, Delete, Filter To, and Filter Out. The following screenshot lists these options:
The data table records of marked data will be listed in the Details-on-Demand panel 
of Spotfire Professional. This panel is located by default on the right lower corner 
of the screen, just below the Filters panel. And just like the filters, it can be moved, 
closed, and opened. To open and close the panel, navigate to the View | Details-on-
Demand menu, or the Details-on-Demand button on the toolbar.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 106 ]
This panel can be customized, by using its Properties dialog box (obtained by  
right-clicking on the window):
•	
Appearance: It allows setting the appearence of the panel, in terms of 
number of rows for header, number of rows for data, show or hide cell 
borders, and column orientation
•	
Fonts: It allows selection of font for table text and headers
•	
Columns: It shows data table columns and their sorting (by default, all are 
shown). Also allows the specification of a renderer for each column (Link, 
Text, or Image from URL)
•	
Sorting: It defines the sorting order by a maximum of three columns in 
ascending or descending order
Preparing and transforming the data
As already emphasized, in Spotfire, the data loaded into data tables is crucial for 
successful visualization creation. It must be in a workable format (or a format 
suitable for aggregation) as Spotfire's data table data manipulation capabilities  
are somewhat limited.
This does not mean, however, that Spotfire cannot perform some work on the  
loaded data. The tool has the following loading and transformation capabilities:
•	
Data loading: It includes:
°°
Adding a data table
°°
Inserting data table columns
°°
Inserting data table rows
•	
Data transformation: It includes:
°°
Pivoting the data
°°
Unpivoting the data
°°
Calculating and replacing the column
°°
Calculating a new column
°°
Changing the column name
°°
Changing the column data type
•	
Replacing data table
All these capabilities will be described in the following sections.

Chapter 4
[ 107 ]
Adding a data table
This topic was already presented in the Data loading section of Chapter 3, Creating 
Visualizations. The theory was accompanied by the demonstration of loading from  
one of the three different data source types: text file, MS Excel file, and database.
Inserting data table columns
Spotfire Professional allows its user to load extra (or new) columns to an already 
existing data table.
This is useful due to the fact that the visualizations have only one main data table. 
The records of main data tables are the base for the creation of graphs, defining rows 
in nonaggregated visualizations, and items in aggregated ones.
Users are able to insert new columns from a second data source, extending the 
original data table. More importantly, the second data source can be totally unrelated 
to the first data source (of the already loaded data).
To add a new column, please access the menu Insert | Columns. If more than one 
data table exists in the analysis, a dialog box will be launched for the user to choose 
the table to which add the columns (dialog box Select Destination). In our case, we 
will select Employees. After clicking on Next, the dialog box will allow the user to 
configure the data source, as shown in the following screenshot:

Mastering Visualizations
[ 108 ]
We will add the columns from the JOBS table of the hr database schema; the 
configuration steps are identical to the Loading from Databases scenario previously 
described in Chapter 3, Creating Visualizations.
After configuring the source, the user will be presented with the Match Columns 
dialog box (here we should configure the matching columns between both tables). 
The Match All Possible option handles this task for us, as in our case, both columns 
to relate share the name and can be automatically identified by the application.
Refer to the following screenshot where the Column Match dialog box is depicted:
By clicking on Next, the user is moved to a column selection dialog box; although 
several columns were selected while loading the data source, the user might not wish 
to add all to the existing data table. In our case, we will select JOB_TITLE (refer to 
following screenshot for details).

Chapter 4
[ 109 ]
There are also some options related to the definition of which data is going to be 
included in the resulting data table—Join method. We will leave the default option.
Clicking on Finish terminates the dialog box and imports the data.
To confirm the new column, we can go to the menu View | Data. A new 
panel is opened on the left-hand side of the screen. Choosing the data 
table Employees will reveal that there is in fact a new column.
To further analyze the data, it is also a good idea to create a new page 
with a new table visualization. Besides the job ID, there is now also a job 
description column.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 110 ]
Inserting data table rows
Adding rows to a data table is very similar to adding columns to a data table.  
And also, as happens for columns, this feature serves as a solution for extending  
any main data table that exists in the analysis.
The added rows need to match the existing data table columns if automatic matching 
is to be done. If not, manual matching has to be performed.
Create the following MS Excel worksheet so that we can import the data:
To add new rows, access the menu Insert | Rows, and we will use the data table 
Performance as the destination for the new rows.
The automatic matching of columns (from the Match All Possible button) will only 
work for Race. All other columns have to be matched by hand as the names differ. 
The resulting matching should be similar to the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 111 ]
Since Age (or similar) does not exist in the Performance data source, we will not 
include this column. Its addition would lead to the creation of empty column values 
for the records already in the Performance data table.
A simple way to confirm the addition of new rows is by creating a new 
visualization of the type Table and by selecting the new data table as 
main data table.
In our scenario, if you navigate to the Performance page, you will see 
that Race 5 was added to the page's visualizations.
Data transformation
While loading data into Spotfire, the user is allowed to modify it. The aim of this 
feature is to permit users to clean up the data, fix data errors or omissions, or even 
change formats and types of the columns.
This task has to be specified while loading the data, which as specified previously, 
occurs solely in the following scenarios: Add Data Tables, Insert Data Table Columns, 
Insert Data Table Rows, and Replace Data Table. Then, the transformations have to 
be defined in the Add Data Tables dialog box. Refer to the Transformations section on 
the following screenshot:

Mastering Visualizations
[ 112 ]
Pivoting data
A pivot table in Spotfire has the same meaning as in MS Excel. The purpose of these 
tables is to summarize the data.
This transformation mutates a tall and skinny data table into a short and wide one, 
where the new columns are usually comprise of aggregated values.
As an example, we will pivot the data of Performance into a new PerformancePivot 
data table.
It is during the creation of the data table, that the user will have the opportunity to 
define its pivot transformation. Our aim will be to pivot [for each Runner] Time per 
Race (without any selected aggregation function).
To achieve this, follow these steps:
1.	 Start by creating a new data table named PerformacePivot, by loading the 
Performance Excel worksheet. From the Transformations drop-down list, 
select the Pivot option and click on Add. A dialog for the Pivot definition 
will be presented as shown in the following screenshot.
2.	 Define Runner as Row identifiers (for each runner), Race as Column titles 
(per race), and Time as Values (value of the records).

Chapter 4
[ 113 ]
Comparing the pivot data table with the original format, we can easily visualize  
the transformation from tall and skinny to short and wide (both tables are shown 
side-by-side in the following screenshot):
Unpivoting data
Unpivoting a table transforms it in the opposite way of pivoting: from short and 
wide to tall and skinny.
As an example, we will unpivot the StoreSales data into a new StoreSalesUnpivot 
data table.
The procedure to unpivot data is similar to the procedure to pivot data; a new data 
table needs to be created with an unpivot transformation. Our objective will be to 
unpivot the sales department (Furniture, Toys, and so on) into a Department Id 
column, and department totals in a Department Total column.
To achieve this, please create a data table named StoreSalesUnpivot loading the 
StoreSales.txt file. Choose transformation of the type Unpivot and define the 
transformation as presented in the following screenshot. The meaning of the unpivot 
configuration is as follows:
•	
Columns to pass through: It lists the columns that are not affected by the 
transformation, but which will exist in the new data table.
•	
Columns to transform: It lists the columns that are to be merged in a single 
category column. In our example, we will unpivot the several departments 
(Furniture, Toys, and so on) into a single column named Department Id.
•	
Available Columns: It defines columns that will not exist in the new  
data table.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 114 ]
•	
Category column name: It defines the name of the new category column.
•	
Value column name: It defines the aggregated value for the result of 
transforming multiple [integer] rows into one category row. This value is 
calculated by aggregating the different values from the excluded columns. 
In our example, this value is the result of adding the department total for the 
several distinct records of: Customer age, Date joined, First buy, Recency, 
Number of purchases, and Receipt average.
Note the Department Id and Department Total columns are the new  
unpivoted columns.

Chapter 4
[ 115 ]
Calculating and replacing a column
Spotfire allows users to replace columns with others whose values are calculated 
through the use of an Expression. This transformation is known as Calculate and 
Replace Column, and as it happens with all the data transformations, it can only 
occur on data loading.
The Calculate and Replace Column dialog box offers users several customizations, 
such as Column to replace, Available columns (to use in the expressions), Functions 
(to create the expressions), Expression builder, and also various Formatting options.
The following screenshot demonstrates the creation of a column named Date joined 
span, which replaces Date joined (for the StoreSales data). This new column 
contains the difference between now and Date joined in days.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 116 ]
The calculated column will have values as shown in the following screenshot:
Calculating a new column
The difference between the transformations Calculate New Column and Calculate 
and Replace Column is solely that the first adds a new column to the data table, 
while the second replaces a column in the data table.
In terms of configuration, both behave in the same way, each having the same rich 
feature set.
Changing the column name
Change Column Names is one more transformation available for the user.  
The new column name does not need to be a defined hardcoded value, as it  
can also be calculated using the Expression builder.
The following screenshot displays the available functions for building a new  
column name.

Chapter 4
[ 117 ]
Changing the column data type
The default data type of a loaded column can also be manipulated: Date columns can 
be loaded as Strings, Integer columns can be loaded as Currency, and so on.
The formatting of the columns is also possible, as the application provides a very rich 
set of formats. The following screenshot lists the available formatting options of a 
Date category.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 118 ]
Besides some predefined possibilities, the user can inclusively define a format from 
scratch using the Custom format.
Replacing the data table
In some scenarios, the users might want to keep one or more visualizations, but 
replace the underlying data with a new set. An example of such a case could be a 
consulting company that analyzes their quarterly results through a set of custom 
visualizations. It is expected that at the end of every quarter, they will want to load 
the quarterly data into Spotfire and run the analysis on the new data.
For such cases, Spotfire Professional offers the possibility of replacing the data table 
content. Users just need to provide a new set of data which has the same columns 
with the same data types as the original data.
To experiment with this function, navigate to the menu File | Replace Data Table. 
A dialog box named Replace Data Table – Select Data Table will be displayed, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 119 ]
In the Select data table to replace: dropdown, users are able to select the data table 
in which they want to load the new data, while the Replace with: radio button 
provides extra loading configuration options.
Column matches
So far we have seen the creation of visualizations from a single data table. This is the 
most common task; however, the tool is not limited to it. If this limitation existed, it 
might lead the users to create massive merged tables, full of repeating data, instead 
of the traditional relational data models.
The Spotfire feature Column Matches, enables the matching of columns between 
distinct data tables, thus fostering the use of multiple data tables in a single 
visualization. In this aspect, Spotfire is extremely friendly, as it makes two  
matching modes available: automatic and manual.
The automatic mode
Spotfire considers that the two columns match when the names and data types 
match. This is not always necessarily true, however; matched columns are not 
necessarily connected and hence do not need to be leveraged.
To access the analysis's Column Matches, navigate to menu Edit | Data Table 
Properties and a dialog box will be shown. Accessing the tab Column Matches 
displays the matched columns for each of the selectable data tables.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 120 ]
The following screenshot lists the automatic matches for the StoreSales data table:
This match is actually incorrect as the data tables are unrelated, and therefore we 
should delete it. To delete it, select the match in the current matches list and click  
on the Delete button next to the list. Now, our data tables are no longer connected.
The manual mode
If Spotfire does not identify the columns as matching, the user can force this,  
by defining new matches.
To do so, users should click on the New button in the Data Table Properties  
dialog box (the Column Matches tab), and select both the data table and the  
columns to match as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 121 ]
Relations
Relations are the ties between columns of two distinct data tables. They are similar 
in principle to Column Matches but their function is different; their aim is to 
propagate filtering and marking between visualizations.
For instance, if two visualizations have defined a relation between two columns of 
their data tables, marking data in the first visualization will mark related records in 
the second visualization.
The columns chosen to participate in a relation should be identifier columns  
in both the data tables, and more than one column can be related between two  
data tables.
To exemplify the creation of a relation between two data tables, we will first need 
to import new data. Add the table JOB_HISTORY (from the Oracle XE database and 
user hr) as an analysis data table named JobHistory. Before closing the Add Data 
Tables dialog box, make sure you click on the Manage Relations button to add a 
relation to data table Employees. Refer to the following screenshot for the Manage 
Relations dialog box:

Mastering Visualizations
[ 122 ]
Click on New and the New Relation dialog box will be opened. Refer to the next 
screenshot for details:
To configure a new relation, perform the following steps:
1.	 Define the Employees data table as Left data table: and leave  
EMPLOYEE_ID as Left column:
2.	 Define the JobHistory data table as Right data table: and leave  
EMPLOYEE_ID as Right column:
3.	 Click on OK.
A new relation is now created between Employees.EMPLOYEE_ID and JobHistory.
EMPLOYEE_ID, which is displayed in the Manage Relations dialog box shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 123 ]
Click on OK twice to close the remaining the dialog boxes. You may also close the 
default scatter plot created for the new JobHistory data table.
Going back to the Data Table Properties dialog box, and validating Column 
Matches of the data table Employees, you can verify that three new Column 
Matches were created between the data tables Employees and JobHistory: 
DEPARTMENT_ID, EMPLOYEE_ID, and JOB_ID. Remove DEPARTMENT_ID 
and JOB_ID, as only EMPLOYEE_ID is a linking key between the data tables.
By deleting the match on the Employees data table, the symmetrical match (from 
JobHistory to Employees) will also be removed.
The following screenshot displays the Data Table Properties dialog box with the  
final result:
Multiple data tables in one visualization
As stated in the Column matches section, the purpose of data table column matching is 
to enable the use of multiple data tables in a single visualization. In that section, we 
also demonstrated how to create column matches between data tables.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 124 ]
Using multiple data tables in one visualization is similar to using just a single data 
table, although in the first we will have the concept of additional data tables besides 
the already known main data table:
•	
Main data table: It has the standard main data table behavior, defining the 
rows of an unaggregated visualization
•	
Additional data tables: These are viewed as extra columns, which can be 
added to visualizations. These columns can only be used in aggregation axes 
(y axis), not grouping (or categorical) axes (x axis).
As an example of this feature, using the main data table Employees and additional 
data table JobHistory, we will represent the total number of employees that are or 
have been in each department. We will create a bar chart with the list of departments 
(DEPARTMENT_ID) as x axis, and the count of employees as y axis. This count will 
be retrieved from both the data tables—the main and the additional.
Please be aware that chosen grouping columns (x axis) should belong to both 
the main and the additional data tables (they have to be matched columns) in 
order for the aggregation to work. Due to this limitation and because we want to 
use DEPARTMENT_ID as x axis, we must first match this column of data table 
Employees with the matching column DEPARTMENT_ID of data table JobHistory.
As specified earlier, column matching is done using the data table Properties editor 
from the Edit menu. In the editing tool, matching of columns can be done in the 
Column Matches tab.
To add a variable to a chart from a data table other than the main one, users have a 
drop-down list available in the variable selection pop up. Only data tables that have 
matched columns to the main data table will be listed in this dropdown.

Chapter 4
[ 125 ]
The following screenshot presents an example of this pop up:
This example belongs to a visualization with the main data table Employees. Since 
this data table has matched columns solely in the data table JobHistory, only these 
two are listed.
To create an example graph for multiple data tables, open your analysis project  
and execute the following steps:
1.	 Create a new page named Employees - Multiple DT.
2.	 Add a bar chart to the new page.
3.	 Define Employees as the chart main data table.
4.	 Select DEPARTMENT_ID as the x axis variable of the chart.
5.	 Select Count(DEPARTMENT_ID) as the y axis variable of the chart.
6.	 Select Count(DEPARTMENT_ID) from the data table JobHistory as a 
second variable of the y axis of the chart.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 126 ]
The resulting graph will look similar to the one presented in the following screenshot:
We can see only departments with IDs 20, 50, 60, 80, 90 and 110 had former employees 
in the past (the coloring of data is different for records for each of the underlying  
data tables).
Save the analysis project.
The visualization layout
Several visualizations can be placed in a single page. The disposition of these is 
customizable, and the size of each can also be manipulated.
Each visualization that is added to a page will be placed on the top, above any 
already existing visualization. The layout can then be manipulated by the user  
and visualizations can be shifted around and arranged in a user chosen fashion.
Spotfire offers the possibility for visualizations to be arranged vertically, horizontally, 
or in a mixed grid. Just be aware that the screen size limits the available area.
Visualizations can be shifted around, just by dragging-and-dropping. To grab 
a visualization, select (with the mouse) the visualization bar which contains the 
visualization name. From there, users can drag-and-drop it anywhere on the 
screen. Moving visualizations can be done at any point in time. When dragging a 
visualization around a page, grayed drop areas will appear to guide the users to 
drop the visualization in a proper location.

Chapter 4
[ 127 ]
Spotfire offers the possibility of auto-arranging the visualizations, where a user can 
simply select one of the four predefined arrangement types. To access this feature, 
open the menu View | Arrange Visualizations. The following screenshot presents 
the list of available possibilities:
The possibilities are described as follows:
•	
Evenly: It distributes the visualizations evenly throughout the page.
•	
Side-by-side: It distributes the visualizations horizontally (side-by-side).
•	
Stacked: It distributes the visualizations vertically stacked.
•	
Maximize Active: It expands the currently selected visualization, minimizing 
all remaining ones. The minimized visualizations are placed at the bottom of 
the page, and only their title bar will be visible.
Pages
Pages foster the creation of Spotfire analysis that includes many visualizations 
functionally segregated and distributed across different containers. Users can create 
pages organized in a logical sequence to better shape their analysis.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 128 ]
Pages do not limit in any way the usage of data tables. One page can 
contain visualizations of many sources.
Spotfire allows navigation between pages in three different ways: using titled tabs, 
step-by-step, and history arrows.
•	
Titled tabs: This is the mode used by us so far. Pages are represented by 
selectable tabs on top of the screen, just below the toolbar. Also, there is a 
drop-down arrow available on the right-hand side of the tabs bar, which 
allows the user to select to switch tab. The following screenshot displays the 
tab bar with the drop-down selection option.
•	
Step-by-step: In step-by-step mode, users will see numbered links as 
the navigator between pages (instead of tabs). The following screenshot 
exemplifies this:
•	
History arrows: History arrows are similar to step-by-step links, but no 
numbered links are available. Only history arrows will be available to users. 
Navigation has to be enabled using text areas or dynamic items on graphical 
tables. More information can be found in Spotfire Professional's Help Topics 
documentation.
To toggle between navigation modes, right-click on 
the Pages toolbar and select Page Navigation.
Libraries
Libraries allow users to share analysis using a central repository. Analysis assets 
created by a user to be shared include not only the pages with their visualizations, 
but also information links, data tables, and so on.

Chapter 4
[ 129 ]
Spotfire Professional offers a library management tool, which can be initiated  
by accessing the menu Tools | Library Administration, as shown in the  
following screenshot:
Administration tasks include folder structure creation and management, importing 
and exporting library files, and permission setting.
To save an analysis project to the library, users can use the menu File | Save (As) 
| Library Item or File | Save Copy (As) | Library Item. There, it will be possible 
to define the folder where the analysis will be stored, and it will also be possible to 
choose other configuration values such as the embedding of data in the analysis.  
All shared analysis will be available not only for Spotfire Professional users, but also 
for Spotfire Server Web Player clients.
Embedding data in libraries has the same behavior as embedding data 
in an analysis file. It means that the source data of the data tables is 
stored with the analysis itself and is always available for loading.
Not embedding data means that the source data of the data tables has 
to be available when an analysis is loaded. If the data is not available, 
users will fail to load the analysis. This configuration has the advantage 
of keeping analysis files smaller in size.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 130 ]
To create a library containing the analysis created throughout this book, perform the 
following steps:
1.	 Access the File menu, and select the option Save As | Library Item.
2.	 Create a new folder named spotfire Analysis, by clicking on the button 
New Folder.
3.	 Double-click on the newly created folder and inside it create a new folder 
named Demo visualizations.
4.	 Once again, double-click on the newly created folder to enter it.
5.	 In the name input box, name the library as demo1. Click on the Next button.
6.	 At this point, a description and several keywords can be associated with our 
library. We will leave both blank. Click on Next.
7.	 In this last configuration step, the user can set the data tables configuration  
for the library (embed or not the data). This is done by using the options  
Edit and Override these settings and embed all in-memory data. We will  
tick the checkbox Override these settings and embed all in-memory data.  
Click on Finish.
8.	 The following pop up will be presented. You can close it by clicking on the 
Close button.

Chapter 4
[ 131 ]
Web Player Server
Web Player Server is the Spotfire platform component which enables web browser 
access to the shared analysis projects stored in the library. This product consists of 
a web application, which is integrated with the Spotfire Server, and can read the 
analysis deployed in it.
Because it supports solely thin clients, Web Player Server makes available only a 
subset of the features of Spotfire Professional. Users can only read analyses; they 
cannot create or modify them.
The following features are available in the tool:
•	
Visualizations panel
•	
Marking of data for drill down and for display of details visualization
•	
Filters panel without filtering schemes and filter customization
•	
Details-on-demand panel, in which the data presented comes from  
standard marking
•	
Libraries
To access the Web Player, open one of the Spotfire Web Player supported web 
browsers, and navigate to http://localhost/SpotfireWeb/.
After logging in with the administration spotfire user, the following library screen 
will be presented:
Here are listed the libraries that are visible to the logged-in user. The library demo1 
was saved as an example for the Libraries section of this chapter.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 132 ]
To open the library, just click on it. If we click on demo1, we will be presented with 
the following screen:
Computational analytics
The Spotfire platform has a set of computational analytics functionalities that are 
distributed among several statistical tools.
One of these functionalities is Predictive modeling, which is the mostly used form of 
data mining, and allows the prediction of the future by forecasting the probabilities 
and trends. This statistical model is widely used in IT, for instance in e-mail spam 
filters, to identify the probability of a message being spam.
In Spotfire, predictive modeling is composed by three distinct steps:
•	
Fitting the model: In this step, the model options are chosen, such as 
statistical method to use, source data table, column to predict, predictor 
columns, and so on. The output of this step is a model page.
•	
Evaluating the model :The model page is evaluated against new data, into 
an evaluation page.
•	
Predicting the model: Additional prediction data becomes available, which 
can be added to the source data table.

Chapter 4
[ 133 ]
Two different models are supported for predictive modeling:
•	
Regression modeling: It offers both the linear regression method and the 
regression tree method.
•	
Classification modeling: It offers both the logistic regression method and 
the classification tree method.
Each model has a different tool, which can be started by accessing the menu tools.
This book will focus on regression modeling or the linear regression method. For 
extra information regarding predictive modeling and the other models, refer to 
Spotfire Professional's Help Topics documentation on the page Predictive Modeling.
Regression modeling/the linear regression 
model
In this model, the scores on one variable are predicted from the scores on a second 
variable. The variable we are predicting is known as Response and the variable we 
are basing our predictions is known as Predictor. When there is only one predictor 
variable, the prediction method is called Simple regression. And, when there are 
many predictor variables, the prediction method is called Multiple regression.
Before attempting to use a linear regression model on the existing data, the user 
should first determine whether or not there is a relationship between the response 
and the predictor variables.
In the visualization of the page StoreSales - Total Sales, we created a scatter plot 
that correlates the StoreSales variable Number of purchases with the variable  
Total. Both the visualization's correlation value of 68 percent and the Straight  
Line Fit direction indicate that there is in fact a positive correlation between  
the variables.
The StoreSales data is therefore suitable for the creation of an example of the linear 
regression model, but since there is only one set of data available, we will need to 
break it into two; we will separate the data into two files according to the year in the 
Recency column – 1994 or 1995. This can be achieved using MS Excel or any other 
tool that will help in the easy location and deletion of lines with certain content. In 
the new data files, columns Customer age, Date joined, First buy, and Recency can 
also be removed as they are not necessary for our example.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 134 ]
Import both the files and create two data tables named StoreSales_1994 (for the 
1994 file) and StoreSales_1995 (for the 1995 file). If you kept the columns Customer 
age, Date joined, First buy, and Recency, beware of the date-time formats while 
importing the files. When done, you can close the default created scatter plots and 
delete their respective pages.
Our objective with this predictive model will be to predict the sales Total, based on 
the Number of purchases. This will be a simple linear regression.
According to the three steps of predictive modeling, we must first fit the model.  
To do so, we will access the Tools menu and select Regression Modeling. This 
action will open the regression modeling configuration tool.
Our model will be named StoreSalesRegressionModel, and the remaining 
configuration should be the following:
•	
Comment: Predict Sales Total based on Number of purchases
•	
Model Method: Linear Regression
•	
Data table: StoreSales_1994
•	
The General tab | Response column: Total
•	
The General tab | Predictor column: Number of purchases
Click on the Add button.

Chapter 4
[ 135 ]
The filled configuration should look similar to the following screenshot:

Mastering Visualizations
[ 136 ]
Click on OK. After a few seconds, a page named StoreSalesRegressionModel will 
be generated, containing the information about our model. The following screenshot 
shows an example of such a page:
The generated model page contains 4 areas:
•	
Model Summary: It lists the name of the model, the model type, and the 
model formula
•	
Table of Coefficients: It lists the model coefficients for the regression model
•	
Available Diagnostic Visualizations: It lists the available visualizations of 
the predictive model, which help to assert its validity
•	
Visualizations area: It is the area where the diagnostic visualizations  
are presented

Chapter 4
[ 137 ]
Proceeding to the second step of our predictive model, we will now evaluate the 
model. To do so, click on the Evaluate model button from the Model Summary's 
toolbar. Refer to the following screenshot for details:
A dialog box will be presented, where we can specify the data table on which we  
want to run the model. We will run it on StoreSales_1995.
Make sure that you have the configuration as shown in the following screenshot:

Mastering Visualizations
[ 138 ]
Click on OK. After a few seconds, a page named Evaluation 
(StoreSalesRegressionModel) will be generated, containing the information  
about our evaluation. The following screenshot shows an example of such a page:
The generated model page contains three areas:
•	
Evaluation Summary: It lists name of the model, the data table used in the 
evaluation, and the model formula
•	
Available Diagnostic Visualizations: It lists the available visualizations  
of the predictive model, which help to assert its validity
•	
Visualizations area: It is the area where the diagnostic visualizations  
are presented
As a final step of the predictive model, we will add the predicted data to the 
StoreSales_1994 data table . For that, click on the Predict from model button from 
the Model Summary's toolbar. Refer to the following screenshot for details:

Chapter 4
[ 139 ]
A dialog box will be presented, where we can specify the data table where to add the 
predicted data. We will choose StoreSales_1994. Also, make sure that you have the 
configuration presented on the following screenshot:
A new column will be added to the StoreSales_1994 data table named predicted.
Please save the analysis project.
Information designer
The Information designer is a Spotfire tool to create information links. These links 
are database queries created from simple elements (columns, filters, procedures,  
and joins) which are composed into complex queries. The purpose of information 
links is their later usage as a data table data source. This tool can be found under  
the Tools menu.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 140 ]
After starting Information Designer, the first configuration step is to define Data 
Source. This can be done by selecting the Setup Data Source option (or by using the 
New dropdown on the top left corner). A configuration as shown in the following 
screenshot specifies the creation of a connection to our installed database, with user hr.
After configuring it, please save it by clicking on the Save As button.
After creating a data source, and going back to the Start tab, users can then  
define the Elements (columns, filters, and so on) required for the creation of the 
information link.
Our objective will be to create two Multiple Columns elements: one with the 
columns DEPARTMENT_ID and DEPARTMENT_NAME from the HR table 
DEPARTMENTS; and a second one with the columns DEPARTMENT_ID,  
FIRST_NAME and LAST_NAME from HR table EMPLOYEES. The following  
screen demonstrates the configuration for the first element:

Chapter 4
[ 141 ]
For starting the creation procedure, it is necessary to select the option Multiple 
Columns under the Start tab of the Create Elements option. Also click on the  
Create Columns button.
Since the columns will be stored as individual elements, it is a good idea to create  
the following folder structure to store them; refer to the following screenshot:
This can be achieved using the New drop-down menu.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 142 ]
The result of the creation of both Multiple Columns should be similar to the 
following screenshot:
Next, we will be creating a join between both DEPARTMENT_ID columns (in both 
the DEPARTMENTS and EMPLOYEES tables). The Create Join option of the Start 
tab triggers the configuration of joins between the Data Sources tables.
To create such a join in the Join configuration, both the DEPARTMENT_ID  
columns must be added. The resulting Join should be saved under the  
Information Links folder.
Our last step will be the creation of the Information Link itself. This procedure can 
be triggered by clicking on the Create Information Link button in the tool's Start 
tab (or by using the New dropdown). The link's elements will be EMPLOYEES | 
FIRST_NAME, EMPLOYEES | LAST_NAME, EMPLOYEES | DEPARTMENT_ID 
and DEPARTMENTS | DEPARTMENT_NAME, and Join path will be the created 
join DEPARTMENTS - EMPLOYEES.

Chapter 4
[ 143 ]
At this point, the Information Link's configuration should look similar to the 
following screenshot:
Please save it as demoIL under the Information Links folder, and close the 
Information Designer window.
At this point, a data table can be created, having demoIL Information Link as the 
source. Please do it and feel free to create a visualization with this main data table.
You should also be aware that all the configured Elements, Joins, and Information 
Links will be available for sharing in the library.

Mastering Visualizations
[ 144 ]
Summary
Together with the previous chapter, this chapter contains the main functionalities 
a user requires when he/she wants to embrace the Spotfire world. It is, however, 
not a comprehensive training guide, as the platform can do more than what was 
presented. I recommend users to consolidate their gained experience and further 
enrich their knowledge, by reading and studying the tool's documentation.
We augmented our knowledge by studying filtering and drill down on the data, and 
how to better prepare and transform the loaded data. We also tried out the Spotfire 
Web Player and described a few similarities between it and Spotfire Professional. 
Also we covered some of the limitations of this tool, and identified its advantages.
This was the final chapter of the book, and I sincerely hope it served as a good 
introduction to the world of Analytics and Spotfire. It is my expectation that you will 
carry on working with the tool and proceed with topics such as 3D scatter plots and 
map chart visualizations, and detail computational analytics and statistical tools.

Index
A
additional data tables  124
administration, TIBCO Spotfire Server
about  41
administration console  42-44
open logs and diagnostic  45
automatic mode, column matches  119, 120
B
Bar Chart
about  70
creating  70
customization  71-76
Big Data  6
Box Plot
about  84
creating  85
customizations  85-87
Business Activity Monitoring (BAM)  6
C
checkboxes  96
clipboard  52
column data type
modifying  117
column matches
about  119
automatic mode  119, 120
manual mode  120
column name
modifying  116
columns
adding, to data table  107-109
calculating  115, 116
replacing  115
components, TIBCO Spotfire platform
Server Database  8
TIBCO Spotfire Professional  8
TIBCO Spotfire Server  7
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Client  8
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server  8
computational analytics
about  132
information designer  139-143
linear regression model  133-138
regression modeling  133-138
configuration, relations  122, 123
configuration, TIBCO Spotfire Server  21-27, 
41
configuration, TIBCO Spotfire Web Player 
Server  46
Customer Relationship Management (CRM)  
5
D
data
loading  54
loading, from database  60-63
pivoting  112, 113
preparing  106
transforming  106, 111
unpivoting  113, 114
database
about  53
data, loading from  60-63
Database Administrator (DBA)  15
data sources
about  52
clipboard  52

[ 146 ]
custom file type  53
database  53
information link  53
MS Excel files  53
SAS files  53
data table
about  52
adding  107
columns, adding to  107-109
replacing  118, 119
rows, adding to  110, 111
data table columns
inserting  107-109
data table rows
inserting  110, 111
data tables, Spotfire  52
details graph
creating  89-91
Details-on-Demand panel  105, 106
details visualizations  89
diagnostics, TIBCO Spotfire Web Player 
Server  46
E
Excel file
loading  58-60
F
features, TIBCO Spotfire platform  6
features, Web Player Server  131
filtering  93
filters
about  93
applying  101, 102
customizing  98
Details-on-Demand panel  105, 106
hierarchies  102-104
marking  105
filters panel  94
filter types
checkboxes  96
item filter  96
listbox filter  97
radio buttons  96
range filter  97
text filter  97
H
hierarchies  102-104
Human Resources (HR)  5
I
in-database data  54
Information designer  139-143
information link  53
in-memory data  53
installation prerequisites, TIBCO Spotfire 
platform
about  11
hardware  11, 12
software  12, 13
installation, Spotfire environment  13
installation, TIBCO Spotfire Professional
about  28-33
Server client packages, installing  28, 29
installation, TIBCO Spotfire Server
about  17-21
DB installation, verifying  13
server database, preparing  15, 16
installation, TIBCO Spotfire Web Player 
Server  35-39
item filter  96
iTunes  8
J
JDBC drivers  21
L
libraries
about  128, 129
creating  130
linear regression method  133
linear regression model  133-138
Line Chart
creating  78, 79
listbox filter  97
logistic regression method  133

[ 147 ]
M
main data table  124
manual mode, column matches  120
marking  105
MS Excel files  53
multiple data tables
in one visualization  124, 125
N
navigation methods, pages
history arrows  128
step-by-step  128
titled tabs  128
NT LAN Manager (NTLM)  18
O
ODBC Data Provider  61
OracleClient Data Provider  61
Oracle Data Provider for .NET (ODP.NET)  
53, 61
P
pages
about  127
navigating, ways  128
Pie Chart
about  80
creating  80
customizations  80, 81
pivot table  112
predictive modeling
about  132
cassification modeling  133
model, evaluating  132
model, fitting  132
model, predicting  132
regression modeling  133
Predictor  133
R
radio buttons  96
range filter  97
regression modeling  133-138
relations
about  121
configuring  122, 123
Response  133
rows
adding, to data table  110, 111
S
SAS files  53
Scatter Plot
about  81
creating  82, 83
customizations  83, 84
schemes
filtering  99, 100
Server Database  8
simple regression  133
Spotfire environment
installing  13
post installation  41
Spotfire platform 5.x  7
SqlClient Data Provider  53
System Identifier  15
T
tables
about  64
customizations  65-69
text area  87, 88
text file
loading  54-58
text files  52
text filter  97
TIBCO  11
TIBCO Spotfire 5.5  11
TIBCO Spotfire platform
about  5
components  7
features  6
installation prerequisites  11
TIBCO Spotfire Professional
about  7, 8, 12, 28
downloading  28
hardware requisites  12
installing  30-33
software requisites  12

[ 148 ]
TIBCO Spotfire Server
about  7, 11, 12, 13, 41
administering  41-45
configuring  21-27, 41
downloading  14
hardware requisites  11
installing  17-21
software requisites  12
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Client  8
TIBCO Spotfire Web Player Server
about  7, 8, 12, 13, 33, 46
configuring  46
downloading  35
hardware requisites  12
installing  35-39
logging  47
Microsoft IIS, configuring  33, 34
monitoring  47
software requisites  13
Tss550  41
V
visual analytics  6
visualization layout
about  126, 127
libraries  128-130
pages  127
Web Player Server  131
visualization types
about  64
bar chart  70-77
box plot  84-87
line chart  78, 79
pie chart  80, 81
scatter plot  81-84
tables  64-69
text area  87-89
W
Web Player Diagnostics console
accessing  46
Web Player Server
about  131
features  131

 
Thank you for buying  
TIBCO Spotfire for Developers
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give 
you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get 
the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in 
the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving 
you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For more 
information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home to 
books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including (but 
not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles will offer 
information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, developers, 
architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like 
to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning 
editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Building Dashboards with 
Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013 and 
Excel 2013
ISBN: 978-1-84968-906-9             Paperback: 268 pages
Easily build powerful dashboards with Microsoft 
Dynamics GP 2013 and Excel 2013
1.	
Build a dashboard using Excel 2013 with 
information from Microsoft Dynamics GP 2013
2.	
Make Excel a true business intelligence tool 
with charts, sparklines, slicers, and more
3.	
Utilize PowerPivot’s full potential to create 
even more complex dashboards
IBM Cognos Business 
Intelligence
ISBN: 978-1-84968-356-2             Paperback: 318 pages
Discover the practical approach to BI with IBM 
Cognos Business Intelligence
1.	
Learn how to better administer your IBM 
Cognos 10 environment in order to improve 
productivity and efficiency.
2.	
Empower your business with the latest 
Business Intelligence (BI) tools.
3.	
Discover advanced tools and knowledge that 
can greatly improve daily tasks and analysis.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Creating Data Models with 
PowerPivot How-to
ISBN: 978-1-84968-956-4             Paperback: 58 pages
Build better business intelligence with this practical 
guide to creating Excel data models with PowerPivot
1.	
Learn something new in an Instant! A short, fast, 
focused guide delivering immediate results
2.	
Detailed, step-by-step interactive tutorial guide 
to learning PowerPivot
3.	
Carefully organized topics for users of all levels
4.	
Learn how to make your data accessible and 
attractive
Clojure Data Analysis Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-78216-264-3            Paperback: 342  pages
Over 110 recipes to help you dive into the world of 
practical data analysis using Clojure
1.	
Get a handle on the torrent of data the modern 
Internet has created
2.	
Recipes for every stage from collection to 
analysis
3.	
A practical approach to analyzing data to help 
you make informed decisions
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles


