How to take care of timber decks, cladding, 
garden sheds, furniture etc – the proper way. 
                                                                                           
 
 
Where do I turn for proper advice? 
There are scores of products on the market for protecting and beautifying timber etc, 
some good and some not so good. There are equally as many variations in advice 
offered, some good and unfortunately lots not so good. 
 
Every day I come across the after-effects of all such products and bad advice out there 
in the course of my work as a wood care specialist / troubleshooter. It is remarkable 
how often I come across people who have been mislead, badly advised, or simply 
picked up the first tin of something they might have seen on the T V, even if it was 
totally inappropriate for their particular needs. It is very hard to find dedicated store 
staff who make an effort to acquire a proper data bank of knowledge in whatever field 
they are involved in no matter what that is! From curtains, to electronic gadgets, to 
woodcare protection etc. When you do come across one of those ‘walking treasures’ 
don’t you just feel so glad you did? Yes, they are out there but we could do with 
seeing more of them. 
 
Anyway, back to timber, taking care of it and keeping it looking at it’s very best for 
many years. 
 
Before one can advise he / she must learn first, both the theory and the practical real-
life stuff.  
During the last ten years or so with IGOE INTERNATIONAL LTD, I’ve invested 
most of my working time learning from several of the leading wood care experts from 
Scandinavia, U.S.A, and elsewhere, while dealing hands-on with numerous on-site 
cock-ups, on all kinds of wooden structures from decks, marinas, yachts, sailing ships, 
cladding, hardwood garden furniture, fencing, log cabins etc, the results of poor 
advice and so on and so on. 
Here are my findings and some practical, sound advice which, hopefully will save you 
and or, your friends or relatives from one of the aforementioned cock-ups and their 
associated cost in money terms as well as all the added frustration and stress. 
 
My top of the pile of ‘what’s out there’ in woodcare would have to be a bunch of 
wood care products from the Owatrol stable. Underdogs to some big brand names 
they may be, but in my opinion, they do the business second to none. A division of 
The Flood Company, Ohio, U.S.A., one of America’s leading deck / timber-care 
product manufacturers, Owatrol International covers a complete line of highest 
quality timber care products.  
 
They are not the cheapest mind you, but to my mind they would safely qualify as the 
best, hard earned money can buy, and given the fact that your beautiful timber doesn’t 
come cheap, why skimp on a few coppers for the sake of getting that job done right 
first time? 
 
From my travels, I do know, that more and more quality deck installers, both in the  
U K & Ireland are recommending this same system I am about to tell you about here 
today. There is a complete family of products to suit the different situations, needs 
and tastes.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Here are some of the main issues to look at before deciding what to do 
with your exterior wood whether it’s new, old, treated or untreated etc: 
 
 
 
1. New wood – What should be done with it? 
2. What do you want your wood to look like when you’re done? 
3. Has it been treated by you or by a previous owner before? 
4. Was that wood ever treated? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. New Wood – what should be done with it? 
Lets take it step by step and start at the beginning with new wood.  
FACT: The first year is the worst year for all new exposed timber! 
 
Irrespective of whether your new deck is pressure treated or not, it is still possible that 
the new wood will crack, split, warp or cup. 
Pressure treating is basically designed to prevent ROT and DECAY, not splitting etc. 
 
New deck timber frequently has mill glaze (a shiny finish caused by a combination of 
timber planing, wood oils, resins etc during manufacture) which prevents the proper 
penetration of practically any finish whatsoever. The net effect of this mill glaze etc is 
that the wood’s pores have been slammed shut by the planer blades and may take 
several months before they become open again properly, or open enough to allow the 
wood be treated properly. The one thing that has a very high success rate of getting 
into this very same wood is good old rainwater! After lying for some time on the 
wood it will get in to the timber.  
 
In other words, you are wasting your money applying any regular off-the-shelf finish 
like stains, cheap deck oils etc, because they probably will not penetrate properly and 
will peel off or wear off in no time. Some mis-informed people advise that you should 
leave your wood to weather with nothing on it for several months and not to apply 
anything. That advice is both right and wrong. It is right to some extent because 
virtually no treatment gets into new wood’s pores – hence the thinking is, wait until 
the pores open fully. 
That advice is wrong because, meanwhile water WILL get into the wood and will do 
damage such as splitting, cupping, warping etc. The Western Red Cedar Association 
in North America says new cedar etc should not be left unprotected for this very 
reason. 
 
New Wood “The Myth”:  
“This wood is pressure treated and does not need to be looked after” 
This kind of comment had been bandied about by some well meaning, but seriously 
mis-informed timber sellers or deck installers. The fact is, pressure treatment basically 
takes care of wood rot related issues and does not deal with water and sun related 
problems which are the biggest ‘visible’ problems you will probably ever come 
across.  

A good analogy would be the expensive paint job on a brand new car, doesn’t it look 
great? Doesn’t it need to be looked after, washed and polished from time to time to 
maintain it and keep it looking great? Leave it to the mercy of our weather, dirt etc 
and it won’t stay looking good for long! The same applies to your new timber or 
wood (whichever you prefer to call it)… left to its own devices it will soon look like a 
pile of old pallets not to mention the damage done to its fibre structure! 
 
Back to the new wood, and what to do with it. 
Irrespective of whether it is pressure treated or not (pressure treated wood usually can 
be identified by a greenish tint) the new wood should be protected against damage and 
algae etc if you want it to last, look well, be most importantly -safe in the case of 
decking. 
 
Owatrol do a product specifically designed to treat new wood, called SEASONITE.  
SEASONITE, a deep penetrating treatment, is applied as soon as possible after 
installing your deck, cladding, wooden garden furniture, shed or any other new 
outdoor timber structure. It is wetter than water, and gets into those tightly closed 
pores where very little else bar water will get in. 
 
Seasonite’s job is to allow the new wood ‘weather’ in a controlled fashion, i.e. it 
allows excess moisture escape GRADUALLY from the new wood over the course of 
six months or more, while at the same time preventing NEW moisture or water from 
getting into the wood.  
Splitting and cracking etc, generally takes place during changes in weather conditions, 
from sun to rain to sun etc, which causes the damp wood to suddenly expand and then 
crack and so on. 
Did you ever ‘hear your deck creak’ after a shower of rain followed by a bit of sun? 
Why does it do that? The wood absorbed the water and as soon as the rain stopped 
and the sun comes out, the sudden, dare I say it – heat, causes the wood to swell or 
expand, and that’s when the damage is done, cracking, warping etc. Plain common 
sense. It’s a real shame to see lovely planks of expensive wood with ugly big splits 
and cracks all over it. 
 
SEASONITE is not a product designed to make a big impression on your visual 
senses, it’s main job is just to protect your wood in it’s first, and most vulnerable year, 
leaving it properly prepared for the next phase of protection where shade, colour etc 
comes in. Another huge benefit of Seasonite is that it contains a fungicide which helps 
prevent the growth of algae etc. (That’s what causes decks to become slippery & 
possibly dangerous when wet). 
 
 
2. What do you want your wood to look like when you’re done? 
 
(2a) That Silvery Greyed Look? 
Depending on how you want your timber to look eventually, i.e. a continuation of that 
lovely just installed look, or what some people like, that silvery greyed look which is 
the way Cedar decking, cladding etc ends up if left untreated. If you want a silvery, 
weathered look, all you need to do is apply one coat of Seasonite every year or two. 
This is a very simple job and can be done in no time at all with a simple, pump type 
garden sprayer or even a roller or sweeping brush etc.  
 
It is not a dirty job and anybody with the slightest DIY ability can do it easily. The 
Seasonite will prevent ‘new’ water / moisture from getting in, and keeps the wood 
inside in good condition while at the same time the outside weathers and takes on that 
weathered silvery look. So you get the look you want but without letting your timber 
go to rack and ruin. 
 

 
(2 b) The Natural New Wood Look or different shades? (Most popular) 
 
If your preference is for that beautiful, natural, recently sawn-wood look I would 
suggest the following course of action. After seasoning has taken place, ideally having 
been treated with Seasonite when installed, & several months (6+) of controlled 
weathering has taken place, your deck is now ready for the next phase of treatment. 
 
Clean & restore the original colour 
 
Clean it. 
Even if you used Seasonite as mentioned above, when the wood was new, it will fade 
and turn grey as well as catch some dirt, bird droppings, water stains etc. So before 
you do anything, the deck, or whatever it is, must be cleaned, and the original natural 
colour of the wood completely restored with Net-Trol, a revolutionary and 
environmentally safe product. It will also remove any remaining Seasonite from the 
wood, necessary before the next phase of the job.  
Here’s how. 
All you’ve got to do is wet the wood thoroughly, apply a mixture of one part Net-Trol 
to about three parts water (the less water the stronger the mix) and apply with 
anything like a clean sweeping brush, or whatever is handy. After about 10 minutes, it 
is a good idea to slightly agitate the applied cleaner with something like a stiff bristled 
nylon brush just to help ‘work it in’ to the pores etc. After about 30 minutes rinse off 
thoroughly with clean water. If you’re doing this job on a dry sunny day and the Net-
Trol cleaning treatment is drying out prematurely, just moisten the area with a fine 
mist from a garden hose to keep it wet, because the cleaning action stops working if it 
dries out. If the wood has been really dirty or very badly faded, you may need to 
repeat the above exercise. (Alternatively, see info on the very powerful PrepDeck 
below) You will also see a vast difference in the look of the wood and the original 
colour will come right back. When the cleaned wood dries out it will brighten to some 
degree but it will look very much like it did when new. 
 
Now, to beautify and protect your wood…Oil it.  
I recommend that you wait for at least three days with good drying conditions after 
the above cleaning has been done before attempting to apply any protective coat. 
Ideally, 3 to 4 good drying days should allow your wood to be fully dried out again 
making it receptive for further treatment. 
 
This easy job is done using a very easy to use product called TEXTROL and 
anybody reasonably competent with his or her hands can do it. (Take all the usual 
precautions like wearing rubber gloves etc)  
 
Textrol is an anti-UV, deep-penetrating clear oil, which goes into the wood rather 
than on it, leaving a nice matte finish.  
There are two ready-tinted versions of Textrol called Golden Oak and Rustic Oak.  
For the more adventurous, the Textrol clear can be tinted (by the paint store) in a nice 
selection of semi-transparent colours from cool blues to warm browns using the 
Textrol as either a yellow or clear base. 
 
How to apply: The very first application (only) should be two coats, one soon after 
the other. Do your project in manageable sections, i.e. you must go back and apply 
your second coat before the first coat ‘sets up’ Depending on the porosity of the 
wood, your first coat should be absorbed in about half an hour or less. If you wait too 
long and the first coat sets up, your second coat will have difficulty getting in, which 
in turn means that the wood will not have had enough to ‘drink’. The knock-on effect 
of this is that the protection will only last half as long as it should. If you are working 

on a deck and some ‘ponding’ occurs from excess Textrol, just wipe it off with a 
clean cloth to prevent ‘skinning’. (See TIP re doing Decks) 
Textrol also contains a fungicide which keeps algae etc at bay, and most importantly, 
in the case of a deck, helps keep it from becoming slippery when wet. Textrol will not 
peel or lift and can be recoated without sanding which is a great advantage. If you 
have a deck that is made of the less expensive pressure treated pine or spruce etc 
(often grooved), the Textrol Rustic Oak will make the deck look more like a teak 
hardwood. It all depends on which wood you have and what your preference is.  
Cedar looks beautiful with the Textrol clear, it enhances the grain and has a lovely 
natural look. It would be best described as looking like clean, new, wet cedar. The 
Golden Oak would darken it a little and you may like that look also. 
Another point to consider is that the two tinted versions will last longer than the clear 
because they have more pigment in them and they resist the UV rays better. 
Textrol (clear) by the way, can last, when properly applied, from1.5 to 3 years 
depending on its position relative to the sun. The less exposed to direct sunlight the 
longer it lasts and visa versa.  
Textrol is water repellent (allows wood to breathe) and ideally should be recoated 
with just one coat without sanding every twelve to eighteen months, depending on sun 
exposure. As with Seasonite, Textrol is very easy to apply, if you have a pump 
sprayer, use that, or you could use a clean sweeping brush, paintbrush or roller. One 
point to remember is, as soon as your wood starts to get grey looking it’s telling you it 
needs some more oiling with Textrol. 
 
NOTE: We recently introduced Tropitech, a new, hard wearing, long lasting, acrylic 
wood finish also from the same suppliers Owatrol – also worth a look, check out the 
website page http://igoe.ie/products/needalonglasting.htm  meanwhile 
for more information. I will be adding pictures and more on Tropitech soon. 
 
3. Has it been treated by you or by a previous owner before? 
You need to find out what you are dealing with before you can effectively restore or 
treat it. Perhaps your deck or exterior wood has been treated before by you or a 
contractor and you cannot remember with what, perhaps the wood was messed up by 
the application of inappropriate coatings, or they were applied in the wrong way? Or 
maybe you’ve recently moved into this house and the exterior woodwork needs doing 
but you don’t have a clue what to do to restore it? Important that you deal with this. 
 
Start at the beginning and do a simple test on various parts of the wood. 
Wait until the wood is dry; apply a few drops of water here and there (gently). If the 
water droplet soaks into the wood after about 5 to 10 minutes, (might be a little longer 
in hardwoods) that tells you that your wood is porous and that it can be treated after a 
relatively easy cleaning with Net-Trol. (See Clean & Restore above) On the other hand if 
the water droplet stays there and does not soak in, but rather sits there on the wood, it 
tells you that there is something there like a previous coating (which may or may not 
be clearly visible) of some sort, and it must be removed properly before doing 
anything else. 
 
This can be achieved with a very powerful stripper cleaner like the PrepDeck. This 
product can be used diluted with water at a ratio of 1 part PrepDeck and 10 parts 
water for wood that is not excessively dirty looking, or you could go all the way up to 
neat Prepdeck for disaster situations, such as heavily coated with old stains, coatings 
etc. It may be useful to do a few tests using different mix ratios to get a feel for might 
work best for your situation.  
Work from weak towards strong. Apply PrepDeck on to dry wood.
 
 
 
 

Next, a few words of caution re PrepDeck: 
• Shake very well before use. 
• Wear protective gloves, eye protection etc and cover anything you don’t want 
splashed or interfered with including shrubs etc. 
• Decks can be very slippery while being treated with PrepDeck so take extreme 
care. 
• Do not let the PrepDeck dry out while it is working, keep moist. 
• On vertical surfaces, it is better to work from the bottom up to minimise streaking 
etc. 
• PrepDeck, because it is so powerful can, and will darken some woods during the 
course of the cleaning action. Don’t worry though, you can restore the natural 
colour of the darkened wood again by treating it with Net-Trol diluted about 4 
parts water to 1 part Net-Trol. In any event, whether the wood darkens or not, the 
PrepDeck will remove the toughest of old stains, oils etc and bring the wood back 
to its original look.  
• All wood cleaned with PrepDeck must be neutralised immediately afterwards 
while still wet with Net-Trol, diluted about 3 or 4 to one before a final thorough 
rinsing off with clean water. You could use a garden hose or even a power washer 
at about 500psi (low pressure) and make sure, if you are using a power washer 
that you run with the wood grain, not against it which might raise the wood fibres 
and or even cause splintering. 
Working time for PrepDeck would be around 20 to 30 minutes for stubborn stains, 
oils etc, and for less challenging cleaning jobs it can be diluted by as much as 20 to 1 
and take about 10 to 15 minutes to work.  
NOTE: In all cases, after you use PrepDeck, the wood must be neutralised with 
diluted Net-Trol immediately afterwards while the wood is still wet. 
Do not, under any circumstances, apply Textrol on to any wood that has been cleaned 
with PrepDeck unless the wood has been neutralised with diluted Net-Trol (see 
above) prior to drying off. 
 
Now, keep that newly cleaned and restored wood looking great! 
Wait for at least three or four good drying days or even a little longer, for your wood 
to dry out completely and then you can treat it with any of your TEXTROL options as 
mentioned in 2 b above.  
 
 
5. Was the wood ever treated? 
If you know that your wood has never treated by you or anybody else, even if it was 
pressure treated, it can easily be brought back to life and look great again. 
If it is not too severely stained or dirty you will get a very good result using Net-Trol 
(See Clean & restore the original colour above). 
 
If the wood is heavily stained, has all sorts of grime and dirt on it; you may need the 
more powerful PrepDeck to get the stubborn stuff off. See 3 above (Followed by Net-
Trol – see 3 above) 
 
My advice is try the Net-Trol first (as per above instructions) even if you have to use 
it almost neat. Do a few simple tests using different strengths of Net-Trol diluted with 
water. Obviously the less Net-Trol you get away with using, the better it is for you! 
You may need to do it twice, but that will be determined by your tests.  
NOTE: You will not see the real result of your test until the wood has dried out to a 
reasonable extent, so just go off and do something else meanwhile. 
 
When you are happy that you have got your wood as clean as possible, wait until it 
has fully dried out and then you can apply the two coats of TEXTROL as per 2 above. 
 

 
DECK TIPS 
• On a new deck, it is advisable to put planter boxes, etc into waterproof trays and if 
possible, raised off the surface of the deck. Move them around from time to time. 
This will prevent “rings” from forming and allow the deck to breathe uniformly. 
 
• Deck furniture such as chairs, umbrella base etc should have rubber or plastic cups 
fitted where possible.  
 
 
• Bar B Que’s should have some form of protection on the deck floor to prevent 
serious burn marks or bad stains. Try a small sheet of aluminium or steel, about 
one meter square, (available from a good DIY store or Builders merchant) which 
can be removed after cooking. This can possibly be stored away underneath the 
deck.  
 
 
• If you have rusting nail heads, hanging flower brackets etc leaving rust stains on 
your wood, they can be cleaned off with the Net-Trol product mentioned above. 
When dried out, apply some Owatrol Oil directly to the rusted nail or screw heads      
      etc to seal them up and prevent the rust reforming again for many years. 
 
• When oiling a deck with TEXTROL, work from the furthest point backwards to 
avoid having to walk over an area you’ve just done. Ideally, Textrol the wood by 
treating about 6 planks, or whatever you at a time from one end to the other. This 
means, by the time you  
 
 

