 
Tinie App V3.6: Set Up Guide 
 
 
Step 1: 
 
Decompress the file. 
 
 
Step 2: 
 
Go to facebook.com/developers and click ‘Set Up New Application’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 3: 
 
Fill in any name you wish for your new application, for example, ‘Daily 
Fun Jokes’, and agree to the terms of service. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Step 4: 
 
Click ‘Create Application’ 
 
Step 5: 
 
Fill in the ‘CAPTCHA’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 6: 
 
Make a new folder on your domain, for example, entitled ‘appfiles’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Then upload the decompressed files to this folder. 
 
STEP 7: 
 
Go back to the facebook.com/developers page, and then look at your ‘My 
Applications’ list.  
 

 
Now click on ‘more’ next to the application, which you recently created, 
and then click ‘Edit Settings’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STEP 8: 
 

You will now see your application settings, click on ‘Facebook 
Integration’ on the left: 
 
 
 
Now in these settings, you need to fill in: 
 
Canvas Page – Fill in any name here, from now on, this will be your 
application link, which you will promote, so I will fill in ‘dailyjokezzz’, 
my application link will be, http://apps.facebook.com/dailyjokezzz. So 
fill in any name you wish here. 
 
Canvas URL – Here, you must fill in, http://mydomain.com/app/ 
Remember, ‘mydomain’ is the name of the domain you are using to host 
files, ‘app’ is the name of the folder you made, and you MUST 
REMEMBER to put a ‘/’ forward slash at the end of the URL. 
 
iFrame Size – Change this to ‘Auto-resize’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STEP 9: 
 
After you have clicked ‘Save Changes’, you should then see this screen: 
 
 
 
 
As you can see, there is ‘Application ID’, ‘Application Secret’, ‘Canvas 
Page’ and ‘Canvas URL’.  (You will use this information in the admin 
panel after you have done the next step) 
 
 
Step 10: 
 
Visit ‘install.php’ on your domain. So for example, 
tinielabs.com/appfiles/install.php – This will guide you through the 
installation process on the server side. 
 
 
Support: 
 
support@tinielabs.com 
 
tinie.applications@gmail.com 
 
MSN – Andee@alumni.com 
 

AIM – AramyE 
 
Skype - Eltorkeyy 
 
 

