CANARY LAND
Tom Purdom
 
 
“Canary Land” appeared in the January 1997 issue of Asimov’s with an
illustration by George H. Krauter. Tom Purdom made his first sale in
1957, to Fan-tastic Universe, and has subsequently sold to Analog, The
Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, Star, and most of the major SF
magazines and antholo-gies; in recent years, he’s become a frequent
con-tributor to Asimov’s Science Fiction, publishing a stream of
sophisticated adventure tales in the mag-azine since his first sale here
in 1988. He is the au-thor of one of the most unfairly forgotten SF novels
of the sixties, the powerful and still timely Reduction in Arms, about the
difficulties of disarmament in the face of the mad proliferation of nuclear
weapons, as well as such novels as I Want the Stars, Tree Lord of
Imeten, Five Against Arlane, and The Barons of Behavior. Purdom lives
with his family in Philadel-phia, where he reviews classical music
concerts for a local newspaper, and is at work on several new novels.
 
Here he sends a hapless immigrant to a future col-ony on the Moon
that looks like a Utopia on the surface, but which, when you examine its
lower depths (as our reluctant hero is forced to do, both literally and
figuratively), turns out to be less than perfect—but still, perhaps a place
where an immi-grant can make a place for himself, if luck stays with him
long enough to keep him alive, that is. ...
 
* * * *
 
Back home in Delaware County, in the area that was gen-erally known as
the “Philadelphia region,” the three guys talking to George Sparr would
probably have been de-scended from long dead ancestors who had
immigrated from Sicily. Here on the Moon they were probably the sons of
parents who had been born in Taiwan or Thailand. They had good contacts,
the big one explained, with the union that “represented” the musicians who
played in eat-eries like the Twelve Sages Cafe. If George wanted to
continue sawing on his viola twelve hours a day, thirteen days out of
fourteen, it would be to his advantage to accept their offer. If he declined,
someone else would take his place in the string quintet that the diners and
lunchers ignored while they chatted.
 
On Earth, George had played the viola because he wanted to. The
performance system he had planted in his nervous system was

top-of-the-line, state-of-the-art. There had been weeks, back when he had
been a normal take-it-as-it-comes American, when he had played with a
dif-ferent trio or quartet every night, including Saturday, and squeezed in
two sessions on Sunday. Now his perfor-mance system was the only thing
standing between him and the euphoric psychological states induced by
malnu-trition. Live music, performed by real live musicians, was one of the
lowest forms of unskilled labor. Anybody could do it, provided they had
attached the right information molecules to the right motor nerves. It was, in
short, the one form of employment you could count on, if you were an
American immigrant who was. when all was said and done, only a
commonplace, cookbook kind of biodesigner.
 
* * * *
 
George’s grasp of Techno-Mandarin was still developing. He had been
scraping for money when he had left Earth. He had sold almost everything
he owned—including his best viola—to buy his way off the planet. The
language program he had purchased had been a cheap, quick-and-dirty
item that gave him the equivalent of a useful pidgin. The three guys were
talking very slowly.
 
* * * *
 
They wanted to slip George into one of the big artificial ecosystems that
were one of the Moon’s leading economic resources. They had a contact
who could stow him in one of the carts that delivered supplies to the
canaries—the “long term research and maintenance team” who lived in the
ecosystem. The contact would think she was merely transferring a
container that had been loaded with a little harmless recreational material.
 
George was only five-eight, which was one reason he’d been
selected for the “opportunity.” He would be wearing a guaranteed, airtight
isolation suit. Once inside, he would hunt down a few specimens, analyze
their genetic makeup with the equipment he would be given, and come out
with the information a member of a certain Board of Directors was
interested in. Robots could have done the job, but robots had to be
controlled from outside, with detectable radio sources. The Director
(George could hear the capi-tal, even with his limited knowledge of the
language) wanted to run some tests on the specimens without en-gaging in
a direct confrontation with his colleagues.
 
There was, of course, a very real possibility the isola-tion suit might
be damaged in some way. In that case, George would become a
permanent resident of the eco-system—a destiny he had been trying to

avoid ever since he had arrived on the Moon.
 
* * * *
 
The ride to the ecosystem blindsided George with an un-expected rush of
emotion. There was a moment when he wasn’t certain he could control the
sob that was pressing against the walls of his throat.
 
He was sitting in a private vehicle. He was racing along a strip of
pavement, with a line of vehicles ahead of him. There was sky over his
head and a landscape around him.
 
George had spent his whole life in the car-dominated metropolitan
sprawls that had replaced cities in the United States. Now he lived in a tiny
one-room apartment, in a corridor crammed with tiny one-room apartments
rented by other immigrants. His primary form of transportation was his own
legs. When he did actually ride in a vehicle, he hopped aboard an
automated cart and shared a seat with someone he had never seen before.
He could under-stand why most of the people on the Moon came from
Asiatic countries. They had crossed two hundred and fifty thousand miles
so they could build a new generation of Hong Kongs under the lunar
surface.
 
The sky was black, of course. The landscape was a rolling desert
composed of craters pockmarked by craters that were pockmarked by
craters. The cars on the black strip were creeping along at fifty kilometers
per hour—or less—and most of the energy released by their batteries was
powering a life support system, not a motor. Still, he looked around him with
some of the tingling pleasure of a man who had just been released from
prison.
 
* * * *
 
The trio had to explain the job to him and some of the less technical data
slipped out in the telling. They were also anxious, obviously, to let him know
their “client” had connections. One of the corporation’s biggest products
was the organic interface that connected the brains of an-imals to electronic
control devices. The company’s major resource was a woman named Ms.
Chao, who was a big expert at developing such interfaces. Her company
had become one of the three competitors everybody in the field wanted to
beat.
 
In this case the corporation was upgrading a package that connected
the brains of surveillance hawks to the electronics that controlled them. The

package included genes that modified the neurotransmitters in the hawk’s
brain and it actually altered the hawk’s intelligence and temperament. The
package created, in effect, a whole new organ in the brain. You infected the
brain with the pack-age and the DNA in the package built a new organ—an
organ that responded to activity within the brain by re-leasing extra
transmitters, dampening certain responses, etc. Some of the standard,
medically approved personality modifications worked exactly the same way.
The package would increase the efficiency of the hawk’s brain and multiply
the number of functions its owners could build into the control interface.
 
Their Director, the trio claimed, was worried about the ethics of the
other directors. The reports from the research and development team
indicated the project was months behind schedule.
 
“Our man afraid he victim big cheat,” the big one said, in slow
Techno-Mandarin pidgin. With lots of emphatic, insistent hand gestures.
 
* * * *
 
It had been the big one, oddly enough, who had done most of the talking. In
his case, apparently, you couldn’t as-sume there was an inverse
relationship between muscle power and brain power. He was one of those
guys who was so massive he made you feel nervous every time he got
within three steps of the zone you thought of as your personal space.
 
* * * *
 
The artificial ecosystems had become one of the founda-tions of the lunar
economy. One of the Moon’s greatest resources, it had turned out, was its
lifelessness. Nothing could live on the surface of the Moon—not a bacteria,
not a fungus, not the tiniest dot of a nematode, nothing.
 
Temperatures that were 50 percent higher than the tem-perature of
boiling water sterilized the surface during the lunar day. Cold that was
grimmer than anything found at the Antarctic sterilized it during the night.
Radiation and vacuum killed anything that might have survived the
tem-perature changes.
 
And what happened if some organism somehow man-aged to survive
all of the Moon’s hazards and cross the terrain that separated an
ecosystem from one of the lunar cities? It still had to cross four hundred
thousand kilo-meters of vacuum and radiation before it reached the real
ecosystems that flowered on the blue sphere that had once been George’s

home.
 
The Moon, obviously, was the place to develop new life-forms. The
designers themselves could sit in Shanghai and Bangkok and ponder the
three-dimensional models of DNA molecules that twisted across their
screens. The hands-on work took place on the Moon. The organisms that
sprouted from the molecules were inserted in artificial ecosystems on the
moon and given their chance to do their worst.
 
Every new organism was treated with suspicion. Any-thing—even the
most trivial modification of a minor in-sect—could produce unexpected side
effects when it was inserted into a terrestrial ecosystem. Once a new
organism had been designed, it had to be maintained in a sealed lunar
ecosystem for at least three years. Viruses and cer-tain kinds of plants and
insects had to be kept imprisoned for periods that were even longer.
 
According to the big guy, Ms. Chao claimed she was still developing
the new hawk control interface. The Di-rector, for some reason, was afraid
she had already fin-ished working on it. She could have turned it over to
another company, the big guy claimed. And the new com-pany could lock it
in another ecosystem. And get it ready for market while the Director thought
it was still under development inside the old company’s ecosystem.
 
* * * *
 
“Other directors transfer research other company,” the big guy said. “Show
him false data. Other company make money. Other directors make money.
His stock—down.”
 
“Stock no worth chips stock recorded on,” the guy with the white scar
on the back of his fingers said.
 
“You not commit crime,” the big one said, with his hands pushing at
the air as if he were trying to shove his complicated ideas into George’s
dumb immigrant’s brain. “You not burglar. You work for Director.
Stockholder. Director have right to know.”
 
* * * *
 
Like everything else on the Moon, the ecosystem was bur-ied under the
surface. George crawled into the back of the truck knowing he had seen all
of the real Topside landscape he was going to see from now until he left
the system. The guy with the scarred hand kept a camera on while he stood
in the sterilizing unit and they talked him through the “donning procedure.”

The suit had already been sterilized. The donning procedure was
supposed to reduce the contamination it picked up as he put it on. The
sterilizing unit flooded him with UV light and other, less obvious forms of
radiation while he wiggled and contorted. The big guy got some bobs and
smiles from the third member of the trio when he made a couple of “jokes”
about the future of George’s chromosomes. Then the big guy tapped a
button on the side of the unit and George stood there for five minutes,
completely encased in the suit, while the unit supposedly killed off anything
the suit had attracted while he had been amusing them with his reverse
striptease. The recording they were mak-ing was for his benefit, the big guy
assured him. If he ran into any legal problems, they had proof they had
administered all the standard safety precautions before he had entered the
ecosystem.
 
* * * *
 
The thing that really made George sweat was the struggle to emerge from
the container. It was a cylinder with a big external pressure seal and they
had deliberately picked one of the smaller sizes. We make so small,
nobody see think person, the big guy had explained.
 
The trick release on the inside of the cylinder worked fine, but after
that he had to maneuver his way through the neck without ripping his suit.
Any tear—any puncture, any pinhole—would activate the laws that
governed the quarantine.
 
The best you could hope for, under the rules, was four-teen months
of isolation. You could only hope for that, of course, if you had entered the
ecosystem legitimately, for a very good reason. If you had entered it
illegally, for a reason that would make you the instant enemy of most of the
people who owned the place, you would be lucky if they let you stay inside
it, in one piece, for the rest of whatever life you might be willing to endure
before you decided you were better off dead.
 
The people on the “long term research and maintenance team” did
some useful work. An American with his train-ing would be a valuable
asset—a high level assistant to the people on the other side of the wall who
really di-rected the research. But everybody knew why they were really
there. There wasn’t a person on the Moon who didn’t know that coal miners
had once taken canaries into their tunnels, so they would know they were
breathing poisoned air as soon as the canaries keeled over. The hu-mans
locked in the ecosystem were the living proof the microorganisms in the
system hadn’t evolved into something dangerous.
 

The contact had placed the container, as promised, in the tall grasses
that grew along a small stream. The eco-system was supposed to mimic a
“natural” day-night cycle on Earth and it was darker than anyplace George
had ever visited on the real planet. He had put on a set of night-vision
goggles before he had closed the hood of the suit but he had to stand still
for a moment and let his eyes adjust anyway.
 
* * * *
 
His equipment pack contained two cases. The large flat case looked like it
had been designed for displaying jew-elry. The two moths fitted into its
recesses would have drawn approving nods from people who were
connois-seurs of bioelectronic craftsmanship.
 
The hawks he was interested in were living creatures with modified
brains. The cameras and computers plugged into their bodies were
powered by the energy generated by their own metabolism. The two moths
occupied a different part of the great borderland between the world of the
living and the world of the machine. Their bodies had been formed in
cocoons but their organic brains had been replaced by electronic control
systems. They drew all their energy from the batteries he fitted into the
slots just be-hind each control system. Their wings were a little wider than
his hand but the big guy had assured him they wouldn’t trigger any alarms
when a surveillance camera picked them up.
 
Insect like this in system. Not many. But enough.
 
The first moth flitted away from George’s hand as soon as he
pressed on the battery with his thumb. It fluttered aimlessly, just above the
tops of the river grasses, then turned to the right and headed toward a
group of trees about a hundred meters from its launch site.
 
At night the hawks were roosters, not flyers. They perched in trees,
dozing and digesting, while the cameras mounted in their skulls continued
to relay data to the se-curity system.
 
* * * *
 
George had never paid much attention when his parents had discussed
their family histories. He knew he had an-cestors who came from Romania,
Italy, Austria, and the less prominent regions of the British Isles. Most of
them had emigrated in the nineteenth century, as far as he could tell. One
of his grandmothers had left some country in Europe when it fell apart near
the end of the twentieth century.

 
Most of them had emigrated because they couldn’t make a living in
the countries they had been born in. That seemed to be clear. So why
shouldn’t he “pull up stakes” (whatever that meant) and head for the
booming economy in the sky? Didn’t that show you were made of
something special?
 
George’s major brush with history had been four sets of
viewer-responsive videos he had studied as a child, to meet the
requirements listed on his permanent educational transcript. His parents
had chosen most of his non-technical educational materials and they had
opted for a series that emphasized human achievements in the arts and
sciences. The immigrants he was familiar with had overcome poverty and
bigotry (there was always some mention of bigotry) and become
prizewinning physicists and world famous writers and musicians. There had
been no mention of immigrants who wandered the corridors of strange
cities feeling like they were stumbling through a fog. There had been no
indication any immigrant had ever realized he had traded utter
hopelessness for permanent, lifelong poverty.
 
There had been a time, as George understood it, when the music in
restaurants had been produced by electronic sound systems and unskilled
laborers had carried food to the tables. Now unskilled labor provided the
music and carts took orders and transported the food. Had any of his
ancestors been invisible functionaries who toted plates of food to
customers who were engrossed in intense conver-sations about the kind of
real work people did in real work spaces like laboratories and offices? He
had never heard his parents mention it.
 
* * * *
 
Battery good twenty minutes. No more. Moth not come back twenty
minutes—not come back ever.
 
He almost missed the light the moth flicked on just before it settled
into the grass. He would have missed it, in fact, if they hadn’t told him he
should watch for it. It was only a blip, and it was really a glow, not a flash. He
crept toward it in an awkward hunch, with both cases in his hands and his
eyes fixed on the ground in front of his boots.
 
The small square case contained his laboratory. The collection tube
attached to the moth’s body fitted into a plug on the side of the case and he
huddled over the display screen while the unit ran its tests. If everything

was on the up and up, the yellow lines on the screen would be the same
length as the red lines. If the “Direc-tor” was being given false information,
they wouldn’t.
 
It was a job that could have been handled by 80 per-cent—at
least—of the nineteen million people currently living on the Moon. In his lab
on Earth, there had been carts that did things like that. A four-wheeled
vehicle a little bigger than the lab case could have carried the two moths
and automatically plugged the collection tube into the analyzer. He was
lurching around in the dark merely because a cart would have required a
wireless communi-cations link that might have been detectable.
 
The first yellow line appeared on the screen. It was a few pixels
longer than the red line—enough to be notice-able, not enough to be
significant.
 
The second yellow line took its place beside the second red line like
a soldier coming to attention beside a partner who had been chosen
because they were precisely the same height. The third line fell in beside
its red line, there was a pause that lasted about five hard beats of George’s
pulse, and the last two yellow lines finished up the for-mation.
 
The moth had hovered above the hawk’s back and jabbed a long,
threadlike tube into its neck. The big changes in the bird’s chemistry would
take place in its brain, but some of the residue from the changes would
seep into its bloodstream and produce detectable altera-tions in the
percentages of five enzymes. The yellow lines were the same length as the
red lines: ergo, the hawks were carrying a package exactly like the package
they were supposed to be carrying.
 
* * * *
 
Which was good news for the Director. Or George pre-sumed it was,
anyway. And bad news for him.
 
If the result had been positive—if he had collected proof there was
something wrong with the hawks—he could have radioed the information in
an encrypted one-second blip and headed straight for the nearest exit. His
three bodyguards would have helped him through the por-tal—they’d said
they would, anyway—and he would have been home free. Instead, he had
to pick up his equipment, close all his cases, and go creeping through the
dark to the other hawk nest in the system. He was supposed to follow the
small stream until it crossed a dirt utility road, the big guy had said. Then he
was supposed to follow the road for about four kilometers, until it

intersected another stream. And work his way through another two
kilometers of tangled, streamside vegetation.
 
The habitat reproduced three hundred square kilometers of
temperate zone forest and river land. It actually sup-ported more plant,
animal, and insect species than any stretch of “natural” terrain you could
visit on the real twenty-first century Earth. Samples of Earth soil had been
carried to the Moon with all their microorganisms intact. Creepers and
crawlers and flying nuisances had been im-ported by the hundreds of
thousands.
 
You couldn’t understand every relationship in a system, the logic ran. 
People might not like gnats and snakes but that didn’t mean the system
could operate without them. The relationship you didn’t think about might be
the very relationship you would disrupt if you created a wonderful,
super-attractive new species and introduced it into a real habitat on Earth. A
change in relationship X might lead to an unexpected change in relationship
Y. Which would create a disruption in relationship C... .
 
And so on.
 
It was supposed to be one of the basic insights of mod-ern biological
science and George Sparr was himself one of the fully credentialed, fully
trained professionals who turned that science into products people would
voluntarily purchase in the free market. The fact was, however, that he 
hated insects and snakes. He could have lived his whole life without one
second of contact with the small-est, most innocuous member of either
evolutionary line. What he liked was riding along in a fully enclosed,
air-conditioned or heated (depending on the season) auto-mobile, with half
a dozen of his friends chattering away on the communications screen, while
a first class, state-of-the-art control system guided him along a first class,
state-of-the-art highway to a building where he would work in air-conditioned
or heated ease and continue to be totally indifferent to temperature,
humidity, illumination, or precipitation.
 
Which was what he had had. Along with pizzas, steak, tacos, turkey
club sandwiches, and a thousand other items that had flavor and texture
and the great virtue that they were not powdered rice flavored with
powdered flavor.
 
* * * *
 
There had been women whose hair tossed across their necks as they gave
him little glances across their music stands while they played quartets with

him. (He had made the right decision, he had soon realized, when he had
cho-sen the viola. The world was full of violinists and cellists looking for
playing partners who could fill in the middle harmonies.) There had even
been the pleasure of express-ing your undiluted contempt for the human
robots who were hustling like mad in China, Thailand, India, and all the other
countries where people had discovered they, too, could enjoy the
satisfactions of electronic entertainment, hundred year lifespans, and
lifelong struggles against obe-sity and high cholesterol levels.
 
* * * *
 
George Sparr was definitely not a robot. Robots lived to work. Humans
worked to live. Work was a means, not an end. Pleasure was an end. Art
was an end. Love and friendship were ends.
 
George had worked for four different commercial or-ganizations in the
eleven years since he had received his Ph.D. He had left every one of them
with a glowing rec-ommendation. Every manager who had ever given him
an evaluation had agreed he was a wonderful person to have on your
payroll on the days when he was actually phys-ically present. And actually
concentrating on the job you were paying him to do.
 
* * * *
 
The dogs weren’t robots, either. They were real muscle-and-tooth living
organisms, and they had him boxed in— right and left, front and back, with
one prowling in reserve—before he heard the first warning growl. The light
mounted on the dog in the front position overwhelmed his goggles before
the control system could react. An ampli-fied female voice blared at him
from somewhere beyond the glare.
 
“Stand absolutely still. There is no possibility the dogs can be outrun.
You will not be harmed if you stand ab-solutely still.”
 
She was speaking complete sentences of formal Techno-Mandarin
but the learning program she had used hadn’t eliminated her
accent—whatever the accent was. It didn’t matter. He didn’t have to
understand every word. He knew the dogs were there. He knew the dogs
had teeth. He knew the teeth could cut through his suit.
 
* * * *
 
“I’m afraid you may have a serious problem, patriot. As far as I can see,
there’s only one candidate for the identity of this director they told you

about—assuming they were telling you the truth, of course.”
 
The ecosystem was surrounded by tunnels that con-tained work
spaces and living quarters. They had put him in a room that looked like it
was supposed to be some kind of art gallery. Half the space on the walls
was covered with watercolors, prints, and freehand crayon work. Shelves
held rock sculptures. He was still wearing his suit and his goggles, but the
goggles had adjusted to the il-lumination and he could see the lighting and
framing had obviously been directed by professional-level programs.
 
They had left him alone twice, but there had been no danger he would
damage anything. The dog sitting two steps from his armchair took care of
that.
 
The man sitting in the other armchair was an American and he was
doing his best to make this a one-immigrant-to-another conversation. He
happened to be the kind of big-bellied, white-faced, fast-food glutton
George particularly disliked; but he hadn’t picked up the contempt ra-diating
from George’s psyche. He probably wouldn’t, ei-ther, given the fact that he
had to observe his surroundings through the fat molecules that puffed up
his eyelids and floated in his brain.
 
George could understand people who choked their ar-teries eating
steaks and lobster. But when they did it stuff-ing down food that had less
flavor than the containers it came in ...
 
“Do you understand who Ms. Chao is?” big-belly said.
 
George shrugged. “You can’t do much biodesign with-out learning
something about Ms. Chao.”
 
The puffy head nodded once. They hadn’t asked George about his
vocational history but he was assuming they had looked at the information
he had posted in the databanks. The woman had asked him for his name
right after she had taken him into custody and he had given it to her without
a fuss.
 
“Your brag screen looked very promising, patriot. It looks like you
might have made it to the big leagues under the right circumstances.”
 
“I worked for four of the largest R&D companies in the United
States.”
 
“But you never made it to the big leagues, right?”

 
George focused his attention on his arms and legs and consciously
made himself relax. He pasted a smile on his face, and tried to make it big
enough so that Mr. Styrofoam could see it through his eye slits.
 
“The closest I ever got to the other side of the Pacific was a weekend
conference on La Jolla Beach.”
 
“That’s closer than I ever got. I was supposed to be a hardwired
program genius—a Prince of the Nerds him-self—right up to the moment I
got my transcript certified. I thought if I came here I could show them what
somebody with my brain circuits could do. And make it to Shanghai the long
way round.”
 
George nodded: the same sympathetic nod and the same
sympathetic expression—he hoped it was sympathetic anyway—that he
offered all the people who told him the same kind of story when they sat
beside him on the trans-portation carts. Half of them usually threw in a few
re-marks to the effect that “doughfaces” didn’t stand a chance anymore. He
would usually nod in sympathy when they said that, too, but he wasn’t sure
that would be a good idea in this situation. His interrogator was putting on a
good act, but the guy could be Ms. Chao’s own son, for all George knew.
George had never seen an Asian who looked that gross, but Styrofoam’s
mother could have de-cided anybody cursed with American genes had to
possess a special, uniquely American variation on the human di-gestive
tract.
 
“The database says you’re a musician.”
 
“I’ve been working in a restaurant. I bought a perfor-mance system
when I was on Earth—one of the best.”
 
“And now you’re serenading the sages and samurai while they dine.”
 
“That’s why I’m here. They told me I’d be thrown out of my job if I
turned them down.”
 
“Ms. Chao had a husband. Mr. Tan. Do you know him?”
 
“I’ve heard about the Tan family. They’re big in Co-pernicus, right?”
 
“They’re one of the families that control the Copernicus industrial
complex. And make it such a wonderful place to work and raise children.
This Mr. Tan—it’s clear he’s connected, but nobody knows how much. Ms.

Chao mar-ried him. They went through a divorce. Somehow he’s still sitting
on the board. With lots of shares.”
 
“And he thinks his ex-wife is trying to put something over on him? Is
that what this is all about?”
 
Chubby hands dug into the arms of the other chair. Arm muscles
struggled against the low lunar gravity as they raised the bloated body to an
upright position. The Prince of the Nerds turned toward the door and let
George admire the width of his waistline as he made his exit.
 
“You’re the one who’s supposed to be coming up with answers,
patriot. We’re supposed to be the people with the questions.”
 
* * * *
 
There was a timestrip built into the base of George’s right glove. It now
read 3:12. When they had brought him into the working and living area, it
had read 3:46.
 
George’s suit was totally self-contained. He could breathe and
re-breathe the same air over and over again. But nothing comes free.
Bacteria recycled the air as it passed through the filtering system. Other
bacteria generated the chemicals in the organic battery that powered the
circulation system. Both sets of bacteria drew their energy from a sugar
syrup. In three hours and twelve minutes, the syrup would be exhausted.
And George could choose between two options. He could open the suit. Or
he could smother to death.
 
* * * *
 
The second interrogator was a bony, stoop shouldered woman. She spoke
English with a British accent but her hand gestures and her general air of
weary cynicism looked European to George’s eye. She glanced at the
timestrip—it now read 2:58—and sat down without mak-ing any comments.
 
The woman waved her hand as if she was chasing smoke away from
her face. “‘You were hired by three people. They coerced you. They
claimed you would lose your job if you didn’t work for them.”
 
“I didn’t have any choice. I could come here or I could find a good
space to beg. Believe me—this is the last place I want to be.”
 
“You’d rather play little tunes in a restaurant than work in a major

ecosystem? Even though your screens say you’re a trained, experienced
biodesigner?”
 
George offered her one of his more sincere smiles. “Ac-tually, we
play almost everything we want to most of the time. Mozart quintets. Faure.
Kryzwicki. Nobody listens anyway.”
 
“The three men who hired you told you they were hired by Mr. Tan. Is
that correct?”
 
* * * *
 
So far George had simply told them the truth—whatever they wanted to
know. Now he knew he had to think. Was she telling him they wanted him to
testify against Mr. Tan? Was Ms. Chao trying to get something on her
ex-husband?
 
Was it possible they had something else in mind? Could they be
testing him in some way?
 
“They’re very tough people,” George said. “They made a lot of
threats.”
 
“They told you all the things Mr. Tan could do if you talked? They
described his connections?”
 
“They made some very big threats. Terminating my job was only part
of it. That’s all I can tell you. They made some very big threats.”
 
The woman stood up. She bent over his timestrip. She raised her
head and ran her eyes over his suit.
 
* * * *
 
George didn’t have to tell the canaries he didn’t want to join them. Nobody
wanted to be a canary. In theory, ca-naries didn’t have it bad. They didn’t
pay rent. The meals they ate were provided free, so their diets could be
mon-itored. They got all the medical care they needed and some they
could have done without. They could save their wages. They could work
their way out of their cage.
 
Somehow, it didn’t work that way. There was always something extra
you couldn’t do without—videos, games, a better violin to help you pass the
time. The artificial ecosystems were a little over thirty years old. So far,

approximately fifteen people had actually left them while they still had the
ability to eat and drink and do anything of consequence with women whose
hair tossed around their neck while they played Smetana’s first quartet.
 
And what would you really have, when you added it up? George had
done the arithmetic. After twenty-five years in an ecosystem—if you did
everything right—you could live in the same kind of room he was living in
now, in the same kind of “neighborhood.” With the same kind of people.
 
 The other possibility would be to buy yourself a return trip to Earth.
You’d even have some money left over when you stepped off the shuttle.
 
* * * *
 
The timestrip read 2:14 when the woman came back. This time she put a
glass bottle on a shelf near the door. George couldn’t read the label but he
could see the green and blue logo. The thick brown syrup in the bottle
would keep the bacteria in his life support system functioning for at least
ten hours.
 
* * * *
 
He was perfectly willing to lie. He had no trouble with that. If they wanted
him to claim his three buddies had told him they were working for Mr. Tan,
then he would stand up in front of the cameras, and place his hand on the
American flag, or a leather bound copy of the last printed edition of The
Handbook of Chemistry and Phys-ics, or some similar object of
reverence, and swear that he had clearly heard one of his abductors say
they were employees of the said Mr. Tan. That wasn’t the problem.
 
Should he lie before the canaries let him out? And hope they would
let him out? Or should he insist they let him out first? Before he perjured
himself?
 
And what if that wasn’t what they wanted? What if there was
something else going on here? Something he didn’t really understand?
 
The people he was talking to were just the fronts. Back in the city
there were offices and labs where the babus who really counted made the
real choices. Somewhere in one of those offices, somebody was looking at
him through one of the cameras mounted in the corners of the room. Right
now, when he looked up at the camera in the front left-hand corner, he was
looking right into the eyes of someone who was sitting in front of a screen

sixty kilometers away.
 
If they would take away the cameras, he could just ask her. Just tell
me what they want, lady. We‘re both crawl-ing around at the bottom of
the food chain. Tell me what I should do. Will they let me out of here if I
cooperate first? Will I get a better deal if I tough it out right to the last
minute? Are all of you really working for Mr. Tan?
 
And what would he have done with her answers when he got them?
Did any of the people in this place under-stand the situation any better than
he did? In the city, he hobbled around in a permanent psychological haze,
sur-rounded by people who made incomprehensible mouth noises and
hurried from one place to another on incom-prehensible missions. In the
ecosystem, the canaries put-tered with their odd jobs and created their
picture of the world from the information that trickled onto their screens.
 
* * * *
 
“I understand there’s a visitors’ lounge attached to the outside of the
ecosystem,” George said. 
 
“And?” the woman said.
 
“I’ll be glad to tell you anything I know. I just want to get out of
here—out of the system itself. There’s no way I can get away if you let me
get that far—just to the lounge. I’ll still need transportation back to the city,
right?”
 
The woman stood up. She stopped in front of the syrup bottle and
picked it up. She turned it around in her hand as if she were reading the
label. She put it back on the shelf. She glanced at the dog. She slipped out
the door.
 
* * * *
 
The timestrip read 0:54 the next time the woman came back. The dog
turned her way and she shook her head when she saw the soulful look in its
eyes.
 
“You’re putting a strain on his toilet training,” the woman said.
 
“Suppose I do give you a statement? Is there any guar-antee you’ll let
me go?”

 
“Are you trying to bargain with us?”
 
“Would you expect me to do anything else?”
 
“You think you’re better than us? You think you de-serve all that 
opportunity you thought they were going to give you when you left Earth?”
 
George shrugged. “I couldn’t get a job on Earth. Any kind of job. I just
came here to survive.”
 
“They wouldn’t even pay you to play that music you like?”
 
“On Earth? There would have been twenty thousand people lined up
ahead of me.”
 
“There’s no way you can bargain with us, George. You answer the
questions. We relay the answers. They decide what to do. There’s only one
thing I can guarantee.”
 
“In fifty-four minutes, I’ll have to open the suit and stay here.”
 
“Right.”
 
* * * *
 
They didn’t let him out when they had his statement. In-stead the woman
poured syrup into the flask that fueled his life support system. Then she
walked out and left him sitting there.
 
The urine collection system on his leg was a brand-name piece of
equipment but he couldn’t empty the re-ceptacle without opening the suit.
He had already used the system once, about an hour after they had
captured him. He didn’t know what would happen the next time he used it.
No one had thought about the possibility he might wear the suit more than
five hours.
 
* * * *
 
The woman smiled when she reentered the room and caught him fidgeting.
The first dog had been replaced a few minutes after it had communicated
its message but no one even mentioned his problem.
 

The woman had him stand up in the middle of the room and face the
left-hand camera. He repeated all his state-ments. He told them, once
again, that the guy with the scarred fingers had mentioned Mr. Tan by name.
 
The timestrip said 3:27 when they left him alone this time. They had
given him a full five hour refill when they had poured in the syrup.
 
* * * *
 
The timestrip read 0:33 when they put him in the security portal. Big-belly
and the woman and three other people stared through the little square
windows. A no-nonsense voice talked him through the procedure in Hong
Kong British.
 
He was reminded that a lapse in the procedure could result in
long-term isolation. He stood in an indentation in the floor. He stuck his
hands into a pair of holes above his head. Robot arms stripped the suit.
Heat and radiation poured into the portal.
 
George had never been a reader, but he had played in orchestras that
accompanied two operatic versions of the Orpheus legend. He kept his
eyes half shut and tried not to look at the door that would take him back to
the eco-system. When he did glance back, after the other door had swung
open, the woman and big-belly looked, it seemed to him, like disappointed
gargoyles. He started to wave at them and decided that would still be too
risky. He walked through the door with his shoulders hunched. And started
looking for the two things he needed most: clothes and a bathroom.
 
* * * *
 
The lounge was just a place where drivers and visitors could stretch their
legs. There was a bathroom. There was a water fountain. There was a
kitchen that checked his credit when he stuck his thumb in the ID unit. And
offered him a menu that listed the kind of stuff he had been eating since he
arrived on the Moon.
 
He queried taxi services on the phone screen and dis-covered a trip
back to the city would cost him a week’s wages. He had never been naked
in a public place before and he didn’t know how to act. Were the canaries
watch-ing him on the single camera mounted in the ceiling?
 
“I didn’t do this because I wanted to,” he told the cam-eras. “I don’t
even know what’s going on. I just want to get out of here. Is that too much to
ask?”

 
* * * *
 
A truck entered the garage space under the lounge. A woman who was old
enough to be his mother appeared in one of the doors and handed him a
wad of cloth. The shirt was too long for him but it was the only thing she
had. He stood around for an hour while she ate a meal and talked to people
on the phone. He couldn’t shake off the feeling he was wearing a dress.
 
* * * *
 
He had missed a full shift at the Twelve Sages Cafe but the first violinist
had left him a message assuring him they had only hired a temporary
replacement. They could all see he was jumpy and preoccupied when he
joined them at the start of the next shift but no one said anything. He had
always been popular with the people he played with. He had the right
temperament for a viola player. He took his part seriously but he
understood the give-and-take that is one of the primary requirements of
good chamber play-ing.
 
* * * *
 
The big guy lumbered into the Twelve Sages Cafe a month later. He smiled
at the musicians playing in the corner. He threw George a big wave as he
sat down.
 
They were playing the slow movement of Mendels-sohn’s A Major
quintet. George actually stumbled out of the room with his hands clutching
his stomach. He man-aged to come back before the next movement
started but he lost his place three times.
 
The second violinist took him aside after the last move-ment and told
him he was putting all their jobs in danger. She came back to his apartment
after the shift ended.
 
* * * *
 
Six months later a woman came up to George during a break and asked
him if he gave lessons in style, interpre-tation, and the other subjects you
could still teach. Eight months after that he had seven students. The
second vi-olinist moved in with him.
 
Then the first violinist discovered one of the most fa-mous
restaurants in the city was looking for a new quartet. And George did

something that surprised him just as much as it surprised every one else.
He told the first violinist they should abandon the other viola player, develop
their interpretation of two of the most famous quartets in the repertoire, and
audition for the other job. They would have to spend all their leisure,
non-sleeping hours study-ing Chi-Li’s Opus 12 and Beethoven’s Opus 59,
No. 2, but the second violinist backed him up. The other two were dubious
but they caught fire as George guided them through the recordings and
interpretative commentaries he selected from the databanks. The
restaurant owner and her husband actually stood up and applauded when
they fin-ished the last note of the Chi-Li.
 
The restaurant paid unskilled labor real money. It was also a place,
George discovered, where some of the cus-tomers actually listened to the
music. They were busy people—men and women who were making
fortunes. Someday they might buy performance systems themselves and
enjoy the pleasure of experiencing music from the inside. For now, they sat
at their tables like barons and duchesses and let the commoners do the
work. Once every three or four days somebody dropped the musicians a tip
that was bigger than all the money their old quintet had received in a week.
 
The other members of the quartet knew they owed it all to George.
Anyone could buy a performance system and play the notes. George was
the guy who understood the shadings and the instrumental interactions that
turned sounds into real music. He had created a foursome that worked well
together—a unit that accepted his ideas with-out a lot of argument.
 
George had occasionally exercised that kind of leader-ship when he
had been playing for pleasure on Earth. Now he did it with all the intensity of
someone who knew his livelihood depended on it.
 
* * * *
 
George searched the databanks twice. He didn’t like to spend money on
things he didn’t need, even after he be-gan to feel more secure. As far as
he could tell, Ms. Chao was still the chief designer in her company. Mr. Tan
had resigned from the board four months after George’s visit to the canary
cage. Then he had rejoined the board six months later. It occurred to
George that Ms. Chao had somehow tricked Mr. Tan into doing something
that looked stupid. But why did she let him rejoin the board later?
 
The second violinist thought it might have something to do with family
ties.
 
“Everybody says the Overseas Chinese have always been big on

family ties,” the second violinist pointed out. “Why should the off-Earth
Chinese be any different?”
 
The whole business became even more puzzling when one of
George’s students told him she was really glad “Tan Zem” had
recommended him. Three of his first four students, George discovered,
had looked him up because Mr. Tan had steered them his way. Had Mr. Tan
felt guilty? Had he been motivated by some kind of criminal code of honor?
Finally George stopped trying to figure it out. He had a bigger apartment.
He had a better job. He had the second violinist. He had become—who
would have believed it?—the kind of immigrant the other im-migrants talked
about when they wanted to convince themselves a determined North
American could create a place for himself in the new society humanity was
build-ing on the Moon.
 
He had become—by immigrant standards—a success.
 
* * * *

