
Topics in Chromatic Graph Theory
Chromatic graph theory is a thriving area that uses various ideas of ‘colouring’ (of vertices, edges, etc.) to
explore aspects of graph theory. It has links with other areas of mathematics, including topology, algebra
and geometry, and is increasingly used in such areas as computer networks, where colouring algorithms
form an important feature.
While other books cover portions of the material, no other title has such a wide scope as this one, in
which acknowledged international experts in the ﬁeld provide a broad survey of the subject. All 15
chapters have been carefully edited, with uniform notation and terminology applied throughout. Bjarne
Toft (Odense, Denmark), widely recognized for his substantial contributions to the area, acted as
academic consultant.
The book serves as a valuable reference for researchers and graduate students in graph theory and
combinatorics and as a useful introduction to the topic for mathematicians in related ﬁelds.
lowell w. beineke is Schrey Professor of Mathematics at Indiana University–Purdue University
Fort Wayne (IPFW), where he has worked since receiving his Ph.D. from the University of Michigan
under the guidance of Frank Harary. His graph theory interests include topological graph theory, line
graphs, tournaments, decompositions and vulnerability. He has published over 100 papers in graph theory
and has served as editor of the College Mathematics Journal. With Robin Wilson he has co-edited ﬁve
books in addition to the three earlier volumes in this series. Recent honours include an award instituted in
his name by the College of Arts and Sciences at IPFW and a Certiﬁcate of Meritorious Service from the
Mathematical Association of America.
robin j. wilson is Emeritus Professor of Pure Mathematics at the Open University, UK, and
Emeritus Professor of Geometry at Gresham College, London. After graduating from Oxford, he received
his Ph.D. in number theory from the University of Pennsylvania. He has written and co-edited many
books on graph theory and the history of mathematics, including Introduction to Graph Theory, Four
Colors Sufﬁce and Combinatorics: Ancient & Modern. His combinatorial research interests formerly
included graph colourings and now focus on the history of combinatorics. An enthusiastic popularizer of
mathematics, he has won two awards for his expository writing from the Mathematical Association of
America.


ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MATHEMATICS AND ITS APPLICATIONS
All the titles listed below can be obtained from good booksellers or from Cambridge University
Press. For a complete series listing visit www.cambridge.org/mathematics.
109 J. M. Borwein and J. D. Vanderwerff Convex Functions
110 M.-J. Lai and L. L. Schumaker Spline Functions on Triangulations
111 R. T. Curtis Symmetric Generation of Groups
112 H. Salzmann et al. The Classical Fields
113 S. Peszat and J. Zabczyk Stochastic Partial Differential Equations with L´evy Noise
114 J. Beck Combinatorial Games
115 L. Barreira and Y. Pesin Nonuniform Hyperbolicity
116 D. Z. Arov and H. Dym J-Contractive Matrix Valued Functions and Related Topics
117 R. Glowinski, J.-L. Lions and J. He Exact and Approximate Controllability for Distributed Parameter
Systems
118 A. A. Borovkov and K. A. Borovkov Asymptotic Analysis of Random Walks
119 M. Deza and M. Dutour Sikiri´c Geometry of Chemical Graphs
120 T. Nishiura Absolute Measurable Spaces
121 M. Prest Purity, Spectra and Localisation
122 S. Khrushchev Orthogonal Polynomials and Continued Fractions
123 H. Nagamochi and T. Ibaraki Algorithmic Aspects of Graph Connectivity
124 F. W. King Hilbert Transforms I
125 F. W. King Hilbert Transforms II
126 O. Calin and D.-C. Chang Sub-Riemannian Geometry
127 M. Grabisch et al. Aggregation Functions
128 L. W. Beineke and R. J. Wilson (eds.) with J. L. Gross and T. W. Tucker Topics in Topological Graph Theory
129 J. Berstel, D. Perrin and C. Reutenauer Codes and Automata
130 T. G. Faticoni Modules over Endomorphism Rings
131 H. Morimoto Stochastic Control and Mathematical Modeling
132 G. Schmidt Relational Mathematics
133 P. Kornerup and D. W. Matula Finite Precision Number Systems and Arithmetic
134 Y. Crama and P. L. Hammer (eds.) Boolean Models and Methods in Mathematics, Computer Science, and
Engineering
135 V. Berth´e and M. Rigo (eds.) Combinatorics, Automata and Number Theory
136 A. Krist´aly, V. D. Rˇadulescu and C. Varga Variational Principles in Mathematical Physics, Geometry, and
Economics
137 J. Berstel and C. Reutenauer Noncommutative Rational Series with Applications
138 B. Courcelle and J. Engelfriet Graph Structure and Monadic Second-Order Logic
139 M. Fiedler Matrices and Graphs in Geometry
140 N. Vakil Real Analysis through Modern Inﬁnitesimals
141 R. B. Paris Hadamard Expansions and Hyperasymptotic Evaluation
142 Y. Crama and P. L. Hammer Boolean Functions
143 A. Arapostathis, V. S. Borkar and M. K. Ghosh Ergodic Control of Diffusion Processes
144 N. Caspard, B. Leclerc and B. Monjardet Finite Ordered Sets
145 D. Z. Arov and H. Dym Bitangential Direct and Inverse Problems for Systems of Integral and Differential
Equations
146 G. Dassios Ellipsoidal Harmonics
147 L. W. Beineke and R. J. Wilson (eds.) with O. R. Oellermann Topics in Structural Graph Theory
148 L. Berlyand, A. G. Kolpakov and A. Novikov Introduction to the Network Approximation Method
for Materials Modeling
149 M. Baake and U. Grimm Aperiodic Order I: A Mathematical Invitation
150 J. Borwein et al. Lattice Sums Then and Now
151 R. Schneider Convex Bodies: The Brunn–Minkowski Theory (Second Edition)
152 G. Da Prato and J. Zabczyk Stochastic Equations in Inﬁnite Dimensions (Second Edition)
153 D. Hofmann, G. J. Seal and W. Tholen (eds.) Monoidal Topology
154 M. Cabrera Garc´ıa and ´A. Rodr´ıguez Palacios Non–Associative Normed Algebras I: The Vidav–Palmer and
Gelfand–Naimark Theorems
155 C. F. Dunkl and Y. Xu Orthogonal Polynomials of Several Variables (Second Edition)
156 L. W. Beineke and R. J. Wilson (eds.) with B. Toft Topics in Chromatic Graph Theory
157 T. Mora Solving Polynomial Equation Systems III: Algebraic Solving
158 T. Mora Solving Polynomial Equation Systems IV: Buchberger’s Theory and Beyond

Above: Francis Guthrie, who proposed the four-colour problem, and Kenneth Appel and
Wolfgang Haken, who solved it. Below: Gerhard Ringel (right) and Ted Youngs, who solved
the Heawood conjecture. (Courtesy of Robin Wilson.)

Topics in Chromatic Graph Theory
Edited by
L OW E L L W. B E I N E K E
Indiana University–Purdue University
Fort Wayne
RO B I N J . W I L S O N
The Open University
and the London School of Economics
Academic Consultant
B JA R N E TO F T
University of Southern Denmark, Odense

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107033504
c⃝Cambridge University Press 2015
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2015
Printed in the United Kingdom by Clays, St Ives plc
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication data
Topics in chromatic graph theory / edited by Lowell W. Beineke,
Indiana University-Purdue University, Fort Wayne, Robin J. Wilson,
The Open University and the London School of Economics ;
academic consultant, Bjarne Toft, University of Southern Denmark, Odense.
pages
cm. – (Encyclopedia of mathematics and its applications ; 156)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-107-03350-4 (Hardback)
1. Graph coloring–Data processing.
2. Graph theory–Data processing.
I. Beineke, Lowell W., editor.
II. Wilson, Robin J., editor.
QA166.247.T67 2015
511′.56–dc23
2014035297
ISBN 978-1-107-03350-4 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication,
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.

Contents
Foreword by Bjarne Toft
page xiii
Preface
xv
Preliminaries
1
LOWELL W. BEINEKE and ROBIN J. WILSON
1. Graph theory
1
2. Graph colourings
9
1
Colouring graphs on surfaces
13
BOJAN MOHAR
1. Introduction
13
2. Planar graphs are 4-colourable and 5-choosable
14
3. Heawood’s formula
18
4. Colouring with few colours
20
5. Gr¨otzsch’s theorem and its generalizations
23
6. Colouring–ﬂow duality
25
7. The acyclic chromatic number
29
8. Degenerate colourings
30
9. The star chromatic number
31
10. Summary
32
2
Brooks’s theorem
36
MICHAEL STIEBITZ and BJARNE TOFT
1. Introduction
36
2. Proofs of Brooks’s theorem
37
3. Critical graphs with few edges
41
4. Bounding χ by  and ω
45
5. Graphs with χ close to 
48
6. Notes
50

viii
Contents
3
Chromatic polynomials
56
BILL JACKSON
1. Introduction
56
2. Deﬁnitions and elementary properties
57
3. Log concavity and other inequalities
59
4. Chromatic roots
60
5. Related polynomials
64
4
Hadwiger’s conjecture
73
KEN-ICHI KAWARABAYASHI
1. Introduction
73
2. Complete graph minors: early results
74
3. Contraction-critical graphs
75
4. Algorithmic aspects of the weak conjecture
79
5. Algorithmic aspects of the strong conjecture
81
6. The odd conjecture
82
7. Independent sets and Hadwiger’s conjecture
85
8. Other variants of the conjecture
86
9. Open problems
89
5
Edge-colourings
94
JESSICA MCDONALD
1. Introduction
94
2. Elementary sets and Kempe changes
96
3. Tashkinov trees and upper bounds
97
4. Towards the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture
101
5. Extreme graphs
103
6. The classiﬁcation problem and critical graphs
105
7. The dichotomy of edge-colouring
108
8. Final thoughts
109
6
List-colourings
114
MICHAEL STIEBITZ and MARGIT VOIGT
1. Introduction
114
2. Orientations and list-colourings
118
3. Planar graphs
121
4. Precolouring extensions
128
5. Notes
129
7
Perfect graphs
137
NICOLAS TROTIGNON
1. Introduction
137

Contents
ix
2. Lov´asz’s perfect graph theorem
139
3. Basic graphs
141
4. Decompositions
142
5. The strategy of the proof
146
6. Book from the Proof
148
7. Recognizing perfect graphs
151
8. Berge trigraphs
152
9. Even pairs: a shorter proof of the SPGT
154
10. Colouring perfect graphs
155
8
Geometric graphs
161
ALEXANDER SOIFER
1. The chromatic number of the plane
161
2. The polychromatic number: lower bounds
162
3. The de Bruijn–Erd˝os reduction to ﬁnite sets
165
4. The polychromatic number: upper bounds
167
5. The continuum of 6-colourings
169
6. Special circumstances
171
7. Space explorations
172
8. Rational spaces
173
9. One odd graph
175
10. Inﬂuence of set theory axioms
175
11. Predicting the future
177
9
Integer ﬂows and orientations
181
HONGJIAN LAI, RONG LUO and CUN-QUAN ZHANG
1. Introduction
181
2. Basic properties
183
3. 4-ﬂows
185
4. 3-ﬂows
185
5. 5-ﬂows
187
6. Bounded orientations and circular ﬂows
188
7. Modulo orientations and (2 + 1/t)-ﬂows
190
8. Contractible conﬁgurations
191
9. Related problems
194
10
Colouring random graphs
199
ROSS J. KANG and COLIN MCDIARMID
1. Introduction
199
2. Dense random graphs
202
3. Sparse random graphs
208
4. Random regular graphs
214

x
Contents
5. Random geometric graphs
217
6. Random planar graphs and related classes
219
7. Other colourings
222
11
Hypergraph colouring
230
CSILLA BUJT ´AS, ZSOLT TUZA and VITALY VOLOSHIN
1. Introduction
230
2. Proper vertex- and edge-colourings
234
3. C-colourings
238
4. Colourings of mixed hypergraphs
243
5. Colour-bounded and stably bounded hypergraphs
247
6. Conclusion
251
12
Chromatic scheduling
255
DOMINIQUE DE WERRA and ALAIN HERTZ
1. Introduction
255
2. Colouring with weights on the vertices
256
3. List-colouring
258
4. Mixed graph colouring
260
5. Co-colouring
261
6. Colouring with preferences
262
7. Bandwidth colouring
264
8. Edge-colouring
266
9. Sports scheduling
268
10. Balancing requirements
269
11. Compactness
273
12. Conclusion
274
13
Graph colouring algorithms
277
THORE HUSFELDT
1. Introduction
277
2. Greedy colouring
279
3. Recursion
284
4. Subgraph expansion
287
5. Local augmentation
289
6. Vector colouring
292
7. Reductions
296
8. Conclusion
301
14
Colouring games
304
ZSOLT TUZA and XUDING ZHU
1. Introduction
304

Contents
xi
2. Marking games
307
3. Greedy colouring games
312
4. Playing on the edge-set
312
5. Oriented and directed graphs
313
6. Asymmetric games
315
7. Relaxed games
316
8. Paintability
316
9. Achievement and avoidance games
321
10. The acyclic orientation game
322
15
Unsolved graph colouring problems
327
TOMMY JENSEN and BJARNE TOFT
1. Introduction
327
2. Complete graphs and chromatic numbers
328
3. Graphs on surfaces
333
4. Degrees and colourings
339
5. Edge-colourings
344
6. Flow problems
348
7. Concluding remarks
350
Notes on contributors
358
Index
363


Foreword
Bjarne Toft
The four colour problem is
the tip of the iceberg,
the thin end of the wedge
and the ﬁrst cuckoo of spring.
W. T. Tutte, 1978
A fundamental process in mathematics is that of partitioning a set of objects into
classes according to certain rules. Chromatic graph theory deals with a situation
where the rules are almost as simple as one can imagine: for each pair of objects
we are told whether they may be put in the same class or not. However, the simplicity
of the rules does not mean that the problems encountered are simple – on the contrary.
Starting from the four-colour problem around 1850, the theory has developed into a
many-sided body of problems, theories, results and applications, and even though
many problems have been solved, sometimes in surprising ways, the number of
simply stated but challenging problems remains large and growing. This explains
the popularity of the area and why it attracts so many active researchers.
This book presents a picture of this many-sided body as it has evolved so far.
Experts from various parts of the area present main ideas, methods and results, and
describe what is important. Map-colouring dominated the ﬁeld for many years, but
with authors like K. Wagner, H. Hadwiger, R. L. Brooks, W. T. Tutte, G. A. Dirac,
G. Haj´os, T. Gallai and P. Erd˝os, among others, the theory became more general,
abstract and applicable.
The chapters cover much ground. The ﬁrst one outlines the general theory
of colouring graphs on surfaces. Other types of graphs, such as perfect graphs,
geometric graphs, random graphs and hypergraphs are then treated in chapters of
their own, as are special types of colourings, such as edge-colourings, list-colourings
and integer ﬂows. Classical topics, such as Brooks’s theorem, Hadwiger’s conjecture
and chromatic polynomials, are described and updated to current knowledge. Appli-
cations and relations to other ﬁelds, such as scheduling, games and algorithms, are
also included. The ﬁnal chapter presents some 20 unsolved problems: solutions to
most of these are probably beyond what can be achieved with current knowledge.
The area continues to surprise, and the achievements of the past few years in
particular have witnessed a treasure trove of results, methods, ideas and problems.
We now know more of W. T. Tutte’s iceberg, even if much still lies hidden below the
surface, waiting for discovery!


Preface
The ﬁeld of graph theory has undergone tremendous growth during the past century.
As recently as the 1950s, the graph theory community had few members and most
were in Europe and North America; today there are hundreds of graph theorists and
they span the globe. By the mid 1970s, the subject had reached the point where
we perceived a need for a collection of surveys of various areas of graph theory:
the result was our three-volume series Selected Topics in Graph Theory, comprising
articles written by distinguished experts and then edited into a common style. Since
then, the transformation of the subject has continued, with individual branches (such
as chromatic graph theory) expanding to the point of having important subdivisions
themselves. This inspired us to conceive of a new series of books, each a collection
of articles within a particular area of graph theory written by experts within that area.
The ﬁrst three of these books were the companion volumes to the present one, on
algebraic graph theory, topological graph theory and structural graph theory. This is
thus the fourth volume in the series.
A special feature of these books is the engagement of academic consultants (here,
Bjarne Toft) to advise us on topics to be included and authors to be invited. We believe
that this has been successful, with the result that the chapters of each book cover the
full range of area within the given area. In the present case, the area is chromatic
graph theory, with chapters written by authors from around the world. Another
important feature is that, where possible, we have imposed uniform terminology and
notation throughout, in the belief that this will aid readers in going from one chapter
to another. For a similar reason, we have not tried to remove a small amount of
material common to some of the chapters.
We hope that these features will facilitate usage of the book in advanced courses
and seminars. We sincerely thank the authors for cooperating in these efforts, even
though it sometimes required their abandoning some of their favourite conventions –
for example, computer scientists commonly use the term node, whereas graph
theorists use vertex; not surprisingly, the graph theorists prevailed on this one. We
also asked our contributors to endure the ordeal of having their early versions
subjected to detailed critical reading. We believe that as a result the ﬁnal product

xvi
Preface
is signiﬁcantly better than it would otherwise have been (as a collection of individual
chapters with differing styles and terminology). We want to express our heartfelt
appreciation to all of our contributors for their cooperation in these endeavours.
We extend special thanks to Bjarne Toft for his service as Academic Consultant –
his advice has been invaluable. We are also grateful to Cambridge University Press
for publishing these volumes; in particular, we thank Roger Astley, Charlotte Thomas
and Clare Dennison for their advice, support, patience and cooperation. Finally we
extend our appreciation to several universities for the ways in which they have
assisted with our project: the ﬁrst editor (LWB) is grateful to his home institution
of Indiana University–Purdue University Fort Wayne, while the second editor (RJW)
has had the cooperation of the Open University as well as the Mathematical Institute
and Pembroke College in Oxford University.
LOWELL W. BEINEKE
ROBIN J. WILSON

Preliminaries
LOWELL W. BEINEKE and ROBIN J. WILSON
1. Graph theory
2. Graph colourings
References
1. Graph theory
This section presents the basic deﬁnitions, terminology and notation of graph theory,
along with some fundamental results. Further information can be found in the many
standard books on the subject – for example, Bondy and Murty [1], Chartrand,
Lesniak and Zhang [2], Gross and Yellen [3] and West [5], or, for a simpler treatment,
Marcus [4] and Wilson [6].
Graphs
A graph G is a pair of sets (V, E), where V is a ﬁnite non-empty set of elements
called vertices, and E is a ﬁnite set of elements called edges, each of which has two
associated vertices. The sets V and E are the vertex-set and edge-set of G, and are
sometimes denoted by V(G) and E(G). The number of vertices in G is called the
order of G and is usually denoted by n (but sometimes by |G|); the number of edges
is denoted by m. A graph with only one vertex is called trivial.
An edge whose vertices coincide is a loop, and if two edges have the same pair
of associated vertices, they are called multiple edges. In this book, unless otherwise
speciﬁed, graphs are assumed to have neither loops nor multiple edges; that is, they
are taken to be simple. Hence, an edge e can be considered as its associated pair of
vertices, e = {v, w}, usually shortened to vw. An example of a graph of order 5 is
shown in Fig. 1(a).
The complement G of a graph G has the same vertices as G, but two vertices
are adjacent in G if and only if they are not adjacent in G. Figure 1(b) shows the
complement of the graph in Fig. 1(a).

2
Lowell W. Beineke and Robin J. Wilson
G
G
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1.
Adjacency and degrees
The vertices of an edge are its endpoints and the edge is said to join these vertices.
An endpoint v of an edge e = vw and the edge e are incident with each other. Two
vertices that are joined by an edge are called neighbours and are said to be adjacent; if
v and w are adjacent vertices we sometimes write v ∼w, and if they are not adjacent
we write v ≁w. Two edges are adjacent if they have a vertex in common.
The set N(v) of neighbours of a vertex v is called its neighbourhood. If X ⊆V,
then N(X) denotes the set of vertices that are adjacent to some vertex of X.
The degree deg v, or d(v), of a vertex v is the number of its neighbours; in a non-
simple graph, it is the number of occurrences of the vertex as an endpoint of an edge,
with loops counted twice. A vertex of degree 0 is an isolated vertex and one of degree
1 is an end-vertex or leaf. A graph is regular if all of its vertices have the same degree,
and is k-regular if that degree is k; a 3-regular graph is sometimes called cubic. The
maximum degree in a graph G is denoted by (G), or just , and the minimum
degree by δ(G) or δ.
An isomorphism between two graphs G and H is a bijection between their vertex-
sets that preserves both adjacency and non-adjacency. The graphs G and H are
isomorphic, written G ∼= H, if there exists an isomorphism between them.
Independent sets and cliques
A set of vertices of a graph G is an independent set (or stable set) if no two vertices
are adjacent. The independence number (or stability number) α(G) is the size of the
largest such set.
A set of vertices is a clique if all pairs of vertices are adjacent. The clique number
ω(G) is the size of a largest clique.
Walks, paths and cycles
A walk in a graph is a sequence of vertices and edges v0, e1, v1, . . . , ek, vk, in which
the edge ei joins the vertices vi 1 and vi. This walk is said to go from v0 to vk or to

Preliminaries
3
connect v0 and vk, and is called a v0–vk walk. It is frequently shortened to v0v1 · · · vk,
since the edges can be inferred from this. A walk is closed if the ﬁrst and last vertices
are the same. Some important types of walk are the following:
• a path is a walk in which no vertex is repeated
• a cycle is a non-trivial closed walk in which no vertex is repeated, except the ﬁrst
and last
• a trail is a walk in which no edge is repeated
• a circuit is a non-trivial closed trail.
Connectedness and distance
A graph is connected if it has a path connecting each pair of vertices, and
disconnected otherwise. A (connected) component of a graph is a maximal connected
subgraph.
The number of occurrences of edges in a walk is called its length, and in a
connected graph the distance d(v, w) from v to w is the length of a shortest v–w path.
It is easy to check that distance satisﬁes the properties of a metric. The diameter of
a connected graph G is the greatest distance between any pair of vertices in G. If G
has a cycle, the girth of G is the length of a shortest cycle.
A connected graph is Eulerian if it has a closed trail containing all of its edges;
such a trail is an Eulerian trail. A connected graph G is Eulerian if and only if every
vertex of G has even degree. This means that the edge-set of G can be partitioned into
cycles.
A graph of order n is Hamiltonian if it has a cycle of length n, and is pancyclic if
it has a cycle of every length from 3 to n. It is traceable if it has a path through all
vertices. No ‘good’ characterizations of these properties are known.
Bipartite graphs and trees
If the set of vertices of a graph G can be partitioned into two non-empty subsets
so that no edge joins two vertices in the same subset, then G is bipartite. The two
subsets are called partite sets, and if they have orders r and s, G is said to be an r × s
bipartite graph. (For convenience, the graph with one vertex and no edges is also
called bipartite.) Bipartite graphs are characterized by having no cycles of odd length.
Among the bipartite graphs are trees, those connected graphs with no cycles. Any
graph without cycles is a forest; thus, each component of a forest is a tree. Trees have
been characterized in many ways, some of which we give here. For a graph G of
order n, the following statements are equivalent:
• G is connected and has no cycles
• G is connected and has n −1 edges
• G has no cycles and has n −1 edges
• G has exactly one path between any two vertices.

4
Lowell W. Beineke and Robin J. Wilson
The set of trees can also be deﬁned inductively: a single vertex is a tree; and for
n ≥1, the trees with n + 1 vertices are those graphs obtainable from some tree with
n vertices by adding a new vertex adjacent to precisely one of its vertices.
This deﬁnition has a natural extension to higher dimensions. The k-dimensional
trees, or k-trees for short, are deﬁned as follows: the complete graph on k vertices is a
k-tree, and for n ≥k, the k-trees with n + 1 vertices are those graphs obtainable from
some k-tree with n vertices by adding a new vertex adjacent to k mutually adjacent
vertices in the k-tree. Figure 2 shows a tree and a 2-tree.
Fig. 2.
An important concept in the study of graph minors (introduced later) is the tree-
width of a graph G, the minimum dimension of any k-tree that contains G as a
subgraph.
Special graphs
We now introduce some individual types of graph:
• the complete graph Kn has n vertices, each adjacent to all the others
• the null graph Kn has n vertices and no edges
• the path graph Pn consists of the vertices and edges of a path of length n −1
• the cycle graph Cn consists of the vertices and edges of a cycle of length n
• the complete bipartite graph Kr,s is the r × s bipartite graph in which each vertex
is adjacent to all of the vertices in the other partite set
• the complete k-partite graph Kr1,r2,...,rk has its vertices in k sets with orders
r1, r2, . . . , rk, and every vertex is adjacent to all of the vertices in the other sets;
if the k sets all have order r, the graph is denoted by Kk(r).
Examples of these graphs are given in Fig. 3.
Operations on graphs
Let G and H be graphs with disjoint vertex-sets V(G) = {v1, v2, . . . , vr} and
V(H) = {w1, w2, . . . , ws}.

Preliminaries
5
K5:
P5:
K5:
C5:
K3,3:
K3(2):
Fig. 3.
The union G ∪H has vertex-set V(G) ∪V(H) and edge-set E(G) ∪E(H). The union
of k graphs isomorphic to G is denoted by kG.
The join G + H is obtained from G ∪H by adding an edge from each vertex in G to
each vertex in H.
The Cartesian product G × H (or G 2 H) has vertex-set V(G) × V(H), with (vi, wj)
adjacent to (vh, wk) if either vi is adjacent to vh in G and wj = wk, or vi = vh and wj is
adjacent to wk in H; in less formal terms, G × H can be obtained by taking n copies
of H and joining corresponding vertices in different copies whenever there is an edge
in G.
Examples of these binary operations are given in Fig. 4.
Subgraphs and minors
If G and H are graphs with V(H) ⊆V(G) and E(H) ⊆E(G), then H is a subgraph of
G, and is a spanning subgraph if V(H) = V(G). The subgraph ⟨S⟩(or G[S]) induced
by a non-empty set of S of vertices of G is the subgraph H whose vertex-set is S and
whose edge-set consists of those edges of G that join two vertices in S. A subgraph
H of G is called an induced subgraph if H = ⟨V(H)⟩. In Fig. 5, H1 is a spanning
subgraph of G, and H2 is an induced subgraph.
The deletion of a vertex v from a graph G results in the subgraph obtained by
removing v and all of its incident edges; it is denoted by G −v and is the subgraph
induced by V −{v}. More generally, if S is any set of vertices in G, then G −S is the
graph obtained from G by deleting all of the vertices in S and their incident edges;
that is, G−S = ⟨V(G)−S⟩. Similarly, the deletion of an edge e results in the subgraph
G −e and, for any set X of edges, G −X is the graph obtained from G by deleting all
the edges in X.

6
Lowell W. Beineke and Robin J. Wilson
G ¥H:
G+H:
G» H:
G :
H :
Fig. 4.
G:
H1:
H2:
induced subgraph
spanning subgraph
graph
Fig. 5.
If the edge e joins vertices v and w, then the subdivision of e replaces e by a new
vertex u and two new edges vu and uw. Two graphs are homeomorphic if there is
some graph from which each can be obtained by a sequence of subdivisions. The
contraction of e replaces its vertices v and w by a new vertex u, with an edge ux
if v or w is adjacent to x in G. The operations of subdivision and contraction are
illustrated in Fig. 6.
If H can be obtained from G by a sequence of edge-contractions and the removal
of isolated vertices, then G is contractible to H. A minor of G is any graph that can
be obtained from G by a sequence of edge-deletions and edge-contractions, along
with deletions of isolated vertices. Note that if G has a subgraph homeomorphic to
H, then H is a minor of G.
Digraphs
Digraphs are directed analogues of graphs, and thus have many similarities, as well as
some important differences. A digraph (or directed graph) D is a pair of sets (V, A),
where V is a ﬁnite non-empty set of elements called vertices, and A is a set of ordered
pairs of distinct elements of V called arcs. Note that the elements of A are ordered,

Preliminaries
7
v
e
u
u
v
w
w
contraction
subdivision
Fig. 6.
which gives each of them a direction. An example of a digraph, with the directions
indicated by arrows, is shown in Fig. 7.
v3
v2
v1
v4
Fig. 7.
Because of the similarities between graphs and digraphs, we mention only the
main differences here and do not redeﬁne those concepts that carry over easily. An
arc (v, w) in a digraph may be written as vw, and is said to go from v to w, or to go
out of v and into w. In the context of digraphs, walks, paths, cycles, trails and circuits
are all understood to be directed, unless otherwise indicated. A digraph D is strongly
connected or strong if there is a path from each vertex to each of the others; note that
the digraph in Fig. 7 is strong. A strong component is a maximal strongly connected
subgraph. Every vertex is in at least one strong component, and an edge is in a strong
component if and only if it is on a directed cycle.
The out-degree d+(v) of a vertex v in a digraph D is the number of arcs out of v,
and the in-degree d−(v) is the number of arcs into v. The minimum out-degree in a
digraph is denoted by δ+, the minimum in-degree δ−, and the minimum of the two is
denoted by δ.
Connectivity
In this section, we give the primary deﬁnitions and some of the basic results on
connectivity, including two versions of the most important one of all, Menger’s
theorem.

8
Lowell W. Beineke and Robin J. Wilson
A vertex v in a graph G is a cut-vertex if G −v has more components than G. For a
connected graph, this is equivalent to saying that G−v is disconnected, and that there
exist vertices u and w, different from v, for which v is on every u–w path. It is easy to
see that every non-trivial graph has at least two vertices that are not cut-vertices.
A non-trivial graph is non-separable if it is connected and has no cut-vertices.
Note that under this deﬁnition the graph K2 is non-separable. There are many
characterizations of the other non-separable graphs, as the following statements are
all equivalent for a connected graph G with at least three vertices:
• G is non-separable
• every two vertices of G share a cycle
• every two edges of G share a cycle
• for any three vertices u, v and w in G, there is a v–w path that contains u
• for any three vertices u, v and w in G, there is a v–w path that does not contain u.
A block in a graph is a maximal non-separable subgraph. Each edge of a graph
lies in exactly one block, while each vertex that is not an isolated vertex lies in at
least one block, those that are in more than one block being cut-vertices. The graph
in Fig. 8 has four blocks.
Fig. 8.
The basic idea of non-separability has a natural generalization: a graph G is
k-connected if the removal of fewer than k vertices always leaves a non-trivial
connected graph. The main result on graph connectivity – indeed, it might well
be called the Fundamental theorem of connectivity – is Menger’s theorem, ﬁrst
published in 1927. It has many equivalent forms, and the ﬁrst that we give here is the
vertex version. Paths joining the same pair of vertices are called internally disjoint if
they have no other vertices in common.
Menger’s theorem (vertex version) A graph is k-connected if and only if every pair
of vertices are joined by k internally disjoint paths.
The connectivity κ(G) of a graph G is the maximum non-negative integer k for
which G is k-connected; for example, the connectivity of the complete graph Kn is
n −1, and a graph has connectivity 0 if and only if it is trivial or disconnected.

Preliminaries
9
There is an analogous body of material that involves edges rather than vertices,
and because of the similarities, we treat it in less detail.
An edge e is a cut-edge (or bridge) of a graph G if G−e has more components than
G. (In contrast to the situation with vertices, the removal of an edge cannot increase
the number of components by more than 1.) An edge e is a cut-edge if and only if
there exist vertices v and w for which e is on every v–w path. The cut-edges in a graph
are also characterized by the property of not lying on a cycle; thus, a graph is a forest
if and only if every edge is a cut-edge. Graphs with no cut-edges can be characterized
in a variety of ways similar to those having no cut-vertices – that is, non-separable
graphs. The concepts corresponding to cycles and paths for vertices are circuits and
trails for edges.
Moving beyond cut-edges, we have the following deﬁnitions. A graph G is l-edge-
connected if the removal of fewer than l edges always leaves a connected graph. Here
is another version of Menger’s theorem.
Menger’s theorem (edge version) A graph is l-edge-connected if and only if each
pair of its vertices is joined by l edge-disjoint paths.
The edge-connectivity λ(G) of a graph G is the greatest non-negative integer l for
which G is l-edge-connected. Obviously, λ(G) cannot exceed the minimum degree
of a vertex of G; furthermore, it is at least as large as the connectivity – that is,
κ(G) ≤λ(G) ≤δ(G).
Along with the undirected versions of Menger’s theorem, there are correspond-
ing directed versions (with directed paths and strong connectivity) and weighted
versions.
2. Graph colourings
The origins of chromatic graph theory lie in the colouring of maps, a story that is
well known. In this section we present some of the deﬁnitions and basic results of
chromatic graph theory.
Vertex-colourings
A colouring of a graph G is an assignment of a colour to each vertex of G so that
adjacent vertices always have different colours, and G is said to be k-colourable if it
has a colouring with k colours. The chromatic number χ(G) is the smallest value of
k for which G has a k-colouring.
The fact that computing the chromatic number of a graph is an NP-complete
problem has contributed to the attraction of this area of mathematics – in fact,
determining whether a graph is 3-colourable is itself NP-complete.

10
Lowell W. Beineke and Robin J. Wilson
We note that the complete graph Kn has chromatic number n and that a bipartite
graph with at least one edge has chromatic number 2, and consequently χ(G) ≥3 if
and only if G contains an odd cycle of odd length. An interesting and useful upper
bound on the chromatic number of graphs in general was published by L. Brooks in
1941.
Theorem 2.1 If G is a connected graph with maximum degree , then
χ(G) ≤ + 1,
with equality if and only if G is a complete graph or a cycle of odd length.
There is also an upper bound on the chromatic number that is in terms of minimum
degrees; it is easily proved by induction.
Theorem 2.2 If G and each of its subgraphs has a vertex of degree δ∗or less, then
χ(G) ≤δ∗+ 1.
As far as lower bounds are concerned, the obvious one is the clique number:
χ(G) ≥ω(G). However, as was ﬁrst shown by Blanche Descartes, there are triangle-
free graphs with arbitrarily large chromatic numbers. More generally, Paul Erd˝os
proved the following result.
Theorem 2.3 For all k ≥2 and all g, there exists a k-chromatic graph with girth
greater than g.
We conclude our discussion of bounds with a pair that involve the independence
number, the dual concept to the clique number.
Theorem 2.4 If G is a graph of order n and independence number α, then
n
α ≤χ(G) ≤n −α + 1.
Critical graphs
In the study of the chromatic number, one type of graph that arises quite naturally
is that of a critical graph, a graph G for which each proper subgraph has chromatic
number less than that of G. If χ(G) = k, they are often called k-critical; they were
ﬁrst studied by G. A. Dirac. Here are two of his results.
Theorem 2.5 For k ≥2, every k-critical graph is (k −1)-edge-connected.
Theorem 2.6 Every k-critical graph is either Hamiltonian or has a cycle of length
at least 2k −2.

Preliminaries
11
Colouring graphs on surfaces
Following his publication in 1890 of the ﬂaw in A. B. Kempe’s purported proof of
the four-colour conjecture, Percy Heawood went on to prove that the analogous result
for the torus was a seven-colour theorem. The story of the corresponding result for
other surfaces is an interesting one. Given an orientable surface S, a generalization of
Euler’s polyhedron formula can be used (with the aid of Theorem 2.2) to obtain an
upper bound for the chromatic number of every graph embeddable on S. However, it
was not until 1968 that this upper bound was also shown to be a lower bound. This
breakthrough came in the form of the theorem of G. Ringel and J. W. T. Youngs on
the genus γ (Kn) of the complete graph – that is, the number of handles that need to
be added to the sphere for there to be an embedding of the Kn on the surface:
γ (Kn) = ⌈1
12(n −3)(n −4)⌉.
The maximum chromatic number among all graphs embeddable on a given surface
S is called the chromatic number of S and is denoted χ(S).
Theorem 2.7 The chromatic number of the orientable surface Sˆg with g handles
(g > 0) is
χ(Sh) = ⌊1
2(7 +

1 + 48g)⌋.
We note that the formula also holds when h = 0 (the four-colour theorem), but the
proof of Ringel and Youngs does not.
There is a corresponding theorem (one that is easier to prove) for non-orientable
surfaces; it was found by Ringel in 1954.
Theorem 2.8 The chromatic number of the non-orientable surface Nˆh with h
crosscaps (h > 0) is
χ(Nh) = ⌊1
2(7 +
√
1 + 24h)⌋,
except that, for the Klein bottle, χ(N2) = 6.
Edge-colourings
Interesting problems also arise when the edges of a graph rather than the vertices are
being coloured. A graph G is called k-edge-colourable if its edges can be coloured
with k colours in such a way that all of the edges at each vertex have different colours.
The minimum k for which G can be k-edge-coloured is called the chromatic index
(or the edge-chromatic number) of G, denoted by χ′(G). Clearly the chromatic index
of a graph G is at least as large as the maximum degree (G). The ﬁrst major result
in this area is due to D. K¨onig and was discovered in his study of independent sets of
edges in graphs.

12
Lowell W. Beineke and Robin J. Wilson
Theorem 2.9 If G is a bipartite graph, then χ′(G) = (G).
The main theorem on edge-colourings, due to V. G. Vizing, says that every graph
can be edge-coloured with (G) + 1 colours.
Theorem 2.10 If G is a graph with maximum degree , then
χ′(G) =  or  + 1.
I. Holyer showed that, even among cubic graphs, deciding which of the two values,
3 or 4, is the correct one is hard. More precisely, he showed that deciding whether a
cubic graph is 3-edge-colourable is NP-complete.
List-colourings
Following the resolution of the four-colour conjecture, considerable attention has
been given to a variation of graph colouring in which there might be different sets
of colours available to different vertices in a graph. Formally, we make the following
deﬁnitions (the terminology may vary from author to author). If v is a vertex in a
graph G, a colour list for v is a set L(v) of colours that are permitted at v. If each
vertex of G has a colour list, then an L-colouring of G is a colouring in which the
colour of each vertex comes from its list. If k is an integer for which a graph G has an
L-colouring for every list L with |L(v)| = k for all vertices v, then G is said to be k-
list-colourable or k-choosable. The list-chromatic number or (choice number) χl(G)
is the minimum number k for which G is k-list-colourable. Since list-colourings are
the subject of Chapter 6, we only mention a few facts about them here.
It is straightforward to show that χl(G) ≤1 + (G). In fact, the analogue of
Brooks’s theorem holds for the list-chromatic number. Clearly, χ(G) ≤χl(G);
however, equality does not always hold. In fact, the list-chromatic number of K3,3
is 3. It is also the case that there are planar graphs that are not 4-list-colourable; the
following result is due to C. Thomassen.
Theorem 2.11 Every planar graph is 5-list-colourable.
References
1. J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty, Graph Theory, Springer, 2008.
2. G. Chartrand, L. Lesniak and P. Zhang, Graphs and Digraphs (5th edn.), CRC, 2011.
3. J. L. Gross and J. Yellen, Graph Theory and its Applications (2nd edn.), CRC, 2005.
4. D. A. Marcus, Graph Theory, Math. Assoc. of America, 2008.
5. D. B. West, Introduction to Graph Theory (2nd edn.), Pearson, 2001.
6. R. J. Wilson, Introduction to Graph Theory (5th edn.), Pearson, 2010.

1
Colouring graphs on surfaces
BOJAN MOHAR
1.
Introduction
2.
Planar graphs are 4-colourable and 5-choosable
3.
Heawood’s formula
4.
Colouring with few colours
5.
Gr¨otzsch’s theorem and its generalizations
6.
Colouring–ﬂow duality
7.
The acyclic chromatic number
8.
Degenerate colourings
9.
The star chromatic number
10. Summary
References
Developments in graph colouring theory were motivated by the four-colour
problem and Heawood’s theorem. Both of these were originally formulated as
map-colouring problems that can be expressed as colouring graphs embedded
on surfaces. This chapter gives an overview of the abundance of results
concerning the chromatic number of graphs that are embedded on surfaces.
1. Introduction
In 1852 Francis Guthrie asked whether the regions of every planar map can be
coloured with four colours in such a way that no two regions of the map with common
boundary receive the same colour. In effect, by duality Guthrie was asking whether
every planar graph is 4-colourable. This easily stated problem became known as the
famous four-colour problem. Attempts to solve it led to many important results in
graph theory, but the problem itself remained unsolved for more than a century. It
was ﬁnally answered in the positive by Appel and Haken [9], [10], [12]. More about
its proof comes later in this chapter.

14
Bojan Mohar
For more than a century, the four-colour problem was one of the driving forces
that led to developments in graph theory, and speciﬁcally graph colouring theory. Its
generalization – the Heawood problem – was the main motivation for developments
in topological graph theory (see [51] or [49]). Both of these were originally formu-
lated as map-colouring problems, asking about colouring the faces of an embedded
graph so that adjacent faces receive different colours. Every map-colouring problem
can be expressed as a graph-colouring problem by considering the dual graph of the
map. Its vertices correspond to the faces of the map, and two vertices are adjacent if
the corresponding faces are adjacent on the surface.
In this chapter we discuss the colouring of graphs embedded on surfaces. We
start by describing some of the ideas in the proof of the four-colour theorem and
give a proof of the list-colouring version of the ﬁve-colour theorem that is due to
Thomassen. Next, we consider a generalization to general surfaces, known as the
Heawood problem.
What is the largest chromatic number of a graph that can be embedded in a given
surface?
A solution was conjectured by Heawood [36] and eventually proved by Ringel
and Youngs [52], [51]. Heawood’s conjecture can be reduced to determining the
genus and the non-orientable genus of complete graphs. The solution by Ringel and
Youngs involves constructions of minimum genus embeddings of these graphs and
introduces techniques that are of interest in topological graph theory. Finally, we
outline colouring results and problems of a more specialized nature. There is an
abundance of new results in this area and we will only give an overview of some
of the most important achievements.
2. Planar graphs are 4-colourable and 5-choosable
A direct consequence of Euler’s formula is that every planar graph has a vertex
of degree 5 or less, from which it follows that every planar graph is 6-colourable.
Heawood [36] proved that every planar graph is 5-colourable. In this section we
present the extension of this result to list-colourings due to Thomassen [59].
Let G be a graph and suppose that, for each vertex v, some set L(v) of natural
numbers is given. We view L(v) as a list of colours that can be used when colouring v.
An L-colouring of G is an assignment of a colour to each vertex of G such that each
vertex v receives a colour from its list L(v) and adjacent vertices get different colours.
Such a colouring is also called a list-colouring. The graph G is k-choosable if it
admits an L-colouring for every list assignment in which each list L(v) contains at
least k colours. The list-chromatic number χl(G) is the minimum integer k for which
G is k-choosable.
In 1975 Vizing raised the question of whether every planar graph is 5-choosable.

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
15
not necessarily 4-choosable. In 1993 Voigt [65] proved the last part of this conjecture
by exhibiting examples of planar graphs that are not 4-choosable. Subsequently, even
3-colourable non-4-choosable planar graphs have been found (see Voigt and Wirth
[67] and Mirzakhani [46]). Thomassen [59] veriﬁed the ﬁrst part of the conjecture,
which implies, in particular, that every planar graph is 5-colourable.
Theorem 2.1 Every planar graph is 5-choosable.
In order to prove Theorem 2.1, it sufﬁces to show that it holds for every planar
triangulation (a plane graph with all faces of length 3). Thus, Theorem 2.1 follows
immediately from Theorem 2.2 below. We recall that a plane graph G is a near-
triangulation if it is 2-connected and if all faces, except possibly the outer face, are
triangles. Thomassen [59] proved the following result.
Theorem 2.2 Let G be a near-triangulation with outer cycle C = v1v2 . . . vpv1.
Assume that L(v1) = {1} and L(v2) = {2} and that, for any other vertex v, the
list L(v) has at least three colours if v ∈V(C)\{v1, v2} and at least ﬁve colours if
v ∈V(G −C). Then G has an L-colouring.
Proof (by induction on the number n of vertices in G)
If n = 3, there is nothing to
prove. So we proceed to the induction step.
If C has a chord, say vivj, where 2 ≤i ≤j −2 ≤p −1 (and vp+1 = v1), then
we apply the induction hypothesis to the cycle C′ = v1v2 . . . vivjvj+1 . . . v1 and its
interior. We also apply induction to C′′ = vjvivi+1 . . . vj−1vj and its interior, where
the list of vertices vi and vj consists of the single colour that was obtained by using
the induction hypothesis on C′ and its interior.
Suppose now that C is a chordless cycle, and let v1, u1, u2, . . . , um, vp−1 be the
neighbours of vp in clockwise order around vp. Since the interior of C is triangulated,
G contains the path P = v1u1u2 . . . umvp−1. Since C is chordless, C′ = P ∪(C −vp)
is a cycle. Let x, y be two colours in L(vp)\{1}. Now deﬁne L′(ui) = L(ui)\{x, y}, for
1 ≤i ≤m, and L′(v) = L(v) if v ∈V(G)\{u1, . . . , um}. Now apply the induction
hypothesis to C′ and its interior and the new lists L′. We extend the obtained L′-
colouring to an L-colouring of G by assigning x or y to vp in such a way that vp and
vp−1 get distinct colours.
■
The four-colour problem was solved by Appel and Haken [9], [10], [12]. An
updated version of their proof may be found in [11], and a simpler and cleaner proof
was given by Robertson, Sanders, Seymour and Thomas [54]. An in-depth discussion
of the four-colour theorem, comments about its proof and its consequences can be
found in [68].
Four-colour theorem Every planar graph is 4-colourable.
The proof of Appel and Haken is lengthy, and part of it was done by a brute-

16
Bojan Mohar
Initially, there was a lot of controversy about the legitimacy of this proof. It was
considered by some mathematicians to be inadequate since it did not qualify as a
conventional proof that could be checked by a human in a lifetime. The original proof
also had some ﬂaws, but all those that were discovered were subsequently corrected
by the authors in their monograph [11].
The proof of Appel and Haken follows the outline proposed by the German
mathematician Heinrich Heesch. First, it is shown that every planar graph contains a
subgraph from a certain list C of conﬁgurations. The proof of this part is based on a
discharging method, a very elaborate use of Euler’s polyhedron formula. Secondly,
it is shown that no conﬁguration from C can occur in a minimal counter-example
to the four-colour theorem. Having a particular conﬁguration X ∈C contained in a
minimal counter-example G, the minimality would ensure that the rest of the graph,
when X is removed from G, can be 4-coloured. There may be many possibilities for
how the colouring would affect the neighbourhood of X. For some conﬁgurations
considered by Appel and Haken, several hundred thousands of cases needed to be
considered. It is here where the use of computers was necessary. For each such
case, it was possible to argue that the colouring can be changed in such a way
that it can be extended to X, yielding a contradiction to the assumption that G is a
counter-example.
The proof method described above can be illustrated by the following example. A
simple corollary of Euler’s formula states that every planar graph contains a vertex
with at most ﬁve neighbours, so the set C could consist of six conﬁgurations, each
corresponding to a vertex of degree i, for 0 ≤i ≤5. If v is a vertex of degree at
most 3, and if G −v has a 4-colouring, then this colouring can be extended to G,
since v can be coloured by a colour that does not appear among its neighbours. It can
also be shown that a vertex of degree 4 cannot appear in a minimal counter-example,
but there is no way to prove the same for vertices of degree 5. This case has to be
replaced by hundreds of more complicated conﬁgurations.
In 1997 Robertson, Sanders, Seymour and Thomas [54] developed another proof,
based on similar principles. The human-checkable part of the proof was made
more transparent, and the computer-veriﬁed part was supported by a well-structured
collection of data that enabled independent checking of the proofs. There may be
doubts about the correctness of the compilers and the stability of the hardware used
in the computer checking, but this is probably much less susceptible to error than
human checking, especially because the latter proof has been independently checked
on different platforms.
The complete proof of the four-colour theorem is available on-line with links from
[57]. It includes the encoding of the unavoidable set of the 633 near-triangulations,
the discharging rules, the computer programs, and other helpful information needed
for the proof.
The four-colour theorem is interesting, in that it has many equivalent formulations,
some of which do not seem to be related to map colourings at all. Two equivalent
versions most frequently used in the literature are dual statements about nowhere-
zero ﬂows and edge-colourings, the topics considered in Chapters 5 and 9.

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
17
Theorem 2.3 Every 2-edge-connected planar graph has a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow.
Theorem 2.4 Every 2-connected cubic planar graph is 3-edge-colourable.
An important side result of the proof of the four-colour theorem is a polynomially
bounded algorithm for 4-colouring planar graphs (see [53]).
Theorem 2.5 A 4-colouring of a given planar graph of order n can be found in O(n2)
steps.
In contrast to Theorem 2.5, deciding whether a planar graph is 3-colourable is
much harder.
Theorem 2.6 The decision problem as to whether a given planar graph is 3-
colourable is NP-complete.
An interesting (but rather easy) fact about 3-colourings of planar graphs is the
following folklore result.
Theorem 2.7 A planar graph is 3-colourable if and only if it is a spanning subgraph
of a 3-colourable triangulation of the plane. A triangulation is 3-colourable if and
only if all its vertices have even degree.
Another folklore result that should be mentioned here concerns 2-colourable planar
graphs. By K¨onig’s theorem, a graph is bipartite if and only if all its cycles have even
lengths. For a planar graph, the face-boundaries generate the cycle space, giving the
following statement.
Theorem 2.8 A planar graph is bipartite if and only if all its faces have even length.
A list-colouring result for planar bipartite graphs was proved by Alon and Tarsi [7]
who used the polynomial method that proved to be an indispensable tool for working
with the list-chromatic number.
Theorem 2.9 Every planar bipartite graph is 3-choosable.
This result is somewhat surprising since, as noted earlier, there are 3-colourable
planar graphs whose list-chromatic number is 5 (see Voigt and Wirth [67] and
Mirzakhani [46]).
To conclude this section, we present some results about extensions of a partial
colouring. Albertson [2] proved that every precolouring of vertices of a planar graph
that are far apart from each other can be extended to a 5-colouring of the whole graph.
Theorem 2.10 If S is a subset of the vertices of a planar graph G, and if the distance
between any two vertices in S is at least 4, then any 5-colouring of S can be extended
to a 5-colouring of G.
Proof
The proof is based on the four-colour theorem. We start with a 4-colouring
of G using colours 1, 2, 3, 4. For each vertex s ∈S, recolour s according to the given

18
Bojan Mohar
precolouring. If c is the colour given to s, then we recolour all the neighbours of s
coloured c with the colour 5. It is easy to see that this gives a 5-colouring of G that
extends the given precolouring.
■
Albertson asked whether this theorem can be extended to list-colourings. This
problem, which became known as Albertson’s conjecture, was solved recently by
Dvoˇr´ak, Lidick´y, Mohar and Postle [28].
Theorem 2.11 If G is a planar graph with list-assignment L that gives a list of size 1
or 5 to each vertex, and if the distance between any pair of vertices with lists of size
1 is at least 1984, then G is L-colourable.
Dvoˇr´ak, Lidick´y and Mohar [27] obtained another result of a similar ﬂavour.
Theorem 2.12 Every graph drawn in the plane with some edges crossing each other
is 5-choosable if all of the crossings are at graph distance 15 or more from each
other.
3. Heawood’s formula
From now on we consider graphs embedded on arbitrary surfaces. Recall that every
surface is homeomorphic to precisely one of the following surfaces:
• the orientable surface Sg of genus g homeomorphic to the sphere with g handles
(g ≥0)
• the non-orientable surface Nh of genus h homeomorphic to the sphere with h
crosscaps (h ≥1).
Since adding two crosscaps to a non-orientable surface is equivalent to adding one
handle, it makes sense to unify the notion of the genus by introducing the Euler genus
g(S) of a surface S by settingg(S) = 2g if S is homeomorphic to Sg, andg(S) = h if
S is homeomorphic to Nh.
Suppose that G is a graph with n vertices, m edges and f faces, that is embedded
in a surface S. Then, by Euler’s formula,
n −m + f ≥2 −g(S),
where equality holds if and only if the embedding is cellular (all faces are
homeomorphic to open discs in the plane).
Heawood [36] proved the following analogue of the four-colour theorem for graphs
embedded on arbitrary surfaces.
Theorem 3.1 Let S be a surface with Euler genus g > 0 and let G be a graph
embedded in S. Then
χ(G) ≤

1
2

7 +

1 + 24g

.
(1)

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
19
Proof
Let r = χ(G). We may assume that each vertex of G has degree at least r−1,
since if deg(v) < r −1, then χ(G −v) = χ(G), and so we may reduce the problem
to G −v. Euler’s formula implies that m ≤3n −6 + 3g. Since 2m ≥(r −1)n,
(r −7)n + 12 −6g ≤0.
(2)
Since g > 0, the right-hand side of (1) is at least 6, and so we may assume that r ≥7.
Since n ≥r, (2) implies that r2 −7r + 12 −6g ≤0. This proves (1).
■
We note that, by the four-colour theorem, the bound (1) holds also for the sphere.
The proof of Theorem 3.1 shows that every graph embeddable on S has a vertex
of degree not exceeding 1
2(5 + √1 + 24g ). Thus, the Heawood bound also holds for
the list-chromatic number:
χl(G) ≤

1
2

7 +

1 + 24g

.
(3)
Heawood conjectured that equality holds in (1). This was eventually veriﬁed by
Ringel and Youngs [51], [52] who proved that, for each surface except the Klein
bottle, there exists a complete graph G for which equality holds in (1). Below we
discuss this result in more detail in terms of colour-critical graphs.
A graph G is k-colour-critical (or k-critical) if χ(G) = k but χ(G′) < k for every
proper subgraph G′ of G.
If v is a vertex of a k-critical graph G, then G −v is (k −1)-colourable. Since its
colouring cannot be extended to a (k −1)-colouring of G, all k −1 colours must be
present on the neighbours of v. In particular, v has degree at least k −1. If G has n
vertices and m edges, this implies that
2m ≥(k −1)n ,
(4)
with equality for Kk. One of Dirac’s results [23] on k-critical graphs is the following
improvement of (4). If G is a k-critical graph with n vertices and m edges, and if
G ̸= Kk, then
2m ≥(k −1)n + k −3 .
(5)
Let H(g) =

1
2( 7 + √1 + 24g )

. Heawood’s theorem asserts that every graph G
on a surface of Euler genus g has chromatic number at most H(g). Dirac [21], [22]
proved the following extension for all values of g except 1 and 3; these cases were
proved later by Albertson and Hutchinson [4].
Theorem 3.2 If G is a graph embeddable in the surface of Euler genus g ≥1, then
χ(G) < H(g) unless G contains the complete graph of order H(g) as a subgraph.
Proof
We present Dirac’s proof which works for g ̸= 1 or 3. Let h = χ(G) = H(g),
and let H be an h-critical subgraph of G. Assume that H has n vertices and m edges,

20
Bojan Mohar
and that H ̸= Kh. By (5), we have 2m ≥(h −1)n + h −3. This inequality, combined
with the aforementioned consequence of Euler’s formula that m ≤3n−6+3g, gives
(h −1)n + h −3 ≤6n −12 + 6g,
which implies that
(h −7)n ≤6g −9 −h.
(6)
Since G ̸= Kh, and since there are no h-critical graphs on h + 1 vertices, n ≥h + 2.
Since g ≥2, h ≥7, and thus (6) implies
(h −7)(h + 2) ≤6g −9 −h.
(7)
It is easy to see that this inequality leads to a contradiction for g = 2 and when
4 ≤g ≤11, so we may assume that g ≥12. From (7) we obtain h2−4h−5−6g ≤0,
implying that
h < 2 +

6g + 9.
On the other hand, h = H(g) > 1
2( 5 + √24g + 1 ). Hence
1 +

24g + 1 <

24g + 36.
This implies that 2√24g + 1 < 34 and therefore g < 12, a contradiction.
■
Since the complete graph K7 cannot be embedded in the Klein bottle (see, for
example, [49]), Theorem 3.2 implies in particular that the Heawood bound can be
improved for the Klein bottle.
Theorem 3.3 If G is a graph embeddable in the Klein bottle, then χ(G) ≤6.
ˇSkrekovski [55] considered (H(g) −1)-critical graphs on surfaces of given Euler
genus g and proved that, for g ≥10, the only such graphs are KH(g)−1 and, in some
exceptional cases, the join KH(g)−4 + C5.
Theorem 3.2 was extended to list-colourings by B¨ohme, Mohar and Stiebitz [13],
except for the case of Euler genus g = 3, which was solved later by Kr´al’ and
ˇSkrekovski [45].
Theorem 3.4 If G is a graph embeddable in a surface of Euler genus g ≥1, then
χl(G) < H(g), unless G contains the complete graph of order H(g) as a subgraph,
in which case χl(G) = H(g).
4. Colouring with few colours
For each surface and each natural number k ≥8, there are only ﬁnitely many k-
critical graphs embeddable on the surface (see Dirac [24] and Edwards [29]).

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
21
Theorem 4.1 Let S be a surface of Euler genus g ≥3. Every 7-critical graph
embeddable on S has at most 69(g −2) vertices, and for k ≥8, every k-critical
graph on S has at most 6(g −2)/(k −7) vertices.
Since a graph is (k −1)-colourable if and only if it contains no k-critical subgraph,
Theorem 4.1 implies the following result.
Corollary 4.2 Let S be a surface and let k ≥7. Then there are only ﬁnitely many
k-critical graphs on S, and there exists a polynomially bounded algorithm for testing
whether an arbitrary S-embeddable graph is (k −1)-colourable.
The algorithm in Corollary 4.2 for testing (k −1)-colourability can be extended to
a linear-time algorithm which also returns a (k −1)-colouring if one exists. Given a
graph G on S, remove successively its vertices of degree less than k −1 until no such
vertex exists. If k = 7, then also remove a vertex of degree 6 if all neighbours have
degree 6 and they induce a cycle. It turns out that the order of the remaining graph H
is bounded above by a constant that depends on S only, and every (k−1)-colouring of
H can be extended (in linear time) to G. Hence G can be (k −1)-coloured if and only
if H has a (k −1)-colouring (which can be discovered in constant time by checking
all possibilities). A similar linear-time algorithm was proposed by Edwards [29] who
also discussed in detail how to perform the removal of vertices in linear time.
Theorem 4.1 says that a graph on a ﬁxed surface is 6-colourable unless the graph
contains a small obstruction. Such an obstruction must contain a non-contractible
cycle of length O(g), where g is the Euler genus of the surface. Graphs that do
not contain short non-contractible cycles are said to be locally planar, since a large
neighbourhood of each vertex is planar. To quantify local planarity, we deﬁne the
notion of a width of the embedded graph as follows (see [49] for more details). The
edge-width ew(G) of a cellular embedded graph G is the shortest length of a cycle in
G that is not contractible on the surface of this embedding. A related parameter is the
surface non-separating edge-width ew′(G) which is the minimum length of a surface
non-separating (homologically non-trivial) cycle in G.
We now describe a 6-colour theorem by Fisk and Mohar [33].
Theorem 4.3 There is a universal constant c for which every graph G embedded in
a surface of Euler genus g > 0 with ew′(G) > c log g is 6-colourable.
Let us now consider 5-colourings.
If G is k-critical and H is l-critical, then their join G+H is (k+l)-critical. Therefore
the graphs C3 +C5, K2 +H7 (where H7 is the graph of Fig. 1) are 6-critical. Figure 2
shows that they are toroidal (where the grey vertices of the second graph correspond
to K2). Thomassen [60] characterized those toroidal graphs that are 5-colourable.
Theorem 4.4 There are precisely four 6-critical toroidal graphs: K6, C3 + C5, K2 +
H7 (where H7 is the graph of Fig. 1), and the graph T11 obtained from the 11-cycle
x0x1 . . . x10x0 by adding all chords xixi+2 and xixi+3 for i = 0, 1, . . . , 10 (see Fig. 3).

22
Bojan Mohar
Fig. 1. The 4-critical graph H7
Fig. 2. The graphs C3 + C5 and K2 + H7 on the torus
Fig. 3. The graph T11 on the torus
All 6-critical graphs in Theorem 4.4 contain non-contractible triangles in all their
embeddings on the torus. This implies the following result.
Corollary 4.5 If a graph G is embedded in the torus such that ew(G) ≥4, then G is
5-colourable.
Thomassen [58] extended this result to all orientable surfaces.
Theorem 4.6 If G is embeddable in an orientable surface of genus g so that the
edge-width is at least 214g+6, then G is 5-colourable.
The proof of Theorem 4.6 uses the fact that, for embedded graphs of sufﬁciently
large edge-width, the surface can be cut in such a way that we obtain a planar graph
after the cutting, and pairs of vertices that are duplicated by the cutting procedure are
far from each other. An extension of the 5-colour theorem for planar graphs is then
used, where we take care of colouring the duplicate pairs with the same colour.
Thomassen asked whether his Theorem 4.6 can be extended to list-colourings. His
question was answered in the afﬁrmative by DeVos, Kawarabayashi and Mohar [20].

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
23
Theorem 4.7 For each surface S there exists a constant M for which every graph
that is embedded in S with edge-width at least M is 5-choosable.
Another extension of Theorem 4.6 was proved by Thomassen [62].
Theorem 4.8
For each surface S, there are only ﬁnitely many 6-critical
S-embeddable graphs.
The complete list of 6-critical graphs is known for the sphere (where there are
none), the projective plane (where K6 is the only one, by Theorem 3.2), for the torus
(Theorem 4.4), and for the Klein bottle [18], [39]. A generalization of Theorem 4.8
to 5-list-colourings has been obtained by Kawarabayashi and Mohar [40].
Corollary 4.9 For each ﬁxed surface S, there is a polynomial-time algorithm for
deciding whether a graph on S can be 5-coloured. The same holds for list-colourings:
it can be decided whether a given graph G embedded in S is 5-choosable and, given
G and a list-assignment L with all lists of size at least 5, whether G is L-colourable.
As mentioned earlier, the problem of 3-colouring graphs on the sphere (and hence
any surface) is NP-complete. Corollary 4.9 thus suggests the following problem. Let
S be a ﬁxed surface. Does there exist a polynomially bounded algorithm for deciding
whether a graph on S can be 4-coloured?
The following result of Fisk [32] implies that there is no 4-colour analogue of
Theorem 4.8.
Theorem 4.10 If G is a triangulation of some surface, and if G has exactly two
vertices of odd degree and they are adjacent, then G is not 4-colourable.
The proof of Theorem 4.10 actually works for every graph in which each edge is
in precisely two triangles.
Corollary 4.11 If S is a surface other than the sphere, and if k = 3, 4 or 5, then
there are inﬁnitely many k-critical S-embeddable graphs.
The following problem was proposed by Albertson [1]. Let S be any surface. Does
there exist a natural number q = q(S) for which any graph G embedded on S contains
a set A of at most q vertices such that G −A is 4-colourable? This problem is open
even for the torus where possibly q = 3 will do, as conjectured by Albertson [1].
5. Gr¨otzsch’s theorem and its generalizations
In this section we discuss the chromatic number of graphs on a ﬁxed surface when
conditions on the girth are imposed. We start with a classical result of Gr¨otzsch [35].
Theorem 5.1 Every planar graph with girth at least 4 is 3-colourable.
Concerning a list-colouring version of Gr¨otzsch’s theorem, Voigt [66] gave an
example of a planar graph of girth 4 that is not 3-choosable. Of course, planar graphs

24
Bojan Mohar
of girth 4 are 4-choosable since they are 3-degenerate. On the other hand, Thomassen
[61] proved 3-choosability under a stronger condition.
Theorem 5.2 Every planar graph of girth at least 5 is 3-choosable.
Gr¨otzsch’s theorem can be strengthened by allowing triangles, as long as these are
far from each other. This was conjectured in 1969 by Havel and proved by Dvoˇr´ak,
Kr´al’ and Thomas [26].
Theorem 5.3 There exists a constant M for which every planar graph whose
triangles are at distance at least M from each other is 3-colourable.
The constant M in [26] is extremely large. Dvoˇr´ak recently succeeded in extending
Theorem 5.2 to 3-list-colourings, under the assumption that cycles of length 3 or 4
are far apart.
Inspired by Theorems 5.1 and 4.6, Hutchinson [37] proved the following.
Theorem 5.4 For each positive integer g there exists a number f(g) for which the
following holds. If G is embedded in the orientable surface Sg so that ew(G) > f(g)
and all facial walks have even length, then G is 3-colourable.
Dvoˇr´ak, Kr´al’ and Thomas [25] extended Theorem 5.4 to arbitrary triangle-free
graphs on any ﬁxed surface S. As a corollary, they showed that 3-colourability of a
triangle-free graph embeddable in S can be tested in polynomial time. In particular,
this gives a linear-time algorithm to compute the chromatic number of such graphs.
While the 5-colour result in Theorem 4.6 holds both for orientable and non-
orientable surfaces, the 3-colour result of Hutchinson does not extend to non-
orientable surfaces because of the following counter-intuitive result of Youngs [69].
Theorem 5.5 If G is embeddable in the projective plane such that every face is of
length 4, then G has chromatic number 2 or 4. Thus, if G is not bipartite, then G is
not 3-colourable.
Theorem 5.5 does not extend to toroidal graphs. This follows from Theorem 5.4, or
by taking the Cartesian product of two cycles. An easy modiﬁcation of this example
shows also that Theorem 5.5 does not hold for graphs on the Klein bottle. However,
Klavˇzar and Mohar [44] proved that twisted Cartesian products of two cycles
of arbitrarily large edge-width on the Klein bottle sometimes need four colours.
Mohar and Seymour [47] obtained a counterpart of Theorem 5.4 for non-orientable
surfaces, by proving that every non-3-colourable graph of large edge-width with all
faces of even length contains a quadrangulation that is not 3-colourable, and then
characterizing completely the non-3-colourable quadrangulations. A generalization
and full explanation of these phenomena were demystiﬁed by DeVos et al. [19] and
are presented in the section on the duality of colourings and ﬂows.
Gimbel and Thomassen [34] extended Theorem 5.5 to a complete characterization
of those graphs in the projective plane which have girth at least 4 and are not
3-colourable.

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
25
Theorem 5.6 Let G be a graph of girth at least 4 embedded in the projective plane.
Then G is 3-colourable if and only if G does not contain a quadrangulation of the
projective plane that is not bipartite.
Gimbel and Thomassen [34] also gave an upper bound for the chromatic numbers
of triangle-free graphs on general surfaces, analogous to Theorem 3.1 except that the
bound is not sharp. For simplicity we formulate it for orientable surfaces only.
Theorem 5.7 There exist positive constants c1 and c2 for which the following
statements hold.
• Every triangle-free graph of genus g has chromatic number at most
c1
3
g/ log g.
• For each g ≥1, there exists a triangle-free graph of genus g and chromatic number
at least c2 3√g/ log g.
The following result was proved independently by Fisk and Mohar [33] and by
Gimbel and Thomassen [34].
Theorem 5.8 Let S be a surface.
• For each k ≥5, there are only ﬁnitely many k-critical triangle-free graphs
embeddable on S.
• There are only ﬁnitely many 4-critical graphs with girth at least 6 on S.
Theorem 5.8 implies that, for each positive integer g, there exists an integer w(g)
for which any triangle-free graph embedded on a surface of Euler genus g with edge-
width exceeding w(g) can be 4-coloured. Fisk and Mohar [33] proved that w(g) <
c log g, where c is an absolute constant. An analogous result holds for 3-colourings
of graphs with girth at least 6.
Theorem 5.8 also shows that, for each surface S, the chromatic number of a graph
of girth 6 embeddable on S can be found in polynomial time. It can also be decided
in polynomial time whether a triangle-free graph on S can be 4-coloured. The same
applies for 3-colourings if the girth is at least 5 (see Thomassen [63]).
Theorem 5.9 For each surface S, there are only ﬁnitely many 4-critical graphs of
girth at least 5 that can be embedded in S.
It is known that there are no such graphs on the torus or the projective plane.
Dvoˇr´ak, Kr´al’ and Thomas have announced a structural description of 4-critical
triangle-free graphs embedded in a ﬁxed orientable surface, based on which one could
obtain a linear-time algorithm for deciding whether they are 3-colourable.
6. Colouring–ﬂow duality
Tutte introduced the notion of a nowhere-zero ﬂow (see Chapter 9) as a notion dual
to a colouring. In this section we state the colouring–ﬂow duality for planar graphs,

26
Bojan Mohar
and show that there is an important extension to locally planar graphs embedded on
other surfaces.
For a graph G without cut-edges, let ϕ(G) denote its ﬂow index, the smallest k for
which G admits a nowhere-zero k-ﬂow. Tutte [64] has proved the following result.
Theorem 6.1 If G is a connected plane graph and if G∗is its dual graph, then
χ(G) = ϕ(G∗).
This duality extends to the circular version of ﬂows and colourings. Let Sr be a
circle in R2 with circumference r > 0. Given a graph G, a mapping c : V(G) →Sr is
called a circular r-colouring if, for each edge vw in G, the distance between c(v) and
c(w) on the circle Sr is at least 1. The circular chromatic number χc(G) is the smallest
number r for which G admits a circular r-colouring. It is a fact that the minimum r
in the deﬁnition is attained, and it turns out that χ(G) −1 < χc(G) ≤χ(G). It is
easy to see that χc(C2k+1) = 2 + (1/k), so this coincides with intuition that long odd
cycles are close to being 2-colourable.
There is similarly the corresponding notion of a circular ﬂow. Let G be a graph
and let us orient the edges of G arbitrarily. A map ϕ : E(G) →R is a ﬂow if, at
each vertex, the sum of the values on the incoming edges is equal to the sum on the
outgoing edges. We say that ϕ is an α-ﬂow if 1 ≤|ϕ(e)| ≤α −1, for each e ∈E(G).
Using this notion, we deﬁne the circular ﬂow index of G as
ϕc(G) = inf{α ∈R : G admits an α-ﬂow}.
As with the circular chromatic number, it turns out that for every graph,
ϕ(G) −1 < ϕc(G) ≤ϕ(G).
Note that the above notions are independent of the chosen orientation of the edges
of G. For example, if we reverse the orientation of an edge e, then by replacing
ϕ(e) by −ϕ(e) we preserve the property that ϕ is an α-ﬂow.
Theorem 6.1 can be extended to circular colourings and ﬂows.
Theorem 6.2 If G is a connected plane graph and if G∗is its dual graph, then
χc(G) = ϕc(G∗).
This duality does not extend beyond planar graphs. It is known that the ﬂow index of
every graph is at most 6 (and it is conjectured that it is at most 5), but the dual graph may
have arbitrarily large chromatic number. Nevertheless, Theorem 4.6 eliminates such an
objection when the graph is locally planar and thus has sufﬁciently large edge-width.
Indeed, DeVos, Goddyn, Mohar, Vertigan and Zhu [19] have generalized Theorem 6.2
to graphs on arbitrary surfaces, by proving the following approximate duality.
Theorem 6.3 Let S be an orientable surface, and let ε > 0. Then there is an integer
M such that, for every graph G embedded in S with edge-width at least M,
ϕc(G∗) ≤χc(G) < ϕc(G∗) + ε,
where G∗is the dual graph of G in S.

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
27
In order to obtain the corresponding duality result for non-orientable surfaces, we
have to extend the deﬁnition of a ﬂow in the dual graph. This extension gives us
an alternative way of deﬁning the circular chromatic number, and we include both
deﬁnitions for comparison.
Let G be a graph embedded in a surface S, and let us orient the edges of G
arbitrarily. A map ϕ : E(G) →R is a tension if, for each cycle C in G, the sum
of the values of ϕ on the forward edges of C is equal to the corresponding sum on the
backward edges of C. This condition is equivalent to a stronger one that, for every
closed walk W, the sum of the values of ϕ on the forward edges of W minus the sum
on the backward edges of W is 0. If this condition is satisﬁed only for every closed
walk W in G that deﬁnes a contractible curve in the surface, then ϕ is said to be a
local tension. If 1 ≤|ϕ(e)| ≤α −1 holds for each e ∈E(G), we say that ϕ is a
(local) α-tension. Using these notions, we have the following:
χc(G) = inf{α ∈R : G admits an α-tension}.
Analogously to this, we deﬁne a new invariant, the local circular chromatic number:
χloc(G) = inf{α ∈R : G admits a local α-tension}.
Note that χloc(G) ≤χc(G), and that strict inequality is possible. The concepts of
tension and local tension involve an auxiliary orientation of the edges, but the values
χc(G) and χloc(G) are independent of the chosen orientation.
If the surface is orientable, then χloc(G∗) = ϕc(G) and ⌈χloc(G∗)⌉= ϕ(G), the
ﬂow index of G. If the surface is non-orientable, then ⌈χloc(G∗)⌉is the biﬂow index of
Bouchet. Thus, χloc both uniﬁes and reﬁnes these two indices for embedded graphs. It
can be used to extend Theorem 6.3 to include non-orientable surfaces. The following
result is due to DeVos, Goddyn, Mohar, Vertigan and Zhu [19].
Theorem 6.4 Let S be a surface, and let ε > 0. Then there is an integer M such that,
for each graph G embedded in S with edge-width at least M,
χloc(G) ≤χc(G) < χloc(G) + ε,
where G∗is the dual graph of G in S.
DeVos et al. [19] also applied this result to two families of embedded graphs
for which χloc exhibits interesting behaviour. An embedded graph G is even-faced
if all of its faces have even length. Note that even-faced graphs in the plane are
2-colourable (see Theorem 2.8). It turns out that even-faced embedded graphs come
in two types, odd and even, and their chromatic number depends on their type.
Another class of graphs whose chromatic number is well understood are planar
triangulations (see Theorem 2.7). On surfaces of higher genus, triangulations can
be classiﬁed as being of even or odd type. In both cases, the type of G depends on
the ‘signature parity’ of certain closed walks in the dual G∗(although in strikingly
different ways). This distinction is reﬂected in the value of χloc(G) (see [19]).

28
Bojan Mohar
Theorem 6.5 (Bimodality of χloc) Let G be an embedded graph.
• If G is even-faced with maximum face-length 2r, then
χloc(G) = 2 (even type)
or
χloc(G) ≥
2r
r −1 (odd type).
• If G is a triangulation, then
χloc(G) = 3 (even type)
or
χloc(G) ≥4 (odd type).
As a corollary, DeVos et al. [19] proved the following.
Corollary 6.6 (Bimodality of χc) For any surface S and any ε > 0, there exists an
integer M such that, for every S-embedded graph G with ew(G) ≥M,
• if G is even-faced with maximum face-length 2r, then
χc(G) ∈[2, 2 + ε] ∪[2r/(r −1), 4]
• if G is a triangulation, then
χc(G) ∈[3, 3 + ε] ∪[4, 5].
DeVos et al. [19] also showed that certain Eulerian triangulations of large
edge-width on non-orientable surfaces have circular chromatic number 5, and that
there are quadrangulations of non-orientable surfaces with arbitrarily large edge-
width, yet with circular chromatic number 4. These results explain Theorem 5.5,
that projective plane quadrangulations never have chromatic number 3, and they
completely generalize and explain similar phenomena on general surfaces that were
observed in the past.
Note that a little more can be said in some special cases.
If S is the plane or projective plane, then the circular chromatic number χc(G) is
relatively well behaved. For example, set ε = 0 in Theorem 6.4 and in Corollary 6.6.
If G is even-faced, then there is an exact formula for χc(G) (see DeVos et al.
[19]). In particular, if G has an even-faced embedding in the projective plane, then
χc(G) = 2 or χc(G) = 2 + (2/k), for some non-negative integer k. Moreover, if
a quadrangulation of the projective plane has χc(G) > 2, then χc(G) = 4; this
strengthens Theorem 5.5.
If the girth of G is at least 6, then the upper bound of 4 can be replaced by 3 in the ﬁrst
part of Corollary 6.6 (see [19]). More generally, it may be true that we can replace 4
by 2 + 2/(g −1), if the girth is at least 2g.
The interval [4, 5] in the second part of Corollary 6.6 can be replaced by {4} if S is
orientable and G is Eulerian. This is implied by a result of Hutchinson et al. [38],
which states that all triangulations of orientable surfaces of sufﬁciently large edge-
width satisfy χ(G) ≤4.

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
29
7. The acyclic chromatic number
A colouring (or a list-colouring) of a graph G is acyclic if every cycle in the graph
receives at least three different colours. Equivalently, if the colour classes of the
colouring are V1, V2, . . . , Vk, then the induced subgraph on Vi ∪Vj is a forest for all
i ̸= j. We deﬁne the acyclic chromatic number χa(G) of a graph G as the minimum
number of colours for which there exists an acyclic colouring of G. This notion was
introduced in 1973 by Branko Gr¨unbaum, who proved that every planar graph admits
an acyclic 9-colouring. After various improvements of Gr¨unbaum’s result, Borodin
[14] proved the ultimate version about the acyclic chromatic number of planar
graphs.
Theorem 7.1 Every planar graph is acyclically 5-colourable.
The bound of 5 is best possible since there are planar graphs whose acyclic
chromatic number is 5; an example is depicted in Fig. 4. If we have a 4-colouring of
this graph, then the two vertices labelled 1 and 2 must be coloured differently or we
obtain a bicoloured 4-cycle, since two of their common neighbours necessarily have
the same colour. Thus, any acyclic 4-colouring is as shown in the ﬁgure. However,
no available colour is left for the vertex z. If we replace each thick edge in this
graph by four paths of length 2 joining the same pair of vertices, we obtain an even
more striking example, a bipartite 2-degenerate planar graph whose acyclic chromatic
number is 5.
z
1
2
3
4
4
3
Fig. 4. A planar graph with acyclic chromatic number 5
The notion of acyclic colourings can be extended to list-colourings. We say that
G is acyclically k-choosable if G admits an acyclic L-colouring for every list-
assignment L for which each vertex has k colours in its list. The acyclic list-chromatic
number χa,l(G) is the minimum k such that G is acyclically k-choosable.
There are many other results on acyclic list colourings of planar graphs. Borodin,
Fon-der-Flaass, Kostochka, Raspaud and Sopena [16] conjectured that every planar
graph is acyclically 5-choosable, and proved the following weaker statement.
Theorem 7.2 Every planar graph is acyclically 7-choosable.

30
Bojan Mohar
If the aforementioned conjecture is true, then it may even be true that the acyclic
chromatic number and the acyclic list-chromatic number are equal for every planar
graph.
Borodin and Ivanova [17] proved that every planar graph without 4-cycles is
acyclically 5-choosable, and Borodin, Chen, Ivanova and Raspaud [15] conjectured
that every planar graph with girth at least 5 is acyclically 3-choosable. The following
weaker bound was proved by Montassier [50].
Theorem 7.3 Every planar graph of girth at least 5 is acyclically 4-choosable.
Concerning graphs on arbitrary surfaces, Borodin conjectured that, apart from the
sphere, the maximum acyclic chromatic number for graphs embeddable on a surface
equals the Heawood bound for the usual chromatic number. This conjecture was
disproved for all surfaces of large genus by Alon, Mohar and Sanders [6], who proved
the following result.
Theorem 7.4 If G is a graph embeddable on a surface of Euler genus g, then
χa(G) ≤100g4/7 + 10 000.
The corresponding bounds for the acyclic list-chromatic number have not appeared
in the literature, but the proof in [6] can be adapted to give the same bounds for the
list-chromatic version.
Theorem 7.5 For each sufﬁciently large integer g, there is a graph G embeddable
on any surface of Euler genus g that satisﬁes χa(G) ≥1
10 g4/7/(log g)1/7.
Examples for Theorem 7.5 were obtained by making small modiﬁcations to
random graphs (with edge-probability p = 3(log n/n)1/4). Alon, Mohar and Sanders
[6] also found Klein bottle graphs whose acyclic chromatic number is 7. For the
projective plane, they provided an upper bound given in the next theorem. It is not
known whether the bound can be improved to 6.
Theorem 7.6 Every projective planar graph is acyclically 7-colourable.
For locally planar graphs, the following result of Kawarabayashi and Mohar [41]
gives an analogue of Theorem 4.6.
Theorem 7.7 For each g ≥0, there exists an integer M such that every graph G
embeddable on a surface of Euler genus g with edge-width at least M has χa(G) ≤7.
8. Degenerate colourings
The notion of a degenerate colouring is a strengthening of the notion of an acyclic
colouring. A graph G is k-degenerate if every subgraph has a vertex of degree at
most k. Note that the requirement for the acyclic chromatic number says that the
union of any two colour classes induces a forest, which is equivalent to the statement

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
31
that it induces a 1-degenerate graph. One can impose an even stronger condition on
a k-colouring, that the union of t colour classes always induces a (t −1)-degenerate
subgraph, for every t. Such a colouring is said to be degenerate, and one can speak of
the degenerate chromatic number χd(G) and the degenerate list-chromatic number
χd,l(G). Note that the condition for t = 1 is just that of a proper colouring, and
the condition for t = 2 is the same as that for acyclic colourings. Borodin [14]
conjectured that Theorem 7.1 can be strengthened.
Conjecture A Every planar graph admits a degenerate 5-colouring.
The strongest result in this direction has been obtained by Kierstead, Mohar,
ˇSpacapan, Yang and Zhu [43].
Theorem 8.1 Every planar graph has a degenerate 9-colouring. Moreover, the
degenerate list-chromatic number of every planar graph is at most 9.
9. The star chromatic number
A proper colouring of G with no 2-coloured path on four vertices is called a star
colouring. This is equivalent to saying that the union of any two colour classes
induces a star forest – that is, a subgraph in which each component is a star K1,t, for
some t ≥0. The least number n for which G admits a star colouring with n colours is
called the star chromatic number of G, denoted by χs(G). Clearly, χs(G) ≥χa(G). If
a colouring is both degenerate and star, then we speak of a degenerate star colouring.
The corresponding chromatic number is denoted by χsd.
Albertson, Chappell, Kierstead, K¨undgen and Ramamurthi [3] proved that every
planar graph admits a star colouring with 20 colours.
Theorem 9.1 If G is a planar graph, then χs(G) ≤20.
The largest known value of the star chromatic number of a planar graph is 10, so
Theorem 9.1 leaves some room for improvement.
Kierstead, K¨undgen, and Timmons [42] proved that every bipartite planar graph
G satisﬁes χs(G) ≤χs,l(G) ≤14, and they provided examples with χs(G) ≥8.
Under a different assumption that the girth is at least 5, Albertson et al. [3] proved
that χs(G) ≤16. Planar graphs with girth 5 and star chromatic number 6 were found
by Timmons [56].
For general surfaces, Mohar and ˇSpacapan [48] improved the linear bound in [3]
to a sublinear upper bound.
Theorem 9.2 If G is a graph embeddable on a surface of Euler genus g, then
χsd(G) ≤⌈1000g3/5 + 100 000⌉.
The bound in Theorem 9.2 is essentially best possible; this is certiﬁed by the
following result of Mohar and ˇSpacapan [48].

32
Bojan Mohar
Theorem 9.3 For each sufﬁciently large integer g, there is a graph G embeddable in
an orientable (or non-orientable) surface of genus g, for which
χsd(G) ≥χs(G) ≥1
32 g3/5/(log g)1/5.
The corresponding result for locally planar graphs was proved by Kawarabayashi
and Mohar [41].
Theorem 9.4 For each positive integer g, there is a constant M such that every graph
G embeddable on an orientable (or non-orientable) surface of genus g with edge-
width at least M satisﬁes χs(G) ≤2s∗
0 + 3 ≤43, where s∗
0 (≤20) is the maximum
star chromatic number for the class of all planar graphs.
10. Summary
The known results on the chromatic number of planar and locally planar graphs are
collected in the following table. The entries with ≤indicate that improvement is
possible. The entries with ≥indicate that there are known examples with the stated
chromatic number.
Table 1.
locally
planar
planar
all
even-faced
triangle-free
girth ≥5
ew ≥M(g)
χ
4
2
3
3
5
(4CT)
(Th. 2.8)
(Th. 5.1)
(Th. 5.1)
(Th. 4.6)
χl
5
3
4
3
5
(Th. 2.1)
(Th. 2.9)
(3-degen.)
(Th. 5.2)
(Th. 4.7)
χa
5
5
5
-
≤7
(Th. 7.1)
(Th. 7.7)
χa,l
≤7
-
-
≤4
-
(Th. 7.2)
(Th. 7.3)
χd
≤9
-
-
-
-
(Th. 8.1)
χs
10 ≤s∗
0 ≤20
≤14, ≥8
-
≤16, ≥6
≤2s∗
0 + 3
(Th. 9.1)
[42]
[3],[56]
(Th. 9.4)

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
33
The dependence of the chromatic number of arbitrary graphs on the genus is
summarized in the table below.
Table 2.
upper bound
lower bound
upper bound
lower bound
(all graphs)
(all graphs)
(triangle-free)
(triangle-free)
χ, χl
O(g1/2)
(g1/2)
O((g/ log g)1/3)
(g1/3/ log g)
(Th. 3.1)
(Th. 3.2 & 3.4)
(Th. 5.7)
(Th. 5.7)
χa, χa,l
O(g4/7)
(g4/7/ log(g)1/7)
-
-
(Th. 7.4)
(Th. 7.5)
χd
O(g3/5)
(g4/7/ log(g)1/7)
-
-
(Th. 9.2)
(bound from χa)
χs, χsd
O(g3/5)
(g3/5/ log(g)1/5)
-
-
(Th. 9.2)
(Th. 9.3)
References
1. M. O. Albertson, Open problem 2, The Theory and Applications of Graphs
(ed. G. Chartrand et al.), Wiley (1981), 609.
2. M. O. Albertson, You can’t paint yourself into a corner, J. Combin. Theory (B) 73 (1998),
189–194.
3. M. O. Albertson, G. G. Chappell, H. A. Kierstead, A. K¨undgen and R. Ramamurthi,
Coloring with no 2-colored P4’s, Electron. J. Combin. 11 (2004), 13 pp.
4. M. O. Albertson and J. P. Hutchinson, The three excluded cases of Dirac’s map-color
theorem, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 319 (1979), 7–17.
5. M. O. Albertson and J. P. Hutchinson, On 6-chromatic triangulations, Proc. London Math.
Soc. 41 (1980), 533–556.
6. N. Alon, B. Mohar and D. P. Sanders, On acyclic colorings of graphs on surfaces, Israel
J. Math. 94 (1996), 273–283.
7. N. Alon and M. Tarsi, Colorings and orientations of graphs, Combinatorica 12 (1992),
125–134.
8. A. Altschuler, Hamiltonian circuits in some maps on the torus, Discrete Math. 1 (1972),
299–314.
9. K. Appel and W. Haken, The existence of unavoidable sets of geographically good
conﬁgurations, Illinois J. Math. 20 (1976), 218–297.
10. K. Appel and W. Haken, Every planar map is four colorable. Part I: Discharging, Illinois
J. Math. 21 (1977), 429–490.
11. K. Appel and W. Haken, Every Planar Map is Four Colorable, Contemp. Math. 98, Amer.
Math. Soc., 1989.
12. K. Appel, W. Haken and J. Koch, Every planar map is four colorable. Part II: Reducibility,
Illinois J. Math. 21 (1977), 491–567.

34
Bojan Mohar
13. T. B¨ohme, B. Mohar and M. Stiebitz, Dirac’s map-color theorem for choosability, J. Graph
Theory 32 (1999), 327–339.
14. O. V. Borodin, On acyclic colorings of planar graphs, Discrete Math. 25 (1979), 211–236.
15. O. V. Borodin, M. Chen, A. O. Ivanova and A. Raspaud, Acyclic 3-choosability of sparse
graphs with girth at least 7, Discrete Math. 310 (2010), 2426–2434.
16. O. V. Borodin, D. G. Fon-Der-Flaass, A. V. Kostochka, A. Raspaud and E. Sopena, Acyclic
list 7-coloring of planar graphs, J. Graph Theory 40 (2002), 83–90.
17. O. V. Borodin and A. O. Ivanova, Acyclic 5-choosability of planar graphs without 4-cycles
(in Russian), Sibirsk. Mat. Zh. 52 (2011), 522–541.
18. N. Chenette, L. Postle, N. Streib, R. Thomas and C. Yerger, Five-coloring graphs in the
Klein bottle, J. Combin. Theory (B) 102 (2012), 1067–1098.
19. M. DeVos, L. Goddyn, B. Mohar, D. Vertigan and X. Zhu, Coloring-ﬂow duality of
embedded graphs, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 357 (2005), 3993–4016.
20. M. DeVos, K. Kawarabayashi and B. Mohar, Locally planar graphs are 5-choosable,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 98 (2008), 1215–1232.
21. G. A. Dirac, Map colour theorems, Canad. J. Math. 4 (1952), 480–490.
22. G. A. Dirac, Short proof of the map colour theorem, Canad. J. Math. 9 (1957), 225–226.
23. G. A. Dirac, A theorem of R. L. Brooks and a conjecture of H. Hadwiger, Proc. London
Math. Soc. (3) 7 (1957), 161–195.
24. G. A. Dirac, Map colour theorems related to the Heawood colour formula, J. London Math.
Soc. 32 (1957), 436–455.
25. Z. Dvoˇr´ak, D. Kr´al’ and R. Thomas, Coloring triangle-free graphs on surfaces, Proc. 20th
Ann. ACM-SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2009, SIAM (2009), 120–129.
26. Z. Dvoˇr´ak, D. Kr´al’ and R. Thomas, Coloring planar graphs with triangles far apart,
http://arxiv.org/abs/0911.0885.
27. Z. Dvoˇr´ak, B. Lidick´y and B. Mohar, 5-choosability of graphs with crossings far apart,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1201.3014.
28. Z. Dvoˇr´ak, B. Lidick´y, B. Mohar and L. Postle, 5-list-coloring planar graphs with distant
precolored vertices, http://arxiv.org/abs/1209.0366.
29. K. Edwards, The complexity of some graph colouring problems, Discrete Appl. Math. 36
(1992), 131–140.
30. P. Erd˝os, Graph theory and probability, II, Canad. J. Math. 13 (1961), 346–352.
31. P. Erd˝os, A. L. Rubin and H. Taylor, Choosability in graphs, Proc. West Coast Conference
on Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Computing (Arcata, California), Congr. Numer. 26
(1980), 125–157.
32. S. Fisk, The non-existence of colorings, J. Combin. Theory (B) 24 (1978), 247–248.
33. S. Fisk and B. Mohar, Coloring graphs without short non-bounding cycles, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 60 (1994), 268–276.
34. J. Gimbel and C. Thomassen, Coloring graphs with ﬁxed genus and girth, Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc. 349 (1997), 4555–4564.
35. H. Gr¨otzsch, Ein Dreifarbensatz f¨ur dreikreisfreie Netze auf der Kugel, Wiss. Z. Martin
Luther-Univ. Halle Wittenberg, Math.-Nat. Reihe 8 (1959), 109–120.
36. P. J. Heawood, Map-colour theorem, Quart. J. Pure Appl. Math. 24 (1890), 332–338.
37. J. P. Hutchinson, Three-coloring graphs embedded on surfaces with all faces even-sided,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 65 (1995), 139–155.
38. J. Hutchinson, R. B. Richter and P. Seymour, Colouring Eulerian triangulations, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 84 (2002), 225–239.
39. K. Kawarabayashi, D. Kr´al’, J. Kynˇcl and B. Lidick´y, 6-critical graphs on the Klein bottle,
SIAM J. Discrete Math. 23 (2009), 372–383.
40. K. Kawarabayashi and B. Mohar, List-color-critical graphs on a ﬁxed surface, Proc.
Twentieth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA’09), SIAM
(2009), 1156–1165.

1 Colouring graphs on surfaces
35
41. K.-I. Kawarabayashi and B. Mohar, Star coloring and acyclic coloring of locally planar
graphs, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 24 (2010), 56–71.
42. H. A. Kierstead, A. K´undgen and C. Timmons, Star coloring bipartite planar graphs,
J. Graph Theory 60 (2009), 1–10.
43. H. Kierstead, B. Mohar, S. ˇSpacapan, D. Yang and X. Zhu, The two-coloring number and
degenerate colorings of planar graphs, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 23 (2009), 1548–1560.
44. S. Klavˇzar and B. Mohar, The chromatic numbers of graph bundles over cycles, Discrete
Math. 138 (1995), 301–314.
45. D. Kr´al’ and R. ˇSkrekovski, The last excluded case of Dirac’s map-color theorem for
choosability, J. Graph Theory 51 (2006), 319–354.
46. M. Mirzakhani, A small non-4-choosable planar graph, Bull. Inst. Combin. Appl. 17
(1996), 15–18.
47. B. Mohar and P. D. Seymour, Coloring locally bipartite graphs on surfaces, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 84 (2002), 301–310.
48. B. Mohar and S. ˇSpacapan, Degenerate and star colorings of graphs on surfaces, Europ.
J. Combin. 33 (2012), 340–349.
49. B. Mohar and C. Thomassen, Graphs on Surfaces, Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001.
50. M. Montassier, Acyclic 4-choosability of planar graphs with girth at least 5, Graph Theory
in Paris (ed. A. Bondy et al.), Birkh¨auser (2007), 299–310.
51. G. Ringel, Map Color Theorem, Springer-Verlag, 1974.
52. G. Ringel and J. W. T. Youngs, Solution of the Heawood map-coloring problem, Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 60 (1968), 438–445.
53. N. Robertson, D. P. Sanders, P. Seymour and R. Thomas, Efﬁciently four-coloring planar
graphs, Proc. Assoc. Comp. Mach. Symp. Theory Comput. 28 (1996), 571–575.
54. N. Robertson, D. Sanders, P. Seymour and R. Thomas, The four-colour theorem,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 70 (1997), 2–44.
55. R. ˇSkrekovski, A theorem on map colorings, Bull. Inst. Combin. Appl. 35 (2002), 53–60.
56. C. Timmons, Star coloring high girth planar graphs, Electron. J. Combin. 15 (2008),
Research Paper 124.
57. R. Thomas, http://people.math.gatech.edu/∼thomas/FC/fourcolor.html
58. C. Thomassen, Five-coloring maps on surfaces, J. Combin. Theory (B) 59 (1993), 89–105.
59. C. Thomassen, Every planar graph is 5-choosable, J. Combin. Theory (B) 62 (1994),
180–181.
60. C. Thomassen, Five-coloring graphs on the torus, J. Combin. Theory (B) 62 (1994), 11–33.
61. C. Thomassen, 3-list coloring planar graphs of girth 5, J. Combin. Theory (B) 64 (1995),
101–107.
62. C. Thomassen, Color-critical graphs on a ﬁxed surface, J. Combin. Theory (B) 70 (1997),
67–100.
63. C. Thomassen, The chromatic number of a graph of girth 5 on a ﬁxed surface, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 87 (2003), 38–71.
64. W. T. Tutte, A contribution to the theory of chromatic polynomials, Canad. J. Math. 6
(1954), 80–91.
65. M. Voigt, List colourings of planar graphs, Discrete Math. 120 (1993), 215–219.
66. M. Voigt, A not 3-choosable planar graph without 3-cycles, Discrete Math. 146 (1995),
325–328.
67. M. Voigt and B. Wirth, On 3-colorable non-4-choosable planar graphs, J. Graph Theory
24 (1997), 233–235.
68. R. Wilson, Four Colors Sufﬁce (revised color edition), Princeton Science Series, Princeton
University Press, 2014.
69. D. A. Youngs, 4-chromatic projective graphs, J. Graph Theory 21 (1996), 219–227.

2
Brooks’s theorem
MICHAEL STIEBITZ and BJARNE TOFT
1. Introduction
2. Proofs of Brooks’s theorem
3. Critical graphs with few edges
4. Bounding χ by  and ω
5. Graphs with χ close to 
6. Notes
References
R. L. Brooks’s seminal paper [4] of 1941 contains the ﬁrst result – known as
Brooks’s theorem – on colouring abstract graphs. That it is worthwhile to study
the chromatic number of graphs in general, rather than just planar graphs,
was pointed out already by A. B. Kempe in 1879 in his paper [28] about map-
colouring. However, it was only with the paper by Brooks that vertex-colouring
of abstract graphs became a topic of study. Over the years, this topic has
developed into a rich theory and, as emphasized by B. Reed in his extensive
paper [51], Brooks’s theorem is just the tip of the iceberg.
1. Introduction
In this chapter only simple graphs are considered. Brooks’s theorem relates the
chromatic number to the maximum degree of a graph. In modern terminology
Brooks’s result is as follows:
Let G be a graph with maximum degree , where  > 2, and suppose that no
connected component of G is a complete graph K+1. Then it is possible to colour the
vertices of G with  colours so that no two vertices of the same colour are adjacent,
and hence G has chromatic number at most .
Brooks noticed that it sufﬁces to prove the result for connected graphs, since the
connected components of a graph can be coloured independently of each other.
Furthermore, he observed that every graph with maximum degree  admits a

2 Brooks’s theorem
37
( + 1)-colouring, by giving to each vertex in turn a colour different from all those
colours already assigned to vertices to which it is adjacent. The three missing cases,
where  = 0, 1, 2, can be easily included in Brooks’s theorem. So another possible
way of formulating Brooks’s fundamental result is as follows.
Theorem 1.1 (Brooks’s theorem) Let G be a connected graph of maximum degree
. Then χ(G) ≤ + 1, where equality holds if and only if G is a complete graph or
an odd cycle.
2. Proofs of Brooks’s theorem
Over the years many different proofs of Brooks’s theorem have been given, but in
principle there are just three basic approaches.
A sequential colouring algorithm
Brooks’s original proof provides an efﬁcient (quadratic-time) algorithm that produces
a -colouring of a connected graph G with maximum degree  ≥3, provided that
G is different from K+1. An improved proof, leading to a linear-time colouring
algorithm, was given by Lov´asz [49] in 1975. Lov´asz’s proof, which has become
the most popular proof of Brooks’s theorem, is based on the following sequential
colouring algorithm:
Starting from a ﬁxed vertex order v1, v2, . . . , vn of G, we consider the vertices in turn
and colour each vertex vi with the smallest positive integer not already used to colour
any vertex among v1, v2, . . . , vi−1 adjacent to vi.
Since G is connected, we can choose a vertex order v1, v2, . . . , vn such that each
vertex vi with 1 ≤i ≤n−1 is adjacent to some vertex vj with j > i. Furthermore, we
can choose any vertex v of G as the last vertex vn. To see this, take a spanning tree of
G and delete step by step an endvertex in the remaining tree, where we delete v last.
If we apply the sequential colouring algorithm to this ordering, then for each vertex
vi with 1 ≤i ≤n −1 we use a colour in {1, 2, . . . , }, since vi is adjacent to at most
 −1 of the previous vertices v1, v2, . . . , vi−1. This shows, in particular, that G −v
admits a -colouring. This -colouring of G −v can be extended to a -colouring
of G if the degree of v is at most  −1, or if v has two neighbours coloured with the
same colour. So we are done if G contains a vertex of degree less than . We are also
done if G is not 2-connected, since
χ(G) = max{χ(H) : H is a block of G}.
(1)
Recall that a block of a graph is a maximal subgraph with no cut-vertex; alternatively,
the edges of a block are the equivalence classes under the relation ‘to be equal or to
lie in a common cycle’. It remains to consider the case when G is -regular and

38
Michael Stiebitz and Bjarne Toft
2-connected. Since G is not a complete graph and  ≥3, it is easy to show that there
are three vertices u, v and w for which uv, vw ∈E(G), uw ̸∈E(G), and G −u −w
is connected (if G is 3-connected, this is obvious; if G is not 3-connected, then let v
belong to a cutset of two vertices and let u and w belong to different end-blocks of
G −v, where an end-block of a graph is a block containing at most one cut-vertex
of the graph). We can thus choose the vertex order v1, v2, . . . , vn in such a way that
v1 = u, v2 = w and vn = v. The colouring algorithm applied to this ordering then
assigns colour 1 to u and w, and hence terminates with a -colouring of G.
If G is 3-connected, Brooks’s proof is based on a similar argument, starting from
a ( + 1)-colouring, where the unwanted colour  + 1 is interchanged with a colour
on a neighbour, and continuing until it arrives at a vertex v with two neighbours with
the same colour, where v may be recoloured, and so  + 1 is not used as a colour.
To handle the remaining case, where G is not 3-connected, Brooks used induction on
the order of G.
A Kempe-change argument
In 1969 Melnikov and Vizing [43] presented a proof of Brooks’s theorem using an
idea going back to Kempe’s attempt to prove the four-colour theorem. The proof is
by contradiction.
So we assume that the result is false and consider a smallest counter-example G.
Then G is a connected graph with maximum degree  ≥3 for which G ̸= K+1
and χ(G) =  + 1. Choose any vertex v of G. Then G −v admits a -colouring,
and in each such colouring all  colours occur among the neighbours of v. So v has
 neighbours v1, v2, . . . , v and we may choose a -colouring ϕ of G −v such that
ϕ(vi) = i for i = 1, 2, . . . , . For i ̸= j, let Gi,j denote the subgraph of G −v induced
by the vertices of colour i and j. Let Pi,j be the component of Gi,j containing the
vertex vi. If we interchange the colours i and j on the vertices of Pi,j, we obtain a new
-colouring ϕ′ of G −v. (This recolouring operation is usually called a Kempe-
change.) We claim that Pi,j contains the vertex vj, implying that Pi,j = Pj, i; for
otherwise, we have ϕ′(vi) = ϕ′(vj) = j, and so we can extend ϕ′ to a -colouring of
G, giving a contradiction. Next, it can be shown that each component Pi,j is a path.
Eventually it can be proved that each component Pi,j consists of exactly one edge
vivj, which implies that G = K+1, giving a contradiction.
Maximum independent sets
Tverberg [60] used an idea developed independently by Catlin [10] and Gerencs´er
[21] to give a short proof of Brooks’s theorem by induction on the maximum degree.
Catlin [10] (see also Mitchem [45]) proved that if G is a connected graph with
maximum degree  ≥1, which is neither a complete graph nor an odd cycle, then G
has a -colouring with a monochromatic maximum independent set.

2 Brooks’s theorem
39
A degree version of Brooks’s theorem
Brooks’s theorem tells us that  colours sufﬁce for a (proper) colouring of all vertices
of a connected graph with maximum degree , unless G is a complete graph or an
odd cycle. In 1979 Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [18] extended Brooks’s result by proving
a degree version, where a list of d(v) colours is assigned to each vertex v of G. Here,
a brick is a complete graph or an odd cycle.
Theorem 2.1 Let G be a connected graph and, for each vertex v of G, let L(v) be a set
of at least d(v) colours. Unless each block of G is a brick, G admits an L-colouring –
that is, there is a colouring of G in which each vertex v of G receives a colour from
its list L(v).
Proof
By a bad pair we mean a pair (G, L) satisfying the hypothesis of the theorem,
for which G has no L-colouring. Our aim is to show that if (G, L) is a bad pair, then
each block of G is a brick. The proof is by induction on the order n of G and uses
the following reduction. Let v be a non-cut-vertex of G and let c ∈L(v) be a colour.
Furthermore, let G′ = G−v and, for w ∈V(G′), let L′(w) = L(w)\{c} if vw ∈E(G),
and L′(w) = L(w) otherwise. Then (G′, L′) is a bad pair and G′ has order n −1. In
this case we write (G′, L′) = (G, L)/(v, c).
We now prove by induction on the order n of G that the bad pair (G, L) satisﬁes
the following properties:
(a) |L(v)| = dG(v) for all v ∈V(G);
(b) provided that G has no cut-vertex, L(v) is the same for each vertex v of G and G
is regular;
(c) every block of G is a brick.
These are obviously true if n = 1, so assume that n ≥2.
For the proof of (a), consider an arbitrary vertex v of G. Since G is connected, there
is a non-cut-vertex w ̸= v in G. Now consider the bad pair (G′, L′) = (G, L)/(w, c),
where c ∈L(w). Then L(w) ̸= ∅and, by the induction hypothesis, |L′(v)| = dG′(v),
which yields |L(v)| = dG(v). This proves (a).
For the proof of (b), assume that G has no cut-vertex. Suppose, to the contrary,
that there are two vertices v ̸= w in G for which L(v) ̸= L(w). Since G is connected,
we may assume that vw ∈E(G). Furthermore, we may assume that there is a colour
c ∈L(w)\L(v). Then (G′, L′) = (G, L)/(w, c) is a bad pair for which |L′(v)| > dG′(v),
contradicting (a). Hence L(v) is the same colour-set for each vertex v of G and so, by
(a), G is regular.
For the proof of (c), we consider two cases. First, assume that G has a cut-vertex.
Then G has at least two end-blocks B1 and B2, and in each Bi there is a vertex vi
such that vi is not a cut-vertex of G. By the induction hypothesis (using the reduction
(G′, L′) = (G, L)/(vi, ci)), each block of G −vi is a brick. Since each block B ̸= Bi
of G is a block of G −vi, this shows that each block of G is a brick, too. It remains
to consider the case that G contains no cut-vertex – that is, G itself is a block. Then it

40
Michael Stiebitz and Bjarne Toft
follows from (b) that G is r-regular with r ≥1, and L(v) = C for all v ∈V(G), where
C is a set of r colours. Let v be a vertex of G. By induction, each block of G −v is a
brick. If G −v consists of a single block, then both G and G −v are complete graphs.
So suppose that G −v has at least two blocks. Since every end-block of G −v must
be (r −1)-regular, the degree of v in G is at least 2(r −1), and so r ≤2. For r = 1,
G = K2 (a brick). For r = 2, G is a cycle and the same two colours are available at
each vertex of G. Since G has no L-colouring, we easily conclude that G is an odd
cycle. This proves (c), and completes the proof of the theorem.
■
The above proof combines the sequential colouring argument with a reduction of
the lists and can be easily extended to hypergraphs (see [31]). The original proof of
the above result by Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [18] was based on a sequential colouring
argument and a structural result, that if a graph contains at least two chords in any
even cycle, then each of its blocks is a brick. They also gave a characterization of the
list assignments that can occur in a bad pair.
Critical graphs
In 1951 Gabriel A. Dirac submitted a Ph.D. thesis entitled On the Colouring of
Graphs to the University of London. In this thesis Dirac continued the study of
colouring abstract graphs started by Brooks, and he introduced the notion of a critical
graph. A graph G is critical if χ(H) < χ(G) whenever H is a proper subgraph of G.
A critical graph with chromatic number k is a k-critical graph.
That critical graphs form a useful concept relies on the fact that many problems
concerning the chromatic number of graphs can be reduced to critical graphs, and
critical graphs have stronger structural properties than graphs in general. Let ρ be a
monotone graph invariant – that is, a mapping that assigns to each graph G a real
number ρ(G) such that ρ(H) ≤ρ(G) whenever H is a subgraph of G. If we wish
to show that every graph G belonging to a class G of graphs closed under taking
subgraphs satisﬁes χ(G) ≤ρ(G), then it sufﬁces to establish this inequality for all
critical graphs in G. This follows from the fact that, for any graph G ∈G, there is
a critical graph H ∈G with H ⊆G and χ(H) = χ(G), and so χ(G) = χ(H) ≤
ρ(H) ≤ρ(G).
The complete graph Kk is a k-critical graph for every k ≥1; it is the only
k-critical graph with k vertices, and for k = 1 or 2 there are no others. By K¨onig’s
characterization of bipartite graphs as graphs with χ ≤2, it follows that the only
3-critical graphs are the odd cycles. However, for any integer k ≥4, a characteriza-
tion of all k-critical graphs seems unattainable.
Let G be a k-critical graph with k ≥3. By (1), G is 2-connected. Dirac [13]
characterized the class of k-critical graphs with a vertex-cut of size 2. Furthermore,
he observed that G is (k −1)-edge connected and so δ(G) ≥k −1. To see this,
consider an arbitrary edge vw of G. Then in any (k −1)-colouring of G −vw, the
vertices v and w receive the same colour c. For any of the remaining k −2 colours c′,

2 Brooks’s theorem
41
the vertices v and w are joined by a path whose vertices are coloured alternately with
c and c′; otherwise, by a Kempe-change, we would get a (k −1)-colouring where v
and w receive different colours, which would be a (k −1)-colouring of G, giving a
contradiction. Hence, together with the edge vw, there are k −1 edge-disjoint paths
between v and w, so G is (k −1)-edge connected. Toft [58] characterized the class of
k-critical graphs with a non-trivial edge-cut of size k −1.
Following Gallai [20], in a k-critical graph G vertices of degree k −1 are called
low and the remaining vertices (of degree at least k) are called high. For a critical
graph G, we denote by GL the subgraph induced by the low vertices of G, and by GH
the subgraph induced by the high vertices of G.
Observe that Brooks’s theorem is equivalent to the statement that the only critical
graphs G with χ(G) = (G) + 1 (or equivalently with GH = ∅) are the complete
graphs and the odd cycles. This result was generalized by Gallai. He proved in [20]
that if G is a critical graph, then each block of GL is a brick. This result can be
easily deduced from Theorem 2.1. To see this, let k ≥1 and G be a k-critical graph
having low vertices, and let G′ be a component of GL. Then there is a colouring ϕ
of G −V(G′) with a set C of k −1 colours. For v ∈V(G′), let L(v) = C \ {ϕ(w) :
w ∈NG(v)}. Since χ(G) = k, G′ has no L-colouring and |L(v)| ≥dG′(v) for all
v ∈V(G′). Hence, Theorem 2.1 implies that each block of G′ is a brick.
Gallai [20] also showed that any graph G′ with (G′) ≤k−1 in which each block
is a brick is equal to GL, for some k-critical graph G. Stiebitz [55] proved that, for any
critical graph G having low and high vertices, GL has at least as many components as
GH, thus answering a question raised by Gallai.
3. Critical graphs with few edges
Dirac was interested in exhibiting structural properties of critical graphs and using
these properties to establish colouring properties of general graphs. In particular,
he investigated the minimum number fk(n) of edges in any k-critical graph with n
vertices. Let Ck(n) denote the set of all k-critical graphs with n vertices and fk(n)
edges. Since k-critical graphs with k ≤3 are well characterized, we assume that
k ≥4.
First we show that fk(n) is deﬁned for all n ≥k, except for n = k + 1. To see this,
we can use two methods for constructing critical graphs. Let G = G1+G2 be the join
of two disjoint graphs G1 and G2. Then χ(G) = χ(G1) + χ(G2), and G is critical if
and only if G1 and G2 are critical; for instance, Kp + C2h+1 is (p + 3)-critical for all
p ≥1.
The next construction was introduced by Haj´os [25]. Let G1 and G2 be two disjoint
k-critical graphs, and let v1w1 and v2w2 be edges of G1 and G2, respectively. Let G
be the graph obtained from G1 −v1w1 and G2 −v2w2 by identifying v1 and v2 to
a new vertex and by adding the new edge w1w2. The resulting graph G is called a
Haj´os sum of G1 and G2. Then, as proved by Dirac [13], G is also k-critical.

42
Michael Stiebitz and Bjarne Toft
Based on these two constructions, it is easy to show that there are k-critical graphs
with n vertices if n ≥k and n ̸= k + 1. Clearly, there is no k-critical graph with
fewer than k vertices and, since no two vertices in a critical graph can have the same
neighbourhood, it follows that there is no k-critical graph with k + 1 vertices.
Since every k-critical graph has minimum degree at least k −1, we have 2fk(n) ≥
(k−1)n, and Brooks’s theorem is equivalent to the fact that equality holds if and only
if n = k. Evidently, Ck(k) = {Kk}. In 1957 Dirac [15] extended Brooks’s theorem by
proving that
2fk(n) ≥(k −1)n + k −3 for n ≥k + 2.
(2)
In 1974 Dirac [16] extended his result further by giving a complete description of the
extremal graphs; in particular, he proved that equality holds in (2) if and only if n =
2k−1. In 1999 Kostochka and Stiebitz [32] proved that 2fk(n) ≥(k−1)n+2(k−3),
provided that n ≥k + 2 and n ̸= 2k −1, with equality when n = 2k – that is,
fk(2k) = k2 −3.
For k ≥3, let Dk denote the family of all graphs G whose vertex-set consists of
three non-empty pairwise disjoint sets A, B1 and B2 with
|B1| + |B2| = |A| + 1 = k −1
and two additional vertices a and b such that A and B1 ∪B2 induce cliques in G not
joined by any edge, N(a) = A ∪B1 and N(b) = A ∪B2. Each such graph G has
n = 2k −1 vertices, with d(v) = k −1 for all vertices v ̸= a, b, and 2|E(G)| =
(k −1)n + k −3. Both Dirac [16] and Gallai [20] proved that Ck(2k −1) = Dk.
For k ≥4, let Ek denote the family of all graphs G whose vertex-set consists of
four non-empty pairwise disjoint sets A, B1, B2 and B3 with
|B1| + |B2| + |B3| = |A| + 1 = k −1
and three additional vertices c1, c2 and c3 for which A and B1 ∪B2 ∪B3 are cliques
in G not joined by any edge and, for i ∈{1, 2, 3}, N(ci) = A ∪Bi. Each such graph G
has order n = 2k and
|E(G)| = 1
2(k −1)n + (k −3) = k2 −3 = fk(2k).
It is easy to check that G is critical, and hence Ek ⊆Ck(2k).
The ﬁrst improvement (for n large enough) of Dirac’s bound (2) was established
by Gallai [20] in 1963; he proved that
2fk(n) ≥

k −1 + k −3
k2 −3
	
n for n ≥k + 2.
(3)
This result is an easy consequence of Gallai’s characterization of the subgraph of a
critical graph induced by its low vertices. A further improvement of Gallai’s bound
was given by Krivelevich [39] in 1997, and by Kostochka and Stiebitz [35] in 2003.
In the second [20] of his two fundamental papers concerning the structure of
critical graphs, Gallai proved the following remarkable result. Subsequent proofs
were obtained by Molloy [46] and Stehl´ık [54].

2 Brooks’s theorem
43
Theorem 3.1 Let k ≥4, and let G be a k-critical graph of order n. If n ≤2k −2,
then G is the join of two non-empty critical graphs. If n < 5
3k, then one of the two
critical graphs may be chosen as a complete graph.
Based on this result, Gallai [20] found the exact values of the function fk(n),
including a description of the corresponding class Ck(n), for k + 2 ≤n ≤2k −1.
Theorem 3.2 Let k and n be integers satisfying k ≥4 and k + 2 ≤n ≤2k −1. Then
2fk(n) = (k −1)n + (n −k)(2k −n) −2 and Ck(n) = {K2k−n−1 + H: H ∈Dn−k+1}.
Fig. 1. The graphs in C4(6), C4(7) and C4(8)
We next establish an upper bound gk(n) for fk(n). For n = k, deﬁne gk(k) =
k
2

. If
n ≥k + 2 and n ≡p + 1 (mod (k −1)), where 2 ≤p ≤k, deﬁne
ck,p = fk(k + p) −1
2

k −
2
k −1
	
(k + p)
and
gk(n) = 1
2

k −
2
k −1
	
n + ck,p = 1
2

k −1 + k −3
k −1
	
n + ck,p.
As explained above, the value fk(k + p) is known, and so gk(n) is a known function.
We claim that, for all feasible values of n, there is a k-critical graph with n vertices
and gk(n) edges, implying that fk(n) ≤gk(n). This is evident if n = k or n = k + p
and 2 ≤p ≤k, since then gk(n) = fk(n). If G is a k-critical graph with n ≥k + 2
vertices and gk(n) edges, then a Haj´os sum of G and Kk results in a k-critical graph
with n′ = n + k −1 vertices and
m′ = |E(G)| +
k
2
	
−1
edges. Since n′ ≡n (mod (k −1)), an easy calculation yields
m′ = gk(n) +
k
2
	
−1 = gk(n + k −1),
which proves our claim. Haj´os’s construction implies that
fk(n + k −1) ≤fk(n) + 1
2k(k −1) −1.

44
Michael Stiebitz and Bjarne Toft
As explained by Jensen and Toft [27], this implies that limn→∞fk(n)/n exists for all
k ≥4.
Ore [50] conjectured that a Haj´os sum of a graph G ∈Ck(n) and that Kk is in
Ck(n + k −1). This implies that fk(n) = gk(n) for all integers n ≥k + 2 and n = k.
The function gk(n) is not linear in n, since the additive term ck,p depends both on k
and on the residue class p+1 of n (mod (k−1)). This may indicate why it is difﬁcult
to prove Ore’s conjecture that fk(n) = gk(n). Recently, Kostochka and Yancey [36]
found the best linear approximation for the function fk(n). Observe that ck,k−1 ≤ck,p
for 2 ≤p ≤k.
Theorem 3.3 Let k ≥4 and let
hk(n) = 1
2

k −
2
k −1
	
n + ck,k−1 = (k + 1)(k −2)n −k(k −3)
2(k −1)
.
Then fk(n) ≥⌈hk(n)⌉whenever n ≥k and n ̸= k + 1.
If n ≡1 (mod (k −1)), then hk(n) = gk(n), and therefore fk(n) = gk(n). This
proves Ore’s conjecture for inﬁnitely many values of n for each k ≥4. Since the
limit of fk(n)/n exists, this implies that
lim
n→∞
fk(n)
n
= 1
2

k −
2
k −1
	
.
If n ≡p + 1 (mod (k −1)) and n ≥k + 2, then fk(n) −hk(n) ≤ck,p −ck,k−1. For
k = 4, we have c4,2 = 0, c4,3 = −2
3, and c4,4 = −1
3. Hence, Theorem 3.3 implies
that
f4(n) =

1
3(5n −2)

(4)
for all n ≥4 and n ̸= 5.
The proof of Theorem 3.3 is relatively long and sophisticated. However, as shown
by Kostochka and Yancey [37], the special case k = 4, that any 4-critical graph G of
order n has at least 1
3(5n −2) edges, can be handled much more easily, leading to a
two-page proof. A very short outline of the proof is as follows.
Assume that G is a counter-example of minimum order. For X ⊆V(G), deﬁne
ρ(X) = 5|X| −3|E(⟨X⟩)|. Since G is a counter-example, ρ(V(G)) ≥3. One can now
prove, from the minimality of G, that ρ(X) ≥5 for any proper subset X of V(G);
moreover, ρ(X) = 5 only if |X| = 1, and ρ(X) = 6 only if ⟨X⟩= K3. These may
then in turn be used to prove that (GL) ≤1 – that is, a vertex in G of degree 3 has
at most one neighbour of degree 3. A discharging argument may then be used. The
initial charge on each vertex v is the degree d(v). Then each vertex of degree greater
than 3 sends a charge of 1
6 to each of its neighbours of degree 3. In this way a vertex
of degree 3 gets a new charge of at least 3+ 1
3 = 10
3 , and a vertex of degree d ≥4 gets
a new charge of at least d −1
6d = 5
6d ≥10
3 . The total amount of charge is 2|E(G)|,
and hence 2|E(G)| ≥
10
3 |V(G)| – that is, ρ(V(G)) = 5|V(G)| −3|E(G)| ≤0,
contradicting the initial assumption that ρ(V(G)) ≥3.

2 Brooks’s theorem
45
A graph satisﬁes χ ≤k −1 if each of its induced subgraphs on n′ ≥k vertices
has less than fk(n′) edges. Lower bounds for fk(n) can therefore be used to prove
colouring theorems.
Dirac [14] used his bound (2) to prove a map-colour theorem related to Heawood’s
bound. Other applications for bounds of fk(n) are discussed by Krivelevich [39],
Kostochka and Yancey [36], [37], and Borodin et al. [3]. As pointed out by Kostochka
and Yancey [37], equation (4) can be used to give a short proof of Gr¨otzsch’s
theorem [22] that any planar triangle-free graph is 3-colourable. The proof is by
contradiction, so we consider a 4-critical graph G without triangles embedded in the
plane with n vertices, m edges and f faces. If G contains a face (x, y, z, u) of size 4,
then ab ̸∈E(G) for (a, b) ∈{(x, z), (y, u)}, and the graph Gab obtained from G by
identifying a and b has chromatic number at least 4. Since Gxz or Gyu is triangle-free,
this gives a smaller counter-example. If G has no face of size 4, then 5f ≤2m and
n −m + f = 2 (by Euler’s formula), which gives m ≤1
3(5n −10). However, by (4),
m ≥1
3(5n −2), a contradiction.
For 5-critical graphs, Theorem 3.3 yields f5(n) ≥9
4n −5
4. This implies that any
triangle-free graph G embedded on the torus or the projective plane is 4-colourable,
since |E(G)| ≤2|V(G)| (by Euler’s formula); the result for the torus was obtained
by Kronk and White [40] in 1972. As pointed out by Thomassen [56], there are
inﬁnitely many 4-critical triangle-free graphs on the torus and on the projective plane.
Furthermore, Thomassen proved a counterpart of Gr¨otzsch’s 3-colour theorem for the
torus and the Klein bottle: every graph on the torus or the Klein bottle containing no
C3 or C4 is 3-colourable. The proof is by inspection of a smallest counter-example,
which is a 4-critical graph of some order n ≥6. Using Euler’s formula and (4), we
deduce that |E(G)| = f4(n). However, it is unknown whether there exists a triangle-
free graph in C4(n), for any n ≥6. Hence the original proof by Thomassen uses an
extension of Gr¨otzsch’s theorem and is rather involved.
As proved by Kostochka and Stiebitz [33], a triangle-free k-critical graph of order
n ≥k + 2 has at least (k −o(k))n edges. On the other hand, as shown by Abbott,
Hare and Zhou [1], there are k-critical graphs without short cycles and with average
degree at most 2(k −2).
4. Bounding χ by  and ω
The clique number ω(G) of a graph G – that is, the order of a largest complete
subgraph – is an obvious lower bound for the chromatic number. On the other hand,
it is well known that there is no upper bound for the chromatic number of a graph in
terms of the clique number. This follows from the fact that, for each integer k ≥1,
there are triangle-free k-chromatic graphs. Graphs with these properties were ﬁrst
constructed by Zykov [62] in 1949. Ten years later, Erd˝os [17] proved by probabilistic
arguments that, for all k and ℓ, there exists a k-chromatic graph with no cycles of
length less than ℓ.

46
Michael Stiebitz and Bjarne Toft
Brooks’s theorem implies that graphs with maximum degree  ≥3 and clique
number ω satisfy χ ≤max{, ω}, and so provides the ﬁrst result bounding the
chromatic number of a graph from above in terms of the maximum degree and the
clique number. Improvements of Brooks’s result in this direction were ﬁrst obtained
independently around the same time by Borodin and Kostochka [2], Catlin [9] and
Lawrence [41]: if 3 ≤ω ≤, then every graph G with maximum degree  and
clique number at most ω satisﬁes
χ(G) ≤ + 1 −
 + 1
ω + 1

.
(5)
The inequality (5) is an immediate consequence of Brooks’s theorem and a
decomposition result of Lov´asz [42], that any graph G with
(G) ≤d1 + d2 + · · · + dp + p −1
has a partition V1, V2, . . . , Vp of its vertex-set such that the subgraph Gi = ⟨Vi⟩
satisﬁes (Gi) ≤di. Now let di = ω for 1 ≤i ≤p −1 and dp ≥ω,
so that d1 + d2 + · · · + dp =  −p + 1 and p = ⌊( + 1)/(ω + 1)⌋. By
Lov´asz’s result, there is a partition G1, G2, . . . , Gp of G such that (Gi) ≤di,
and hence χ(Gi) ≤di by Brooks’s theorem when ω ≥3. Consequently, χ(G) ≤
χ(G1) + χ(G2) + · · · + χ(Gp) ≤d1 + d2 + · · · + dp =  −p + 1. Lov´asz’s
decomposition result follows from the basic case p = 2 by induction. For p = 2, a
partition for which d1|E(G2)|+d2|E(G1)| is minimum has the desired property, since
otherwise a vertex of too large a degree could be moved to the other side to obtain a
better partition.
For triangle-free graphs, (5) yields the same bound for the chromatic number as
for K4-free graphs, since (5) assumes that ω ≥3. However, Johanssen (unpublished)
has proved that every graph with ω(G) = 2 satisﬁes
χ(G) ≤
c(G)
log (G)
(6)
for some constant c. A proof of this result by probabilistic means can be found in the
book by Molloy and Reed [48].
As an immediate consequence of (5), we deduce that any graph G with 3 ≤
ω(G) ≤1
2( −1) satisﬁes χ(G) ≤(G) −1. This observation led Borodin and
Kostochka [2] to propose the following conjecture.
Conjecture A Every graph G with (G) ≥9 and ω(G) ≤(G) −1 satisﬁes
χ(G) ≤(G) −1.
As observed by Kostochka [30], it sufﬁces to verify the conjecture for graphs with
 = 9; this follows from his result that any graph with maximum degree  and clique
number ω ≥ −
√
 + 3
2 has an independent set meeting all maximum cliques (see
also [12]). Reed [52] proved that, for any  ≥9, if G is a smallest counter-example
to Conjecture A of maximum degree , then the cliques of size  −1 in G are

2 Brooks’s theorem
47
disjoint. Hence, as noticed by Reed, the Borodin–Kostochka conjecture would be a
simple consequence of the following statement.
Every graph G with (G) = 9 and all of whose cliques of size 8 are disjoint, has a
vertex partition into two graphs G1 and G2 such that (Gi) ≤4 and ω(Gi) ≤4 for
i = 1, 2.
This implies, by Brooks’s theorem, that χ(G) ≤χ(G1) + χ(G2) ≤8.
Reed [52] proved in 1999 that the Borodin–Kostochka conjecture is true for graphs
with maximum degree at least 0 = 1014. The large value of 0 is due to the fact
that the proof uses the Lov´asz local lemma in order to ﬁnd an appropriate partial
colouring.
Theorem 4.1 If G is a graph with (G) ≥1014 and ω(G) ≤(G) −1, then
χ(G) ≤(G) −1.
Reed [52] also conjectured the following bounds for the chromatic number, by a
convex combination of the clique number and the maximum degree + 1.
Conjecture B χ(G) ≤⌈1
2((G) + 1) + 1
2ω(G)⌉.
Conjecture C χ(G) ≤2
3((G) + 1) + 1
3ω(G), provided that (G) ≥3.
Gallai [20] constructed an inﬁnite family of 4-critical graphs which are 4-regular
and triangle-free. This shows that the rounding-up in Conjecture B is necessary.
Another family of graphs showing that the rounding-up is necessary for arbitrarily
large  was given by Kostochka (see [48]): if G = C5[Kn] is the composition (or
lexicographic product) of C5 and Kn, then |V(G)| = 5n, (G) = 3n −1, ω(G) = 2n
and χ(G) = ⌈5
2n⌉. In particular, the graph C5[K3] shows that the Borodin–Kostochka
conjecture does not hold for graphs with maximum degree 8.
Reed’s Conjecture B is trivial when ω(G) = (G), ω(G) = (G) + 1 and
ω(G) = 1, and it follows from Brooks’s theorem when ω(G) = (G) −1 and
ω(G) = (G) −2. That this conjecture holds when ω(G)
=
2 and (G) is
sufﬁciently large follows from Johannsen’s bound (6). So Conjecture B may be
considered as a far-reaching extension of Brooks’s theorem.
Let (a, b) be a pair of real numbers such that χ(G) ≤a((G) + 1) + bω(G) for
all graphs with (G) sufﬁciently large. By considering complete graphs, we see that
a + b ≥1. Furthermore, as proved by Reed [52], a ≥1
2.
The following two results, obtained in 1998 by Reed [51], support Conjecture B.
Theorem 4.2 There is a positive constant ε such that
χ(G) ≤(1 −ε)((G) + 1) + εω(G)
for every graph G with (G) ≥3.
Theorem 4.3 For every positive real number b there is a number b such that
χ(G) ≤(G)+1−b for every graph G with ω(G) ≤(G)+1−2b and (G) ≥b.

48
Michael Stiebitz and Bjarne Toft
5. Graphs with χ close to 
Brooks’s theorem is equivalent to the statement that if  ≥3, then K+1 is the
only ( + 1)-critical graph with maximum degree . Reed’s result (Theorem 4.1)
is equivalent to the statement that if  ≥0, then there is no -critical graph with
maximum degree .
For any  ≥2, let h be the maximum integer h for which  ≥(h + 1)(h + 2),
so h ≈
√
 −2. The following result of Molloy and Reed [47] is a strengthening
of Theorem 4.1, since no k-critical graph can have order k + 1.
Theorem 5.1 There is a constant ′ such that, for any  ≥′ and any h < h, any
graph with maximum degree  and chromatic number at least  −h + 1 contains
a ( −h + 1)-critical subgraph whose order is at most  + 1. In particular, any
( −h + 1)-critical graph with maximum degree  has order  + 1.
The proof of this remarkable result uses the Lov´asz local lemma, which requires a
large constant ′. On the other hand, Molloy and Reed conjectured that the condition
 ≥′ is not necessary if we require only that the order of the critical subgraph is
bounded by a function f().
In contrast to the above theorem, it was also proved by Molloy and Reed that, for
any  ≥2 and any h > h, there are arbitrarily large ( −h + 1)-critical graphs
with maximum degree . To obtain such graphs, start with a ( −h + 1)-critical
graph G of arbitrarily large order. If a vertex v in G has degree greater than , split
v into an independent set X of size h + 2 and join each vertex in X completely to
a complete graph K−h−1: this results in another ( −h + 1)-critical graph. By
repeated application of this operation, we obtain the desired graph. This construction
is a special case of a more general construction involving critical hypergraphs, due to
Toft [58].
A graph has chromatic number at least k if and only if it contains a k-critical
subgraph. So if we study graphs with chromatic number at least  −h + 1 for
sufﬁciently large , then Theorem 5.1 implies that the corresponding critical graphs
have order close to their chromatic number. For such graph classes, however, Gallai’s
Theorem 3.1 is applicable.
First, we introduce some notation. Let Gk(n) be the class of k-critical graphs
of order n, and let G∗
k (n) be the subclass consisting of all graphs in Gk(n) with
no dominating vertices. (Recall that a vertex is dominating in G if it is adjacent
to all the remaining vertices of G.) For a graph K and a graph class G, deﬁne
K + G = {K + G : G ∈G} if G is non-empty, and K + G = ∅otherwise.
Let k ≥4, 2 ≤s < 2
3k and G ∈Gk(k + s). Clearly, G = Kk−ℓ+ H is the join
of a complete graph and a graph H with no dominating vertices (possibly ℓ= k or
H = ∅). Since G has order n ≥k + 2, G ̸= Kk, and so H is non-empty. Since G
is k-critical, H is ℓ-critical and |V(H)| = k + s −(k −ℓ) = ℓ+ s. Since H has no
dominating vertices, χ(H) ≥3 and |V(H)| ≥5. Since n = k + s < 5
3k, it follows
from Theorem 3.1 that k−ℓ≥1 and ℓ+s = |V(H)| ≥5
3ℓ. Consequently, 3 ≤ℓ≤3
2s

2 Brooks’s theorem
49
and, since no 3-critical graph has even order,
Gk(k + s) =
⌊3s/2⌋

ℓ=ℓs
Kk−ℓ+ G∗
ℓ(ℓ+ s),
(7)
where ℓs = 3 if s is even, and ℓs = 4 otherwise. Clearly, Gk(k) consists only of
Kk, and Gk(k + 1) is empty. Lists of small critical graphs were determined by Toft
[59], by Jensen and Royle [26], and by Royle [53]. In particular, there are exactly
two (non-isomorphic) 4-critical graphs H1 and H2 on 7 vertices and neither of which
contains a dominating vertex (see Fig. 2). With the help of these lists, one can give an
explicit description of Gk(k+s) for s = 2, 3, 4 and 5, provided that k ≥4 and s < 2
3k.
In particular, Kk−3 + C5 is the only graph in Gk(k + 2) for k ≥4, and Kk−4 + H1 and
Kk−4 + H2 are the only two graphs in Gk(k + 3) for k ≥5. The class Gk(k + 4) with
k ≥6 consists of twenty-two graphs.
Fig. 2. The only two 4-critical graphs on 7 vertices
Let  ≥′ and 0 ≤h < h, and let S,h be the set of all non-isomorphic
( −h + 1)-critical graphs with order at most  + 1. Such a set S,h consists of the
non-isomorphic graphs in the class
G = G−h+1( −h + 1) ∪
h+1

s=3
G−h+1( −h + s).
From Theorem 5.1 it then follows that every graph G with maximum degree 
satisﬁes
(Th) χ(G) ≥ −h + 1 if and only if G contains a (subgraph isomorphic to a) graph
in S,h.
Note that statement (T0) is Brooks’s theorem and statement (T1) is equivalent to
Theorem 4.1.
If we also assume that +1 < 5
3(−h+1) (which is equivalent to  > 5
2h−1),
then we can apply (7) to determine S,h. In particular, S,0 = {K+1}, S,1 = {K},
S,2 = {K−1, K−4+C5}, and S,3 = {K−2, K−5+C5, K−6+H1, K−6+H2}.
Furthermore, as shown by Farzad, Molloy and Reed [19], |S,4| = 26 and |S,5| =
420. For h = 2, 3, 4 and 5, statement (Th) was established by Farzad et al. Since
ω(H1) = ω(H2) = 3, each graph in S,h, for h = 0, 1, 2 and 3, contains a K−h. We
thus obtain the following result of Farzad et al.

50
Michael Stiebitz and Bjarne Toft
(S) If χ(G) ≥(G) −2 and (G) is sufﬁciently large, then χ(G) ≤ω(G) + 1.
It was also noticed in [19] that the threshold  −2 is sharp. To see this, let G =
K−9 + C5 + C5. Then χ(G) =  −3 and ω(G) =  −5 = χ(G) −2. This
provides a solution to one of the problems proposed in the book by Jensen and Toft
[27, Problem 4.7].
6. Notes
Brooks’s claim to fame rests on two papers [6] and [4], which to this day continue to
stimulate mathematicians. Rowland Leonard Brooks was born on 6 February 1916 in
Lincolnshire, England, and died on 18 June 1993. He started his university studies in
Cambridge in 1935. On the very ﬁrst day of lectures he found himself attending an
advanced lecture by mistake, together with another freshman, Cedric Smith. Shortly
after this he met two other students, A. H. Stone and W. T. Tutte. It was Tutte
who in November 1940 communicated Brooks’s paper [4] as a research note to the
Cambridge Philosophical Society.
After ﬁnishing Cambridge, Brooks became an income-tax inspector in London.
He continued his interest in mathematics throughout his life (see [5], [7] and [8]).
C. A. B. Smith remained a close friend and they met regularly to discuss mathemat-
ical problems. Smith told Toft (private communication) that Brooks was a rather shy
person who did not want his photograph published, which is why it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd
a photograph of him. He also hesitated to make biographical material available.
The various equivalent formulations of Brooks’s theorem, as discussed in this
chapter, are the triggers for enhancements and extensions of the fundamental result.
Here is another formulation of Brooks’s theorem in terms of forbidden subgraphs.
Every connected graph G ̸= Kk+1 (k ≥3) not containing K1,k+1 as a subgraph
satisﬁes χ(G) ≤k.
Taking this formulation into account, it becomes natural to consider arbitrary trees
of order k+2, and Mihok [44] proved the following result. Here the colouring number
col(G) of a graph G is (the maximum minimum degree of the subgraphs of G) + 1.
If T ̸= K1,k+1 is a tree of order k + 2 with k ≥3, then every connected graph
G ̸= Kk+1 not containing T as a subgraph satisﬁes δ(G) ≤k −1, and hence χ(G) ≤
col(G) ≤k.
The list-chromatic number χℓ(G) of G is the smallest integer k ≥0 such that G is
L-colourable for each list assignment L of G satisfying |L(v)| = k for all v ∈V(G).
Using a sequential colouring algorithm, it is easy to show that χℓ(G) ≤col(G). Thus
the following well-known sequence of inequalities holds for any graph G:
ω(G) ≤χ(G) ≤χℓ(G) ≤col(G) ≤(G) + 1.
(8)

2 Brooks’s theorem
51
That Brooks’s theorem remains true when the chromatic number χ is replaced
by the list-chromatic number χℓfollows from Theorem 2.1 (due to Erd˝os, Rubin
and Taylor [18]). On the other hand, to characterize the class of graphs G for which
χ(G) = χℓ(G) seems very difﬁcult, or even unattainable. Some partial answers are
discussed in Chapter 6 on list-colourings.
Another interesting variant of the chromatic number is the equitable chromatic
number χeq(G), deﬁned as the least k for which G has an equitable k-colouring –
that is, a k-colouring in which the sizes of the colour classes differ by at most 1. As
proved by Hajnal and Szemer´edi [24], χeq(G) ≤(G) + 1. A short proof of this
result was recently given by Kierstead et al. [29]. It is not known (see [27, Problem
4.10]) whether a Brooks-type result holds for χeq – that is, whether every connected
graph G satisﬁes χeq(G) ≤(G) if G is neither a complete graph nor an odd cycle.
Chen, Lih and Wu [11] conjectured that, for  ≥3, every connected graph with
maximum degree  has an equitable -colouring, unless G = K+1, or  is odd
and G = K,.
Mihok’s result about the chromatic number of graphs not containing a speciﬁc tree
T shows that the most interesting case is when T is a star. However, if we forbid a
tree as an induced subgraph, then the corresponding question becomes much more
difﬁcult. Gyarf´as [23] conjectured that, for every given tree T, there exists a function
fT such that χ(G) ≤fT(ω(G)) for every graph G not containing T as an induced
subgraph. This conjecture is wide open.
That it is worthwhile to study critical graphs, and especially the function fk(n), was
ﬁrst emphasized by G. A. Dirac in his thesis, and subsequently by Gallai [20] and Ore
[50]. Kostochka and Yancey [36] recently succeeded in determining the best linear
approximation to the function fk(n); their result is a major breakthrough in the study
of critical graphs. However, even if we know that f4(n) = ⌈1
3(5n−2)⌉, our knowledge
about the class C4 = 
n C4(n) remains incomplete. Is there a decomposition result
for graphs in C4? All known graphs in C4, except K4 and K1 + C5, have a vertex-cut
of size 2 or a non-trivial edge-cut of size 3, and can therefore be decomposed into
two smaller graphs or hypergraphs belonging to C4. For instance, the only graph in
C4(8) can be decomposed into K4 and a 4-critical hypergraph with ﬁve vertices (see
Fig. 3). Kostochka and Yancey [38] proved that, if n ≡1 (mod (k −1)), then any
graph in Ck(n) has a vertex-cut of size 2.
Fig. 3. A decomposition for the graph in C4(8)

52
Michael Stiebitz and Bjarne Toft
As observed during a discussion between Kostochka and the authors of this
chapter, the Kostochka–Yancey bound also holds for critical hypergraphs. Recall
that in a (proper) colouring of a hypergraph we require that each edge contains two
vertices of different colours. The deﬁnition of the chromatic number and criticality
can be easily extended to hypergraphs.
Theorem 6.1 For k ≥4, any k-critical hypergraph with n vertices has at least hk(n)
edges.
Proof
Consider a k-critical hypergraph G on n vertices and m edges. To prove that
m ≥hk(n), we use induction on the number h of hyperedges in G – that is, edges with
at least three vertices. For h = 0, the result follows from Theorem 3.3. So assume
that h ≥1 and let e be a hyperedge of G. We now construct a new hypergraph
G′ as follows. Let Td
k denote the graph obtained from d disjoint complete graphs
K1, K2, . . . , Kd, each with k −1 vertices, and an additional vertex u, ﬁrst by adding
d −1 edges x1y2, x2y3, . . . , xd−1yd, where xi ∈V(Ki), yi+1 ∈V(Ki+1) (for 1 ≤i ≤
d −1) and xi ̸= yi (for 2 ≤i ≤d −1), and then joining u to the remaining vertices
of degree k −2. Note that T1
k = Kk and that Td+1
k
is a Haj´os sum of Td
k and Kk. So
Td
k is a k-critical graph. We now choose d such that T = Tk
d satisﬁes dT(u) ≥|e|.
Now let G′ be the hypergraph obtained from G −e by splitting the vertex u of T
into the set e – that is, G is obtained from G−e and T−u by joining each neighbour of
u in T to exactly one vertex of e such that each vertex in e has at least one neighbour
in T −u. It is then not difﬁcult to show that G′ is a k-critical hypergraph. This is a
special case of a reduction method for critical hypergraphs invented by Toft [58]. For
n′ = |V(G′)| and m′ = |E(G′)|, we have n′ = n + d(k −1) and
m′ = m + 1
2d(k −2)(k + 1).
On the other hand, since G′ has h −1 hyperedges, the induction hypothesis
implies that
m′ ≥hk(n′) = hk(n) + 1
2(k −
2
k −1)(d(k −1))
= hk(n) + 1
2d(k −2)(k + 1),
which yields m ≥hk(n), as claimed.
■
Note that n′ ≡n (mod (k−1)). Thus, if Ore’s conjecture that fk(n) = gk(n) is true,
then we can use the above proof to show that each k-critical hypergraph on n vertices
has at least fk(n) edges.
In addition to Theorem 6.1, Kostochka and Stiebitz [33] proved that if a k-critical
hypergraph on n vertices contains no ordinary edge (of size 2), then it has at least
(k −1) −1/ 3√
k −1)n edges.
It would be also of much interest to know whether the Kostochka–Yancey bound
holds for list-colourings. A graph G is called k-list-critical if there is a list assignment
L with |L(v)| = k −1 for all vertices v such that every proper subgraph of G has

2 Brooks’s theorem
53
an L-colouring, but G itself has no L-colouring. Then any k-critical graph is k-list-
critical. Furthermore, a graph G is k-list-critical if χℓ(H) < χℓ(G) = k for every
proper subgraph H of G. So let f ℓ
k (n) denote the minimum number of edges possible
in a k-list-critical graph on n vertices. Not much is known about this function. That
Gallai’s bound (3) holds for list-critical graphs is a simple consequence of the fact that
if G is a k-list-critical graph with k ≥4, then each block of the low-vertex subgraph
GL is a brick; this is a simple consequence of Theorem 2.1 and has been observed by
several authors (see, for example, [31], [35] and [57]). That Dirac’s bound (2) holds
for list-critical graphs – that is, 2f ℓ
k (n) ≥(k−1)n+k−3 – was proved by Kostochka
and Stiebitz [34].
Does there exists a triangle-free graph in C4? Dirac also considered the function
fk(n, r), equal to the minimum number of edges in any k-critical graph of order n
without containing a Kr. Dirac [15] proved that 2fk(n, r) ≥(k −1)n + 2k −r −3.
Weinstein [61] improved this bound to 2fk(n, r) ≥(k −1)n + 3k −2r −3. A Gallai-
type bound for the function fk(n, r) was established by Krivelevich [39]. Kostochka
and Stiebitz [33] proved that fk(n, 3) ≥(k −o(k))n. This result is a consequence of
Johannsen’s bound (6) for the chromatic number of triangle-free graphs in terms of
the maximum degree; for graphs with small maximum degree, Johannsen’s bound
is not helpful. Kostochka proved that any triangle-free graph G satisﬁes χ(G) ≤
2
3((G) + 3) (see [27, Problem 4.6]). Note that Reed’s conjecture (Conjecture B)
implies that Kostochka’s bound can be improved to χ(G) ≤1
2((G)+2) for triangle-
free graphs.
In his 1951 thesis, Dirac considered not only critical graphs with few edges, but
also those with many edges. During his doctoral study in London in 1949, Dirac met
P. Erd˝os and told him about the new concept of critical graphs. Erd˝os immediately
asked for the maximum number of edges in such a minimal graph (with respect to
χ). Dirac observed that G = C2ℓ+1 + C2ℓ+1 is a 6-critical graph with n = 4ℓ+ 2
vertices and 1
4n2 + n edges. Whether there exists a 6-critical graph with n vertices
and more than 1
4n2 + n edges is unknown; see also the book of Jensen and Toft [27,
Problem 5.1]. Chapter 5 of that book discusses several other problems related to the
structure of critical graphs.
References
1. H. L. Abbott, D. R. Hare and B. Zhou, Sparse color-critical graphs and hypergraphs with
no short cycles, J. Graph Theory 18 (1994), 373–388.
2. O. V. Borodin and A. V. Kostochka, On an upper bound of a graph’s chromatic number,
depending on the graph’s degree and density, J. Combin. Theory (B) 23 (1977), 247–250.
3. O. V. Borodin, A. V. Kostochka, B. Lidik´y and M. Yancey, Short proofs of coloring
theorems on planar graphs, manuscript.
4. R. L. Brooks, On colouring the nodes of a network, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 37
(1941), 194–197.
5. R. L. Brooks, A procedure for dissecting a rectangle into squares, and an example for the
rectangle whose sides are in the ratio 2:1, J. Combin. Theory (B) 8 (1970), 232–242.

54
Michael Stiebitz and Bjarne Toft
6. R. L. Brooks, C. A. B. Smith, A. H. Stone and W. T. Tutte, The dissection of rectangles
into squares, Duke Math. J. 7 (1940), 312–340.
7. R. L. Brooks, C. A. B. Smith, A. H. Stone and W. T. Tutte, A simple perfect square, Nederl.
Akad. Wetensch. Proc. 50 (1947), 1300–1301.
8. R. L. Brooks, C. A. B. Smith, A. H. Stone and W. T. Tutte, Determinants and current ﬂows
in electric networks, Discrete Math. 100 (1992), 291–301.
9. P. A. Catlin, A bound on the chromatic number of a graph, Discrete Math. 22 (1978),
81–83.
10. P. A. Catlin, Brooks’ graph-coloring theorem and the independence number, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 27 (1979), 42–48.
11. B. Chen, K. Lih and P. Wu, Equitable coloring and the maximum degree, Europ. J.
Combinatorics 15 (1994), 443–447.
12. D. W. Cranston and L. Rabern, Conjectures equivalent to the Borodin–Kostochka
conjecture that appear weaker, manuscript.
13. G. A. Dirac, The structure of k-chromatic graphs, Fund. Math. 40 (1953), 42–55.
14. G. A. Dirac, Map colour theorems related to the Heawood colour formula, J. London Math.
Soc. 31 (1956), 460–471.
15. G. A. Dirac, A theorem of R. L. Brooks and a conjecture of H. Hadwiger, Proc. London
Math. Soc. (3) 7 (1957), 161–195.
16. G. A. Dirac, The number of edges in critical graphs, J. Reine Angew. Math. 268/269
(1974), 150–164.
17. P. Erd˝os, Graph theory and probability, Canad. J. Math. 11 (1959), 34–38.
18. P. Erd˝os, A. L. Rubin and H. Taylor, Choosability in graphs, Proc. West-Coast Conf. on
Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Computing, Congr. Numer. XXVI (1979), 125–157.
19. B. Farzad, M. Molloy and B. Reed, ( −k)-critical graphs, Discrete Math. 93 (2005),
173–185.
20. T. Gallai, Kritische Graphen I, II, Publ. Math. Inst. Hungar. Acad. Sci. 8 (1963), 165–192
and 373–395.
21. L. Gerencs´er, Szinez´esi probl´em´akrol, Mat. Lapok 16 (1965), 274–277.
22. H. Gr¨otzsch, Ein Dreifarbensatz f¨ur dreikreisfreie Netze auf der Kugel, Wiss. Z. Martin-
Luther Univ. Halle-Wittenberg, Math.-Nat. Reihe 8 (1958/59), 109–120.
23. A. Gy´arf´as, Problems from the world surrounding perfect graphs, Zastos. Mat. 19 (1988),
413–431.
24. A. Hajnal and E. Szemer´edi, Proof of a conjecture of P. Erd˝os, Combinatorial Theory and
its Application, Vol. II (eds. P. Erd˝os et al.), North-Holland (1970), 601–623.
25. G. Haj´os, ¨Uber eine Konstruktion nicht n–f¨arbbarer Graphen, Wiss. Z. Martin-Luther-
Univ. Halle-Wittenberg, Math.-Naturw. Reihe 10 (1961), 116–117.
26. T. R. Jensen and G. F. Royle, Small graphs with chromatic number 5: A computer search,
J. Graph Theory 19 (1995), 107–116.
27. T. R. Jensen and B. Toft, Graph Coloring Problems, Wiley, 1995.
28. A. B. Kempe, On the geographical problem of four colours, Amer. J. Math. 2 (1879),
193–200.
29. H. A. Kierstead, A. V. Kostochka, A. V. Mydlarz and E. Szemer´edi, A fast algorithm for
equitable coloring, Combinatorica 30 (2010), 217–224.
30. A. V. Kostochka, Degree, density, and chromatic number (in Russian), Metody Diskret.
Anal. 35 (1980), 45–70.
31. A. V. Kostochka, M. Stiebitz and B. Wirth, The colour theorems of Brooks and Gallai
extended, Discrete Math. 191 (1996), 125–137.
32. A. V. Kostochka and M. Stiebitz, Excess in colour-critical graphs, Graph Theory and Com-
binatorial Biology (Balatonlelle, Hungary, 1996), Bolyai Society Mathematical Studies 7
(1999), 87–99.

2 Brooks’s theorem
55
33. A. V. Kostochka and M. Stiebitz, On the number of edges in colour-critical graphs and
hypergraphs, Combinatorica 20 (2000), 521–530.
34. A. V. Kostochka and M. Stiebitz, A list version of Dirac’s theorem on the number of edges
in colour-critical graphs, J. Graph Theory 39 (2002), 165–167.
35. A. V. Kostochka and M. Stiebitz, A new lower bound for the number of edges in colour-
critical graphs and hypergraphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 20 (2003), 374–402.
36. A. V. Kostochka and M. Yancey, Ore’s conjecture on color-critical graphs is almost true,
manuscript.
37. A. V. Kostochka and M. Yancey, Ore’s conjecture for k = 4 and Gr¨otzsch’s theorem,
Combinatorica 34 (2014), 323–329.
38. A. V. Kostochka and M. Yancey, A Brooks-type result for sparse critical graphs,
manuscript.
39. M. Krivelevich, On the minimal number of edges in color-critical graphs, Combinatorica
17 (1997), 401–426.
40. H. V. Kronk and A. T. White, A 4-color theorem for toroidal graphs, Proc. Amer. Math.
Soc. 34 (1972), 83–86.
41. J. Lawrence, Covering the vertex set of a graph with subgraphs of smaller degree, Discrete
Math. 21 (1978), 61–88.
42. L. Lov´asz, On decomposition of graphs, Studia Sci. Math. Hungar. 1 (1966), 237–238.
43. L. S. Melnikov and V. G. Vizing, New proof of Brooks’ theorem, J. Combin. Theory 7
(1969), 289–290.
44. P. Mihok, An extension of Brooks’ theorem, Ann. Discrete Math. 51 (1992), 235–236.
45. J. Mitchem, A short proof of Catlin’s extension of Brooks’ theorem, Discrete Math. 21
(1978), 213–214.
46. M. Molloy, Chromatic neighborhood sets, J. Graph Theory 31 (1999), 303–311.
47. M. Molloy and B. Reed, Colouring graphs when the number of colours is almost
the maximum degree, Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing (2001), 462–470.
48. M. Molloy and B. Reed, Graph Coloring and the Probabilistic Method, Springer, 2002.
49. L. Lov´asz, Three short proofs in graph theory, J. Graph Theory 19 (1975), 269–271.
50. O. Ore, The Four Colour Problem, Academic Press, 1967.
51. B. Reed, χ, , and ω, J. Graph Theory 27 (1998), 177–213.
52. B. Reed, A strengthening of Brooks’s theorem, J. Combin. Theory (B) 76 (1999), 136–149.
53. G. F. Royle, Small graphs, http://school.maths.uwa.edu.au/˜ gordon/remote/graphs/, 2000.
54. M. Stehl´ık, Critical graphs with connected complements, J. Combin. Theory (B) 89 (2003),
189–194.
55. M. Stiebitz, Proof of a conjecture of T. Gallai concerning connectivity properties of colour-
critical graphs, Combinatorica 2 (1982), 315–323.
56. C. Thomassen, Gr¨otzsch’s 3-colour theorem and its counterparts for the torus and the
projective plane, J. Combin. Theory (B) 62 (1994), 268–279.
57. C. Thomassen, Color-critical graphs on a ﬁxed surface, J. Combin. Theory (B) 70 (1997),
67–100.
58. B. Toft, Colour-critical graphs and hypergraphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 16 (1974),
145–161.
59. B. Toft, Critical subgraphs of colour critical graphs, Discrete Math. 7 (1974), 377–392.
60. H. Tverberg, On Brooks’ theorem and some related results, Math. Scand. 52 (1983),
37–40.
61. J. Weinstein, Excess in critical graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 18 (1975), 24–31.
62. A. A. Zykov, On some properties of linear complexes (in Russian), Mat. Sbornik N. S. 24
(1949), 163–188; English translation in Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. 79 (1952), 418–449.

3
Chromatic polynomials
BILL JACKSON
1. Introduction
2. Deﬁnitions and elementary properties
3. Log concavity and other inequalities
4. Chromatic roots
5. Related polynomials
References
This chapter is concerned with chromatic polynomials and other related
polynomials: ﬂow polynomials, characteristic polynomials, Tutte polynomials
and the Potts model partition function. We describe their basic properties and
state some recent results and open problems. We also outline some techniques
for working with these polynomials.
1. Introduction
The study of chromatic polynomials of graphs was initiated by Birkhoff [3] in 1912
and continued by Whitney [49], [50] in 1932. Inspired by the four-colour conjecture,
Birkhoff and Lewis [4] obtained results concerning the distribution of the real zeros
of chromatic polynomials of planar graphs and made the stronger conjecture that
they have no real zeros greater than or equal to 4. Their hope was that results from
analysis and algebra could be used to prove their stronger conjecture, and hence to
deduce that the four-colour conjecture was true. This has not yet occurred: indeed, the
four-colour conjecture is now a theorem, but the stronger conjecture of Birkhoff and
Lewis remains open. Nevertheless, many beautiful results on chromatic polynomials
have been obtained, and many other intriguing questions remain unanswered.
Work on chromatic polynomials has received fresh impetus in recent years from an
interaction with mathematical physics. The chromatic polynomial is a specialization
of the Potts model partition function, used by mathematical physicists to study phase
transitions. A combination of ideas and techniques from graph theory and statistical

3 Chromatic polynomials
57
mechanics has led to signiﬁcant new results on both polynomials. Other recent
progress has been made through the use of techniques from algebraic geometry
to solve a long-standing open problem concerning the coefﬁcients of chromatic
polynomials.
2. Deﬁnitions and elementary properties
All graphs considered are ﬁnite and (unless stated otherwise) without loops or
multiple edges. As usual, we use G −e to denote the graph obtained by deleting
an edge e from a graph G and G/e the graph obtained by contracting e. For any
positive integer q, the chromatic polynomial P(G, q) of G is deﬁned as the number of
distinct proper q-colourings of G. It is easy to see that a graph G with n vertices and
no edges has chromatic polynomial qn and that P(Kn, q) = q(q −1) . . . (q −n + 1).
Some reduction techniques
The following results give a recursive procedure for calculating chromatic
polynomials.
Theorem 2.1 (The deletion/contraction lemma) Let G be a graph and e be an edge
of G. Then
P(G, q) = P(G −e, q) −P(G/e, q).
Proof
Let e = vw. Then P(G−e, q) = P(G, q)+P(G/e, q) for all positive integers
q, since P(G, q) counts the number of q-colourings of G −e in which v and w are
given different colours and P(G/e, q) counts the number in which v and w are given
the same colour.
■
This result can be used recursively to express P(G, q) as a linear combination
of chromatic polynomials of graphs with no edges. Alternatively, we can use the
‘addition/contraction’ form
P(G, q) = P(G + e, q) + P(G/e, q),
where e is a new edge added between two non-adjacent vertices, to express P(G, q)
as a linear combination of chromatic polynomials of complete graphs.
Theorem 2.1 can also be used to deduce many elementary properties of chromatic
polynomials. In particular, an easy induction on the number of edges of G gives the
following result.
Theorem 2.2 Let G be a graph with n vertices. Then P(G, q) is a monic polynomial
of degree n with zero constant term and with integer coefﬁcients that alternate in
sign.

58
Bill Jackson
The recursive calculation of P(G, q) can often be simpliﬁed by using the following
factorization result.
Theorem 2.3 Let G be a graph, and let G1 and G2 be subgraphs of G for which
G1 ∪G2 = G and G1 ∩G2 = Kr. Then
P(G, q) =
P(G1, q)P(G2, q)
q(q −1) · · · (q −r + 1).
Proof
The vertices of Kr must receive distinct colours in any q-colouring of G.
There are P(Kr, q) = q(q −1) · · · (q −r + 1) ways to colour Kr and the symmetry
between the colours implies that any such colouring of Kr can be extended to exactly
P(G1, q)/[q(q −1) · · · (q −r + 1)] colourings of G1 and to P(G2, q)/[q(q −1) · · ·
(q −r + 1)] colourings of G2. The result follows.
■
Our third reduction involves a rather special case.
Theorem 2.4 Let G be a graph, and let v be a vertex adjacent to all other vertices of
G. Then
P(G, q) = qP(G −v, q −1).
Proof
We have q choices to colour v, and this leaves q −1 colours to colour
G −v.
■
Some examples
A tree T with n vertices has P(T, q) = q(q −1)n−1.
This can be deduced directly from the deﬁnition – we have q choices for colouring
any given vertex, then q −1 choices for colouring each of its neighbours, and so
on. Alternatively, we can express T as T1 ∪T2, where T1 ∩T2 = K1, and apply
Theorem 2.3 and induction.
The cycle Cn with n vertices has P(Cn, q) = (q −1)n + (−1)n(q −1).
This can be proved by using the deletion/contraction formula and then applying the
above result for trees to Cn −e and induction to Cn/e. Alternatively, we can use
the addition/contraction formula, and then apply Theorem 2.3 and induction to Cn +
e = Cn1 ∪Cn2 with Cn1 ∩Cn1 = K2, and Cn/e = Cn1−1 ∪Cn2−1 with Cn1−1 ∩
Cn2−1 = K1.
The wheel Wn with n vertices has P(Wn, q) = q[(q −2)n−1 + (−1)n−1(q −2)].
This follows from the above result for cycles and Theorem 2.4.
Calculating P(G, q) for an arbitrary graph using Theorems 2.1, 2.3 and 2.4 may
take an exponential amount of time. This is to be expected, since it is NP-hard to
determine the chromatic number of a graph. Since the chromatic number of G is one
more than the largest integer zero of P(G, q), it will also be NP-hard to determine
P(G, q). More details on algorithms for calculating chromatic polynomials can be
found in Chapter 13.

3 Chromatic polynomials
59
The subgraph expansion
Theorem 2.2 tells us that the coefﬁcients of chromatic polynomials are integers.
Whitney [49] gave an interpretation for these values.
Theorem 2.5 Given a graph G = (V, E),
P(G, q) =

A⊆E
(−1)|A|qk(A) ,
(1)
where k(A) is the number of connected components of the graph (V, A). Equivalently,
P(G, q) = n
k=1 ck qk, where ck = ceven
k
(G) −codd
k
(G) and ceven
k
(G) and codd
k
(G) are
respectively the numbers of spanning subgraphs of G with k connected components
and with an even and odd number of edges.
Proof
Since P(G, q) is the number of colourings of G using colours from [q] =
{1, 2, . . . , q}, we have
P(G, q) =

σ:V→[q]

vw∈E
(1 −δσ(v), σ(w)) ,
where δi,j is the Kronecker delta function. We now expand the product as a sum over
subsets of E and then reverse the order of summation to obtain
P(G, q) =

σ:V→[q]

A⊆E
(−1)|A| 
vw∈A
δσ(v), σ(w)
=

A⊆E
(−1)|A|

σ:V→[q]

vw∈A
δσ(v), σ(w)
=

A⊆E
(−1)|A| qk(A) ,
where the last equality follows since the product is 1 if σ is constant on each
component of (V, A), and is 0 otherwise.
■
Theorem 2.5 explains why P(G, q) is a monic polynomial of degree n with zero
constant term. It also implies that the coefﬁcient of qn−1 is −|E|. The fact that
the coefﬁcients of P(G, q) alternate in sign gives a non-trivial relationship between
ceven
k
(G) and codd
k
(G).
3. Log concavity and other inequalities
One of the most celebrated conjectures on chromatic polynomials, that their coef-
ﬁcients are log concave, was made by Read [36] in 1968. This has recently been
proved by Huh [23] using techniques from algebraic geometry.
Theorem 3.1 If P(G, q) = n
k=1 ck qk is the chromatic polynomial of a graph G,
then
ck−1ck+1 ≤c2
k
for all 2 ≤k ≤n −1

60
Bill Jackson
A related conjecture of Brenti [8], that P(G, q) is log concave for integer values of
q > χ(G), was veriﬁed for several families of graphs in [8] but was shown to be false
in general by Seymour [38]. Fadnavis [17] has recently shown that the conjecture is
true for integer values of q that are large compared to the maximum degree of G.
Theorem 3.2 Let G be a graph with maximum degree . Then
P(G, q −1)P(G, q + 1) ≤P(G, q)2 ,
for all integers q ≥9.767.
On the other hand, Bartels and Welsh [1] showed that P(G, q) is convex for integers
q > χ(G).
Theorem 3.3 Let G be a graph. Then for all integers q > χ(G),
P(G, q −1) + P(G, q + 1) ≥2P(G, q).
Given a graph G on n vertices and a positive integer q, the probability that a random
q-colouring of the vertices is a proper q-colouring is P(G, q)/qn. It seems reasonable
to expect this probability to increase with q, but Colin McDiarmid showed that this is
not true in general (see [1]). Dong [10] showed that this probability increases as long
as q is large compared to the order of G.
Theorem 3.4 For all graphs G on n vertices and all real q ≥n −1,
P(G, q)
qn
≤P(G, q + 1)
(q + 1)n
.
The special case of this result when q = n −1 was conjectured by Bartels and
Welsh [1]. This conjecture became known as the shameful conjecture, because it is
equivalent to the ‘intuitively obvious’ statement that the expected number of colours
used in a proper colouring of G is minimized when G has no edges.
Fadnavis [18] has recently used methods from statistical mechanics to show that
the probability that a random q-colouring of the vertices of G is a proper q-colouring
increases with q if G is claw-free (has no induced K1,3), or if q is large compared to
the maximum degree of G.
Theorem 3.5 Let G be a graph with maximum degree  and let q be a positive
integer. If G is claw-free, or if q > 4003/2, then
P(G, q)
qn
≤P(G, q + 1)
(q + 1)n
.
4. Chromatic roots
A zero of a chromatic polynomial of a graph G is called a chromatic root of G.
Birkhoff and Lewis’s original paper on chromatic polynomials stimulated research

3 Chromatic polynomials
61
into ﬁnding intervals on the real line that contain no chromatic roots of given families
of graphs. Mathematical physicists on the other hand have been concerned with
ﬁnding regions of the complex plane for which the Potts model partition function
is non-zero, because of implications for the location of phase transitions. Regions
free from complex chromatic roots are an important special case.
We can view both areas of research as determining real or complex analytic
properties of chromatic polynomials. There has been much less work on determining
their algebraic properties. In particular, little is known on the fundamental problem of
determining whether or not a given algebraic integer is a chromatic root. We describe
the main results and open problems in these areas.
Real roots and the sign of the chromatic polynomial
Results which determine intervals on the real line that are free from chromatic roots
have invariably determined the sign of the chromatic polynomial in these intervals.
The zero-free intervals for the family of all graphs are determined by the following
results from [47], [51] and [24].
Theorem 4.1 Let G be a graph with n vertices, c components and b blocks, with at
least two vertices. Then:
• P(G, q) is non-zero with sign (−1)n for q ∈(−∞, 0), and has a zero of multiplicity
c at q = 0
• P(G, q) is non-zero with sign (−1)n+c for q ∈(0, 1), and has a zero of multiplicity
b at q = 1
• P(G, q) is non-zero with sign (−1)n+c+b for q ∈(1, 32
27].
The ﬁrst part of this theorem follows immediately from Theorem 2.2. The other
parts can be deduced from Theorems 2.1 and 2.3 by using increasingly complicated
inductive arguments. A conceptually simpler inductive proof for the last part is given
in [29], using the added freedom given by the Potts model partition function. We
return to this in Section 5.
The fact that Theorem 4.1 gives a complete list of zero-free intervals follows from
a result of Thomassen [43], that the chromatic roots of all graphs form a dense subset
of ( 32
27, ∞). A recent related result of Goldberg and Jerrum [16] implies that it is NP-
hard to determine the sign of P(G, q) for all q ∈( 32
27, ∞) other then q = 2. (Note that
P(G, 2) is positive if G is bipartite and is zero otherwise.)
The families of graphs which demonstrate the aforementioned density and com-
plexity results contain many 2-vertex cuts, and it seems likely that Theorem 4.1 can
be extended beyond q =
32
27 when G is 3-connected. In [24] we conjectured that
P(G, q) is non-zero with sign (−1)n for q ∈(1, α] when G is 3-connected, where
α ≈1.781 is the chromatic root of K3,4 in (1, 2). Some evidence in favour of this
conjecture is given in [11].
We can also consider other special families of graphs. Results of Birkhoff and
Lewis [4] and Woodall [51], [52] give an analogue of Theorem 4.1 for plane

62
Bill Jackson
triangulations which holds throughout the interval (−∞, β), where β ≈2.546
is a chromatic root of the octahedron. Thomassen [44] showed that the zero-free
interval (1, 32
27] can be extended to (1, γ ] for graphs with a Hamiltonian path, where
γ ≈1.296 is the real root of (2 −t)3 = 4(t −1)2, and he conjectures [42] that it
extends all the way to (1, 2) for graphs with a Hamiltonian cycle. Dong and Koh [13]
made the same conjecture for the larger family of independently 1-tough graphs –
that is, graphs G with the property that G −S has at most |S| components for all
non-empty independent sets of vertices S.
Results have also been obtained on ‘upper zero-free intervals’. The idea is that
upper bounds on the chromatic number (and hence on the largest integer chromatic
root) of a family of graphs often correspond to similar bounds on the largest real
chromatic root for the family. A classical example is the result of Birkhoff and Lewis
[4] that the ﬁve-colour theorem for planar graphs G can be extended to show that
P(G, q) > 0 for all q ∈[5, ∞), and their conjecture that a similar extension holds for
the four-colour theorem. An analogous situation occurs for graphs G with maximum
degree . The greedy algorithm implies that χ(G) ≤ + 1, and a result of Dong
and Koh [12] gives P(G, q) > 0 for all q ∈[5.664, ∞). It is an open problem to
decide whether P(G, q) > 0 for all q ∈(, ∞), although Woodall [53] has shown
that this conclusion holds under a stronger hypothesis.
Theorem 4.2 If every minor of a graph G has maximum degree at most , then
P(G, q) > 0 for all q ∈(, ∞).
Note that upper bounds on the chromatic number do not always give rise to upper
zero-free intervals: bipartite graphs have chromatic number 2, but can have arbitrarily
large real chromatic roots (see Woodall [51]).
Complex roots
Sokal [40] has shown that there are no zero-free regions in the complex plane for the
family of all graphs.
Theorem 4.3 The chromatic roots of all graphs form a dense subset of the complex
plane.
The family of graphs that he used to prove this result is surprisingly simple. The
generalized theta graph s,t consists of two vertices joined by t internally disjoint
paths of length s. Sokal showed that, if we vary the parameters s and t, then the
chromatic roots of these graphs are dense everywhere in the complex plane, with the
possible exception of the disc |q −1| < 1. He then covered this disc with chromatic
roots by using the families obtained by adding either one vertex, or two adjacent
vertices joined to all to other vertices of s,t, and then applying Theorem 2.4.
As for upper zero-free intervals in the real case, we may hope that an upper bound
on the chromatic numbers of a family of graphs might correspond to a similar bound
on the largest absolute value of chromatic roots for the same family. The generalized
theta graphs demonstrate that this does not occur even for the family of planar graphs.

3 Chromatic polynomials
63
Sokal [39] showed, however, that it does occur for graphs with maximum degree ,
by proving that all their chromatic roots lie in a disc |q| < C, for some universal
constant C – this was a long-standing conjecture of Biggs, Damerell and Sands
[2]. His proof used techniques from statistical mechanics, which will be outlined
below. Sokal’s value C = 7.963 was improved to C = 6.907 by Fern´andez and
Procacci [21], by strengthening one of the key results from statistical mechanics. The
aforementioned result of Dong and Koh that the real roots are bounded by 5.664
was obtained by making a further improvement in the real case.
The following is a gross oversimpliﬁcation of Sokal’s proof technique from
[39]. (In particular, Sokal’s proof holds for the more general Potts model partition
function.) He constructed a weighted graph, called a polymer gas, whose vertices
(or polymers) are the connected subgraphs of G. Each polymer H has weight
(−1)|E(H)|q|V(H)|−1, and two polymers are joined by an edge whenever their union
is connected. The chromatic polynomial of G can be expressed as the independent-
set polynomial of this polymer gas: we have P(G, q) = 
S w(S), where the sum
extends over all independent sets of vertices S in the polymer gas, and w(S) is the
product of the weights of the polymers in S. He used the hypothesis on the maximum
degree of G to show that the number of connected n-vertex subgraphs containing a
ﬁxed vertex of G is at most cnn, for some constant c. This gives rise to a bound on
the weighted degree of each polymer in the polymer gas, and this in turn enabled
him to bound the absolute values of the zeros of its independent-set polynomial
by a linear function of c, using powerful results from statistical mechanics (see
[20], [32]).
Algebraic properties
Since chromatic polynomials are monic polynomials with integer coefﬁcients, every
chromatic root is an algebraic integer. It is easy to see that if α is a chromatic root
of a graph G, then so is every conjugate of α (that is, every root of the minimum
polynomial of α over Q). Combined with Theorem 4.1, this gives us the following
necessary condition for an algebraic integer to be a chromatic root.
Theorem 4.4 If an algebraic integer α is a chromatic root, then no conjugate of α
can belong to (−∞, 32
27] \ {0, 1}.
Tutte [46] showed that |P(G, τ + 1)| ≤τ 5−n for all plane triangulations with n
vertices, where τ = 1
2(1 +
√
5) is the golden ratio. This indicates that large plane
triangulations may have a chromatic root close to τ +1. On the other hand τ +1 itself
cannot be a chromatic root of any graph; this follows from Theorem 4.4, because 2−τ
is a conjugate of τ + 1 and 2 −τ ∈(0, 1).
It seems unlikely that the necessary condition for an algebraic integer to be a
chromatic root given in Theorem 4.4 is also sufﬁcient, but no counter-examples
are known. The following two problems are particularly attractive (and frustrating)

64
Bill Jackson
instances of this. The ﬁrst was suggested by Feng Ming Dong at the Newton Institute
Programme on Combinatorics and Statistical Mechanics (CSM) held in Cambridge
in 2008; the second came out of conversations between Graham Farr and the author.
Problem Can a purely imaginary complex number be a chromatic root? In particular,
is i =
√
−1 a chromatic root?
Problem Are 1, e2πi/3, e−2πi/3 the only chromatic roots of unity?
The numbers e2πi/3, e−2πi/3 are chromatic roots of C7. The only root of unity that
we know cannot be a chromatic root is −1.
We can also search for conditions that are sufﬁcient for an algebraic integer to
be a chromatic root. The following conjectures were formulated by a discussion
group on the algebraic properties of chromatic roots that took place during the above
mentioned CSM Programme (see [5] and [9]).
Conjecture A If α is an algebraic integer, then α + p is a chromatic root for some
p ∈N.
Conjecture B If α is a chromatic root, then α p is a chromatic root for all p ∈N.
Conjecture A was veriﬁed for quadratic integers during the CSM programme (see
[9]) and for cubic integers by Bohn [6]. Bohn [7] showed that Conjecture B is valid
for chromatic roots of generalized theta graphs, and hence holds for a set of algebraic
integers that is dense in the complex plane, by the remark after Theorem 4.3.
5. Related polynomials
In this section we deﬁne ﬂow polynomials, characteristic polynomials of matroids,
Potts model partition functions and Tutte polynomials, and outline their connections
with the chromatic polynomial. We allow graphs to contain loops and multiple edges,
since such edges have a non-trivial effect on these polynomials. This fact also means
that we must keep any multiple edges or loops created by the contraction of an edge
(in contrast to the situation for the chromatic polynomial). We refer readers who are
unfamiliar with ﬂows in graphs to Chapter 9, and readers unfamiliar with matroids
to [34].
Flow polynomials
Tutte [45] deﬁned the ﬂow polynomial F(G, q) of a graph G to be the number of
distinct nowhere-zero -ﬂows in a ﬁxed orientation of G, for a given abelian group
 of order q, and showed that this number is the same for all orientations of G and
all choices of . Note, however, that the number of nowhere-zero q-ﬂows of G (that
is, Z-ﬂows which take the values {±1, ±2, · · · , ±(q −1)}) is in general not equal to
F(G, t) (see Kochol [31]).

3 Chromatic polynomials
65
The ﬂow polynomial is dual to the chromatic polynomial in the following sense. If
G is a connected plane graph and G∗is its planar dual, then
F(G, q) = q−1P(G∗, q).
(2)
This identity tells us that results and conjectures on chromatic polynomials of plane
graphs can be restated in terms of ﬂow polynomials of plane graphs. In particular,
since generalized theta graphs are planar, their duals show that ﬂow roots of planar
graphs are dense everywhere in the complex plane, with the possible exception of the
disc |q −1| < 1 (by the remark following Theorem 4.3).
For non-planar graphs there are still many similarities between the two polyno-
mials: versions of Theorems 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 hold for ﬂow polynomials (see, for
example, [25]); the log concavity of the coefﬁcients of F(G, t) was also established
by Huh in [23]; Wakelin [48] obtained an analogue of Theorem 4.1 which determines
the sign of F(G, q) for all q ∈(−∞, 32
27].
On the other hand, the behaviour of the ﬂow polynomial for all graphs seems to
be closer to the behaviour of the chromatic polynomial for the special case of planar
graphs. For example, we showed in [26] and [27] that the results of Woodall on
the real chromatic roots of plane triangulations mentioned in Section 4 extend to
ﬂow polynomials of all cubic graphs. A major open problem for ﬂow polynomials
is to decide whether there is an upper zero-free interval for all graphs. Welsh
conjectured over ten years ago (see [25]) that (4, ∞) is an upper zero-free interval
for ﬂow polynomials, and hence that the Birkhoff–Lewis conjecture for chromatic
polynomials of plane graphs holds for ﬂow polynomials of all graphs, as long as
q ̸= 4. Royle [37] showed that this is false by constructing graphs with ﬂow roots in
(4, 5), but offered the modiﬁed conjecture that [5, ∞) is an upper zero-free interval.
The value q = 5 is of special signiﬁcance since it corresponds to Tutte’s 5-ﬂow
conjecture. The best-known general upper bound on ﬂow roots, that F(G, q) > 0
whenever G is a bridgeless graph on n vertices and q > 2 log2 n, is given in [25].
Characteristic polynomials of matroids
Similarities between the chromatic and ﬂow polynomials for non-planar graphs can
be explained by extending the duality identity (2) using matroids. We denote a
matroid as M = (E, r), where E is the set of elements and r is the rank function.
The characteristic polynomial of M is
C(M, q) =

A⊆E
(−1)|A|qr(E)−r(A).
(3)
The cycle matroid of a graph G = (V, E) is the matroid MG = (E, rG), where
rG(A) = |V| −k(A) for all A ⊆E. Comparing (1) and (3) we see that
P(G, q) = qk(G) C(MG, q),
(4)
where k(G) is the number of connected components of G.

66
Bill Jackson
Given a matroid M = (E, r), its dual matroid M∗= (E, r∗) is deﬁned by putting
r∗(A) = |A| −r(E) + r(E \ A) for all A ⊆E. The cocycle matroid M∗
G of a graph
G is the dual matroid of its cycle matroid. A similar argument to that used in the
derivation of (1) (see, for example, [41]) implies that
F(G, q) =

A⊆E
(−1)|A| q|E\A|−|V|+k(E\A),
(5)
and (3) now gives
F(G, q) = C(M∗
G, q).
(6)
Equations (4) and (6) imply that chromatic and ﬂow polynomials of graphs are
both examples of characteristic polynomials of matroids. Furthermore, when G is
a connected plane graph and G∗is its planar dual, we have M∗
G = MG∗. Hence (4)
and (6) also imply (2).
It follows from the above discussion that any result on the characteristic polyno-
mials of a family of matroids which includes both the cycle and cocycle matroids of
graphs implies the same result for chromatic and ﬂow polynomials as special cases.
For example, Huh showed in [23] that the coefﬁcients of characteristic polynomials
of matroids that are representable over a ﬁeld of characteristic 0 are log concave, and
a version of Theorem 4.1 for characteristic polynomials of all matroids was given in
[15] and [29].
A challenging open problem is to decide whether some version of the results of
Section 4 on complex roots of graphs of bounded degree holds for ﬂow polynomials –
or, better still, for characteristic polynomials of a family of matroids which includes
the cycle matroids of graphs of maximum degree  and their matroid duals. A
conjecture and some preliminary results are given in [30] and [28].
The Potts model partition function
Let G = (V, E) be a graph, and let w : E →C be a weight function on E. The Potts
model partition function, or multivariate Tutte polynomial, of the weighted graph
(G, w) is
Z(G, q, w) =

A⊆E
qk(A)wA,
(7)
where wA = 
e∈A we and we denotes the weight of the edge e. When all edges have
the same weight w, we write Z(G, q, w) for the partition function. Comparing (7)
with (1), we see that P(G, q) = Z(G, q, −1). A similar argument to that used in the
derivation of (1) gives us the following expression for the partition function when q
is a positive integer:
Z(G, q, w) =

σ:V→[q]

e=vw∈E
(1 + weδσ(v), σ(w)) .
(8)

3 Chromatic polynomials
67
This expression for Z(G, q, w) is similar to the form given in the original paper
of Potts [35]; the equivalence of the two expressions is due to Fortuin and
Kasteleyn [22].
Equation (8) expresses Z(G, q, w) as a weighted sum over all q-colourings of
the vertices of G, where a particular q-colouring σ has weight (1 + we) and the
product ranges over all edges e that are not properly coloured by σ. This colouring
interpretation enables us to extend Theorem 2.1 and a special case of Theorem 2.3 to
the partition function, using similar proofs.
Theorem 5.1 Let (G, w) be a weighted graph and let e be an edge of G = (V, E).
Then
Z(G, q, w) = Z(G −e, q, w|E−e) + we Z(G/e, q, w|E−e).
Theorem 5.2 Let (G, w) be a weighted graph and let G1 = (V1, E1) and G2 =
(V2, E2) be edge-disjoint subgraphs of G with |V1 ∩V2| = r for some r ∈{0, 1} and
with G1 ∪G2 = G. Then
Z(G, q, w) = q−rZ(G1, q, w|E1) Z(G2, q, w|E2) .
(The hypothesis of Theorem 5.2 that the subgraphs are edge-disjoint is needed in the
case when r = 1 and their common vertex is incident to one or more loops.)
An advantage of introducing edge-weights is that they give rise to new reduction
operations. The parallel reduction operation replaces two parallel edges by a single
edge with the same endpoints. The series reduction operation replaces a vertex v of
degree 2 and its incident edges by a single edge joining the neighbours of v.
Theorem 5.3 Let (G, w) be a weighted graph and let e1, e2 be edges of G.
If H is obtained by applying the parallel reduction operation to e1, e2, then
Z(G, q, w) = Z(H, q, w|E\{e1,e2}, we1∥we2) ,
where we1∥we2 = we1 + we2 + we1we2 is the weight of the edge that replaces e1
and e2.
If H is obtained by applying the series reduction operation to e1, e2, then
Z(G, q, w) = (q + we1 + we2)Z(H, q, w|E\{e1,e2}, we1 ▷◁q we2) ,
where we1 ▷◁q we2 = we1we2(q + we1 + we2)−1 is the weight of the edge that replaces
e1 and e2.
We refer the reader to Sokal [41] for a proof of these results. He also gives several
impressive applications of how the freedom to change the edge-weights can give
simple proofs for Z(G, q, w), and hence give results for P(G, q) that were either new
or were obtained by much more difﬁcult proofs. One such example is given below.
The basic idea behind the original proof [24] of the last part of Theorem 4.1
is as follows. We proceed by contradiction. Fix q ∈(1, 32
27] and suppose that

68
Bill Jackson
(−1)n+c+bP(G, q) ≤0 for some graph G = (V, E). Choose G with |E| as small
as possible. Theorem 2.3 implies that G is 2-connected and Theorem 2.1 then
tells us that either G −e or G/e is not 2-connected for all e ∈E. This gives
structural information about G which can be reﬁned by several more applications of
Theorems 2.1 and 2.3 to show that G belongs to a well-deﬁned family of 2-connected
graphs called ‘generalized triangles’. The proof is completed by an inductive proof
that every generalized triangle G satisﬁes (−1)nP(G, q) > 0.
The proof given in [29] is much simpler. We choose q ∈(1, 32
27] and use a stronger
inductive hypothesis that (−1)n+c+bZ(G, q, w) > 0 for all w : E →Iq, for some
interval Iq ⊆(−∞, −q/2) with −1 ∈Iq. The interval Iq is chosen to be closed
under the parallel and series transformations (w1, w2) →w1∥w2 and (w1, w2) →
w1 ▷◁q w2. We use Theorem 5.2 to reduce to the case when G is 2-connected and
loopless, and Theorem 5.3 to reduce to the case when G has minimum degree 3 and
no multiple edges. We can then use a result of Oxley [33] to deduce that G has an edge
e for which G−e and G/e are both 2-connected. The proof is completed by applying
Theorem 5.1 using this edge e. This proof also explains the signiﬁcance of the number
32
27; it is the largest value of q for which there exists an interval Iq ⊆(−∞, 0) such
that −1 ∈Iq and Iq is closed under the parallel and series transformations.
The proof in [29] is matroidal and gives the same result for the matroid version
of the partition function. It therefore provides a simple proof that (1, 32
27] is a zero-
free interval for characteristic polynomials of matroids, and hence also for ﬂow
polynomials of graphs.
Tutte polynomials
The Tutte polynomial of a graph G = (V, E) was deﬁned by Tutte [45] as
T(G, x, y) =

A⊆E
(x −1)k(A)−k(G)(y −1)|A|−|V|+k(A) .
(9)
Comparing (9) with (1) and (5) tells us that
P(G, q) = (−1)|V|−k(G) qk(G) T(1 −q, 0)
and
F(G, q) = (−1)|E|+|V|+k(G) T(0, 1 −q) ,
so the chromatic and ﬂow polynomials are both specializations of the Tutte
polynomial. Similarly, a comparison of (9) and (7) implies that
T(G, x, y) = (x −1)−k(G)(y −1)−|V| Z(G, (x −1)(y −1), y −1)
and
Z(G q w) = qk(G) w|V|−k(G) T(G, 1 + q/w, 1 + w)

3 Chromatic polynomials
69
so the Tutte polynomial and the partition function with constant edge-weights can
be interchanged by a simple change of variables. Note, however, that the variables
in these polynomials play different roles. In the partition function, q acts as a global
variable representing the number of possible colours or ‘states’ for each vertex and
w represents the weight of an edge. The variables x, y in the Tutte polynomial act as
a pair of ‘dual’ global variables. This duality is best illustrated when we extend the
deﬁnition of the Tutte polynomial to a matroid M = (E, r): we obtain
T(M, x, y) =

A⊆E
(x −1)r(E)−r(A)(y −1)r∗(E)−r∗(E\A) ,
(10)
where r∗is the rank function for the dual matroid M∗. This immediately gives
T(M, x, y) = T(M∗, y, x) and implies that T(G, x, y) = T(G∗, y, x) for any connected
planar graph G with planar dual G∗.
The evaluation of the Tutte polynomial of a graph G at the points in the xy-plane
(the so-called Tutte plane) gives an attractive picture for viewing all of the above
polynomials (and many more): the x-axis corresponds to the chromatic polynomial,
the y-axis corresponds to the ﬂow polynomial and the hyperbolas (x −1)(y −1) = q
give the Potts model partition function for ﬁxed q and all edge-weights equal to y−1
(see Fig. 1).

70
Bill Jackson
The results of [29] can be applied to give a region in the Tutte plane for which the
sign of T(G, x, y) is determined by a function of the numbers of vertices, components
and blocks of G. Goldberg and Jerrum [16] have recently obtained a complementary
result which identiﬁes large regions in the Tutte plane for which it is NP-hard to
determine the sign of T(G, x, y). They also point out that in addition to the tractable
region implied by [29], we can use (8) to determine the sign of T(G, x, y) at certain
points on the hyperbolas q = (x −1)(y −1) when q is a positive integer.
Computing the sign of the Tutte polynomial is polynomial at black points and is
NP-hard at grey points. The complexity at white points is not known: the white point
(0, −4) and black point (0, −5) correspond respectively to Tutte’s 5-ﬂow conjecture
and Seymour’s 6-ﬂow theorem; the lower white region is related to the problem
of determining whether there is an upper zero-free interval for ﬂow polynomials;
the curved boundary between the black and grey regions is given by the hyperbola
(x −1)(y −1) = 32
27; [29, Conjectures 10.1, 10.2] would imply that the black region
can be extended to ﬁll most of the two upper white regions.
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank Douglas Woodall for stimulating my
interest in chromatic polynomials, and Alan Sokal for both his research collaboration
and his efforts to increase interaction between the statistical mechanics and graph
theory communities. I am also indebted to Leslie Goldberg, Mark Jerrum and Iain
Moffat for their helpful comments.
References
We refer the reader to [14], [25] and [37] for more information on chromatic, ﬂow, and
characteristic polynomials, to [41] for Potts model partition functions, and to [19] for Tutte
polynomials.
1. J. E. Bartels and D. Welsh, The Markov chain of colourings, Proc. 4th International IPCO
Conference on Integer Programming and Combinatorial Optimization, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science 920, Springer-Verlag (1995), 373–387.
2. N. L. Biggs, R. M. Damerell and D. A. Sands, Recursive families of graphs, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 12 (1972), 123–131.
3. G. D. Birkhoff, A determinant formula for the number of ways of colouring a map, Ann.
of Math. 14 (1912), 42–46.
4. G. D. Birkhoff and D. C. Lewis, Chromatic polynomials, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 60
(1946), 355–451.
5. A. Bohn, Chromatic roots as algebraic integers, DMTCS Proceedings, North America, July
2012, http://www.dmtcs.org/dmtcs-ojs/index.php/proceedings/article/view/dmAR0148/
3962.
6. A. Bohn, Chromatic polynomials of complements of bipartite graphs, Graphs Combin. 30
(2014), 287–301.
7. A. Bohn, A dense set of chromatic roots which is closed under multiplication by positive
integers, Discrete Math. 321 (2014), 45–52.
8. F. Brenti, Expansions of chromatic polynomials and log-concavity, Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc. 332 (1992), 729–756.
9. P. J. Cameron and K. Morgan, Algebraic properties of chromatic roots, submitted.

3 Chromatic polynomials
71
10. F. M. Dong, Proof of a chromatic polynomial conjecture, J. Combin. Theory (B) 78 (2000),
35–44.
11. F. M. Dong and B. Jackson, A zero-free interval for chromatic polynomials of nearly
3-connected plane graphs, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 25 (2011), 1103–1118.
12. F. M. Dong and K. M. Koh, Bounds for the real zeros of chromatic polynomials, Combin.
Probab. Comput. 17 (2008), 749–759.
13. F. M. Dong and K. M. Koh, On zero-free intervals in (1, 2) of chromatic polynomials of
some families of graphs, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 24 (2010), 370–378.
14. F. M. Dong, K. M. Koh and K. L. Teo, Chromatic Polynomials and Chromaticity of
Graphs, World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co., 2005.
15. H. Edwards, R. Hierons and B. Jackson, The zero-free intervals for characteristic
polynomials of matroids, Combin. Probab. Comput. 7 (1998), 153–165.
16. L. A. Goldberg and M. Jerrum, The complexity of computing the sign of the Tutte
polynomial (and consequent #P-hardness of approximation), http://arxiv.org/abs/1104.
0707v4.
17. S. Fadnavis, On Brenti’s conjecture about the log-concavity of the chromatic polynomial,
Europ. J. Combin. 33 (2012), 1842–1846.
18. S. Fadnavis, A generalization of the birthday problem and the chromatic polynomial,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1105.0698v2.
19. G. E. Farr, Tutte–Whitney polynomials: some history and generalizations, Combinatorics,
Complexity, and Chance, Oxford Lecture Ser. Math. Appl. 34, Oxford University Press
(2007), 28–52.
20. R. Fern´andez and A. Procacci, Cluster expansion for abstract polymer models: new bounds
from an old approach, Comm. Math. Phys. 274 (2007), 123–140.
21. R. Fern´andez and A. Procacci, Regions without complex zeros for chromatic polynomials
on graphs with bounded degree, Combin. Probab. Comput. 17 (2008), 225–238.
22. C. M. Fortuin and P. W. Kasteleyn, On the random-cluster model. I. Introduction and
relation to other models, Physica 57 (1972), 536–564.
23. J. Huh, Milnor numbers of projective hypersurfaces and the chromatic polynomial of
graphs, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 25 (2012), 907–927.
24. B. Jackson, A zero-free interval for chromatic polynomials of graphs, Combin. Probab.
Comput. 2 (1993), 325–336.
25. B. Jackson, Zeros of chromatic and ﬂow polynomials of graphs, J. Geometry 76 (2003),
95–109.
26. B. Jackson, A zero-free interval for ﬂow polynomials of cubic graphs, J. Combin. Theory
(B) 97 (2007), 127–143.
27. B. Jackson, Zero-free intervals for ﬂow polynomials of near cubic graphs, Combin.
Probab. Comput. 16 (2007), 85–108.
28. B. Jackson, Counting 2-connected deletion minors of binary matroids, Discrete Math. 313
(2013), 1262–1266.
29. B. Jackson and A. D. Sokal, Zero-free regions for multivariate Tutte polynomials (alias
Potts-model partition functions) of graphs and matroids, J. Combin. Theory (B) 99 (2009),
869–903.
30. B. Jackson and A. D. Sokal, Maxmaxﬂow and counting subgraphs, Electron. J. Combin.
17 (2010), No. 1, Research Paper 99, 46 pp.
31. M. Kochol, Polynomials associated with nowhere zero ﬂows, J. Combin. Theory (B) 84
(2002), 260–269.
32. R. Koteck´y and D. Preiss, Cluster expansion for abstract polymer models, Comm. Math.
Phys. 103 (1986), 491–498.
33. J. G. Oxley, On minor-minimally-connected matroids, Discrete Math. 51 (1984), 63–72.

72
Bill Jackson
34. J. G. Oxley, Matroid Theory (2nd edn.), Oxford University Press, 2011.
35. R. B. Potts, Some generalized order–disorder transformations, Proc. Cambridge Philos.
Soc. 48 (1952), 106–109.
36. R. C. Read, An introduction to chromatic polynomials, J. Combin. Theory 4 (1968), 52–71.
37. G. F. Royle, Recent results on chromatic and ﬂow roots of graphs and matroids, Surveys
in Combinatorics 2009 (eds. S. Huczynska, J. D. Mitchell and C. M. Roney-Dougal),
Cambridge University Press (2009), 289–327.
38. P. D. Seymour, Two chromatic polynomial conjectures, J. Combin. Theory (B) 70 (1997),
184–196.
39. A. D. Sokal, Bounds on the complex zeros of (di)chromatic polynomials and Potts model
partition functions, Combin. Probab. Comput. 10 (2001), 41–77.
40. A. D. Sokal, Chromatic roots are dense in the whole complex plane, Combin. Probab.
Comput. 13 (2004), 221–261.
41. A. D. Sokal, The multivariate Tutte polynomial (alias Potts model) for graphs and
matroids, Surveys in Combinatorics, 2005 (ed. B. S. Webb), Cambridge University Press
(2005), 173–226.
42. C. Thomassen, On the number of hamiltonian cycles in bipartite graphs, Combin. Probab.
Comput. 5 (1996), 437–442.
43. C. Thomassen, The zero-free intervals for chromatic polynomials of graphs, Combin.
Probab. Comput. 6 (1997), 497–506.
44. C. Thomassen, Chromatic roots and hamiltonian paths, J. Combin. Theory (B) 80 (2000),
218–224.
45. W. T. Tutte, A contribution to the theory of chromatic polynomials, Canad. J. Math. 6
(1954), 80–91.
46. W. T. Tutte, On chromatic polynomials and the golden ratio, J. Combin. Theory (B) 9
(1970), 289–296.
47. W. T. Tutte, Chromials, Springer Lecture Notes in Math. 411 (1974), 243–266.
48. C. D. Wakelin, Chromatic Polynomials, Ph.D. thesis, University of Nottingham, 1994.
49. H. Whitney, A logical expansion in mathematics, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 38 (1932),
572–579.
50. H. Whitney, The coloring of graphs, Ann. Math. 33 (1932), 688–718.
51. D. R. Woodall, Zeros of chromatic polynomials, Combinatorial Surveys (ed. P. J.
Cameron), Academic Press (1977), 199–223.
52. D. R. Woodall, A zero-free interval for chromatic polynomials, Discrete Math. 101 (1992),
333–341.
53. D. R. Woodall, The largest real zero of the chromatic polynomial, Discrete Math. 172
(1997), 141–153.

4
Hadwiger’s conjecture
KEN-ICHI KAWARABAYASHI
1. Introduction
2. Complete graph minors: early results
3. Contraction-critical graphs
4. Algorithmic aspects of the weak conjecture
5. Algorithmic aspects of the strong conjecture
6. The odd conjecture
7. Independent sets and Hadwiger’s conjecture
8. Other variants of the conjecture
9. Open problems
References
Hadwiger’s conjecture states that any graph that does not have the complete
graph Kk as a minor is (k −1)-colourable. It is well known that the case
k = 5 is equivalent to the four-colour theorem. In 1993 Robertson, Seymour
and Thomas proved that the case k = 6 is also equivalent to the four-colour
theorem. For k ≥7, the conjecture is still open. Our main focus in this chapter
is to present recent results related to minimal counter-examples to Hadwiger’s
conjecture and some variations. We also consider algorithmic aspects of the
conjecture and some of its variants, including the list-colouring version (which
is false), the odd case of the conjecture, Haj´os’s conjecture and totally odd
subdivisions, and Hadwiger’s conjecture for some special classes of graphs.
1. Introduction
This chapter is motivated by Hadwiger’s conjecture from 1943, which suggests a far-
reaching generalization of the four-colour theorem. It is among the most challenging
open problems in all of graph theory.
Hadwiger’s conjecture (strong version) For all k, every k-colourable graph contains
the complete graph Kk as a minor.

74
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
For k ≤3, Hadwiger’s conjecture is easy to prove, and for k = 4, it was proved
independently by Hadwiger himself [31] and Dirac [21]. For k = 5, however, it
becomes extremely difﬁcult. In 1937 Wagner [74] proved that this case is equivalent
to the four-colour theorem, so, given that result in [2], [3], [56], it follows that the
case k = 5 also holds. In the deepest theorem in this area so far, Robertson, Seymour
and Thomas [62] proved in 1993 that a minimal counter-example to the case k = 6
must have a vertex whose removal leaves a planar graph, so this case too follows
from the four-colour theorem. For k ≥7, the conjecture is still open. For k = 7,
Kawarabayashi and Toft [46] proved that every 7-chromatic graph has K7 or K4,4 as
a minor, and recently Kawarabayashi [38] proved that every 7-chromatic graph has
K7 or K3,5 as a minor.
Because of the current state of affairs, there is considerable interest in a weaker
version of Hadwiger’s conjecture.
Hadwiger’s conjecture (weak version) There exists a constant c such that, for k ≥1,
every ck-chromatic graph contains the complete graph Kk as a minor.
The best result of this type currently known is that there exists a constant c for
which every ck

log k-chromatic graph has Kk as a minor. This follows from the
results in [66], [67], [50] and [49] (see Section 2). It was proved thirty years ago, and
no one has been able to improve on the superlinear order k

log k of the bound on
the chromatic number. Hence, it would be of great interest to establish that a linear
function of the chromatic number k is sufﬁcient to force Kk as a minor.
In this chapter, we survey recent progress concerning the two conjectures, paying
special attention to the following.
Properties of minimal counter-examples, including the question of ﬁniteness
(Section 3).
Algorithmic aspects (Sections 4 and 5).
Other variants of Hadwiger’s conjecture, including the odd Hadwiger conjecture
(Section 6), immersion and Haj´os’s conjecture (Sections 6 and 8).
Hadwiger’s conjecture for special families of graphs, including claw-free graphs and
graphs with independence number 2 (Section 7).
The list-colouring version of Hadwiger’s conjecture (Section 8).
The ﬁrst step in attacking Hadwiger’s conjecture is to ﬁnd conditions on the minimum
degree in a graph that force the existence of a large complete minor, an approach that
has been taken since the 1960s. We survey these classical results in Section 2; for
earlier results, see [73].
2. Complete graph minors: early results
Wagner and Mader studied extremal problems concerning the maximum number of
edges in Kk-minor-free graphs. Wagner [75] proved that a sufﬁciently large chromatic

4 Hadwiger’s conjecture
75
number (depending only on k) guarantees Kk as a minor, and Mader [52] showed that
a sufﬁciently large average degree does the same. Later, Kostochka [50], [49] and
Thomason [66] independently proved that the correct order of the average degree
that forces Kk as a minor is (k

log k).
Theorem 2.1 There exist positive constants c1 and c2 such that every graph with
average degree at least c1k
√
ln k contains Kk as a minor, while for k ≥3 there exist
graphs with average degree at least c2k
√
ln k that do not.
More recently, Thomason [67] found the asymptotically sharp value of this
‘extremal’ function: it is (α +o(1))k
√
ln k, where α = 0.319... is an explicit constant
determined by a particular equation.
These results show that if the minimum degree of a graph G is o(k
√
ln k), then
G does not necessarily contain a Kk-minor. This cannot be improved upon even if
we add a connectivity condition; only connectivity of order (k
√
ln k) forces the
presence of a Kk-minor. However, as Thomason pointed out, the extremal graphs are
close to disjoint unions of suitable dense random graphs. Such graphs cannot have
too many vertices, a point we return to in Section 4.
Precise extremal numbers of edges for Kk-minors are known only for k ≤9. For
k ≤7, these were found by Dirac [23] and Mader [52], while the result for k =
8 is due to Jørgensen [34], and the case k = 9 was recently settled by Song and
Thomas [64].
There is an analogue to Theorem 2.1 for topological minors (recall that a graph H
is a topological minor of a graph G if a subgraph of G is homeomorphically reducible
to H) [11], [48]. Here the extremal function is of order (k2).
Theorem 2.2 There exist positive constants c1 and c2 such that every graph with
average degree at least c1k2 contains Kk as a topological minor, while for k ≥3
there exist graphs with average degree at least c2k2 that do not contain Kk as a
topological minor.
3. Contraction-critical graphs
In attacking Hadwiger’s conjecture, it is natural to consider minimal counter-
examples, and in this section, we give several properties of such graphs.
Let G be a graph that is k-chromatic, is minimal with respect to the minor-relation
in the class of all k-chromatic graphs, and does not contain Kk as a minor. Such a
graph is called k-contraction-critical and cannot be a complete graph. These graphs
were introduced by Dirac [22], [24], and one of his results was that the minimum
degree in such a graph is at least k. The following result is shown in [36]; its proof
is given below (following Theorem 3.5). Kawarabayashi and Yu [47] have recently
shown that the fraction 2
27 can be replaced by 1
9.
Theorem 3.1 Every k-contraction-critical graph is 2
27k-connected.

76
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
In order to prove Theorem 3.1, we need to deﬁne ‘highly linked’ subgraphs, which
will be discussed in the next subsection.
The next result is a variation of an old theorem of Mader [53]; its non-algorithmic
counterpart appeared in [9]. For completeness, we include its full proof, needed to
establish the algorithmic part. The following concept will be useful in the proof.
Given a graph G, a pair (A, B) of induced subgraphs is called a separation of G if
G = A∪B. Its order is |V(A∩B)|. It is also useful to have a name for a 2k-connected
graph H that has at least 5k|V(H)| edges; we call it extra-2k-connected.
Theorem 3.2 Let G be a graph with n vertices and m edges, and let k be such that n ≥
5
2k and m ≥25
4 kn −25
2 k2. Then n ≥10k + 2 and G contains an extra-2k-connected
subgraph H. Furthermore, H can be found in time O(n3).
Proof
Clearly, if G is a graph of order n with at least 25
4 kn −25
2 k2 edges, then
25
4 kn −25
2 k2 ≤
n
2

. Hence, either
n ≤25
4 k + 1
2 −1
4

(25k + 2)2 −400k2 < 5
2k
or
n ≥25
4 k + 1
2 + 1
4

(25k + 2)2 −400k2 > 10k + 1.
Since n ≥5
2k, it follows that n ≥10k + 2.
Suppose now that the theorem is false. Let G be a graph with n vertices and m
edges, and let k satisfy the conditions of the theorem. Assume, moreover, that n is the
least order of such a graph with the property that no subgraph is extra-2k-connected.
We now show that the minimum degree of G satisﬁes δ(G) > 25
4 k. Suppose that
G has a vertex v with degree at most 25
4 k, let G′ = G −v, and let n′ and m′ be
the numbers of vertices and edges in G′. By our choice of G, G′ has no extra-2k-
connected subgraphs. It follows from the fact that n ≥10k + 2 that n′ = n −1 ≥5
2k.
Also, m′ ≥m −25
4 k ≥25
4 kn′ −25
2 k2. Since n′ < n, this contradicts the minimality of
n and thus establishes that δ(G) > 25
4 k.
Since m ≥25
4 kn −25
2 k2 and n ≥10k + 2, we have m ≥5kn. But no subgraph of G
is extra-2k-connected, so G cannot be 2k-connected. Since n > 2k, this implies that
G has a separation (A1, A2) for which both A1 −A2 and A2 −A1 are non-empty and
|A1 ∩A2| ≤2k −1. By the condition on δ, |Ai| ≥25
4 k + 1. For i = 1, 2, let Gi be
a subgraph of G with vertex-set Ai for which G = G1 ∪G2 and E(G1 ∩G2) = ∅.
Further, let ni be the number of vertices and mi the number of edges in Gi, and
suppose that mi < 25
4 kni −25
2 k2 for i = 1, 2. Then
25
4 kn −25
2 k2 ≤m = m1 + m2 < 25
4 k(n + |A1 ∩A2|) −25k2 ≤25
4 kn −25
2 k2,
a contradiction. Hence, we may assume that m1 ≥25
4 kn1 −25
2 k2. Since n > n1 ≥
25
4 k+1 and G1 has no extra-2k-connected subgraph H, this contradicts the minimality
of n, and the existence of H is established.

4 Hadwiger’s conjecture
77
The above proof yields an O(n3) algorithm for ﬁnding H. First, we remove vertices
of degree at most 25
4 k as long as the minimum degree remains less than 25
4 k; this can
be done in linear time – ﬁrst we list those vertices whose degree is at most 25
4 k, and
then we remove them one by one. At each step, degrees change only at the neighbours
of the removed vertex, and it takes constant time to lower their degrees by 1 and to
move those whose degree drops to ⌊25
4 k⌋into the list of vertices to be removed.
Next, we check whether G is 2k-connected. By an algorithm of Henzinger, Rao and
Gabow [32], this can be done in O(n2) time. At the same time we ﬁnd a separation
(A1, A2) of order less than 2k if one exists. As shown above, one of the corresponding
subgraphs G1 or G2 can be used to continue the process. The recursion brings another
factor of n to the time complexity, so the subgraph H can be found in O(n3) time.
■
A graph G is said to be k-linked if it has at least 2k vertices, and for each pair
of k-tuples (v1, v2, . . . , vk) and (w1, w2, . . . , wk) of 2k distinct vertices, there exist k
disjoint paths P1, P2, . . . , Pk with Pi a vi–wi path.
An important tool in what follows is the following theorem of Thomas and
Wollan [65].
Theorem 3.3 Every extra-2k-connected graph G is k-linked.
This theorem implies that every 10k-connected graph is k-linked. We note that
Bollob´as and Thomason [11] had proved earlier that every 22k-connected graph
is k-linked, and that Kawarabayashi, Kostochka and Yu [39] improved this to
12k-connected.
Combining Theorems 3.2 and 3.3, we have the following result.
Corollary 3.4 Let G be a graph with n vertices and m edges, and let k be such that
n ≥5
2k and m ≥25
4 kn −25
2 k2. Then G contains a k-linked subgraph, and such a
subgraph can be found in O(n3) time.
Our next goal is to prove Theorem 3.1. To this end, it is useful to have a
further deﬁnition and a lemma. Let (A, B) be a separation in a graph G and let
P = {S1, S2, . . . , Sr} be a partition of S = V(A) ∩V(B). Then we say that A is
contractible over {S1, S2, . . . , Sr} if there is a family H = {H1, H2, . . . , Hr} of disjoint
connected subgraphs of A such that Si ⊆V(Hi) for each i. The following result is the
lemma that we need.
Theorem 3.5 Let G be a graph with n vertices and minimum degree d. Let (A, B)
be a separation in G of minimum order, and let S = V(A) ∩V(B) and s = |S|.
If s ≤⌊2
27d⌋and P is any partition of S, then A is contractible over P, and the
corresponding family H of subgraphs can be found in O(n3) time.
Proof
We may assume that the subgraph A1 = A −S is connected. Note that each
vertex in A1 has degree at least d−s ≥25
27d. Therefore, A1 has at least 25
27d vertices and
at least 25
54d|V(A1)| edges. Let k = ⌊2
27d⌋. By Theorem 3.2, A1 contains an extra-2k-
connected subgraph H1, which (by Corollary 3.4) is k-linked. By the minimality of S
and Menger’s theorem, there are s disjoint paths P
P
P from S to V(H ), with

78
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
Pi joining vi ∈S and wi ∈Hi. Since H1 is 2k-connected, it contains s independent
edges e1, e2, . . . , es with ei = wiw′
i for i = 1, 2, . . . , s.
We now assume that the vertices v1, v2, . . . , vs of S are listed so that the ﬁrst |S1|
are in S1, the next |S2| are in S2, and so on. Since H1 is k-linked and s ≤k, there
are s −1 disjoint paths P′
1, P′
2, . . . , P′
s−1 in H1 such that P′
i joins wi and w′
i+1. The
subgraph of A consisting of the s paths Pi, the s edges ei, and the s−1 paths P′
i is a tree
whose contraction gives rise to identiﬁcation of all vertices of S1 into a single vertex.
Similarly, there are such trees for S2, S3, . . . , Sr, and they are all disjoint. Hence A is
contractible for {S1, S2, . . . , Sr}.
As far as the algorithm is concerned, by Theorem 3.2, we can ﬁnd H1 in O(n3)
time. To ﬁnd paths P1, P1, . . . , Ps, we can apply an augmenting path algorithm
s(< 2k) times, which can be done in O(n2) time. Finally, the disjoint connecting
paths P′
1, P′
2, . . . , P′
s−1 can be found by the graph minors algorithm of Robertson and
Seymour [57] in O(n3) time. This completes the proof of the lemma.
■
We now show that this result implies Theorem 3.1.
Proof of Theorem 3.1
Take a minimal cutset S of G. Then |S| < ⌈2
27k⌉. Let A1 be
a component of G −S and let A2 = G −A1 −S. Then both A1 ∪S and A2 ∪S have
chromatic number at most k −1. Let S1 be a maximum independent set in ⟨S⟩, let S2
be a maximum independent set in ⟨S −S1⟩, and so on, thereby obtaining a partition
P = {S1, S2, · · · , Sr} of S.
By Theorem 3.5, we can contract both A1 and A2 over P so that each of the resulting
graphs on S is complete on S. Now let G1 be the resulting graph together with A2 and
let G2 be the resulting graph together with A1. Then by the minimality of G, χ(G1)
and χ(G2) ≤k −1. But clearly we can combine the colourings of G1 and G2 to
give a colouring of the whole graph G with at most k −1 colours. This contradiction
completes the proof.
■
Returning to the algorithmic portion of the result, we note that we can use
Robertson and Seymour’s algorithm from [57] to ﬁnd the disjoint connecting paths
P′
1, P′
2, . . . , P′
s−1. However, it turns out that when we apply Theorem 3.5 in the
algorithm for Theorem 4.1 in the next section, we may assume that the k-linked
subgraph H1 is of bounded size; that is, if N(k) is the constant from Theorem 3.6
below and |V(H1)| ≥N(k), then we know that H1 contains Kk as a minor. Since this is
one of the possible outcomes of the algorithm, we may assume that |V(H1)| < N(k),
and hence the paths P′
1, P′
2, . . . , P′
s−1 can be found in constant time.
The following result is proved in [9].
Theorem 3.6 For each integer l, there exists a constant N(l) such that every
2l-connected graph with at least N(l) vertices and minimum degree at least 31
2 l
contains Kl as a minor.
Actually, the main result proved in [9] is stronger: For any integers s, k and l,
there is a constant N(s k l) such that every (3l + 2)-connected graph of order at least

4 Hadwiger’s conjecture
79
N(s, k, l) and minimum degree at least d contains either Ksk,l as a topological minor
or a minor isomorphic to s copies of Kk,l. Since G could be the complete bipartite
graph Kd,m with m arbitrarily large, it is necessary to include the possibility of having
a subdivision of Ksk,l.
The next result follows from Theorems 3.1 and 3.6.
Theorem 3.7 If G is a 31
2 k-contraction-critical graph of order n, then there is a
function f(k) for which n ≤f(k).
This theorem tells us that there are only ﬁnitely many minimal counter-examples
to the weak conjecture.
4. Algorithmic aspects of the weak conjecture
Although the weaker version of Hadwiger’s conjecture is still open, we can show that
from an algorithmic point of view, this problem can be ‘decided’ in polynomial time
(with complexity O(n3)).
Theorem 4.1 For each k ∈N, there is a polynomial-time algorithm for deciding
that
(1) a given graph G is 27k-colorable
(2) G contains a Kk-minor
or
(3) there is a function f(k) for which G contains a minor H of order at most f(k) that
does not contain a Kk-minor and is not 27k-colourable.
Note that if (3) holds, then H is a counter-example to Hadwiger’s conjecture – in
fact, to the weaker conjecture that every 27k-chromatic graph has Kk as a minor. If
(1) holds, then the graph can be coloured with 27k colours, while if (c) holds, then
we can exhibit the minor H.
To prove this theorem, we need Theorem 3.6, but we do not need any result in the
graph minor series. However, the proof of Theorem 3.6 given in [9] does depend on
Robertson and Seymour’s deep results (see [9], [59], [58]).
Before we give an algorithm for Theorem 4.1, we need some additional deﬁnitions.
A tree decomposition of a graph G is a pair (T, Y), where T is a tree and Y is a family
{Yt : t ∈V(T)} of sets of vertices of G for which the following two properties hold.
(W1) 
t∈V(T) Yt = V(G), and each edge of G has both ends in some Yt.
(W2) If t, t′, t′′ ∈V(T) and if t′ lies on the t–t′′ path in T, then Yt ∩Yt′′ ⊆Yt′.
The width of a tree decomposition (T, Y) is maxt∈V(T)(|Yt| −1).
We are now ready to describe our algorithm.

80
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
Algorithm for Theorem 4.1
Input: A graph G
Output: As described in Theorem 4.1.
Description:
Step 1 If G has a vertex of degree less than 27k, we delete it. We continue this
procedure until there are no vertices of degree less than 27k. (This can be done in
linear time.) Let G′ be the resulting graph. Proceed to Step 2.
Step 2 Test whether the tree-width of G′ is small or not, say smaller than some value
g(k). For simplicity in later steps, we assume that g(k) ≥N(k), where N(k) is as in
Theorem 3.6: this can be done in linear time by an algorithm of Bodlaender [8]. If the
tree-width is at least g(k), go to Step 3. Otherwise, use the linear-time algorithm of
Arnborg and Proskurowski [4] to colour G′. If G′ can be coloured with 27k colours,
then colour G−G′ greedily, and output the colouring of G. If G′ is not 27k-colourable,
check whether it contains a Kk-minor; again, this can be done using the algorithm of
Arnborg and Proskurowski (or that of Robertson and Seymour [57]). If G′ contains
Kk as a minor, output that G contains Kk as a minor. If G′ does not contain Kk as
a minor, then proceed as argued below. (Up to this point, the whole process can be
done in linear time.)
Let (T, Y) be the tree-decomposition found above. The dynamic programming
approach of Arnborg and Proskurowski assumes that T is a rooted tree whose edges
are directed away from the root. For tt′ ∈E(T) (where the root is closer to t than to
t′), deﬁne S(t, t′) = Yt ∩Yt′ and let G′(t, t′) be the induced subgraph G′[ Ys], where
the union runs over those vertices s in the component of T −tt′ that does not contain
the root. The algorithm of Arnborg and Proskurowski starts at all leaves of T and for
each edge tt′ in T, computes the set C(t, t′) of all 27k-colourings of S(t, t′) that can
be extended to the whole of G′(t, t′). If T has a vertex t of very large degree, then for
two neighbours t′ and t′′, S(t, t′) = S(t, t′′) and C(t, t′) = C(t, t′′). Then G′(t, t′) can
be deleted, and we still have a graph of bounded tree-width without a Kk minor and
with no 27k-colourings.
If all vertices of T have bounded degree, then T has a long path and there are two
edges t1t′
1 and t2t′
2 on this path (with the second further from the root) for which
|S(t, t′)| = |S(t, t′′)| and C(t, t′) = C(t, t′′). In the same way as argued in [9], we may
assume that there are |S(t, t′)| disjoint paths joining S(t, t′) and S(t, t′′). By contracting
these paths and replacing G′(t, t′) by G′(t, t′′), we obtain a minor of G′ that is still of
bounded tree-width, without a Kk minor and without 27k-colourings. Repeating this,
we eventually end up with the desired minor of G′ of bounded size. This bound is
actually a doubly exponential value expressed in terms of k.
Step 3 Test whether G′ is 2k-connected. By the assumption in Step 2, if G′ is 2k-
connected, then |G′| ≥g(k) ≥N(k); it then follows from Theorem 3.6 that G′
contains Kk as a minor. So output that G has Kk as a minor. If G′ is not 2k-connected,
go to Step 4.

4 Hadwiger’s conjecture
81
Step 4 If G′ is not 2k-connected, ﬁnd a minimal separation (A, B); this can be done
in polynomial time by standard methods. The best known algorithm for this is due to
Henzinger, Rao and Gabow [32] and needs time O(n2).
Let S = V(A) ∩V(B). Then |S| < 2k. As in the proof of Theorem 3.5, let
A′
1 be a component of G′ −S and A′
2 = G′ −A′
1 −S. Let S1 be a maximal
independent set in G′[S]. Let Si be a maximal independent set in G′(S) −i−1
j=1 Sl,
for i = 2, 3, . . . . These maximal independent sets can be found greedily (or by other
means) in constant time (since |S| < 2k). Next, we collapse each non-empty set Si
to a single vertex si; then the resulting graph on S′ = {s1, s2, . . . , sr} is complete. Let
A1, A2 be the corresponding graphs obtained from A′
1, A′
2 by adding the clique S′ and
the corresponding edges between A′
i and S′.
Finally, we test A1 and A2 (recursively), starting from Step 1. If both A1 and A2 are
27k-colourable, they give rise to a 27k-colouring of their union since S′ is a clique.
Since the sets Si that were collapsed into single vertices in S′ are independent in G′,
this colouring gives rise to a colouring of G′ which can then be extended to all of G.
If one of the graphs, say A1, contains a Kk-minor, then we obtain a Kk-minor in
G′ (after contracting A2 onto S′) by using Theorem 3.5 with d = 27k. Similarly, if
outcome (c) occurs for A1, we get the same outcome for G′ by using a contraction of
A2 onto S′.
This algorithm stops when the order of the current graph is small or when the
current graph is 2k-connected with minimum degree at least 27k. The correctness
follows from Theorem 3.5.
Now we estimate the time-complexity of the algorithm. All steps except the
application of Theorem 3.5 can be done in time proportional to n2. Another factor
of n arises because of the recursion in Step 4. Finally, Theorem 3.5 is applied only
when we backtrack from the recursion. If we apply it on the graph A1 of order n1,
then we spend O(n3
1) time, but we never use it again on the same vertices. Therefore
applications of Theorem 3.5 use only O(n3) time in total. This completes the proof
of the correctness and of the stated time-complexity of the algorithm.
5. Algorithmic aspects of the strong conjecture
Robertson and Seymour found the result stated in the next theorem; it gives rise to a
polynomial-time algorithm for k-colouring Kk-minor-free graphs if Hadwiger’s con-
jecture is true. They did not publish a proof, but one can be found in Kawarabayashi
and Reed [44].
Theorem 5.1 For each k ∈N, there is a polynomial-time algorithm for decid-
ing that
(1) a given graph G is k-colourable.
(2) G contains a Kk+1-minor.

82
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
or
(3) G contains a minor H of order at most N(k) that is Kk+1-minor-free and is not
k-colourable.
Robertson has pointed out that in order to prove this theorem, he and Seymour
used the following result. It is not only of independent interest, but is arguably the
strongest known result in this direction.
Theorem 5.2 For k ≥4 and any graph G with no Kk+1-minor, one of the following
statements holds:
(1) There exists an integer f(k) such that G has tree-width at most f(k).
(2) G has a vertex of degree at most k.
(3) G has a vertex v of degree k + 1 with three mutually non-adjacent neighbours.
(4) G has a separation (A, B) of order at most k and with A ̸= G such that A can be
contracted to a clique K on A ∩B with each vertex of A ∩B in a different vertex
of K.
(5) G has a set S of at most k −4 vertices for which G −S is planar.
Note that (2), (3) and (4) cannot happen in a minimal counter-example to
Hadwiger’s conjecture, and that a graph satisfying (5) is also not a counter-example,
by the four-colour theorem. The proof is complicated and uses the graph minor
structure theory heavily, but does not use the well-quasi-ordering result (see [59]
or [58]). The proof in [44] is much simpler, but still depends on the graph minor
structure theory. Seymour has also pointed out that property (3) can be eliminated at
the expense of a considerably longer proof.
6. The odd conjecture
Recently, the concept of an ‘odd minor’ has received considerable attention from
researchers. We say that G has an odd complete minor of size k if it contains k disjoint
trees with any two having adjacent vertices and which can be properly 2-coloured in
such a way that the edges between trees have both vertices the same colour (hence
the vertices of all trivial trees must receive the same colour). We say that G has an
odd Kk minor if it has an odd complete minor of size k. It is easy to see that any graph
with an odd Kk minor contains Kk as a minor.
Gerards and Seymour (see [33]) conjectured an analogue of Hadwiger’s conjecture
for odd complete graphs.
The odd conjecture For each k ∈N, every graph with no odd Kk+1 minor is
k-colorable.
This conjecture is trivially true for k = 1 and 2. In fact, for k = 2, it says simply
that every graph with no odd cycles is 2-colourable. The case k = 3 was proved
by Catlin [13]. Recently, Bertrand Guenin announced a solution of the k = 4 case,

4 Hadwiger’s conjecture
83
which would imply the four-colour theorem since a graph that has an odd K5-minor
certainly has a K5-minor. The conjecture remains open for k ≥5.
The following theorem, ﬁrst proved by Geelen et al. [29], is clearly a generalization
of Theorem 2.1.
Theorem 6.1 Any graph with no odd Kk-minor is O(k

log k)-colourable.
Our proof [37] uses induction on the number of vertices. To this end, we prove
the stronger statement below. We let c1 be as in Theorem 2.1; thus, any graph with
minimum degree at least c1k

log k contains a Kk-minor.
Theorem 6.2 If G is a graph of order n and if k ≤1
4n, then either G has an odd
Kk-minor or every precolouring of an induced subgraph of order 4k can be extended
to a ⌊64c1k

log k + 4k⌋-colouring of G.
Proof
Suppose that the result does not hold. We assume that 4k < n since otherwise
there is nothing to prove. Let G be a counter-example of minimum order, and let Z
be a set of 4k vertices of G. If G −Z has a vertex v of degree at most 64c1k

log k +
4k −1, then, by the minimality of G, G −v has a ⌊64c1k

log k + 4k⌋-colouring.
This colouring can clearly be extended to a colouring of G, which is a contradiction.
Hence, we assume that δ(G −Z) ≥64c1k

log k + 4k.
We prove the theorem by establishing ﬁve claims.
(1) G does not have a separation (A, B) of order 2k or less for which both A −B −Z
and B −A −Z are non-empty.
Suppose that there is such a separation (A, B) of order at most 2k, and let S = A ∩B.
Since |S| ≤2k and |Z| ≤4k, it follows that either |S∪(A∩Z)| ≤4k or |S∪(B∩Z)| ≤
4k, say the former. By the minimality of G, there is a colouring of G[B ∪Z] with Z
precoloured. Note that the subgraph of G induced on B ∪Z is smaller than G.
Again, by the minimality of G, we can colour G[A] with Z′ = S ∪(A ∩Z)
precoloured, where the precolouring of vertices in S comes from the colouring of
G[B ∪Z]. Recall that |Z′| ≤4k and that the subgraph induced on A is smaller than
G. Hence, there is a colouring of G[A] with Z′ precoloured. A combination of the
obtained colourings of G[B] and G[A] yields a desired colouring of G, giving the
required contradiction and proving the claim.
We choose a spanning bipartite graph H of G−Z whose minimum degree is as large
as possible. An old theorem of Erd˝os says that every graph of minimum degree at
least 2l has a spanning bipartite graph with minimum degree at least l. Since G−Z has
minimum degree at least 64c1k

log k, H has minimum degree at least 32c1k

log k.
The following result now follows by Mader’s theorem [53].
(2) H has an 8c1k

log k-connected subgraph L.
We say that P is a parity-breaking path for L if P is disjoint from L except for its
endpoints, and L together with P has an odd cycle. We need a generalization of

84
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
Mader’s well-known S-path theorem for paths of odd length, and for this we use
the following result of Geelen et al. [29].
Theorem 6.3 For any set S of vertices in a graph G and for any integer k, either
there are k disjoint paths of odd length and both ends in S, or there is a set X of at
most 2k −2 vertices for which G −X has no such set of paths.
Since L is 8c1k

log k-connected, each of the partite sets of L has at least 8c1k

log k
vertices.
(3) There are at least k disjoint parity-breaking paths for L.
Take one partite set S of L and apply Theorem 6.3 to G and S. If there are at least
k disjoint odd S paths in G, then we can clearly ﬁnd k disjoint parity-breaking paths
for L, since otherwise, by Theorem 6.3, there is a separation (A, B) of order at most
2k −2 such that A contains S and A −B has no such paths. Since A ∩B has at most
2k−2 vertices and L is 8c1k

log k-connected, it follows that A contains L. By Claim
1, B −A −Z = ∅. It follows from Theorem 6.3 that A −B can be expressed as
L′ ∪W1 ∪W2 ∪· · · ∪Wm, for some integer m with L′ a bipartite graph containing L
and each Wi a block. In addition, each Wi contains a cut-vertex vi to L′ so that Wi −vi
consists of vertices in Z, since otherwise there would be a separation (A′, B′) of order
at most 2k and both A′ −B′ −Z and B′ −A′ −Z non-empty, contradicting Claim
1. Since |Z| ≤4k, we have m ≤4k. Because B −A −Z = ∅, we need at most 4k
colours for Z, at most 4k colours for the vertices v1, v2, . . . , vm, two colours for L′,
and at most 2k −2 colours for A ∩B (since A ∩B has order at most 2k −2). These
colours are enough to colour G, and we need only at most 10k ≤8c1k

log k + 4k
colours for the colouring of G. This completes the proof of Claim 3.
The next claim is proved in [35], although the proof there is slightly different;
its proof is inspired by proofs of Robertson and Seymour [57] and Bollob´as and
Thomason [11].
(4) Let G be a graph, let S = {s1, s2, . . . , sk} be a set of k vertices, and sup-
pose that G has a K2k-minor and is k-connected. Then G has k vertex-disjoint
non-empty connected subgraphs C1, C2, . . . , Ck such that, for each 1 ≤i ≤
k, the subgraph Ci contains si and is adjacent to all of the other subgraphs
C1, C2, . . . , Ci−1, Ci+1, . . . , Ck.
Let P1, P2, . . . , Pk be the parity-breaking paths for L with ends pi and p′
i, for 1 ≤
i ≤k. By our choice of c, L has a K4k-minor. So claims 3 and 4 imply the following
result.
(5) G has a K2k-minor M consisting of 2k disjoint trees N1, N2, . . . , N2k, each of
which is contained in the bipartite graph L, and in which there are k disjoint parity-
breaking paths P1, P2, . . . , Pk in which Pi has one end pi in N2i−1 and the other end
p′
i in N2i, but is otherwise disjoint from M.
The induced subgraph consisting of trees N1, N2, . . . , N2k in L is clearly bipartite.
We now use Claim 5 to construct an odd-Kk-minor. Suppose that we can 2-colour

4 Hadwiger’s conjecture
85
Nj ∪Pj ∪Nj+k so that the trees Ni ∪Pi ∪Ni+k consist of an odd Kj-minor for 1 ≤i ≤j.
We claim that we can 2-colour Nj+1 ∪Pj+1 ∪Nj+1+k so that the trees Ni ∪Pi ∪Ni+k
consist of an odd Kj+1-minor for 1 ≤i ≤j + 1. This is certainly possible since
the 2-colouring of Nj+1+k can be interchanged with the 2-colouring of Nj+1 in the
bipartition of L. So, for any i ≤j, either the edge between Ni and Nj+1 or the edge
between Ni+k and Nj+1+k has both vertices the same colour. In this way, we can
construct the desired odd Kk-minor, and this completes the proof of the theorem.
■
7. Independent sets and Hadwiger’s conjecture
There is another way to think about Hadwiger’s conjecture, based on the relation
between the independence number and the chromatic number of a graph. Recall that
in a coloring of a graph, each color-class is a set of independent vertices, so that if G
has independence number α, then χ(G) ≥n/α. Hadwiger’s conjecture asserts that
G has Kχ(G) as a minor, and so, if true, implies the following conjecture, which was
ﬁrst explicitly stated and put into context by Woodall [77]. Throughout this section,
n denotes the order of the graph G, and α denotes its independence number.
Conjecture A Every graph G has a K⌈n/α⌉minor.
This conjecture seems weaker than Hadwiger’s conjecture; however, for α = 2, the
two are equivalent (see [54]). In 1982 Duchet and Meyniel [25] proved the following
remarkable result.
Theorem 7.1 Every graph G has a K⌈n/(2α−1)⌉minor.
This result was improved ﬁrst by Plummer, Toft and Kawarabayashi (see [41])
and subsequently in [6], [27] and [48]. Currently, the strongest result of this type is
due to Balogh and Kostochka [5], who showed that ⌈n/(2α −1)⌉can be replaced by
⌈n/(2 −c)α⌉, for some constant c >
1
19.2 = 0.052 0833....
We note that it seems quite hard to improve the constant 1
3 in Theorem 7.1 for
α = 2 (a question asked independently by Seymour and Mader). As far as we know,
no progress has yet been made on this question, although some related results appear
in [16].
Analogous questions for the odd Hadwiger conjecture have also been studied; one
is the following, due to Koml´os and Szemer´edi [48].
Theorem 7.2 Every graph G has an odd K⌈n/(2α−1)⌉minor.
A slightly stronger result is known when α(G) = 3. This is an analogue of a result
in [48].
Theorem 7.3 Every graph G with α = 3 has an odd K⌈n/4⌉minor.
A graph is called claw-free if it does not contain K1,3 as an induced subgraph;
clearly every graph G with α = 2 has this property. It is therefore likely to be very

86
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
hard to show Hadwiger’s conjecture for claw-free graphs. One result on minors and
claw-free graphs was proved by Fradkin [28].
Theorem 7.4 Every claw-free graph with no K2k-minor is 3k-colourable.
8. Other variants of the conjecture
In this section we consider some other concepts for which Hadwiger-like conjectures
are quite natural; in particular, we consider subdivisions and immersions of graphs,
and then move on to list-colourings.
Subdivisions
Although Kuratowski’s well-known theorem can be stated in terms of both subdivi-
sions and minors, similarities between the two concepts do not seem to carry much
beyond that. For example, graphs without K5-minors were already characterized by
Wagner [74] in 1937, but graphs without K5-subdivisions are still mysterious and a
characterization is perhaps out of reach. Another difference between the two is that,
as shown by Robertson and Seymour [60] in proving Wagner’s famous conjecture,
graphs are well-quasi-ordered by the minor relation, but not by the subdivision
relation.
In connection with the four-colour problem, Haj´os conjectured in the 1940s that,
for all k, every graph without a subdivision of Kk is (k −1)-colourable. For k ≤3
the result is obvious, while for k = 4 it was proved independently by Hadwiger [31]
and Dirac [21]. However, it was disproved by Catlin [13] for k ≥7. In fact, Erd˝os
and Fajtlowicz [26] proved that the conjecture is false for almost all graphs (see also
Bollob´as and Catlin [10]). Recently, Thomassen [71] has given many families of
graphs that are counter-examples to Haj´os’s conjecture. In fact, it is known that the
order of magnitude for the chromatic number of graphs without a Kk-subdivision is
(k2) (see [10], [11] and [45]). Thus, we have this modiﬁed version (which some
might consider more of a question) of Haj´os’s original conjecture.
Conjecture B Every graph without a subdivision of K4 is 3-colourable, and every
graph without a subdivision of K5 is 4-colourable.
The story does not end there however, as a restricted form of subdivision has led
to some interesting questions. In a totally odd subdivision of a graph G, each edge of
G has been replaced by a path of odd length. Totally odd subdivisions of K4 play an
important role in both graph theory and combinatorial optimization. In graph theory,
their importance arises in graph colouring. Toft [72] conjectured that any graph with
no totally odd K4-subdivision is 3-colourable, a generalization of the k = 4 case of
Haj´os’s original conjecture. This was ﬁnally settled by Zang [78] and Thomassen
[70] independently. (This conjecture also relates to the so-called ‘t-perfect graphs’

4 Hadwiger’s conjecture
87
and ‘strongly t-perfect graphs’ from the theory of perfect graphs; for more details,
see the book by Schrijver [63].)
A general result by Thomassen [68] asserts that there is a function f : N →N with
the property that every f(k)-chromatic graph has a subdivision of Kk in which each
edge corresponds to a path of prescribed parity in the subdivision. As pointed out by
Thomassen [69], totally odd Kk-subdivisions are also interesting in this connection.
Unfortunately, the bound on the chromatic number given by Thomassen [68] is far
from best possible, even in the totally odd case. Here we give an essentially sharp
bound.
Theorem 8.1 For any set S of at most k2 vertices in a graph G, either G has a
totally odd Kk-subdivision or every precolouring of the induced subgraph ⟨S⟩can be
extended to a 79
4 k2-colouring of G.
A result in [11] and [45] asserts that there exists a constant c for which every
graph with minimum degree ck2 contains a subdivision of Kk. This implies that the
chromatic number of any graph without a subdivision of Kk is at most ck2 −1;
furthermore, this result is sharp (up to constants). Hence, our result is best possible
in a sense, and generalizes the result in [11] and [45].
Because the proof of Theorem 8.1 is quite similar to that of Theorem 6.2, we do
not include it here. We note, however, that the proof implies that the same conclusion
holds if ‘totally odd’ is replaced by ‘prescribed parity’.
Immersions
An immersion of one graph H into another graph G is a mapping η that is one-to-one
from V(H) into V(G) and maps the edges in H to edge-disjoint paths in G in such a
way that if e = vw is an edge of H, then η(e) is a path joining η(v) and η(w) in G.
Previous investigations on immersions were mainly conducted from an algorithmic
standpoint (see [12]), but it would be interesting to consider structural issues, since
the notions of an immersion and a minor seem to be quite similar, and a structural
approach concerning graph minors has been extremely successful. In fact, Robertson
and Seymour [61] extended their proof of Wagner’s conjecture [60] to prove that
graphs are well-quasi-ordered by the immersion relation, and this proves a conjecture
of C. Nash-Williams. The proof is based on the entire series of graph minors papers,
and thus we may expect that a structural approach to immersions is very difﬁcult –
perhaps as hard as structural results on minors.
Immersion containment is not quite the same as either subdivision or minor
containment. Clearly, a subdivision of H in G implies the existence of an immersion
of H, but the converse is apparently not true. Also, a subdivision of H implies a
minor of H, but the converse is not true. So, the existence of a subdivision is stronger
than either a minor or an immersion. On the other hand, a minor and an immersion
do not seem to be comparable. It would therefore be interesting to investigate

88
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
relations between the chromatic number of a graph G and the largest order of a
complete graph immersed in G. In fact, Abu-Khzam and Langston [1] conjectured the
following.
Conjecture C Every graph with no immersions of Kk is (k −1)-colourable.
This conjecture, like Hadwiger’s conjecture and Haj´os’s conjecture, is true for
k ≤4. In fact, this follows from the truth of Haj´os’s conjecture for k ≤4.
Abu-Khzam and Langston [1] proved the weaker result that K5 with one edge
removed has an immersion in every 5-chromatic graph. They also pointed out that
structural investigations have been extensively carried out for graphs without a
K4-immersion (see [12]).
Independently, DeVos et al. [19] and Lescure and Meyniel [51] have proved cases
k = 5, 6 and 7 of the conjecture. Recently, DeVos et al. [18] proved a very general
result that says that Conjecture C is true if k is replaced by 200k – in fact, they
proved that the average degree 200k is enough to force a Kk-immersion. This actually
differentiates between Hadwiger’s conjecture and Conjecture C since the average
degree (k

log k) forces Kk as a minor (see Kostochka [50] and Thomason [66]),
and this bound is sharp. On the other hand, only an average degree of 200k is needed
to force Kk as an immersion.
List-colourings
The last variation that we consider in this section involves a different type of
colouring rather than a different type of graph. Motivated by the weak Hadwiger
conjecture, Kawarabayashi and Mohar [40] proved the following result. (A constant
f(k) is computable means that f(k) can be expressed as a speciﬁc value, depending
on k (see [9]).)
Theorem 8.2 For each positive integer k, there exists a computable constant
f(k) such that every graph G with no Kk-minor admits a vertex-partition
{V1, V2, . . . , V⌈31k/2⌉} for which every component of each G[Vi] has at most f(k)
vertices.
When f(k) = 1, we get a colouring of G. Thus, the theorem gives a lessening of
the requirements of a colouring, and hence a relaxation of Hadwiger’s conjecture,
and is the ﬁrst result in this direction. In fact, since it is still not known whether there
exists a constant c for which every ck-chromatic graph has a Kk-minor, this may be
viewed as a ﬁrst step in attacking that question.
Actually, the main result in [9] is the list-colouring version of Theorem 8.2 (see
Chapter 6). When any of a set of ck colours is allowed at each vertex (called
ck-choosability), we obtain this list-colouring version of Hadwiger’s conjecture.
Conjecture D There is a constant c for which every graph without a Kk-minor is
ck-choosable.

4 Hadwiger’s conjecture
89
The list-colouring version of Hadwiger’s conjecture itself is false; for example,
there are planar graphs, which of course have no K5 minors, that are not 4-choosable.
Furthermore, Conjecture D is not true for c = 1; an example of Barat, Joret and
Wood [7] shows that there is a K3k+2-minor-free graph that is not 4k-choosable.
Fractional colourings
Fractional colourings are closely related to the independent sets in a graph; in fact,
the deﬁnition involves them, so we let I denote the family of independent sets in a
graph G. For k a non-negative rational number, a fractional k-colouring of graph G
is a map q : I →Q+ (the set of non-negative rationals) such that
• for each vertex v,  q(S) = 1, where the sum is over all S ∈I that contain v
•  q(S) ≤k, where the sum is over all S ∈I.
Thus, when k is an integer, a graph G is k-colourable if and only if it has a
fractional k-colouring q that has its values in (0, 1). Consequently, if true, Hadwiger’s
conjecture would imply that every graph with no Kt+1-minor has a fractional
t-colouring. In this direction, Reed and Seymour [55] proved the following result.
Theorem 8.3 For each integer t ≥1, every graph with no Kt-minor has a fractional
2t-colouring.
Motivated by the odd conjecture and Theorem 8.3, Kawarabayashi and Reed [43]
deduced the same conclusion when only odd minors are excluded.
Theorem 8.4 For each integer t ≥1, every graph with no odd Kt-minor has a
fractional 2t-colouring.
9. Open problems
We conclude the chapter with some open questions related to Hadwiger’s conjecture.
The ﬁrst unsettled case of the conjecture is the following.
Conjecture E Every 7-chromatic graph has a K7 minor.
Mader [52] proved that a minimal counter-example to Hadwiger’s conjecture is
7-connected. Hence, Conjecture E is implied by the next one.
Conjecture F Every 7-connected graph with no K7 minor has two vertices whose
removal leaves a planar graph.
Motivated by the fact that a complete characterization for graphs without K6
minors is not known, Jørgensen [34] made the following beautiful conjecture.
Conjecture G Every 6-connected graph G with no K6 minors contains a vertex whose
removal leaves a planar graph.

90
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
This conjecture was solved for large graphs in [41], but their method cannot give a
complete solution. The next conjecture actually seems much harder than Conjecture
G, and even out of reach for large graphs.
Conjecture H Every 7-connected graph has K6 as a minor.
In fact, for a complete characterization of graphs with no K6 minors, we may need
to ﬁnd a characterization of 5-connected graphs with no K6 minor. The following
weakening of Conjecture H would be a step in the right direction.
Conjecture I Every sufﬁciently large 7-connected graph G with no K7-minors has
two vertices v, w such that G −v −w is planar.
As we have seen in this chapter, there are many weaker versions of Hadwiger’s
conjecture, all of which currently appear to be intractable. Let us state again the
weak version of Hadwiger’s conjecture.
Hadwiger’s conjecture (weak version) There exists a constant c such that for k ≥1,
every ck-chromatic graph contains the complete graph Kk as a minor.
A stronger conjecture has also been made (see [40]).
Conjecture J There is a constant c for which every graph without a Kk-minor is
ck-choosable.
Finally, we mention two other related conjectures. The ﬁrst was made indepen-
dently by Chartrand, Geller and Hedetniemi [14] and Woodall [77], while the second
is due to Bojan Mohar.
Conjecture K For integers 1 ≤h ≤k, every graph G without Kk+1 or a
K⌊(k+2)/2⌋,⌈(k+2)/2⌉-minor, has a partition of G into k−h+1 parts, each part inducing
a graph without Kh+1 or a K⌊(h+2)/2⌋,⌈(h+2)/2⌉-minor.
Conjecture L There are only ﬁnitely many 3-connected k-colour-critical graphs
without Kk as a minor.
References
1. F. N. Abu-Khzam and M. A. Langston, Graph coloring and the immersion order, to appear.
2. K. Appel and W. Haken, Every planar map is four colorable, Part I. Discharging, Illinois
J. Math. 21 (1977), 429–490.
3. K. Appel, W. Haken and J. Koch, Every planar map is four colorable, Part II. Reducibility,
Illinois J. Math. 21 (1977), 491–567.
4. S. Arnborg and A. Proskurowski, Linear time algorithms for NP-hard problems restricted
to partial k-trees, Discrete Appl. Math. 23 (1989), 11–24.
5. J. Balogh and A. Kostochka, Large minors in graphs with given independent number,
Discrete Math. 311 (2011), 2204–2215.
6. J. Balogh, J. Lenz and H. Wu, Complete minors, independent sets, and chordal graphs,
Discuss. Math. Graph Theory, to appear.

4 Hadwiger’s conjecture
91
7. J. Barat, G. Joret and D. Wood, Disproof of the list Hadwiger conjecture, Electron.
J. Combin. 18 (2011), P232.
8. H. L. Bodlaender, A linear-time algorithm for ﬁnding tree-decompositions of small
treewidth, SIAM J. Comput. 25 (1996), 1305–1317.
9. T. B¨ohme, K. Kawarabayashi, J. Maharry and B. Mohar, Linear connectivity forces large
complete bipartite minors, J. Combin. Theory (B) 99 (2009), 557–582.
10. B. Bollob´as and P. A. Catlin, Topological cliques of random graphs, J. Combin. Theory
(B) 30 (1981), 224–227.
11. B. Bollob´as and A. Thomason, Highly linked graphs, Combinatorica 16 (1996), 313–320.
12. H. D. Booth, R. Govindan, M. A. Langston and S. Ramachandramurthis, Sequential and
parallel algorithms for K4-immersion testing, J. Algorithms 30 (1999), 344–378.
13. P. A. Catlin, A bound on the chromatic number of a graph, Discrete Math. 22 (1978),
81–83.
14. G. Chartrand, D. Geller and S. Hedetniemi, Graphs with forbidden subgraphs, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 10 (1971), 12–41.
15. M. Chudnovsky and A. O. Fradkin, Hadwiger’s conjecture for quasi-line graphs, J. Graph
Theory 59 (2008), 17–33.
16. M. Chudnovsky and P. Seymour, Packing seagulls, Combinatorica, to appear.
17. V. Chv´atal, On certain polytopes associated with graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 18 (1975),
138–154.
18. M. DeVos, Z. Dvoˇr´ak, J. Fox, J. McDonald, B. Mohar and D. Scheide, A minimum degree
condition forcing complete graph immersion, Combinatorica 34 (2014), 279–298.
19. M. DeVos, K. Kawarabayashi, B. Mohar and H. Okamura, Immersing small complete
graphs, Ars Math. Contemp. 3 (2010), 139–146.
20. R. Diestel, Graph Theory (2nd edn.), Springer, 2000.
21. G. A. Dirac, A property of 4-chromatic graphs and some remarks on critical graphs,
J. London Math. Soc. 27 (1952), 85–92.
22. G. A. Dirac, Trennende Knotenpunktmengen und Reduzibilit¨at abstrakter Graphen mit
Anwendung auf das Vierfarbenproblem, J. Reine Angew. Math. 204 (1960), 116–131.
23. G. A. Dirac, Homomorphism theorems for graphs, J. Reine Angew. Math. 153 (1964),
69–80.
24. G. A. Dirac, On the structure of 5- and 6-chromatic abstract graphs, Math. Ann. 214/215
(1964), 43–52.
25. P. Duchet and H. Meyniel, On Hadwiger’s number and the stability number, Graph Theory
(Cambridge, 1981), North-Holland (1982), 71–73.
26. P. Erd˝os and S. Fajtlowicz, On the conjecture of Haj´os, Combinatorica 1 (1981), 141–143.
27. J. Fox, Complete minors and independence number, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 24 (2010)
1313–1321.
28. A. O. Fradkin, Clique minors in claw-free graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 102 (2012),
71–85.
29. J. Geelen, B. Gerards, B. Reed, P. Seymour and A. Vetta, On the odd variant of Hadwiger’s
conjecture, J. Combin. Theory (B) 99 (2009), 20–29.
30. B. Gerards, An extension of K¨onig’s theorem to graphs with no odd-K4, J. Combin. Theory
(B) 47 (1989), 330–348.
31. H. Hadwiger, ¨Uber eine Klassiﬁkation der Streckenkomplexe, Vierteljschr. Naturforsch.
Ges. Z¨urich 88 (1943), 133–142.
32. M. R. Henzinger, S. Rao and H. N. Gabow, Computing vertex connectivity: new bounds
from old techniques, J. Algorithms 34 (2000), 222–250.
33. T. R. Jensen and B. Toft, Graph Coloring Problems, Wiley–Interscience, 1995.
34. L. Jørgensen, Contraction to K8, J. Graph Theory 18 (1994), 431–448.

92
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi
35. K. Kawarabayashi, Rooted minors problem in highly connected graphs, Discrete Math.
287 (2004), 121–123.
36. K. Kawarabayashi, On the connectivity of minimal counterexamples to Hadwiger’s
conjecture, J. Combin. Theory (B) 97 (2007), 144–150.
37. K. Kawarabayashi, Note on coloring graphs with no odd-Kk-minors, J. Combin. Theory
(B) 99 (2009), 738–741.
38. K. Kawarabayashi, Minors in 7-chromatic graphs, preprint.
39. K. Kawarabayashi, A. Kostochka and G. Yu, On sufﬁcient degree conditions for a graph
to be k-linked, Combin. Probab. Comput. 15 (2006), 685–694.
40. K. Kawarabayashi and B. Mohar, A relaxed Hadwiger’s conjecture for list-colorings,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 97 (2007), 647–651.
41. K. Kawarabayashi, S. Norine, R. Thomas and P. Wollan, K6 minors in large 6-connected
graphs, submitted.
42. K. Kawarabayashi, M. Plummer and B. Toft, Improvements of the theorem of Duchet and
Meyniel on Hadwiger’s conjecture, J. Combin. Theory (B) 96 (2005), 152–167.
43. K. Kawarabayashi and B. Reed, Fractional coloring and the odd Hadwiger’s conjecture,
Europ. J. Combin. 29 (2008), 411–417.
44. K. Kawarabayashi and B. Reed, Hadwiger’s conjecture is decidable, STOC’09 Proc. 2009
ACM International Symposium on Theory of Computing, ACM (2009), 445–454.
45. K. Kawarabayashi and Z. Song, Some remarks on the odd Hadwiger’s conjecture,
Combinatorica 27 (2007), 429–438.
46. K. Kawarabayashi and B. Toft, Any 7-chromatic graph has K7 or K4,4 as a minor,
Combinatorica 25 (2005), 327–353.
47. K. Kawarabayashi and G. Yu, Connectivities for k-knitted graphs and for minimal
counterexamples to Hadwiger’s conjecture, J. Combin. Theory (B) 103 (2013), 320–326.
48. J. Koml´os and E. Szemer´edi, Topological cliques in graphs II, Combin. Prob. Comput. 5
(1996), 79–80.
49. A. Kostochka, The minimum Hadwiger number for graphs with a given mean degree of
vertices, Metody Diskret. Analiz 38 (1982), 37–58.
50. A. Kostochka, Lower bound of the Hadwiger number of graphs by their average degree,
Combinatorica 4 (1984), 307–316.
51. F. Lescure and H. Meyniel, On a problem upon conﬁgurations contained in graphs with
given chromatic number, Graph Theory in Memory of G. A. Dirac (Sandbjerg, 1985), Ann.
Discrete Math. 41, North-Holland (1989), 325–331.
52. W. Mader, Homomorphies¨atze f¨ur Graphen, Math. Ann. 178 (1968), 154–168.
53. W. Mader, Existenz n-fach zusammenh¨angender Teilgraphen in Graphen gen¨ugend
grosser Kantendichte, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg 37 (1972), 86–97.
54. M. Plummer, M. Stiebitz and B. Toft, On a special case of Hadwiger’s conjecture, Discuss.
Math. Graph Theory 23 (2003), 333–363.
55. B. Reed and P. D. Seymour, Fractional chromatic number and Hadwiger’s conjecture,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 74 (1998), 147–152.
56. N. Robertson, D. P. Sanders, P. D. Seymour and R. Thomas, The four-color theorem,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 70 (1997), 2–44.
57. N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour, Graph minors XIII. The disjoint paths problem,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 63 (1995), 65–110.
58. N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour, Graph minors XVII. Taming a vortex, J. Combin. Theory
(B) 77 (1999), 162–210.
59. N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour, Graph minors XVI. Excluding a non-planar graph,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 89 (2003), 43–76.

4 Hadwiger’s conjecture
93
60. N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour, Graph minors XX. Wagner’s conjecture, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 92 (2004), 325–357.
61. N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour, Graph minors XXIII, Nash-Williams’ immersion
conjecture, J. Combin. Theory (B) 100 (2010), 181–205.
62. N. Robertson, P. D. Seymour and R. Thomas, Hadwiger’s conjecture for K6-free graphs,
Combinatorica 13 (1993), 279–361.
63. A. Schrijver, Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedra and Efﬁciency, Springer, 2003.
64. Z. Song and R. Thomas, The extremal function for K9 minors, J. Combin. Theory (B) 96
(2006), 240–252.
65. R. Thomas and P. Wollan, An improved linear edge bound for graph linkages, Europ.
J. Combin. 26 (2005), 309–324.
66. A. Thomason, An extremal function for contractions of graphs, Math. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc. 95 (1984), 261–265.
67. A. Thomason, The extremal function for complete minors, J. Combin. Theory (B) 81
(2001), 318–338.
68. C. Thomassen, Graph decomposition with applications to subdivisions and path systems
modulo k, J. Graph Theory 7 (1983) 261–271.
69. C. Thomassen, Parity, cycle space, and K4-subdivision in graphs, Surveys in Combin-
atorics, 1999, London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes 267, Cambridge University Press (1999),
223–238.
70. C. Thomassen, Totally odd K4-subdivisions in 4-chromatic graphs, Combinatorica 21
(2001), 417–443.
71. C. Thomassen, Some remarks on Haj´os’ conjecture, J. Combin. Theory (B) 93 (2005),
95–105.
72. B. Toft, Problem 11, Recent Advances in Graph Theory (ed. M. Fiedler), Academia Praha
(1975), 543–544.
73. B. Toft, A survey of Hadwiger’s conjecture, Congr. Numer. 115 (1996), 249–283.
74. K. Wagner, ¨Uber eine Eigenschaft der ebenen Komplexe, Math. Ann. 114 (1937), 570–590.
75. K. Wagner, Beweis einer Abschw¨achung der Hadwiger-Vermutung, Math. Ann. 153
(1964), 139–141.
76. D. Wood, Independent sets in graphs with an excluded clique minor, Discrete Math. Theor.
Comput. Sci. 9 (2007), 171–175.
77. D. R. Woodall, Subcontraction-equivalence and Hadwiger’s conjecture, J. Graph Theory
11 (1987), 197–204.
78. W. Zang, Proof of Toft’s conjecture: every graph containing no fully odd K4 is 3-colorable,
J. Combin. Optim. 2 (1998), 117–188.

5
Edge-colourings
JESSICA MCDONALD
1. Introduction
2. Elementary sets and Kempe changes
3. Tashkinov trees and upper bounds
4. Towards the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture
5. Extreme graphs
6. The classiﬁcation problem and critical graphs
7. The dichotomy of edge-colouring
8. Final thoughts
References
The focus of this chapter is on two cornerstones in modern edge-colouring: the
famous Goldberg–Seymour conjecture, and ideas culminating in the method of
Tashkinov trees. We also discuss extreme examples, the classiﬁcation problem,
and the computational complexity of edge-colouring.
1. Introduction
The central question concerning edge-colourings is: given a graph G, what is its
chromatic index χ′(G) – that is, the minimum number of colours needed to edge-
colour G? We explore this question in detail in this chapter.
The most obvious lower bound on the chromatic index of a graph G is χ′(G) ≥
(where  is the maximum degree in G), and in 1916 K¨onig [39] proved that all
bipartite graphs satisfy this bound with equality.
Theorem 1.1 If G is a bipartite graph, then χ′(G) = .
The most famous upper bounds on the chromatic index are the following two
results. The ﬁrst of these was proved by Shannon [75] in 1949, and the second
was proved by Vizing [81], and independently by Gupta [27], in the 1960s. The

5 Edge-colourings
95
second result is widely known as Vizing’s theorem, and it makes use of the maximum
edge-multiplicity of a graph G, denoted by μ = μ(G).
Theorem 1.2 For every graph G, χ′(G) ≤3
2.
Theorem 1.3 For every graph G, χ′(G) ≤ + μ.
In terms of exactly determining the chromatic index of a graph G, Theorem 1.2
gives a range of about 1
2 possible values. When μ < 1
2, Vizing’s theorem further
narrows this window. In particular, when G is a simple graph (μ = 1), Vizing’s
theorem says that there are only two possible values for the chromatic index:  and
 + 1. However, even in the case of simple graphs (and in fact even in the case of
3-regular simple graphs), it is NP-hard to determine the chromatic index exactly, as
shown by Holyer [35].
Each colour class in an edge-colouring of a graph is a matching in that graph.
Hence, given a set S of vertices in a graph G, where |S| is odd and at least 3, the
maximum size of a colour class in G[S] is 1
2(|S| −1). Thus the following is a natural
lower bound for the chromatic index:
ρ = ρ(G) = max
2|E(G[S])|
|S| −1
: S ⊆V(G), |S| ≥3 and odd

.
In fact, we also get χ′(G) ≥⌈ρ⌉, since the chromatic index is an integer. The famous
Goldberg–Seymour conjecture, posed independently by Goldberg [18] and Seymour
[73] in the 1970s, says that any graph with chromatic index higher than  + 1 must
have chromatic index ⌈ρ⌉.
Conjecture A For any graph G, χ′(G) is ,  + 1 or ⌈ρ⌉.
Conjecture A is an amazing generalization of Vizing’s theorem for simple graphs.
Moreover, it suggests a dichotomy within edge-colouring. While Holyer’s result tells
us that it is NP-hard to distinguish between chromatic index  and  + 1, the truth
of the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture would imply the following for any graph G:
Determining whether or not χ′(G) >  + 1 can be done in polynomial time.
Furthermore, the exact value of χ′(G) can be computed in polynomial time whenever
χ′(G) >  + 1.
This implication is not immediate, but it can be deduced from well-known results in
combinatorial optimization. In Section 7 we explain this in detail.
The focus of this chapter is on the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture and the
techniques used in edge-colouring, particularly the ‘method of Tashkinov trees’. In
Section 2 we explain the core concepts of this method, taking as an example a proof
of K¨onig’s theorem. In Section 3 we discuss Tashkinov trees, and present easy proofs
of Shannon and Vizing’s theorems. We also present other important upper bounds for
the chromatic index, all of which can be obtained in a similar manner. In Section 4
we survey the current status of work towards the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture, and
show more advanced proof ideas that lead to approximations of the conjecture.

96
Jessica McDonald
Given a known bound for the chromatic index – say, χ′(G) ≤k for all graphs
G – can we characterize those G for which χ′(G) = k? Our discussion of such
extreme graphs begins in Section 5, where we also touch on graphs at the other end
of the scale – those with chromatic index . When we restrict the characterization
of extreme graphs to simple graphs, we meet the so-called classiﬁcation problem,
the NP-hard problem of distinguishing simple graphs with chromatic index  or
 + 1. This is a very rich area, and we provide a brief survey in Section 6. Section 7
contains the explanation mentioned above, concerning the complexity implications
of the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture and the dichotomy between low and high
chromatic index. Our ﬁnal section contains some ﬁnal thoughts about this dichotomy,
Conjecture A and the method of Tashkinov trees.
There are many well-studied variations and problems concerning edge-colourings
that we do not attempt to cover here. The curious reader is referred to the thorough
and thoughtful new book, Graph Edge-colouring: Vizing’s Theorem and Goldberg’s
Conjecture, by Stiebitz, Scheide, Toft and Favrholt [77]. This book also contains
more information on nearly everything we discuss here and we refer to it henceforth
as Stiebitz et al. [77].
2. Elementary sets and Kempe changes
A partial edge-colouring ϕ of a graph G is an edge-colouring of some subgraph of G.
The edges of this subgraph are referred to as the domain of ϕ and denoted by dom(ϕ).
Suppose we want to ﬁnd a k-edge-colouring of a graph G, or at least show that one
exists. It is trivial to ﬁnd a partial k-edge-colouring ϕ of G with |dom(ϕ)| = 1, and
we can view this as a starting point. The next step is to ﬁnd a k-edge-colouring ϕ′
of G for which |dom(ϕ′)| = |dom(ϕ)| + 1, and then iterate this process. We can
phrase such an argument in an algorithmic way (given any partial k-edge-colouring
whose domain is not E(G), we ﬁnd one with a larger domain) or in an extremal way
(given a partial k-edge-colouring with maximum domain, we show that its domain
is E(G)). Each phrasing has its own merit and will suit us at different times in this
chapter.
Given a graph G and a partial edge-colouring ϕ of G, let ϕ(v) be the set of colours
in ϕ that are not used on any edge incident to v – that is, the set of colours missing
at v. A set of vertices W ⊆V(G) is said to be ϕ-elementary if no pair of vertices in W
have a common missing colour – that is, ϕ(w1) ∩ϕ(w2) = ∅for each pair of distinct
vertices w1, w2 ∈W. If the ends of an uncoloured edge are not ϕ-elementary, then
there is some colour missing at both ends, and that colour could be used on the edge
in question. It is worth stating this formally, as follows.
Theorem 2.1 Let G be a graph and let ϕ be a partial k-edge-colouring of G that
leaves e = vw uncoloured. If {v, w} is not ϕ-elementary, then there is a k-edge-
colouring of dom(ϕ) ∪{e}.

5 Edge-colourings
97
In the next section we discuss Tashkinov’s Theorem (Theorem 3.1), which is a
generalization of Theorem 2.1. A prerequisite to this topic is the fundamental concept
of Kempe changes, which we describe now and use, along with Theorem 2.1, to prove
K¨onig’s theorem.
Given a partial k-edge-colouring of a graph G, any pair of colours a, b ∈
{1, 2, . . . , k} induces a subgraph G(a, b) of G, where every component is a path or
an even cycle. Note that switching a and b on any such component of G(a, b) results
in another k-edge-colouring of G. We call any such switch a Kempe change. First
introduced by Kempe in his erroneous proof of the four-colour theorem, Kempe
changes have been widely used in edge-colouring.
Given a partial k-edge-colouring ϕ of a graph G and a vertex v in G with a ∈ϕ(v),
b ̸∈ϕ(v), one can consider a maximal (a, b)-alternating path starting at v – that is, a
path whose edges alternate in the colours a and b. Performing a Kempe change along
this path, we obtain a k-edge-colouring with domain dom(ϕ), where b ∈ϕ(v) and
a ̸∈ϕ(v). This simple procedure is a staple in edge-colouring.
Let us now give a quick proof of K¨onig’s theorem, that all bipartite graphs are
-edge-colourable. Let ϕ be a partial -edge-colouring of a bipartite graph G with
maximum domain, and suppose (for a contradiction) that some edge e = vw is
uncoloured. Then there exist some colour a ∈ϕ(v) and some colour b ∈ϕ(w).
By Theorem 2.1, {v, w} must be ϕ-elementary, so a ̸= b and we can make a Kempe
change along the maximal (a, b)-alternating path beginning at w. The alternating path
cannot end at v, since this would create an odd cycle, and so in the resulting colouring
ϕ′, b ∈ϕ′(v) ∩ϕ′(w). However, Theorem 2.1 then guarantees a -edge-colouring of
dom(ϕ′) ∪{e}, contradicting the fact that ϕ has maximum domain. K¨onig’s theorem
is thus proved.
The above proof of K¨onig’s theorem can be thought of as a blueprint for the method
of Tashkinov trees that we see next. We have already mentioned that the statement
of Tashkinov’s theorem (Theorem 3.1) is a generalization of Theorem 2.1. Moreover,
the proof of Tashkinov’s theorem is made up entirely of sophisticated sequences of
Kempe changes.
3. Tashkinov trees and upper bounds
Let G be a graph and let ϕ be a partial edge-colouring of G in which edge e1 is
uncoloured. A ϕ-Tashkinov tree is a sequence T = (v1, e1, v2, e2, . . . , vt) of distinct
vertices v1, v2, . . . , vt and edges e1, e2, . . . , et−1 of G such that e1 = v1v2 and, for
each ei with i ≥2,
(T1) ei has endpoints vl, vi+1, for some l ≤i
(T2) ϕ(ei) ∈ϕ(vk), for some k ≤i.
We say that such a Tashkinov tree starts at its uncoloured edge e1, and that it is
ϕ-elementary if V(T) is ϕ-elementary.

98
Jessica McDonald
Given a partial edge-colouring ϕ of a graph G and an edge e not coloured by ϕ, e
and its endpoints constitute a ϕ-Tashkinov tree. Hence the following result, proved by
Tashkinov [78] in 2000 and known as Tashkinov’s theorem, generalizes Theorem 2.1
when k ≥ + 1.
Theorem 3.1 Let G be a graph, let ϕ be a partial k-edge-colouring of G with k ≥
 + 1, and assume that e is uncoloured by ϕ. If there is a ϕ-Tashkinov tree starting
at e that is not ϕ-elementary, then there is a k-edge-colouring of dom(ϕ) ∪{e}.
Theorem 3.1 actually generalizes Theorem 2.1, not only in the sense that its
outcome is to guarantee the existence of a ‘better’ colouring, but in that it actually
provides an algorithm to ﬁnd such a colouring. This algorithm – that is, the proof of
Theorem 3.1 – consists of a sophisticated sequence of Kempe changes. It provides the
promised new colouring using at most a polynomial number (in n and ) of Kempe
changes (see [45] or [77]).
There are two special cases of Tashkinov’s theorem that are much easier to prove –
that is, they require fewer Kempe changes. In (T1), if we can replace ‘l’ with ‘i’ then
T is also called a ϕ-Kierstead path; if we can replace ‘l’ with ‘1’ then T may be called
a ϕ-Vizing fan.
Theorem 3.2 Let G be a graph, let ϕ be a partial k-edge-colouring of G, and assume
that e is uncoloured by ϕ. Assume that
either
(1) k ≥ + 1 and there is a ϕ-Kierstead path T starting at e;
or that
(2) k ≥ and there is a ϕ-Vizing fan T starting at e.
If T is not ϕ-elementary, then there is a k-edge-colouring of dom(ϕ) ∪{e}.
Case 2 of the above theorem was essentially proved by Vizing himself in his
original argument for Vizing’s theorem. In 1984 Kierstead [38] gave a new proof
of Vizing’s theorem, and on the way he proved case 1 of Theorem 3.2, a result which
directly paved the way for Theorem 3.1. In fact, Tashkinov’s proof of Theorem 3.1
is inductive and reduces to the case where the tree in question is a path – that is, a
Kierstead path.
To apply Tashkinov’s theorem, we typically want to consider a maximal
ϕ-Tashkinov tree starting at e, where ‘maximal’ refers to the number of vertices in
the tree. There may be a variety of such trees, with edge- and vertex-orderings that
are distinct. However, it is easy to see that all maximal ϕ-Tashkinov trees starting at e
must have the same vertex-set. We denote the vertex-set of any maximal ϕ-Tashkinov
tree starting at e by T (e, ϕ). It is often helpful to consider a maximal ϕ-Kierstead path
starting at e, or a maximal ϕ-Vizing fan starting at e, although the vertex-sets of such
trees can vary considerably.
We now show how Theorem 3.1 implies both Shannon’s and Vizing’s theorems
– in fact, we will see that these results follow from Case 1 of Theorem 3.2. To this
end, let ϕ be a partial k-edge-colouring of a graph G, where k ≥ + 1. (The value

5 Edge-colourings
99
of k is either ⌊3
2⌋or  + μ here, and we note that the case of ⌊3
2⌋<  + 1
is trivially resolved.) Suppose, for a contradiction, that ϕ has maximum domain but
some edge e is left uncoloured. By Tashkinov’s theorem, T (e, ϕ) is ϕ-elementary, so
setting |T (e, ϕ)| = t we get
k ≥| ∪v∈T (e,ϕ) ϕ(v)| ≥2 +

v∈T (e,ϕ)
(k −deg(v)) ≥2 + t(k −),
(1)
where the ‘2’ accounts for the edge e being uncoloured. Rearranging gives
k ≤ +  −2
t −1 .
(2)
We know that t ≥3 since if e = vw, each colour in ϕ(v) appears on an edge incident
with w, and we may pick any such edge as a second edge for a ϕ-Tashkinov tree.
However, using t ≥3 and k = ⌊3
2⌋in inequality (2) yields a contradiction. Thus
we have proved Shannon’s theorem.
To get Vizing’s theorem, we go in a slightly different direction within the same
argument, and pick some vertex x ∈T (e, ϕ) that is not an endpoint of e. Since T (e, ϕ)
is ϕ-elementary, x must be incident to an edge of every colour in 
v∈T (e,ϕ),v̸=x ϕ(v),
and by maximality, all these edges must be between x and T (e, ϕ) −x. As there can
only be at most μ(t −1) such edges, we get
μ(t −1) ≥|∪v∈T (e,ϕ),v̸=xϕ(v)| ≥2 + (t −1)(k −),
(3)
where the second inequality comes from inequality (1). Rearranging, we get
(t −1)( + μ −k) ≥2.
(4)
Setting k =  + μ in (4) yields a contradiction, and this proves Vizing’s theorem.
The above proofs of Vizing’s and Shannon’s theorems are stated in the language of
Tashkinov trees, but can be rephrased in terms of Kierstead paths, so that only Case 2
of Theorem 3.2 need be applied. To do so, simply consider a maximal ϕ-Kierstead
path beginning at e and proceed as before, choosing x as the last vertex in this path
in the proof of Vizing’s theorem.
We discuss results that require the full strength of Tashkinov’s theorem in the next
section. First, however, we note that we can get even more from Theorem 3.2.
We can actually improve the condition t ≥3 in the above argument to t ≥go,
where go is the odd girth of the underlying simple graph. We see this by taking
colours a ∈ϕ(v) and b ∈ϕ(w) and considering a maximal (a, b)-alternating path
from w. (This path must end at v, since otherwise a single Kempe change causes
{v, w} to be non-elementary and hence contradict Theorem 2.1.) Putting t ≥go in
equation (2) yields a contradiction when k =  + 1 + ⌊( −2)/(go −1)⌋, and thus
leads to a proof that of the following result, originally proved by Goldberg [21] in
1984.
Theorem 3.3 For every non-bipartite graph G, χ′(G) ≤ + 1 + −2
go−1.

100
Jessica McDonald
Theorem 3.3 generalizes Shannon’s theorem. A more careful analysis of the above
argument for Vizing’s theorem also yields a generalization. This generalization was
proved by Steffen [76] in 2000 and uses the girth g of the underlying graph.
Theorem 3.4 For every graph G containing a cycle, χ′(G) ≤ + 1 + (μ−1)
⌊g/2⌋.
There is another well-known way of generalizing Vizing’s theorem. Ore [53]
proved the following local reﬁnement in the 1960s, using the parameter μ(v) to
denote the maximum multiplicity of an edge incident with v; we also use μ(v, w)
to denote the number of edges between a speciﬁc pair of vertices v and w.
Theorem 3.5 For every graph G, χ′(G) ≤max{deg(v) + μ(v) : v ∈V(G)}.
Another recent local reﬁnement is due to Stiebitz et al. [77].
Theorem 3.6 For every graph G with at least two vertices,
χ′(G) ≤ + min{μ(G −v) : v ∈V(G)}.
Theorem 3.6 generalizes an earlier result of Chetwynd and Hilton [4]. Theorem 3.5
is best proved using Case 2 of Theorem 3.2, as follows. We observe that if ϕ is
a partial edge-colouring of a graph G, and T = (v1, e1, v2, . . . , vt) is a maximal
ϕ-Vizing fan that is ϕ-elementary, then

t
i=2
ϕ(vi)
 =
t

i=2
|ϕ(vi)| ≤
 t

i=2
μ(v1, vi)

−1,
(5)
since every colour that is missing at one of v2, v3, . . . , vt must be present on an
edge between v1 and v2, v3, . . . , vt (since otherwise the fan is not maximal), and e
is uncoloured. On the other hand, as in (1), we get
t

i=2
|ϕ(vi)| ≥1 +
t

i=2
(k −deg(vi)).
(6)
Combining (5) and (6) and using Case 1 of Theorem 3.2, we get the following.
Theorem 3.7 Let G be a graph and let ϕ be a partial k-edge-colouring of G with
k ≥. Assume that ϕ has maximum domain but that e = vw is uncoloured. Then
there is a vertex-set X ⊆N(v) such that |X| ≥2, w ∈X, and

x∈X
(deg(x) + μ(v, x) −k) ≥2.
Theorem 3.7 is commonly referred to as the fan inequality. If we set k =
max{deg(v) + μ(v) : v ∈V(G)} in Theorem 3.7 we see that for this value it is
not possible to have a partial k-edge colouring of maximum domain that does not
colour all of G, hence proving Ore’s theorem. The proof of Theorem 3.6 also relies
on the fan inequality, although we omit those details here.

5 Edge-colourings
101
The bounds mentioned in this section are arguably the most important in edge-
colouring, and we discuss graphs that achieve them in Section 5. First however, we
present more advanced results using Tashkinov trees, requiring the full generality of
Theorem 3.1 – namely, we discuss approximations towards the Goldberg–Seymour
conjecture.
4. Towards the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture
An equivalent way of stating the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture (Conjecture A), as
given in our introductory section, is that for any graph G,
χ′(G) ≤max{⌈ρ⌉,  + 1}.
This conjecture is far from being established, but there is mounting evidence towards
it, as we discuss in this chapter.
The Goldberg–Seymour conjecture is true asymptotically: Kahn [37] has shown
that, for any graph G,
χ′(G) ∼max{ρ, }
as max{ρ, } →∞.
The conjecture was shown by Marcotte [43] to be true for all graphs that do not
contain a K−
5 -minor, where K−
5 is K5 with an edge removed. Most other results
towards Conjecture A take the form of an approximation – namely, that χ′(G) ≤
max{⌈ρ⌉,  + s} for some speciﬁc s > 1.
There is a family of results, starting in the 1970s, which assert that
χ′ ≤max

⌈ρ⌉,  + 1 +  −2
m −1

,
(7)
for increasing values of m. Such results have been obtained by Goldberg [21], [20]
for m = 9, Nishizeki and Kashiwagi [51] and (independently) Tashkinov [78] for
m = 11, Favrholt, Stiebitz and Toft [16] for m = 13, Scheide [69], [66] for m = 15,
and Kurt [41] for m = 25. Since ( −2)/24 < 1 when  ≤25, the best of these
results show that the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture holds when the maximum degree
is at most 25.
Scheide [69] (see also [67]) and Chen, Yu and Zang [3] independently proved a
different sort of approximation to the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture. Building on
earlier work by Favrholdt, Stiebitz and Toft [16], they proved the following.
Theorem 4.1 For every graph G, χ′(G) ≤max

⌈ρ⌉,  + √/2

.
Theorem 4.1 greatly improves the above-mentioned approximations when  is
large. This result can be tightened slightly by replacing √/2 by √( −1)/2 (see
[68], [45]), and Kurt [41] has announced that he can replace it with
3√/2. We would
like to replace this term by log  as a next step, but this remains out of reach at this
point. On the other hand, by allowing the parameter μ, Haxell and McDonald [28]
proved the following.

102
Jessica McDonald
Theorem 4.2 For every graph G, χ′(G) ≤max

⌈ρ⌉,  + 2

μ log 

.
Another way to obtain approximations for the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture is to
use the number of vertices n as a parameter. Plantholt [56] proved that every graph
with even order n ≥572 satisﬁes
χ′(G) ≤max{, ⌈ρ⌉} + 1 +

n log(n/6),
and he recently made a further improvement that applies to all values of n (see [58]).
In fact, the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture is known to be true for graphs for which n
is very small. In 1997 Plantholt and Tipnis [59] completely determined the chromatic
index of all graphs with at most 10 vertices, and showed that all graphs of this
size satisﬁed the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture. Scheide’s result of (7) (or rather,
its proof) also implies the truth of the conjecture for graphs with at most 15 vertices.
We explain this in more detail shortly.
The aforementioned work of Kahn, Marcotte and Plantholt et al. does not use
the method of Tashkinov trees, but all the other results do, even those that predate
Theorem 3.1. Tashkinov’s association with (7) refers to his 2000 paper where
Tashkinov trees were ﬁrst introduced. However, as we saw in the last section,
specialized versions of this method have long been used in edge-colouring.
In Section 3 we saw how to use Tashkinov trees (or even Kierstead paths) to
k-edge-colour a graph G when k = ⌊3
2⌋(Shannon’s theorem), k = +μ (Vizing’s
theorem) and k =  + 1 + ⌊( −2)/(g0 −1)⌋(Goldberg’s theorem). But how can
we use this technique to prove k-edge-colourability when k = max{⌈ρ⌉,  + s} for
some s ≥1? We now explore this question.
Let ϕ be a partial k-edge-colouring of a graph G with maximum domain, and let e
be an edge uncoloured by ϕ. Then T (e, ϕ) is ϕ-elementary by Tashkinov’s theorem.
This means that if |T (e, ϕ)| = t, then every colour that is missing at a vertex in
T (e, ϕ) must occur on exactly 1
2(t −1) edges in G[T (e, ϕ)] (and hence t must be
odd), as such a colour cannot be missing at any other vertex in T (e, ϕ) and cannot
occur on any edge in δ(T (e, ϕ)) (since then this edge could be added to T (e, ϕ)). By
(1), the number of such missing colours is at least t(k −) + 2. It follows from the
deﬁnition of ρ that
χ′(G) ≥ρ ≥2|E(G[T (e, ϕ)])|
t −1
> t(k −) + 2,
(8)
where the strict inequality arises from the fact that the uncoloured edge e also lies in
G[T (e, ϕ)]. If we knew instead that all k colours occurred on exactly 1
2(t −1) edges
of G[T (e, ϕ)], we could deduce (by using k = max{⌈ρ⌉,  + s} in (8)) that
χ′(G) ≥ρ > k ≥ρ,
which is a contradiction and hence proves the k-colourability of G. Thus, we may
assume that there is some colour in {1, 2, . . . , k} that appears on fewer than 1
2(t −1)
edges of G[T (e, ϕ)]. Since this colour cannot be missing at any vertex in G[T (e, ϕ)],

5 Edge-colourings
103
it must appear on multiple (in fact, at least 3) edges of δ(T (e, ϕ)); such a colour
is called a defective colour. The existence of a defective colour yields further
information about G: in particular, Favrholdt, Stiebitz and Toft [16] (see also [77])
have proved several such facts using Kempe changes, allowing us to improve the
bound in inequality (2), and obtain the following result; similar statements are given
in [77] and [45].
Theorem 4.3 Let G be a graph, s be a positive integer, and k = max{ + s, ⌈ρ⌉}.
If there is a partial k-edge-colouring ϕ of G with maximum domain where e is
uncoloured and |T (e, ϕ)| ≥t, then
s ≤ −3
t + 1 .
In the light of this result, if we wish to prove that
χ′(G) ≤max

⌈ρ⌉,  + 1 +  −3
t + 1

for a given value of t, we need ‘only’ build a large enough Tashkinov tree
(|T (e, ϕ)|≥t) and use Theorem 4.3 to get a contradiction. The results of form (7) are
roughly obtained in this way by guaranteeing t ≥m−2, but as m increases this tends
to require substantial case analysis. The bound of Theorem 4.1 requires showing that
t is large compared to the number of colours k (=  + s) – in particular, t ≥2s + 3;
this can be done easily by analyzing the number of times that a colour on an edge of
a Tashkinov tree must appear in T (e, ϕ). Taking this idea further, and considering the
parameter μ as well, one can show that t > 1+(1+ 1
2sμ)s, from which Theorem 4.2
follows.
If we set s = 1 in the above arguments and are able to show the existence of a
Tashkinov tree of size t, then we can deduce that all graphs with fewer than t vertices
satisfy the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture. In fact, using results from [16] we can
tighten this further to prove the conjecture whenever n < t + 3; in particular, this
yields the aforementioned result due to Scheide [67] for graphs with up to 15 vertices.
5. Extreme graphs
Which graphs have the highest (and lowest) chromatic indices? For example, if we
know that all graphs G satisfy χ′(G) ≤k, can we characterize those G for which
χ′(G) = k?
If H is a simple graph, then we denote by H(μ) the μ-multiple of H – that is, the
graph obtained from H by replacing each edge with μ parallel edges. Multiples of
even cliques and multiples of even cycles are known to have chromatic index equal
to . On the other hand, by considering the vertex-set of an odd clique or an odd
cycle, we can see that
ρ(K(μ)
d+1) ≥ + μ
and
ρ(C(μ)
go ) ≥ + 1 + ⌊( −2)/(go −1)⌋,

104
Jessica McDonald
for all even d and odd go. Since ⌈ρ⌉is a lower bound on the chromatic index and we
can use the theorems of Vizing and Goldberg, this tells us that
χ′(K(μ)
d+1) =  + μ
and
χ′(C(μ)
k
) =  + 1 + ⌊( −2)/(go −1)⌋
for all d even and k odd. We thus obtain a class of examples (multiples of odd cliques)
that achieve Vizing’s bound and a class of examples (multiples of odd cycles) that
achieve Goldberg’s bound; the latter can be speciﬁed to yield a class of examples
(multiples of triangles) that achieve Shannon’s bound. These actually turn out to be
the only extreme graphs for Shannon’s and Goldberg’s bounds – namely, Vizing [83]
proved that
χ′(G) = 3
2
if and only if
G = K(μ)
3
,
and McDonald [46] generalized this to
χ′(G) =  + 1 +  −2
go −1 if and only if
G = C(μ)
go and (go −1) divides 2(μ −1).
These proofs can be deduced from the proof of Goldberg’s bound presented in
Section 3 by letting k = χ′(G) −1; instead of seeking a contradiction, we seek to
understand the necessity of the last colour. This value of k in (2) implies that t ≤go,
and hence inequalities (1) and (2) are satisﬁed with equality, leading to our desired
characterization.
While all multiples of odd cliques achieve Vizing’s bound of χ′(G) = +μ, these
are not the only graphs to do so; for example, we can easily check that χ′(K(2)
7
−e)
=  + μ. Scheide and Stiebitz [70] listed pairs (, μ) for which there exists a
graph with maximum degree  and multiplicity μ achieving the bound, and proved
that their list is complete provided that Conjecture A holds. Necessary structural
conditions for graphs achieving Vizing’s bound are also known (see [38], [46]), and
if we restrict ourselves to multiples of simple graphs, a descriptive characterization
of sorts is attainable; here it turns out that odd cliques do tell the full story (see [47]).
In the absence of a general descriptive characterization, however, simply charac-
terizing non-simple graphs achieving Vizing’s bound as having chromatic index ⌈ρ⌉
would be highly desirable. This would mean proving that χ′(G) ≤max{⌈ρ⌉,  +
μ −1} when μ ≥2, and partial results towards this have been obtained (see [28] and
[16]). Without the condition on μ Holyer’s result says that there would be no hope
here, and perhaps this helps to explain why the problem is so difﬁcult. In contrast,
one can extend the characterization of Goldberg’s bound even further to deduce that
χ′(G) ≤max{⌈ρ⌉,  + 1 + ( −3)/(go + 3)} (see [48]).
We have already encountered two families of graphs that have the lowest possible
chromatic index (): bipartite graphs and multiples of even cliques. Because of
Holyer’s work we know that we cannot hope for a characterization of such graphs.
However, Seymour [72] made the following conjecture, characterizing regular planar
graphs of chromatic index .

5 Edge-colourings
105
Conjecture B Let G be a regular planar graph. Then χ′(G) =  if and only if
ρ(G) ≤.
Note that this conjecture does not follow from the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture,
which says that χ′(G) =  or  + 1 if ρ(G) ≤. The truth of Conjecture B is
well known to be equivalent to the four-colour theorem when  = 3, and has been
established for all  ≤8 with a string of deep papers by Guenin [26], Dvoˇr´ak,
Kawarabayashi and Kr´al [12], Kawarabayashi and Edwards (see [14], [9]) and
Chudnovsky, Edwards and Seymour [10]. There are also signiﬁcant results towards
two generalizations of Conjecture B, one asserting that it holds even if ‘planar graph’
is replaced by ‘graph containing no Petersen minor’, and the other asserting that
the chromatic index of any planar graph is equal to max{, ⌈ρ⌉} (see [74], [44],
[61], [63] and [62]). The methods in these papers vary greatly from what we have
been discussing so far – in particular, we see induction, discharging and reducible
conﬁgurations, as introduced in Chapter 1.
When we restrict our discussion of extreme graphs to simple graphs, the scope of
our problem paradoxically seems to increase. Since simple graphs can take only one
of two values for the chromatic index, every simple graph can be considered extreme,
in the sense that it meets either the upper bound  + 1 of Vizing’s theorem or the
lower bound . Work on edge-colouring simple graphs has been proliﬁc; Fiorini and
Wilson’s 1977 book Edge-colourings of Graphs [17] (see also the later survey by
Hilton and Wilson [30]) focuses almost exclusively on simple graphs. We devote the
next section to a short survey of this important topic.
6. The classiﬁcation problem and critical graphs
Vizing’s theorem divides all simple graphs into one of two classes: those with
chromatic index  and those with chromatic index  + 1. The former simple graphs
are called class 1 and the latter are called class 2, according to the convention
introduced by Wilson. The problem of distinguishing between them, which we have
already seen is NP-hard, is commonly called the classiﬁcation problem.
To follow up on results from the previous section, the classiﬁcation problem has
been well studied for planar graphs. Vizing [82] conjectured that all simple planar
graphs with  ≥6 are of class 1, and this has now been established save for the
case  = 6; the case  = 7 was recently proved independently by Gr¨unewald [23],
Sanders and Zhao [64] and Zhang [88]. The classiﬁcation problem has also been
studied for graphs embedded on other surfaces by Sanders and Zhao [65] and Luo
and Zhao [42].
Even when we step away from talking about planar (or embedded) graphs, graphs
of class 1 are much more abundant than those of class 2. In fact, Erd˝os and Wilson
[15] proved in 1977 that almost all simple graphs are of class 1.
One way to prove that a simple graph is of class 2 is to show that ⌈ρ⌉≥ + 1;
the easiest case is when we need only analyze the entire vertex-set V(G) (as opposed

106
Jessica McDonald
to various odd subsets S of V(G)). With this in mind, Hilton deﬁned a simple graph
G to be overfull if m ≥⌊1
2n⌋ + 1. Such an inequality is not possible unless n is odd
and n ≥3, so we see that every overfull graph has too many edges to be of class 1 –
that is, for any overfull graph G,
χ′(G) ≥⌈ρ⌉≥
 2m
n −1

≥
(n −1) + 2
n −1

=  + 1.
Every simple regular graph of odd order is easily seen to be overfull, and is thus of
class 2; additional examples can be found in the early paper of Beineke and Wilson
[2]. Hoffman and Rodger [34] proved that a complete multipartite graph is of class 2
if and only if it is overfull. Hilton’s overfull conjecture, posed by Hilton in 1985 and
ﬁrst appearing in [5] and [6], states that when  > 1
3|V(G)|, overfullness is the only
possible reason for a simple graph G to be of class 2.
Conjecture C Let G be a simple graph with  > 1
3n. If G is of class 2, then G
contains an overfull subgraph H with (H) = (G).
Note that the 1
3n condition is best possible: consider P −v, where P is the Petersen
graph. An earlier and weaker version of Conjecture C, where G is a regular simple
graph with 2n vertices and  ≥n, appeared in Chetwynd and Hilton [4] and is known
as the 1-factorization conjecture. This conjecture is known to be true asymptotically,
as shown by Perkovi´c and Reed [55], and there are other supporting results (see,
for example, [7] and [52]). Little progress has been made on Conjecture C in
general, save for work by Plantholt [57], although Hilton and Johnson explored
consequences of the conjecture in [29]. Generalizations of the 1-factorization
conjecture and the overfull conjecture for all (not necessarily simple) graphs have
been proposed by Plantholt and Tipnis [60] and Stiebitz et al. [77], respectively;
the ﬁrst of these was proved asymptotically by Plantholt and Tipnis [60] and
Vaughan [80].
Many results on the classiﬁcation problem give structural properties of class 2
graphs. Thomassen [79] proved that every class 2 graph contains two vertices of
degree  that are joined by  edge-disjoint paths. A number of authors (see [33],
[32], [4] and [7]) have studied the subgraph induced by all vertices of maximum
degree, called the core of a graph, and found conditions for a graph to be of class 1
or class 2 depending on its core. Of special interest are the Hilton graphs, connected
simple graphs of class 2 with a core of  = 1 or 2 (see [31]).
Results about class 2 graphs (in particular, those mentioned in the above para-
graph) very often make use of the following result, known as Vizing’s adjacency
lemma. Here we encounter for the ﬁrst time in this chapter the important notion
of critical as it relates to edge-colouring: an edge e in a graph G is critical if
χ′(G −e) < χ′(G), and G is critical if every edge of G is a critical edge.
Theorem 6.1 Let G be a simple graph of class 2 and let e = vw be a critical edge of
G. Then v is adjacent to at least  −deg(w) + 1 vertices of degree .

5 Edge-colourings
107
This lemma, originally proved by Vizing [82], can be seen as a consequence of
the fan inequality (Theorem 3.7). Namely, if we apply Theorem 3.7 with k =  and
μ = 1 and let Z = X \ w, where X is the set of vertices guaranteed by Theorem 3.7,
we deduce that w ̸∈Z ⊆N(v) and

z∈Z
(deg(z) + 1 −) ≥ −deg(w) + 1.
Hence the vertices of Z give the outcome of Vizing’s adjacency lemma. With
considerably more care, one can also prove a number of generalizations of Vizing’s
adjacency lemma (which provide additional structure), including those due to
Goldberg [19] and Andersen [1], Choudum and Kayarthi [8] and Kostochka and
Stiebitz [40].
Every simple graph G of class 2 contains as a subgraph a critical simple graph G′
of class 2 with the same maximum degree (see Vizing [82]). Thus, a study of simple
graphs of class 2 amounts to a study of critical simple graphs of class 2. Further,
the only critical simple graphs that are of class 1 are stars (as these are the only
graphs where deleting any edge causes the maximum degree to drop). Therefore, the
classiﬁcation problem can be seen as the problem of describing critical simple graphs
of class 2.
There are constructions for critical simple graphs of class 2 by authors such as
Jacobsen [36] (using Haj´os’s construction), Gr¨unewald and Steffen [24] and Yap [87].
Vizing [83], [84] also made the following conjectures about critical simple graphs of
class 2.
Conjecture D If G is a simple critical n-vertex graph of class 2, then:
• the independence number of G is at most 1
2n
• G contains a 2-regular spanning subgraph
• the number of edges in G is at least 1
2(( −1)n + 3).
Note that the ﬁrst conjecture above, commonly known as Vizing’s independence
number conjecture, is implied by the second conjecture, referred to as Vizing’s
2-factor conjecture. The latter is known to be true for all overfull graphs (see
Gr¨unewald and Steffen [25]) and the former is additionally known to be true when
when 1
2 is replaced by 3
5 (Woodall [86]). The last conjecture above, Vizing’s average
degree conjecture, is known to be true when 1
2((−1)n+3) is replaced by 1
3(+1)n
(Woodall [85]), and there are a number of other supporting results; see [77] for a
survey.
It is worth noting that nearly all of our earlier discussions can be phrased in terms
of critical graphs. In particular, both of the following conjectures are equivalent
to the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture; the ﬁrst is known as the critical multigraph
conjecture and the second is known as Andersen’s conjecture. Of interest is the
fact that Andersen proposed his conjecture in 1975 while an M.Sc. student at the
University of Aarhus; it was later published in [1].

108
Jessica McDonald
Conjecture E Every critical graph G with χ′(G) ≥ + 2 has n odd and m =
1
2(χ′(G) −1)(n −1) + 2.
Conjecture F If e is an edge in a critical graph G with χ′(G) ≥ + 2, then there is
a (χ′(G) −1)-edge-colouring of G −e such that no colour is missing at more than
one vertex.
Unlike the situation for simple graphs, we have reason to hope that there may be
a polynomial-time algorithm for χ′(G)-edge-colouring any graph G with χ′(G) ≥
 + 2. This is why we chose not to restrict our earlier discussions to critical graphs.
We explain this hope in the following section.
7. The dichotomy of edge-colouring
Let G be a graph, and let M(G) be the set of matchings in G. As previously
mentioned, each colour class in an edge-colouring is a matching. Hence, we can
express the chromatic index of G as
χ′(G) = min


M∈M(G)
xM :

M:e∈M
xM = 1 for all e ∈E, x ∈ZM(G) and x ≥0

,
where xM ∈{0, 1} indicates whether or not the matching M is a colour class in the
edge-colouring x ∈{0, 1}M(G). The linear programming relaxation gives rise to the
fractional chromatic index of G, χ′
f (G) – namely,
χ′
f (G) = min


M∈M(G)
xM :

M:e∈M
xM = 1 for all e ∈E, x ∈RM(G) and x ≥0

,
where we view xM ∈[0, 1] as the weight with which we pick the matching M. The
matching polytope MP(G) of G is deﬁned to be the convex hull of the characteristic
vectors of matchings in G, and this deﬁnition leads immediately to the following:
χ′
f (G) = min{β : (1/β, 1/β, . . . , 1/β) ∈MP(G)}.
(9)
Edmonds [13] gave a combinatorial description of MP(G) that is now known
as Edmonds’s matching polytope theorem, a short proof of which appears in
[71, pp. 109–111]. This theorem and equation (9) yield the following useful
interpretation of the fractional chromatic index:
χ′
f (G) = max{ρ, }.
(10)
We can now explain why the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture implies what we
claimed it did in Section 1 – namely the following.
Determining whether or not χ′(G) >  + 1 can be done in polynomial time.
Moreover, the exact value of χ′(G) can be computed in polynomial time whenever
χ′(G) >  + 1.

5 Edge-colourings
109
To this end, note that the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture and (10) imply that
χ′(G) >  + 1
⇐⇒
χ′(G) = ⌈ρ⌉>  + 1
⇐⇒
χ′(G) = ⌈χ′
f (G)⌉>  + 1.
Hence our claim amounts to being able to compute χ′
f (G) in polynomial time.
Linear programs are known to be solvable in time that is polynomial in their
number of constraints. The linear program describing the fractional chromatic
index has an exponential number of constraints, however, as is the case with the
linear program describing the fractional chromatic number. Despite this, although
computing the fractional chromatic number is known to be NP-hard, there is a
polynomial-time algorithm to compute the fractional chromatic index because of (9)
and the work of Edmonds.
Equation (9) reduces the computation of χ′
f (G) to the following separation problem
over the matching polytope.
Given a weighting of the edges in G, either identify a constraint of the matching
polytope that is violated, or prove that no such constraint exists.
This is because we know, for example, that (
1
−1,
1
−1, . . . ,
1
−1) ̸∈MP(G) and
( 3
2, 3
2, . . . , 3
2) ∈MP(G) (by Shannon’s theorem), and we can use bisection to
ﬁnd the minimum as in (9).
There are two ways to show that we can solve this separation problem in
polynomial time, both relying on the work of Edmonds. First, Padberg and Rao
[54] solved this directly by making use of Edmonds’s matching polytope theorem.
Alternatively, we now know that for the matching polytope (or even more generally),
a separation problem can be solved in polynomial time if and only if an optimization
problem can be solved in polynomial time (see [22] and [11, p.238]). A polynomial-
time algorithm for optimizing over the matching polytope was found by Edmonds in
the 1960s; it is commonly called Edmonds’s blossom algorithm.
8. Final thoughts
Our discussions have centred on the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture (Conjecture A)
and the method of Tashkinov trees. This method consists of modifying a given
partial edge-colouring with sequences of Kempe changes and resulting extensions
(colouring an edge e with a colour a, provided that a is missing at both ends of e).
Therefore, if we want to know whether the method of Tashkinov trees can be used to
prove the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture, we need to ask the following question.
Can every partial χ′(G)-edge-colouring of G be turned into a χ′(G)-edge-colouring
of G by a sequence of Kempe changes and extensions?
An afﬁrmative answer to this question would settle positively the following conjec-
ture of Vizing from 1965, now known as Vizing’s interchange conjecture. Observe

110
Jessica McDonald
(for what follows) that a Kempe change may reduce the frequency of a colour, and
when this change involves a single edge, the frequency may decrease to 0.
Conjecture G Every edge-colouring of G can be turned into a χ′(G)-edge-colouring
of G by a sequence of Kempe changes.
Two colourings are said to be Kempe equivalent if one can be obtained from the
other by a sequence of Kempe changes. Vizing [83] noted that not all edge-colourings
of a given graph are Kempe equivalent, but that Conjecture G holds when χ′(G) =
 + μ or χ′(G) = 3
2, and we see that the same is true for all the bounds proved
using the method of Tashkinov trees. More results on Kempe equivalence of edge-
colourings have been found by Mohar [50] and McDonald, Mohar and Scheide [49].
In the previous section we saw that the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture implies that
there exists a polynomial-time algorithm for determining χ′(G), whenever χ′(G) >
 + 1. Is it possible that when χ′(G) >  + 1, every partial χ′(G)-edge-colouring
of G can be turned into a χ′(G)-edge-colouring of G by a polynomial number of
Kempe changes and extensions? We know that such a polynomial-time algorithm
cannot exist for graphs with lower chromatic index (see Holyer [35]), but there may
well be such a dichotomy in edge-colouring. In fact, graphs that have extremely high
chromatic index appear to be among the easiest to edge-colour efﬁciently, perhaps
because they are ‘far away’ from the classiﬁcation problem. Accordingly, while one
might hope to prove the Goldberg–Seymour conjecture ﬁrst for graphs with μ ≤2,
or even just for 2-multiples of simple graphs, these may be among the most difﬁcult
cases to settle.
References
1. L. Andersen, On edge-colourings of graphs, Math. Scand. 40 (1977), 161–175.
2. L. W. Beineke and R. J. Wilson, On the edge-chromatic number of a graph, Discrete Math.
5 (1973), 15–20.
3. G. Chen, X. Yu and W. Zang, Approximating the chromatic index of multigraphs,
J. Combin. Optim. 21 (2011), 219–246.
4. A. G. Chetwynd and A. J. W. Hilton, Regular graphs of high degree are 1-factorizable,
Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 50 (1985), 193–206.
5. A. G. Chetwynd and A. J. W. Hilton, Star multigraphs with three vertices of maximum
degree, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 100 (1986), 303–317.
6. A. G. Chetwynd and A. J. W. Hilton, The edge chromatic class of graphs with maximum
degree at least |V| −3, Graph Theory in Memory of G. A. Dirac (eds. L. Andersen,
I. Jakobsen, C. Thomassen, B. Toft and P. Vestergaard), Vol. 1, Ann. Discrete Math. 41,
North-Holland (1989), 91–110.
7. A. G. Chetwynd and A. J. W. Hilton, 1-factorizing regular graphs of high degree – an
improved bound, Discrete Math. 75 (1989), 103–112.
8. S. Choudum and K. Kayathri, An extension of Vizing’s adjacency lemma on edge
chromatic critical graphs, Discrete Math. 206 (1999), 97–103.
9. M. Chudnovsky, K. Edwards, K. Kawarabayashi and P. Seymour, Edge-colouring seven-
regular planar graphs, to appear.

5 Edge-colourings
111
10. M. Chudnovsky, K. Edwards and P. Seymour, Edge-colouring eight-regular planar graphs,
to appear.
11. W. J. Cook, W. H. Cunningham, W. R. Pulleyblank and A. Schrijver, Combinatorial
Optimization, Wiley, 1998.
12. Z. Dvoˇr´ak, K. Kawarabayashi and D. Kr´al, Packing six T-joins in plane graphs,
manuscript.
13. J. Edmonds, Maximum matching and a polyhedron with 0,1-vertices, J. Research Nat.
Bureau of Standards (B) 69 (1965), 125–130.
14. K. Edwards, Optimization and Packings of T-joins and T-cuts, M.Sc. thesis, McGill
University, 2011.
15. P. Erd˝os and R. J. Wilson, On the chromatic index of almost all graphs, J. Combin. Theory
(B) 23 (1977), 255–257.
16. L. M. Favrholdt, M. Stiebitz and B. Toft, Graph Edge Colouring: Vizing’s Theorem
and Goldberg’s Conjecture, Preprints 2006, No. 20, IMADA, University of Southern
Denmark, 91 pages.
17. S. Fiorini and R. J. Wilson, Edge-colourings of Graphs, Research Notes in Mathematics
16, Pitman, 1977.
18. M. K. Goldberg, On multigraphs with almost-maximal chromatic class [in Russian],
Diskret. Analiz 23 (1973), 3–7.
19. M. K. Goldberg, A remark on the chromatic class of a multigraph [in Russian], Vyˇcisl.
Mat. i. Vyˇcisl. Tehn. (Kharkow) 5 (1974), 128–130.
20. M. K. Goldberg, Structure of multigraphs with restrictions on the chromatic class [in
Russian], Metody Diskret. Analiz 30 (1977), 3–12.
21. M. K. Goldberg, Edge-coloring of multigraphs: recolouring technique, J. Graph Theory 8
(1984), 123–137.
22. M. Gr¨otschel, L. Lov´asz and A. Schrijver, Geometric Algorithms and Combinatorial
Optimization, Springer-Verlag, 1988.
23. S. Gr¨unewald, Chromatic Index Critical Graphs and Multigraphs, Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
sit¨at Bielefeld, 2000.
24. S. Gr¨unewald and E. Steffen, Chromatic-index critical graphs of even order, J. Graph
Theory 30 (1999), 27–36.
25. S. Gr¨unewald and E. Steffen, Independent sets and sets and 2-factors in edge-chromatic-
critical graphs, J. Graph Theory 45 (2004), 113–118.
26. B. Guenin, Packing T-joins and edge-colouring in planar graphs, manuscript.
27. R. P. Gupta, Studies in the Theories of Graphs, Ph.D. thesis, Tata Institute, Bombay, 1967.
28. P. Haxell and J. McDonald, On characterizing Vizing’s edge-colouring bound, J. Graph
Theory 69 (2012), 160–168.
29. A. J. W. Hilton and P. D. Johnson, Graphs which are vertex-critical with respect to the
edge-chromatic number, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 102 (1987), 211–221.
30. A. J. W. Hilton and R. J. Wilson, Edge-colorings of graphs: a progress report, Graph
Theory and its Applications: East and West (Jinan, 1986) (eds. M. Capobianco et al.),
Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 576 (1989), 241–249.
31. A. J. W. Hilton and Y. Zhao, One the edge-colouring of graphs whose core has maximum
degree two, J. Combin. Math. Combin. Comput. 21 (1996), 97–108.
32. D. Hoffman, Cores of class II graphs, J. Graph Theory 20 (1995), 397–402.
33. D. Hoffman and C. Rodger, Class 1 graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 44 (1988), 372–376.
34. D. Hoffman and C. Rodger, The chromatic index of complete multipartite graphs, J. Graph
Theory 16 (1992), 159–163.
35. I. Holyer, The NP-completeness of edge-colouring, SIAM J. Comput. 10 (1981),
718–720.

112
Jessica McDonald
36. I. T. Jakobsen, Some remarks on the chromatic index of a graph, Arch. Math. (Basel) 24
(1973), 440–448.
37. J. Kahn, Asymptotics of the chromatic index for multigraphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 68
(1996), 223–254.
38. H. A. Kierstead, On the chromatic index of multigraphs without large triangles, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 36 (1984), 156–160.
39. D. K¨onig, ¨Uber Graphen und ihre Anwendung auf Determinantentheorie und Mengen-
lehre, Math. Ann. 77 (1916), 453–465.
40. A. Kostochka and M. Stiebitz, Edge-colouring: a new fan equation, manuscript, 2006.
41. O. Kurt, On the Edge Coloring of Graphs, Ph.D. thesis, Ohio State University, 2009.
42. R. Luo and Y. Zhao, Finding the exact bound of the maximum degrees of class two graphs
embeddable in a surface of characteristic ε ∈{−1, −2, −3}, J. Combin. Theory (B) 306
(2008), 1788–1790.
43. O. Marcotte, On the chromatic index of multigraphs and a conjecture of Seymour, II, Proc.
DIMACS Workshop, Morristown, N. J. (eds. W. Cook and P. D. Seymour), American Math.
Soc. (1990), 245–279.
44. O. Marcotte, Optimal edge-colourings for a class of planar multigraphs, Combinatorics 21
(2001), 361–394.
45. J. McDonald, Multigraphs With High Chromatic Index, Ph.D. thesis, University of
Waterloo, 2009.
46. J. McDonald, Achieving maximum chromatic index in multigraphs, Discrete Math. 309(8)
(2009) 2077–2084.
47. J. McDonald, On multiples of simple graphs and Vizing’s theorem, Discrete Math. 310
(2010), 2212–2214.
48. J. McDonald, On a theorem of Goldberg, J. Graph Theory 68(1) (2011), 8–21.
49. J. McDonald, B. Mohar and D. Scheide, Kempe equivalence of edge-colourings in
subcubic and subquartic graphs, J. Graph Theory 70(2) (2012), 226–239.
50. B. Mohar, Kempe equivalence of colorings, Graph Theory in Paris: Conf. in Honour of
Claude Berge (eds. J. A. Bondy et al.), Birkh¨auser (2006), 287–297.
51. T. Nishizeki and K. Kashiwagi, On the 1.1 edge-coloring of multigraphs, SIAM J. Discrete
Math. 3(3) (1990), 391–410.
52. T. Nissen and L. Volkmann, Class 1 conditions depending on the minimum degree and the
number of vertices of maximum degree, J. Graph Theory 14 (1990), 225–246.
53. O. Ore, The Four-color Problem, Academic Press, 1967.
54. M. W. Padberg and M. R. Rao, Odd minimum cut-sets and b-matchings, Math. Oper. Res.
7(1) (1982), 67–80.
55. L. Perkovi´c and B. Reed, Edge coloring regular graphs of high degree, Discrete Math.
165/166 (1997), 567–578.
56. M. Plantholt, A sublinear bound on the chromatic index of multigraphs, Discrete Math.
202 (1999), 201–213.
57. M. Plantholt, Overfull conjecture for graphs with high minimum degree, J. Graph Theory
47 (2004), 73–80.
58. M. Plantholt, A combined logarithmic bound on the chromatic index of multigraphs,
J. Graph Theory 73 (2013), 239–259.
59. M. Plantholt and S. Tipnis, The chromatic index of multigraphs of order at most 10,
Discrete Math. 177 (1997), 185–193.
60. M. Plantholt and S. Tipnis, All regular multigraphs of even order and high degree are
1-factorable, Electron. J. Combin. 8(1) (2001), R41.
61. N. Robertson, P. Seymour and R. Thomas, Tutte’s edge-coloring conjecture, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 70 (1997), 166–183.

5 Edge-colourings
113
62. D. Sanders, P. Seymour and R. Thomas, Edge three-coloring cubic doublecross graphs, in
preparation.
63. D. Sanders and R. Thomas, Edge three-coloring cubic apex graphs, in preparation.
64. D. Sanders and Y. Zhao, On the size of edge chromatic critical graphs, J. Combin. Theory
(B) 86 (2002), 408–412.
65. D. Sanders and Y. Zhao, Coloring edges of graphs embedded in a surface of characteristic
zero, J. Combin. Theory (B) 87 (2003), 254–263.
66. D. Scheide, On the 15/14 edge-colouring of multigraphs, Preprints 2007 No. 11, IMADA,
University of Southern Denmark, 49 pages.
67. D. Scheide, Edge-colourings of Multigraphs, Ph.D. thesis, TU Ilmenau, 2009.
68. D. Scheide, A polynomial-time  + √( −1)/2-edge-colouring algorithm, Preprints
2009 No. 4, IMADA, University of Southern Denmark, 15 pages.
69. D. Scheide, Graph edge-colouring: Tashkinov trees and Goldberg’s conjecture, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 100 (2010), 68–96.
70. D. Scheide and M. Stiebitz, On Vizing’s bound for the chromatic index of a multigraph,
Discrete Math. 309 (2009), 4920–4925.
71. A. Schrijver, Theory of Linear and Integer Programming, Wiley, 1986.
72. P. Seymour, Matroids, Hypergraphs and the Max.-Flow Min.-Cut Theorem, D.Phil. Thesis,
Oxford University, 1975.
73. P. Seymour, On multi-colourings of cubic graphs, and conjectures of Fulkerson and Tutte,
Proc. London Math. Soc. 3 (1979), 423–460.
74. P. Seymour, Colouring series-parallel graphs, Combinatorica 10 (1990), 379–392.
75. C. E. Shannon, A theorem on colouring the lines of a network, J. Math. Phys. 28 (1949),
148–151.
76. E. Steffen, A reﬁnement of Vizing’s theorem, Discrete Math. 218 (2000), 289–291.
77. M. Stiebitz, D. Scheide, B. Toft and L. Favrholt, Graph Edge-colouring: Vizing’s Theorem
and Goldberg’s Conjecture, Wiley, 2012.
78. V. A. Tashkinov, On an algorithm to color the edges of a multigraph (in Russian), Diskret.
Analiz 7 (2000), 72–85.
79. C. Thomassen, Haj´os’ conjecture for line graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 97 (2007),
156–157.
80. E. Vaughan, An asymptotic version of the multigraph 1-factorization conjecture, J. Graph
Theory 72 (2013), 19–29.
81. V. G. Vizing, On an estimate of the chromatic class of a p-graph, Diskret. Analiz 3 (1964),
25–30.
82. V. G. Vizing, Critical graphs with a given chromatic class, Diskret. Analiz 5 (1965), 9–17.
83. V. G. Vizing, The chromatic class of a multigraph, Kibernetika (Kiev) 1 (1965) 29–39 [in
Russian]; English transl.: Cybernetics 1 (1965), 32–41.
84. V. G. Vizing, Some unsolved problems in graph theory (in Russian), Uspekhi Mat. Nauk.
23 (1968), 117–134; English transl.: Russian Math. Surveys 23 (1968), 125–141.
85. D. R. Woodall, The average degree of an edge-chromatic critical graph II, J. Graph Theory
56 (2007), 194–218.
86. D. R. Woodall, The independence number of an edge-chromatic critical graph, J. Graph
Theory 66 (2011), 98–103.
87. H. P. Yap, Some Topics in Graph Theory, London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes 108,
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1986.
88. L. Zhang, Every planar graph with maximum degree 7 is class 1, Graphs Combin. 16
(2000), 467–495.

6
List-colourings
MICHAEL STIEBITZ and MARGIT VOIGT
1. Introduction
2. Orientations and list-colourings
3. Planar graphs
4. Precolouring extensions
5. Notes
References
Over the years, many generalizations of the graph colouring problem have
been introduced and investigated in the graph theory literature. Such genera-
lizations are typically obtained by relaxation of the colouring condition that
each colour class forms an independent set, or by imposing restrictions on
the colours that may be used. A popular example of the second type is the
list-colour problem, in which it is required to choose a colour for each vertex
v of G from an individual list L(v) of available colours. The list-chromatic
number χℓ(G) is the smallest integer k such that, whenever we assign a list
of k colours to each vertex of G, there is a colouring of the vertices of G for
which each vertex receives a colour from its list and adjacent vertices receive
different colours. In recent years the list-colouring problem has attracted much
attention and has led to many interesting results and open problems.
1. Introduction
Let G = (V, E) be a graph, let f : V(G) →N, and let k ≥0 be an integer. A list-
assignment L of G is a function that assigns to each vertex v of G a set (list) L(v) of
colours: usually each colour is a positive integer. We say that L is an f-assignment
if |L(v)| = f(v) for all v ∈V, and a k-assignment if |L(v)| = k for all v ∈V.
A colouring of G is a function ϕ that assigns a colour to each vertex of G so that
ϕ(v) ̸= ϕ(w) whenever vw ∈E. An L-colouring of G is a colouring ϕ of G such that

6 List-colourings
115
ϕ(v) ∈L(v) for all v ∈V. If G admits an L-colouring, then G is L-colourable, or list-
colourable if L is understood. When L(v) = [1, k] for all v ∈V (where [1, k] is the
set {1, 2, . . . , k}), the corresponding terms become a k-colouring and k-colourable,
respectively. The graph G is said to be f-list-colourable if G is L-colourable for every
f-assignment L of G. When f(v) = k for all v ∈V, the corresponding terms become
k-list-colourable and k-choosable. The list-chromatic number or choice number
χℓ(G) is the least number k such that G is k-list-colourable.
The study of list-colouring problems for graphs was initiated in the 1970s
independently by Vizing [65] and Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [18]. In both papers it
was observed that every k-list-colourable graph is k-colourable, so that χ ≤χℓ, but
not conversely (see Fig. 1). Moreover, the gap between χ and χℓcan be arbitrarily
large. To see this, consider the complete bipartite graph G = Km,m, with m =
2r−1
r

for some integer r ≥2. If C is a set of 2r −1 colours, then there is an r-assignment L
of G such that every r-subset of C is assigned to exactly one vertex on each side of the
bipartition (A, B) of G. We claim that G is not L-colourable, and hence χℓ(G) ≥r+1.
Suppose on the contrary that there is an L-colouring ϕ of G. Then X = {ϕ(a) : a ∈A}
and Y = {ϕ(b) : b ∈B} are disjoint subsets of C and, since |C| = 2r −1, one of
the two sets, say X, has at most r −1 elements. But then there is a vertex a ∈A for
which L(a) ⊆C \ X, contradicting ϕ(a) ∈L(a).
1,2
3,4
1,3
1,4
2,3
2,4
2,3
1,3
1,2
1,2
1,2
1,3
2,3
1,2
2,3
1,3
1,2
1,2
1,3
2,3
2,3
1,3
1,2
1,2
2,3
1,3
2,1
1,2
1,3
2,3
1,2
1,3
2,3
Fig. 1. Small bipartite graphs with uncolourable 2-assignments
Let m(r, k) be the minimum number of edges in an r-uniform hypergraph with
chromatic number greater than k, and denote by N(k, r) the minimum number of
vertices in a k-colourable graph with list-chromatic number greater than r. That the
colouring of r-uniform hypergraphs relates to list-colourings of bipartite graphs was
ﬁrst observed by Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [18], who proved that
m(r, 2) ≤N(r, 2) ≤2m(r, 2), for r ≥2.

116
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
Erd˝os established the ﬁrst non-trivial bounds on m(r, 2) – namely,
2r−1 ≤m(r, 2) ≤r22r.
Further results concerning m(r, k) are discussed in the survey paper [37].
For m, r ≥1, let Km∗r be the complete r-partite graph with m vertices in each of
the r parts. Then, as proved by Alon [3], there are positive constants c1 and c2 such
that c1r log m ≤χℓ(Km∗r) ≤c2r log m, where m, r ≥2.
The line graph L(G) of a graph G is the simple graph with vertex-set E(G) in which
e, f ∈E(G) are adjacent if they are adjacent as edges in G. A colouring of L(G) is
therefore a map ϕ : E(G) →C with ϕ(e) ̸= ϕ(f) for any adjacent edges e, f of G.
A colouring of L(G) is also called an edge-colouring of G, and χ′(G) = χ(L(G)) is
called the chromatic index of G and χ′
ℓ(G) = χℓ(L(G)) is called the list-chromatic
index of G.
While the gap between χ(G) and χℓ(G) can be arbitrarily large, even for the class
of bipartite graphs, it was conjectured independently by various researchers such
as Vizing, Albertson, Collins, Tucker, Gupta, Bollob´as and Harris that this cannot
happen for the class of line graphs.
List-edge-colouring conjecture (LECC) Every graph G satisﬁes χ′
ℓ(G)= χ′(G).
The LECC seems difﬁcult to attack, and might even be false for the class of all
graphs. Hence it is reasonable to search for subclasses for which the conjecture can
be proved. Dinitz suggested a candidate for such a subclass – the class of complete
bipartite graphs Km,m. One of the spectacular results about list-colourings is Galvin’s
1995 proof [23] that the LECC holds for the class of bipartite graphs; the proof
method is discussed in Section 2. That the LECC is true for the class of simple graphs,
at least asymptotically, was proved by Kahn [35], who showed that any simple graph
G satisﬁes χ′
ℓ(G) = (G) + o((G)).
Another class of graphs for which the chromatic number and the list-chromatic
number always coincide was recently recognized by Noel, Reed and Wu [50]. This
remarkable result provides an afﬁrmative answer to a conjecture proposed in 2002 by
Ohba.
Theorem 1.1 Every simple graph G with |V(G)| ≤2χ(G) + 1 satisﬁes χℓ(G) =
χ(G).
There are several further classes of graphs for which it has been conjectured that
χℓ= χ. These classes include claw-free graphs, total graphs and squares of graphs.
A graph is claw-free if it contains no K1,3 as an induced subgraph: line graphs are
claw-free. The conjecture that every claw-free graph G satisﬁes χℓ(G) = χ(G) is
due to Gravier and Mafrey [24].
The total graph T(G) of a graph G is the simple graph with vertex-set V(G)∪E(G)
in which two vertices are adjacent whenever the corresponding elements in G
are adjacent or incident. That every graph G satisﬁes χℓ(T(G)) = χ(T(G)) was
conjectured about the same time (and independently of each other) by Borodin,
Kostochka and Woodall [10], Juvan, Mohar and ˇSkrekovski [32], and Hilton and

6 List-colourings
117
Johnson [29]. This conjecture became known as the list-total-colouring conjecture
(LTCC).
The square G2 of a simple graph G is the simple graph with the same vertex-set
as G in which two vertices are adjacent if and only if their distance in G is at most 2.
The list-square-colouring conjecture (LSCC), made by Kostochka and Woodall [38],
says that every simple graph G satisﬁes χℓ(G2) = χ(G2). If H is a graph and if G is
the simple graph obtained from H by subdividing each edge of H, then G2 = T(H).
Thus, the LSCC implies the LTCC.
One obvious way to ﬁnd an L-colouring of a given graph G is the following
sequential algorithm:
• choose a vertex-order v1, v2, . . . , vn of G – either an arbitrary one, or one that
satisﬁes a certain property
• consider the vertices in turn and colour each vertex vi with a colour, (if any) from
L(vi), different from all those colours already assigned to the neighbours of vi
among v1, v2, . . . , vi−1.
This procedure yields an L-colouring of G if |L(vi)| ≥dGi(vi) + 1 for all i ∈[1, n],
where Gi = ⟨v1, v2, . . . , vi⟩. The least integer p ≥1 for which G has a vertex-order
in which each vertex is preceded by fewer than p of its neighbours is called the
colouring number col(G) of G. Observe that col(G) ≤(G) + 1. Furthermore, the
clique number ω(G) (the largest number n for which Kn is a subgraph of G) is a lower
bound for the chromatic number. So we have proved the following:
Every graph G is f-list-colourable, where f(v) = dG(v) + 1 for all v ∈V(G), and
ω(G) ≤χ(G) ≤χℓ(G) ≤col(G) ≤(G) + 1.
(1)
It is well known that the colouring number of a non-empty graph G is equal to 1 +
(the maximum minimum degree of the subgraphs of G). A graph G with col(G) ≤
k + 1 is k-degenerate, so a graph is 0-degenerate if and only if it is edgeless, and is
1-degenerate if and only if it is a forest.
Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [18] proved that a connected graph G is f-list-colourable,
where f(v) = dG(v) for all v ∈V(G), unless each block of G is a complete graph or
an odd cycle (see Chapter 2). From this result they deduced that a connected graph
G satisﬁes χℓ(G) ≤(G), unless G is a complete graph or an odd cycle. This list-
version of Brooks’s theorem was independently obtained by Vizing [65].
It follows from (1) that if χ →∞, then col →∞. The complete bipartite graph
Km,m with colouring number m + 1 shows that the converse statement is not true.
However, the following result of Alon [4] shows that if col →∞then χℓ→∞.
Recall that 2|E(G)|/|V(G)| is the average degree of G.
Theorem 1.2 Let G be a simple graph with average degree at least d. If s is an
integer, and if
d > 4
s4
2
	
log2

2
s4
2
		
,
then
(G) ≥
+ 1

118
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
Let G be a simple graph, and let f, g : V(G) →N be functions. We call G (f : g)-
list-colourable if, given any f-assignment L of G, we can choose sets Sv ⊆L(v), with
|Sv| = g(v) for all v ∈V(G), so that Sv ∩Sw = ∅whenever vw is an edge of G.
When f(v) = a and g(v) = b for all v ∈V(G), the corresponding term becomes
(a : b)-list-colourable. Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [18] asked whether every (a : b)-list-
colourable graph is necessarily (ma : mb)-list-colourable? On the one hand, the only
pair for which this is known to be true is (a, b) = (2, 1) (see [63]). On the other hand,
Kostochka and Woodall [38] proposed the following conjectures.
Conjecture A The weak (a : b)-choosability conjecture:
For all a, b, m ∈N, if a simple graph G is (a : b)-list-colourable, then G is (ma : mb)-
list-colourable.
Conjecture B The strong (a : b)-choosability conjecture:
For all a, b, m ∈N, if a simple graph G is (a : b)-list-colourable, then G[Km] is
(ma : b)-list-colourable.
Conjecture C The (a : b)-choosability equivalence conjecture:
For all a, b ∈N, a simple graph G is (a : b)-list-colourable if and only if G[Kb] is
a-list-colourable.
If G is a simple graph, then G[Km] is called a uniform inﬂation of G. The classes
of line graphs, claw-free graphs and squares are closed under uniform inﬂations.
The following result due to Kostochka and Woodall [38] thus shows that the (a : b)-
choosability conjectures for these classes of graphs are implied by the LECC, the
list-colouring conjecture for claw-free graphs, and the LSCC, respectively. Observe
that the class of total graphs is not closed under uniform inﬂation.
Theorem 1.3 If G is a simple graph satisfying χℓ(G[Km]) = χ(G[Km]) for all m ∈
N, then all three (a : b)-choosability conjectures hold for G.
2. Orientations and list-colourings
Let D be a digraph. Recall that, for a vertex v ∈V(D), the out-degree d+
D(v) is
the number of edges in D that go out of v, and the in-degree d−
D(v) is the number
of edges in D that go into v. The maximum out-degree is denoted by +(D). For
a set X ⊆V(D), we denote by D⟨X⟩the subdigraph induced by X – that is,
V(D⟨X⟩) = X and E(D⟨X⟩) = {vw ∈E(D) : v, w ∈X}. A set X ⊆V(D) is a
kernel if X is an independent set of D (that is, D⟨X⟩has no edges) and for each
vertex v ∈V(D) \ X there is a vertex w ∈X for which vw ∈E(D). A digraph
D is kernel-perfect if every induced subdigraph of D has a kernel. The underlying
graph of D is the simple graph G with V(G) = V(D) and E(G) = {vw : vw or wv ∈
E(D)}.

6 List-colourings
119
Theorem 2.1 Let D be a kernel-perfect digraph and let G be the underlying graph
of D. If f, g : V(D) →N are functions for which
f(v) ≥g(v) +

vw∈E(D)
g(w)
whenever g(v) ≥1, then G is (f : g)-list-colourable, and so χℓ(G) ≤+(D) + 1.
Theorem 2.1 was ﬁrst used by Galvin [23] in order to show that the LECC holds
for line graphs of bipartite (multi)graphs. The following extension of this landmark
result was obtained by Borodin, Kostochka and Woodall [10].
Theorem 2.2 Let G be a bipartite graph and let f(e) = max{dG(v), dG(w)} for
each edge e joining v and w in G. Then the line graph of G is f-list-colourable.
Consequently, χ′
ℓ(G) = χ′(G) = (G).
Borodin, Kostochka and Woodall [10] used the above theorem to show that every
graph G satisﬁes χ′
ℓ(G) ≤3
2(G). This is analogous to Shannon’s bound for the
chromatic index (see Chapter 5).
Let D be a digraph with n ≥1 vertices v1, v2, . . . , vn. To each vertex vi we associate
a variable xi, and deﬁne the polynomial PD by
PD =

vivj∈E(D)
(xj −xi).
(2)
Clearly, PD ∈Z[x1, x2, . . . , xn] is a polynomial over the integer ring Z in n variables;
as usual, the product over the empty set is the unit of the underlying ring. The
polynomial PD can be written as a linear combination of monomials,
PD =

d1,d2,...,dn
ad1,d2,...,dn
n

i=1
xdi
i ,
(3)
where the sum is over all possible tuples (d1, d2, . . . , dn) of non-negative inte-
gers. The coefﬁcient ad1,d2,...,dn
belongs to the ring Z and is denoted by
koefD(d1, d2, . . . , dn). If G is the underlying graph of D and L(vi) is a non-empty
list for i ∈[1, n], then G is non-L-colourable if and only if PD vanishes over
L(v1) × L(v2) × · · · × L(vn).
The following result of Alon and Tarsi [6] relates list-colourability to the coef-
ﬁcients of the polynomial PD. This result is a consequence of the Combinatorial
Nullstellensatz [5].
Theorem 2.3 Let D be a digraph with vertex-set V(D) = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} and let
m = |E(D)|. If
koefD(d1, d2, . . . , dn) ̸= 0
for some tuple (d1, d2, . . . , dn) of non-negative integers, then d1 + d2 + · · · + dn = m
and the underlying graph G of D is f-list-colourable, where f(vi) = di + 1 for each
i ∈[1, n].

120
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
Alon and Tarsi [6] established a combinatorial interpretation for the coefﬁcients of
the polynomial PD, which makes the above theorem more applicable. A digraph D
is Eulerian if the in-degree and out-degree are equal at each vertex. For a digraph D,
let E(D) denote the set of all sets F ⊆E(D) for which D −(E(D) \ F) is Eulerian.
Furthermore, let Eo(D) be the set of all sets F ∈E(D) for which |F| is odd, and Ee(D)
be the corresponding set when |F| is even. Associate with these sets the following
numbers:
ε(D) = |E(D)|, εo(D) = |Eo(D)| and εe(D) = |Ee(D)|.
As
proved
by
Alon
and
Tarsi
[6],
every
digraph
D
with
vertex-set
V(D) = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} and with out-degrees d+
D(vi) = di, for 1 ≤i ≤n, satisﬁes
koefD(d1, d2, . . . , dn) = εe(D) −εo(D).
Together with Theorem 2.3 this implies the following result of Alon and Tarsi [6].
Theorem 2.4 Let D be a digraph and let G be the underlying graph of D. If εe(D) ̸=
εo(D), then G is f-list-colourable, where f(v) = d+
D(v) + 1 for each vertex v ∈V(G).
Moreover, χℓ(G) ≤+(D) + 1.
Let D denote the class of digraphs D satisfying εe(D) ̸= εo(D). Then D
contains acyclic digraphs, digraphs containing no directed cycles of odd order, and
orientations of bipartite graphs. However, all these digraphs are also kernel-perfect.
In general, it seems to be difﬁcult to decide whether a digraph belongs to D.
For Eulerian digraphs, however, the following observation due to Fleischner and
Stiebitz [22] has proved useful. If D is an Eulerian digraph with an even number of
edges and with ε(D) ≡2 (mod 4), then D ∈D. Thus, the underlying graph G is
f-list-colourable, where f(v) = d+
D(v) + 1 for each vertex v ∈V(G). Consequently,
if G is a simple graph with an even number of edges such that dG(v) is even for all
v ∈V(G), and if D is an Eulerian orientation of G with ε(D) ≡2 (mod 4), then
χℓ(G) ≤1
2(G) + 1. Fleischner and Stiebitz [22] used this result to show that if a
4-regular graph G on 3n vertices is the union of a Hamiltonian cycle and n disjoint
triangles, then χℓ(G) = χ(G) = 3.
Ellingham and Goddyn [17] used Theorem 2.4 to show that any d-regular planar
graph G satisﬁes χ′
ℓ(G) = d if and only if χ′(G) = d. By Theorem 1.3, this implies
all the (a : b)-choosability conjectures for line graphs of planar d-regular graphs with
chromatic index d.
Prowse and Woodall [51] used the Alon–Tarsi method to prove that χℓ(G) = χ(G)
if G = Cp
n is the power of a cycle – that is, the vertices of G are v1, v2, . . . , vn
and N(vi) = {vi−p, . . . , vi−1, vi+1, . . . , vi+p} for i = 1, 2, . . . , n, where subscripts
are taken modulo n. This implies that all the (a : b)-choosability conjectures hold for
powers of cycles.

6 List-colourings
121
If G is a graph whose underlying simple graph is a forest F, then an easy inductive
argument shows that
χ′
ℓ(G) = χ′(G) = (G), χℓ(T(G)) = χ(T(G)) = (G) + 1
and χℓ(G2) = χ(G2) = (F) + 1.
Hence G satisﬁes the LECC, LTCC and LSSC. Kostochka and Woodall [39] proved
the LECC and LTCC for ring graphs – that is, graphs whose underlying simple graph
is a cycle. The proof of the LECC for ring graphs is very short, while the proof of the
LTCC for ring graphs is long and complicated; one part uses the kernel method and
one part uses the Alon–Tarsi method.
3. Planar graphs
By Euler’s formula, simple planar graphs are 5-degenerate and hence 6-list-
colourable. On the other hand, the four-colour theorem states that planar graphs are
4-colourable. A comprehensive survey about colourings of planar graphs is given by
Borodin [9]. Many references for the results in this section can be found there.
Planar bipartite graphs
In 1979 Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [18] asked whether there exists a planar bipartite
graph that is not 3-list-colourable. That the answer is negative was proved by Alon
and Tarsi [6]. A simple bipartite planar graph G has an orientation D satisfying
+(D) ≤2; this follows from the fact that any subgraph H of G has at most
2|V(H)| −4 edges. Since G is bipartite, D satisﬁes εe(D) = εo(D), and by Theo-
rem 2.4 this implies that χℓ(G) ≤3. It is also easy to see that any orientation of a
bipartite graph has a kernel and is therefore kernel-perfect. Theorem 2.1 thus implies
that every planar bipartite graph is (3m : m)-list-colourable, for all m ≥1.
For these graphs, the proof of Theorem 2.1 can be easily transformed into an
algorithm. So let G be a simple planar bipartite graph, let D be an orientation of
G with +(D) ≤2, and let L be a 3m-assignment for G. The aim is to ﬁnd
a set Sv ⊆L(v) of m colours for each vertex v of G, such that Sv ∩Sw = ∅
whenever vw is an edge of G. Let α be a colour occurring in the lists and let
Vα = {v ∈V(D) : α ∈L(v)}. Now construct a kernel Kα of Dα = D⟨Vα⟩, as
follows. If v ∈Vα has no successor in Dα, then add v to Kα and remove v and all
of its predecessors from Dα; continue in this way until the remaining digraph has no
vertices or all vertices have successors in it; in the latter case, add one of the partition
classes to Kα. For all vertices v ∈Kα assign colour α to its colour set Sv and remove
α from all lists. If |Sv| = m, remove v and its incident edges from the graph, and
continue in this way until the graph has no vertices. Note that every vertex gets m
colours, since a colour is removed from its list if and only if the vertex itself, or one

122
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
of its two successors, gets this colour. Thus the algorithm terminates with the required
colouring.
For a graph G, let mad(G) = max∅̸=H⊆G 2|E(H)|/|V(H)| be the maximum aver-
age degree of G. As ﬁrst observed by Alon and Tarsi [6], every simple bipartite graph
G satisﬁes χℓ(G) ≤⌈1
2mad(G)⌉+ 1.
5-list-colourability
In 1979 Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [18] conjectured that all planar graphs are 5-list-
colourable, but that not all planar graphs are 4-list-colourable. The second part of
this conjecture was veriﬁed in 1993 by Voigt [66], who constructed a non-4-list-
colourable planar graph with 238 vertices. The smallest known example of such a
graph has 63 vertices and was obtained by Mirzakhani [48].
How can we construct such a graph? Consider the basic graph W ﬁrst used by
Gutner [28] and the list-assignment L given by M. Voigt and B. Wirth (see Fig. 2).
a1
a2
c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
b1
b2
L(c5) = (b,g,d, 5)
L(c4) = (a, g, d, 5)
L(c3) = (b,g,d, 5)
L(c2) = (a, g, d, 5)
L(c1) = (a, b, g, d)
L(b2) = (a, b, d, 5)
L(b1) = (a, b, g, 5)
L(a2) = (b)
L(a1) = (a)
Fig. 2. The graph W with a list-assignment
Then W is not L-colourable. To see this, assume ﬁrst that c1 is coloured δ; then
the triangle b1c2c3 cannot be properly coloured. Otherwise, c1 is coloured γ and the
triangle b2c4c5 cannot be properly coloured. Now take twelve disjoint copies of the
graph W – say, W1, W2, . . . , W12. For each vertex v of W, denote by v(i) the copy of v
in Wi. Identify all twelve vertices a1(i) to a new vertex p1 and all twelve vertices a2(i)
to a new vertex p2, and add an edge joining p1 and p2. Identify b2(i) with b1(i + 1)
for i = 1, 2, . . . , 11. The resulting graph G has (12 × 5) + 2 + 13 = 75 vertices. For
each vertex v of W, let L(v(i)) be the list obtained from L(v) by replacing α, β, γ , δ
according to the following table. Finally, set L(p1) = L(p2) = {1, 2, 3, 4}.
i
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
α
1
1
4
4
4
3
3
3
1
2
2
2
β
2
3
3
2
1
1
2
4
4
4
3
1
γ
4
2
1
3
2
4
1
2
3
1
4
3
δ
3
4
2
1
3
2
4
1
2
3
1
4

6 List-colourings
123
Notice that L(b1) = {α, β, γ , 5} and L(b2) = {α, β, δ, 5}, implying that L(b2(i)) =
L(b1(i + 1)) for i = 1, 2, . . . , 11. So G is a planar graph and L is a 4-assignment for
G. Furthermore, for each colour pair (α, β) ∈L(p1) × L(p2) with α ̸= β, there is an
i ∈[1, 12] for which L(a1(i)) = {α} and L(a2(i)) = {β}. This implies that G has no
L-colouring, and so χℓ(G) ≥5.
The above graph G has list-chromatic number 5, but chromatic number 3. This
answers in the negative a question of Jensen and Toft [31, Problem 2.13], who asked
whether every 3-colourable planar graph is 4-list-colourable. Note that for the given
list-assignment, the total set of colours has only 5 elements.
In 1994 Thomassen [57] proved a list version of Heawood’s ﬁve-colour theorem,
thus answering the conjecture of Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [18].
Theorem 3.1 Every planar graph is 5-list-colourable.
Thomassen’s proof of the above result is surprisingly short and from ﬁrst prin-
ciples. In contrast to the usual proof of the ﬁve-colour theorem, Thomassen’s proof
does not use Euler’s formula and involves no recolouring argument. The proof can be
extended to show that every planar graph is (5m : m)-list-colourable for all m ≥1 (see
[63]); moreover, the proof yields a linear colouring algorithm. In 2007 Thomassen
[60] proved that if G is a planar graph with n vertices and if L is a 5-assignment for
G, then G has at least 2n/9 distinct L-colourings. Clearly, there are no more than
5n distinct list-colourings. In 1998 ˇSkrekovski [55] extended Thomassen’s result
and proved that every graph G not containing K5 as a minor satisﬁes χℓ(G) ≤5.
DeVos, Kawarabayashi and Mohar [13] proved that locally planar graphs are 5-list-
colourable. If a graph G is embedded on a surface S, then the edge-width of G is the
length of a shortest cycle of G that is non-contractible in S.
Theorem 3.2 For each surface S there exists a constant w such that every graph that
can be embedded in S with edge-width at least w is 5-list-colourable.
In 2012 Kawarabayashi and Thomassen [36] proved the following extension of
Theorem 3.1.
Theorem 3.3 Let G be a connected graph embedded in a surface S of Euler
characteristic ε. Then G has a vertex-set A with at most 1000(2 −ε) vertices for
which G −A is 5-list-colourable.
Forbidden cycles and 4-list-colourability
Many authors have investigated whether forbidden cycles of speciﬁc length in a
planar graph ensure 4-list-colourability. It is easy to show that any simple planar
graph without triangles is 3-degenerate, and hence 4-list-colourable. Lih and Wang
[44] proved that if G is a planar graph in which any two distinct triangles are vertex-
disjoint, then G is also 4-list-colourable. Xu considered the (4m : m)-list-colourability

124
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
of planar graphs [75] and graphs embedded in the projective plane [76]. Xiaofang
[74] generalized the result of Lih and Wang to toroidal graphs.
Theorem 3.4 Let G be a graph in which any two distinct triangles are vertex-disjoint.
If G can be embedded in the torus, then G is 4-list-colourable. If G can be embedded
in the projective plane, then G is (4m : m)-list-colourable for all integers m ≥1.
Wang and Lih [45] proved that any simple planar graph without 5-cycles is
3-degenerate, and hence (4m : m)-list-colourable for all m ≥1; the proof contains
a small ﬂaw, but it can easily be ﬁxed. However, simple planar graphs without 4-
cycles are not 3-degenerate in general. Based on the discharging method, Lam et
al. [41] proved that any planar graph without 4-cycles is 4-list-colourable, and Lam,
Shiu and Xu [42] showed that these graphs are even (4m : m)-list-colourable. In 2002
Fijavˇz et al. [21] managed to show that every simple planar graph without 6-cycles is
3-degenerate, and hence (4m : m)-list-colourable for all m ≥1. Finally, every planar
graph without 7-cycles is 4-list-colourable, as proved by Farzad [20]. In summary,
we have the following result.
Theorem 3.5 Let k = 3, 4, 5 or 6. If G is a planar graph with no cycle of length k,
then G is (4m : m)-list-colourable for all m ≥1. If G is a planar graph with no cycle
of length 7, then G is 4-list-colourable.
Gutner [28] constructed a non-4-list-colourable planar graph whose longest cycle
has length 16. It is not known whether there exists a non-4-list-colourable planar
graph without k-cycles, for k ∈{8, 9, . . . , 16}. Cai, Wang and Zhu [11] extended the
above result for toroidal graphs, where the bounds for the list-chromatic number are
tight.
Theorem 3.6 Let G be a toroidal graph without cycles of length k. Then
χℓ(G) ≤4 if k = 3, 4 or 5, χℓ(G) ≤5 if k = 6, and χℓ(G) ≤6 if k = 7.
Triangle-free planar graphs
As mentioned above, triangle-free planar graphs are 4-list-colourable. A famous
result of Gr¨otzsch [25] says that triangle-free planar graphs are 3-colourable.
However, as proved by Voigt [67], there are triangle-free planar graphs that are not
3-list-colourable. There are even examples of such graphs where the colours of a bad
3-assignment are taken from a set of ﬁve colours only. Whether ‘ﬁve’ can be replaced
by ‘four’ is unknown.
The situation is different for planar graphs of higher girth. A planar graph of
girth at least 6 is 2-degenerate, and hence 3-list-colourable. In 1995 Thomassen [58]
extended this result to planar graphs of girth at least 5.
Theorem 3.7 Every planar graph of girth at least 5 is 3-list-colourable.
Moreover, Thomassen [59] proved that if G is a planar graph with girth at least 5,
and if L is a 3-assignment for G, then G has at least 2n/10000 distinct L-colourings.

6 List-colourings
125
Several authors established conditions for the 3-list-colourability of planar graphs
with girth at least 4 if some cycles of given length are missing. For details and
references concerning the following result, see [15].
Theorem 3.8 Let k = 5, 6, 7 or 8. Then a planar graph G is 3-list-colourable, unless
G contains a cycle of length 3, k or k + 1.
A further strengthening of Theorem 3.7 was given by Dvoˇr´ak, Lidick´ı and
ˇSkrekovski [16] and (independently) by Guo and Wang [26]. They proved that if
a triangle-free planar graph is not 3-list-colourable, then it contains a 4-cycle that
intersects another 4-cycle or 5-cycle in exactly one edge.
The list version of Steinberg’s conjecture
In 1976 Steinberg (see [31, Problem 2.9]) conjectured that every planar graph without
4-cycles and without 5-cycles is 3-colourable. In 1990 Erd˝os (see [9, ref. 43])
suggested the following relaxation of Steinberg’s conjecture.
Problem What is the smallest integer ℓfor which every planar graph without j-cycles
for 4 ≤j ≤ℓis 3-colourable?
The best partial result, due to Borodin et al. (see [9, ref. 43]), states that every
planar graph G is 3-colourable, unless G contains a cycle of length 4, 5, 6 or 7, and
thus ℓ≤7. On the other hand, Abbott and Zhou (see [9, ref. 1]) constructed two
inﬁnite families of 4-critical planar graphs – one without cycles of length 4 and with
six cycles of length 5, and the other without cycles of length 5 and with at most four
cycles of length 4. For more references concerning this topic see [31]. Montassier
suggested the corresponding question for list-colourings.
Problem What is the smallest integer ℓsuch that every planar graph without j-cycles
for 4 ≤j ≤ℓis 3-list-colourable?
Voigt [69] constructed a planar graph without 4-cycles or 5-cycles which is not
3-list-colourable. M. Montassier, A. Raspaud and W. Wang [49] found a non-3-list-
colourable planar graph without 4-cycles, 5-cycles or intersecting triangles. Thus
ℓ≥6 in the above problem, and the list version of Steinberg’s conjecture is false. On
the other hand, ℓ≤9 (a consequence of the next theorem). For details and references
concerning the proof of this theorem, see [71].
Theorem 3.9 For every pair i, j of integers with 5 ≤i < j ≤8, a planar graph G is
3-list-colourable unless G contains a cycle of length 4, i, j or 9.
Edge-list-colouring
In 1976 Vizing [65] conjectured that every simple graph G satisﬁes χ′
ℓ(G) ≤
(G) + 1. This conjecture is implied by the LECC and Vizing’s bound for the

126
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
It follows from the inequality (1) that every simple graph G with E(G) ̸= ∅
satisﬁes χ′
ℓ(G) ≤2(G) −1, since (L(G)) ≤2(G) −2. Moreover, we
know from Brooks’s theorem (see Chapter 2) that every simple graph G satisﬁes
χ′
ℓ(G) ≤2(G) −2, unless G is an odd cycle; this implies Vizing’s conjecture
for (G) = 3. Juvan, Mohar and ˇSkrekovski [33] conﬁrmed Vizing’s conjecture
for graphs with maximum degree  = 4. Borodin (see [9, ref. 27]) proved that every
planar simple graph G with (G) ≥9 satisﬁes χ′
ℓ(G) ≤(G)+1. Whether Vizing’s
conjecture holds for planar simple graphs G with (G) = 5, 6, 7 or 8 remains open.
Juvan, Mohar and Thomas [34] proved the LECC for series–parallel simple graphs
(but not for series–parallel graphs in general), and hence for simple outerplanar
graphs. The result for simple outerplanar graphs was independently obtained by Lih
and Wang [43]. Lih and Wang also proved the LTCC for outerplanar graphs with
maximum degree  ≥4. The following theorem combines results from [10], [54],
[46] and [47].
Theorem 3.10 If G is a planar graph, then χ′
ℓ(G) = (G) if any of the following
conditions holds:
• (G) ≥12
• (G) ≥8 and no two triangles have a vertex in common
• (G) ≥8 and no triangle shares an edge with a 4-cycle
• (G) ≥6 and G contains neither C4 nor C6, or G contains neither C5 nor C6.
There are many results conﬁrming Vizing’s conjecture for planar graphs with
special structures. Interestingly, planar graphs with maximum degree 5 seem to play
a special role in the general case.
Theorem 3.11 For k = 3, 4, 5 or 6, every planar simple graph G without a k-cycle
satisﬁes χ′
ℓ(G) ≤(G) + 1.
In 2004 Zhang and Wu [73] proved Theorem 3.11 for k = 3. In the same paper
they settled the case k = 4 under the assumption that (G) ̸= 5. The case k = 4 with
(G) = 5 was proved independently by Wang [70] and Farzad in his Ph.D. thesis
[19]. Lih and Wang [45] considered the case k = 5; their proof contains a small ﬂaw,
but it can be easily ﬁxed. The ﬁrst correct proof for k = 6 was given in 2005 by
Farzad [19].
Richter’s planar graph problem
Thomassen’s ﬁve-colour theorem tells us that every planar graph G of order n is f-list-
colourable if f(v) = 5 for all v ∈V(G); this gives 
v f(v) = 5n. On the other hand,
if D is an acyclic orientation of a planar graph G with n vertices, then D is kernel-
perfect and Theorem 2.1 implies that G is f-list-colourable if f(v) = d+
D(v) + 1 for
all v ∈V(G); this yields 
v f(v) = |E(G)| + n ≤4n −6.

6 List-colourings
127
In 2008 Hutchinson [30] published results on list-colourings of subclasses of
planar graphs where, for each v ∈V(G), f(v) = min{d(v), k} for some given integer
k. She proved that a 2-connected outerplanar bipartite graph is f-list-colourable if
f(v) = min{d(v), 4} for all v ∈V, and a 2-connected outerplanar near-triangulation
is f-list-colourable if f(v) = min{d(v), 5} for all v ∈V except when the graph is
K3 with identical 2-lists. In the same paper she mentioned the following problem of
Bruce Richter.
Problem Let G be a planar 3-connected graph that is not a complete graph. If f(v) =
min{d(v), 6} for all v ∈V(G), is G f-list-colourable?
From Thomassen’s result on 5-list-colourability of planar graphs it follows
immediately that the answer is ‘yes’ if G has minimum degree at least 5. Moreover,
if G has maximum degree at most 6, then f(v) = d(v) for all v ∈V(G) and G is
f-list-colourable unless each block of G is a complete graph or an odd cycle [18].
In [12] it is observed that there are planar 2-connected non-complete graphs G with
minimum degree δ(G) = 3 and list-assignments L with |L(v)| = min{d(v), 6} for
which G is not L-list-colourable. Thus, the answer is negative if the assumption of
‘3-connectivity’ is relaxed to ‘2-connectivity’ or δ(G) = 3.
Hutchinson observed that the requirement of planarity cannot be weakened to
having no K5-minor. If we replace f(v) = min{d(v), 6} by f(v) = min{d(v), 5}, then
the answer is negative, even if the distance between vertices of degree smaller than 5
is at least 4, as shown by an example presented by Zs. Tuza and M. Voigt [64]. On
the other hand, if f(v) = min{d(v), 6} and the distance between vertices of degree
smaller than 6 is at least 3, then a planar graph is f-list-colourable, by a result of
Albertson [1].
Theorem 3.12 Suppose that G is r-list-colourable and W ⊆V(G) is such that the
distance between any two vertices in W is at least 3. Let L be a list-assignment such
that |L(v)| ≥r+1 for all v ∈V(G)\W. Then, any precolouring of W can be extended
to an L-colouring of G.
This result can be extended by some easy arguments. Let G be a planar graph with
f(v) = min{d(v), 6} for all v ∈V, and let H be the subgraph of G induced by the set
of vertices of degree smaller than 6. If any two components of H have distance at least
5 in G, then G is L-colourable for every f-assignment L. To see this, choose for each
component Hi of H a vertex vi ∈V(G) \ V(H) for which vi is adjacent to a vertex wi
in Hi. Colour vi with a colour α ∈L(vi) \ L(wi). Note that |L(vi)| > |L(wi)|, because
of the choice of the vertices. By Theorem 3.12, we can colour the remaining vertices
of G−V(H). After that, every vertex w of H has still at least dH(w) available colours;
moreover, for each component of H, the speciﬁed vertex wi has at least dH(wi) + 1
available colours. By a result of Kostochka, Stiebitz and Wirth (see Chapter 2, ref.
30), the colouring can be completed. The general problem is still open. Some more
partial results and references are given in [12].

128
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
4. Precolouring extensions
Extending colourings of an induced subgraph of a graph to the entire graph has
become an important tool in graph colouring. A colouring of a complete subgraph
can always be extended to an optimal colouring of the entire graph. For an edgeless
subgraph, however, this need not to be the case. To see this, let G be the graph whose
vertex-set consists of p pairwise disjoint sets X1, X2, . . . , Xp, each with k −1 vertices,
and p + 1 additional vertices v1, v2, . . . , vp+1 for which X1, X2, . . . , Xp are cliques in
G not joined by any edge, N(v1) = X1, N(vp+1) = Xp and N(vi) = Xi−1 ∪Xi for
i = 2, 3, . . . , p. Then χ(G) = k, and in any k-colouring of G the vertices v1 and vp+1
receive the same colour. Note that G is planar if k ≤4 and the distance between v1
and vp+1 is p + 2. The example is thus in sharp contrast to the following result of
Albertson [1].
Theorem 4.1 Let G be a planar graph, and let W ⊆V(G) such that the distance
between any two vertices of W is at least 4. Then any 5-colouring of W can be
extended to a 5-colouring of G.
As pointed out by Albertson, the threshold for the distance is best possible. This
result motivated Albertson [1] to propose the following question, which has received
much attention.
Problem Does there exist an integer d for which, if G is a planar graph and L is a
5-assignment for G, then any colouring of a vertex-set W ⊆V(G) can be extended
to an L-colouring of G, provided that the distance between any two vertices of W is
at least d?
An example showing that d ≥5 was presented by Tuza and Voigt [64]. Dvoˇr´ak et
al. [14] found an upper bound for the distance d, which is certainly not tight.
Theorem 4.3 Let G be a planar graph, let L be a 5-assignment, and let W ⊆V(G)
be such that the distance between any two vertices of W is at least 19 828. Then any
colouring of W can be extended to an L-colouring of G.
Let G be a graph and let L be a list-assignment for G. Furthermore, let H
be an induced subgraph of G and let ϕ be an L-colouring of H. To decide
whether this precolouring can be extended to an L-colouring of G, we deﬁne a list-
assignment L′ of G′ = G −V(H) by L′(v) = L(v) \ {ϕ(u) : u ∈N(v) ∩V(H)}. Note
that ϕ can be extended to an L-colouring of G if and only if G′ admits an L′-colouring.
This observation can be used to prove Theorem 3.12.
Axenovich [8] and (independently) Albertson, Kostochka and West [2] proved
a precolouring extension of Brooks’s theorem. In both papers it is proved that the
threshold for the distance bound is sharp. However, Rackham [53] improved this
bound to 4, provided that the graph is 3-edge-connected.
Theorem 4.4 Let G be a graph with maximum degree  ≥3 containing no K+1,
and let W ⊆V(G) be such that the distance between any two vertices of W is at

6 List-colourings
129
least 8. Furthermore, let L be a -assignment for G. Then, every precolouring of W
can be extended to an L-colouring of G.
For the ordinary colouring problem there are many results where the set of
precoloured vertices is not an independent set; for references, see [52]. The proof
of the following list-colouring result about precolourings of outerplanar graphs can
be found in [52].
Theorem 4.5 Let G be an outerplanar graph, and let W ⊆V(G) be such that ⟨W⟩is
bipartite. Assume that the shortest distance between components of ⟨W⟩is at least 7.
If L is a 4-assignment for G −W, then any precolouring of ⟨W⟩with two colours for
each component can be extended to an L-colouring of G.
5. Notes
The list-colouring concept was introduced in the 1970s, but in the following years
only a few papers appeared on this subject. The situation changed in the early 1990s
with the publication of the pioneering works of Alon and Tarsi [6], Alon [3], [4],
Voigt [66], Thomassen [57] and Galvin [23]. Since then, the area has ﬂourished
and has attracted much attention, while the number of publications has increased
immensely.
Several survey papers have helped readers to keep track of the subject. The ﬁrst
summary, published in 1997 by Tuza [61], contains more than eighty references on
list-colourings. This survey was updated two years later by Kratochv´ıl, Tuza and
Voigt [40], who discussed new trends in this area of research, including colouring
extensions, set choosability, partial colourings, oriented colourings and the new
concept of mixed hypergraphs.
The survey in 2001 by Woodall [72] covers more recent topics, such as defective or
improper list-colourings. A typical result in this area says that if G is a planar graph
and L is a 3-assignment, then there is an improper L-colouring of G for which each
colour class induces a subgraph with maximum degree at most 2. This result was
proved by ˇSkrekovski and (independently) by Eaton and Hull (see [72, refs. 55 and
12]). It is not known whether, for every planar graph and every 4-assignment, there
exists an improper list-colouring for which every colour class induces a subgraph
with maximum degree at most 1.
As we saw in the Introduction, k-colourable graphs need not be k-list-colourable
unless all lists are the same or the lists are pairwise different. A graph is called (k, p)-
list-colourable if G is L-colourable for each k-assignment L for which |L(v)∩L(w)| ≤
p whenever vw ∈E(G). As observed by Kratochv´ıl, Tuza and Voigt [40], every planar
graph is (4,1)-list-colourable; this follows from the fact that if G is a simple planar
graph, then G admits an orientation D for which d+(v) ≤3. Let L be a 4-assignment
for G for which |L(v)∩L(w)| ≤1 for every edge vw of G. To ﬁnd an L-colouring of G
choose, for each vertex v of D, a colour from L(v) that does not occur in the lists of its

130
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
predecessors. While it is known that not every planar graph is (4,3)-list-colourable, it
remains unknown whether every planar graph is (4,2)-list-colourable.
It is folklore that the chromatic number is a submultiplicative function with respect
to the graph union – that is, χ(G ∪H) ≤χ(G) × χ(H). Assign to each vertex of
G ∪H a pair of colours, where the ﬁrst colour refers to a colouring of G and the
second colour refers to a colouring of H. This deﬁnes a colouring of G ∪H.
Conjecture D For graphs G and H, χℓ(G ∪H) ≤χℓ(G) × χℓ(H).
The truth of this conjecture is implied by the weak (a : b)-choosability conjecture
(Conjecture A). To see this, suppose that χℓ(G) = k and χℓ(H) = h. Let L be a
kh-assignment for G ∪H, where we assume that V(G) = V(H). The weak (a : b)-
choosability conjecture implies that G is (k h : h)-list-colourable. Thus, for each
vertex v of G, there is a set L′(v) ⊆L(v) with |L′(v)| = h for which L′(v)∩L′(w) = ∅
whenever vw is an edge of G. So L′ is a h-assignment for H and so, since χℓ(H) = h,
there is an L′-colouring of H which is an L-colouring of G∪H. Note that Conjecture D
is true if G or H is a 2-list-colourable graph, since the weak (a : b)-choosability
conjecture is proved for a = 2, b = 1. Moreover, if G or H is a k-degenerate graph
with list-chromatic number χℓ= k + 1, then it is (χℓm : m)-list-colourable for all m.
Thus, Conjecture D is also true for this class of graphs which contains (for example)
chordal graphs. If G = F ∪H is the union of a forest F which is 2-list-colourable and
a 2-degenerate graph H, then χ(G) ≤χℓ(G) ≤6. M. Tarsi (see [31, Problem 4.2])
has asked whether χ(G) ≤5.
As observed by N. Alon, it follows from Theorem 1.2 that there exists a function
f = f(k, ℓ) for which χℓ(G ∪H) ≤f(χℓ(G), χℓ(H)).
The weak (a : b)-choosability conjecture says that any (a : b)-list-colourable graph
is (am : bm)-list-colourable for all m ≥1. Motivated by this conjecture, it is natural
to investigate the set
CH(G) = {a/b : G is (a : b)-list-colourable}.
Gutner proved in his thesis [27] that the elements of CH(G) can be arbitrarily close
to χ(G). The choice ratio of a graph G is deﬁned by chr(G) = inf CH(G). It is not
hard to see that every odd cycle C2k+1 is (2k + 1 : h)-list-colourable for all h ≤k,
and that the choice ratio of C2k+1 is 2 + (1/k) (see [7]), which is also the fractional
chromatic number. That the equality between choice ratio and fractional chromatic
number holds for all graphs was proved in 1997 by Alon, Tuza and Voigt [7]; in
fact, there are two different proofs, one probabilistic and the other deterministic.
Moreover, it follows that the inﬁmum in the deﬁnition of the choice ratio can be
replaced by the minimum. However, it is an open problem to ﬁnd small integers a
and b such that chr(G) = a/b and G is (a : b)-list-colourable. The proof yields
only very huge integers with this property. Nevertheless, chr(G) ≤χ(G) for all G, in
contrast to the list-chromatic number which can be arbitrarily large compared with
the chromatic number.

6 List-colourings
131
The ( f : g)-choosability concept is closely related to list-set-colourings or colour-
ings of weighted graphs. A weighted graph is a pair (G, g) consisting of a simple
graph G and a function g : V(G) →N. A colouring of (G, g) with colour-set C
is a map ϕ that assigns to each vertex v a set ϕ(v) ⊆C of g(v) colours for which
ϕ(v) ∩ϕ(w) = ∅whenever vw ∈E(G). If L is an list-assignment for G, then a
colouring ϕ of (G, g) is called an L-colouring if ϕ(v) ⊆L(v) for all v ∈V(G). The
weighted graph (G, g) is called f-list-colourable if (G, g) admits an L-colouring for
every f-assignment L of G. If f(v) = k for all v ∈V(G), the corresponding term is
k-list-colourable. Note that (G, g) is f-list-colourable if and only if G is ( f : g)-list-
colourable. The chromatic number χ(G, g) is the least integer k for which (G, g) has
a colouring with a set of k colours. The list-chromatic number χℓ(G, g) is the least
integer k for which (G, g) is k-list-colourable.
It is also well known that the colouring problem for a weighted graph can be
reduced to an ordinary colouring problem. For a weighted graph (G, g), let G[g]
denote the graph obtained from G by replacing each vertex v of G by a complete
graph Kv of order g(v), where all these complete graphs are vertex-disjoint, and by
joining Kv and Kw by all possible edges whenever vw ∈E(G); the resulting graph
G[g] is called an inﬂation of G. If g(v) = n for all v ∈V(G), then G[g] = G[Kn] is a
uniform inﬂation of G.
It is also well known that the fractional chromatic number χ∗(G) of a simple graph
G satisﬁes χ∗(G) = limn→∞χ(G[Kn])/n. It is easy to show that χ(G, g) = χ(G[g]).
On the other hand, for the list-chromatic number we have only that χℓ(G, g) ≤
χℓ(G[g]), and it is unknown whether equality always holds. For a weighted graph
(G, g),
ω(G[g]) ≤χ(G, g) ≤χℓ(G, g) ≤χℓ(G[g]) ≤col(G[g]) ≤(G[g]) + 1,
(4)
where
ω(G[g]) = max
 
v∈X
g(v) : X ⊆V(G)is a clique

and
(G[g]) = max

g(v) +

u∈N(v)
g(u) : v ∈V(G)

−1.
The list version of Brooks’s theorem implies that every weighted connected graph
(G, g) with g(v) ≥1 for all v ∈V(G) satisﬁes χℓ(G, g) ≤(G[g]) + 1, where
equality holds if and only if G is a complete graph, or g = 1 and G is an odd cycle.
As proved by Stiebitz, Tuza and Voigt [56], this result can be improved as follows. If
(G, g) is a weighted connected graph such that g(v) ≥1 for all v ∈V(G), then
χℓ(G, g) ≤(G[g]) + 1 −min
v∈V(G) g(v),
unless G is a complete graph or an odd cycle. The proof uses Galvin’s kernel method
and the following result of Stiebitz, Tuza and Voigt. If G is a simple connected graph,

132
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
then there is a kernel-perfect digraph D such that G is the underlying graph of D and
d+(v) ≤d(v) −1 for all v ∈V(G), unless each block of G is a complete graph or an
odd cycle.
In the study of colourings of graphs, critical graphs play an important role. A graph
G is said to be L-critical, where L is a list-assignment for G, if every proper subgraph
of G is L-colourable, but G itself is not L-colourable. If L(v) = {1, 2, . . . , k −1}
for all V ∈V(G), where k ≥1, we also use the term k-critical. The graph G is
called k-list-critical if G is L-critical for some (k −1)-assignment L for G. Clearly,
every k-critical graph is k-list-critical, but not conversely. A graph G is k-critical if
and only if χ(H) < χ(G) = k for every proper subgraph H of G. Thus, a k-critical
graph cannot contain another k-critical graph as a proper subgraph. However, this
may happen for k-list-critical graphs. To see this, let G be the graph obtained from
two disjoint copies K, K′ of Kk by adding an edge xx′ with x ∈V(K) and x′ ∈V(K′).
Let L be the (k −1)-assignment with L(v) = {1, 2, . . . , k −1} if v ∈V(G) \ {x, x′},
and L(x) = L(x′) = {2, 3, . . . , k}. Then G is L-critical, and hence k-list-critical, but
not k-critical. Clearly, Kk is a k-list-critical graph, and for k = 1 or 2 it is the only
k-list-critical graph. It follows from K¨onig’s characterization of bipartite graphs that
the only 3-critical graphs are the odd cycles.
By a minimal k-list-critical graph we mean a k-list-critical graph that contains no
other k-list-critical graph as a proper subgraph. It is easy to show that a graph G is
minimal k-list-critical if and only if χℓ(H) < χℓ(G) = k for every proper subgraph
H of G. Thus, a graph G satisﬁes χℓ(G) ≤k −1 if and only if G contains no minimal
k-list-critical subgraph. Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [18] provided a characterization
of 2-list-colourable graphs in terms of forbidden subgraphs. A graph G is minimal
3-list-critical if and only if G belongs to one of the following six types:
• an odd cycle
• two vertex-disjoint even cycles joined by a path
• two even cycles with exactly one vertex in common
• two vertices joined by three internally-disjoint even paths, where the length of at
least two of the paths is not exactly 2
• two vertices joined by three internally disjoint odd paths
• two vertices joined by four internally disjoint even paths, where the length of at
least three of the paths is exactly 2.
It seems hopeless to characterize the class of simple graphs G satisfying χℓ(G) =
χ(G). However, the situation changes if we require that the condition holds also for
every subgraph. A graph G is said to be strong choice-perfect if χℓ(H) = χ(H) for
every subgraph H of G. The following result was obtained by P. Mihok and M. Voigt
(unpublished).
Theorem 5.1 A graph G is strong choice-perfect if and only if it contains no bipartite
minimal 3-list-critical graph as a subgraph.

6 List-colourings
133
Clearly, a strong choice-perfect graph cannot contain a bipartite minimal 3-list-
critical subgraph. But suppose that G does not contain a bipartite minimal 3-list-
critical graph as a subgraph, and let H be a subgraph of G. We show that χℓ(H) =
χ(H). The proof is by induction on k = χ(H). For k = 2, this follows from the
assumption, since G contains no bipartite non-2-list-colourable subgraph. So assume
k ≥3. Consider a proper k-colouring of H and let V1, V2, . . . , Vk denote the k colour
classes. Let H1 = H⟨V1∪V2∪· · ·∪Vk−1⟩and let H2 = (V, E2) be the bipartite graph
with vertex-set V = V(H) and edge-set E2 = {e ∈E(H) : e has an endpoint in Vk}.
Clearly, χ(H1) = k−1 and χ(H2) = 2. It then follows from the induction hypothesis
that χℓ(H1) = k −1 and χℓ(H2) = 2. Let L be an arbitrary k-assignment for H =
H1 ∪H2. By a result from [64], there exists a colour cv ∈L(v) for each vertex v ∈Vk
such that, for every vertex w ∈V(H1), the reduced list L′(w) = L(w)\{cv : wv ∈E2}
satisﬁes |L′(w)| ≥k−1. Since χℓ(H1) = k−1, it follows that H1 has an L′-colouring.
Clearly, this leads to an L-colouring of H, as required.
We deﬁne a graph G to be choice-perfect if χℓ(H) = χ(H) for every induced
subgraph H of G. To characterize choice-perfect graphs it is not sufﬁcient to exclude
bipartite minimal 3-list-critical graphs. So we have χ(K3,3) = 2 and χℓ(K3,3) = 3
and K3,3 contains no induced bipartite minimal 3-list-critical subgraph. The recent
state of research concerning choice-perfect graphs is discussed in [62].
A conjecture related to this topic was made by Voigt in 1994. Let G = (V, E) be a
simple graph with χ(G) = k. If every subgraph of G induced by two colour classes
is 2-list-colourable, then G is k-list-colourable. This conjecture was disproved by
Glenn Chappell (personal communication) in 2004 by the following example. Let G
be the Cartesian product of K3 and K1,6: this graph can be drawn nicely as seven
triangles – one in the centre, and the rest in a ring around it. Each triangle in the
ring is then joined to the one in the centre via a matching. Every 3-colouring of
this graph has the property that the union of any pair of colour classes induces a
forest. However, the graph is not 3-list-colourable. To see this, give each vertex in the
centre triangle the list {1,2,3}. Pick one of the ring triangles and give its vertices the
lists {1, 4, 5}, {2, 4, 5} and {3, 4, 5}. Now we cannot colour the vertices in the centre
triangle 1, 2 and 3. There are six possible colourings of the centre triangle. We can
use each triangle of the ring to forbid one of them, as above.
References
1. M. O. Albertson, You can’t paint yourself into a corner, J. Combin. Theory (B) 73 (1998),
189–194.
2. M. O. Albertson, A. V. Kostochka and D. B. West, Precoloring extension of Brooks’
theorem, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 18 (2004), 542–553.
3. N. Alon, Choice numbers of graphs; a probabilistic approach, Combin. Probab. Comput.
1 (1992), 107–114.
4. N. Alon, Restricted colorings of graphs, Surveys in Combinatorics, 1993 (ed. K. Walker),
Cambridge University Press (1993), 1–33.
5. N. Alon, The combinatorial Nullstellensatz, Combin. Probab. Comput. 8 (1999), 7–29.

134
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
6. N. Alon and M. Tarsi, Colorings and orientations of graphs, Combinatorica 12 (1992),
125–134.
7. N. Alon, Zs. Tuza and M. Voigt, Choosability and fractional chromatic number, Discrete
Math. 165/166 (1997), 31–38.
8. M. Axenovich, A note on graph coloring extensions and list colorings, Electronic
J. Combin. 10 (2003), N1.
9. O. V. Borodin, Colorings of planar graphs: a survey, Discrete Math. 313 (2013),
517–539.
10. O. V. Borodin, A. V. Kostochka and D. R. Woodall, List edge and list total colourings of
multigraphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 71 (1997), 184–204.
11. L. Cai, W. Wang and X. Zhu, Choosability of toroidal graphs without short cycles,
J. Graph Theory 65 (2010), 1–15.
12. D. W. Cranston, A. Pruchnewski, Zs. Tuza and M. Voigt, List colorings of K5-minor-free
graphs with special list assignments, J. Graph Theory 71 (2012), 18–30.
13. M. DeVos, K. Kawarabayashi and B. Mohar, Locally planar graphs are 5-choosable,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 98 (2008), 1215–1232.
14. Z. Dvoˇr´ak, B. Lidick´ı, B. Mohar and L. Postle, 5-list-coloring planar graphs with distant
precolored vertices, arXiv:1209.0366 [math.CO].
15. Z. Dvoˇr´ak, B. Lidick´ı and R. ˇSkrekovski, Planar graphs without 3-, 7-, and 8-cycles are
3-choosable, Discrete Math. 309 (2009), 5899–5904.
16. Z. Dvoˇr´ak, B. Lidick´ı and R. ˇSkrekovski, 3-choosability of triangle-free planar graphs
with constraints on 4-cycles, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 24 (2010), 934–945.
17. M. N. Ellingham and L. Goddyn, List edge colourings of some 1-factorizable multigraphs,
Combinatorica 16 (1996), 343–352.
18. P. Erd˝os, A. L. Rubin and H. Taylor, Choosability in graphs, Congr. Numer. XXVI (1979),
125–157.
19. B. Farzad, On Four Colourings of Graphs, Ph.D. thesis, University of Toronto, 2005.
20. B. Farzad, Planar graphs without 7-cycles are 4-choosable, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 23
(2009), 1179–1199.
21. G. Fijavˇz, M. Juvan, B. Mohar and R. ˇSkrekovski, Planar graphs without cycles of speciﬁc
length, European J. Combin. 23 (2002), 377–388.
22. H. Fleischner and M. Stiebitz, A solution to a colouring problem of P. Erd˝os, Discrete
Math. 101 (1992), 39–48.
23. F. Galvin, The list chromatic index of a bipartite multigraph, J. Combin. Theory (B) 63
(1995), 153–158.
24. S. Gravier and F. Maffrey, Choice number of 3-colorable elementary graphs, Discrete
Math. 165/166 (1997), 353–358.
25. H. Gr¨otzsch, Ein Dreifarbensatz f¨ur dreikreisfreie Netze auf der Kugel, Wiss. Zeitschrift
der Universit¨at Halle, Math.-Nat. VIII/1 (1958), 109–119.
26. J.-L. Guo and Y.-L. Wang, 3-list-coloring planar graphs of girth 4, Discrete Math. 311
(2011), 413–417.
27. S. Gutner, Choice Numbers of Graphs, M.Sc. thesis, Tel Aviv University, 1992.
28. S. Gutner, The complexity of planar graph choosability, Discrete Math. 159 (1996),
119–130.
29. A. J. W. Hilton and P. D. Johnson, The Hall number, the Hall index, and the total Hall
number of a graph, Discrete Appl. Math. 94 (1999), 227–245.
30. J. P. Hutchinson, On list-coloring outerplanar graphs, J. Graph Theory 59 (2008), 59–74.
31. T. R. Jensen and B. Toft, Graph Coloring Problems, Wiley Interscience, 1995.
32. M. Juvan, B. Mohar and R. ˇSkrekovski, List-total colorings of graphs, Combin. Probab.
Comput. 7 (1998), 181–188.

6 List-colourings
135
33. M. Juvan, B. Mohar and R. ˇSkrekovski, Graphs of degree 4 are 5-edge-choosable, J. Graph
Theory 32 (1999), 250–262.
34. M. Juvan, B. Mohar and R. Thomas, List edge-coloring of series-parallel graphs,
Electronic J. Combin. 6(1) (1999), R42.
35. J. Kahn, Asymtotically good list colourings, J. Combin. Theory (A) 73 (1996), 1–59.
36. K. Kawarabayashi and C. Thomassen, From the plane to higher surfaces, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 102 (2012), 852–868.
37. A. V. Kostochka, Color-critical graphs and hypergraphs with few edges: a survey, Bolyai
Society Mathematical Studies 15 (2006), 175–197.
38. A. V. Kostochka and D. R. Woodall, Choosability conjecture and multicircuits, Discrete
Math. 240 (2001), 123–143.
39. A. V. Kostochka and D. R. Woodall, Total choosability of multicircuits I, II, J. Graph
Theory 40 (2002), 26–43, 44–67.
40. J. Kratochv´ıl, Zs. Tuza and M. Voigt, New trends in the theory of graph colorings:
Choosability and list colorings, DIMACS, Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical
Computer Science 49 (1999), 183–198.
41. P. C. B. Lam, J. Liu and B. Xu, The 4-choosability of plane graphs without 4-cycles,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 76 (1999), 117–126.
42. P. C. B. Lam, W. C. Shiu and B. Xu, On structure of some plane graphs with application
to choosability, J. Combin. Theory (B) 82 (2001), 285–296.
43. K. Lih and W. Wang, Choosability, edge-choosability and total choosability of outerplane
graphs, Europ. J. Combin. 22 (2001), 71–78.
44. K. Lih and W. Wang, Choosability and edge choosability of planar graphs without
intersecting triangles, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 15 (2002), 538–545.
45. K. Lih and W. Wang, Choosability and edge choosability of planar graphs without ﬁve
cycles, Appl. Math. Lett. 15 (2002), 561–565.
46. R. Li and B. Xu, Edge choosability and total choosability of planar graphs with no 3-cycles
adjacent to 4-cycles, Discrete Math. 311 (2011), 2158–2163.
47. B. Liu, J. Hou and G. Liu, List edge and list total colorings of planar graphs without short
cycles, Inform. Process. Lett. 108 (2008), 347–351.
48. M. Mirzakhani, A small non-4-choosable planar graph, Bull. Inst. Combin. Appl. 17
(1996), 15–18.
49. M. Montassier, A. Raspaud and W. Wang, Bordeaux 3-color conjecture and 3-choosability,
Discrete Math. 306 (2006), 573–579.
50. J. A. Noel, B. A. Reed and H. Wu, A proof of a conjecture of Ohba, manuscript, (2012).
51. A. Prowse and D. R. Woodall, Choosability and powers of circuits, Graphs Combin. 19
(2003), 137–147.
52. A. Pruchnewski and M. Voigt, Precoloring extension for K4-minor-free graphs, J. Graph
Theory 60 (2009), 284–294.
53. T. Rackham, A note on K−
+1-free precolouring with  colours, Electronic J. Combin. 16
(2009), N28.
54. H. Sheng and Y. Wang, A structural theorem for planar graphs with some applications,
Discrete Appl. Math. 159 (2011), 1183–1187.
55. R. ˇSkrekovski, Choosability of K5-minor-free graphs, Discrete Math. 190 (1998),
223–226.
56. M. Stiebitz, Zs. Tuza and M. Voigt, Orientations of graphs with prescribed weighted
out-degrees, Graphs Combin. (2013).
57. C. Thomassen, Every planar graph is 5-choosable, J. Combin. Theory (B) 62 (1994),
180–181.
58. C. Thomassen, 3-list-coloring planar graphs of girth 5, J. Combin. Theory (B) 64 (1995),
101–107.

136
Michael Stiebitz and Margit Voigt
59. C. Thomassen, Many 3-colorings of triangle-free planar graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 97
(2007), 334–349.
60. C. Thomassen, Exponentially many 5-colorings of planar graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B)
97 (2007), 571–583.
61. Zs. Tuza, Graph colorings with local constraints – A survey, Discuss. Math.– Graph
Theory 17 (1997), 161–228.
62. Zs. Tuza, Choice-perfect graphs, Discuss. Math.– Graph Theory 33 (2013), 231–242.
63. Zs. Tuza and M. Voigt, On a conjecture of Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor, Discuss. Math.–
Graph Theory 9 (1996), 69–82.
64. Zs. Tuza and M. Voigt, List colorings and reducibility, Discrete Appl. Math. 79 (1997),
247–256.
65. V. G. Vizing, Coloring the vertices of a graph in prescribed colors, (in Russian), Metody
Diskret. Anal. v Teorii Kodov i Schem 29 (1976), 3–10.
66. M. Voigt, List colorings of planar graphs, Discrete Math. 120 (1993), 215–219.
67. M. Voigt, A not 3-choosable planar graph without 3-cycles, Discrete Math. 146 (1995),
325–328.
68. M. Voigt, Choosability of planar graphs, Discrete Math. 150 (1996), 457–460.
69. M. Voigt, A non-3-choosable planar graph without cycles of length 4 and 5, Discrete Math.
294 (2005), 297–301.
70. W. Wang, Edge choosability of planar graphs without short cycles, Science in China (A)–
Mathematics 48 (2005), 1531–1544.
71. Y. Wang, Q. Wu and L. Shen, Planar graphs without cycles of length 4, 7, 8 or 9 are
3-choosable, Discrete Appl. Math. 159 (2011), 232–239.
72. D. R. Woodall, List colourings of graphs, Surveys in Combinatorics, 2001 (ed. J.W.P.
Hirschfeld), London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes 288, Cambridge University Press (2001),
269–301.
73. L. Zhang and B. Wu, Edge choosability of planar graphs without small cycles, Discrete
Math. 283 (2004), 289–293.
74. L. Xiaofang, The 4-choosability of toroidal graphs without intersecting triangles, Inform.
Process. Lett. 102 (2007), 85–91.
75. B. Xu, (4m, m)-choosability of plane graphs, J. Systems Sci. Complexity 14 (2001),
174–178.
76. B. Xu, On structure of graphs embedded on surfaces of nonnegative characteristic with
application to choosability, Discrete Math. 248 (2002), 283–291.

7
Perfect graphs
NICOLAS TROTIGNON
1.
Introduction
2.
Lov´asz’s perfect graph theorem
3.
Basic graphs
4.
Decompositions
5.
The strategy of the proof
6.
Book from the Proof
7.
Recognizing perfect graphs
8.
Berge trigraphs
9.
Even pairs: a shorter proof of the SPGT
10. Colouring perfect graphs
References
Perfect graphs were deﬁned by Claude Berge in the 1960s. They are important
objects for graph theory, linear programming and combinatorial optimization.
Berge made a conjecture about them (now called the strong perfect graph
theorem or SPGT) which was proved by Chudnovsky, Robertson, Seymour
and Thomas in 2002. This survey about perfect graphs mostly focuses on
the SPGT.
1. Introduction
Every graph G clearly satisﬁes χ(G) ≥ω(G), where ω(G) is the clique number
of G, because the vertices of a clique must receive different colours. A graph G is
perfect if every induced subgraph H of G satisﬁes χ(H) = ω(H). A chordless cycle
of length 2k + 1, for k ≥2, satisﬁes 3 = χ > ω = 2, and its complement satisﬁes
k + 1 = χ > ω = k; these graphs are therefore imperfect. Since perfect graphs are
closed under taking induced subgraphs, they must be deﬁned by excluding a family F
of graphs as induced subgraphs. The strong perfect graph theorem (SPGT for short)
states that the two examples just given are the only members of F.

138
Nicolas Trotignon
Let us make this more formal. A hole in a graph G is an induced cycle of length at
least 4, and an antihole is a hole of G. A graph is Berge if it does not contain an odd
hole or an odd antihole. The following was conjectured by Berge [3] in the 1960s and
was the object of much research until it was ﬁnally proved in 2002 by Chudnovsky,
Robertson, Seymour and Thomas [13].
Theorem 1.1 (Strong perfect graph theorem) A graph is perfect if and only if it is
Berge.
One direction of the proof is easy: every perfect graph is Berge since, as we
observed above, odd holes and antiholes satisfy χ = ω + 1. The proof of the
converse statement is very long and relies on structural graph theory. The main step
is a decomposition theorem (Theorem 5.1), which states that every Berge graph is
either in a well-understood basic class of perfect graphs (see Section 3), or has some
decomposition (see Section 4). The goal of this survey is to make this result and
its meaning understandable to a non-specialist mathematician. For this purpose, not
only the proof is surveyed, but also some results that were seminal to it, and some
that were proved after it. Another goal is to present perfect graphs as a lively subject
for researchers, by mentioning several attractive open questions.
We start with an open question that has the same ﬂavour as the SPGT. In 1987
Gy´arf´as [35] proposed the following generalization of a perfect graph: a graph G is
χ-bounded by a function f if every induced subgraph H of G satisﬁes χ(H) ≤
f(ω(H)); thus, perfect graphs are χ-bounded by the identity function. There might
exist a short proof that, for some function f (possibly fastly increasing), all Berge
graphs are χ-bounded by f, but so far the proof of the SPGT is the only known proof
of this fact. In [35] the following conjecture is stated.
Conjecture A There exists a function f such that, for all graphs G, if G has no odd
hole, then G is χ-bounded by f.
The SPGT can be rephrased as follows: perfect graphs and Berge graphs form
the same class. We still keep two names for the same class, and use Berge when
we concentrate on excluding holes and antiholes, and perfect when we focus on
colourings. Note that the distinction between Berge and perfect has to be kept when
we sketch the proof of the SPGT, since in the proof the two classes are supposed to
be potentially different. A minimally imperfect graph is an imperfect graph, every
proper induced subgraph of which is perfect. A restatement of the SPGT is thus
that minimally imperfect graphs are precisely the odd holes and antiholes. Many
statements about minimal imperfect graphs are therefore trivial to check by using
the SPGT, but when proving the SPGT it is essential to prove them by other means.
Observe that a minimal (and therefore minimum) counter-example to the SPGT has
to be a Berge minimally imperfect graph.
We mostly follow the terminology from [13], which is not fully standard. Since the
whole theory deals with induced subgraphs, we write G contains H to mean that H is
an induced subgraph of G and write path instead of chordless path or induced path.

7 Perfect graphs
139
When a and b are vertices of a path P, we denote by aPb the subpath of P whose
ends are a and b. A subset A of V(G) is complete to a subset B of V(G) if A and B
are disjoint and every vertex of A is adjacent to every vertex of B; we also say that B
is A-complete.
We use the preﬁx anti to mean a property or a structure of the complement (as for
holes and antiholes). For instance, an antipath in G is a path in G, A is anticomplete
to B means that no edge of G has an end in A and the other one in B, and G
is anticonnected if its complement is connected. By C(A) we mean the set of all
A-complete vertices in G, and by C(A) the set of all A-anticomplete vertices. By a
colouring of a graph, we mean an optimal colouring of the vertices.
Since we focus on the SPGT and its proof, most of this survey is on the structure
of Berge graphs, and we omit many other important aspects of the theory, such as the
ellipsoid method used by Gr¨ostchel, Lov´asz and Schrijver [34] to colour any input
perfect graph in polynomial time. The theory of semi-deﬁnite programming started
there.
Several earlier surveys exist. The survey of Lov´asz [45] from the 1980s is still
good, while two books are completely devoted to perfect graphs [4], [50], and contain
a lot of material cited below. Part VI of Schrijver [55] is the most comprehensive
survey on perfect graphs. Chudnovsky, Robertson, Seymour and Thomas [12] wrote
a good survey just after their proof, while Roussel, Rusu and Thuillier [53] wrote a
good survey about the long sequence of results, attempts and conjectures that ﬁnally
led to the successful approach.
For more historical aspects, see Section 67.4g of Schrijver [55]. Berge and Ram´ırez
Alfons´ın ([50, pp.1–12]) wrote an article about the origin of perfect graphs, and
Seymour [56] wrote an article, interesting even to a non-mathematician, telling the
story of how the SPGT was proved.
2. Lov´asz’s perfect graph theorem
As pointed out by Preissmann and Seb˝o (see [50, pp. 185–214]), the following
theorem conveniently gives a weak (1) and a strong (2) characterization of perfect
graphs. Hence, to prove perfection checking the weak one is enough, while to use
perfection one may rely on the strong one. This allows a kind of leverage that is used
often in what follows.
Theorem 2.1 Let G be a graph. The following three statements are equivalent.
(1) G is perfect.
(2) For each induced subgraph H of G and each v ∈V(H), H contains a stable set
that contains v and intersects all maximum cliques of G.
(3) For each induced subgraph H of G, H contains a stable set that intersects all
maximum cliques of G.

140
Nicolas Trotignon
Proof
To prove that (1) implies (2), consider an optimal colouring of H and the
colour class S that contains v. Then S is a stable set that intersects all maximum
cliques of H, for otherwise χ(H \ S) ≥ω(H), which is a contradiction.
Trivially, (2) implies (3).
To prove that (3) implies (1), consider the following greedy colouring algorithm:
Step 1. Set i ←1 and H ←G.
Step 2. While H is non-empty, consider a stable set of H, as in (3), give it colour i,
and set H ←H \ S and i ←i + 1.
Since ω decreases at each iteration in Step 2, this algorithm produces a colouring of
G with ω(G) colours, and it can be processed for any induced subgraph of G. Thus,
G is perfect.
■
Replicating a vertex v of a graph G means adding a new vertex v′ adjacent to v and
to all neighbours of v. Note that the property χ = ω is not preserved by replication.
As an example, consider the non-perfect graph G obtained by replicating one vertex
of C5. Clearly, χ(G) = ω(G) = 3. However, by replicating any vertex of degree 2
in G, a graph G′ such that χ(G′) = 4 > ω(G′) = 3 is obtained. Thus, the following
lemma due to Lov´asz [44] is more surprising than it may look at ﬁrst glance.
Theorem 2.2 (Replication lemma) Perfection is preserved by replication.
Proof
Let G be a perfect graph and let G′ be obtained from G by replicating a
vertex v. We show that G′ satisﬁes Theorem 2.1(3). Let H be an induced subgraph of
G′. We look for a stable set S that intersects all maximum cliques of H. If H contains
at most one vertex from {v, v′}, then it is isomorphic to an induced subgraph of G,
so clearly S exists. Otherwise, H \ v′ is perfect, so, by Theorem 2.1(2), there exists
a stable set S that contains v and intersect all maximum cliques of H \ v′. In fact, S
intersects all maximum cliques of H, because a maximum clique of H contains v if
and only if it contains v′.
■
The following result was conjectured by Berge as the weak perfect graph
conjecture and is now called the perfect graph theorem. We give the proof that,
among the available ones, is most closely related to the rest of this chapter.
Theorem 2.3 If a graph is perfect, then its complement is perfect.
Proof
Let G be a perfect graph. Construct a graph G′ as follows: start from G and
replicate every vertex v αv −1 times, where αv is the number of maximum stable
sets of G that contain v; note that replicating −1 times means deleting the vertex, and
replicating 0 times means doing nothing. From its construction, G′ can be covered
by k disjoint maximum stable sets that therefore form an optimal colouring of G′.
Since G′ is perfect, by Theorem 2.2, it follows that G′ has a clique K′ of size k. Since
a clique and a stable set intersect in at most one vertex, K′ intersects all maximum
stable sets of G′. Now construct a clique K of G by taking, for each vertex of K′,

7 Perfect graphs
141
the vertex of G from which it is replicated. The clique K that we obtain intersects all
maximum stable sets of G. By the same argument, a clique intersecting all maximum
stable sets can be found in any induced subgraph of G. Thus the complement of G
satisﬁes Theorem 2.1(3) and is therefore perfect.
■
In [35], the question of generalizing Theorem 2.3 is discussed, but since then, little
progress has occurred in this direction (see [36]). In particular, the following neat
generalization of Theorem 2.3 (due to Gy´arf´as) is still open.
Conjecture B There exists a function f such that, for all graphs G, if G is χ-bounded
by x →x + 1, then G is χ-bounded by f.
The perfect graph theorem has a polyhedral proof found by Fulkerson [30], related
to polyhedral characterizations of perfect graphs discovered by him and Chv´atal [18].
Lov´asz [43] proved a deep characterization of perfect graphs suggested by Hajnal.
Theorem 2.4 A graph G is perfect if and only if every induced subgraph H of G
satisﬁes α(H) ω(H) ≥|V(H)|.
This characterization implies that deciding the perfection of an input graph is a
CoNP problem (see [50, pp. 185–214]). It can be proved by a simple argument,
relying on linear algebra, discovered by Gasparian [32]. Since the characterization
is self-complementary, it gives another proof of the perfect graph theorem. This
characterization is the starting point of many developments of great signiﬁance, such
as the theory of partitionable graphs surveyed by Preissmann and Seb˝o (see [50, pp.
185–214]). It has deep connections with combinatorial optimization, as explained in
Cornu´ejols [25].
3. Basic graphs
In this section, we survey the ﬁve basic classes that are used in the proof of the
SPGT: bipartite graphs, their complements, line graphs of bipartite graphs, their
complements, and double split graphs. Bipartite graphs are easily checked to be
perfect, and so, by Theorem 2.3, their complements are perfect; this can be restated
as: ‘every bipartite graph G satisﬁes θ(G) = α(G)’. Since |V(G)| = θ(G) + ν(G) =
α(G) + τ(G) for any triangle-free graph G, we deduce that every bipartite graph G
satisﬁes ν(G) = τ(G); this can be rephrased as: ‘the complements of line graphs
of bipartite graphs are perfect’. Again applying Theorem 2.3, we deduce that line
graphs of bipartite graphs are perfect; this can be restated as: ‘every bipartite graph
G satisﬁes (G) = χ′(G)’. Theorem 2.3 thus implies the perfection of three of the
four historical basic classes of perfect graphs: bipartite graphs, their complements,
their line graphs and the complements of their line graphs.
We now turn our attention to the ﬁfth class that is ﬁrst presented in the proof of the
SPGT: double split graphs. As presented in [13], this class is not closed under taking

142
Nicolas Trotignon
induced subgraphs, so we prefer to use doubled graphs, that are easily seen to form
the class of induced subgraphs of double split graphs.
A good partition of a graph G is a partition (X, Y) of V(G) (possibly, X or Y = ∅)
such that:
• Every component of G[X] has at most two vertices, and every anticomponent of
G[Y] has at most two vertices.
• For every component CX of G[X], every anticomponent CY of G[Y], and every
vertex v in CX ∪CY, there exist at most one edge and at most one antiedge between
CX and CY that are incident to v.
A graph is doubled if it has a good partition. Doubled graphs are easily seen to be
perfect, by a direct colouring argument. They are also closed under taking induced
subgraphs and complements. A graph is basic if it belongs to at least one of the
ﬁve classes deﬁned here. For each basic class, the characterization by excluding
induced subgraphs is known (see Beineke [2] for line graphs, and Alexeev, Fradkin
and Kim [1] for doubled graphs); the recognition can be performed in polynomial
time (see Lehot [40] or Roussopoulos [54] for line graphs and Maffray [46] for
doubled graphs). Also the colouring and maximum clique problems can be solved
in polynomial time (see Schrijver [55] for the historical classes and Maffray [46] for
doubled graphs).
In this section, we have focused on the basic graphs that play an important role in
the proof of the SPGT. But any class of graphs whose perfection is simple to prove
can potentially serve as a basic class of a decomposition theorem, so all classes are
potentially of interest. The book of Brandst¨adt, Le and Spinrad [6] is on general
graph classes, but contains a lot of material on perfect graphs. The most complete
catalogue of classes of perfect graphs seems to be that written by Hougardy [38],
which describes 120 classes. Chapter 66 in Schrijver [55] also contains an extensive
survey about classes of perfect graphs. Golumbic’s book [33] surveys algorithmic
aspects of several classes of perfect graphs.
The most important class that we omit from here is the seminal class of hole-
free graphs; it is the ﬁrst class with a decomposition theorem, has some connections
with graph minor theory and tree-width, and is also important in fast graph-searching
algorithms (see Sections 9.7–9.8 in Bondy and Murty [5]). Another important class
that has connections with ordered sets is the class of comparability graphs, introduced
by Gallai [31]; the English translation by Maffray and Preissmann ([50, pp. 25–66])
contains a short survey.
4. Decompositions
By a decomposition of a graph we mean a way to partition its vertices with some
prescribed adjacencies. A decomposition is useful if it can be proved that a minimum
counter-example to the SPGT cannot admit the decomposition. Indeed, suppose that

7 Perfect graphs
143
we can prove a statement such as: ‘every Berge graph is either basic or has a useful
decomposition’. The SPGT can then be proved as follows: consider a minimum
counter-example, which is thus a Berge graph, imperfect, and of minimum size.
It does not admit a decomposition (because the decomposition is useful), and since it
is imperfect, it cannot be basic, contradicting the statement.
A 2-join of a graph G, ﬁrst deﬁned by Cornu´ejols and Cunningham [26], is a
partition (X1, X2) of V(G) for which there exist disjoint non-empty sets A1, B1 ⊆X1,
A2, B2 ⊆X2 satisfying:
• A1 is complete to A2, B1 is complete to B2, and these edges are the only ones
between X1 and X2.
• |X1| ≥3 and |X2| ≥3.
• every component of G[Xi] intersects Ai and Bi, for i = 1 and 2.
• if |Ai| = |Bi| = 1, then G[Xi] is not a path of length 2 joining the members of Ai
and Bi, for i = 1 and 2.
Cornu´ejols and Cunningham [26] proved that a minimally imperfect graph admit-
ing a 2-join must be an odd hole (so 2-joins are useful). Note that here, path 2-joins
are allowed: these are 2-joins such that, for i = 1 and 2, |Ai| = |Bi| = 1 and G[Xi] is
a path from the unique vertex in Ai to the unique vertex in Bi. Some papers (mostly
those involving Conforti, Cornu´ejols or Vuˇskovi´c) restrict the notion of 2-joins to
non-path 2-joins. Section 8 discusses the relevance of excluding path 2-joins. When
Xi, Ai and Bi are as above, it is customary to set Ci = Xi \(Ai ∪Bi). It is easy to prove
that in a Berge graph, all paths from Ai to Bi with interior in Ci have the same parity,
since otherwise an odd hole exists. There are thus two kinds of 2-joins: odd 2-joins
and even ones. If (X1, X2) is a 2-join of G, then it is a complement 2-join of G.
When G is a graph and A ⊆V(G), we denote by C(A) the set of vertices of G
complete to A, and by C(A) the set of vertices of G anticomplete to A. A homogeneous
pair (ﬁrst deﬁned by Chv´atal and Sbihi [20], who proved that they are useful) is a pair
of disjoint sets A, B ⊆V(G) for which |A|, |B| ≥2, every vertex of A has a neighbour
and a non-neighbour in B, every vertex of B has a neighbour and a non-neighbour in
A, and the sets
A, B, C(A) ∩C(B), C(A) ∩C(B), C(A) ∩C(B) and C(A) ∩C(B)
are all non-empty and partition V(G).
The decompositions presented so far are nice in the following sense. When
applied recursively, they yield decomposition trees of polynomial size that allow the
solution of several problems; the machinery is too heavy to be presented here (see
Section 10).
We now turn our attention to other cutsets that do not have this nice property. A star
cutset in a graph G (ﬁrst deﬁned by Chv´atal [19]) is a set S of vertices for which G\S
is disconnected and S contains a vertex v called the centre, complete to S \ v. The
following is a result of Chv´atal [19].

144
Nicolas Trotignon
Theorem 4.1 (Star cutset lemma) A minimally imperfect graph has no star cutset.
Proof
Let G be a minimally imperfect graph, and suppose for a contradiction that G
has a star cutset S centred at v. Let (X, Y) be a partition of V(G \ S) for which |X| and
|Y| ≥1 and X is anticomplete to Y. We now prove that G satisﬁes Theorem 2.1(3);
this implies that G is perfect, giving the required contradiction. Since every proper
induced subgraph of G is perfect, it remains to ﬁnd the desired stable set in G.
By Theorem 2.1(2), there exists a stable set AX in G[S ∪X] that contains v and inter-
sects all maximum cliques of G[S∪X]. A similar stable set AY exists in G[S∪Y]. We
see that AX∪AY is then a stable set of G that intersects all maximum cliques of G.
■
It is quite easy to turn the above proof into a colouring algorithm that would, for
instance, colour any perfect graph every induced subgraph of which is either basic or
decomposable by a star cutset. The algorithm would output a stable set that intersects
all maximum cliques and, following the lines of the proof of Theorem 2.1, would
yield a colouring algorithm. Unfortunately, this algorithm does not run in polynomial
time, because the star cutset can be very big (for instance, all the graph except for
two vertices). In this case, the complexity analysis of the recursive calls leads to an
exponential number of calls. There is a similar problem with the generalizations that
we consider next. This is the main reason why the decomposition of Berge graphs
does not lead to a polynomial-time colouring algorithm.
A skew partition of a graph G (ﬁrst deﬁned by Chv´atal [19]) is a partition (A, B)
of V(G) for which G[A] is not connected and G[B] is not anticonnected; in this
case, we say that B is a skew cutset. Following a prophetic insight that some self-
complementary decomposition generalizing the star cutset should play a role, Chv´atal
conjectured that a minimally imperfect graph has no skew partition and (a less formal
statement) that skew partitions should appear in the decomposition of Berge graphs.
Observe that if a graph with at least ﬁve vertices and at least one edge has a star
cutset, then it has a skew partition.
The proof of Ch´vatal’s conjectures escaped their investigators, but several fruitful
attempts were made. In particular, many special kinds of skew partitions were proved
not to be in minimal imperfect graphs (see Reed [51] for a survey). In the opposite
direction, a generalization of skew partitions was proved to decompose all Berge
graphs in the following theorem of Conforti, Cornu´ejols and Vuˇskovi´c [23]. Here, a
double star cutset in a graph G is a set S ⊆V(G) such that G \ S is disconnected and
S contains an edge vw for which every vertex of S is adjacent to at least one of v and
w. Observe that antiholes of length at least 6 have double star cutsets. Note that, for
a Berge graph G, the following yields information for both G and G.
Theorem 4.2 A graph with no odd hole is either basic, or has a 2-join or a double
star cutset.
One of the breakthroughs made in the proof of the SPGT is the concept of a
balanced skew partition. For a graph G, a partition (skew or not) (A, B) of V(G)
is balanced if every path of length at least 3 with ends in B and interior in A, and

7 Perfect graphs
145
every antipath of length at least 3 with ends in A and interior in B have even length.
It is straightforward to check that a partition (A, B) of a Berge graph is balanced if
and only if adding a vertex complete to B and anticomplete to A yields a Berge graph.
As we will see, the notion of a balanced skew partition is sufﬁciently particular to
allow a short proof that a minimum counter-example to the SPGT cannot contain it,
and is sufﬁciently general to be found in all non-basic Berge graphs that cannot be
decomposed otherwise.
Theorem 4.3 If (A, B) is a balanced partition of a perfect graph G, and if every
Berge graph of order at most |V(G)|+1 is perfect, then G[B] admits a colouring that
can be extended to a colouring of G.
Proof
Consider the graph G′ that is obtained by adding to G a clique of size k =
ω(G) −ω(G[B]) complete to B and anticomplete to A. It is Berge because (A, B)
is balanced. So it is perfect when k ≤1 from our assumption, and it is also perfect
when k ≥2 by several applications of Theorem 2.2. Observe that ω(G′) = ω(G).
An ω(G)-colouring of G′ then yields a colouring of G[B] that extends to a colouring
of G.
■
The following theorem is due to Chudnovsky, Robertson, Seymour and
Thomas [13].
Theorem 4.4 A minimum imperfect Berge graph admits no balanced skew partition.
Proof
Let G be a minimum imperfect Berge graph, so χ(G) > ω(G). By Theo-
rem 2.3, G is also a minimum imperfect Berge graph. Let (A, B) be a balanced skew
partition in G, so A partitions into two sets A1 and A2 anticomplete to one another,
and B partitions into two sets X and Y complete to one another. By Theorem 4.1
|A1| and |A2| ≥2, for otherwise the vertex in A1 or A2 would be the centre of a
star cutset in G. It follows from the minimality of G that every Berge graph of size
|B∪Ai|+1 is perfect for i = 1 and 2. By Theorem 4.3, consider an ω(G[B]) colouring
Ci of G[B] that extends to a colouring of G[B ∪Ai]. Let Xi be the set of vertices of
G[B ∪Ai] whose colour in the colouring Ci is present in X, and let Yi = (B ∪Ai) \ Xi.
Because of the colouring Ci, ω(G[Xi]) = ω(G[X]), so ω(G[X1 ∪X2]) = ω(G[X]).
By the minimality of G, it follows that G[X1 ∪X2] has an ω(G[X])-colouring.
Because of the colouring Ci, ω(G[Yi]) = ω(G) −ω(G[Xi]) = ω(G) −ω(G[X]), so
ω(G[Y1 ∪Y2] = ω(G)−ω(G[X]). By the minimality of G, it follows that G[Y1 ∪Y2]
has an (ω(G)−ω(G[X]))-colouring, and hence that G has an ω(G)-colouring, which
is a contradiction.
■
The following question may be hopeless to answer, because a proof would imply a
direct argument for the skew partition conjecture (no such argument exists at present).
Also, a proof of the following, together with Theorem 4.2, would yield a new proof
of the SPGT.

146
Nicolas Trotignon
Problem Find a direct proof of the following: if G is a minimum Berge imperfect
graph, then at least one of G or G admits no double star cutset.
Rusu (see [50, pp. 167–183]) wrote a survey about cutsets in perfect graphs, and
Reed [51] wrote a survey about skew partitions (on which this section is mostly
based).
An important question about decompositions is their detection in polynomial time.
For a graph with n vertices and m edges, the following decompositions can be
detected in polynomial time: 2-join (in time O(n2m), see Charbit, Habib, Trotignon
and Vuˇskovi´c [8]), homogeneous pair (in time O(n2m), see Habib, Mamcarz and de
Montgolﬁer [37]) and skew partitions (in time O(n4m), see Kennedy and Reed [39]).
Trotignon [57] showed that balanced skew partitions are NP-hard to detect, but
devised an O(n9)-time non-constructive algorithm that certiﬁes whether an input
Berge graph has a balanced skew partition.
5. The strategy of the proof
The main result in [13] is Theorem 5.1 below and, as we know from the earlier
sections, it implies the SPGT. Its statement is the result of a long sequence of attempts
by many researchers, as explained in the introduction of [13] or in [53]. A slight
variant on what seems now to be the right statement was ﬁrst conjectured by Conforti,
Cornu´ejols and Vuˇskovi´c [22]. They proved it in the square-free case, and some of
the arguments that they discovered are essential in the strategy described below – in
particular, the attachments to prisms, and the use of Truemper conﬁgurations.
Theorem 5.1 Every Berge graph is basic, or has a 2-join, a complement 2-join, a
homogeneous pair or a balanced skew partition.
The strategy used by Chudnovsky, Robertson, Seymour and Thomas to prove
Theorem 5.1 is classical in structural graph theory. It consists of identifying a ‘dense’
basic class and a ‘sparse’ basic class, as we now explain. The ‘dense’ basic class does
not contain the obstruction (here an odd hole or antihole), but ‘almost’ contains it,
so that if a graph G contains an induced dense subgraph H, then any vertex exterior
to H must attach in a very speciﬁc way to H, either enlarging the basic graph to
a bigger basic graph, or entailing a decomposition. For the sake of proving the
decomposition theorem, it can therefore be assumed that this particular class of basic
graphs is excluded. The process can then be iterated with a new kind of dense basic
graphs. The sparse class is what remains when all dense substructures are excluded.
Observe that this method is in some sense safer than proofs by induction. Finding the
right induction hypothesis is time-consuming because, for each failure, one has to
restart from scratch, whereas a result asserting that some dense substructure entails a
decomposition is a true statement that can be used in the future, even if the strategy
of the proof changes.

7 Perfect graphs
147
For the proof of Theorem 5.1 the sparse class is formed by bipartite graphs and
their complements. The dense class is more complicated. At the beginning of the
proof it is formed by ‘sufﬁciently’ connected line graphs, their complements and
doubled graphs. The simplest line graphs in this context are the prisms, where a
prism is a graph made of three vertex-disjoint paths P1 = a1 . . . b1, P2 = a2 . . . b2
and P3 = a3 . . . b3 of length 1 or more, for which a1a2a3 and b1b2b3 are triangles
and no edges exist between the paths except those of the two triangles. Note that for
a prism in a Berge graph, the lengths of the three paths must have the same parity.
The prism is odd or even according to this parity.
To understand why prisms and their generalizations are ‘dense’, one can check
that a Berge graph formed of a prism and one vertex not in the prism is either a larger
line graph, or has a 2-join or some kind of skew partition such as a star cutset. For
this purpose, it is convenient to know that Berge graphs have no pyramids, where a
pyramid is a graph made of three paths P1 = a . . . b1, P2 = a . . . b2 and P3 = a . . . b3
of length at least 1, two of which have length at least 2, are vertex-disjoint except at
a, and are such that b1b2b3 is a triangle and no edges exist between the paths except
those of the triangle and the three edges incident with a. What makes this work is
that prisms are ‘close to’ containing pyramids, and a pyramid always contains an
odd hole. One can also try to prove a similar statement for the line graph of the 2-
subdivision of K4, or similar statements with the vertex outside the prism replaced by
some path with neighbours in exactly two paths of the structure, for instance. All this
should lead to variants of Theorem 10.1 from [13], whose proof is easy to read since
it does not rely on any technical lemmas. More on attachments to prisms is explained
in Section 6 below.
In fact, a dozen dense basic graphs are considered: ﬁrst, several kinds of line graphs
of bipartite subdivisions of K4; even prisms; then long prisms (long means that at least
one of the paths has length at least 2); the double diamond (the graph obtained from a
cycle abcd by adding an edge vw such that v is adjacent to a and b and w to c, d, and a
second edge v′w′ with the same attachment to abcd); various kinds of wheels (where
a wheel is a graph formed by a hole H together with a vertex with at least three
neighbours in the hole); and antiholes of length at least 6. For each of these dense
basic classes, it was proved that containing it leads to being basic or having some
decomposition; the Berge graphs handled next are thus supposed not to contain this
kind of induced subgraph. At the end of this process, so many induced subgraphs are
excluded that the graph under consideration, or its complement, is bipartite. Needless
to say, identifying this long sequence of ‘dense’ graphs is a tour de force, especially
since for each of them, the technicalities are really involved.
Despite all these technicalities, the objects considered in the proof of Theorem 5.1
are very combinatorial. This leads to the following problem.
Problem Can the above strategy be transformed into a polynomial-time algorithm
whose input is an arbitrary graph G and whose output is either an odd hole, an
odd antihole, or a partition of the vertices of G certifying one of the outcomes of
Theorem 5.1?

148
Nicolas Trotignon
In [13] the global strategy of the proof is well explained at the beginning, and
more about the strategy can be found in [56] and [12]. How structural methods can
be used generally for classes closed under taking induced subgraphs is discussed
by Chudnovsky and Seymour [14]. Prisms, pyramids and wheels are ‘Truemper
conﬁgurations’, graphs that play an important role in many decompostion theorems
(see the survey of Vuˇskovi´c [60]). To make a start on the above problem, the ﬁrst
step is the detection in polynomial time of the structures that are used in the proof
(line graphs of a bipartite subdivision of K4, even prisms, odd prisms and wheels).
Apart from wheels they all can be detected in polynomial time in a Berge graph (see
Maffray and Trotignon [47]). Diot, Tavenas and Trotignon proved that detecting a
wheel in a Berge graph is an NP-complete problem, but for the sake of the problem
above, this problem might be by-passed.
6. Book from the Proof
We are now ready to investigate some technicalities of the proof of the SPGT. A
lemma due to Roussel and Rubio [52] is used at many steps in [13]; in fact, the
authors of [13] rediscovered it (in joint work with Thomassen) and initially named it
the Wonderful lemma because of its many applications.
The Roussel–Rubio lemma states that, in a sense, any anticonnected set of vertices
of a Berge graph behaves like a single vertex. How does a vertex v ‘behave’ in a
Berge graph? If a path of odd length (at least 3) has both ends adjacent to v, then v
must have other neighbours in the path, for otherwise there is an odd hole. The lemma
states roughly that an anticonnected set T of vertices behaves similarly: if a path of
odd length (at least 3) has both ends complete to T, then at least one internal vertex of
the path is also complete to T (there are exceptions, see the statement below). When
P = xx′ . . . y′y is a path of length at least 3, a leap for P is a pair of non-adjacent
vertices v, w such that N(v) ∩V(P) = {x, x′, y} and N(w) ∩V(P) = {x, y′, y}. We
denote by P∗the interior of a path P. The result of Roussel and Rubio is as follows.
Theorem 6.1 Let T be an anticonnected set of vertices in a Berge graph G. If P is
a path of odd length at least 3, vertex-disjoint from T, whose ends are T-complete,
then one of the following holds:
(1) an internal vertex of P is T-complete;
(2) there is a leap for P in T;
(3) P has length 3, and its two internal vertices are the ends of an antipath of odd
length whose interior is in T.
We now give a corollary of Theorem 6.1 that is used constantly in [13].
Corollary 6.2 Let T be an anticonnected set of vertices in a Berge graph G. If P is
a path with odd length at least 3, vertex-disjoint from T, whose ends are T-complete
and such that no internal vertex of P is T-complete, then every T-complete vertex has
a neighbour in P∗.

7 Perfect graphs
149
Proof
Let v be a T-complete vertex, and suppose that v has no neighbour in P∗(so v
is not in V(P)∪T). Apply Theorem 6.1 to T and P. If conclusion (2) holds, then a path
of odd length with same interior as P joins the members of the leap. Together with v it
forms an odd hole, giving a contradiction. If conclusion (3) holds, then the antipath of
odd length can be completed to an odd antihole through v, giving a contradiction.
■
We now present a self-contained lemma from [13] in order to give some taste of the
technicalities. We place this lemma in context by stating informally how line graphs
are handled.
A line graph K of a bipartite graph is formed from a collection of cliques and
a collection of paths linking them. If K is contained in a Berge graph G, a vertex
v ∈V(G \ K) is major if it has many (at least 2) neighbours in each clique, and
minor if it has neighbours in at most one of the paths or in at most one of the cliques.
An important result is that every vertex is major or minor, or allows one to obtain a
larger line graph. (This is not fully true, but vertices that are neither major nor minor
can be considered as part of some of the paths in what is called a generalized line
graph; therefore, when the generalized line graphs are properly deﬁned, every vertex
is major or minor with respect to a maximal generalized line graph.) A next step
is to prove that connected (or sometimes anticonnected) components of vertices of
G\K behave as a vertex. For more details of these components, see the proof of 10.1
in [13]; we deal with anticomponents below.
If there are no major vertices, then the graph is formed of the line graph and
possibly a collection of minor components. If some of these components are attached
to a clique then there is a balanced skew partition, and if some are attached to a
path there is a 2-join. If there are major vertices, then it can be proved that an
anticomponent of these is formed of vertices that are all major in the same way,
meaning that they are all attached to exactly the same vertices of the cliques. An
anticomponent of major vertices is therefore complete to its attachment and forms
a skew cutset separating parts of the line graph. The next lemma (a variant of
7.3 of [13]) proves a statement of this form. It illustrates another breakthrough
made in [13]: showing how the Roussel–Rubio lemma can be used to ﬁnd skew
partitions.
Theorem 6.3 In a Berge graph G, let K be a prism with triangles a1a2a3 and b1b2b3
and paths Pi = ai . . . bi for i = 1, 2, 3. Suppose that, for each i = 1, 2, 3, Pi has
length at least 2. Let Y be an anticonnected set of vertices each of which has at least
two neighbours in {a1, a2, a3} and at least two neighbours in {b1, b2, b3} (so Y is
disjoint from K). Then at least two members of {a1, a2, a3} and at least two members
of {b1, b2, b3} are Y-complete.
Proof
Suppose not; then there is an antipath with interior in Y joining two vertices
both of which are in {a1, a2, a3} or in {b1, b2, b3}. Let Q be a shortest such antipath
and suppose up to symmetry that Q is from a1 to a2. Every vertex in Y is adjacent
to either a1 or a2, so Q has length at least 3. From the minimality of Q, a3 is

150
Nicolas Trotignon
Q∗-complete, and so is at least one of {b1, b2, b3} (say bi). Since Q can be completed
to an antihole via a1bia2, it follows that Q has even length, at least 4. Let Q =
a1q1 . . . qna2, let a′
i be the neighbour of ai in Pi for i = 1, 2, and P = a′
1P1b1b2P2a′
2.
We now prove two claims.
(1) At least one internal vertex of P is (Q∗\ q1)-complete, and at least one internal
vertex of P is (Q∗\ qn)-complete.
If one of b1 or b2 is Q∗-complete, the claim is obviously true. Otherwise, none of
b1, b2 is Q∗-complete, so there exists a antipath from b1 to b2 whose interior is in
Q∗, and from the minimality of Q this antipath has the same interior as Q. It follows
that one of b1, b2 is complete to Q∗\ q1 and the other is complete to Q∗\ qn. This
proves (1).
(2) If an internal vertex of P is (Q∗\ q1)-complete or (Q∗\ qn)-complete, then it is
Q∗-complete. If a′
1 is (Q∗\ q1)-complete, then it is Q∗-complete.
If an internal vertex v of P is (Q∗\ qn)-complete then it is Q∗-complete, since
otherwise, vqnQa1v is an odd antihole. If v is a′
1 is an internal vertex of P, and if
v is (Q∗\ q1)-complete, then v is Q∗-complete, for otherwise, vq1Qa2v is an odd
antihole. This proves (2).
If both a′
1, a′
2 are Q∗-complete, then Q can be completed to an odd antihole via
a1a′
2a′
1a2, giving a contradiction. So, up to symmetry, we may now suppose from
here on that a′
1 is not Q∗-complete. It follows by (2) that a′
1 is not (Q∗\q1)-complete.
Let x be the (Q \ q1)-complete vertex of P closest to a′
1 along P. By (1), x exists
and is an internal vertex of P. By (2), x is in fact Q∗-complete.
If a′
1a1Px has odd length, then by Corollary 6.2 applied to a1a′
1Px and Q∗\ q1,
there is a contradiction because a3 is (Q∗\ q1)-complete and has no neighbour in
the interior a1Px. So a1Px has even length. It follows that xPa′
2a2 has odd length.
By Corollary 6.2 applied to xPa′
2a2 and Q∗\ qn, and because of a3, there must be
an internal vertex v of xPa′
2a2 that is (Q∗\ qn)-complete. By (2), v is in fact Q∗-
complete. But then, a3a1a′
1Px is odd and its ends are Q∗-complete, but none of its
internal vertex is Q∗-complete. This contradicts Corollary 6.2 because of v.
■
The above lemma shows how the Roussel–Rubio lemma ‘generates’ antiholes to
provide contradictions. Maybe it can be used to investigate the structure of several
subclasses of Berge graphs, such as in the next problem.
Problem Is there a structural characterization of Berge graphs with no antihole of
length at least 6?
A proof of the Roussel–Rubio lemma is given in Maffray and Trotignon [48],
where some applications are also presented. A shorter proof in the case when T is
a stable set is due to Kapoor, Vuˇskovi´c and Zambelli (see [58] where several very
simple applications are presented). For applications of the Roussel–Rubio lemma,
see [13, 3.1].

7 Perfect graphs
151
About technicalities, the best source is of course Chudnovsky, Robertson, Seymour
and Thomas [13]. This paper is well organized: the ﬁrst four sections are devoted
to technical lemmas that are used intensively in the sequel, but as a result of this
organization, it is hard to extract a meaningful chunk, and it is difﬁcult to appreciate
how useful the technical lemmas are without knowing the sequel, and the sequel is
difﬁcult to understand without mastering the technicalities of the lemmas. The easiest
parts of [13] are perhaps 15.1, Section 15 and Section 16. Section 10 is devoted to
even prisms and is a self-contained chunk that has fewer technicalities than the rest
of the paper, but still relies greatly on technical lemmas from the previous sections.
7. Recognizing perfect graphs
From here on we investigate results on perfect graphs that were obtained after the
proof of the SPGT. Soon after this proof, in 2002, another open question was solved,
when Chudnovsky, Cornu´ejols, Liu, Seymour and Vuˇskovi´c [11] found a polynomial-
time algorithm that decides whether an input graph is Berge. Note that this algorithm
is independent of the SPGT: it takes an arbitrary graph G as input and in time O(n9)
outputs an odd hole or antihole of G, if there is one. We give here a brief outline,
from the introduction to [11]. In what follows, G is the input graph.
. . . we would like to decide either that G is not Berge, or that G contains
no odd hole. (To test Bergeness, we just run this algorithm on G and then
again on the complement of G.) If there is an odd hole in G, then there is
a shortest one, say C. A vertex of the remainder of G is C-major if its set
of neighbours in C is not a subset of the vertex set of any 3-vertex path
of C; and C is clean (in G) if there are no C-major vertices in G. If there
happens to be a clean shortest odd hole in G, then it stands out and can
be detected relatively easily; and that essentially is the ﬁrst step of our
algorithm, a routine to test whether there is a clean shortest odd hole. The
remainder of the algorithm consists of reducing the general problem to
the ‘clean’ case that was just handled. If C is a shortest odd hole in G,
let us say a subset X of V(G) is a cleaner for C if X ∩V(C) = ∅and
every C-major vertex belongs to X. Thus if X is a cleaner for C then C
is a clean hole in G \ X. The idea of the remainder of the algorithm is
to generate polynomially many subsets of V(G), such that if there is a
shortest odd hole C in G, then one of the subsets will be a cleaner for C.
If we can do that, then we delete each of these subsets in turn, thereby
generating polynomially many induced subgraphs; and we know that
there is an odd hole in G if and only if in one of these subgraphs there is
a clean shortest odd hole. Thus we can decide whether G has an odd hole
by testing whether any of these subgraphs has a clean shortest odd hole.
Theorem 7.1 There exists an algorithm that decides whether an input graph is Berge
in time O(n9).

152
Nicolas Trotignon
Let us now explain brieﬂy the two steps from the sketch above.
The ﬁrst step relies on the shortest-path detector, a method designed by Chud-
novsky and Seymour [11]. The shortest-path detector enumerates all possible subsets
of ﬁxed size of vertices that are potentially particular vertices of some structure to
be detected, and computes shortest paths between them to complete the structure
until the desired structure is detected. At ﬁrst glance this should fail because between
the paths chords could exist (the paths might fail to be disjoint also). But a clever
argument shows that this failure leads to a smaller structure similar to the one to
be detected, so that when the enumeration suddenly matches the particular vertices
of a smallest structure in the graph, the problem does not arise, and the structure
is detected. This method is used in [11] to decide in time O(n9) whether a graph
contains a pyramid.
The second step relies on a powerful technique discovered by Conforti and
Rao [24], called the cleaning, which consists in ‘guessing’ a cleaner. Here, the way
to guess the cleaner comes from some Roussel–Rubio-like lemmas, asserting that the
set X of vertices to be ‘guessed’ that are all major vertices of some possible smallest
odd hole, are all common neighbours of some restricted set S of neighbours. One can
therefore enumerate all possible sets S by brute force, and for each of them nominate
X as the set of S-complete vertices.
The following problem is still open.
Problem Is there a polynomial-time algorithm to decide whether an input graph has
an odd hole?
In [11], another algorithm for recognizing Berge graphs is given. It relies on
decompositions and uses Theorem 4.2. Detecting odd holes can be solved in
polynomial time under the assumption that the largest size of a clique in the input
graph is bounded by some constant. This was proved by Conforti, Cornu´ejols, Liu,
Vuˇskovi´c and Zambelli [21], a good source for understanding the main ideas of the
recognition of Berge graphs. Simple examples of shortest path detectors can be found
in Maffray and Trotignon [47].
8. Berge trigraphs
An obvious question arising from Theorem 5.1 is whether it is best possible. Is each
outcome necessary? Are there outcomes that can be made more precise? A careful
reader of [13], noticing that the outcome ‘homogeneous pair’ is obtained only once in
the whole proof, might therefore wonder whether it is really necessary. Chudnovsky
proved that it is not. Let us explain how.
A way of proceeding is to consider a smallest Berge graph G for which the
homogeneous pair is the only outcome satisﬁed by G in Theorem 5.1, and to look
for a contradiction. A natural idea is then to ‘contract’ a homogeneous pair (A, B)

7 Perfect graphs
153
so as to ﬁnd a smaller Berge graph G′, and to apply Theorem 5.1 to G′ and prove
that any outcome of Theorem 5.1 in G′ yields an outcome in G (because G′ and G
are very similar). From our initial assumption, G′ therefore satisﬁes no outcome of
Theorem 5.1, and this provides a contradiction. We call this a bootstrap method,
because it improves structural theorems somehow ‘for free’. The natural way to
‘contract’ a homogeneous pair (A, B) of G is to replace A by a vertex a complete
to C(A) and anticomplete to C(A), and to replace B by a vertex b complete to C(B)
and anticomplete to C(B).
The bootstrap method is hard to implement in this context. The problem is with ab:
should it be an edge or an antiedge of G′? Both choices lead to difﬁcult technicalities:
if ab is chosen to be a non-edge, then some skew cutset may separate a from b
in G′ while A and B are linked in G. If a is chosen to be adjacent to b, then the
same phenomenon may happen in the complement. No neat example of these bad
phenomena can be given, because (as we will see) the outcome ‘homogeneous pair’
is not necessary in Theorem 5.1. But any attempt of proof must face this issue and is
likely to fail.
Chudnovsky’s idea was to leave undecided the adjacency between a and b in G′.
For this purpose, she deﬁned trigraphs as graphs with edges, anti-edges, and a third
kind of adjacency: a switchable pair. For each pair of distinct vertices v and w, vw is
an edge, an antiedge or a switchable pair. A realization G of a trigraph T is any graph
on V(T) such that all edges of T are edges of G and all antiedges of T are antiedges
of G (so every switchable pair is transformed into an edge or an antiedge). A trigraph
is Berge if every realization is Berge.
We do not give the long list of deﬁnitions that extends the vocabulary of graphs to
trigraphs. The key point is in the deﬁnitions of the decompositions: all the ‘important’
edges in these deﬁnitions are not allowed to be switchable pairs. For instance, if
(X, Y) is a 2-join of a trigraph T, no switchable pair of T is from X to Y. If (X, Y)
is a skew partition of a trigraph T, then X must be partitioned into sets X1 and X2
for which no edge and no switchable pair exist between X1 and X2, and Y must be
partitioned into sets Y1 and Y2 for which no antiedge and no switchable pair exist
between Y1 and Y2. It is easy to guess how useful this requirement is: for instance,
when building G′ from G as in the paragraph above, ab is deﬁned to be a switchable
pair, and so the problem that we mentioned with the skew cutset separating a from b
does not arise any more.
One slight problem with this notion of trigraph is that Theorem 5.1 has to
be proved again for Berge trigraphs. Chudnovsky proved several decomposition
theorems similar to Theorem 5.1 for Berge trigraphs. The proof of her main one
is self-contained (that is, it does not rely on the proof of Theorem 5.1) and runs to
more than two hundred pages. We do not give the precise statements here since we
do not give the precise deﬁnitions of decompositions and basic classes of trigraph.
The precise statements of the theorems are in [10], where only parts of the proofs are
given, and the complete proof is in [9]. With trigraphs, the bootstrap method works

154
Nicolas Trotignon
smoothly and yields the following result of Chudnovsky. We translate back to graphs,
since a graph is a particular trigraph.
Theorem 8.1 Every Berge graph is basic, or has a 2-join, a complement 2-join or a
balanced skew partition.
Another potential improvement of Theorem 5.1 concerns the technical require-
ments in the deﬁnition of a 2-join. Some authors consider only non-path 2-joins, and
in some applications it is essential to use these, because one needs to replace one
side of a 2-join by a long path in proofs by induction or in recursive algorithms,
and this obviously fails if the side is already a long path. Trotignon [57] investigated
this question and obtained the following result starting from Theorem 8.1 and with
the bootstrap method applied to graphs. It easily implies the different variants of
Theorem 5.1. Path cobipartite graphs and path double-split graphs are Berge graphs
obtained by subdividing edges in complements of bipartite graphs and in double split
graphs respectively (a more precise deﬁnition can be given, but this one is enough
here). Note that subdividing an edge in any graph creates a path 2-join. In [57],
several graphs that yield a unique outcome in the following theorem of Trotignon
are given.
Theorem 8.2 If G is a Berge graph, then G is basic or has a balanced skew partition,
or one of G, G is a path-cobipartite graph, or is a path-double split graph, or has a
non-path 2-join, or has a homogeneous pair and a path 2-join.
Little work has been devoted to the algorithmic aspects of trigraphs. The following
problem is still open.
Problem What is the complexity of recognizing Berge trigraphs?
It seems now that trigraphs are an important tool for graph decompositions, as
suggested by their use in claw-free and bull-free graphs (see [14]). For algorithms for
Berge trigraphs, Chudnovsky, Trotignon, Trunck and Vuˇskovi´c [17] seems to be the
only available reference.
9. Even pairs: a shorter proof of the SPGT
An even pair in a graph is a pair of distinct vertices such that every path between them
has even length. This notion is involved in algorithmic aspects of perfect graphs and
in a signiﬁcantly shorter proof of the SPGT due to Chudnovsky and Seymour [15].
Meyniel [49] proved the following result.
Theorem 9.1 A minimally imperfect graph has no even pair.
It follows that even pairs may be an ingredient of a useful decomposition theorem
for Berge graphs. Every known example of a Berge graph with no even pair contains
either an odd prism or an antihole. Artemis graphs are such graphs with no odd holes,

7 Perfect graphs
155
no antiholes of length at least 5, and no prisms. The following result was proved by
Maffray and Trotignon [48].
Theorem 9.2 Every Artemis graph is a clique or has an even pair.
Recall that given two vertices v and w in a graph G, the operation of contracting
them means removing v and w and adding one vertex with edges to every vertex of
G \ {v, w} that is adjacent in G to at least one of v or w; we denote by G/vw the graph
that results from this operation. Fonlupt and Uhry [29] proved that if G is a perfect
graph and if {v, w} is an even pair in G, then G/vw is perfect and has the same
chromatic number as G. Using this idea, it is easy to turn the proof of Theorem 9.2
into a polynomial-time algorithm that colours every Artemis graph (see [42] for a
faster algorithm).
The proof of the next theorem uses several ideas from the proof of Theorem 9.2, is
very readable, and (as we will see) saves about ﬁfty pages in the proof of the SPGT.
An odd wheel (C, T) in a graph G consists of a hole C of length at least 6, and a
non-empty anticonnected subset T ⊆V(G) \ V(C) for which at least three vertices
of C are T-complete and there is a path P of C with odd length at least 3, whose
ends are not T-complete and whose internal vertices are all T-complete. We say that
G is impoverished if G is Berge and if G and G contain no odd wheel, long prism
or double diamond. A dominant pair in G is a pair {v, w} of non-adjacent vertices
for which every other vertex of G is adjacent to at least one of v, w. The following
theorem is due to Chudnovsky and Seymour [15].
Theorem 9.3 If G is impoverished, then either G admits a star cutset, an even pair
or a dominant pair, or G is a complete graph.
It is not difﬁcult to prove that a minimally imperfect graph has no dominant
pair (see [15]), and it follows easily by Theorem 9.1 and Theorem 4.1 that every
impoverished graph is perfect. Since the last ﬁfty-ﬁve pages of the proof of the SPGT
are devoted to ﬁnding a skew partition in an impoverished graph, they are no longer
necessary and can be replaced by the nine pages needed to prove Theorem 9.3.
A good survey (with many conjectures) on even pairs is by Everett, de Figueiredo,
Linhares Sales, Maffray Porto and Reed (see [50, pp. 67–92]). It seems that even pairs
provide a cornucopia of conjectures: other conjectures on even pairs can be found in
Burlet, Maffray and Trotignon [7] and L´evˆeque and de Werra [41]. Short proofs of
the existence of even pairs in classical classes of perfect graphs (Meyniel graphs and
weakly chordal graphs) can be found in Trotignon and Vuˇskovi´c [58].
10. Colouring perfect graphs
In the 1980s Gr¨ostchel, Lov´asz and Schrijver [34] devised a polynomial-time
algorithm that colours any input perfect graph. This algorithm relies on the ellipsoid
method, and one may wonder whether a more combinatorial algorithm exists. Even if

156
Nicolas Trotignon
there is no formal deﬁnition of what a combinatorial algorithm should be, most math-
ematicians agree that any algorithm that relies on graph searches and decompositions,
or even on classical linear programming, can be called ‘combinatorial’ and that the
ellipsoid method cannot be, so this question is considered as open. A more precise
question is whether a fast colouring algorithm can be derived from Theorem 5.1.
We describe here recent progress in this direction.
Gr¨ostchel, Lov´asz and Schrijver [34] devised a polynomial-time combinatorial
algorithm that colours every Berge graph, under the assumption that a polynomial-
time algorithm is available for the maximum stable set (this is also explained in [17]).
So our question now is whether Theorem 5.1 (or one of its variants from Section 8)
helps us to ﬁnd a maximum weighted stable set. It turns out that the question is easy
for all basic classes – for the historical ones see [55], and for doubled graphs see [17].
Also homogeneous pairs and complement 2-joins are not hard to handle (see [17]).
For 2-joins, the situation is more complicated because a maximum stable set may
overlap a 2-join in many ways. In fact, Naves (see [59]) observed that for some class
of graphs decomposable by 2-joins into very simple graphs, it is NP-hard to compute
a maximum stable set. We now explain how 2-joins can actually help to ﬁnd stable
sets in Berge graphs. If (X1, X2) is a 2-join and if A1, B1, C1, A2, B2, C2 are as in
the deﬁnition of a 2-join, we set αAC = α(G[A1 ∪C1]), αBC = α(G[B1 ∪C1]),
αC = α(G[C1]) and αX = α(G[X1]). The next inequalities from Trotignon and
Vuˇskovi´c [59] tell us how stable sets and 2-joins overlap in Berge graphs.
Theorem 10.1 If (X1, X2) is an odd 2-join of G, then αC + αX ≤αAC + αBC, and if
(X1, X2) is an even 2-join of G, then αAC + αBC ≤αC + αX.
The above lemma allows to construct blocks of decomposition of a 2-join that
preserve being Berge and allow us to keep track of α (see [17] for a precise deﬁnition
of the blocks). Interestingly, 2-joins are used to compute α in other classes of graphs,
while they seem to be hard to use in general: for claw-free graphs see Faenza, Oriolo
and Stauffer [28], and for even-hole-free graphs with no star cutsets see Trotignon
and Vuˇskovi´c [59].
In [17], Theorem 10.1 is used to prove the following result. Many technicalities
are needed, some of which come from the fact that the decomposition blocks for
2-joins that keep track of α do not preserve having no balanced skew partition. It is
also proved in [17] that for Berge graphs with no balanced skew partition there
exist extreme decompositions, in which one of the blocks is basic; these are very
convenient for proofs by induction. To handle all these technicalities, it is convenient
(if not essential) to work with trigraphs, but here we state the result for graphs. The
following result is due to Chudnovsky, Trotignon, Trunck and Vuˇskovi´c [17].
Theorem 10.2 There exists an O(n7)-time algorithm whose input is a Berge graph
with no balanced skew partition and whose output is a maximum weighted stable set
of G and a colouring of G.

7 Perfect graphs
157
Up to now, no-one has discovered how skew partitions could be handled so as to
provide a polynomial colouring algorithm. One might think that a Berge graph that
is uniquely decomposable with a balanced skew partition must have an even pair.
To support this idea, Chudnovsky and Seymour [16] studied the structure of Berge
graphs with no K4 and no even pair. They describe them quite precisely in the next
result.
Theorem 10.3 If G is a 3-connected K4-free Berge graph with no even pair and with
no clique cutset, then one of G and G is the line graph of a bipartite graph.
Unfortunately, it seems that this theorem does not generalize to larger values of
ω, as shown by the WKBGSF, a graph G (discovered by Chudnovsky and Seymour,
unpublished) shown in Fig. 1. Every edge of G is the middle edge of a P4 so that,
in the complement, each pair of non-adjacent vertices can be linked by a P4, so G
has no even pairs. However, G is perfect, and the balanced skew partition is the only
outcome of Theorem 5.1 satisﬁed by G.
Fig. 1. The WKBGSF (Worst Known Berge Graph So Far): a vertex in the left part is adjacent
to one of the three vertices in the right part if they share one of the colours black, white or grey
The following two problems may be the most important ones about perfect graphs.
Problem Describe the structure of Berge graphs with no even pairs.
Problem Find a combinatorial polynomial-time algorithm that colours every Berge
graph.
Acknowledgement We thank Maria Chudnovsky, Fr´ed´eric Maffray and Irena Penev
for their help.
References
1. N. Alexeev, A. Fradkin and I. Kim, Forbidden induced subgraphs of double-split graphs,
SIAM J. Discrete Math. 26 (2012), 1–14.
2. L. W. Beineke, Characterizations of derived graphs, J. Combin. Theory 9 (1970), 129–135.
3. C. Berge, F¨arbung von Graphen, deren s¨amtliche bzw. deren ungerade Kreise starr sind,
Technical report, Wiss. Z. der Martin-Luther-Univ. Halle-Wittenberg, Math.-Natur. Reihe
10, 1961.

158
Nicolas Trotignon
4. C. Berge and V. Chv´atal (eds.), Topics on Perfect Graphs, Ann. Discrete Math. 21, North-
Holland, 1984.
5. J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty, Graph Theory, Graduate Texts in Math. 244, Springer,
2008.
6. A. Brandst¨adt, V. B. Le and J. P. Spinrad, Graph Classes: A Survey, SIAM, 1999.
7. M. Burlet, F. Maffray and N. Trotignon, Odd pairs of cliques, Graph Theory in Paris,
Proc. Conf. in Memory of Claude Berge (eds. A. Bondy et al.), Birkh¨auser (2007),
85–95.
8. P. Charbit, M. Habib, N. Trotignon and K. Vuˇskovi´c, Detecting 2-joins faster, J. Discrete
Algorithms 17 (2012), 60–66.
9. M. Chudnovsky, Berge Trigraphs and their Applications, Ph.D. thesis, Princeton Univer-
sity, 2003.
10. M. Chudnovsky, Berge trigraphs, J. Graph Theory 53 (2006), 1–55.
11. M. Chudnovsky, G. Cornu´ejols, X. Liu, P. Seymour and K. Vuˇskovi´c, Recognizing Berge
graphs, Combinatorica 25 (2005), 143–186.
12. M. Chudnovsky, N. Robertson, P. Seymour and R. Thomas, Progress on perfect graphs,
Math. Programming (B) 97 (2003), 405–422.
13. M. Chudnovsky, N. Robertson, P. Seymour and R. Thomas, The strong perfect graph
theorem, Ann. of Math. 164 (2006), 51–229.
14. M. Chudnovsky and P. Seymour, Excluding induced subgraphs, Surveys in Combinatorics,
2007, London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes 346 (2007), 99–119.
15. M. Chudnovsky and P. Seymour, Even pairs in Berge graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 99
(2009), 370–377.
16. M. Chudnovsky and P. Seymour, Three-colourable perfect graphs without even pairs,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 102 (2012), 363–394.
17. M. Chudnovsky, N. Trotignon, T. Trunck and K. Vuˇskovi´c, Coloring perfect graphs with
no balanced skew-partitions, submitted.
18. V. Chv´atal, On certain polytopes associated with graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 18 (1975),
138–154.
19. V. Chv´atal, Star-cutsets and perfect graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 39 (1985),
189–199.
20. V. Chv´atal and N. Sbihi, Bull-free Berge graphs are perfect, Graphs Combin. 3 (1987),
127–139.
21. M. Conforti, G. Cornu´ejols, X. Liu, K. Vuˇskovi´c and G. Zambelli, Odd hole recognition
in graphs of bounded clique size, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 20 (2006), 42–48.
22. M. Conforti, G. Cornu´ejols and K. Vuˇskovi´c, Square-free perfect graphs, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 90 (2004), 257–307.
23. M. Conforti, G. Cornu´ejols and K. Vuˇskovi´c, Decomposition of odd-hole-free graphs by
double star cutsets and 2-joins, Discrete Appl. Math. 141 (2004), 41–91.
24. M. Conforti and M. R. Rao, Testing balancedness and perfection of linear matrices, Math.
Programming 61 (1993), 1–18.
25. G. Cornu´ejols, Combinatorial Optimization: Packing and Covering, CBMS-NSF Regional
Conf. Series in Applied Math. 74, SIAM, 2001.
26. G. Cornu´ejols and W. H. Cunningham, Composition for perfect graphs, Discrete Math. 55
(1985), 245–254.
27. E. Diot, S. Tavenas and N. Trotignon, Detecting wheels, Analysis Discrete Math. 8 (2014),
111–122.
28. Y. Faenza, G. Oriolo and G. Stauffer, An algorithmic decomposition of claw-free graphs
leading to an O(n3)-algorithm for the weighted stable set problem, SODA (2011),
630–646.

7 Perfect graphs
159
29. J. Fonlupt and J. P. Uhry, Transformations which preserve perfectness and h-perfectness
of graphs, Bonn Workshop on Combinatorial Optimization (eds. A. Bachem, M. Gr¨otschel
and B. Korte), Ann. Discrete Math. 16 (1982), 83–85.
30. D. R. Fulkerson, Anti-blocking polyhedra, J. Combin. Theory (B) 12 (1972), 50–71.
31. T. Gallai, Transitiv orientierbare Graphen, Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar. 18 (1967),
25–66.
32. G. S. Gasparian, Minimal imperfect graphs: a simple approach, Combinatorica 16 (1996),
209–212.
33. M. C. Golumbic, Algorithmic Graph Theory and Perfect Graphs, Elsevier, 2004.
34. M. Gr¨ostchel, L. Lov´asz and A. Schrijver, Geometric Algorithms and Combinatorial
Optimization, Springer-Verlag, 1988.
35. A. Gy´arf´as, Problems from the world surrounding perfect graphs, Zastowania Mat. Appl.
Math. 19 (1987), 413–441.
36. A. Gy´arf´as, Z. Li, R. C. S. Machado, A. Seb˝o, S. Thomass´e and N. Trotignon,
Complements of nearly perfect graphs, J. Combin. 4 (2013), 299–310.
37. M. Habib, A. Mamcarz and F. de Montgolﬁer, Algorithms for some H-join decomposi-
tions, LATIN 2012, 446–457.
38. S. Hougardy, Classes of perfect graphs, Discrete Math. 306 (2006), 2529–2571.
39. W. S. Kennedy and B. Reed, Fast Skew Partition Recognition, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 4535 (2008), 101–107.
40. P. G. H. Lehot, An optimal algorithm to detect a line graph and output its root graph,
J. Assoc. Comp. Mach. 21 (1974), 569–575.
41. B. L´evˆeque and D. de Werra, Graph transformations preserving the stability number,
Discrete Appl. Math. 160 (2012), 2752–2759.
42. B. L´evˆeque, F. Maffray, B. Reed and N. Trotignon, Coloring Artemis graphs, Theor. Comp.
Sci. 410 (2009), 2234–2240.
43. L. Lov´asz, A characterization of perfect graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 13 (1972),
95–98.
44. L. Lov´asz, Normal hypergraphs and the perfect graph conjecture, Discrete Math. 2 (1972),
253–267.
45. L. Lov´asz, Perfect graphs, Selected Topics in Graph Theory (eds. L. W. Beineke and R. J.
Wilson), Academic Press (1983), 55–87.
46. F. Maffray, Fast recognition of doubled graphs, Technical Report, Les Cahiers Leibniz
202, 2013.
47. F. Maffray and N. Trotignon, Algorithms for perfectly contractile graphs, SIAM J. Discrete
Math. 19 (2005), 553–574.
48. F. Maffray and N. Trotignon, A class of perfectly contractile graphs, J. Combin. Theory
(B) 96 (2006), 1–19.
49. H. Meyniel, A new property of critical imperfect graphs and some consequences, Europ.
J. Combin. 8 (1987), 313–316.
50. J. L. Ram´ırez Alfons´ın and B. A. Reed (eds.), Perfect Graphs, Wiley Interscience, 2001.
51. B. A. Reed, Skew partitions in perfect graphs, Discrete Appl. Math. 156 (2008),
1150–1156.
52. F. Roussel and P. Rubio, About skew partitions in minimal imperfect graphs, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 83 (2001), 171–190.
53. F. Roussel, I. Rusu and H. Thuillier, The Strong Perfect Graph Conjecture: 40 years of
attempts and its resolution, Discrete Math. 309 (2009), 6092–6113.
54. N. D. Roussopoulos, A max {m, n} algorithm for determining the graph H from its line
graph G, Inform. Proc. Letters 2 (1973), 108–112.
55. A. Schrijver, Combinatorial Optimization, Polyhedra and Efﬁciency, Springer, 2003.

160
Nicolas Trotignon
56. P. Seymour, How the proof of the strong perfect graph conjecture was found, Gazette des
Math. 109 (2006), 69–83.
57. N. Trotignon, Decomposing Berge graphs and detecting balanced skew partitions,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 98 (2008), 173–225.
58. N. Trotignon and K. Vuˇskovi´c, On Roussel–Rubio-type lemmas and their consequences,
Discrete Math. 311 (2011), 684–687.
59. N. Trotignon and K. Vuˇskovi´c, Combinatorial optimization with 2-joins, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 102 (2012), 153–185.
60. K. Vuˇskovi´c, The world of hereditary graph classes viewed through Truemper conﬁgu-
rations, Surveys in Combinatorics 2013, London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes 409 (2013),
265–326.

8
Geometric graphs
ALEXANDER SOIFER
1.
The chromatic number of the plane
2.
The polychromatic number: lower bounds
3.
The de Bruijn–Erd˝os reduction to ﬁnite sets
4.
The polychromatic number: upper bounds
5.
The continuum of 6-colourings
6.
Special circumstances
7.
Space explorations
8.
Rational spaces
9.
One odd graph
10. Inﬂuence of set theory axioms
11. Predicting the future
References
In this chapter we address a colourful area of geometric graph theory: ﬁnding
the chromatic number of the plane and related problems. In addition to results,
we present open problems of a classical kind that are easy to understand, but
hard to solve.
1. The chromatic number of the plane
In the deﬁnition of a graph, edges symbolize the adjacency of points and nothing
else: we ignore their shape and length. However, the past century has witnessed a
great deal of interest in geometric graphs, where geometrical considerations such as
distance deﬁne the adjacency. The wealth of material related to geometric graphs is
so vast that one can easily imagine a book written on this topic alone. In view of space
and time limitations and our emphasis on chromatic graph theory,we have chosen to
go deep and address a small but colourful area of geometric graphs: the problem of
ﬁnding the chromatic number of the plane and related problems. My monograph [45]

162
Alexander Soifer
contains further material on this topic, although there is some new material here that
did not appear in that book.
We can create a graph G from the Euclidean plane E2 by taking all of its points as
vertices, and joining two vertices by an edge if and only if they are at distance 1 apart.
More generally, we call a graph unit-distance when any two vertices are adjacent if
and only if they are at distance 1 apart. The main open problem in the subject is as
follows.
Problem Find the chromatic number of the above graph G.
This number is called the chromatic number of the plane (CNP) and is denoted by
χ(E2). As outlined in [45], this problem was created in late 1950 by the 18-year-old
Edward Nelson, who determined a lower bound; his 20-year-old friend John Isbell
found an upper bound:
4 ≤χ(E2) ≤7 – that is, χ(E2) = 4, 5, 6 or 7.
There are similarities between the problem of ﬁnding the chromatic number of
the plane (CNP) and the four-colour problem (4CP); both refer to plane colourings
and both withstood all assaults for a long time, but whereas the latter problem
was eventually solved, the former one remains open. Both problems had their
distinguished promoters who kept the problems alive in their infancy: in the case of
the 4CP it was Augustus De Morgan, and in the case of the CNP problem it was Paul
Erd˝os. Yet, the problems differ vastly in their history. In 1890 P. J. Heawood proved
the ﬁve-colour theorem, showing that the answer to the four-colour problem is 4 or
5. After over sixty years of intensive work, using tools from geometry, graph theory,
abstract algebra, topology and measure theory, we still today have no improvement
in the general case on the above bounds for χ(E2), a surprisingly wide spread.
In a 2002 lecture, Ronald L. Graham offered a reward for the ﬁrst solution to a
special case that he called ‘another four-colour conjecture’.
Problem Is it possible to 4-colour the plane so as to forbid a monochromatic
distance 1?
Graham now believes that the chromatic number of the plane is 5 or 6 (see [19] and
[20]). He cited a theorem of O’Donnell [31] showing the existence of 4-chromatic
unit-distance graphs of arbitrarily large girth (see Theorem 3.2 below) as ‘perhaps,
the evidence that χ is at least 5’. Erd˝os [13], [14] believed that the chromatic number
of the plane is 5, 6 or 7. Somewhat disjointly from Graham and Erd˝os, I predict that
the answer is either 4 or 7.
2. The polychromatic number: lower bounds
Numerous problems related to the chromatic number of the plane have been posed.
Let us look at one of them here. We say that a point set S realizes the distance d if S
contains two points at distance d apart. In 1958 Erd˝os posed the following question.

8 Geometric graphs
163
Problem What is the smallest number of colours needed to colour the plane so that
no colour realizes all distances?
In 1992 Soifer [40] named this invariant the polychromatic number of the plane, and
denoted it byχp(E2). Clearly χp(E2)≤χ(E2)≤7. In 1970 upper and lower bounds for
χp(E2) were published by a Russian high-school student, Dmitry Raiskii [37]. We
look at the lower bound here and return to the upper bound in Section 4.
In 1961 Leo and Willie Moser produced the seven-point plane conﬁguration that
we now call the Mosers spindle (see Fig. 1): each edge in the spindle has length 1. In
[29] they proved the following result.
Theorem 2.1 Any three points of the Mosers spindle contain two points at dis-
tance 1 apart. Consequently, in a colouring of the Mosers spindle that forbids
monochromatic distance 1, at most two points can be of the same colour.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Fig. 1. The Mosers spindle
Raiskii’s lower bound was as follows. A striking proof was found in 1997 by
Alexei Merkov, another Russian high-school student, and appeared in an obscure
brochure [34]. The following proof is due to Merkov, with modiﬁcations by the
author.
Theorem 2.2 χp(E2) ≥4.
Proof
We assume that the plane is coloured in three colours, red, white and blue,
and that each colour forbids a distance r, w and b, respectively. Equip the 3-coloured
plane with Cartesian coordinates with origin O, and construct three 7-point sets Sr,
Sw and Sb, each being the Mosers spindle (Fig. 2), in such a way that all three
spindles share O as one of their seven vertices and have edges coloured r, w and b,
respectively. This construction deﬁnes eighteen vectors: six ‘red’ ones, v1, v2, . . . , v6
from the origin O to each remaining point of Sr, six ‘white’ ones, v7, v8, . . . , v12
from O to the points of Sw, and six ‘blue’ ones v13, v14, . . . , v18 from O to the
points of Sb

164
Alexander Soifer
Fig. 2. The Cartesian plane with three Mosers spindles
We now introduce 18-dimensional Euclidean space E18 and a function M: E18 →
E2 that maps each vector (a1, a2, . . . , a18) to a1v1 + a2v2 + . . . + a18v18. This
function induces a 3-colouring of E18 by assigning to a point of E18 the colour of
the corresponding point of the plane. In accordance with the colours of the vectors
vi,we call the ﬁrst six axes of E18 ‘red’, the next six axes ‘white’, and the last six axes
‘blue’.
Let W be the subset of E18 consisting of all points whose coordinates include at
most one equal to 1 for each of the three colours of the axes, and the remaining
(ﬁfteen or more) coordinates equal to 0; it is easy to verify that W has 73 = 343
points. For any ﬁxed array of coordinates allowable in W on white and blue axes, we
get the 7-element set A of points in W with ﬁxed coordinates on white and blue axes.
The image M(A) forms in the plane a translate of the original 7-point set Sr. If we ﬁx
another array of white and blue coordinates we obtain another 7-element set in E18,
whose image under M in the plane would form another translate of Sr. Thus, the set
W gets partitioned into 49 subsets, each of which maps into a translate of Sr.
By Theorem 2.1, any translate of Sr has at most two red points among its 7 points.
Since W has been partitioned into translates of Sr, at most 2/7 of the points of
Warered. We can now start all over again, and show similarly that at most 2/7 of the
points of W are white, and at most 2/7 of the points are blue. But 2/7 +2/7 + 2/7 < 1.
This contradiction implies that at least one of the colours realizes all distances, as
required.
■

8 Geometric graphs
165
3. The de Bruijn–Erd˝os reduction to ﬁnite sets
We can expand the notion of the chromatic number to any subset S of the plane. The
chromatic number χ(S) is the smallest number of colours sufﬁcient to colour the
points of S in such a way that forbids monochromatic pairs of points at distance 1
apart.
In 1951 de Bruijn and Erd˝os [11] published a powerful lemma that implies the
following ‘compactness theorem’; it assumes the axiom of choice.
Theorem 3.1 The chromatic number of the plane is equal to the maximum chromatic
number of its ﬁnite subsets.
Accordingly, Erd˝os used to claim that the problem of ﬁnding the chromatic number
of the plane is a problem about ﬁnite sets in the plane. In 1975 he posed the following
problem [12].
Problem Let S be a subset of the plane which contains no equilateral triangle of side
length 1. Join two points of S if their distance is 1. Does this graph have chromatic
number at most 3? If the answer is no, assume that the graph deﬁned by S contains
no cycles Cl of length l, for 3 ≤l ≤t, and ask the same question.
Erd˝os was unsure of the outcome: he expected triangle-free unit distance graphs to
have chromatic number at most 3, or else that a chromatic number of 3 can be forced
by prohibiting all small cycles up to Ct, for sufﬁciently large t.
In 1979 Wormald [51] disproved the ﬁrst (easier) triangle-free conjecture above,
and Erd˝os promptly reported the result in a lecture and later in print (see [15]):
In a recent paper (still unpublished), Wormald found a set S for which the unit
distance graph G 1 (S) has girth 5 and chromatic number 4. His construction involved
elaborate computations and is fairly complicated. Indeed, aided by a computer, he
had proved in [51] the existence of a set S of 6448 points with chromatic number 4
and without triangles or quadrilaterals with all sides of length 1.
In a talk in 1992 the author shared this problem of Erd˝os, in the form of a
competition:
Problem Find the smallest number σ4 of points in a plane set with chromatic number
4 without unit equilateral triangles, and classify all such sets S of σ4 points.
A number of young mathematicians entered the race, and the graphs obtained by
the record setters were as mathematically signiﬁcant as they were beautiful (see [45]).
The two record-holding graphs, created by Hochberg and O’Donnell [22], are shown
in Figs. 3 and 4; both graphs are 4-chromatic unit-distance graphs.
The problem of ﬁnding a 5-chromatic unit distance graph – or proving that none
exists – remains open. However, much has been learned about 4-chromatic unit-
distance graphs. The best of these results appeared in O’Donnell’s Ph.D. thesis [31],
where he answered Erd˝os’s problem above in the negative (see [45, Theorem 48.4]).
O’Donnell’s result can be stated as follows.

166
Alexander Soifer
Fig. 3. The Hochberg-O’Donnell ﬁsh graph, of girth 4 and order 23
Fig. 4. The Hochberg-O’Donnell star graph, of girth 5 and order 45

8 Geometric graphs
167
Theorem 3.2 There exist 4-chromatic unit-distance graphs with arbitrarily large
ﬁnite girth.
4. The polychromatic number: upper bounds
Raiskii’s paper [37] also contained the upper bound χp(E2) ≤6. An example proving
this bound was found by Stechkin and published by Raiskii. We present Stechkin’s
construction (see Fig. 5).
Fig. 5. Stechkin’s 6-colouring of the plane
The ‘unit of construction’ is a parallelogram consisting of four regular hexagons
and eight equilateral triangles, all of side-length 1. We colour the hexagons with
colours 1, 2, 3 and 4. We then partition the triangles into two types: assign colour 5
to the triangles with a vertex below their horizontal base, and colour 6 to those with
a vertex above their horizontal base. While colouring, assume that every hexagon
includes its entire boundary, except for its one right-most and two lowest vertices,
and that every triangle includes none of its boundary points. We can now tile the
entire plane with translates of the ‘unit of construction’.
If our ultimate goal is to ﬁnd the chromatic number of the plane, or at least to
improve the known bounds of 4 and 7, it might be worthwhile to ‘measure’ how close
a given colouring of the plane is to achieving this goal. In 1992 such a measurement
was introduced by the author and named the colouring type (see Soifer [40], [41]):
given an n-colouring of the plane for which colour i does not realize the distance di
(for 1 ≤i ≤n), we say that this colouring is of type (d1, d2, . . . , dn).
It would greatly improve our search for the chromatic number of the plane if we
could ﬁnd a 6-colouring of type (1,1,1,1,1,1), or show that one does not exist. With
an appropriate choice of unit, Stechkin’s colouring in Fig. 5 has type (1,1,1,1,1/2,
1/2). In 1973 Woodall [50] found a second 6-colouring of the plane with no colour

168
Alexander Soifer
realizing all distances; his colouring had the special property that each of the six
monochromatic sets is closed. His example, however, had three ‘missing distances’:
it had type (1,1,1, 1
√
3, 1
√
3, 1

2
√
3).
In 1991 a new 6-colouring was found by the author [51], using a tiling of the plane
by squares and non-regular octagons; it had type (1,1,1,1,1, 1
√
5). To construct it,
we start with two squares, one with side 2 and the other with diagonal 1 (see Fig. 6),
and use them to create a tiling of the plane with squares and non-regular octagons
(see Fig. 8). We use colours 1–5 for the octagons and colour 6 for all the squares.
With each octagon and each square we include half of its boundary (bold lines in
Fig. 7) without the endpoints of that half. It is easy to verify that
√
5 is not realized
by any of the colours 1–5, and that 1 is not realized by colour 6. By shrinking all
linear sizes by a factor of
√
5, we obtain the 6-colouring of type (1,1,1,1,1, 1
√
5).
To simplify the veriﬁcation, we deﬁne the unit of construction as the region
bounded by the bold line in Fig. 8; its translates tile the plane.
Figs. 6 and 7
4
3
2
1
5
1
5
4
3
2
3
2
1
5
4
5
4
3
2
1
Fig. 8. Soifer’s 6-colouring of the plane

8 Geometric graphs
169
The above 6-colouring gave birth to a new deﬁnition (see [23]). The almost
chromatic number χa(E2) of the plane is the minimum number of colours that are
required to colour the plane so that all but one of the colours forbid distance 1, and the
remaining colour forbids a distance that is not necessarily 1. Note that χa(E2) = 4,
5 or 6; the lower bound follows from Raiskii [37], and the upper bound follows from
the above 6-colouring. The problem of determining χa(E2) is still open (see [45]).
5. The continuum of 6-colourings
In 1993 Hoffman and the author [23], [24] found another 6-colouring, with type
(1, 1, 1, 1, 1, √2 – 1); the story of its discovery can be found in [45]. To construct
it we ﬁrst tile the plane with squares of diagonals 1 and √2 – 1(see Fig. 9). We use
colours 1–5 for the larger squares and colour 6 for all the small squares. With each
square we include the left and lower sides of its boundary without the endpoints of
this half (see Fig. 10). To verify that this colouring does the job, deﬁne the unit of
construction that is bounded by the bold line in Fig. 9; its translates tile the plane.
In 1993 the above two examples prompted the introduction of the new terminology
and the translation of earlier results and problems into this new language (see [42],
Fig. 9. Hoffman–Soifer’s 6-colouring of the plane
Fig. 10.

170
Alexander Soifer
[43]). We let X6 denote the 6-realizable set of all positive numbers α for which there
exists a 6-colouring of the plane of type (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, α).The problem, which is still
open and extremely difﬁcult, is to ﬁnd X6.
We know from our above discussion that 1
√5 and √2 – 1 both lie in X6. As
shown in [42] and [43](see also [45]), these are extreme examples of the general
case, which includes a continuum of ‘working’ 6-colourings: for each α between
√2 −1 and 1/√5, there is a 6-colouring of type (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, α).
Theorem 5.1 X6 contains the closed interval [√2 −1, 1/√5].
Outline of proof Partly cover a unit square by a smaller square that cuts off the unit
square’s vertical and horizontal segments (say, of lengths x and y, respectively) and
forms with it an angle ω (see Fig. 11). These squares induce a tiling of the plane that
consists of congruent non-regular octagons and ‘small’ squares (see Fig. 12).
We now colour this tiling in six colours. Denote by F the unit of our construction,
bounded by a bold line and consisting of ﬁve octagons and four ‘small’ squares.
Use colours 1–5 for the octagons inside F and colour 6 for all ‘small’ squares, and
include in the colours of octagons and ‘small’ squares those parts of their boundaries
that are shown in bold in Fig. 13. Translates of F tile the plane and thus determine
the 6-colouring of the plane.
We now wish to select parameters to guarantee that each colour forbids a distance.
In fact, a stronger result was proved (see [42], [43]) – namely that, for each angle
ω between the small and the large squares in Fig. 11, there are uniquely determined
sizes of the two squares, and uniquely determined parameters x and y, for which the
constructed 6-colouring has type (1, 1, 1, 1, 1, α) for a uniquely determined α.
y
x
1
w
Fig. 11.

8 Geometric graphs
171
4
5
3
2
1
4
5
3
2
1
4
5
3
2
1
4
5
3
2
1
Fig. 12. Continuum of 6-colorings of the plane
Fig. 13.
Note that the ‘working’ solutions barely exist – they comprise something of a curve
in three-dimensional space of the angle ω and two linear variables x and y. We have
thus found a continuum of permissible values for α and a continuum of ‘working’
6-colourings of the plane.
We remark that the problem of ﬁnding the 6-realizable set X6 is closely related to
the problem of ﬁnding the chromatic number χ(E2) of the plane: ﬁnding X6 would
shed light on – if not solve – the latter problem, for if 1 is in X6 then χ(E2) ≤6, and
if 1 is not in X6 then χ(E2) = 7.
6. Special circumstances
In 1973 Woodall [50] attempted to prove a lower bound for the chromatic number of
the plane for the special case of ‘map-type colourings’ of the plane. However, in 1979

172
Alexander Soifer
Stephen Townsend constructed a counter-example that showed that one essential
idea of Woodall’s proof was incorrect. By that time Townsend had already proved
the same result, and his proof was much more elaborate than Woodall’s attempt.
For decades Townsend’s proof was unavailable until he produced a clear version
of it where the complete deﬁnition of the map-type colouring can also be found
(see [45]). The following result was thus conjectured by Woodall and proved by
Townsend.
Theorem 6.1 The chromatic number of the plane under map-type colouring is 6 or 7.
Woodall [50] also showed that this result implies another one worth mentioning.
Theorem 6.2 The chromatic number of the plane under colouring with closed
monochromatic sets is 6 or 7.
In 1993–94 three American undergraduate students, Nathanial Brown, Nathan
Dunﬁeld and Greg Perry, proved that a similar result is true for colouring with open
monochromatic sets (see [3], [4] and [5]).
Theorem 6.3 The chromatic number of the plane under colouring with open
monochromatic sets is 6 or 7.
Meanwhile, Falconer [16], while still a graduate student, proved the following
important result, that the measurable chromatic number χm(E2) of the plane is 5,
6 or 7.
Theorem 6.4 If E2 =
4
i=1
Ai is a covering of the Euclidean plane E2 by four disjoint
measurable sets, then one of the sets Ai realizes distance 1.
Recently, Falconer wrote a more detailed and self-contained exposition (see [45]).
Theorem 6.4 implies that if a 4-colouring of the plane forbids monochromatic
distance 1, then one of the classes will not be ‘nice’ (it will be non-measurable). There
is a supplementary result by Thomassen [49], who proved that if the colour classes
are sufﬁciently ‘nice’ and forbid monochromatic distance 1, then seven colours are
needed.
7. Space explorations
Around 1961 Erd˝os generalized the problem of ﬁnding the chromatic number of the
plane to n-dimensional Euclidean space En. He was interested both in asymptotic
behaviour as n increases, and in exact values of the chromatic number χ(En) for
small n (especially n = 2 and 3).
In 1970 Raiskii [37] proved that χ(En) ≥n + 2, for all n > 1; thus, for n = 3 we
have χ(E3) ≥5. This lower bound for E3 lasted until 2000, when Oren Nechushtan

8 Geometric graphs
173
proved that χ(E3) ≥6 (see [30]). For upper bounds Coulson [9], [10] proved that
χ(E3) ≤15, by using a face-centred cubic lattice (see Conway and Sloane [8] for
more on cubic lattices). Coulson informally conjectured that his upper bound of 15 is
best possible for lattice-based colouring. For higher dimensions, Cantwell [6] proved
in 1996 that χ(E4) ≥7 and χ(E5) ≥9; these remain the best results known. Then,
in 2008, Josef Cibulka [7] proved that χ(E6) ≥11.
Many years ago, Erd˝os conjectured that the chromatic number χ(En) increases
exponentially with n. This conjecture was settled in the afﬁrmative by two results,
an exponential upper bound, found in 1972 by Larman and Rogers [26], and an
exponential lower bound obtained in 1981 by Frankl and Wilson [18]:
for all n, (1 + o(1))1.2n ≤χ(En) ≤(3 + o(1))n.
Asymptotically, Larman and Rogers’s upper bound remains the best possible today.
In 2000 Frankl and Wilson’s asymptotic lower bound was improved by Raigorodskii
[36] to (1.239. . . + o(1))n. It would be desirable to narrow the gap between these
bounds.
The polychromatic number χp(E2) also generalizes to higher dimensions. Raiskii
[37] was the ﬁrst to obtain a result, χp(En) ≥
n + 2, for all n > 1. Larman and
Rogers’s upper bound implies that χp(En) ≤(3 + o(1))n. They conjectured that
χp(En) grows exponentially with n, and this was proved by Frankl and Wilson [18],
who showed that (1 + o(1))1.2n ≤χp(En).
8. Rational spaces
Another approach to the chromatic number of the Euclidean plane E2 is to use
Cartesian coordinates. As usual, E2 is the set of all ordered pairs (x, y) with real
coordinates x and y, and the distance between two points is deﬁned in the usual
Euclidean way.
By de Bruijn and Erd˝os’s Theorem 3.1 it sufﬁces to deal with ﬁnite subsets of E2,
and so we can restrict the coordinates to some subset C of E. The problem is: which
subset should we choose?
Problem Find a countable subset C of the set of real numbers E for which the
chromatic number χ(C2) equals that of the plane.
The set Q of all rational numbers does not work, as shown by Woodall [50] in
1973.
Theorem 8.1 χ(Q2) = 2.
Proof
We need to colour the points of the rational plane Q2 – that is, the set of
ordered pairs (r1, r2), where r1 and r2 are rational numbers. We ﬁrst partition Q2 into
disjoint classes by putting two pairs (r1, r2), and (q1, q2) into the same class if and

174
Alexander Soifer
only if r1 −q1 and r2 −q2 both have odd denominators when written in their lowest
terms.
This partition of Q2 into subsets has an important property: if the distance between
two points of Q2 is 1, then both points belong to the same subset of the partition.
Indeed, let the distance between (r1, r2), and (q1, q2) be equal to 1. Then
(r1 −q1)2 + (r2 −q2)2 = 1.
Let r1 −q1 = a/b and r2 −q2 = c/d be these differences, written in their lowest
terms. Then
(a/b)2 + (c/d)2 = 1 – that is, a2d2 + b2c2 = b2d2.
Thus b and d must both be odd and so, by our deﬁnition above, (r1, r2) and (q1, q2)
must belong to the same class.
Since any class of our partition can be obtained from any other class by a
translation, it sufﬁces to colour just one class and extend the colouring to the whole
of Q2 by translations. Let us colour the class that contains the point (0, 0). This class
consists of the points (r1, r2), where (in their lowest terms) the denominators of r1
and r2 are both odd. We colour red the points of the form (o/o, o/o) and (e/o, e/o),
and colour blue the points of the form (o/o, e/o) and (e/o, o/o), where o stands for
an odd number and e for an even number. In this colouring, two points of the same
colour cannot be at distance 1 apart.
■
In 1975 there appeared a ‘legendary unpublished manuscript’, as P. D. Johnson,
Jr. referred to a manuscript by Miro Benda and Micha Perles. This admired and
widely circulated manuscript was called Colorings of Metric Spaces; Johnson tells its
story in Geombinatorics, where in January 2000 the Benda–Perles paper was ﬁnally
published [2]. Their results include the following.
Theorem 8.2 χ(Q3) = 2 and χ(Q4) = 4.
Benda and Perles [2] then posed some important open problems.
Problem Find χ(Q5) and, in general, χ(Qn).
Problem Find the chromatic number of Q(√2)2 and, in general, of any algebraic
extension of Q2.
This direction was developed by P. D. Johnson, Jr., Joseph Zaks, Klaus Fischer,
Kiran B. Chilakamarri, Michael Reid, Douglas Jungreis, David Witte and Timothy
Chow. In 2006 Johnson [25] published in Geombinatorics ‘A tentative history and
compendium’ of this direction of inquiry.
More recently Matthias Mann [27] proved that χ(Q5) ≥7. This jump from
χ(Q4) = 4 explains the difﬁculty of ﬁnding χ(Q5), whose exact value is still

8 Geometric graphs
175
unknown. Mann [28] then obtained further lower bounds: χ(Q6) ≥10, χ(Q7) ≥13
and χ(Q8) ≥16. In 2008 Cibulka [7] obtained new lower bounds for these chromatic
numbers, improving some of Mann’s results: χ(Q5) ≥8 and χ(Q7) ≥15.
9. One odd graph
In 1994 Moshe Rosenfeld [38] deﬁned the odd-distance graph Eodd to be the graph
with vertex-set E2 in which two vertices are adjacent whenever the distance between
them is an odd integer. He showed that Eodd does not have a subgraph K4, and
asked whether the chromatic number of Eodd is ﬁnite. In fact, while the problem
was new, the absence of K4-subgraphs was not, following from the following much
more general result of Graham, Rothschild and Straus [21].
Theorem 9.1 In En there exist n + 2 points, the distance between any two of which
is an odd integer if and only if n ≡14(mod 16).
In the necessary part of the proof, the authors used an old result about determinants
by Arthur Cayley. The main problem of this section remains wide open.
Problem Find χ(Eodd).
We do not even know whether χ(Eodd) is ﬁnite. In 2009 Ardal, Manuch, Rosenfeld,
Shelah and Stacho [1] improved the lower bound to χ(Eodd) ≥5.
We denote the measurable chromatic number of the odd-distance graph by
χm(Eodd). In 1986 Falconer and Marstrand [17] proved that plane sets with positive
density at inﬁnity contain all large distances. This implies that χm(Eodd) ≥ℵ0. In
2009 the MIT undergraduate Jacob Steinhardt [48] found an alternative proof of this
result using tools of spectral graph theory, which may be beneﬁcial in solving other
colouring problems.
10. Inﬂuence of set theory axioms
In this section, we need some ideas from set theory. We denote the standard Zermelo–
Fraenkel choice system of axioms for set theory by ZFC, the countable axiom of
choice by ACℵ0 and the principle of dependent choices by DC. We will use one
further axiom, LM: every set of real numbers is Lebesgue measurable.
Our ﬁrst task is to extend the deﬁnition of the chromatic number of a graph.
Without the axiom of choice, the chromatic number of a graph may not exist. When
allowing a system of axioms for set theory to exclude the axiom of choice, we need
to create a much broader deﬁnition of the chromatic number than the usual one, if we
want it to exist. In fact, instead of the chromatic number we ought to talk about the
set of chromatic cardinalities. There are several meaningful ways to deﬁne this. Here
is one that I chose in [45].

176
Alexander Soifer
Let G be a graph and let A be a system of axioms for set theory. The set of chromatic
cardinalities χA(G) of G is the set of all cardinal numbers τ ≤|V(G)| for which there
is a proper colouring of the vertices of G in τ colours, and τ is minimum with respect
to this property. As can be seen, the set of chromatic cardinalities need not have just
one element as was the case with A = ZFC. It can also be empty. The advantage of
this deﬁnition is its simplicity. Best of all, we can use inequalities on sets of chromatic
cardinalities as follows.
Let τ be a cardinal number. The inequality χA(G) > τ means that σ > τ for every
σ ∈χA(G); the inequalities <, ≤and ≥are deﬁned analogously. We also agree that
the empty set is greater than or equal to any other set of cardinal numbers. Finally, if τ
is a cardinal number and χA(G) = {τ} is a one-element set of chromatic cardinalities
(as is the case with the chromatic number when A = ZFC), then we will simplify
our notation by omitting parentheses and writing χA(G) = τ.
An inﬁnite cardinal ℵα is regular if cf ωα = ωα, and κ is a strong limit cardinal
if, for every cardinal λ, λ < κ implies that 2λ < κ. A cardinal κ is inaccessible
if κ > ℵ0 and κ is regular and a strong limit cardinal. Assuming the existence of
an inaccessible cardinal, and using Paul Cohen’s forcing, Solovay [47] constructed
in 1964 (and published in 1970) a model that proved a remarkable theorem. In his
honour the author [45] deﬁned the Zermelo–Fraenkel–Solovay system of axioms ZFS
for set theory by
ZFS = ZF + ACℵ0 + LM and ZFS+ = ZF + DC + LM.
Solovay’s theorem can now be formulated very concisely.
Theorem 10.1 ZFS+ is consistent.
Shelah and Soifer [39] constructed the following example. Deﬁne a graph G as
follows: the vertex-set is the set of real numbers, and the set of edges is {(s, t) : s−t−
√2 ∈Q}. They then proved that, for this graph, χZFC(G) = 2, while χZFS(G) > ℵ0.
Similar examples with the plane E2 and (in general) En as the vertex-set were
constructed in [46] and [44], respectively. These examples illuminate the inﬂuence
of the system of axioms for set theory on combinatorial results. They also suggest that
the chromatic number of En may not exist ‘in the absolute’ (that is, in ZF), but may
depend upon the system of axioms chosen for set theory. These examples naturally
prompt the following open problem.
Problem For which values of n is the chromatic number χ(En) uniquely deﬁned ‘in
the absolute’ – that is, in ZF– regardless of the addition of the axiom of choice or its
relative?
An important example came from the Australian student Michael Payne [32], who
started with the unit-distance graph G1 with vertex-set Q2, where two vertices are
adjacent if and only if they are at distance 1 apart. He then showed that the desired

8 Geometric graphs
177
unit-distance graph G on the vertex-set E2 is obtained by tiling the plane by translates
of G1−that is, its edge-set is {(p1, p2) : p1, p2 ∈E2, p1 – p2 ∈Q2 and |p1 −p2| =
1}, and proved that χZFC(G) = 2 and χZFS(G) = 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7.
Payne proved ﬁrst that any measurable set S of positive Lebesgue measure contains
the endpoints of a path of length 3 in G; of course, this ruled out a 2-colouring
of S. Payne continued: ‘We can then proceed in a similar fashion to Shelah and
Soifer’s proof’[39]. In 2009 he constructed a new class of unit distance graphs on
the vertex-set En whose chromatic number depends upon the system of axioms for
set theory [33].
11. Predicting the future
In 2003 Shelah and Soifer [39] obtained the following surprising result.
Theorem 11.1 Assume that any ﬁnite unit-distance plane graph has chromatic
number not exceeding 4. Then χZFC(E2) = 4, but χZFS+(E2) ≥5.
Can we obtain any results unconditionally? Yes, we can (see [45]), but not yet in
ZFC.
Theorem 11.2 χZFS+(E2) ≥5.
We conclude with the author’s conjectures [45] of the expected value of the
chromatic number of the plane, and more generally of En, in ZFC.
Conjecture
χ(E2) = 4 or 7.
If the chromatic number of the plane were 4, then Theorem 11.1 would imply
that the chromatic number of the plane does not exist in absolute, but depends upon
the choice of the system of axioms for set theory. However, if I were limited to
conjecturing a single value for the chromatic number of the plane, I would choose
the value 7.
If the last conjecture is true, then a unit-distance 7-chromatic ﬁnite graph must
exist in the plane. In 1998 Pritikin [35] published a lower bound for the order of such
a graph.
Theorem 11.3 Any unit-distance 7-chromatic graph G has at least 6198 vertices.
In fact, the order of the smallest such graph may have to be much larger.
For 3-dimensional space the author [45] conjectured that χ(E3) = 15. My main
conjecture is as follows.
Main conjecture
For any positive integer n > 1, χ(En) = 2n+1 −1.

178
Alexander Soifer
To paraphrase Paul Erd˝os’s words about some of his conjectures, we can say that this
conjecture is likely to withstand centuries, but we shall see!
Acknowledgement
This chapter was written in 2013 and celebrates the centenary of
the birth of Paul Erd˝os.
References
1. H. Ardal, J. Manuch, M. Rosenfeld, S. Shelah and L. Stacho, The odd-distance plane
graph, Discrete Comput. Geom. 42 (2009), 132–141.
2. M. Benda and M. Perles, Colorings of metric spaces, Geombinatorics IX (3) (2000),
113–126.
3. N. Brown, N. Dunﬁeld and G. Perry, Colorings of the plane I, Geombinatorics III (2)
(1993), 24–31.
4. N. Brown, N. Dunﬁeld and G. Perry, Colorings of the plane II, Geombinatorics III (3)
(1993), 64–74.
5. N. Brown, N. Dunﬁeld and G. Perry, Colorings of the plane III, Geombinatorics III (4)
(1993), 110–114.
6. K. Cantwell, All regular polytopes are Ramsey, J. Combin. Theory (A) 114 (2007),
555–562.
7. J. Cibulka, On the chromatic number of real and rational spaces, Geombinatorics XVIII
(2) (2008), 53–65.
8. J. H. Conway and N. J. A. Sloane, Sphere Packings, Lattices and Groups, 3rd edn.,
Springer-Verlag, 1999.
9. D. Coulson, A 15-colouring of 3-space omitting distance one, Discrete Math. 256 (2002),
83–90.
10. D. Coulson, Tilings and colourings of 3-space, Geombinatorics XII (3) (2003),
102–116.
11. N. G. de Bruijn and P. Erd˝os, A color problem for inﬁnite graphs and a problem in the
theory of relations, Indag. Math. 13 (1951), 369–373.
12. P. Erd˝os, Problem (p. 681); Unsolved problems, Proceedings of the Fifth British Combina-
torial Conference 1975, University of Aberdeen, July 1975 (eds. C. St.J. A. Nash-Williams
and J. Sheehan), Congr. Numer. XV, Utilitas Mathematica, 1976.
13. P. Erd˝os, Combinatorial problems in geometry and number theory, Relations between
combinatorics and other parts of mathematics, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math. (Ohio State
Univ., 1978), Proc. Sympos. Pure Math. XXXIV, Amer. Math. Soc. (1979), 149–162.
14. P. Erd˝os, Some combinatorial problems in geometry, Geom. & Diff. Geom. (Proc. Haifa,
1979), Lecture Notes in Math. 792, Springer (1980), 46–53.
15. P. Erd˝os, Some new problems and results in graph theory and other branches of
combinatorial mathematics, Combinatorics and Graph Theory (Proc. Symp. Calcutta
1980), Lecture Notes in Math. 885, Springer (1981), 9–17.
16. K. J. Falconer, The realization of distances in measurable subsets covering Rn, J. Combin.
Theory (A) 31 (1981), 187–189.
17. K. J. Falconer, and J. M. Marstrand, Plane sets with positive density at inﬁnity contain all
large distances, Bull. London Math. Soc. 18 (1986), 471–474.
18. P. Frankl and R. M. Wilson, Intersection theorems with geometrical consequences,
Combinatorica 1 (1981), 357–368.
19. R. L. Graham, Some of my favourite problems in Ramsey theory, Proceedings of the
‘Integers Conference 2005’ in Celebration of the 70th Birthday of Ronald Graham,

8 Geometric graphs
179
Carrolton, Georgia, USA, 2005 (eds. B. Landman et al.), Walter de Gruyter (2007),
229–236.
20. R. L. Graham, Old and new problems and results in Ramsey theory, Horizons of
Combinatorics (Conference and EMS Summer School, Hungary, 2006) (eds. E. Gy˝ori,
G. Katona and L. Lov´asz), Bolyai Society Mathematical Studies (2008), 105–118.
21. R. L. Graham, B. L. Rothschild and E. G. Straus, Are there n + 2 points in En with odd
integral distances?, Amer. Math. Monthly 81 (1974), 21–25.
22. R. Hochberg and P. O’Donnell, Some 4-chromatic unit-distance graphs without small
cycles, Geombinatorics V(4) (1996), 137–141.
23. I. Hoffman and A. Soifer, Almost chromatic number of the plane, Geombinatorics III (2)
(1993), 38–40.
24. I. Hoffman and A. Soifer, Another six-colouring of the plane, Discrete Math. 150 (1996),
427–429.
25. P. D. Johnson, Jr., Coloring the rational points to forbid the distance one – A tentative
history and compendium, Geombinatorics XVI (1) (2006), 209–218.
26. D. G. Larman and C. A. Rogers, The realization of distances within sets in Euclidean
space, Mathematika 19 (1972), 1–24.
27. M. Mann, A new bound for the chromatic number of the rational ﬁve-space, Geombina-
torics XI (2) (2001), 49–53.
28. M. Mann, Hunting unit-distance graphs in rational n-spaces, Geombinatorics XIII (2)
(2003), 86–97.
29. L. Moser and W. Moser, Solution to problem 10, Canad. Math. Bull. 4 (1961), 187–189.
30. O. Nechushtan, On the space chromatic number, Discrete Math. 256 (2002), 499–507.
31. P. O’Donnell, High Girth Unit-distance Graphs, Ph.D. thesis, Rutgers University, 1999.
32. M. S. Payne, A unit distance graph with ambiguous chromatic number, arXiv:
0707.1177v1 [math.CO], 9 July 2007.
33. M. S. Payne, Unit distance graphs with ambiguous chromatic number, Electronic J.
Combin. 16 (2009).
34. Materialy Konferenzii ‘Poisk-97’, Moscow, 1997 (in Russian).
35. D. Pritikin, All unit-distance graphs of order 6197 are 6-colourable, J. Combin. Theory
(B) (1998),159–163.
36. A. M. Raigorodskii, On the chromatic number of a space, Russian Math. Surveys 55
(2000), 351–352.
37. D. E. Raiskii, Realizing of all distances in a decomposition of the space Rn into n + 1
parts, Mat. Zametki 7 (1970), 319–323 (in Russian); English transl., Math. Notes 7 (1970),
194–196.
38. M. Rosenfeld, Odd integral distances among points in the plane, Geombinatorics V (4)
(1996), 156–159.
39. S. Shelah and A. Soifer, Axiom of choice and chromatic number of the plane, J. Combin.
Theory (A) 103 (2003), 387–391.
40. A. Soifer, Relatives of chromatic number of the plane I, Geombinatorics I (4) (1992),
13–15.
41. A. Soifer, A six-colouring of the plane, J. Combin. Theory (A) 61 (1992), 292–294.
42. A. Soifer, Six-realizable set X6, Geombinatorics III (4) (1994), 140–145.
43. A. Soifer, An inﬁnite class of 6-colorings of the plane, Congr. Numer. 101 (1994), 83–86.
44. A. Soifer, Axiom of choice and chromatic number of Rn, J. Combin. Theory (A) 110
(2005), 169–173.
45. A. Soifer, The Mathematical Coloring Book: Mathematics of Coloring and the Colorful
Life of its Creators, Springer, 2009.
46. A. Soifer and S. Shelah, Axiom of choice and chromatic number: an example on the plane,
J. Combin. Theory (A) 105 (2004), 359–364.

180
Alexander Soifer
47. R. M. Solovay, A model of set theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable,
Ann. of Math. 92 (1970), 1–56.
48. J. Steinhardt, On coloring the odd-distance graph, Electronic J. Combin. 16 (12)
(2009), 1–7.
49. C. Thomassen, On the Nelson unit distance coloring problem, Amer. Math. Monthly 106
(1999), 850–853
50. D. R. Woodall, Distances realized by sets covering the plane, J. Combin. Theory (A) 14
(1973), 187–200.
51. N. C. Wormald, A 4-chromatic graph with a special plane drawing, J. Austral. Math. Soc.
(A) 28 (1979), 1–8.

9
Integer ﬂows and orientations
HONGJIAN LAI, RONG LUO and CUN-QUAN ZHANG
1. Introduction
2. Basic properties
3. 4-ﬂows
4. 3-ﬂows
5. 5-ﬂows
6. Bounded orientations and circular ﬂows
7. Modulo orientations and (2 + 1/t)-ﬂows
8. Contractible conﬁgurations
9. Related problems
References
The theory of integer ﬂows was introduced by Tutte as a generalization of map-
colouring problems. This chapter is a brief survey of integer ﬂows, including
their extensions: circular ﬂows, modulo orientations, group connectivity, and
an update of recent progress on Tutte’s ﬂow conjectures.
1. Introduction
The concept of an integer ﬂow was introduced by Tutte [55], [56] as a generalization
of map-colouring problems (see Theorem 1.1). This chapter is a brief survey of
integer ﬂow theory; for further study in this area, see Zhang [63].
Let G = (V, E) be a graph. Given an orientation D of E(G), we denote the resulting
directed graph by D(G), and for each vertex v ∈V(G), let E+(v) and E−(v) be the
sets of arcs of D(G) with their tails and heads (respectively) at v.
Let G be a graph, let D be an orientation of G, let  be an abelian group (an additive
group with 0 as the identity) and let f : E(G) → be a mapping. Then the ordered
pair (D, f) is called a ﬂow (or group -ﬂow) of G if

e∈E+(v)
f(e) =

e∈E−(v)
f(e),

182
Hongjian Lai, Rong Luo and Cun-Quan Zhang
t
t
t
t

6
?












@
@
@
@
@@
@
@
@
@
@
R
1
1
1
3
2
2
Fig. 1. A nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow of the complete graph K4.
for each vertex v ∈V(G). In this chapter, we are interested in ﬁnite abelian groups,
inﬁnite groups Z (the set of integers), Q (the set of rational numbers), R (the set of
real numbers) and Zk (the cyclic group of order k).
Let (D, f) be a -ﬂow of a graph G and let k be an integer. Then (D, f) is called
an integer ﬂow if  = Z, and an integer ﬂow is a k-ﬂow if |f(e)| < k for each edge
e ∈E(G). (D, f) is a mod-k-ﬂow if f : E(G) →Z is such that

e∈E+(v)
f(e) ≡

e∈E−(v)
f(e)(mod k),
for each v ∈V(G) – that is, (D, f) is a group Zk-ﬂow.
The support supp ( f) of a -ﬂow (D, f) is the set of all edges of G with f(e) ̸= 0.
A ﬂow (D, f) is a nowhere-zero ﬂow if supp ( f) = E(G). An example of a nowhere-
zero 4-ﬂow is given in Fig. 1.
Flow-colouring duality
The following theorem of Tutte [56] indicates the important relation between map
colouring and integer ﬂows, and motivates the study of the theory of integer ﬂows.
Theorem 1.1 Let G be a planar bridgeless graph. Then G is k-face-colourable if and
only if G admits a nowhere-zero k-ﬂow.
Note that the ‘only if’ part of Theorem 1.1 holds not only for planar graphs, but
also for all graphs embeddable on some orientable surface. Tutte [56] also proved the
following result.
Theorem 1.2 Let G be a bridgeless graph with a closed 2-cell embedding on some
orientable surface. If G is k-face-colourable, then G admits a nowhere-zero k-ﬂow.
Tutte’s conjectures
The following conjectures are the most famous in the theory of integer ﬂows. They
were proposed by Tutte ([56], [59] and Problem 48 in [7]).

9 Integer ﬂows and orientations
183
Conjecture A (5-ﬂow conjecture) Every bridgeless graph admits a nowhere-zero
5-ﬂow.
Conjecture B (4-ﬂow conjecture) Every bridgeless graph containing no subdivision
of the Petersen graph admits a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow.
Conjecture C (3-ﬂow conjecture) Every bridgeless graph containing no 3-edge-cut
admits a nowhere-zero 3-ﬂow.
These well-known conjectures are motivated by the following map-colouring
theorems of Heawood [23], Appel and Haken [2], [3] and Gr¨otzsch [21].
Theorem 1.3 (The ﬁve-colour theorem) Every bridgeless planar graph is 5-face-
colourable.
Theorem 1.4 (The four-colour theorem) Every bridgeless planar graph is 4-face
colourable.
Theorem 1.5 (The three-colour theorem) Every bridgeless planar graph without a
3-edge-cut is 3-face colourable.
Although six decades have passed and some signiﬁcant and important approaches
have been made toward these conjectures, they remain essentially open.
2. Basic properties
In this section, we introduce some basic deﬁnitions and properties concerning integer
ﬂows.
Equivalence of k-ﬂows
The following fundamental theorem is due to Tutte [55], [56].
Theorem 2.1 Let G be a graph, let k be a positive integer, and let  be an abelian
group of order k. Then the following statements are equivalent:
(1) G admits a nowhere-zero integer k-ﬂow
(2) G admits a nowhere-zero mod-k-ﬂow
(3) G admits a nowhere-zero group -ﬂow.
From Theorem 2.1, all nowhere-zero ﬂows are equivalent, so whenever we say that
‘a graph G admits a nowhere-zero k-ﬂow’, it always means that G admits a nowhere-
zero integer k-ﬂow, a nowhere-zero group -ﬂow with || = k, or a nowhere-zero
mod-k-ﬂow. Note that each deﬁnition of a nowhere-zero ﬂow has its own special
advantages, depending on the topic being studied.
The equivalence of (1) and (2) is strengthened by a useful technical result
(Theorem 2.3). The equivalence of (2) and (3) was originally proved by Tutte by
using the ﬂow polynomial technique.

184
Hongjian Lai, Rong Luo and Cun-Quan Zhang
From the deﬁnition of an integer ﬂow, the following observations of Tutte [56],
[57] are straightforward.
Theorem 2.2 If a graph G admits a nowhere-zero integer k-ﬂow, then G admits a
nowhere-zero integer h-ﬂow, for each h ≥k.
A graph G admits a nowhere-zero 2-ﬂow if and only if the degree of every vertex is
even.
Mod-k-ﬂows
In Theorem 2.1, the proof of ‘(a) ⇒(b)’ is trivial, since a nowhere-zero integer
k-ﬂow is also a nowhere-zero mod-k-ﬂow. The proof of ‘(b) ⇒(a)’ follows from the
following stronger result (see [55]).
Theorem 2.3 If a graph G admits a mod-k-ﬂow (D, fa), then G admits an integer
k-ﬂow (D, fb) for which fa(e) ≡fb(e) (mod k) for each edge e ∈E(G).
Note that both ﬂows in Theorem 2.3 correspond to the same orientation D.
Products of ﬂows
The following result has been used in the proofs of some landmark theorems (see
Jaeger [26] and Seymour [47]).
Theorem 2.4 Let G be a graph and let k1 and k2 be integers. If G admits a k1-ﬂow
(D, f1) and a k2-ﬂow (D, f2), and if supp (f1) ∪supp (f2) = E(G), then (D, k2f1 + f2)
and (D, f1 + k1f2) are nowhere-zero (k1k2)-ﬂows of G.
This result can be generalized to an ‘if and only if’ result (see Zhang [63]).
Theorem 2.5 Let G be a graph and let k1 and k2 be integers. Then G admits a
nowhere-zero (k1k2)-ﬂow if and only if G admits a k1-ﬂow (D, f1) and a k2-ﬂow
(D, f2) with supp (f1) ∪supp (f2) = E(G).
Sums of ﬂows
Results on the sum of ﬂows have been obtained by Little, Tutte and Younger [40].
Theorem 2.6 For each non-negative integer k-ﬂow (D, f) of a graph G, G admits
k −1 non-negative 2-ﬂows (D, fr) (r = 1, 2, . . . , k −1) with f = k−1
r=1 fr.
A directed graph is even if the in-degree of each vertex equals its out-degree.
Since the support of a non-negative 2-ﬂow is a directed even subgraph with orien-
tation D, the following theorem on directed even subgraph covering is equivalent to
Theorem 2.6.

9 Integer ﬂows and orientations
185
Corollary 2.7 Let G be a graph and let D be an orientation of G. Then the graph
G admits a positive k-ﬂow (D, f) if and only if D(G) contains k −1 directed even
subgraphs such that each arc of D(G) appears in at least one of them.
3. 4-ﬂows
In this section we study properties, open problems, and some partial results related
to the following major open problem in ﬂow theory.
Recall Tutte’s 4-ﬂow conjecture (Conjecture B), that every bridgeless graph
containing no subdivision of the Petersen graph admits a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow, and
(from Theorem 1.4) that every bridgeless planar graph admits a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow.
It is well known that, for a cubic graph G, the graph G admits a nowhere-zero
4-ﬂow if and only if G is 3-edge-colourable. Tutte [60] also conjectured. that every
bridgeless cubic graph containing no subdivision of the Petersen graph admits a
nowhere-zero
4-ﬂow.
Jaeger [28] asked whether the latter conjecture is equivalent to Conjecture B. It
was eventually proved by Robertson, Sanders, Seymour and Thomas [52], [48], while
Conjecture B remains open.
Theorem 3.1 Every bridgeless cubic graph containing no subdivision of the Petersen
graph is 3-edge-colourable, and thus admits a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow.
The proof of this will consist of a series of papers (see [52]).
The following theorem for highly connected graphs was proved by Jaeger [26].
Theorem 3.2 Every 4-edge-connected graph admits a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow.
4. 3-ﬂows
Recall that a major open problem in integer ﬂow theory is Conjecture C (Tutte’s
3-ﬂow conjecture), which is a generalization of Gr¨otzsch’s 3-colouring theorem
(Theorem 1.5) for planar graphs.
The following result was observed by Tutte [55].
Theorem 4.1 Let G be a cubic graph. Then G admits a nowhere-zero 3-ﬂow if and
only if G is bipartite.
A weak version of Conjecture C was proposed by Jaeger [26], that there is an
integer h for which every h-edge-connected graph admits a nowhere-zero 3-ﬂow.
Some early partial results on this weak conjecture can be found in Lai and Zhang
[39] and Alon, Linial and Meshulam [1]. It was recently proved by Thomassen [54]
with h = 8. Thomassen’s theorem [54] was further improved by Lov´asz, Thomassen,
Wu and Zhang [41].

186
Hongjian Lai, Rong Luo and Cun-Quan Zhang
Theorem 4.2 Every 6-edge-connected graph admits a nowhere-zero 3-ﬂow.
For embedded graphs, we recall Gr¨otzsch’s theorem (Theorem 1.5) that every
4-edge-connected planar graph is 3-face colourable, and so admits a nowhere-zero
3-ﬂow. The following generalizations can be viewed as partial results for the 3-ﬂow
conjecture; they are due, respectively, to Gr¨unbaum [22], Steinberg and Younger [51]
and Thomassen [53].
Theorem 4.3 Every bridgeless planar graph containing at most three 3-edge-cuts is
3-face-colourable and so admits a nowhere-zero 3-ﬂow.
Theorem 4.4 Every 2-edge-connected graph with at most one 3-edge-cut that can
be embedded in the projective plane admits a nowhere-zero 3-ﬂow.
Theorem 4.5 Let G be a graph embedded in the torus such that all contractible
cycles are of length at least 5. Then G is 3-vertex-colourable.
Tutte’s 3-ﬂow conjecture was originally proposed for graphs with no 1-edge-cut
and no 3-edge-cut. It was pointed out in [26], [28] and [47] that no 2-edge-cut exists
in any smallest counter-example to some well-known ﬂow conjectures, including
Conjecture C.
A graph G is λo-odd edge-connected if every odd edge-cut of G has at least λo
edges. Theorem 4.2 has a stronger version for odd edge-connectivity, as proved by
Lov´asz, Thomassen, Wu and Zhang [41].
Theorem 4.6 Every 7-odd edge-connected graph admits a nowhere-zero 3-ﬂow.
For any smallest counter-example to Conjecture C, the following proposition was
obtained by applying a vertex-splitting lemma in [64].
Theorem 4.7 Any smallest counter-example to the 3-ﬂow conjecture is 5-regular and
5-odd edge-connected.
Kochol [32] also proved that it sufﬁces to prove the 3-ﬂow conjecture for 5-edge-
connected graphs.
Theorem 4.8 The following statements are equivalent.
• Every 4-edge-connected graph admits a nowhere-zero 3-ﬂow.
• Every 5-edge-connected graph admits a nowhere-zero 3-ﬂow.
Unlike k-ﬂows with k > 3, nowhere-zero 3-ﬂows can be viewed as a modulo
orientation problem. An orientation D of a graph G is called a modulo 3-orientation
if |E+(v)| ≡|E−(v)| (mod 3), for each v ∈V(G).
The following observation appeared in [62] and [51].
Theorem 4.9 A bridgeless graph G admits a nowhere-zero 3-ﬂow if and only if G
has a modulo 3-orientation D.
This observation is further generalized in Section 7.

9 Integer ﬂows and orientations
187
5. 5-ﬂows
The main topic of this section is the 5-ﬂow conjecture (Conjecture A) of Tutte [56].
When Tutte introduced the concept of an integer ﬂow, he ﬁrst conjectured that there
is an integer k for which every bridgeless graph admits a nowhere-zero k-ﬂow, and
pointed out that k ≥5, since the Petersen graph does not admit a nowhere-zero
4-ﬂow. This conjecture was proved independently by Jaeger [26] and Kilpatrick [30]
with k = 8 (the 8-ﬂow theorem). The best approach to it is currently the 6-ﬂow
theorem of Seymour [47].
Theorem 5.1 Every bridgeless graph admits a nowhere-zero 6-ﬂow.
The approaches in the proofs of the 8-ﬂow and 6-ﬂow theorems were different.
The 8-ﬂow theorem was proved by applying a theorem of Tutte and Nash-Williams
[58], [43] and showing the existence of three edge-disjoint spanning trees in 2G for
a 3-edge-connected graph G. The 6-ﬂow theorem was proved by showing that every
bridgeless graph admits two ﬂows (D, f1) and (D, f2), where one is a 2-ﬂow and the
other is a 3-ﬂow with supp(f1) ∪supp(f2) = E(G). The 5-ﬂow conjecture is still open.
For graphs embedded on some surface, the dual of vertex-colouring is the
ﬂow problem. Thus, Heawood’s colouring result (Theorem 1.3) implies the 5-ﬂow
conjecture for certain families of embedded graphs.
The following result of M¨oller, Carstens and Brinkmann [42] and Fouquet [18] is
related to the 5-colour theorem and the 5-ﬂow conjecture.
Theorem 5.2 Every bridgeless graph embeddable in an orientable surface of genus
g ≤2, or in a non-orientable surface of genus g ≤4, admits a nowhere-zero
5-ﬂow.
The 5-ﬂow conjecture has been proved for some special families of graphs. The
following result was proved by Jaeger [25].
Theorem 5.3 Let e be an edge of a graph G. If G admits a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow and
G −e is bridgeless, then G −e admits a nowhere-zero 5-ﬂow.
Let H be a spanning even subgraph of a graph G. The oddness of H is the number
of components of H containing an odd number of odd-degree vertices of G. The
oddness of G is the minimum of the oddnesses of all spanning even subgraphs of G.
It is straightforward to show that G admits a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow if and only if the
oddness of G is 0.
Special cases of such graphs G −e in Theorem 5.3 are graphs containing a
Hamiltonian path, and (in general) graphs of oddness at most 2. On the other hand,
Celmins [11] observed a similar result in the opposite direction.
Theorem 5.4 If a bridgeless graph G has an edge e for which G −e admits a
nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow, then G admits a nowhere-zero 5-ﬂow.
Both results have been further extended to the deletion of more than one edge by
Steffen [49], [50], under some conditions of cyclic edge-connectivity.

188
Hongjian Lai, Rong Luo and Cun-Quan Zhang
For vertex-deletions, Gerards and Seymour (personal communication, 1995)
proved the 5-ﬂow conjecture for apex graphs. (An apex graph is one in which at
least one vertex is adjacent to all the others.)
Theorem 5.5 Every apex graph admits a nowhere-zero 5-ﬂow.
By applying a lemma in [46], that every cubic graph with girth at least 6 must have
a Petersen minor, Kochol [31] further generalized the above theorem.
Theorem 5.6 Every Petersen minor-free cubic graph admits a nowhere-zero 5-ﬂow.
A smallest counter-example to the 5-ﬂow conjecture must be cubic and not 3-edge-
colourable. The following further result was proved by Kochol [34].
Theorem 5.7 A smallest counter-example G to the 5-ﬂow conjecture has girth at
least 11 and cyclic edge-connectivity at least 6.
The ﬁrst result was proved by using a computer-aided search, which extended the
girth results in some earlier articles.
Modulo 5-orientations
An 8-ﬂow is obtained as the product of three 2-ﬂows (see Jaeger [26]), while a 6-ﬂow
is obtained as the product of a 2-ﬂow and a 3-ﬂow (see Seymour [47]). But 8 and 6
are composite numbers, while 5 is a prime number. So what can we do for 5-ﬂows?
Certainly they cannot be the product of smaller ﬂows. Various approaches have been
proposed, such as orientable 5-even subgraph double covers (see Archdeacon [4] and
Jaeger [28]), modulo 5-orientations (see Jaeger [28]) and bipartizing matching (see
Fleischner [17]).
The modulo 5-orientation was proposed by Jaeger [28] as an approach to the 5-ﬂow
conjecture (see Section 7 for a detailed discussion on modulo orientation).
Jaeger proved [28] that the following conjecture implies the 5-ﬂow conjecture.
Conjecture D Every 9-edge-connected graph has a modulo 5-orientation.
A partial result concerning this conjecture is a result of Lov´asz, Thomassen, Wu
and Zhang [41].
Theorem 5.8 Every 12-edge-connected graph has a modulo 5-orientation.
6. Bounded orientations and circular ﬂows
Let {A, B} be a partition of the vertex-set V(G), and let D be an orientation of G. The
set of arcs of D(G) with tails in A and heads in B is denoted by [A, B]D, or simply by
[A, B] if no confusion arises.
The following is a revised version of a result by Hoffman (see [6]).

9 Integer ﬂows and orientations
189
Theorem 6.1 Let G be a bridgeless graph, let D be an orientation of G and let a and
b be two positive integers with a ≤b. Then the following statements are equivalent:
(a) a/b ≤|[A, B]D|/|[B, A]D| ≤b/a, for every edge-cut (A, B) of G;
(b) G admits a nowhere-zero integer ﬂow (D, f1) such that a ≤f1(e) ≤b for each
e ∈E(G);
(c) G admits a nowhere-zero real-valued ﬂow (D, f2) such that a ≤f2(e) ≤b for
each e ∈E(G).
Corollary 6.2 A graph G admits a nowhere-zero k-ﬂow if and only if G has an
orientation D for which
1
k −1 ≤|[A, B]D|
|[B, A]D| ≤k −1,
for every edge-cut (A, B) of G.
Let k and d be two integers with 0 < d ≤1
2k. An integer ﬂow (D, f) of a graph G
is a circular k/d-ﬂow if f : E(G) →{±d, ±(d+1), . . . , ±(k−d)}∪{0}. The concept
of a circular ﬂow, introduced by Goddyn, Tarsi and Zhang [20], is a generalization
of integer ﬂows and is a dual version of the circular colouring problem (see Zhu [65]
for a comprehensive survey of this area).
Theorem 6.3 Let G be a bridgeless graph, let D be an orientation of G and let
k, d ∈Z+ and q ∈Q+ be such that q = k/d ≥2. Then the following statements are
equivalent:
(a) G admits a positive circular k/d-ﬂow (D, f1);
(b) G admits a rational-valued ﬂow (D, f2) such that f2 : E(G) →[1, q −1];
(c)
q −1 = k −d
d
≥|[U, V(G) −U]D|
|[V(G) −U, U]D| ≥
d
k −d =
1
q −1,
for each non-empty proper subset U ⊂V(G).
An immediate corollary of Theorem 6.3, proved in [20], is the following result,
analogous to Theorem 2.2.
Theorem 6.4 Let G be a graph and let p ∈Q+. If G admits a nowhere-zero circular
p-ﬂow, then G admits a nowhere-zero circular q-ﬂow for every q ∈Q+ with q ≥p.
For a bridgeless graph G, the ﬂow index ϕ(G) is the smallest rational number ℓ
for which G admits a nowhere-zero circular ℓ-ﬂow. It is natural to ask, for any given
rational number ℓ, whether there is a graph G for which the ﬂow index ϕ(G) of the
graph is precisely ℓ. The following result of Pan and Zhu [44] answers this question.
Theorem 6.5 For every rational number ℓin the interval [2, 5], there is a graph G
for which ϕ(G) = ℓ.

190
Hongjian Lai, Rong Luo and Cun-Quan Zhang
Tutte’s Theorem 1.1 states the relation between integer ﬂows and face-colouring
for planar graphs. The following result of DeVos, Goddyn, Mohar, Vertigan and Zhu
[13] extends this theorem to locally planar graphs.
Theorem 6.6 For a given orientable surface  and positive number ε, there is a
function f(, ε) such that, for every graph G embedded on  with edge-width at
least f(, ε), if the dual graph G∗admits a nowhere-zero circular ℓ-ﬂow, then the
graph G is circular (ℓ+ ε)-vertex-colourable.
Together with Theorem 1.2, Theorem 6.6 provides a close relationship between
face-colouring and ﬂow index for ‘locally planar’ graphs (graphs with sufﬁciently
large edge-width).
7. Modulo orientations and (2 + 1/t)-ﬂows
As with 3-ﬂows and mod-3-orientations (Theorem 4.9), a circular (2 + 1/t)-ﬂow can
also be considered as a modulo (2t + 1)-orientation for each positive integer t.
Let k be an odd integer. An orientation D of a graph G is called a modulo
k-orientation if d+
D(v) ≡d−
D(v) (mod k), for every v ∈V(G). The following result is
due to Jaeger [27].
Theorem 7.1 Let G be a graph and let t be a positive integer. Then G has a modulo
(2t + 1)-orientation if and only if G admits a nowhere-zero circular (2 + 1/t)-ﬂow.
The following conjecture was proposed by Jaeger [27] (see also [28] and [63]).
Conjecture E Let G be a graph and let k (≥3) be an odd integer. If G is (2k −2)-
edge-connected, then G has a modulo k-orientation.
The 3-ﬂow conjecture (by Theorem 4.9) and Conjecture D are special cases of
Conjecture E (for k = 3 and 5).
A weak version of this conjecture, the (2 + ε)-ﬂow conjecture, was proposed
by Seymour (personal communication 1999) and Galluccio, Goddyn and Hell [19]
as an analogue to Jaeger’s weak-3-ﬂow conjecture [26]. It was proved recently by
Thomassen [54] and improved by Lov´asz, Thomassen, Wu and Zhang [41].
Theorem 7.2 Let G be a graph and let k = 2t +1 ≥3 be an odd integer. Then G has
a modulo k-orientation if G is (3k−3)-edge-connected, and so admits a nowhere-zero
circular (2 + 1/t)-ﬂow.
As we discussed in Section 4, odd edge-connectivity plays an important role for
ﬂows and modulo orientations. The following conjecture was proposed in [64] as a
reﬁnement of Conjecture E and Theorem 7.2 for (2 + 1/t)-ﬂows (modulo (2t + 1)-
orientations).
Conjecture F For each positive integer t, every graph with odd edge-connectivity at
least 4t + 1 admits a nowhere-zero circular (2 + 1/t)-ﬂow.

9 Integer ﬂows and orientations
191
A weak version [64] of Conjecture F has now been solved by Lov´asz, Thomassen,
Wu and Zhang [41].
Theorem 7.3 For each positive integer t, every (6t + 1)-odd edge-connected graph
admits a nowhere-zero circular (2 + 1/t)-ﬂow.
This result relaxes the edge-connectivity requirements in Theorem 7.2. Theorem 4.6
is a special case of this general result.
8. Contractible conﬁgurations
Contraction is one of the most useful and powerful operations in the inductive study
of graph theory, if the resulting graph preserves a given graph property. In this section,
we introduce contractible conﬁgurations and collapsible graphs; contractions of such
graphs preserve some properties, such as integer ﬂows.
Let P be a graph-theoretic property. A graph H is a contractible conﬁguration of
P if, for each supergraph G of H, G/H has property P if and only if G does.
Group connectivity
Group connectivity was introduced by Jaeger, Linial, Payan and Tarsi [29] as a
generalization of integer ﬂows. Let G be a graph, let  be an abelian group, and
let β : V(G) →. Then β is called a boundary if it has zero-sum – that is, if

v∈V(G) β(v) = 0. The graph G is -connected if, for each boundary β, there are an
orientation Dβ and a nowhere-zero weight fβ of E(G) such that

e∈E+
Dβ (v)
fβ(e) −

e∈E−
Dβ (v)
fβ(e) = β(v),
(1)
for each vertex v ∈V(G).
By the deﬁnition of group connectivity, we easily deduce the following result.
Theorem 8.1 If H is -connected, then H is a contractible conﬁguration for -ﬂow.
As for Tutte’s ﬂow conjectures, several open problems were proposed by Jaeger,
Linial, Payan and Tarsi [29].
Conjecture G
Every 5-edge connected graph is Z3-connected.
Every 3-edge connected graph is Z5-connected.
Note that the 5-edge-connectivity is sharp for the ﬁrst of these conjectures, since
some 4-edge-connected counter-examples were discovered in [29] and [37]. The
following theorem of Jaeger, Linial, Payan and Tarsi [29] gives some partial results.

192
Hongjian Lai, Rong Luo and Cun-Quan Zhang
Theorem 8.2
Every 3-edge-connected graph is -connected for every group  of order at least 6.
Every 4-edge-connected graph is -connected for every group  of order at least 4.
The ﬁrst part of Conjecture G was veriﬁed by Lai and Li [38] for planar graphs,
and by Lov´asz, Thomassen, Wu and Zhang [41] for 6-edge-connected graphs.
Short cycles
Analogous to the girth studies of small counter-examples to Tutte’s conjectures,
shorter cycles are -connected for larger groups . The following observation was
due to Jaeger, Linial, Payan and Tarsi [29].
Theorem 8.3 Every cycle of length at most r −1 is -connected for every abelian
group  of order at least r.
Note that a cycle C of length r is not -connected if || ≤r: one can easily see
that a constant boundary β = 1 is a ‘bad’ boundary – that is, there is no fβ satisfying
equation (1).
From Theorem 8.3, we know that a digon is a contractible conﬁguration for the
3-ﬂow problem, and we also see that a triangle is not a contractible conﬁguration for
3-ﬂows. However, some graphs with many triangles (for example, even wheels) can
be contractible conﬁgurations for the 3-ﬂow problem.
A graph G is triangularly connected if, for each pair of edges e and f of G, there are
triangles T1, T2, . . . , Tr such that e ∈E(T1), f ∈E(Tr), and E(Ti) ∩E(Ti+1) ̸= ∅,
for each i = 1, 2, . . . , r −1.
Let WF be the subfamily of triangularly connected graphs constructed (recur-
sively) as follows:
• the triangle is a member of WF
• odd wheels are members of WF
• for a pair of WF-graphs G1 and G2, let ei ∈E(Gi); a new WF-graph G is
constructed from G1 and G2 by merging e1 and e2 into a single edge e (see Fig. 2)
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
u
Fig. 2. A WF-graph.
e
G1
G2

9 Integer ﬂows and orientations
193
The following result of Fan, Lai, Xu, Zhang and Zhou [16] characterizes all
triangularly connected graphs that are Z3-connected.
Theorem 8.4 A triangularly connected graph is Z3-connected if and only if it is not
a member of WF.
This result yields 3-ﬂows for many families of dense graphs, such as locally
connected graphs [36], squares of graphs [15], [61], triangulations of embedded
graphs [5] and certain products of graphs [24].
A noticeable feature for 4-ﬂows or their contractible conﬁgurations is that,
although a 4-cycle is not Z4-connected, it is a contractible conﬁguration for 4-ﬂows.
Catlin [9] proved the following result.
Theorem 8.5 Let G be a graph and let C be a cycle of length 4. Then G admits
a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow if and only if G/C admits a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow – that is,
4-cycles are contractible conﬁgurations for the 4-ﬂow problem.
Collapsible graphs
‘Collapsible graphs’, introduced by Catlin [8], are also contractible conﬁgurations
for the 4-ﬂow problem, due to the close relationship between supereulerian graphs
and 4-ﬂows.
A graph H is collapsible if, for each X ⊆V(H) of even order, H has a connected
spanning subgraph HX for which X = O(HX), the set of all odd-degree vertices in HX.
The following result appeared in Lai [35].
Theorem 8.6 Collapsible graphs are -connected for every abelian group  of
order 4.
For more information on collapsible graphs, see Catlin’s survey [10] and its
supplement [12].
Group structure
For group-ﬂow problems, the structure of the group makes no difference to the
existence of nowhere-zero k-ﬂows (see Theorem 2.1) if k, the order of the group,
is ﬁxed. However, the situation seems different for group connectivity problems. For
example, it remains open as to whether Z4-connectivity is equivalent to (Z2 × Z2)-
connectivity. The following conjecture is due to Jaeger, Linial, Payan and Tarsi [29].
Conjecture H A graph G is Z4-connected if and only if it is (Z2 × Z2)-connected.
Modulo orientations with boundaries
Beyond group connectivity, which mainly targets integer-valued k-ﬂow problems for
k = 3, 4, · · · , the investigation of contractible conﬁgurations has been extended to
circular (2 + 1/t)-ﬂows with t ≥1 (see [64], [37] and [54]).

194
Hongjian Lai, Rong Luo and Cun-Quan Zhang
Let G be a graph and let k be an odd integer. A mapping β : V(G) →Zk is called
a Zk-boundary of G if 
v∈V(G) β(v) ≡0 (mod k). An orientation D of G is called a
β-orientation of G if d+
D(v) −d−
D(v) ≡β(v) (mod k).
Theorem 8.7 Let G be a graph and let k = 2t + 1 be an odd integer. Then the
following statements are equivalent:
• G has a β-orientation for each Zk-boundary β of G
• G is a contractible conﬁguration for modulo k-orientation
• G is a contractible conﬁguration for a circular (2 + 1/t)-ﬂow.
Just as short cycles are contractible conﬁgurations for integer ﬂows, so parallel
edges are contractible conﬁgurations for modulo orientation (see [64]).
Theorem 8.8 Let k ≥3 be an odd integer. Then the parallel edge (k −1)K2 is a
contractible conﬁguration for modulo k-orientation.
The following conjecture was proposed by Lai [37].
Conjecture I If G is a (2k −1)-edge-connected graph, k ≥3 is an odd integer and
β is a Zk-boundary of G, then G has a β-orientation.
A weak version [37] of Conjecture I was proved recently by Thomassen [54] and
further improved by Lov´asz, Thomassen, Wu and Zhang [41].
Theorem 8.9 Let G be a graph and let k ≥3 be an odd integer. If G is (3k−3)-edge-
connected, then G has a β-orientation for every Zk-boundary β, so every (3k −3)-
connected graph is a contractible conﬁguration for modulo k-orientation.
9. Related problems
Together with the 5-ﬂow conjecture, the cycle double cover conjecture and the
Berge–Fulkerson conjecture are major open problems for snark graphs (cubic graphs
with chromatic index 4). These conjectures have some important common properties:
they all hold for 3-edge-colourable cubic graphs, but remain open for snarks, and
investigations of one problem may be related to others, but little is known about how
closely they are related.
Cycle double cover
In this section, we present some relations between ﬂow problems and cycle double
cover problems. In [55], Tutte proved the following results for cubic graphs. They
were generalized and reformulated by Jaeger and Seymour.
Theorem 9.1 For a graph G, the following statements are equivalent:
• G admits a nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow

9 Integer ﬂows and orientations
195
• G has a 3-even subgraph double cover
• G has a 4-even subgraph double cover.
Preissmann [45] and Celmins [11] proposed the following conjecture.
Conjecture J Every bridgeless graph has a 5-even-subgraph double cover.
However, we have no knowledge yet about the relationship between 5-even-subgraph
double covers and 5-ﬂows.
An early result of Tutte [55] about orientable cycle double covers is closely related
to integer ﬂows.
Theorem 9.2 Let r = 3 or 4 and let G be a graph. Then G admits a nowhere-zero
r-ﬂow if and only if G has an orientable r-even-subgraph double cover.
A conjecture of Archdeacon [4] and Jaeger [28] analogous to Conjecture J is as
follows.
Conjecture K Every bridgeless graph has an orientable 5-even-subgraph double
cover.
It is evident that Conjecture K is stronger than Conjecture J, and they both seem
to have some relationship with the 5-ﬂow conjecture. We know that Conjecture K
implies the 5-ﬂow conjecture, but we do not know whether they are equivalent.
Flow double covering
The following conjecture was made by Zhu (unpublished notes, 2005).
Conjecture L Let G be a bridgeless graph with an orientation D, and let r = 2, 3, 4
or 5. The graph G admits a set of r-ﬂows (D, f1), (D, f2), . . . , (D, f7−r) for which
each edge is covered by the supports of precisely two of these r-ﬂows.
Note that, for r = 2, Conjecture L is equivalent to Conjecture J, and for r = 5,
Conjecture L is equivalent to the 5-ﬂow conjecture.
Cycle space minors
The following concepts and conjecture were introduced by Jaeger [28].
Let G1 and G2 be bridgeless graphs. We write G1 ≤C G2 if G1 has a subdivision
H and there is a bijection ϕ : E(H) →E(G2) such that, for each even subgraph C of
H, ϕ(C) is an even subgraph in G2.
In the following, the graph with one vertex and one loop is denoted by L, the graph
with two vertices and three parallel edges is denoted by 3K2, and the Petersen graph
is denoted by P10. Jaeger [28] observed that 3K2 ≤C G if and only if G admits a
nowhere-zero 4-ﬂow.

196
Hongjian Lai, Rong Luo and Cun-Quan Zhang
Let G be the set of all bridgeless graphs. A graph G is called a cycle space minor
if G is a minimal member of G under the order ≤C. The cycle space of a graph is
denoted by C(G) and the rank of C(G) is denoted by rC(G); the ranks of the cycle
spaces of L, 3K2 and P10 are 1, 2 and 6, respectively. It is not hard to prove that there
is no cycle space minor M with rC(M) = 3, 4 or 5. Is there any cycle space minor
with rank higher than 6? The following conjecture of Jaeger [28] implies many cycle
cover conjectures.
Conjecture M The only three cycle space minors are L, 3K2 and P10.
Conjecture M implies the cycle double cover conjecture, the 5-even subgraph
double cover conjecture and the Berge–Fulkerson conjecture. Since the mapping
ϕ preserves even subgraphs but not orientations, the cycle space minor problem is
mainly related only to 2t-ﬂows, where t is a positive integer.
The concept of cycle space minor was further extended by DeVos, Neˇsetˇril and
Raspaud [14], to the case where a generalized graph mapping preserves both ﬂow-
values and orientations.
References
1. N. Alon, N. Linial and R. Meshulam, Additive bases of vector spaces over prime ﬁelds,
J. Combin. Theory (A) 57 (1991), 203–210.
2. K. Appel and W. Haken, Every map is four colorable, Part I: Discharging, Illinois J. Math.
21 (1977), 429–490.
3. K. Appel, W. Haken and J. Koch, Every map is four colorable, Part II: Reducibility, Illinois
J. Math. 21 (1977), 491–567.
4. D. Archdeacon, Face coloring of embedded graphs, J. Graph Theory 8 (1984), 387–398.
5. J. Bar´at and C. Thomassen, Claw-decompositions and Tutte-orientations, J. Graph
Theory 52 (2006), 135–146.
6. C. Berge, Graphs and Hypergraphs (transl. E. Minieka), North-Holland, 1973.
7. J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty, Graph Theory with Applications, Macmillan, 1976.
8. P. A. Catlin, A reduction method to ﬁnd spanning eulerian subgraph, J. Graph Theory 12
(1988), 29–45.
9. P. A. Catlin, Double cycle covers and the Petersen graph, J. Graph Theory 13 (1989),
465–483.
10. P. A. Catlin, Supereulerian graphs: a survey, J. Graph Theory 16 (1992), 177–196.
11. U. A. Celmins, On Cubic Graphs that do not have an Edge 3-coloring, Ph.D. thesis,
University of Waterloo (1984).
12. Z.-H. Chen and H.-J. Lai, Reductions techniques for supereulerian graphs and related
topics – a survey, Combinatorics and Graph Theory 95, Vol. 1 (ed. Ku Tung-Hsin), World
Scientiﬁc (1995), 53–69.
13. M. DeVos, L. Goddyn, B. Mohar, D. Vertigan and X.-D. Zhu, Coloring-ﬂow duality of
embedded graphs, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 357 (2005), 3993–4016.
14. M. DeVos, J. Neˇsetˇril and A. Raspaud, On edge-maps whose inverse preserves ﬂows
and tensions, Graph Theory, Trends in Mathematics (eds. J. A. Bondy, J. Fonlupt, J.-L.
Fouquet, J.-C. Fournier and J. L. R. Alfonsin), Birkh¨auser (2006), 109–138.
15. M. DeVos, R. Xu and G. Yu, Nowhere-zero Z3-connectivity, Discrete Math. 306 (2006),
26–30.

9 Integer ﬂows and orientations
197
16. G.-H. Fan, H.-J. Lai, R. Xu, C.-Q. Zhang and C. Zhou, Nowhere-zero 3-ﬂows in
triangularly connected graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 98 (2008), 1325–1336.
17. H. Fleischner, Bipartizing matchings and Sabidussi’s compatibility conjecture, Discrete
Math. 244 (2002), 77–82.
18. J. L. Fouquet, Conjecture du 5-ﬂot pour les graphes presque planaires, S`eminaire de
Math´ematiques Discr`etes et Applications, Grenoble, 7 November 1985.
19. A. Galluccio, L. A. Goddyn and P. Hell, Large girth graphs avoiding a ﬁxed minor are
nearly bipartite, J. Combin. Theory (B) 83 (2001), 1–14.
20. L. A. Goddyn, M. Tarsi and C.-Q. Zhang, On (k, d)-colorings and fractional nowhere zero
ﬂows, J. Graph Theory 28 (1998), 155–161.
21. H. Gr¨otzsch, Ein Dreifarbensatz f¨ur dreikreisfreie Netze auf der Kugel, Wiss. Z.
der Martin-Luther-Universit¨at Halle-Wittenberg, Math.-Naturwissenschaftliche Reihe 8
(1958/59), 109–120.
22. B. Gr¨unbaum, Gr¨otzsch’s theorem on 3-colorings, Michigan Math. J. 10 (1963), 303–310.
23. P. J. Heawood, Map color theorem, Quart. J. Pure and Applied Math. 24 (1890),
332–338.
24. W. Imrich, I. Peterin, S. ˇSpacapan and C.-Q. Zhang, NZ-ﬂows in strong products of graphs,
J. Graph Theory 64 (2010), 267–276.
25. F. Jaeger, On interval hypergraphs and nowhere-zero ﬂow in graphs, Research Report of
Mathematics Application and Information, Universit´e Scientiﬁque et Medicale et Institut
National Polytechnique de Grenoble 126, 1978.
26. F. Jaeger, Flows and generalized coloring theorems in graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 26
(1979), 205–216.
27. F. Jaeger, On circular ﬂows in graphs, Finite and Inﬁnite Sets (Eger, 1981),
Colloq. Math. Soc. J´anos Bolyai 37, North-Holland (1984), 391–402.
28. F. Jaeger, Nowhere-zero ﬂow problems, Selected Topics in Graph Theory 3, (eds. L. W.
Beineke and R. J. Wilson), Academic Press (1988), 71–95.
29. F. Jaeger, N. Linial, C. Payan and M. Tarsi, Group connectivity of graphs – A nonho-
mogeneous analogue of nowhere-zero ﬂow properties, J. Combin. Theory (B) 56 (1992),
165–182.
30. P. A. Kilpatrick, Tutte’s First Colour-Cycle Conjecture, Ph.D. thesis, Cape Town, 1975.
31. M. Kochol, Cubic graphs without a Petersen minor have nowhere-zero 5-ﬂows, Acta Math.
Univ. Comenianae LXVIII (1999), 249–252.
32. M. Kochol, An equivalent version of the 3-ﬂow conjecture, Discrete Math. 83 (2001),
258–261.
33. M. Kochol, Reduction of the 5-ﬂow conjecture to cyclically 6-edge-connected snarks,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 90 (2004), 139–145.
34. M. Kochol, Smallest counterexample to the 5-ﬂow conjecture has girth at least eleven,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 100 (2010), 381–389.
35. H.-J. Lai, Extending a partial nowhere zero 4-ﬂow, J. Graph Theory 30 (1999), 277–288.
36. H.-J. Lai, Nowhere-zero 3-ﬂows in locally connected graphs. J. Graph Theory 42 (2003),
211–219.
37. H.-J. Lai, Mod (2p+1)-orientations and K1,2p+1-decompositions, SIAM J. Discrete
Math. 21 (2007), 844–850.
38. H.-J., Lai and X.-W. Li, Group Chromatic number of planar graphs with girth at least 4,
J. Graph Theory 52 (2006), 51–72.
39. H.-J. Lai and C.-Q. Zhang, Nowhere-zero 3-ﬂows of highly connected graphs, Discrete
Math. 110 (1992), 179–183.
40. C. H. C. Little, W. T. Tutte and D. H. Younger, A theorem on integer ﬂows, Ars
Combin. 26A (1988), 109–112.

198
Hongjian Lai, Rong Luo and Cun-Quan Zhang
41. L. M. Lov´asz, C. Thomassen, Y.-Z. Wu and C.-Q. Zhang, Nowhere-zero 3-ﬂows and
modulo k-orientations, J. Combin. Theory (B) 103 (2013), 587–598.
42. M. M¨oller, H. G. Carstens and G. Brinkmann, Nowhere-zero ﬂows in low genus graphs,
J. Graph Theory 12 (1988), 183–190.
43. C. St.J. A. Nash-Williams, Edge-disjoint spanning trees of ﬁnite graphs, J. London
Math. Soc. 36 (1961), 445–450.
44. Z. Pan and X.-D. Zhu, Construction of graphs with given circular ﬂow numbers. J. Graph
Theory 43 (2003), 304–318.
45. M. Preissmann, Sur les Colorations des Arˆetes des Graphes Cubiques, Th`ese de Doctorat
de 3eme, Universit´e de Grenoble, 1981.
46. N. Robertson, P. D. Seymour and R. Thomas, Girth six cubic graphs have Petersen minors,
arXiv:1405.0533.
47. P. D. Seymour, Nowhere-zero 6-ﬂows, J. Combin. Theory (B) 30 (1981), 130–135.
48. P.
D.
Seymour,
Tutte’s
three-edge-colouring
conjecture,
Proceedings
of
Graph
Theory@Georgia Tech, a conference honouring the 50th birthday of Robin Thomas, May
2012, https://smartech.gatech.edu/handle/1853/44224.
49. E. Steffen, Tutte’s 5-ﬂow conjecture for highly cyclically connected cubic graphs, Discrete
Math. 310 (2010), 385–389.
50. E. Steffen, Intersecting 1-factors and nowhere-zero 5-ﬂows, preprint, 2012.
51. R. Steinberg and D. H. Younger, Gr¨otzsch’s theorem for the projective plane, Ars
Combin. 28 (1989), 15–31.
52. R. Thomas, Generalizations of the four color theorem,
http://people.math.gatech.edu/∼thomas/FC/generalize.html.
53. C. Thomassen, Gr¨otzsch’s 3-color theorem and its counterparts for the torus and the
projective plane, J. Combin. Theory (B) 62 (1994), 268–279.
54. C. Thomassen, The weak 3-ﬂow conjecture and the weak circular ﬂow conjecture,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 102 (2012), 521–529.
55. W. T. Tutte, On the imbedding of linear graphs in surfaces, Proc. London Math. Soc. (2)
51 (1949), 474–483.
56. W. T. Tutte, A contribution on the theory of chromatic polynomial, Canad. J. Math. 6
(1954), 80–91.
57. W. T. Tutte, A class of Abelian groups, Canad. J. Math. 8 (1956), 13–28.
58. W. T. Tutte, On the problem of decompositing a graph into n connected factors, J. London
Math. Soc. 36 (1961), 221–230.
59. W. T. Tutte, On the algebraic theory of graph colourings, J. Combin. Theory 1 (1966),
15–50.
60. W. T. Tutte, A geometrical version of the four color problem, Combinatorial Mathematics
and its Applications (eds. R. C. Bose and T. A. Dowling), Univ. North Carolina Press,
1967.
61. R. Xu and C.-Q. Zhang, Nowhere-zero 3-ﬂows in squares of graphs, Electron. J. Combin.
10 (2003), R5.
62. D. H. Younger, Integer ﬂows, J. Graph Theory 7 (1983), 349–357.
63. C.-Q. Zhang, Integer Flows and Cycle Covers of Graphs, Marcel Dekker, 1997.
64. C.-Q. Zhang, Circular ﬂows of nearly eulerian graphs and vertex-splitting, J. Graph
Theory 40 (2002), 147–161.
65. X. D. Zhu, Recent developments in circular colouring of graphs, Topics in Discrete
Mathematics (eds. M. Klazar et al.), Springer (2006), 497–550.

10
Colouring random graphs
ROSS J. KANG and COLIN MCDIARMID
1. Introduction
2. Dense random graphs
3. Sparse random graphs
4. Random regular graphs
5. Random geometric graphs
6. Random planar graphs and related classes
7. Other colourings
References
Typically how many colours are required to colour a graph? In other words,
given a graph chosen randomly, what can we expect its chromatic number to
be? We survey the classic interpretation of this question, with the binomial or
Erd˝os–R´enyi random graph and the usual chromatic number. We also treat a
few variations, not only of the random graph model, but also of the chromatic
parameter.
1. Introduction
How many colours are typically necessary to colour a graph?
We survey a number of perspectives on this natural question, which is central
to random graph theory and to probabilistic and extremal combinatorics. It has
stimulated a vibrant area of research, with a rich history extending back through
more than half a century.
Erd˝os and R´enyi [36] asked a form of this question in a celebrated early paper on
random graphs in 1960. Let Gn,m be a graph chosen uniformly at random from the
set of graphs with vertex-set [n] = {1, 2, . . . , n} and m edges. In this probabilistic
model, we cannot rule out the possibility that Gn,m is, for example, the disjoint
union of one large clique and some isolated vertices, or perhaps one Tur´an graph
(a balanced complete multipartite graph) and some isolated vertices. The resulting

200
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
range is large: in the former situation the chromatic number could be about
√
2m,
while in the latter it could be 2 if m ≤n2/4. These outcomes are unlikely, however,
and we are interested in the most probable ones. To state the question properly, we
say that an event An (which here always describes a property of a random graph on
the vertex-set [n]) holds asymptotically almost surely (a.a.s.) if the probability that
An holds satisﬁes P(An) →1 as n →∞. Erd˝os and R´enyi asked the following
question.
Suppose that m ∼cn for some c ≥1
2. Is there a positive integer function f = fc(n)
for which χ(Gn,m) = f a.a.s., and if so how large is it?
They already noted that f = 3 if c = 1
2, which tells us that P(χ(Gn,n/2) = 3) →1
as n →∞; however, as we will see, handling larger ﬁxed values of c is a very
challenging task.
If, however, we instead consider Gn,m with the symmetric choice m = 1
2
n
2

, then
this is nearly the same as the basic model Gn,1/2, chosen uniformly at random from
graphs with vertex-set [n]. Equivalently, form Gn,1/2 by including as an edge each of
the
n
2

possible pairs from
[n]
2

independently at random with probability 1
2. Even
the following seemingly innocent question was open for decades in spite of serious
and sustained efforts, thus taking the pattern of other hard problems in combinatorics
and graph theory.
What is the a.a.s. ﬁrst-order approximate behaviour of the chromatic number of a
uniformly chosen graph with vertex-set [n]?
In other words, this question asks for an elementary function f(n) (if there is one)
that satisﬁes χ(Gn,1/2) ∼f(n) a.a.s. The typical value of the chromatic number is
an attractive concept in its own right, but there is also a strong interplay with other
research areas. This provides some contrasting viewpoints we now brieﬂy discuss.
Researchers in ‘deterministic’ (chromatic) graph theory frequently look to random
graphs for examples and counter-examples. In 1959 Erd˝os [34] elegantly proved the
existence of graphs with both girth and chromatic number arbitrarily large – a clean
constructive proof came somewhat later. Also, Erd˝os and Fajtlowicz [35] showed
that ‘almost all’ graphs are counter-examples to Haj´os’s conjecture, which, as an
over-strengthened form of Hadwiger’s conjecture, claimed that every k-chromatic
graph contains a subdivision of Kk. Both of these well-known applications of the
probabilistic method used lower bounds for the chromatic number of a random graph.
In theoretical computer science, determining the chromatic number of a given
graph is an archetypal NP-hard optimization problem. One might wonder whether
the situation is simpler in a probabilistic setting. The chromatic number of random
graphs (as well as the performance of algorithms that compute or approximate it)
may be viewed as a crude indication of ‘average-case’ computational behaviour.
Surprisingly, the study of the chromatic number of random graphs is equivalent to
an important model of spin glasses studied in statistical physics. It has been referred

10 Colouring random graphs
201
to variously as the ‘diluted mean-ﬁeld antiferromagnetic Potts model’ and the ‘zero-
temperature Curie–Weiss–Potts antiferromagnet’. Spin glass models are insightful
representations for the physical phenomenon of a phase transition, such as the change
between water and ice.
This topic thus provides common ground for combinatorialists, probabilists,
theoretical computer scientists and statistical physicists. Later we will see examples
where the mixing of ﬁelds in this area has been stimulating and fruitful.
A main focus of ours is to address the two questions in italics above, which
correspond to standard density regimes in the theory of classical Erd˝os–R´enyi
random graphs. The latter question, treated in Section 2, is representative of the
‘dense’ regime of random graphs, since the expected number of edges in Gn,1/2
is (n2). The former question (discussed in Section 3) belongs to the ‘sparse’
regime, since there are only a linear number of edges. Random graphs have very
interesting properties and go through a number of well-deﬁned phases according
to the graph’s density. For more on the theory and evolution of Erd˝os–R´enyi
random graphs, see the standard texts by Bollob´as [15] and Janson, Łuczak and
Ruci´nski [49].
The overarching question posed at the very beginning can be ascribed a broader
meaning. It is well separated into its constituent parts, one of which concerns ‘random
graphs’, the other of which concerns ‘colouring’. The second half of this chapter is
devoted to selectively developing these parts independently.
Random graph theory continues to develop rapidly and steadily, partly through
the inﬂuence of networks. Many probability spaces for graphs can be interpreted as
models for real networks such as the internet, protein–protein interaction, mathe-
matical collaboration and telecommunication. We treat a selection of random graph
models (apart from Erd˝os–R´enyi) for which the chromatic number is important.
Random regular graphs are discussed in Section 4; random geometric graphs, which
are considered a standard model for frequency allocation in ad hoc communication
networks, are treated in Section 5; and random graph models related to the colouring
of planar graphs are considered in Section 6.
It is more than evident from the chapters in this book that chromatic graph theory is
a broad and mature ﬁeld. Chromatic random graph theory is also well developed. In
the last section, Section 7, we present results on a few speciﬁc chromatic parameters,
concentrating for brevity on the dense Erd˝os–R´enyi random graph. First we discuss
strengthenings of the chromatic number, then we cover edge and total colourings,
and last we consider generalizations of the chromatic number.
We must mention at least two other major research areas that combine probability
with graph colouring. Although they are closely related to this topic, they are outside
the scope of this chapter. The generation of a uniformly random colouring of a graph,
often with the Markov chain Monte Carlo method, has been extensively studied
(see [44]). The application of the probabilistic method in graph colouring, using the
Lov´asz local lemma, for instance, has been very successful and is covered in depth
in the monograph of Molloy and Reed [75].

202
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
In this chapter, the symbols P and E denote probability and expectation,
respectively. The level of probabilistic expertise needed for this material is not
burdensome, but for more background see Alon and Spencer [9] or one of the
random graph texts [15], [49]. Mostly we just use the ﬁrst moment (Markov’s
inequality) and second moment (Chebyshev’s or the Paley–Zygmund inequality)
methods. Given a non-negative random variable X, Markov’s inequality asserts that
P(X ≥a) ≤E(X)/a for any a > 0, while the Paley–Zygmund inequality implies that
P(X > 0) ≥( E(X))2/ E(X2). We refer to other inequalities for the establishment
of concentrated probability measure – Chernoff, Azuma–Hoeffding, Janson’s and
Talagrand’s inequalities – all of which are covered in the above-mentioned texts. We
also use the approximation (n/k)k ≤
n
k

≤(en/k)k, which is a consequence of the
fact that ex ≥xk/k! for x ≥0, and the basic inequality (1 −a)n ≤exp(−an) for
a ∈(0, 1). When we write an unadorned logarithm symbol log, it is assumed to have
base 2; ln has the natural base e. We omit symbols for ﬂoors and ceilings, unless they
are important. We have adopted standard asymptotic (Landau) notation: O, , , ∼,
o and ω. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, the asymptotics are as n →∞. Recall that, for
functions f(n) and g(n) > 0, we write f = O(g) if f(n) ≤cg(n) for some constant
c, f = (g) if both f = O(g) and g = O( f), f ∼g if f(n)/g(n) →1, f = o(g) if
f(n)/g(n) →0, and f = ω(g) if g = o( f).
2. Dense random graphs
By the dense regime of Erd˝os–R´enyi random graphs, we mean Gn,p for ﬁxed p ∈
(0, 1). For clarity, we have chosen to restrict our attention to p = 1
2 – that is, ‘almost
all graphs’, though all results in this section extend naturally across the entire dense
regime, to other ﬁxed p ∈(0, 1).
Upon encountering the problem for the ﬁrst time, one might observe that the graph
Gn,1/2 has ‘global’ rather than ‘local’ structure. In particular, any given vertex has
a reasonable chance to be adjacent (or not) to any other vertex in the graph. This
suggests that its chromatic number might not necessarily be determined by a local
quantity, such as a large clique or a small maximum degree. As it happens, both
the clique number of Gn,1/2 (which is about 2 log n a.a.s., as we shall see) and the
maximum degree of Gn,1/2 (which is concentrated around 1
2n a.a.s.) are quite far
away from χ(Gn,1/2).
Instead, it turns out that the value of χ(Gn,1/2) strongly depends upon large stable
sets in Gn,1/2. (Throughout this chapter, we exclusively use stable set, rather than
independent set, to refer to a vertex subset that induces a subgraph having no edges.)
Recall that in any proper colouring of Gn,1/2, each colour class has order at most
α(Gn,1/2) (where α(G) denotes the number of vertices in a largest stable set of G), and
thus χ(Gn,1/2) ≥n/α(Gn,1/2) always. Fortunately, as we see in the next subsection,
α(Gn,1/2) can be precisely determined without much difﬁculty. On the other hand,
a thorough understanding of the ‘global’ behaviour of large stable sets in Gn,1/2 is

10 Colouring random graphs
203
necessary for a good upper bound on χ(Gn,1/2). This vague narrative should become
clearer later.
The stability number
Let Sk be the collection of stable sets of order k in Gn,1/2. To determine α(Gn,1/2), we
ﬁrst study the expectation of |Sk|. There are
n
k

sets of order k, and the probability
that such a set is stable (that is, each of its
k
2

edges is absent) is 2−(k
2). We thus have
E(|Sk|) =
n
k
	
2−(k
2).
For relevant values of k, this expression for the ﬁrst moment of |Sk| is decreasing in k.
We are interested in the values of k over which it changes from a large quantity (much
greater than 1) to a small quantity (somewhat less than 1). In the latter case, there is
positive probability that there are no stable sets of order k (that is, P(|Sk| = 0) > 0),
whereas in the former, if the expectation is large enough, we would hope that the
distribution of such sets is sufﬁciently well behaved that we could then pin down
such a set. As we now show, the change in E(|Sk|) is large and the range of k over
which it happens is small.
With foresight, we consider, for some ﬁxed ε ∈(0, 1), the choice
k = k+ε = ⌊k0 + ε⌋, where k0 = 2 log n −2 log log n + 2 log e −1.
Now, by an approximation of the binomial coefﬁcient,
E(|Sk+ε+1|) ≤

en
k+ε + 1
	k+ε+1
2−(k+ε+1
2 ),
and so, since k+ε + 1 ≥k0 + ε,
2 log E(|Sk+ε+1|)
k+ε + 1
≤2 log e + 2 log n −2 log k0 −k0 −ε + 1 = −ε + o(1),
since log k0 = log log n + 1 + o(1). As we are interested in an asymptotic statement,
we may allow an arbitrarily large choice of n. Then this last expression becomes at
most −1
2ε, and k+ε ≥log n. It follows that, for sufﬁciently large n, E(|Sk+ε+1|) ≤
exp
 
−1
4ε log n
!
, a vanishing quantity. We immediately deduce from an application
of Markov’s inequality that
P(α(Gn,1/2) > k+ε) = P(|Sk+ε+1| ≥1) ≤E(|Sk+ε+1|) →0 as n →∞.
In other words, α(Gn,1/2) ≤k+ε a.a.s.
Next let us consider, for some ﬁxed ε > 0, the choice k = k−ε = ⌊k0 −ε⌋,
where k0 is as above. Using another approximation of the binomial coefﬁcient (in the
other direction), we obtain by almost identical manipulations that, for n large enough,

204
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
E(|Sk−ε|) ≥exp
 
1
4ε log n
!
, an unbounded quantity. So we see that as a result of
a small decrease in k (from k+ε + 1 to k−ε) there is a large increase in E(|Sk|).
Around 1970 Matula [62], [63] showed that moreover |Sk−ε| is concentrated around
its mean. In particular, it is possible to show that the second moment E(|Sk−ε|2) of
|Sk−ε| is very small compared to ( E(|Sk−ε|))2, by using calculations similar to (but
more involved than) those just given above for the ﬁrst moment. Consequently, an
application of Chebyshev’s or the Paley–Zygmund inequality yields α(Gn,1/2) ≥k−ε
a.a.s. Thus the value of the stability number of Gn,1/2 is very precisely determined
a.a.s.
Theorem 2.1 For ﬁxed ε ∈(0, 1), α(Gn,1/2) ∈[k−ε, k+ε] a.a.s.
A slightly sharper form of this was proved independently by Bollob´as and Erd˝os [17]
in 1976.
A greedy algorithm
In the last subsection, we saw with a ﬁrst moment argument that α(Gn,1/2) ≤k+ε
and so the lower bound χ(Gn,1/2) ≥n/k+ε ∼n/(2 log n) holds a.a.s. We now show
how another ﬁrst moment argument, due to Grimmett and McDiarmid [48] in 1975,
also gives a reasonable upper bound on χ(Gn,1/2), one that is only twice as large
as the lower bound. This argument uses a simple colouring algorithm. It relies on
the following observation for maximal stable sets – that is, stable sets that cannot be
enlarged by adding a vertex.
Theorem 2.2 With probability at least 1 −exp(−(log3 n)), every maximal stable
set of Gn,1/2 has order greater than log n −3 log log n.
Proof
Given a stable set in Gn,1/2 of order k, the probability that it is maximal is
(1 −2−k)n−k, this being the probability that each vertex outside the stable set is
adjacent to at least one of the vertices within the set. As there are at most
n
k

stable
sets of order k, and so fewer than nk, the expected number of maximal stable sets of
order at most log n −3 log log n is at most
log n−3 log log n

k=1
n
k
	
(1 −2−k)n−k ≤
log n−3 log log n

k=1
nk exp(−(n −k)2−k)
≤(log n)nlog n exp(−(1 −k/n) log3 n)
= exp(−(log3 n)),
where we have used the fact that exp(−(n−k)2−k) is maximized over k ∈[1, log n−
3 log log n] when k = log n −3 log log n. So, by Markov’s inequality, the probability
of there being a maximal stable set of order at most log n −3 log log n is also at most
exp(−(log3 n)).
■

10 Colouring random graphs
205
We see now that the following greedy procedure quickly and reliably produces a
stable set S whose order is almost half of α(Gn,1/2): initialize S to be the empty set;
at each step, choose a previously unchosen vertex of [n] \ S and add it to S if it is
adjacent to none of the vertices in S. The greedy colouring algorithm borrows this as
a subprocedure to generate new colour classes iteratively. The validity of the analysis
relies on the observation that the generation of S relies only on the examination (or
‘exposure’) of candidate edges that have an endpoint in S, and thus the graph obtained
by the removal of S from some Gn′,1/2 may be viewed as an independent copy of the
random graph Gn′−|S|,1/2, upon which we may iterate. We continue until fewer than
n/ log2 n vertices remain and we give each of these vertices its own colour. Thus the
total number of colours used is less than
n
log n −5 log log n +
n
log2 n
∼
n
log n,
assuming that each iteration successfully generates a colour class of order log n −
5 log n. The probability that any iteration of the algorithm fails to extract such a colour
class from Gn′,1/2, with n′ ≥n/ log2 n, is at most exp(−(log3 n)), by Theorem 2.2.
Trivially, there are at most n stages, and thus by the union bound (Boole’s inequality)
the algorithm succeeds with probability at least 1 −n exp(−(log3 n)) →1 as
n →∞. It is easily checked that this algorithm runs in polynomial time, and so
we have the following result.
Theorem 2.3 There is a polynomial-time algorithm that a.a.s. produces a proper
colouring of Gn,1/2 with at most (1 + o(1))n/ log n colours.
In fact, McDiarmid [66] showed that many of the most common polynomial-time
colouring heuristics a.a.s. produce colourings of Gn,1/2 with at most (1+o(1))n/ log n
colours.
Concentration and the chromatic number
We have seen that (1 + o(1))n/(2 log n) ≤χ(Gn,1/2) ≤(1 + o(1))n/ log n a.a.s.
Grimmett and McDiarmid also showed that the expected number of proper
((1 + ε)n/(2 log n))-colourings of Gn,1/2 tends to inﬁnity, and then conjectured that
the lower bound in the above range should be the correct ﬁrst-order behaviour of
χ(Gn,1/2) a.a.s. This remained one of the most important open problems in random
graph theory for well over a decade.
A turning point was the introduction of simple yet powerful tools from probability
theory for proving concentration of measure. We owe this important insight to
Shamir and Spencer [82] in 1987. With a direct application of the Azuma–Hoeffding
martingale inequality (to the ‘vertex exposure’ martingale), they showed that the
value of χ(Gn,1/2) is a.a.s. concentrated within an interval roughly of length O(√n).
Frustratingly, however, this method gave no clue as to the location of this interval!

206
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
In spite of this, the discovery of this connection proved decisive and the problem
was resolved soon after. Several methods were developed, independently or in quick
succession. In the next section, we discuss the ‘expose-and-merge’ algorithm of
Matula [64]. The elegant method of Bollob´as [14] applied martingale concentration
to prove that a non-algorithmic form of the greedy process described in the last
subsection can properly colour Gn,1/2 with large colour classes. This approach
depends on the following strong upper bound on the probability of Gn,1/2 to have
all stable sets slightly smaller than the values given by Theorem 2.1.
Theorem 2.4 P(α(Gn,1/2) < 2 log n −3 log log n) < exp(−(n2/ log5 n)).
Before discussing this bound further, let us ﬁrst see how it is used to determine the
a.a.s. ﬁrst-order behaviour of χ(Gn,1/2).
Theorem 2.5 χ(Gn,1/2) ∼n/(2 log n) a.a.s.
Proof
As the lower bound follows from the upper bound on α(Gn,1/2) of The-
orem 2.1, it sufﬁces to prove the upper bound. To this end, let An be the set of
graphs G on [n] with α(G[S]) ≥2 log n −7 log log n for all S ⊆[n] with |S| ≥
n/ log2 n. Then Theorem 2.4 yields, as n →∞, that
P(Gn,1/2 /∈An) ≤2n P(α(Gn/ log2 n,1/2) < 2 log n −7 log log n)
≤2n exp(−(n2/ log9 n)) →0.
Thus Gn,1/2 ∈An a.a.s.
For any graph in An, an iterative process similar to the greedy algorithm yields a
good colouring. We start with T = [n]. As long as |T| ≥n/ log2 n, the condition for
membership in An guarantees that we can extract a new colour class S from T with
at least 2 log n −7 log log n vertices and then set T = T \ S. After stopping, we give
each vertex left in T its own colour, so fewer than n/(2 log n−7 log log n)+n/ log2 n
∼n/(2 log n) colours are used.
■
By our earlier use of the term ‘non-algorithmic’ (which was not strictly correct),
we meant that, while Theorem 2.4 ensures that there is a large stable set, it does
not provide any efﬁcient method for producing one. Certainly, a brute-force test of
every subset with the appropriate number of vertices is far too slow. In 1976 Karp [52]
asked whether there is a polynomial-time algorithm that produces from Gn,1/2 a stable
set of size (1+ε) log n a.a.s. This is open, even if (for example, by Theorem 2.2) there
are fast algorithms to produce stable sets of size (1 −ε) log n.
As mentioned above, tools for proving strong concentration of measure were
crucial. By now, there are a few ways to prove Theorem 2.4. Bollob´as’s proof made
a clever choice of two random variables that track large stable sets. One of these
never exceeds the other, but they serve different purposes: the former has expectation
easily bounded from below, while the latter is a martingale amenable to the Azuma–
Hoeffding inequality. More direct proofs use more sophisticated concentration

10 Colouring random graphs
207
bounds, such as Talagrand’s inequality. We have chosen to outline the use of Janson’s
inequality – a powerful probabilistic tool partly inspired by Bollob´as’s method – to
prove Theorem 2.4. The reader may choose to skip the following outline, and take
away the rough message that, for sets that are large but not too large, Janson’s
inequality provides the required probability bound if we can control the pairwise
dependence (measured by a parameter  below) among the events of being stable.
Outline of proof of Theorem 2.4
As before, let Sk be the collection of stable sets of
order k in Gn,1/2. By Janson’s inequality (Theorem 2.18(ii) in [49]),
P(α(Gn,1/2) < k) = P(|Sk| = 0) ≤exp

−
μ2
μ + 
	
,
where μ = E(|Sk|). On summing over ordered pairs A, B ⊆[n] with 2 ≤|A ∩B| ≤
k −1,
 =

P(A, B ∈Sk).
Recall that μ =
n
k

2−(k
2), and observe that 2−2(k
2)+(ℓ
2) is the probability that two
given subsets of [n] of order k that overlap in exactly ℓvertices are both in Sk. We
may then write
 =
k−1

ℓ=2
n
k
	k
ℓ
	n −k
k −ℓ
	
2−2(k
2)+(ℓ
2) = μ
k−1

ℓ=2
k
ℓ
	n −k
k −ℓ
	
2−(k
2)+(ℓ
2).
It is a routine exercise to check, under the assumption that k ≤2 log n −3 log log n,
that the ﬁrst term is the largest in the sum, and therefore
 ≤μ(k −2)
k
2
	n −k
k −2
	
2−(k
2)+1 ≤μ2O

k5
n2

= O

μ2 log5 n
n2

.
The choice of k also implies that μ = exp(((log log n) log n)), so μ2/(μ + ) =
(n2/ log5 n), as required.
■
Colouring rate and anti-concentration
Theorem 2.5 answers the latter question in the Introduction, but the story does not end
here. We mentioned that Shamir and Spencer proved that χ(Gn,1/2) is contained in
an interval of length roughly O(√n) a.a.s., but it remains unclear precisely where the
interval could be situated. (Note that this interval can be narrowed by a log n factor,
see [9, Ex. 7.9].) Theorem 2.5 has been tightened recently, as we see in the following
theorem, but the resulting explicit interval is still comparatively large, having length
(n/ log2 n).
Theorem 2.6 Let k1 = 2 log n −2 log log n −2 (= k0 −2 log e −1). Then
n
k1 + o(1) ≤χ(Gn,1/2) ≤
n
k1 −1 −o(1) a.a.s.

208
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
The lower bound, due to Panagiotou and Steger [78] in 2009, and the upper bound,
due to Fountoulakis, Kang and McDiarmid [38] a year later, improved upon the best
previously known range (in [67]) from some two decades earlier. We prefer to restate
the result in a modiﬁed form. We deﬁne the colouring rate α(G) of a graph G to
be |V(G)|/χ(G), which is the maximum average size of a colour class in a proper
colouring of G. The above theorem says that the colouring rate of Gn,1/2 a.a.s. lies in
the following interval of length 1 + o(1):
k1 −1 −o(1) ≤α(Gn,1/2) ≤k1 + o(1).
Notice in particular that α(Gn,1/2) is strictly smaller than α(Gn,1/2) a.a.s. A natural
problem is to determine the a.a.s. behaviour of α(Gn,1/2) up to a o(1) additive error.
What is the length of a smallest interval I for which P(χ(Gn,1/2) ∈I) ≥ε? Lower
bounds on this quantity are called ‘anti-concentration’ results. Various behaviours
for anti-concentration of the chromatic number have been proposed (see [7], [16]).
This problem is likely to be far from easy: while the length of the interval is at
most about O(√n/ log n), there are currently no results that show that χ(Gn,1/2)
is not contained a.a.s. in an interval of constant length. The possibility has been
suggested [7] (‘conjecture’ would be too strong a word) that there may even be non-
monotonicity in n – that is, it might be the case that very sharp concentration holds
for inﬁnitely many values of n, while for inﬁnitely many other values it does not.
3. Sparse random graphs
In this section we consider the chromatic number for Gn,p when p = p(n) satisﬁes
p →0 as n →∞. First we see how the chromatic number becomes more sharply
concentrated for sparser graphs – that is, for p(n) tending to 0 more quickly. In the
second subsection we consider the speciﬁc case p = d/n, for some ﬁxed choice of
d > 1. By a standard equivalence, this amounts to the ﬁrst displayed question in the
Introduction. This question has recently beneﬁted from the inﬂuence of analysis and
statistical physics, leading to dramatic progress.
Expose-and-merge and concentration
A subtle colouring method of Matula [64], dubbed the ‘expose-and-merge’ algo-
rithm, was used to prove Theorem 2.5 without the need for martingale- or Talagrand-
type concentration, but rather with the more elementary inequalities of Chebyshev
and Chernoff, as shown by Matula and Kuˇcera [65]. For sparse Gn,p, Bollob´as’s
method of extracting the colour classes one by one could not be extended further,
though it worked down to edge probability about p = n−1/3 (that is, expected average
degree about n2/3). However, Łuczak [59] realized that Matula’s algorithm and the
concentration bounds key to Bollob´as’s approach could be combined effectively to

10 Colouring random graphs
209
prove the following stronger result. This signiﬁcantly extended the range of p = p(n)
for the known a.a.s. ﬁrst-order term of χ(Gn,p).
Theorem 3.1 There is a constant d0 such that, if p = p(n) satisﬁes np > d0 for n
sufﬁciently large and p = o(1), then a.a.s.
χ(Gn,p) =
np
2 ln(np)

1 + 
ln ln(np)
ln(np)
		
.
Outline of proof
For simplicity, we assume throughout that p < ln−7 n. The lower
bound follows by noticing that the ﬁrst moment argument used for the upper bound
in Theorem 2.1 extends routinely to the sparse regime:
α(Gn,p) ≤(2 ln(np) −2 ln ln(np) + 2 −2 ln 2 + ε)/p a.a.s.
For the upper bound, we employ the expose-and-merge method. We are somewhat
rough with our description of this; for a more precise and detailed account, see [49,
Sec. 7.5]. The engine behind this technique is a result of the following type, which
a.a.s. guarantees the existence of many disjoint stable sets of nearly maximum
order.
Theorem 3.2 Fix ε > 0. There exists Cε such that if Cε/n ≤p ≤ln−7 n then, with
probability at least 1 −1/n, Gn,p contains a disjoint collection of y stable sets, each
of order at least k, where
k = k(n) = (2 ln(np) −2 ln ln(np) + 2 −2 ln 2 −ε)/p and y = y(n) =
n
k ln5(np)
.
Matula and Kuˇcera proved a dense version of this result by a lengthy though
uncomplicated second moment computation. For the form stated here, speciﬁc to
sparse random graphs, the second moment is not as well behaved. Luckily, it does
not grow too quickly, so the standard argument succeeds when it is strengthened by
the appropriate application of a martingale concentration inequality. This neat trick
was ﬁrst employed by Frieze [41] to determine the stability number of sparse Gn,p.
With Theorem 3.2 in hand, we may attempt to extract from Gn,p several large stable
sets at a time. Set ˆn = n/ lnC(np) for a ﬁxed positive constant C to be determined
and, with a view to applying Theorem 3.2 repeatedly, set
ˆk = k(ˆn) ∼(2 ln(np) −2(C + 1) ln ln(np))/p and ˆy = y(ˆn) ∼
n
ˆk lnC+5(np)
,
where the asymptotics implied in ∼are as np →∞.
To begin, choose, or rather expose, some subset A1 of [n] uniformly at random
among all subsets of order ˆn. The induced subgraph H1 = Gn,p[A1] may be viewed
as Gˆn,p, so by Theorem 3.2, with probability at least 1−1/ˆn, it contains a collection of

210
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
ˆy disjoint stable sets each of order ˆk. Let us choose one such collection, S1
1, S2
1, . . . , Sˆy
1,
uniformly at random (giving each subset of A1 of order ˆk a fair chance to be part of
this collection). We label all vertices in 
j Sj
1 as used and all pairs of vertices in A1
as exposed. Due to our extraction of a particular collection of stable sets from H1, we
can no longer view the exposed pairs as random edges.
Next we choose a new subset A2 of order ˆn uniformly at random from only the
unused vertices. Unfortunately, we may not view the induced subgraph Gn,p[A2] as
Gˆn,p because its structure depends possibly on some exposed pairs. The bald but
critical idea now is simply to forget about this problem for a while. More precisely,
for each exposed pair from A2, we resample by performing a new independent
random experiment to include that pair as an edge with probability p. Let H2 denote
the graph on A2 formed in this way. The key property of H2 is that it may now be
viewed as an independent copy of Gˆn,p and, using Theorem 3.2 as above, we may
choose a collection, S1
2, S2
2, . . . , Sˆy
2, of disjoint stable sets each of order ˆk. We now
label all vertices in 
j Sj
2 as used and all pairs of vertices in A2 as exposed.
Over ˆx = lnC+5(np) −lnC+2(np) iterations, the probability that some iteration
fails to generate a collection of ˆy disjoint stable sets, each of order ˆk, is at most
ˆx/ˆn = o(1). With all but negligible probability, we have at the end a collection of
ˆxˆy ∼np/(2 ln(np)) disjoint sets Sj
i such that S1
i , S2
i , . . . , Sˆy
i are all stable in Hi. It
now remains to show how to merge these sets into a proper colouring of nearly all
of Gn,p. In particular, we sketch how the sets Sj
i can be pruned slightly to form a
proper colouring of all but at most O(n/ ln3(np)) vertices. (It can then be checked
that the graph induced by the remaining vertices has small enough degeneracy that it
can be polished off greedily, using only a few extra colours — recall that degeneracy
is deﬁned as the maximum over all induced subgraphs of the minimum degree.) The
crux here is that, due to our temporary amnesia, although Sj
i is a stable set in Hi, it
might not be stable in Gn,p. We are in trouble if Sj
i contains some pair of adjacent
vertices that was exposed in a previous iteration but resampled as a non-edge in the
ith iteration. With an appropriate choice of C and a ﬁrst moment estimation, it is
indeed possible (although we omit the details) to show that the number Y of such
troublesome pairs is small, satisfying P(Y > n/ ln3(np)) = O(1/ ln2(np)). Thus
a.a.s. we may safely remove Y vertices from 
i,j Sj
i, one from each troublesome pair,
to obtain the required proper colouring of nearly all of Gn,p.
■
As in the dense regime, in the sparse case one can prove strong concentration
results for χ(Gn,p) without knowing an asymptotic value. In addition to the afore-
mentioned bound for the dense case, Shamir and Spencer showed with martingales
that, for p = n−α with α > 1
2, χ(Gn,p) is a.a.s. conﬁned to an interval whose width
is a constant dependent upon α. A few years later, their proof was sharpened by
Łuczak [60] to demonstrate two-point concentration when α > 5
6. (By continuity
considerations, there must exist edge probability functions p(n) that evenly balance
the probability mass between the events that the chromatic number evaluates to one
of two consecutive integers; so two-point concentration is best possible in general.)

10 Colouring random graphs
211
Another few years later, Alon and Krivelevich [7] extended the two-point result to
hold for all (ﬁxed) α > 1
2, using recolouring via the Lov´asz local lemma.
This brings us close to the situation that we encountered in the dense case.
Martingale techniques show that there is a small range of values that the chromatic
number can take, but they do not give any hint of where it is located. The explicit
interval implied by Theorem 3.1 is of width (np ln ln(np)/ ln2(np)). This is
unbounded (and certainly larger than 2) if np is unbounded. On the other hand, if
np is bounded, then we have the intuition (or at least some hope) that it would be
possible to identify (nearly) exact values. We pursue this next.
Sharp thresholds for k-colourability
Random graphs exhibit behaviours that might seem counter-intuitive at ﬁrst sight.
Many properties or parameters of Gn,p, such as the stability number or the number
of proper k-colourings, experience a sudden change across a small interval of p. This
is sometimes referred to as a threshold (or phase transition, as mentioned earlier).
It is well known that thresholds arise in wider contexts in mathematics, physics,
economics, sociology and elsewhere. In Gn,p, their study is of great importance. The
demonstration by Bollob´as and Thomason [18] that thresholds exist in a general sense
for graph properties (families of graphs that are closed under isomorphism) that are
monotone (closed under edge-removal) is one of the fundamental results in random
graphs.
In 1999 Friedgut [40] investigated how suddenly a given phase transition takes
place. Imprecisely, given a property of Gn,p that undergoes a transition, consider the
ratio of the following two quantities:
• the length of the window of p over which the transition takes place
• the critical probability pc for which Gn,pc possesses the property with probability
exactly 1
2 (which is guaranteed to exist).
The property’s threshold is sharp if as n →∞this ratio tends to 0, whereas if
the ratio is bounded away from 0 it is a called a coarse threshold. (The result of
Bollob´as and Thomason showed the ratio to be bounded above for any monotone
property.) The foundational example of a sharp threshold is the critical probability
for connectivity of Gn,p: it is located at around p = (ln n)/n, but the length of the
interval over which Gn,p changes from being disconnected to connected is of order
1/n. The seminal work of Friedgut used Fourier analytic techniques to give a deep
criterion for monotone graph properties in Gn,p to have sharp thresholds. In rough
terms, a monotone graph property with a coarse threshold can be approximated
by the property that it contains one of a ﬁxed collection of graphs as a subgraph.
With this characterization, Achlioptas and Friedgut [1] showed that, for k ≥3, the
property of k-colourability (that is, of having chromatic number at most k) has a
sharp threshold sequence.

212
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
Theorem 3.3 Let k ≥3 be an integer. There exists dk = dk(n) such that, for any
ε > 0,
lim
n→∞P

χ

Gn,(dk−ε)/n

≤k

= 1 and
lim
n→∞P

χ

Gn,(dk+ε)/n

≤k

= 0.
(It is known that the threshold for 2-colourability is coarse, since the probabilities of
Gn,d/n having an odd cycle and not having an odd cycle are both bounded away from
0 for d ∈(0, 1).) From Theorem 3.3, we deduce that χ(Gn,d/n) would be one-point
concentrated for all but a vanishing proportion of d > 1 (in Lebesgue measure) if it
could be shown that dk(n) converges as n →∞, or even that dk(n) is constrained
to an interval of length independent of k for all large enough n. Unfortunately,
Achlioptas and Friedgut’s result does not directly yield anything on the actual value
of the chromatic number.
The question of convergence of dk(n) as n →∞is open, but in a breakthrough in
2005 Achlioptas and Naor [3] found an explicit interval within which the limit must
lie if it exists.
Theorem 3.4 Let k ≥3 be an integer. For any ε > 0,
lim
n→∞P

χ

Gn,(2(k−1) ln(k−1)−ε)/n

≤k

= 1
and
lim
n→∞P

χ

Gn,((2k−1) ln k)/n

≤k

= 0.
Thus the sharp threshold sequence dk = dk(n) for k-colourability (as guaranteed by
Theorem 3.3) satisﬁes, for all n,
2(k −1) ln(k −1) ≤dk ≤(2k −1) ln k.
(1)
An immediate corollary of Theorem 3.4 is that a.a.s. the chromatic number of
Gn,d/n must take either one explicit value or one of two values.
Corollary 3.5 Given d > 0, let kd be the least integer k for which d < 2(k −1)
ln(k −1). Then χ(Gn,d/n) is kd −1 or kd a.a.s. If d ≥(2kd −3) ln(kd −1), then
χ(Gn,d/n) = kd a.a.s.
Building upon this work and combining it carefully with some other ideas used for
existential sharp concentration of the chromatic number, Coja-Oghlan, Panagiotou
and Steger [26] have obtained an explicit two- or three-point concentration result
for denser Gn,p, speciﬁcally for p = n−α with α > 3
4. Recently, Dyer, Frieze and
Greenhill [33] have obtained an analogue of Theorem 3.4 for the weak chromatic
number of binomial random k-uniform hypergraphs.
We brieﬂy outline some of the ideas of the proof of Theorem 3.4. First of all,
rather than Gn,d/n, it is easier, and also does not hurt, to work with the random
multigraph "Gn,m with m =
1
2dn, where we throw in m edges independently
and uniformly at random, allowing repetitions. Counting the number of proper
k-colourings of "Gn,m is equivalent to summing, over all possible partitions of [n]

10 Colouring random graphs
213
into k parts, the indicator variable that the given partition is a proper colouring.
The right-hand side of (1), as ﬁrst observed by Devroye (see [23]), is a simple ﬁrst
moment estimate. It follows from the fact that a given partition into k parts is a proper
colouring with probability at most (1−1/k)m, and thus the expected number of proper
k-colourings of "Gn,m is at most kn(1 −1/k)m.
For the much more difﬁcult part, the lower bound on dk, Achlioptas and Naor
made a consummate application of the second moment method, which they reduced
to a high-dimensional optimization problem. A powerful simpliﬁcation is to restrict
attention to partitions of [n] that are balanced – that is, each part has n/k vertices
(where we have also assumed that k divides n). These account for most proper k-
colourings of "Gn,m. The number of balanced proper k-colourings of "Gn,m is a sum of
n!/((n/k)!)k indicators, and it follows that its ﬁrst moment is
n!
((n/k)!)k

1 −1
k
	m
.
To bound the second moment of this random variable, we bound the probability, for
a given pair of balanced partitions, that both are proper k-colourings of "Gn,m. Using
the property that the partitions are balanced, we may see that this probability is
⎛
⎝1 −2
k +

i,j
ℓij2
n2
⎞
⎠
m
,
where ℓij is the number of vertices of [n] with colour i in one of the balanced partitions
and colour j in the other. So the correlation between two variables that indicate
whether a given balanced partition is proper is governed by k2 parameters. Consider
the set L of all k × k matrices L = (ℓij) of non-negative integers for which the sum
of each row and each column is n/k. The second moment of the number of balanced
proper k-colourings can be expressed as

L∈L
n!

i,j ℓij!
⎛
⎝1 −2
k +

i,j
ℓij2
n2
⎞
⎠
dn/2
.
Optimization over L can be translated into optimization over the Birkhoff polytope
Bk, the set of k × k doubly stochastic matrices. Thus, to bound the second moment
appropriately, it sufﬁces to show a particular entropy–energy inequality over Bk.
Achlioptas and Naor did so by ﬁrst relaxing to singly stochastic matrices and then
using sophisticated geometric and analytic ideas. Their argument then shows that the
probability of being k-colourable is bounded above 0, whereupon an application of
Theorem 3.3 implies the theorem.
Recent work of Coja-Oghlan and Vilenchik [27] and of Coja-Oghlan [24] has
markedly improved both ends of the interval (1) (which we remark has length
(1 + o(1)) ln k as k →∞). Guided by important developments in statistical
physics, which used applications of the so-called ‘cavity method’ and ‘belief/survey

214
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
propagation’ algorithms [21], [76], they have obtained a range of length that is
independent of k:
(2k −1) ln k −2 ln 2 −o(1) ≤dk ≤(2k −1) ln k −1 + o(1),
(2)
where the o(1) asymptotics are as k →∞. The above range for the k-colourability
sharp threshold sequence (particularly the improved lower bound) is quite close to
completely settling the original question of Erd˝os and R´enyi from 1960. It shows
that χ(Gn,d/n) is concentrated on an explicit value – that is, the least integer k for
which d < (2k −1) ln k −2 ln 2 holds – for all but a vanishing proportion of d > 1.
4. Random regular graphs
Given an integer r ≥1, let Gn,r be a graph chosen uniformly at random from the set of
r-regular graphs with vertex-set [n] (where rn is even, for feasibility). This model of
random graphs has received much attention since the late 1970s, when Bollob´as [13]
probabilistically reinterpreted an enumerative formula of Bender and Canﬁeld [11]
using the now-standard ‘conﬁguration’ or ‘pairing’ model. In some aspects, Gn,r is
qualitatively quite distinct from Gn,p; for example, Gn,r has stronger connectivity
properties at lower edge densities: notably, Gn,3 is Hamiltonian a.a.s. However, for
larger r, Gn,r seems to behave more like Gn,p; this was partially formalized by Kim
and Vu [54]. (The rough intuition behind this is that, above a certain density, all
the degrees of Gn,p are highly concentrated around np.) Techniques for proving
properties of Gn,r are usually more difﬁcult though, and are close in spirit to those
used in analytic and enumerative combinatorics. The reﬁnement of these techniques
is useful in the study of degree-constrained random graphs, with relevance to real-
world network modelling. Wormald [88] has a broad account of the theory of random
regular graphs. It is important to note that, unlike Gn,p, the model Gn,r is not generally
one that is monotone in density. In other words, it is not true in general that, if a
monotone property holds in Gn,r a.a.s., then it also holds in Gn,r+1 a.a.s. (as can be
seen by considering the property of containment of a perfect matching); however, for
ﬁxed r ≥2, this statement is true as a consequence of ‘contiguity’ (see, for example,
[49] or [88]).
Two of the ﬁrst results on the chromatic number of Gn,r were given in 1992. Molloy
and Reed bounded the expected number of proper k-colourings in the pairing model
of Gn,r, with r ﬁxed, to conclude that, if k(1 −1/k)r/2 < 1, then χ(Gn,r) > k a.a.s.
This argument was given in Molloy’s University of Waterloo Master’s thesis, but it
has been reiterated in the more easily obtained paper [84]. Frieze and Łuczak [43]
further analyzed the pairing model to show that, if r = r(n) < n1/3−ε for some ε > 0
and r ≥r0 for some constant r0, then a.a.s.
χ(Gn,r) =
r
2 ln r + 
r ln ln r
ln2 r
	
.

10 Colouring random graphs
215
About a decade later, with an ‘edge-switching’ strategy, Cooper, Frieze, Reed and
Riordan [28] extended this asymptotic statement to hold if r < n1−ε for some
ε > 0 (and r ≥r0 for some constant r0). In an independent and complementary
project, Krivelevich, Sudakov, Vu and Wormald [57] used an expression for the
probability that Gn,p is r-regular to show in the range n6/7+ε < r < 0.9n that
χ(Gn,r) ∼n/(2 logb r), where b = n/(n −r). An easy calculation checks that these
estimates of χ(Gn,r) agree asymptotically as r →∞with those of χ(Gn,p) with
p = r/n.
As it did for Gn,p, signiﬁcant progress on the determination of χ(Gn,r) in the sparse
case (when r is constant) came later. The values r ≤3 are easy: trivially, χ(Gn,1) = 2
a.a.s. For r ≥2, Gn,r contains an odd cycle a.a.s. and so χ(Gn,2) = 3 a.a.s.; also
a.a.s. χ(Gn,3) = 3, since Gn,3 contains no K4-subgraph and the statement follows
from Brooks’s theorem. The next values are more involved. For 4 ≤r ≤10, Shi and
Wormald [83], [84] provided a ﬁne analysis in 2007, using the differential equations
method [87], of a tailored colouring algorithm, to obtain explicit one- or two-point
determinations. (The idea behind this general analytic method is to show that a
random variable of interest can be tracked accurately by some function expressed as
the solution to a set of differential equations.) In particular, Shi and Wormald proved
that χ(Gn,4) = 3, χ(Gn,5) is 3 or 4, and χ(Gn,6) = 4 a.a.s.
A further advance was obtained a few years later. Improving on a previously-
announced bound of Achlioptas and Moore [2], Kemkes, P´erez-Gim´enez and
Wormald [53] used subgraph conditioning (see [88]) to prove the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1 Given r > 0, let kr be the least integer k for which r < 2(k −1)
ln(k −1). Then χ(Gn,r) is kr −1 or kr a.a.s. If r ≥(2kr −3) ln(kr −1), then
χ(Gn,r) = kr a.a.s.
The lower bound is just the aforementioned bound of Molloy and Reed. As we have
often seen, the most difﬁcult part in obtaining the upper bound is controlling the
second moment. Even after an adaptation of the sophisticated analysis of Achlioptas
and Naor, the second moment is too large for the application of either Chebyshev’s
inequality or the Paley–Zygmund inequality directly, and no sharp threshold-type
result is available. In particular, the second moment is some constant times the square
of the ﬁrst moment. The broad intuition for the subgraph conditioning method is
that much of the magnitude of the second moment may depend on the presence of
some speciﬁc small but not too common subgraphs, such as short cycles. When the
method applies, conditioning on counts of enough of these small subgraphs does
not change the ﬁrst moment by too much, but it reduces the second moment to any
desired fraction of the original. Kemkes, P´erez-Gim´enez and Wormald showed that
this method is applicable to the number of balanced k-colourings of Gn,r, in order to
obtain the upper bound on χ(Gn,r) in this theorem.
A comparison of Theorem 4.1 and Corollary 3.5 suggests that Gn,r and Gn,r/n
have a close afﬁnity with respect to k-colourability, which contrasts with the broader
qualitative differences we pointed out earlier. In a recent manuscript, Coja-Oghlan,

216
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
Efthymiou and Hetterich [25] have proved a more direct connection between these
parameters, and used that link to tighten the bounds on χ(Gn,r) to match the bounds
on χ(Gn,p) in (2). In particular, there is some εk with εk →0 as k →∞such
that if r ≤(2k −1) ln k −2 ln 2 −εk, then χ(Gn,r) ≤k a.a.s., whereas if r ≥
(2k −1) ln k −1 + εk, then χ(Gn,r) > k a.a.s.
For the upper bound, they combined the second moment calculations in [27] with
the subgraph conditioning methodology in [53]. The lower bound demands more
technical care, and for this they study the geometry of the set of proper k-colourings
and use large deviations analysis.
Note that the result that χ(Gn,4) = 3 a.a.s. is not captured by Theorem 4.1 or
the more recent work [25]. The conjecture that χ(Gn,5) = 3 a.a.s. remains open,
but there is some positive evidence for it in [30]. Ben-Shimon and Krivelevich [10]
have used the edge-switching method to prove existential two-point concentration
of χ(Gn,r) for r = o(n1/5), though since the continuity argument fails for Gn,r it is
unclear even whether two-point concentration is best possible. For ﬁxed r, it seems
very likely that χ(Gn,r) is always uniquely determined a.a.s. This is true with an
explicit determination for ‘most’ values of r, by the new results in [25].
Random Cayley graphs
So far in this section, we have focused on the uniform model of a regular graph. We
now mention brieﬂy a very different algebraically deﬁned family of random regular
graph models that has recently garnered heightened interest, including in regard to
the chromatic number. Let B be a ﬁnite group of order n and let k ∈[⌊1
2n⌋]. Choose
a subset A ⊆B by ﬁrst choosing k elements of B independently and uniformly at
random (with repetitions), and then letting A be these elements together with their
inverses, without the identity. The random Cayley graph with respect to B and k is
the graph with vertex-set B, where b1 and b2 are adjacent when b1 · b2−1 ∈A; this
graph is regular of degree |A| ≤2k. The study of such random graphs is important
in many settings, such as information theory, computational complexity and additive
combinatorics.
The behaviour of the chromatic number of random Cayley graphs is currently an
active research area; we refer the interested reader to Alon [6] for a systematic study,
where, for instance, it is shown that the chromatic number of the random Cayley
graph with respect to any B and k is O(k/ ln k). (Alon furthermore gives general lower
bounds that nearly match the upper bound in the dense case k = (n) but worsen for
smaller k.) We also point to a recent manuscript of Green and Morris [47] on random
Cayley sum graphs with respect to Z/nZ. In this model, A ⊆Z/nZ is chosen by
including each element independently at random with probability 1
2; then x, y ∈Z/nZ
are adjacent in the graph when x+y ∈A. With methods from additive combinatorics,
such as an ‘arithmetic regularity lemma’, they prove that such graphs a.a.s. have no
clique or stable set of order more than (2 + o(1)) log n. A matching upper bound on

10 Colouring random graphs
217
the chromatic number, although with a technical restriction that gcd(n, 6) = 1, was
recently proved by Green [46].
5. Random geometric graphs
Suppose that we wish to assign bands of radio frequencies to a collection of active
transmitters scattered in some region. Minimizing the amount of spectrum allocated
can be modelled (albeit with many simplifying assumptions) as follows. Given a
collection X = Xn of independent random points X1, X2, . . . , Xn ∈Rd with common
probability distribution ν and a positive distance parameter r = r(n) > 0, we ﬁrst
construct a random geometric graph Gn(X, r) with vertex-set [n], where i and j are
adjacent when ∥Xi −Xj∥< r. Then, taking ∥· ∥as the ordinary Euclidean norm and
ν as a uniform distribution over [0, 1]2, we may imagine the points Xi as transmitters
in the plane and r as their common transmission (and interference) range. We are
interested in the asymptotic behaviour of Gn(X, r) as n →∞and assume that r =
r(n) = o(n). (In fact, the norm ∥· ∥may be any norm and ν may be any probability
distribution with a bounded density function over Rd.) We may thus consider a proper
colouring as a good spectrum allocation, so that χ(Gn(X, r)) indicates the minimum
amount needed.
The random geometric graph is a much-studied model because of its simple
and natural deﬁnition, its history going back more than half a century, and its
well-established links to areas such as statistics, probability theory and electrical
engineering. Background and further properties of Gn(X, r) are covered in detail
in the monograph of Penrose [79]. Intuitively, the parameter r(n) plays the same
role that the edge probability parameter p(n) does in Gn,p. It controls density: the
average degree of Gn(X, r) is (rdn) in general, and is about πr2n for the Euclidean
norm and a uniform distribution over [0, 1]2. As we might expect, Gn(X, r) goes
through a number of phases as r increases. We remark here that most of the results in
this section are given with stronger convergence than a.a.s.: a property holds almost
surely (a.s.) if it holds with probability 1.
We will see that there is a threshold in the a.s. behaviour of χ(Gn(X, r)). Loosely
speaking, the chromatic number behaves very ‘locally’ in the sparse regime when the
average degree is o(ln n), whereas it behaves essentially as if the points are uniformly
spread in the dense regime when the average degree is ω(ln n); the behaviour at the
threshold (ln n) is most interesting. Moreover, the chromatic number of Gn(X, r)
is quite close to both the clique number and the maximum degree, in contrast with
Gn,p. This bolsters our natural intuition from the fact that the structure of Gn(X, r) is
locally determined. (We comment here that, for a ‘deterministic’ geometric graph G
in the plane with Euclidean norm, it is known that χ(G) ≤3ω(G) −2 and (G) ≤
6ω(G) −7.)
Before stating the main result, we deﬁne the parameters required of the common
probability measure ν and the norm ∥·∥. The maximum density σ of ν is the essential

218
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
supremum of the probability density function f of ν – that is to say, σ = sup{t :
vol ({x : f(x) > t}) > 0}, where vol denotes the (Lebesgue measure) volume. For
K > 0, let N(K) be the maximum cardinality of a collection of pairwise disjoint
translates of the unit ball B = {x ∈Rd : ∥x∥< 1} with centres in (0, K)d. The
(translational) packing density δ of the unit ball B with respect to ∥· ∥is deﬁned as
δ = lim
K→∞
N(K) vol (B)
Kd
.
This limit always exists and satisﬁes 0 < δ ≤1. For the Euclidean norm in R2, it is
known that δ = π/(2
√
3) ≈0.907. Informally, δ is the greatest proportion of Rd that
can be ﬁlled with disjoint translates of B. We are now ready to see the full picture of
phases for χ(Gn(X, r)).
Theorem 5.1 For the random geometric graph Gn(X, r), the following hold.
Very sparse regime: Suppose that rdn ≤n−α for some ﬁxed α > 0, and let k =
k(n) =

| ln n/ ln(rdn)| + 1
2

. Then a.s. χ(Gn(X, r)) = ω(Gn(X, r)) is k or k + 1
for all but ﬁnitely many n.
Sparse regime: Suppose that rdn = ω(n−ε) for all ε > 0 but rdn = o(ln n). Then
a.s. both χ(Gn(X, r)) and ω(Gn(X, r)) are asymptotic to ln n/ ln(ln n/(rdn)).
Intermediate regime: Suppose that σrdn/ ln n →t ∈(0, ∞). Then a.s.
χ(Gn(X, r)) ∼fχ(t) · σrdn and ω(Gn(X, r)) ∼fω(t) · σrdn
where the functions fχ and fω are given explicitly in [72]. They depend only on d and
∥· ∥, and are continuous; fχ is non-increasing, and satisﬁes fχ(t) →vol (B)/(2dδ)
as t →∞, and fχ(t) →∞as t ↓0; and fω is strictly decreasing, and satisﬁes
fω(t) →vol (B)/2d as t →∞, and fω(t) →∞as t ↓0.
Dense regime: Suppose that rdn = ω(ln n) but r →0. Then a.s.
χ(Gn(X, r)) ∼vol (B)
2dδ
· σrdn and ω(Gn(X, r)) ∼vol (B)
2d
· σrdn.
The results on ω(Gn(X, r)) essentially already appeared in Penrose’s book [79] of
2003, except that an assumption has been dropped and some results ampliﬁed. Both
Penrose [79] and McDiarmid [68] studied the chromatic number in the sparse and
dense regimes, but prior to the 2011 work of McDiarmid and M¨uller [72] little was
known about the chromatic number in the most difﬁcult intermediate regime, rdn =
(ln n). The proof of Theorem 5.1 took an optimization viewpoint. In particular,
McDiarmid and M¨uller thoroughly investigated the fractional chromatic number,
which is the solution to the linear programming relaxation of the natural integer linear
programme for the chromatic number. This could be reduced to analyzing weighted
integrals that correspond to feasible solutions of the dual linear programme for the
fractional chromatic number. The result then follows on showing that the chromatic
and fractional chromatic numbers are close.

10 Colouring random graphs
219
The most striking consequence of Theorem 5.1 is that χ(Gn(X, r)) and
ω(Gn(X, r)) have the same asymptotic value when rdn = o(ln n), but the two
quantities differ by a multiplicative factor (if the packing density δ is less than 1)
when rdn = ω(ln n). McDiarmid and M¨uller also found a sharp threshold between
these behaviours (again, if δ < 1).
Theorem 5.2 If δ < 1, there is a critical parameter t0, depending only on d and ∥·∥,
for which the following hold for the random geometric graph Gn(X, r):
• if lim supn→∞σrdn/ ln n ≤t0, then χ(Gn(X, r))/ω(Gn(X, r)) →1 a.s.
• if lim infn→∞σrdn/ ln n > t0, then lim infn→∞χ(Gn(X, r))/ω(Gn(X, r)) > 1
a.s.
M¨uller [77] established a general principle of existential concentration for param-
eters of Gn(X, r). Speciﬁc consequences of this principle are that the clique number
ω(Gn(X, r)), the chromatic number χ(Gn(X, r)) and the degeneracy δ∗(Gn(X, r)) of
the random geometric graph are each a.a.s. two-point concentrated if rdn = o(ln n).
The two consecutive values upon which the chromatic number is concentrated remain
unknown except in the very sparse regime as speciﬁed in Theorem 5.1. Furthermore,
in the light of Theorem 5.2, M¨uller suggested that it would be interesting to determine
the location of the threshold (if one exists) for the property that the difference
χ(Gn(X, r)) −ω(Gn(X, r)) is bounded.
6. Random planar graphs and related classes
Given the storied history of chromatic graph theory, it would seem unjust to omit
mention of planar and other embeddable graphs in a colouring survey. A considerable
amount of work has been done on random planar graphs and related models, much of
it in recent years. Let Pn be the set of planar graphs with vertex-set [n] and let Pn be
a graph chosen uniformly at random from Pn. We already see the difﬁculty of this
model in its deﬁnition: to get a good grip on this random object, we essentially need
to enumerate planar graphs as combinatorial structures, regardless of any particular
topological embedding. An advance in our understanding of Pn came about a decade
ago, when McDiarmid, Steger and Welsh [74] used a superadditivity argument to
show the existence of the (labelled) planar graph growth constant γ , satisfying
lim
n→∞
|Pn|
n!
	1/n
= γ .
More recently, Gim´enez and Noy [45] built on work of Bender, Gao and
Wormald [12] in a masterful application of analytic combinatorics. They applied
classical graph-theoretic decompositions according to connectivity, showed that these
translate into basic functional relationships among the corresponding generating
functions, and then applied singularity analysis to these functions to determine γ
exactly. The mere existence of γ , though, was already enough to derive a range of

220
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
properties of Pn, including results on the numbers of vertices of a given degree, of
faces of a given size in any embedding, and of automorphisms. These results were
given as consequences of what is now known as the ‘appearances theorem’ [74,
Theorem 4.1], which says roughly that a.a.s. any connected planar graph appears
in Pn as a pendant copy a linear number of times. Another consequence of the
appearances theorem is that Pn fails to contain a K4 subgraph with probability e−(n).
This implies the following, the ﬁrst part of which is immediate.
Theorem 6.1 A.a.s. χ(Pn) = 4. Furthermore, there is an expected quadratic-time
algorithm to provide an optimal colouring of Pn.
The second part of this theorem is an observation of Taraz and Krivelevich (see [74]).
In linear time, we can distinguish between two cases. The ﬁrst is that there is a
K4 subgraph, in which case we apply the quadratic-time 4-colouring algorithm for
planar graphs. In the second case, which occurs with probability e−(n), we colour
the graph optimally using the planar separator theorem, and this takes O(c
√n) time.
This amounts to a quadratic expected running time. One might wonder whether there
is a faster colouring algorithm or a shorter proof of 4-colourability speciﬁc to random
planar graphs; however, the appearances theorem suggests this to be unlikely. With
the above in mind, we might ask what more can be said about colouring random
planar graphs. We take several tacks.
One natural direction, towards a probabilistic analogue of the Ringel–Youngs
theorem, is to consider graphs embeddable in a ﬁxed surface S. Let Sn be a graph
chosen uniformly at random from the set of graphs embeddable in S with vertex-
set [n]. These graph classes were ﬁrst considered in [69], where it was shown, for
example, that they all possess a growth constant, and indeed all have the same growth
constant γ (as we met for planar graphs). It then follows by an appearances statement
(linearly many pendant copies of each connected planar graph) that χ(Sn) ≥4
a.a.s. due to K4 subgraphs. With additional ingredients from topological graph theory
and generating function analysis, Chapuy, Fusy, Gim´enez, Mohar and Noy [22]
obtained more precise results on Sn. One consequence of their work was that a.a.s. Sn
has arbitrarily large face-width, indicating local planarity. A result of Thomassen [85]
then implies that a.a.s. Sn is properly 5-colourable. Thus the following holds.
Theorem 6.2 A.a.s. χ(Sn) is 4 or 5.
It was conjectured in [22] that 4 is a.a.s. the correct value. Recall from Chapter 6
that the choosability ch(G) of a graph G is the least k for which, for any assignment
of lists of at least k colours at each vertex, there is always a proper colouring
of G so that each vertex is given a colour from its list. (We discuss choosability
further in Section 7.) The choosability of Sn has been determined exactly: a list-
colouring extension [29] of the aforementioned result of Thomassen, together with
the appearances statement for some non-4-choosable (connected) planar graph, imply
that ch(Sn) = 5 a.a.s.

10 Colouring random graphs
221
From surfaces, one could continue further by studying graphs chosen uniformly
from a minor-closed class, as was done in [70]. We comment on one particular
aspect of this study which is relevant to chromatic graph theory. In the Introduction,
we mentioned that Gn,1/2 generates a plethora of counter-examples to an over-
strengthened form of Hadwiger’s conjecture. Let us rather consider Hadwiger’s
conjecture itself from the viewpoint of random graphs. Recall that this conjecture
asserts that, for any positive integer k, each k-chromatic graph has Kk as a minor.
It has been proved for k ≤6. Fix an integer k ≥7, and let Ex(Kk) denote the
class of graphs without Kk as a minor. Since the class Ex(Kk) is ‘addable’ (meaning
that it satisﬁes some simple decomposition closure properties), it then has a growth
constant and so admits an appearances theorem (linearly many pendant copies of
each connected member of Ex(Kk)). So, if Hadwiger’s conjecture fails for k, then it
should be ‘easy’ to ﬁnd counter-examples: if Gn is chosen uniformly at random from
the set of graphs in Ex(Kk) on the vertex-set [n], then χ(Gn) ≥k with probability
1 −e−(n).
Next, we consider random planar graphs of a given density. Let Pn,m be a graph
chosen uniformly at random from the set of all planar graphs on [n] with m edges;
any such graph satisﬁes m ≤3n −6. This model is directly inspired by Gn,m or
Gn,p, although the condition of planarity clearly imposes extra difﬁculties. As a
by-product of their analytic work, Gim´enez and Noy exactly determined the growth
constant for the asymptotic number of planar graphs on [n] with cn edges, for
c ∈(1, 3). Recently, M. Kang and Łuczak [50], investigating what happens around
c = 1, proved (by a combination of counting and analytic methods) a phenomenon
akin to, though qualitatively distinct from, the emergence of the ‘giant component’
in Gn,p. Around c = 1, something also occurs with respect to the chromatic number
of Pn,m.
Theorem 6.3
If lim supn→∞m/n < 1, then χ(Pn,m) ≤3 a.a.s.
If lim infn→∞m/n > 1, then χ(Pn,m) = 4 a.a.s. and there is an expected quadratic-
time algorithm for an optimal colouring of Pn,m.
Kang and Łuczak showed the ﬁrst part as a corollary to structural properties that
they proved for Pn,m in the sparse regime. The second part follows from work of
Dowden; in particular, the argument is similar to that above for Pn, but with an
appearances theorem for random planar graphs of a given edge density (up to and
including 3) (see [31, Theorem 61] and [32]). This demonstrates a phase transition in
the behaviour of χ(Pn,m). It would be of interest to understand more precisely how
χ(Pn,m) behaves when m/n →1.
Our last tack is to consider the stability number of Pn. Obviously, α(Pn) ≥1
4n, but
is it a.a.s. much higher? We do not determine α(Pn), but we shall quickly show that
the answer is yes. Recall that the core (or 2-core) core(G) of a graph G is the unique
maximal subgraph with minimum degree at least 2. Call fr(G) = G \ core(G) the
fringe of G. Take G to be a 4-colourable graph with n vertices. Since core(G) is also

222
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
4-colourable, it has a bipartite induced subgraph B with |B| ≥1
2(n −| fr(G)|). The
vertices of fr(G) can be added one by one to B so that it remains bipartite, yielding a
bipartite graph B′ with |B′| ≥1
2(n−| fr(G)|)+| fr(G)| = 1
2(n+| fr(G)|). Thus α(G) ≥
1
4(n + | fr(G)|). Applying this to Pn, using the fact shown in [71] that | fr(Pn)|/n →
δ ≈0.038157 a.a.s., we conclude that α(Pn) ≥(0.25 + 0.019)n = 0.269n a.a.s. The
question remains, how large is α(Pn) a.a.s.?
7. Other colourings
In this section we hint at the variety of research, even within random graph theory,
on other types of graph colouring. We have had to limit ourselves to brief accounts
for a small selection of topics, showing the tip of the iceberg. Moreover, we mainly
consider just the symmetric case Gn,1/2, the dense Erd˝os–R´enyi random graph, as in
Section 2. Some of the results mentioned below extend to other (sparser) choices of
p, to varying extents.
Strengthened colourings
Equitable chromatic number
A proper colouring is equitable if the orders of the colour classes differ by at most 1.
The celebrated Hajnal–Szemer´edi theorem states that every graph G has an equitable
proper k-colouring, for each k ≥(G) + 1. The least k for which G has an equitable
proper k-colouring is the equitable chromatic number χ=(G) of G. The property of
equitable k-colourability is not monotone in k, but in the light of the above statement
the following deﬁnition is natural. The least k for which G has an equitable proper
k′-colouring for every k′ ≥k is the equitable chromatic threshold χ∗
=(G) of G. Note
that χ(G) ≤χ=(G) ≤χ∗
=(G) always.
Krivelevich and Patk´os [56] re-purposed the greedy processes, both of Grimmett
and McDiarmid and of Bollob´as, to prove the following.
Theorem 7.1
A.a.s. χ=(Gn,1/2) ≤(1 + o(1))χ(Gn,1/2)
and χ∗
=(Gn,1/2) ≤(2 + o(1))χ(Gn,1/2).
They obtained partial results for other values of p and have furthermore conjectured
that χ∗
=(Gn,p) ≤(1 + o(1))χ(Gn,p) a.a.s. if np →∞. Further results have been
obtained by Rombach and Scott [80].
Choosability
We deﬁned the choosability ch(G) of a graph G in Section 6 – see also Chapter 6.
In a ﬁrst paper on choosability in 1979, Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor conjectured that

10 Colouring random graphs
223
ch(Gn,1/2) = o(n) a.a.s. This conjecture was proved by Alon [4] in 1992. Shortly
thereafter, Kahn proved the following theorem (see [5]).
Theorem 7.2 A.a.s. ch(Gn,1/2) = (1 + o(1))χ(Gn,1/2).
Kahn’s proof is elegant. The idea is to extract repeatedly (using Theorem 2.4) a
large colour class for any colour that appears on more than n/ log2 n vertices, and
at the end to match the remaining vertices with the remaining colours using Hall’s
theorem. Later, Krivelevich [55] extended Theorem 7.2 to hold for p as low as n−α
with α < 1
4, which was soon after improved to α < 1
3 in [58]. Alon, Krivelevich
and Sudakov [8] conjectured that Theorem 7.2 extends to the case np →∞. They
obtained partial progress on this conjecture, getting the correct value up to a constant
multiple; this was proved independently by Vu [86].
Edge-colourings and total colourings
Chromatic index
Recall from Chapter 5 that a proper edge-colouring of a graph G is an assignment
of colours to the edges so that incident edges receive different colours; the chromatic
index χ′(G) is the least number of colours needed for such a colouring. Vizing’s
theorem states that χ′(G) is (G) or (G) + 1; those graphs with the smaller value
are of class 1 while those with the larger are of class 2. By noticing that Gn,1/2
a.a.s. has a unique vertex of maximum degree, Erd˝os and Wilson [37] in 1977 proved
the following.
Theorem 7.3 A.a.s. Gn,1/2 is of class 1.
A decade later, Frieze, Jackson, McDiarmid and Reed [42] improved on this by
showing that the probability of Gn,1/2 being of class 2 satisﬁes, for any ﬁxed ε > 0
and large enough n,
n−(1/2+ε)n ≤P(Gn,1/2 is of class 2) ≤n−(1/8−ε)n.
They proved the upper bound by analyzing a certain polynomial-time edge-colouring
algorithm and bounding its failure probability. The lower bound relied on bounding
the probability that Gn,1/2 is regular.
Total chromatic number
A total colouring of a graph G is an assignment of a colour to each vertex and each
edge so that no pair of adjacent vertices or adjacent edges receive the same colour
and every edge is coloured differently from its endpoints. The total chromatic number
χ′′(G) is the least number of colours needed for such a colouring. It is obvious that
χ′′(G) ≥(G) + 1 for all G. The total colouring conjecture, due independently to
Behzad and Vizing, asserts that χ′′(G) ≤(G) + 2 for all G. Molloy and Reed have

224
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
shown by probabilistic means that there is a (not incredibly large) constant C for
which χ′′(G) ≤(G) + C for all G (see [75, Chs. 17–18]). Before that, McDiarmid
and Reed [73] in 1993 studied χ′′(Gn,1/2). Partly by adapting the above-mentioned
algorithm for edge-colouring and partly by invoking the probabilistic method, they
proved the following.
Theorem 7.4
P(χ′′(Gn,1/2) > (Gn,1/2) + 1) ≤n−(1/8−ε)n.
P(χ′′(Gn,1/2) > (Gn,1/2) + 2) = e−(n2).
The second bound in particular implies that Gn,1/2 satisﬁes the total colouring
conjecture up to a minuscule failure probability.
Generalized colourings
Hereditary properties
A graph property is hereditary if it is closed under vertex deletion. (Note, for
example, that every monotone graph property is hereditary.) Given some ﬁxed
hereditary property P, the (generalized) P-chromatic number χP(G) of a graph G
is the least number of parts in a vertex partition of G for which each part induces a
subgraph satisfying P. By taking P to be the set of all edgeless graphs, we recover
the ordinary chromatic number. If P is the set of all graphs or is ﬁnite, then χP(G)
is uninteresting; so we assume otherwise, calling such properties non-trivial. In
1992 Scheinerman [81] discovered that a non-trivial general statement is possible.
In particular, for non-trivial hereditary P, χP(Gn,1/2) = O(n/ log n) a.a.s. A few
years later, Bollob´as and Thomason [19] proved the following tighter result.
Theorem 7.5 For any non-trivial hereditary property P, there is a constant c =
c1/2(P) for which χP(Gn,1/2) = (c + o(1))n/(2 log n) a.a.s.
To prove this, they used a well-known asymptotic characterization of hereditary
properties according to a particular extremal parameter. Given non-negative integers
a and b, we say that an (a, b)-colouring of a graph G is a partition of the vertex-set
into a cliques and b stable sets. The colouring number τ(P) of a hereditary property
P is the largest k for which there are a and b with a + b = k for which every (a, b)-
colourable graph has property P. It was known that the parameter τ(P) governs the
asymptotic behaviour of the cardinality |Pn| of graphs on [n] satisfying P. Bollob´as
and Thomason showed moreover that τ(P) determines the constant c in Theorem 7.5.
In follow-up work [20], they extended this theorem to other ﬁxed values of p ∈(0, 1),
with cp(P) in the place of c1/2(P). This problem gave exception to the rule that
a result for Gn,1/2 is easily extendable to the entire dense regime. An application
of Szemer´edi’s regularity lemma was needed to approximate the given hereditary

10 Colouring random graphs
225
property structurally. Marchant and Thomason [61] recently improved this structural
approximation to shed more light on how to compute speciﬁc values of cp(P).
Improper colourings
Given a non-negative integer t, a t-improper colouring of G is a vertex partition in
which each part induces a subgraph of maximum degree at most t; the t-improper
chromatic number χt(G) is the least number of parts needed for such a partition.
This type of chromatic parameter can be used to measure the effects of a controlled
amount of error in our graph colourings, which can be helpful in certain applications,
such as in channel assignment or in distributed computing. Clearly, t = 0 corresponds
to the ordinary chromatic number. It is known (and fairly easy to see) that
χ(G)
t + 1 ≤χt(G) ≤min
(G) + 1
t + 1

, χ(G)

.
The authors in [51] considered χt(Gn,1/2) when t is allowed to increase as a
function of n. In particular, the above theorem for hereditary properties does not
apply in this situation. If t = o(log n), then χt(Gn,1/2) has the same a.a.s. ﬁrst-order
behaviour as χ(Gn,1/2), while χt(Gn,1/2) ∼np/t a.a.s. if t = ω(log n). This implies
that the above upper bound on χt(G) for general G is usually the right asymptotic
answer for Gn,1/2. The following is a fuller and more detailed result.
Theorem 7.6 There exists a function κ = κ1/2(τ) that is continuous and strictly
increasing for τ ∈[0, ∞), with κ1/2(0) = 2/ ln 2 and κ1/2(τ) ∼2τ as τ →∞, for
which, if t(n) = o(n), then a.a.s.
χt(Gn,1/2) ∼
n
κ1/2(t/ ln n) ln n.
This result was proved by a careful study of the nearly maximum t-stable sets
– vertex subsets that induce subgraphs of maximum degree at most t – using tools
from large deviations analysis. Such tools were critical in computing both the ﬁrst
and second moments, especially at the threshold t = (log n). Other more precise
results on both the t-stability and t-improper chromatic numbers of Gn,p can be found
in [38] and [39].
References
1. D. Achlioptas and E. Friedgut, A sharp threshold for k-colorability, Random Structures
Algorithms 14 (1999), 63–70.
2. D. Achlioptas and C. Moore, The chromatic number of random regular graphs, Proc. 7th
International Workshop on Approximation Algorithms for Combinatorial Optimization
Problems (APPROX) and 8th International Workshop on Randomization and Computation
(RANDOM), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer (2004), 219–228.
3. D. Achlioptas and A. Naor, The two possible values of the chromatic number of a random
graph, Ann. of Math. (2) 162 (2005), 1335–1351.

226
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
4. N. Alon, Choice numbers of graphs: a probabilistic approach, Combin. Probab. Comput.
1 (1992), 107–114.
5. N. Alon, Restricted colorings of graphs, Surveys in Combinatorics, 1993 (Keele) (ed. K.
Walker), London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes 187, Cambridge Univ. Press (1993), 1–33.
6. N. Alon, The chromatic number of random Cayley graphs, Europ. J. Combin. 34 (2013),
1232–1243.
7. N. Alon and M. Krivelevich, The concentration of the chromatic number of random
graphs, Combinatorica 17 (1997), 303–313.
8. N. Alon, M. Krivelevich and B. Sudakov, List coloring of random and pseudo-random
graphs, Combinatorica 19 (1999), 453–472.
9. N. Alon and J. Spencer, The Probabilistic Method (3rd edn.), with an appendix on the
life and work of Paul Erd˝os, Wiley–Interscience Series in Discrete Mathematics and
Optimization, 2008.
10. S. Ben-Shimon and M. Krivelevich, Random regular graphs of non-constant degree:
concentration of the chromatic number, Discrete Math. 309 (2009), 4149–4161.
11. E. A. Bender and E. R. Canﬁeld, The asymptotic number of labeled graphs with given
degree sequences, J. Combin. Theory (A) 24 (1978), 296–307.
12. E. A. Bender, Z. Gao and N. C. Wormald, The number of labeled 2-connected planar
graphs, Electron. J. Combin. 9, Research Paper 43, 13 pp. (electronic), 2002.
13. B. Bollob´as, A probabilistic proof of an asymptotic formula for the number of labelled
regular graphs, Europ. J. Combin. 1 (1980), 311–316.
14. B. Bollob´as, The chromatic number of random graphs, Combinatorica 8 (1988), 49–55.
15. B. Bollob´as, Random Graphs (2nd edn.), Cambridge Studies in Advanced Math. 73,
2001.
16. B. Bollob´as, How sharp is the concentration of the chromatic number?, Combin. Probab.
Comput. 13 (1) (2004), 115–117.
17. B. Bollob´as and P. Erd˝os, Cliques in random graphs, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc.
80 (1976), 419–427.
18. B. Bollob´as and A. Thomason, Threshold functions, Combinatorica 7 (1987), 35–38.
19. B. Bollob´as and A. Thomason, Generalized chromatic numbers of random graphs.
Random Structures Algorithms 6 (1995), 353–356.
20. B. Bollob´as and A. Thomason, The structure of hereditary properties and colourings of
random graphs, Combinatorica 20 (2000), 173–202.
21. A. Braunstein, R. Mulet, A. Pagnani, M. Weigt and R. Zecchina, Polynomial iterative
algorithms for coloring and analyzing random graphs, Phys. Rev. E (3) 68 (2003),
036702, 15.
22. G. Chapuy, ´E. Fusy, O. Gim´enez, B. Mohar and M. Noy., Asymptotic enumeration and
limit laws for graphs of ﬁxed genus, J. Combin. Theory (A) 118 (2011), 748–777.
23. V. Chv´atal, Almost all graphs with 1.44n edges are 3-colorable, Random Structures
Algorithms 2 (1991), 11–28.
24. A. Coja-Oghlan, Upper-bounding the k-colorability threshold by counting covers, Elec-
tron. J. Combin. 20 (2013), paper 32, 28.
25. A. Coja-Oghlan, C. Efthymiou and S. Hetterich, On the chromatic number of random
regular graphs, ArXiv e-prints, Aug. 2013.
26. A. Coja-Oghlan, K. Panagiotou and A. Steger, On the chromatic number of random graphs,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 98 (2008), 980–993.
27. A. Coja-Oghlan and D. Vilenchik, Chasing the k-colorability threshold, ArXiv e-prints,
Apr. 2013.
28. C. Cooper, A. Frieze, B. Reed and O. Riordan, Random regular graphs of non-constant
degree: independence and chromatic number, Combin. Probab. Comput. 11 (2002),
323–341.

10 Colouring random graphs
227
29. M. DeVos, K. Kawarabayashi and B. Mohar, Locally planar graphs are 5-choosable, J.
Combin. Theory (B) 98 (2008), 1215–1232.
30. J. D´ıaz, A. C. Kaporis, G. D. Kemkes, L. M. Kirousis, X. P´erez-Gim´enez and N. C.
Wormald, On the chromatic number of a random 5-regular graph, J. Graph Theory 61
(2009), 157–191.
31. C.
Dowden,
Uniform
Random
Planar
Graphs
with
Degree
Constraints,
Ph.D.
thesis,
University
of
Oxford,
2008,
http://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid%
3Af8a9afe3-30ad-4672-9a6c-4fb9ac9af041.
32. C. Dowden, The evolution of uniform random planar graphs, Electron. J. Combin. 17
(2010), R7, 20 pp.
33. M. Dyer, A. Frieze and C. Greenhill, On the chromatic number of a random hypergraph,
ArXiv e-prints, Aug. 2012.
34. P. Erd˝os, Graph theory and probability, Canad. J. Math. 11 (1959), 34–38.
35. P. Erd˝os and S. Fajtlowicz, On the conjecture of Haj´os, Combinatorica 1 (1981), 141–143.
36. P. Erd˝os and A. R´enyi, On the evolution of random graphs, Magyar Tud. Akad. Mat. Kutat´o
Int. K¨ozl. 5 (1960), 17–61.
37. P. Erd˝os and R. J. Wilson, On the chromatic index of almost all graphs, J. Combin. Theory
(B) 23 (1977), 255–257.
38. N. Fountoulakis, R. J. Kang and C. McDiarmid, The t-stability number of a random graph,
Electron. J. Combin. 17 (2010), R59, 29 pp.
39. N. Fountoulakis, R. J. Kang and C. McDiarmid, Largest sparse subgraphs of random
graphs, Europ. J. Combin. 35 (2014), 232–244.
40. E. Friedgut, Sharp thresholds of graph properties, and the k-SAT problem, with an
appendix by Jean Bourgain, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 12 (1999), 1017–1054.
41. A. Frieze, On the independence number of random graphs, Discrete Math. 81 (1990),
171–175.
42. A. Frieze, B. Jackson, C. McDiarmid and B. Reed, Edge-colouring random graphs,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 45 (1988), 135–149.
43. A. Frieze and T. Łuczak, On the independence and chromatic numbers of random regular
graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 54 (1992), 123–132.
44. A. Frieze and E. Vigoda, A survey on the use of Markov chains to randomly sample colour-
ings, Combinatorics, Complexity, and Chance (eds. G. Grimmett and C. McDiarmid),
Oxford Lecture Ser. Math. Appl. 34, Oxford Univ. Press (2007), 53–71.
45. O. Gim´enez and M. Noy, Asymptotic enumeration and limit laws of planar graphs,
J. Amer. Math. Soc. 22 (2009), 309–329.
46. B. Green, On the chromatic number of random Cayley graphs, ArXiv e-prints, Aug. 2013.
47. B. Green and R. Morris, Counting sets with small sumset and applications, ArXiv e-prints,
May 2013.
48. G. Grimmett and C. McDiarmid, On colouring random graphs, Math. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc. 77 (1975), 313–324.
49. S. Janson, T. Łuczak and A. Ruci´nski, Random Graphs, Wiley–Interscience Series in
Discrete Math. and Optimization, 2000.
50. M. Kang and T. Łuczak, Two critical periods in the evolution of random planar graphs,
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 364 (2012), 4239–4265.
51. R. J. Kang and C. McDiarmid, The t-improper chromatic number of random graphs,
Combin. Probab. Comput. 19 (2010), 87–98.
52. R. M. Karp, The probabilistic analysis of some combinatorial search algorithms, Algo-
rithms and Complexity (Carnegie-Mellon Univ., 1976) (ed. J. F. Traub), Academic Press
(1976), 1–19.
53. G. Kemkes, X. P´erez-Gim´enez and N. C. Wormald, On the chromatic number of random
d-regular graphs, Adv. Math. 223 (2010), 300–328.

228
Ross J. Kang and Colin McDiarmid
54. J. H. Kim and V. H. Vu, Sandwiching random graphs: universality between random graph
models, Adv. Math. 188 (2004), 444–469.
55. M. Krivelevich, The choice number of dense random graphs, Combin. Probab. Comput. 9
(2000), 19–26.
56. M. Krivelevich and B. Patk´os, Equitable coloring of random graphs, Random Structures
Algorithms 35 (2009), 83–99.
57. M. Krivelevich, B. Sudakov, V. H. Vu and N. C. Wormald, Random regular graphs of high
degree, Random Structures Algorithms 18 (2001), 346–363.
58. M. Krivelevich, B. Sudakov, V. H. Vu and N. C. Wormald, On the probability of
independent sets in random graphs, Random Structures Algorithms 22 (2003), 1–14.
59. T. Łuczak, The chromatic number of random graphs, Combinatorica 11 (1991),
45–54.
60. T. Łuczak, A note on the sharp concentration of the chromatic number of random graphs,
Combinatorica 11 (1991), 295–297.
61. E. Marchant and A. Thomason, The structure of hereditary properties and 2-coloured
multigraphs, Combinatorica 31 (2011), 85–93.
62. D. W. Matula, On the complete subgraphs of a random graph, Proc. Second Chapel Hill
Conf. on Combinatorial Mathematics and its Applications (Univ. of North Carolina, 1970),
Univ. of North Carolina, Chapel Hill (1970), 356–369.
63. D. W. Matula, The employee party problem, Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 19 (1972),
A–382.
64. D. W. Matula, Expose-and-merge exploration and the chromatic number of a random
graph, Combinatorica 7 (1987), 275–284.
65. D. W. Matula and L. Kuˇcera, An expose-and-merge algorithm and the chromatic number
of a random graph, Random Graphs ’87 (Pozna´n, 1987) (eds. M. Karo´nski, J. Jaworski
and A. Ruci´nski), Wiley (1990), 175–187.
66. C. McDiarmid, Colouring random graphs badly, Graph Theory and Combinatorics (Open
Univ., Milton Keynes, 1978) (ed. R. J. Wilson), Research Notes in Math. 34, Pitman
(1979), 76–86.
67. C. McDiarmid, On the chromatic number of random graphs, Random Structures Algo-
rithms 1 (1990), 435–442.
68. C. McDiarmid, Random channel assignment in the plane, Random Structures Algorithms
22 (2003), 187–212.
69. C. McDiarmid, Random graphs on surfaces, J. Combin. Theory (B) 98 (2008), 778–797.
70. C. McDiarmid, Random graphs from a minor-closed class, Combin. Probab. Comput. 18
(2009), 583–599.
71. C. McDiarmid, Random graphs from a weighted minor-closed class, Electron. J. Combin.
20 (2013), R52, 39 pp.
72. C. McDiarmid and T. M¨uller, On the chromatic number of random geometric graphs,
Combinatorica 31 (2011), 423–488.
73. C. McDiarmid and B. Reed, On total colourings of graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 57
(1993), 122–130.
74. C. McDiarmid, A. Steger and D. Welsh, Random planar graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 93
(2005), 187–205.
75. M. Molloy and B. Reed, Graph Colouring and the Probabilistic Method, Algorithms and
Combinatorics 23, Springer-Verlag, 2002.
76. R. Mulet, A. Pagnani, M. Weigt and R. Zecchina, Coloring random graphs, Phys. Rev. Lett.
89 (2002), 268701, 4.
77. T. M¨uller, Two-point concentration in random geometric graphs, Combinatorica 28
(2008), 529–545.

10 Colouring random graphs
229
78. K. Panagiotou and A. Steger, A note on the chromatic number of a dense random graph,
Discrete Math. 309 (2009), 3420–3423.
79. M. Penrose, Random Geometric Graphs, Oxford Studies in Probability 5, Oxford
University Press, 2003.
80. M. P. Rombach and A. Scott, Equitable colourings of random graphs, in preparation, 2014.
81. E. R. Scheinerman, Generalized chromatic numbers of random graphs, SIAM J. Discrete
Math. 5 (1992), 74–80.
82. E. Shamir and J. Spencer, Sharp concentration of the chromatic number on random graphs
Gn,p, Combinatorica 7 (1987), 121–129.
83. L. Shi and N. C. Wormald, Colouring random 4-regular graphs, Combin. Probab. Comput.
16 (2007), 309–344.
84. L. Shi and N. C. Wormald, Colouring random regular graphs, Combin. Probab. Comput.
16 (2007), 459–494.
85. C. Thomassen, Five-coloring maps on surfaces, J. Combin. Theory (B) 59 (1993), 89–105.
86. V. H. Vu, On some simple degree conditions that guarantee the upper bound on the
chromatic (choice) number of random graphs, J. Graph Theory 31 (1999), 201–226.
87. N. C. Wormald, Differential equations for random processes and random graphs,
Ann. Appl. Probab. 5 (1995), 1217–1235.
88. N. C. Wormald, Models of random regular graphs, Surveys in Combinatorics, 1999
(Canterbury) (eds. J. D. Lamb and D. A. Preece), London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes 267,
Cambridge Univ. Press (1999), 239–298.

11
Hypergraph colouring
CSILLA BUJT ´AS, ZSOLT TUZA and VITALY VOLOSHIN
1. Introduction
2. Proper vertex- and edge-colourings
3. C-colourings
4. Colourings of mixed hypergraphs
5. Colour-bounded and stably bounded hypergraphs
6. Conclusion
References
We discuss the colouring theory of ﬁnite set systems. This is not merely an
extension of results from collections of 2-element sets (graphs) to larger
sets. The wider structure (hypergraphs) offers many interesting new kinds of
problems, which either have no analogues in graph theory or become trivial
when we restrict them to graphs.
1. Introduction
In this introductory section we give the most important deﬁnitions required to study
hypergraph colouring, and brieﬂy survey the half-century history of this topic. For
more details on the material of Sections 1 and 2 we refer to Berge [8], Zykov [76]
and Duchet [27].
Let V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} be a ﬁnite set of elements called vertices, and let E =
{E1, E2, . . . , Em} be a family of subsets of V called edges or hyperedges. The pair
H = (V, E) is called a hypergraph with vertex-set V = V(H) and edge-set E =
E(H). The hypergraph H = (V, E) is sometimes called a set system. If each edge of
a hypergraph contains precisely two vertices, then it is a graph. As in graph theory,
the number |V| = n is called the order of the hypergraph. Edges with fewer than
two elements are usually allowed, but will be disregarded here. Thus, throughout this
chapter we assume that each edge E ∈E contains at least two vertices, unless stated
explicitly otherwise. Edges that coincide are called multiple edges.

11 Hypergraph colouring
231
In a hypergraph, two vertices are said to be adjacent if there is an edge containing
both of these vertices. The adjacent vertices are sometimes called neighbours of each
other, and the set of neighbours of a given vertex v is called the (open) neighbourhood
N(v) of v. If v ∈E, then the vertex v and the edge E are incident with each other. For
an edge E, the number |E| is called the size or cardinality of E.
If every edge of H is of size r, then H is called an r-uniform hypergraph; evidently,
a simple graph is a 2-uniform hypergraph. For 2 ≤r ≤n, we deﬁne the complete
r-uniform hypergraph to be the hypergraph Kr
n = (V, E) for which |V| = n and E
is the family of all subsets of V of size r. Thus, the complete 2-uniform hypergraph
K2
n is the complete graph Kn. Traditionally, for a set X and an integer k ≥1, the
family of all k-element subsets of X is denoted by
X
k

. With this notation we have
Kr
n = (V,
V
r

).
A subset of vertices S ⊆V is called stable (or independent) if no edge of H is a
subset of S. The maximum cardinality of a stable set is termed the stability number
(or independence number) α(H) of H.
A proper λ-colouring of a hypergraph H = (V, E) is a mapping c : V →
{1, 2, . . . , λ} for which every edge E ∈E has at least two vertices of different colours.
The number of proper λ-colourings of H is a polynomial in λ; it is denoted by P(H, λ)
and is called the chromatic polynomial. The minimum value of λ for which there
exists a proper λ-colouring of a hypergraph H is called the chromatic number of H,
denoted by χ(H). A hypergraph H is k-colourable if χ(H) ≤k, and is k-chromatic
if χ(H) = k. When χ(H) ≤2, the hypergraph H is called bicolourable; in parts of
the literature the term ‘bipartite’ is also used.
As for graphs, proper colourings generate partitions of the vertex-set into a number
of stable (monochromatic) non-empty subsets called colour classes, with as many
classes as the number of colours actually used.
A graph G = (V, E) is called a host graph of a hypergraph H = (V, E) if each edge
of H induces a connected subgraph in G. Some structural subclasses of hypergraphs
are identiﬁed referring to this notion. In particular, interval hypergraphs, hyperstars,
hypertrees and circular hypergraphs are deﬁned as hypergraphs with a host graph
that is a path, star, tree or cycle. Since 1-element edges are excluded, a ‘hyperstar’
means that the intersection of all edges is non-empty.
Historical background
The above deﬁnitions represent natural generalizations of the respective concepts
from graph theory. It was realized in the early 1960s that many graph-theoretical
methods can be successfully extended to the more general structure of set sys-
tems. The term ‘hypergraph’ was ﬁrst suggested at the seminar series of Claude
Berge [9].
The colouring of hypergraphs started in 1966 when Erd˝os and Hajnal [31]
introduced the notions of colouring and the chromatic number of a hypergraph, and
obtained the ﬁrst important results. In particular, they deﬁned the colouring number,

232
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
whose graph analogue is also called the ‘Szekeres–Wilf number’ and is equal to the
‘degeneracy’ + 1; this became an important tool in studying the chromatic number
of a hypergraph. From the deﬁnition, in a proper colouring no edge is allowed to
be monochromatic. In the literature these colourings are sometimes called weak
colourings.
This generalization of graph colourings initiated a wide area of further research.
First, some old problems in set systems were formulated as colouring problems and
many results in graph colouring were extended to hypergraphs. For example, using
a natural generalization of the degree of a vertex, the classic theorem of Brooks (see
Chapter 2) was shown to hold for hypergraphs (see [8], [76]). Another generalization
of the degree of a vertex allowed Tomescu [61] to extend to hypergraphs some
advanced upper bounds on the chromatic number from graph results of Welsh and
Powell [71]. Berge [8] introduced the β-degree of a vertex and showed that by using
it many previous bounds follow, including those related to the chromatic number.
In addition, it provided an algorithm for ﬁnding a bound on the chromatic number of
a hypergraph.
It is well known that bipartite graphs play a signiﬁcant role in graph theory.
A simple but very important characterization of them is the one by K¨onig, that a graph
is bipartite if and only if it contains no odd cycles. For hypergraphs, there is no such
simple condition for bicolourability, although some criteria in terms of transversal
hypergraphs were found by Berge [8]. In the next section we present some further
important sufﬁcient conditions on bicolourability. Also, the bicolourable hypergraphs
were the ﬁrst application of the widely used Lov´asz local lemma [32]. Many more
classes of hypergraphs generalizing bipartite graphs have been investigated; see [8]
for details.
It is generally accepted that graph colouring started in 1852 with the question of
whether any map can be coloured using just four colours (see Chapter 1). It eventually
led to the concept of a planar graph. In 1974 Zykov [76] introduced the notion
of a planar hypergraph and obtained the ﬁrst results on them. He also generalized
the notions of connection–contraction and of the Hadwiger number of a graph (see
Chapter 4). The latter makes it possible to consider hypergraph versions of problems
related to Hadwiger’s conjecture.
Sometimes a hypergraph approach permits problems to be solved more easily than
a graph approach. A celebrated example is Berge’s weak perfect graph conjecture,
which was ﬁrst proved by Lov´asz [46] using so-called normal hypergraphs.
Many generalizations of graph colourings to hypergraphs are more speciﬁc and
more restrictive than the Erd˝os–Hajnal approach. We discuss a few of these in the
following sections. However, there is one thing that they have in common: they
all have graph analogues, because they all emerged from a single concept – graph
colourings: this means that they all exclude monochromatic edges. As we see next, a
new approach that is even more general than the Erd˝os–Hajnal generalization allows
us to introduce colourings that have no analogues for graph colouring. In part, this
is because, by assumption, the possibility of monochromatic edges is not excluded.

11 Hypergraph colouring
233
We may observe further that the Erd˝os–Hajnal classic concept of hypergraph
colouring is asymmetric: with the chromatic number as its central notion, this
theory focuses on the minimum number of colours, while the maximum number of
colours has no mathematical interest since a totally multicoloured vertex-set is always
feasible. This asymmetry of classical hypergraph colouring was inherited from graph
colouring.
A different direction for research concerns the maximum number of colours,
excluding polychromatic edges. In hypergraph terms this was proposed by Berge and
was ﬁrst investigated in detail by Sterboul [59] in the early 1970s. We may say that
the so-called ‘sub-Ramsey numbers’ and ‘rainbow numbers’ also ﬁt here, but those
studies went along a different track and were not investigated as widely. We discuss
the hypergraph version under the name ‘C-colouring’. Although the ﬁrst published
paper on this is more than forty years old, it gained its importance only two decades
ago when a more general model was born.
In 1993 Voloshin [66], [67] introduced the concept of a mixed hypergraph
colouring, which eliminated the above asymmetry and opened up an entirely new
direction of research. Instead of H = (V, E), the basic idea is to consider a structure
H = (V, C, D), termed a mixed hypergraph, with two families of subsets called
C-edges and D-edges. By deﬁnition, a proper λ-colouring of a mixed hypergraph
H = (V, C, D) is a mapping c : V →{1, 2, . . . , λ} for which two conditions hold:
• every C ∈C has at least two vertices of a Common colour
• every D ∈D has at least two vertices of Different colours.
Formally, this is a combination of classical proper colourings and C-colourings, but
mixed hypergraphs were introduced independently.
The concept of a mixed hypergraph colouring has led to the discovery of new
principal properties of colourings that do not exist in classical graph and hypergraph
colourings: uncolourability in its most general setting, chromatic polynomials of
degree less than n, phantom vertices, gaps in the chromatic spectrum, and hypergraph
perfection, to name just a few. Moreover, it led to the introduction and study of
new classes of hypergraphs, and further types of constraints that are imposed on
the edges of a hypergraph when we colour the vertices. It also brings a new look at
some classical graph and hypergraph colouring problems, such as colouring planar
hypergraphs, chromatic polynomials, edge-colourings, colouring and probability,
colouring algorithms, and so on. Finally, it has generated, and continues to gener-
ate, a wide variety of combinatorial problems and applications that formerly had
no analogues. (The newest, and perhaps most unexpected, application of mixed
hypergraphs is the modelling of problems arising in distributed computing and
cybersecurity – see [37].) A signiﬁcant number of subsequent new ideas, results and
publications have led to a situation where colouring theory as a whole is taking a new
shape.
In the next section we describe a collection of signiﬁcant results in classical
hypergraph colouring, where monochromatic edges are excluded. We then consider
C-colourings, which may be viewed as the counterpart on excluding multicoloured

234
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
edges. In later sections we survey some of the new trends which, in their turn,
give rise to new challenges in this fast-developing area. In particular, Section 4 is
devoted to mixed hypergraphs, which opened up this new dimension of hypergraph
colouring. For further information on these, we refer to the research monograph
[68] and the regularly updated website [69]. Some results and many open problems
are collected in the surveys [64] and [2]. Finally, we discuss an even more general
colouring model of hypergraphs, introduced in 2007 by Bujt´as and Tuza [15], [13].
In that setting, lower and upper bounds on the number of different colours, and those
on the size of the largest monochromatic vertex-subset, can be prescribed for each
edge independently. A hypergraph with these colouring restrictions is called a stably
bounded hypergraph.
2. Proper vertex- and edge-colourings
In this section, we survey the most signiﬁcant results in classical hypergraph colour-
ing, their relationship with graph colouring, and some further general hypergraph
concepts and parameters.
We mention ﬁrst that, for each k ≥2, it is NP-complete to decide in general
whether a hypergraph is k-colourable. It remains NP-complete for k = 2 on
3-uniform hypergraphs (see Lov´asz [47]). For all k ≥2 and r ≥2, it is NP-complete
also on r-uniform hypergraphs in which any two edges share at most one vertex,
except for bipartite graphs when k = r = 2 (see Phelps and R¨odl [55]).
In fact, the decision problem for bicolourability had already been proved to be
NP-hard in 1972 by the following result of Woodall [73].
Theorem 2.1
Let G be a graph, and construct a hypergraph H as follows: each
vertex of H corresponds to an edge of G, and each odd cycle of G forms an edge of
H. Then G is 4-colourable if and only if H is 2-colourable.
For uniform hypergraphs, a sufﬁcient condition for bicolourability can be given in
terms of the number of edges. Erd˝os [29] observed that every r-uniform hypergraph
with at most 2r−1 edges is bicolourable: in fact, assigning one of two colours to each
vertex randomly and independently, we obtain a proper 2-colouring with positive
probability. This bound on the number of edges is not tight and has been improved a
couple of times. The current record is held by Radhakrishnan and Srinivasan [56].
Theorem 2.2 For sufﬁciently large values of r, every r-uniform hypergraph with at
most 0.7 × 2r√r/ ln r edges is bicolourable, and can be properly 2-coloured by a
polynomial-time algorithm.
On the other hand, for every r ≥2, non-bicolourable r-uniform hypergraphs exist
with fewer than r2 2r+1 edges (see Erd˝os [30]).
Hypergraphs that are r-uniform and r-regular are interesting combinatorial
objects – for instance, they describe the neighbourhood structures (both open and
closed) of regular graphs. Concerning their bicolourability, Alon and Bregman [1]

11 Hypergraph colouring
235
proved the sufﬁcient condition r ≥8, and it was recently proved by Henning and
Yeo [36] that r ≥4 is sufﬁcient. (The Fano plane shows that the assertion is not valid
for r = 3.)
A cycle of length s (s ≥2) in a hypergraph H = (V, E) is a sequence
v0E0v1E1v2 . . . vs−1Es−1vs with v0 = vs, consisting of s distinct vertices and s
distinct edges, such that vi, vi+1 ∈Ei for all i = 0, 1, . . . , s −1. Depending on the
parity of s, the cycle is called odd or even. Moreover, the odd cycle v0E0v1E1v2 . . .
vs−1Es−1vs is an anti-Sterboul cycle if any two non-consecutive edges are disjoint
and if |Ei ∩Ei+1| = 1 for every i = 0, 1, . . . , s−2 (but not necessarily for Es−1 ∩E0).
A Sterboul hypergraph is a hypergraph containing no anti-Sterboul cycle.
The next two theorems give sufﬁcient conditions for bicolourability in terms
of conditions imposed on cycles. The ﬁrst one, due to Fournier and Las Vergnas
[33], was the deepest theorem of this kind for several decades. Its formulation
with 3-critical hypergraphs is taken from Zykov [76]. (As for graphs, a k-chromatic
hypergraph is critical if the removal of any edge decreases the chromatic number.)
Theorem 2.3 If every cycle of odd length in a hypergraph H contains three edges
with a vertex in common, then H is bicolourable. Equivalently, every 3-chromatic
critical hypergraph contains an odd cycle in which no three edges have a vertex in
common.
This theorem was recently strengthened by D´efossez [24], who proved an old
conjecture of Sterboul.
Theorem 2.4 Every Sterboul hypergraph is bicolourable.
There are also lower bounds on the number of edges in critical hypergraphs.
The ﬁrst one was proved by Seymour [58] in 1974; the second is more recent, by
Kostochka and Stiebitz [40].
Theorem 2.5
If a hypergraph on n vertices is 3-chromatic critical, then it has at
least n edges.
Theorem 2.6 If a hypergraph on n vertices is (k+1)-chromatic critical and contains
no 2-element edges, then the number of its edges is at least (k −3/
3√
k) n.
Let H = (V, E) be a hypergraph, and let T be a subset of V. Then the hypergraph
H/T = (T, E′) is the restriction of H to T, where E′ consists of all non-empty
intersections of edges of E with T. A hypergraph is said to be balanced if every
odd cycle has an edge that contains three vertices of the cycle. Berge [7] proved the
following characterization.
Theorem 2.7
A hypergraph is balanced if and only if every restriction is
2-colourable.
Let H = (V, E) be a hypergraph. The chromatic index χ′(H) of H is the least
number of colours necessary to colour the edges of H in such a way that any two
intersecting edges have distinct colours.

236
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
For a vertex v, the number of all edges containing v is the degree of v, denoted
by d(v). The maximum vertex-degree in a hypergraph H = (V, E) is (H) =
maxv∈V d(v). For any hypergraph H, it is clear that χ′(H) ≥(H). A hypergraph H
has the edge-colouring property if χ′(H) = (H). In this connection, the following
famous result was proved by Baranyai [6].
Theorem 2.8 If n is a multiple of r, then χ′(Kr
n) = (Kr
n) =
n−1
r−1

.
In a hypergraph H = (V, E), for any subfamily F ⊆E we call the hypergraph
HF = (V, F) the partial subhypergraph of H. We say that a hypergraph H is
normal if every partial subhypergraph of H satisﬁes the edge-colouring property.
The following result was proved by Fournier and Las Vergnas [33].
Theorem 2.9 Every normal hypergraph is bicolourable.
A subset T ⊆V is called a transversal of a hypergraph H = (V, E) if |T ∩E| ≥1
for each edge E ∈E. The cardinality of a minimum transversal is denoted by τ(H).
In a hypergraph H, a set of edges that pairwise have no vertices in common is called a
matching. The maximum size of a matching (over all matchings) is denoted by ν(H).
Since any matching is a set of pairwise non-intersecting edges, any transversal
must have at least one vertex from each edge of the matching. This implies that
τ(H) ≥ν(H) for any hypergraph H. We say that H satisﬁes the K¨onig property if
τ(H) = ν(H). The next theorem, due to Lov´asz [46], is sometimes called the perfect
graph theorem because it implies that the complement of a perfect graph is perfect.
The latter statement was formerly known as the weak perfect graph conjecture,
formulated by Claude Berge in the early 1960s (see Chapter 7).
Theorem 2.10 A hypergraph H is normal if and only if every partial subhypergraph
H′ has the K¨onig property.
Besides normal and balanced hypergraphs, there are many other classes of
hypergraphs that are either bicolourable or generalize the bipartite graphs: hyper-
graphs without odd cycles, unimodular hypergraphs, hypertrees (also called arboreal
hypergraphs), Mengerian hypergraphs, paranormal hypergraphs, and others. The
hierarchy of these and further related classes is exhibited in [8, p.163]. Some of them
have min-max properties arising from bipartite graphs and are used in polyhedral
optimization (see [8], [27]).
It may appear that increasing both the size of edges and the length of the
shortest cycle decreases the chromatic number of a hypergraph and eventually makes
it bicolourable. This is not true: there exist high-chromatic hypergraphs for any
values of these parameters. The following theorem was ﬁrst proved by Erd˝os and
Hajnal [31], and constructions were given later by Lov´asz [45] and by Neˇsetˇril and
V. R¨odl [52].
Theorem 2.11 For any integers r, s, t ≥2, there exists an r-uniform hypergraph H
with no cycles shorter than s, for which χ(H) ≥t.
For a hypergraph H = (V, E), we deﬁne the bipartite (K¨onig) representation of
H to be the bipartite graph B(H) with partite sets V and E, where a vertex v ∈V is

11 Hypergraph colouring
237
adjacent to a vertex E ∈E in B(H) if and only if the vertex v ∈V is incident with the
edge E ∈E in H.
A hypergraph H = (V, E) is said to be planar if B(H) is a planar graph (see
[68], [76]). This means that any planar hypergraph can be drawn in the plane in
the following way: vertices are points; each edge is a closed curve whose interior
region contains the points of the edge, and any two edges intersect only at small
neighbourhoods of their common vertices. The remaining connected regions of the
plane form the faces of such a plane embedding. Planar graphs are special cases of
planar hypergraphs: we can replace the curves corresponding to graph edges with
closed curves encircling the adjacent vertices.
We next cite two results, the ﬁrst by Bulitko and the second by Burshtein and
Kostochka [76, p. 138].
Theorem 2.12
The four-colour theorems for planar graphs and for planar
hypergraphs are equivalent.
Theorem 2.13
If a planar hypergraph contains at most one edge of size 2, then
χ(H) ≤2.
There are several types of more restrictive hypergraph colourings that are regularly
encountered in the literature (see [8], [76], [68]). Here we list some of them.
Strong colouring
A strong λ-colouring of H is a partition of V into λ stable sets Si (i = 1, 2, . . . , λ) such
that the inequality |Ej ∩Si| ≤1 holds for each edge Ej and for every i. The strong
chromatic number γ (H) is the smallest number λ for which there exists a strong
λ-colouring of H. It follows that γ (H) ≥χ(H), because every strong colouring is
also a weak colouring. Note that the strong and weak colourings coincide when H
is a graph. Also, γ (H) is the chromatic number of the 2-section graph of H – that
is, the graph obtained from H on replacing each edge Ej by the complete graph with
vertex-set Ej.
Equitable colouring
An equitable λ-colouring of H is a partition of V into λ stable sets Si (i = 1, 2, . . . , λ)
such that the following inequalities hold for each edge Ej and for each i:
'
|Ej|/λ
(
≤|Ej ∩Si| ≤
)
|Ej|/λ
*
.
Good colouring
A good λ-colouring of H is a partition of V into λ stable sets Si (i = 1, 2, . . . , λ)
such that each edge Ej has min{|Ej|, λ} colours. If λ ≥maxj∈J |Ej|, then a good

238
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
λ-colouring is a strong λ-colouring. For each λ, any equitable λ-colouring is also a
good λ-colouring.
I-regular colouring
For each edge Ej in H, let aj and bj be integers with 0 ≤aj ≤bj < |Ej|. An
I-regular λ-colouring of H is a partition of V into λ stable sets Si (i = 1, 2, . . . , λ),
in such a way that aj ≤|Ej ∩Si| ≤bj for each edge Ej and each i = 1, 2, . . . , λ.
Notice that each weak colouring is an I-regular colouring if aj = 0 and bj = |Ej| −1,
that every strong colouring is an I-regular colouring with aj = 0 and bj = 1, and
that every equitable λ-colouring is an I-regular colouring with aj =
'
|Ej|/λ
(
and
bj =
)
|Ej|/λ
*
.
List-colouring
As for graphs, list-colouring and related notions (see Chapter 6) can also be deﬁned
for hypergraphs; for example, it is also true that the choice number of any hypergraph
is equal to its fractional chromatic number (see [48]). Since a hypergraph can repre-
sent a set system of any generality, this theorem implies the corresponding equality
for many kinds of colourings, including edge- and total-colourings, generalized
colourings deﬁned in terms of hereditary properties, and so on.
There are further connections between hypergraph colourings and extremal prob-
lems, Kneser’s problem, Ramsey-type problems, etc., and many applications. These
issues are not discussed here; for information we refer to [8] and [27].
3. C-colourings
The classical proper colouring of hypergraphs discussed in the previous section
requires that two vertices have different colours inside each edge. A C-colouring
of a hypergraph applies an opposite colouring constraint, prescribing the presence
of two vertices with a Common colour inside each edge. Assigning the same colour
to all vertices always yields a C-colouring. Thus, the essential parameter here is not
the minimum possible number of colours, but the maximum. This is called the upper
chromatic number of a hypergraph H and is denoted by ¯χ(H).
Historically, the upper chromatic number appears in works of Sterboul [59], Berge
[8] (who called ¯χ(H)+1 the ‘cochromatic number’), Voloshin [67] and other authors.
Recent results are surveyed in [20].
The following are some basic facts concerning C-colourings.
• The inequality ¯χ(H) ≤α(H) holds for every hypergraph: indeed, select one vertex
from each colour class of a ¯χ-colouring of H. The ¯χ-element vertex-set obtained
in this way is independent, as otherwise we would have a polychromatic edge.

11 Hypergraph colouring
239
• Denote by τ2(H) the minimum cardinality of a ‘2-transversal’, a vertex-set T ⊆V
for which |T ∩E| ≥2 for each E ∈E. We obtain a C-colouring of H by assigning
colour 1 to each element of T and colouring the remaining vertices with colours
2, 3, . . . , n −τ2 + 1 pairwise differently. This proves that ¯χ(H) ≥n −τ2(H) + 1.
• Let S = (V, E) be a hyperstar, so the intersection +
E∈E E is not empty. In addition,
assume that |E| ≥3 for all E ∈E, and consider a vertex z contained in all edges.
Then on deleting z from each E ∈E we obtain a hypergraph S−for which ¯χ(S) =
α(S−) + 1. Moreover, if S is 3-uniform, then S−is simply a graph. It is thus
easy to see that the determination of the upper chromatic number is an NP-hard
problem, even for the class of 3-uniform hypertrees. Another consequence of this
simple construction is that the difference α(S) −¯χ(S) can be arbitrarily large,
since α(S) = |V| −1.
In connection with the upper chromatic number, Voloshin [67] introduced the
notion of a C-perfect hypergraph. Analogously to the well-known deﬁnition of a
perfect graph, we start with an inequality that is valid for all objects and prescribe that
it hereditarily holds with equality. More precisely, let H = (V, E) be a hypergraph,
and let T be a subset of V. Then the hypergraph H′ = (T, E′) is called the induced
subhypergraph if E′ consists of all edges of E that lie entirely in T. A hypergraph
H is called C-perfect if ¯χ(H′) = α(H′) for every induced subhypergraph H′ ⊆H;
otherwise, H is C-imperfect. Finally, C-imperfect hypergraphs, all of whose proper
induced subhypergraphs are C-perfect, are called minimally C-imperfect.
The following are some basic facts concerning C-perfect and C-imperfect
hypergraphs.
• A typical example of a C-perfect hypergraph is a hyperstar H with | +
E∈E E|≥2.
Indeed, if H is of order n, then α(H) = ¯χ(H) = n −1, and every induced
subhypergraph of it is either edgeless or has at least two vertices contained in the
common intersection of the edges.
• A monostar H is a hyperstar with | +
E∈E E| = 1. It is always C-imperfect, since
¯χ(H) < α(H) = n −1. (For example, the hypergraphs in Fig. 1 are monostars.)
    K1 ⊕K3
     K1 ⊕2K2
     K1 ⊕P4
     K1 ⊕C4
Fig. 1. The four minimal C-imperfect 3-uniform monostars

240
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
• A cycloid Cr
n is an r-uniform circular hypergraph with n vertices and n edges
(where n > r ≥3) for which each edge contains r consecutive vertices of the host
cycle. (See Fig. 2, which is the cycloid C3
5.) Every cycloid of the form Cr
2r−1 (with
r ≥3) is minimally C-imperfect, since α(Cr
2r−1) = 2r −3 and ¯χ(Cr
2r−1) = 2r −4;
moreover, each of its non-edgeless proper induced subhypergraphs is a C-perfect
hyperstar. Otherwise, Cr
n is C-perfect if n ≤2r −2, and C-imperfect (but not
minimally) if n ≥2r.
     Fig. 2. The cycloid C3
5
Clearly, a hypergraph is C-perfect if and only if it has no induced subhypergraph
that is minimally C-imperfect. For some structural subclasses of hypergraphs,
forbidden subhypergraph characterizations have been proved for C-perfectness. The
following statements appear in [23], [18] and [19], respectively.
Theorem 3.1
• An interval hypergraph is C-perfect if and only if it contains no induced monostar.
• Let H be a circular hypergraph in which no edge contains any other edge as a
subset. Then H is C-perfect if and only if it contains no induced monostar and is
not isomorphic to the cycloid Cr
2r−1 for any r ≥3.
• A hypertree is C-perfect if and only if it contains no induced monostar.
It has been conjectured that the number of r-uniform minimally C-imperfect
hypergraphs is ﬁnite for each r, but in fact we do not even know whether there is a
3-uniform minimally C-imperfect hypergraph different from the six examples shown
in Figs. 1, 2 and 3. Here, C6(1, 2, 5) ∪C6(1, 3, 5) is Kr´al’s example [41], which
consists of six edges obtained by rotating clockwise the edge on the left plus two
more edges on the right (they should be in the same vertex-set).
On the number of r-uniform minimally C-imperfect hypergraphs, ﬁniteness has
been veriﬁed in the cases where also the transversal number is bounded. More
precisely, the following result was proved by Bujt´as and Tuza [18].
Theorem 3.2 For each ﬁxed r ≥3 and t ≥1, there are only ﬁnitely many r-uniform
minimally C-imperfect hypergraphs with transversal number t.

11 Hypergraph colouring
241
            rotate
+
Fig. 3. A minimally C-imperfect hypergraph C6(1, 2, 5)∪C6(1, 3, 5) that is neither a monostar
nor a cycloid
In the same paper, Bujt´as and Tuza characterized minimally C-imperfect hyper-
graphs with transversal numbers τ = 2 and τ = 3 and constructed r-uniform
examples with τ
= 2 and 3 for which the number of minimally C-imperfect
constructions increases without bound as r →∞. We do not know any minimally
C-imperfect hypergraphs with τ ≥4.
The C-perfection of a hypergraph may lead to efﬁcient algorithms for solving some
problems that are NP-complete in general. For example, although the determination
of the upper chromatic number is an NP-complete problem, even for just the class
of 3-uniform monostars, the C-perfect hypertrees (even without any restrictions on
edge sizes) can still be ¯χ-coloured in polynomial time (see [19]). On the other hand,
the recognition problem for C-perfect hypertrees is co-NP-complete, but it becomes
polynomial-time solvable if edge-sizes are bounded from above. Further results on
time complexity can be found in [43] and [19], which show that the situation is more
complicated than in the case of graph perfectness.
The minimum number of r-edges, for ¯χ < r
By the pigeonhole principle, for every r-uniform hypergraph H any vertex colouring
with r −1 colours yields a C-colouring; thus, ¯χ(H) ≥r −1 always holds. This
observation leads to the extremal problem of determining the minimum number of
r-element edges on n vertices for which ¯χ = r −1. We denote this minimum number
by f(n, r), where n ≥r ≥2. Alternatively, we can deﬁne f(n, r) to be the minimum
number of r-element subsets of an n-element underlying set V, selected so that, for
each r-partition (V1, V2, . . . , Vr) of V, there exists a selected r-element set S that
intersects each Vi in precisely one element.
For r = 2, f(n, 2) is the minimum number of edges in a connected graph of order
n, so f(n, 2) = n −1. Taking an n-element vertex-set V and ﬁxing a vertex z ∈V, we
obtain a general upper bound for f(n, r) from the hyperstar H = (V, E) with edge-set
E =

E ∈
V
r
	
: z ∈E

.

242
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
Observe that ¯χ(H) = r −1 and |E| =
n−1
r−1

. For a lower bound, consider an
r-uniform hypergraph H = (V, E) with ¯χ(H) = r −1, and take a set U of r −2
vertices. Since the graph with vertex-set V \ U and edge-set {E \ U : U ⊆E ∈E}
must be connected for every choice of U, a lower bound on f(n, r) can be calculated.
These estimates appeared ﬁrst in a paper of Sterboul [60].
Theorem 3.3 For every n ≥r ≥3,
2
n −r + 2
n
r
	
≤f(n, r) ≤
n −1
r −1
	
.
The lower bound in this theorem is tight for 3-uniform hypergraphs – that is,
f(n, 3) = ⌈1
3n(n −2)⌉, for each n ≥3. The simplest proof appeared in [25], and
further references to a series of papers proving the same theorem can be found in
the survey [20]. For r ≥4 and n large, however, the lower bound is no longer tight
(see [17]).
Let us mention a further equality from [60]:
f(n, n −2) =
n
2
	
−ex(n, {C3, C4}),
where the last term is the Tur´an number for graphs of order n and girth 5. Its
determination (exact or asymptotic) has been an open problem for several decades.
The ratio of known upper and lower bounds is still about
√
2 for any large n. This
indicates that ﬁnding an exact general formula for f(n, k) is a hopeless task.
Recently, Bujt´as and Tuza [17] gave an asymptotic solution:
Theorem 3.4 If n > k > 2, then
• for all ﬁxed k and all n,
f(n, k) ≤
2
n −1
n −1
k
	
+ n −1
k −1
n −2
k −2
	
−
n −k −1
k −2
		
.
• for all k = o(n1/3) as n →∞,
f(n, k) = (1 + o(1)) 2
k
n −2
k −1
	
.
C-type colourings of graphs
For graphs (that is, 2-uniform hypergraphs), C-colouring imposes the simple restric-
tion that each connected component of the graph must be monochromatic, so there is
little to explore in this direction. But the following defective version of C-colouring
introduced by Bujt´as et al. [11] raises interesting questions, even for graphs.
For each integer k ≥1, a k-improper C-colouring is a colouring of vertices of a
graph G such that, for each vertex v, at most k vertices in the neighbourhood N(v)
receive colours different from that of v; the k-improper upper chromatic number

11 Hypergraph colouring
243
¯χk-imp(G) is the maximum number of colours that can be achieved in such a colouring.
Equivalently, ¯χk-imp(G) is precisely the maximum number of components that can be
obtained from G by deleting at most k edges at each vertex. As proved in [11], the
Nordhaus–Gaddum-type inequality
¯χk-imp(G) + ¯χk-imp(G) ≤n + 1
holds for every k > 0 and for every graph G of order n ≥8k + 1. Moreover, if both
G and G have colourings with more than one colour, then the upper bound is 4k + 2,
independently of n.
Some further versions of graph colouring that can be described by C-type colouring
constraints are surveyed in [20].
4. Colourings of mixed hypergraphs
We recall from the end of Section 1 that a mixed hypergraph is a triple H = (V, C, D),
where both C and D are set-systems over the vertex-set V; their members C ∈C
and D ∈D are termed C-edges and D-edges, respectively. A vertex λ-colouring
c : V →{1, 2, . . . , λ} is proper if
|c(C)| < |C| for all C ∈C,
and |c(D)| > 1 for all D ∈D,
where c(Y) denotes, for any Y ⊆V, the set of colours assigned by the mapping c
to the vertices in Y. We say that H is a bi-hypergraph if C = D, and for any mixed
hypergraph a set in C ∩D is called a bi-edge. Note that the case C = ∅(termed a
D-hypergraph) corresponds to a proper vertex-colouring in the classical sense,
whereas D = ∅(termed a C-hypergraph) was discussed in the previous section
with respect to C-colouring.
In our historical introduction we have already indicated brieﬂy that mixed hyper-
graphs opened up a new dimension in hypergraph colouring theory. In this section
we give more details.
Example. Consider the complete r-uniform hypergraph Kr
n of order n, and consider all
r-tuples as bi-edges. Then we may use no more than r −1 colours (because C =
V
r

)
and no colour may occur on more than r −1 vertices (because D =
V
r

). Thus, for
n > (r −1)2, the hypergraph does not admit any proper colouring. In particular, for
r = 2 and n = 2, the vertex pair, which would simultaneously be a C-edge and a
D-edge, leads to a contradiction of colouring requirements.
Arising from this example, we call a mixed hypergraph colourable if it admits
at least one proper colouring, and call it uncolourable otherwise. Uncolourable
mixed hypergraphs were studied in detail by Tuza and Voloshin [63], who presented
the following construction for uncolourable hypergraphs, based on a principle
substantially different from the one above.

244
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
Example. Let G = (V, E) be a graph with chromatic number k, and deﬁne D = E.
Moreover, let C ⊆
V
k

be the k-uniform set system whose members are the vertex-
sets of Pk subpaths in G. Then H = (V, C, D) is uncolourable, by a theorem of Gallai
and Roy (see [34], [57], [62]).
A further construction from the same paper can be thought of as ‘list-colouring
without lists’. For any instance of the list-colouring problem with a graph G = (V, E)
and lists Lv on its vertices, we can extend V with the set of colours to obtain a mixed
hypergraph H on the vertex-set V ∪
v∈V Lv. The D-edges of H are the edges of G,
and the C-edges are the sets Lv ∪{v}, for all v ∈V. Then H is colourable if and only
if G admits a list-colouring.
Algorithmically it is an NP-complete problem to recognize colourable mixed
hypergraphs, and so there is no hope of ﬁnding easily identiﬁable obstacles against
colourability. Quantitatively, only the very strong requirement ¯χ(C) −χ(D) ≥n −3
is sufﬁcient to imply colourability; even replacing n −3 by n −4 yields some
uncolourable hypergraphs (see Tuza and Voloshin [63]).
The chromatic inversion of a mixed hypergraph H = (V, C, D) is the mixed
hypergraph Hc = (V, Cc, Dc), with Cc = D and Dc = C. Nearly two decades
ago, Voloshin [67] asked whether there is a connection between the colourability
of H and that of Hc. A negative answer was recently given by Hegyh´ati and Tuza
[35], who proved that it is NP-complete to test whether the chromatic inversion of
a colourable 3-uniform mixed hypergraph is colourable, and co-NP-complete to test
whether the chromatic inversion of an uncolourable 3-uniform mixed hypergraph
is uncolourable. This negative result is derived from the positive theorem that if
D =
V
3

and H is 3-uniform, then the colourability of H is decidable in polynomial
time.
Properties of colourable mixed hypergraphs
For the rest of this section we restrict our attention to mixed hypergraphs H =
(V, C, D) that are colourable. Under this assumption it is interesting to study the
feasible set (H) of H, deﬁned as the set of those integers k for which H admits a
proper k-colouring with exactly k-colours.
Among the elements of (H), the minimum χ(H) and the maximum ¯χ(H)
are termed the lower chromatic number and upper chromatic number, respectively.
In some classes of hypergraphs, where ¯χ is near to n, the decrement, deﬁned as
dec(H) = n −¯χ(H), may be informative.
Further information, more detailed than (H), about the colourability properties
of a mixed hypergraph, is provided by the chromatic spectrum. It is deﬁned as the
sequence (r1, r2, . . . , rn), where each rk is the number of feasible partitions – that is,
the partitions of the vertex-set into colour classes induced by proper colourings using
precisely k colours. A gap in the chromatic spectrum and in the feasible set is an
integer k for which χ(H) < k < ¯χ(H) and rk = 0.

11 Hypergraph colouring
245
If H is a D-hypergraph, then its feasible set is an interval of integers: (H) =
{χ(H), χ(H) + 1, . . . , n}. Similarly, if H is a C-hypergraph, then its feasible set is
the interval (H) = {1, 2, . . . , ¯χ(H)}. Somewhat unexpectedly, the feasible sets of
non-1-colourable mixed hypergraphs are rather unrestricted – namely, for any ﬁnite
set S ⊂N \ {1} of integers, there exists a mixed hypergraph H for which (H) = S
(see Jiang et al. [38]). Even more generally, for any ﬁnite sequence (rk)b
k=a of non-
negative integers with 2 ≤a ≤b and ra ̸= 0 ̸= rb, there exists a mixed hypergraph
H for which χ(H) = a, ¯χ(H) = b, and for each a ≤k ≤b, the number of feasible
partitions is exactly rk (see Kr´al’ [42]). A similar statement is valid for feasible sets
of r-uniform mixed hypergraphs with only one additional restriction: if an integer
k < r −1 belongs to , then all integers between k and r −1 also have to be
contained in  (see Bujt´as and Tuza [14]). The case of chromatic spectra with r1 = 0
and rk = 0 or 1 for all k ≥2 was recently studied by Zhao, Diao and Wang [74],
[75], especially concerning the minimum number of vertices and edges.
Hypertrees are more restrictive: colourability implies that χ = 2 (unless D = ∅, in
which case χ = 1) and that the feasible set is gap-free. More generally, no gap occurs
if the hypergraph admits a host graph in which any two cycles are vertex-disjoint (see
Kr´al et al. [43]). A proper 2-colouring of a hypertree is also easy to ﬁnd: as long
as there exist C-edges of size 2, contract them to single vertices, and then colour
the contracted host tree properly in the usual sense. A hypertree is uncolourable
if and only if this procedure yields a contracted D-edge of size 1 (see Tuza and
Voloshin [63]).
The upper chromatic number turns out to be a harder issue. Although Bulgaru and
Voloshin [23] proved that it can be expressed with a nice formula on mixed interval
hypergraphs, the determination of ¯χ on hypertrees is NP-hard (see [43]). Moreover,
various results on its non-approximability are known (see [22]).
For the feasible set of a planar mixed hypergraph H, Kobler and K¨undgen [39]
proved that either (H) is a gap-free interval with minimum value 4 or less, or the
lower chromatic number is χ = 2 and the only gap occurs at 3.
On the boundary of colourability and uncolourability, those mixed hypergraphs
have been located that admit just one feasible partition – that is, those with just
one rk = 1 in their chromatic spectrum, and zeros otherwise. The systematic study
of these uniquely colourable mixed hypergraphs was initiated by Tuza, Voloshin
and Zhou [65]. This class is NP-hard to recognize (it is co-NP-complete when the
input hypergraph is given, together with a proper colouring) and it does not admit a
characterization in terms of forbidden induced subhypergraphs; in fact, every mixed
hypergraph can be embedded as an induced subhypergraph into a uniquely colourable
one. Moreover, Bujt´as and Tuza [12] proved that it is also NP-complete to decide
whether H admits a vertex ordering v1, v2, . . . , vn such that, for all 1 ≤i ≤n, the
subhypergraph induced by {v1, v2 . . . , vi} is uniquely colourable.
Some uniquely colourable subclasses admit a good characterization and efﬁcient
recognition algorithm – for instance, those with χ = n −1 and χ = n −2 (see [54]),
uniquely colourable mixed hypertrees (see [53]) and circular mixed hypergraphs

246
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
(see [70]). Moreover, the possible size distributions of colour classes in uniquely
colourable r-uniform bi-hypergraphs have also been characterized (see [5]).
An analogy with complete graphs is that uniquely colourable separators (vertex
subsets that induce a uniquely colourable subhypergraph and whose removal makes
H disconnected) can be applied to derive a recursive formula to compute the
chromatic polynomial (see [65]). On the other hand, colourable graphs do not
satisfy the requirement put on uniquely colourable mixed hypergraphs; instead, they
form a subclass of weakly uniquely colourable mixed hypergraphs; this means that
rχ = r ¯χ = 1. They have also been studied to some extent in [65].
C-perfect mixed hypergraphs
C-perfectness can be deﬁned for mixed hypergraphs H = (V, C, D) in the same way
as for C-colouring, by requiring that ¯χ(H′) = αC(H′) for all induced subhypergraphs
H′ = (V′, C′, D′) of H, where αC(H′) is the independence number of the hypergraph
(V, C′). Generalizing the class of monostars, one can obtain C-imperfect mixed
hypergraphs by taking some C-edges with non-empty intersection, and inserting each
2-element subset of their common intersection as a D-edge. (These constructs are
called polystars.) But the characterization problem for C-perfect mixed hypergraphs
looks even harder than that for C-perfect hypergraphs. Some examples given in [19]
indicate that the situation already becomes quite complicated for mixed hypertrees.
Steiner systems and ﬁnite projective planes
A Steiner system S(t, k, v) is a k-uniform hypergraph of order v, for which each
t-tuple of vertices is contained in precisely one edge. To mention some celebrated
examples, a system S(2, 3, v) is a Steiner triple system STS(v), an S(3, 4, v) is a
Steiner quadruple system SQS(v), and an S(2, q + 1, q2 + q + 1) is a ﬁnite projective
plane of order q.
The edges are traditionally called blocks. We may view each block as a C-edge
(where an STS(v) is denoted by CSTS(v)) or as a bi-edge – that is, a C-edge and a
D-edge at the same time (where an STS(v) is denoted by BSTS(v)). The notations
CS(t, k, v), BS(t, k, v), CSQS(v) and BSQS(v) are derived for the respective systems
in a similar way.
The study of the upper chromatic number in Steiner triple systems started with a
paper by Milazzo and Tuza [49], where the authors proved that
¯χ(BSTS(v)) ≤¯χ(CSTS(v)) ≤s,
for all v ≤2s −1. This upper bound on ¯χ is tight for all s ≥2, and the systems
attaining equality were also characterized. More generally,
¯χ(BS(t, t + 1, v)) ≤¯χ(CS(t, t + 1, v)) = O(ln v)

11 Hypergraph colouring
247
holds for any ﬁxed t ≥2 as v →∞(see [50]). Interestingly, from below it is not even
known whether ¯χ(BSQS(v)) can tend to inﬁnity with v. Moreover, no uncolourable
BSQS has so far been found.
Concerning the decrements of projective planes (q) of order q, Bacs´o and Tuza
[4] proved that dec((q)) ≥2q+√q/2−o(√q). For an inﬁnite sequence of values q
this is provably optimal, even in the order (√q) of its second term: if q is a square,
then the union of two disjoint Baer subplanes in the Galois plane PG(2, q) meets
each line in more than one point, and this allows us to construct a colouring; we
deduce that dec(PG(2, q)) ≤2q + 2√q + 1. Recently, Bacs´o, H´eger and Sz˝onyi [3]
gave sufﬁcient conditions to ensure that dec(PG(2, q)) = τ2((PG(2, q))) −1. (The
right-hand side is always an upper bound if there exists a 2-transversal of minimum
cardinality that is independent – see the section on C-colouring.)
For projective planes (q) without an underlying algebraic structure, a general
upper bound for dec((q)) is 3q −2. Indeed, one can pick three lines L, L′, L′′ in
general position (that is, with empty intersection), and assign colour 1 to L′ ∩L′′ and
to all points of L \ (L′ ∪L′′), and colour 2 to all points of (L′ ∪L′′) \ (L′ ∩L′′). Then
every line contains two points of the same colour, and so each remaining point can
have its distinct colour.
More details about colourings of block designs can be found in the survey [51].
5. Colour-bounded and stably bounded hypergraphs
In this section we consider generalizations of mixed hypergraphs; we shall view
them as hypergraphs H = (V, E) with additional constraints prescribed for the
edges. For convenience, we assume that E
=
{E1, E2 . . . , Em}. These struc-
tures include colour-bounded hypergraphs, stably bounded hypergraphs and pattern
hypergraphs.
The most general class is the third one, introduced by Dvoˇr´ak et al. [28]. For each
edge Ei, a family Pi of partitions is speciﬁed, and a vertex-colouring is considered to
be proper if its colour classes induce a partition of each Ei which is a member of Pi.
Even in this very general model, the authors managed to develop a theory concerning
feasible sets with or without gaps.
The other two classes are closer to the ﬂavour of mixed hypergraphs; their
conditions on the edges are given quantitatively. For the more general one, a stably
bounded hypergraph required four functions s, t, a, b : E →N to be given: we write
si = s(Ei), ti = t(Ei), ai = a(Ei), bi = b(Ei), for all 1 ≤i ≤m. Given these
parameters, a colouring is proper if, for each Ei ∈E:
• the number of different colours assigned to the vertices of Ei is at least si
• the number of different colours assigned to the vertices of Ei is at most ti
• there exists a colour assigned to at least ai vertices of Ei
• no colour occurs on more than bi vertices of Ei.

248
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
So the functions s and t impose bounds on the largest polychromatic subsets of the
edges, while the functions a and b impose bounds on their largest monochromatic
subsets.
These four colour-bounding functions can capture many kinds of partitioning
problems, allowing a concise model description. A practical example of this is
resource allocation where, loosely speaking, the lower bounds (ensuring several kinds
of resources or multiple copies of one resource) increase the security and stability
of a system, while the upper bounds correspond to constructing the system in an
economical way (since more pieces of resource increase the cost).
Functional subclasses
Colour-bounding functions of types si = 1, ti = |Ei|, ai = 1, and bi = |Ei| are
called non-restrictive on the edge Ei, because they express no real restrictions on
proper colourings. A colour-bounding function is non-restrictive in a hypergraph
H if it is so on all edges of H; otherwise, it is called restrictive. In notation, we
write capital letters to indicate the functions that are allowed to be restrictive in a
hypergraph. For instance, an (S, T)-hypergraph means that only s and t are given –
that is, only the numbers of different colours occurring in the edges are bounded;
an (S, T)-hypergraph is also called a colour-bounded hypergraph. Similarly, in
S-hypergraphs only the minimum number of required colours is given for each edge.
Note that every S-hypergraph is an (S, T)-hypergraph at the same time, because t is
not required to be restrictive for the latter.
Chromatic polynomials
As in the classical theory of graph colourings, for a hypergraph H = (V, E)
and an integer λ ∈N, we denote by P(H, λ) the number of proper colourings
c : V →{1, 2, . . . , λ}. This P(H, λ) is a polynomial in λ for every H (in the most
general class, pattern hypergraphs, too), and is thus termed the chromatic polynomial
of H. Voloshin [66] extended the concept of P(H, λ) from the classical one to
mixed hypergraphs, and discovered some new properties of P(H, λ). For example, he
showed that the degree of a chromatic polynomial is not determined by the number
of vertices in general, as it is equal to the upper chromatic number ¯χ(H); only in
classical graph and hypergraph colourings do the two invariants coincide. Another
unusual property is that some mixed hypergraphs contain vertices whose removal
from H changes nothing with respect to colourability: all colourings and P(H, λ)
remain the same. Such vertices are called phantom vertices; they are invisible for
P(H, λ), and H may contain any number of them.
The famous connection–contraction algorithm for ﬁnding the chromatic poly-
nomial, as originated by Birkhoff [10] in 1912, formalized by Whitney [72] in
1932, and generalized to hypergraphs by Zykov [76] in 1974, was extended to the

11 Hypergraph colouring
249
splitting–contraction algorithm for mixed hypergraphs by Voloshin [66] in 1993.
Further, some properties of P(H, λ) in S-hypergraphs have been described in [26].
It is not known which polynomials occur as chromatic polynomials of mixed
hypergraphs. For non-1-colourable structures, however, Bujt´as and Tuza [15] gave
the following necessary and sufﬁcient conditions. Here S(n, k) is the Stirling number
of the second kind, the number of partitions of n elements into precisely k non-empty
sets.
Theorem 5.1 Let P(λ) = ℓ
k=0 akλk be a non-zero polynomial for which P(1) = 0
(so ℓ
k=0 ak = 0). Then the following properties are equivalent.
• P(λ) is the chromatic polynomial of a colour-bounded hypergraph
• P(λ) is the chromatic polynomial of a mixed hypergraph
• P(λ) satisﬁes the following conditions:
– all coefﬁcients ak of P(λ) are integers
– the leading coefﬁcient aℓis positive
– the constant term a0 is 0
– for each positive integer j ≤ℓ, ℓ
k=j akS(k, j) ≥0.
These characterizations remain the same if we replace the pair (S, T) (colour-
bounded hypergraphs) by any of (S, A), (T, B) and (A, B) (those that admit
uncolourable hypergraphs), or by (S, T, A, B) itself, or by pattern hypergraphs.
One way to describe relations between functional classes (deﬁned in terms of the
subsets of {S, T, A, B}) is to consider the classes of chromatic polynomials that occur
in them. In Fig. 4 we exhibit their Hasse diagram; we indicate the positions of the
classes of C-, D-, and mixed hypergraphs by PC, PD and PM, respectively. The sets
of chromatic polynomials belonging to non-1-colourable (S, T, A, B)-hypergraphs
and to non-1-colourable (S, T)-hypergraphs are the same; the difference shown in
Fig. 4 arises from the fact that there are 1-colourable (S, T, A, B)-hypergraphs whose
chromatic spectra do not occur for any (S, T)-hypergraphs. Note that there are
examples of problems (such as algorithmic problems), and of classes, where the
problem is provably harder on the class located lower in the hierarchy of chromatic
polynomials.
Ps,t,a,b = Ps,a = Pa,b
Pa = Pa,t
Ps,t,b = Ps,t = Pt,b = PM
PC = Pt
Ps = Ps,b
PD = Pb
Fig. 4. The Hasse diagram for classes of chromatic polynomials

250
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
Interval hypergraphs and hypertrees
The colouring properties of some well-structured hypergraph classes have been
analysed in detail. Many results are known about the computational complexity of
the problems of deciding colourability and of determining χ and ¯χ for hypertrees,
interval hypergraphs and some of their subclasses. For a summary of what is known
and what is still open, we refer to the three handy tables in Bujt´as and Tuza [21].
Below we mention a few of these results.
The cases of just one restrictive function are quite well understood, except in
interval A-hypergraphs, where the algorithmic complexity of determining ¯χ is still an
open problem. The interval S- and B-hypergraphs admit optimal periodic colourings,
with χ = max si and χ = max⌈|Ei|/bi⌉colours, respectively. We observe that ¯χ for
interval T-hypergraphs can be computed efﬁciently.
Concerning two restrictive functions, the simplest case is (S, B), for which χ =
max(si, ⌈|Ei|/bi⌉). For each of the pairs (T, B), (A, B) and (S, A), however, it is NP-
complete to decide whether a given interval hypergraph is colourable. (This implies
intractability for any three restrictive functions, while colourability and the values of
χ and ¯χ can be determined efﬁciently, even for (S, T, A, B) on classes of hypergraphs
with bounded edge size.) The important unsolved case is to decide colourability and
to determine ¯χ for an interval (S, T)-hypergraph. But interestingly enough, as proved
in [16], once we know that it is colourable, we immediately obtain χ = max si, and if
a proper colouring is given also, then it can be transformed efﬁciently to an optimal
one; moreover, the feasible set is gap-free. For other pairs of restrictive functions,
only a few upper bounds for χ have been found for interval hypergraphs (for example,
χ ≤max |Ei|, even for (S, T, A, B)), and it is not known whether some interval (S, A)-
hypergraphs, (T, B)-hypergraphs or (A, B)-hypergraphs can have any gaps between
χ + 1 and max |Ei| −1.
Colour-bounded and stably bounded hypertrees turn out to be much more complex
than mixed hypertrees. The decision problem for colourability is NP-complete for
any non-trivial pair of restrictive functions (that is, other than (S, B) and (T, A)), even
in the 3-uniform case. Recalling that every mixed hypertree has a gap-free feasible
set, we report that a further dramatic change is illustrated by the following theorem
from [16].
Theorem 5.2 Let F be a ﬁnite set of positive integers. Then there exists an (S, T)-
hypertree with feasible set F if and only if min(F) = 1 or min(F) = 2 and F contains
all integers between min(F) and max(F), or min(F) ≥3.
Finally, we mention that the results on interval (S, T)-hypergraphs can be partially
extended to circular (S, T)-hypergraphs (see [16]); namely, if a hypergraph from this
class is colourable, then it satisﬁes the inequality χ ≤2(max si) −1 and no gaps
can occur between 2(max si) −1 and ¯χ. For max si ≥3 we do not know, however,
whether there can exist any gaps between χ and 2(max si) −1.

11 Hypergraph colouring
251
6. Conclusion
In this chapter we described the current state of hypergraph colourings as a separate
subject. With so many relations to graph colouring and new fundamental ideas,
results and applications, this area is developing fast. The impact of every result may
be to give rise to a set of new problems, often without any analogues from the past.
While the number of publications continues to grow, we observe that some possible
subdirections remain untouched. We predict that hypergraph generalizations of such
areas as colouring graphs on surfaces, edge-colourings, colouring and probability,
Hadwiger’s conjecture, colouring games, orientations and ﬂows (to name just a few)
have great research potential in the observable future.
References
1. N. Alon and Z. Bregman, Every 8-uniform 8-regular hypergraph is 2-colorable, Graphs
Combin. 4 (1988), 303–306.
2. G. Bacs´o, Cs. Bujt´as, Zs. Tuza and V. Voloshin, New challenges in the theory of
hypergraph coloring, Advances in Discrete Mathematics and Applications, RMS Lecture
Notes 13 (2010), 45–57.
3. G. Bacs´o, T. H´eger and T. Sz˝onyi, The 2-blocking number and the upper chromatic number
of PG(2, q), J. Combin. Designs 21 (2013), 585–602.
4. G. Bacs´o and Zs. Tuza, Upper chromatic number of ﬁnite projective planes, J. Combin.
Designs 16 (2008), 221–230.
5. G. Bacs´o, Zs. Tuza and V. Voloshin, Unique colorings of bi-hypergraphs, Austral. J.
Combin. 27 (2003), 33–45.
6. Zs. Baranyai, On the factorization of the complete uniform hypergraph, Inﬁnite and Finite
Sets (Keszthely, 1973) (eds. A. Hajnal, R. Rado and V. T. S´os), Colloq. Math. Soc. J.
Bolyai 10, North-Holland (1975), 91–107.
7. C. Berge, Sur certains hypergraphes g´en´eralisant les graphes bipartites, Combinatorial
Theory and its Applications, I (Balatonf¨ured, 1969), North-Holland (1970), 119–133.
8. C. Berge, Hypergraphs: Combinatorics of Finite Sets, North-Holland, 1989.
9. C. Berge, Motivations and history of some of my conjectures, Discrete Math. 165/166
(1997), 61–70.
10. G. D. Birkhoff, A determinant formula for the number of ways of colouring a map, Ann.
of Math. 14 (1912), 42–46.
11. Cs. Bujt´as, E. Sampathkumar, Zs. Tuza, L. Pushpalatha and R. C. Vasundhara, Improper
C-colorings of graphs, Discrete Applied Math. 159 (2011), 174–186.
12. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, Orderings of uniquely colorable mixed hypergraphs, Discrete
Applied Math. 155 (2007), 1395–1407.
13. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, Color-bounded hypergraphs, III: Model comparison, Applic.
Anal. and Discrete Math. 1 (2007), 36–55.
14. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, Uniform mixed hypergraphs: The possible numbers of colors,
Graphs Combin. 24 (2008), 1–12.
15. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, Color-bounded hypergraphs, I: General results, Discrete Math.
309 (2009), 4890–4902.

252
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
16. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, Color-bounded hypergraphs, II: Interval hypergraphs and
hypertrees, Discrete Math. 309 (2009), 6391–6401.
17. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, Smallest set-transversals of k-partitions, Graphs Combin. 25
(2009), 807–816.
18. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, C-perfect hypergraphs, J. Graph Theory 64 (2010), 132–149.
19. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, Voloshin’s conjecture for C-perfect hypertrees, Australas.
J. Combin. 48 (2010), 253–267.
20. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, Maximum number of colors: C-coloring and related problems,
J. Geometry 101 (2011), 83–97.
21. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, Color-bounded hypergraphs, VI: Structural and functional jumps
in complexity, Discrete Math. 313 (2013), 1965–1977.
22. Cs. Bujt´as and Zs. Tuza, Approximability of the upper chromatic number of hypergraphs,
manuscript, 2013.
23. E. Bulgaru and V. Voloshin, Mixed interval hypergraphs, Discrete Applied Math. 77
(1997), 24–41.
24. D. D´efossez, A sufﬁcient condition for the bicolorability of a hypergraph, Discrete Math.
308 (2008), 2265–2268.
25. K. Diao, G. Liu, D. Rautenbach and P. Zhao, A note on the least number of edges
of 3-uniform hypergraphs with upper chromatic number 2, Discrete Math. 306 (2006),
670–672.
26. E. Drgas-Burchardt and E. Łazuka, Chromatic polynomials of hypergraphs, Applied Math.
Letters 20 (2007), 1250–1254.
27. P. Duchet, Hypergraphs, Handbook of Combinatorics, Vol. 1 (eds. R. L. Graham,
M. Gr¨otschel and L. Lov´asz), Elsevier (1995), 381–432.
28. Z. Dvoˇr´ak, J. K´ara, D. Kr´al’ and O. Pangr´ac, Pattern hypergraphs, Electron. J. Combin. 17
(2010), #R15.
29. P. Erd˝os, On a combinatorial problem, Nordisk Mat. Tidskr. 11 (1963), 5–10.
30. P. Erd˝os, On a combinatorial problem II, Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar. 15 (1964),
445–447.
31. P. Erd˝os and A. Hajnal, On chromatic number of graphs and set-systems, Acta Math. Acad.
Sci. Hungar. 17 (1966), 61–99.
32. P. Erd˝os and L. Lov´asz, Problems and results on 3-chromatic hypergraphs and some
related questions, Inﬁnite and Finite Sets (Keszthely, 1973) (eds. A. Hajnal, R. Rado and
V. T. S´os), Colloq. Math. Soc. J. Bolyai 10, North-Holland (1975), 609–627.
33. J.-C. Fournier and M. Las Vergnas, Une class d’hypergraphes bichromatiques, Discrete
Math. 2 (1972), 407–410.
34. T. Gallai, On directed paths and circuits, Theory of Graphs (Tihany, 1966) (eds. P. Erd˝os
and G. O. H. Katona), Academic Press, San Diego (1968), 115–118.
35. M. Hegyh´ati and Zs. Tuza, Colorability of mixed hypergraphs and their chromatic
inversions, J. Combin. Optim. 25 (2013), 737–751.
36. M. A. Henning and A. Yeo, 2-colorings in k-regular k-uniform hypergraphs, Europ.
J. Combin. 34 (2013), 1192–1202.
37. A. Jaffe, T. Moscibroda and S. Sen, On the price of equivocation in Byzantine agreement,
Proc. 2012 ACM Symp. on Principles of Distributed Computing, ACM, New York (2012),
309–318.
38. T. Jiang, D. Mubayi, V. Voloshin, Zs. Tuza and D. West, The chromatic spectrum of mixed
hypergraphs, Graphs Combin. 18 (2002), 309–318.
39. D. Kobler and A. K¨undgen, Gaps in the chromatic spectrum of face-constrained plane
graphs, Electron. J. Combin. 8 (2001), #N3.
40. A. V. Kostochka and M. Stiebitz, On the number of edges in colour-critical graphs and
hypergraphs, Combinatorica 20 (2000), 521–530.

11 Hypergraph colouring
253
41. D. Kr´al’, A counter-example to Voloshin’s hypergraph co-perfectness conjecture,
Australas. J. Combin. 27 (2003), 25–41.
42. D. Kr´al’, On feasible sets of mixed hypergraphs, Electron. J. Combin. 11 (2004), #R19.
43. D. Kr´al’, J. Kratochv´ıl, A. Proskurowski and H.-J. Voss, Coloring mixed hypertrees,
Discrete Applied Math. 154 (2006), 660–672.
44. D. Kr´al’, J. Kratochv´ıl and H.-J. Voss, Mixed hypercacti, Discrete Math. 286 (2004),
99–113.
45. L. Lov´asz, On chromatic number of ﬁnite set-systems, Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hungar. 19
(1968), 59–67.
46. L. Lov´asz, Normal hypergraphs and the perfect graph conjecture, Discrete Math. 2 (1972),
253–267.
47. L. Lov´asz, Coverings and colourings of hypergraphs, Congr. Numer. 8 (1973), 3–12.
48. P. Mih´ok, Zs. Tuza and M. Voigt, Fractional P-colourings and P-choice-ratio, Tatra
Mountains Math. Publ. 18 (1999), 69–77.
49. L. Milazzo and Zs. Tuza, Upper chromatic number of Steiner triple and quadruple systems,
Discrete Math. 174 (1997), 247–259.
50. L. Milazzo and Zs. Tuza, Logarithmic upper bound for the upper chromatic number of
S(t, t + 1, v) systems, Ars Combin. 92 (2009), 213–223.
51. L. Milazzo, Zs. Tuza and V. I. Voloshin, Strict colorings of Steiner triple and quadruple
systems: a survey, Discrete Math. 261 (2003), 399–411.
52. J. Neˇsetˇril and V. R¨odl, A short proof of the existence of highly chromatic hypergraphs
without short cycles, J. Combin. Theory (B) 27 (1979), 225–227.
53. A. Niculitsa and V. Voloshin, About uniquely colorable mixed hypertrees, Discuss. Math.
Graph Theory 20 (2000), 81–91.
54. A. Niculitsa and H.-J. Voss, A characterization of uniquely colorable mixed hypergraphs
of order n with upper chromatic numbers n−1 and n−2, Australas. J. Combin. 21 (2000),
167–177.
55. K. T. Phelps and V. R¨odl, On the algorithmic complexity of coloring simple hypergraphs
and Steiner triple systems, Combinatorica 4 (1984), 79–88.
56. J. Radhakrishnan and A. Srinivasan, Improved bounds and algorithms for hypergraph
2-coloring, Random Struct. Alg. 16 (2000), 4–32.
57. B. Roy, Nombre chromatique et plus longs chemins d’un graphe, Rev. AFIRO 1 (1967),
127–132.
58. P. D. Seymour, On the two-colouring of hypergraphs, Quart. J. Math. Oxford (3) 25
(1974), 303–312.
59. F. Sterboul, A new combinatorial parameter, Inﬁnite and Finite Sets (Keszthely, 1973)
(eds. A. Hajnal, R. Rado and V. T. S´os), Colloq. Math. Soc. J. Bolyai 10, North-Holland
(1975), 1387–1404.
60. F. Sterboul, Un probl`eme extr´emal pour les graphes et les hypergraphes, Discrete Math.
11 (1975), 71–78.
61. I. Tomescu, Sure le probl´eme du coloriage des graphes g´en´eralis´es, C. R. Acad. Sci. (Paris)
267:6 (1968), 250–252.
62. Zs. Tuza, Graph coloring in linear time, J. Combin. Theory (B) 55 (1992), 236–243.
63. Zs. Tuza and V. Voloshin: Uncolorable mixed hypergraphs, Discrete Applied Math. 99
(2000), 209–227.
64. Zs. Tuza and V. Voloshin, Problems and results on colorings of mixed hypergraphs,
Horizons of Combinatorics (eds. E. Gy˝ori, G. Katona and L. Lov´asz), Bolyai Society
Math. Studies 17, Springer-Verlag (2008), 235–255.
65. Zs. Tuza, V. I. Voloshin and H. Zhou, Uniquely colorable mixed hypergraphs, Discrete
Math. 248 (2002), 221–236.

254
Csilla Bujt´as, Zsolt Tuza and Vitaly Voloshin
66. V. I. Voloshin, The mixed hypergraphs, Computer Sci. J. Moldova 1 (1993), 45–52.
67. V. I. Voloshin, On the upper chromatic number of a hypergraph, Australas. J. Combin. 11
(1995), 25–45.
68. V. I. Voloshin, Coloring Mixed Hypergraphs: Theory, Algorithms and Applications, Fields
Institute Monographs 17, Amer. Math. Soc., 2002.
69. V. Voloshin, Mixed Hypergraph Coloring Web Site, http://spectrum.troy.edu/voloshin/
mh.html.
70. V. Voloshin and H.-J. Voss, Circular mixed hypergraphs I: colorability and unique
colorability, Congr. Numer. 144 (2000), 207–219.
71. D. J. A. Welsh and M. B. Powell, An upper bound for the chromatic number of a graph
and its application to timetabling problems, Comp. J. 10 (1967), 85–86.
72. H. Whitney, The colouring of graphs, Ann. of Math. 33 (1932), 688–718.
73. D. R. Woodall, Property B and the four-colour problem, Combinatorics, Proc. 1972
Oxford Combinatorial Conference (eds. D. J. A. Welsh and D. R. Woodall), Inst. Math.
Appl. (1972), 322–340.
74. P. Zhao, K. Diao and K. Wang, The smallest one-realization of a given set, Electron.
J. Combin. 19 (2012), #P19.
75. P. Zhao, K. Diao and K. Wang, The smallest one-realization of a given set, II, Discrete
Math. 312 (2012), 2946–2951.
76. A. A. Zykov, Hypergraphs, Uspekhi Mat. Nauk 29 (1974), 89–154 (in Russian).

12
Chromatic scheduling
DOMINIQUE DE WERRA and ALAIN HERTZ
1.
Introduction
2.
Colouring with weights on the vertices
3.
List-colouring
4.
Mixed graph colouring
5.
Co-colouring
6.
Colouring with preferences
7.
Bandwidth colouring
8.
Edge-colouring
9.
Sports scheduling
10. Balancing requirements
11. Compactness
12. Conclusion
References
Variations and extensions of the basic vertex-colouring and edge-colouring
models have been developed to deal with increasingly complex scheduling
problems. We present and illustrate them in speciﬁc situations where additional
requirements are imposed. We include list-colouring, mixed graph colouring,
co-colouring, colouring with preferences and bandwidth colouring, and we
present applications of edge-colourings to open shop, school timetabling
and sports scheduling problems. We also discuss balancing and compactness
constraints which often appear in practical situations.
1. Introduction
We show here how graph colouring models may provide a natural tool for dealing
with a variety of scheduling problems. Starting from the basic vertex-colouring
model, we will introduce some variations and extensions that are motivated by
their applications to some scheduling issues. In each case we give references for

256
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
further results and for extensions of the various models presented. For algorithms,
see Chapter 13.
In chromatic scheduling problems we have a collection V of items, such as
operations of jobs to be performed. In V there are some pairs v, w that are subject
to an incompatibility condition and we call E the set of such incompatibility pairs.
These data are represented by the graph G = (V, E) in which the items are associated
with the vertices and the incompatible pairs v, w with the edges vw between the
corresponding vertices.
We also have a set C = {1, 2, . . . , k} of time periods (of unit duration). Assuming
that each item (considered as an operation) has unit completion time, we may ask
whether we can ﬁnd a schedule taking the incompatibilities into account and using at
most k periods of time. This is precisely the vertex k-colouring problem: there exists
a feasible schedule if and only if the set V of vertices can be partitioned into subsets
S1, S2, . . . , Sk, where each Si contains no two incompatible items.
In some instances, we may try to ﬁnd the smallest set C of periods (that is, the
smallest k) for which a schedule in time k = |C| exists. This is the usual chromatic
number χ(G) of the associated graph G. A classical application of this model is the
basic school timetabling problem: the items are one-hour classes, and two classes are
incompatible if they cannot be simultaneously given because they involve the same
students or the same teacher.
We recall that for arbitrary graphs, the vertex k-colouring problem is NP-complete
(see Garey and Johnson [21]).
2. Colouring with weights on the vertices
Previously we have assumed that all items v have the same unit completion time,
which we denote by ω(v). More generally, we may have arbitrary completion times
for the items; we identify these completion times with weights ω(v) which we assume
for simplicity to be non-negative integers.
As before we have a set C of unit periods with k = |C|, and in order to complete
item v we have to assign to it a subset c(v) of ω(v) periods from C. In order to respect
the incompatibility requirements, the assignments of ω(v) periods to the items v must
be such that c(v) ∩c(w) = ∅for each incompatible pair vw in E. This is precisely
the multicolouring problem which has been studied, for instance, by Halld´orsson and
Kortsarz [28].
In the multicolouring model we observe that if ω(v) = r > 1 for every v in a graph
G, then the minimum number of colours needed for a multicolouring of G may be
strictly smaller than r χ(G), as can be seen for the pentagon with r = 2 in Fig. 1,
where the weights are indicated inside each vertex: here only 5(< 2 χ(G) = 6)
colours are needed.
We observe immediately that the multicolouring problem in a graph G is
equivalent to the basic vertex-colouring problem in the graph G′ obtained from

12 Chromatic scheduling
257
3,4
2
2
2
2
1,2
4,5
2,3
1,5
2
Fig. 1.
G by replacing each vertex v by vertices v1, v2, . . . , vω(v), each one linked
to all neighbours of v in G. We also introduce all possible edges between
v1, v2, . . . , vω(v).
The above multicolouring model may produce schedules in which the ω(v) periods
during which a particular item v is being processed are not consecutive. We say that
the schedule has some preemptions – that is, interruptions during the execution of
some of the items. This may be acceptable in some types of application such as school
timetabling: if v represents the ω(v) lectures of a same topic given by a teacher to a
speciﬁc set of students, a schedule will be improved if these ω(v) lectures are spread
throughout the week. We see later how one can impose such a requirement for these
ω(v) lectures.
There are also contexts in which interruptions during the completion of an item v
are not allowed: this means that v has to be assigned a set c(v) of ω(v) consecutive
time periods in C. If this is required for every item v, we have an interval colouring
problem. This model has been discussed by various authors (see ˇCangalovi´c and
Schreuder [41] and Bouchard et al. [3]). It occurs in particular when there are
prohibitive set-up times needed to start or restart the processing of an item.
As an illustration, the multicolouring with k = 4 colours in Fig. 2(a) (where
weights appear inside each vertex) is not an interval colouring. An interval colouring
with k = 5 colours is shown in Fig. 2(b). Notice that no such interval colouring can
be found with fewer than ﬁve colours.
1
3
1
1
3
3
2,3,4
1
2
1,3,4
3
1,2,4
(a)
1
3
1
1
3
3
2,3,4
1
2
3,4,5
4
1,2,4
(b)
1
3
1
1
3
3
1
2
3
1
4
1
(c)
Fig. 2.
In some circumstances, the schedules constructed are designed to be repeated,
day after day (say). In such cases it may be convenient to consider that the set
C = {1, 2, . . . , k} is cyclically ordered, this means in particular that period 1 follows
period k.

258
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
In the interval colouring context, we also allow intervals that contain periods k
and 1. The possible intervals are now called cyclic intervals and the corresponding
problem is the cyclic interval colouring problem: assign to each vertex v of the
graph G a cyclic interval c(v) in C of length ω(v), in such a way that for any two
incompatible items v, w we have c(v) ∩c(w) = ∅. Cyclic interval colourings have
been considered by de Werra and Solot [14]. The multicolouring in Fig. 2(a) is a
cyclic interval colouring with four colours.
A related situation occurs in the batch scheduling problem: as before we have
a set V of items with a family E of pairwise incompatibilities; each item v again
has an integral weight ω(v) that corresponds to its processing time. We will not
allow the items to start their processing individually, but we rather partition the
set V into a number k (to be determined) of batches S1, S2, · · · , Sk, where each Si
is a subset of items that have no incompatibilities, and therefore whose items can
be processed simultaneously. The completion time of a batch Si is then deﬁned as
p(Si) = maxv∈Si ω(v). It is then required to ﬁnd a value k and a partition into batches
S1, S2, . . . , Sk for which p(S1) + . . . + p(Sk) is minimum.
Such a problem arises when we have items v to sterilize by placing them into
an oven for a duration of at least ω(v) consecutive time units. Incompatibility
requirements do not allow us to place certain speciﬁed pairs of items simultaneously
in the oven. Finding such a schedule is called the batch colouring problem: it has
been studied (under the name of ‘weighted colouring’) in Demange et al. [15].
An optimum batch colouring (minimizing 
i p(Si)) is given in Fig. 2(c); here

i p(Si) = 3 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 6. It uses 4(> χ(G) = 3) colours and no colouring with
three colours can be as good.
As a ﬁnal observation we mention that if in all the above types of colouring each
weight ω(v) is equal to 1, then we get back to the basic vertex-colouring problem.
So all of these models are generalizations of this problem and they are motivated by
various types of application.
We now consider more situations in which extensions of the basic vertex-colouring
problem arise.
3. List-colouring
We return to the basic vertex-colouring model in which each weight ω(v) = 1. Here
we have a set C = {1, 2, . . . , k} of periods and each item v has a list L(v) ⊆C of
periods to which it could be assigned. In the course scheduling context this means
that each class v can be offered only at one of the periods in L(v). Finding a basic
vertex-colouring in G such that each vertex v gets a colour c(v) ∈L(v) is the well-
known list-colouring problem which has been extensively studied, for reasons related
to its many applications (see Chapter 6 and Voigt [42] for some basic results).
Worthy of interest is the special case in which |L(v)| = 1 for a particular subset
V∗of items and L(v) = C for all items v ∈V −V∗. It means that the vertices v ∈V∗

12 Chromatic scheduling
259
have already been coloured, and it is required to determine whether the colouring
can be extended to the whole graph. This is the precolouring extension problem; it is
often met in applications related to class scheduling. In such situations some classes
are scheduled initially (in order to satisfy some requirements that may be intractable
in a simple graph colouring model) and we wish to construct the rest of the schedule
while keeping the precolouring ﬁxed.
This problem is also a generalization of the basic vertex-colouring model (it is
the case V∗= ∅) and is NP-hard for general graphs. Surprisingly, for a bipartite
graph G with V∗= {v1, v2, v3} and L(v1) = {1}, L(v2) = {2}, L(v3) = {3},
C = {1, 2, 3}, the precolouring extension problem is difﬁcult (see Even et al.
[20]).
We may observe that if the set C = {1, 2, . . . , k} of colours to be used is speciﬁed,
then a list-colouring problem may be transformed into a basic vertex-colouring
problem. Starting from G = (V, E) and a collection of lists L(v) ⊆C = {1, 2, . . . , k}
for each v ∈V, we add a clique K on new vertices w1, w2, . . . , wk and join each
vertex v ∈V to all vertices wi ∈K for which i /∈L(v). Then any colouring with k
colours in the resulting graph gives a list-colouring of G if we call i the colour c(wi)
for i = 1, 2, . . . , k.
It is also appropriate to recall that in most school timetabling contexts, we
usually also have a list ¯L(v) of unavailable periods for each teacher v. But since
the set C = {1, 2, . . . , k} of teaching periods in the week is generally speciﬁed, we
easily get L(v) = C −¯L(v) as a list of possible periods (colours) for the classes of
teacher v.
In connection with list-colouring, there is another concept that is of interest in the
context of timetabling and scheduling: we say that a graph G = (V, E) is p-choosable
if there is a list-colouring of G for all assignments of lists L(v) with |L(v)| ≥p for
each v ∈V. Choosability has been extensively studied from a theoretical point of
view (see Chapter 6, Erd˝os et al. [19] and Gutner [26]). The choice number ch(G)
is the minimum number p for which G is p-choosable. Graphs G with ch(G) =
2 have been characterized (see Erd˝os et al. [19]), but for ch(G) > 2 a complete
characterization is still elusive.
In terms of timetabling, choosability is a natural concept: consider a school
timetabling problem, where the dean in charge of the timetable has assigned courses
to the teachers, and on this basis the graph G of conﬂicts between courses can be
constructed. A colouring of G with k colours gives an assignment of classes to
periods in the set C = {1, 2, . . . , k} of teaching periods. But teachers are not always
available and may be invited to give a list of periods in which their own classes can
be scheduled. In order to ﬁnd a feasible timetable, one has to ask teachers to give
lists of sufﬁcient size. This is a problem for the dean who has to ﬁnd a value p for
which an acceptable timetable can be constructed, whatever set of at least p periods is
given by each teacher. The dean naturally has to determine a value p that is as small
as possible to avoid a rebellion of teachers. This is why it is so useful to be able to
determine ch(G).

260
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
4. Mixed graph colouring
Suppose now that in a basic class scheduling problem we have not only incompati-
bility requirements preventing some pairs of classes from being assigned to the same
period, but also precedence constraints: these require that, for some pairs v, w of
classes, v must be scheduled for some period c(v) occurring earlier than the period
c(w) assigned to w. Such a requirement is represented in the graph G by an arc
oriented from v to w. A graph G = (V, E) with a set A of oriented arcs will be denoted
by G = (V, E, A), and is called a mixed graph. It follows that, given G = (V, E, A)
and C = {1, 2, . . . , k}, a mixed graph colouring is an assignment of a period c(v) ∈C
to each item v in such a way that c(v) ̸= c(w) for each pair vw ∈E and c(v) < c(w)
for each (ordered) pair vw ∈A.
Mixed graph colourings have been extensively studied. We can see easily that, for
a bipartite mixed graph G = (V, E, A) with C = {1, 2, 3}, the problem of ﬁnding
whether there is a mixed graph colouring is difﬁcult: the precolouring extension
problem at the end of Section 3 is equivalent to a mixed graph colouring problem
obtained from G by introducing a set A = {v1u1, u1u2, u3v2, v2u4, u5u6, u6v3} of arcs,
where the ui are new vertices (see Fig. 3). Properties of mixed graph colourings can be
found in Ries [35], Ries and de Werra [36], Hansen et al. [29] and Sotskov et al. [40].
v1
u1
u2
v2
u4
u3
u5
u6
v3
L(v1) = {1}
L(v2) = {2}
L(v3) = {3}
C ={1,2,3}
Fig. 3.
Notice that what makes the mixed graph colouring problem difﬁcult is the presence
of edges, not of arcs: if we have a graph G = (V, E, A) with E = ∅, then there is
a vertex-colouring satisfying c(v) < c(w) for each arc vw if and only if G contains
no oriented cycle. The colour of a vertex v is simply the length of a longest path
ending in v.
There are strong connections between colourings and orientations of graphs: it
is not difﬁcult to see that ﬁnding a colouring with a minimum number of colours
is equivalent to ﬁnding an acyclic orientation of all its edges for which the longest
oriented path is as short as possible.
In this spirit we recall the well-known Gallai–Roy theorem which states that, for
any oriented graph ⃗G, the chromatic number of its unoriented copy G does not exceed
the maximum number of vertices in an elementary oriented path of ⃗G (see Roy [38]).
The graph colouring problem can also be considered as formulated in the oriented
graph obtained by replacing each edge vw in the initial graph G by a pair of opposite

12 Chromatic scheduling
261
arcs vw and wv forming a disjunctive pair. Let ⃗G be the resulting graph: then ﬁnding
a vertex-colouring of G with k colours amounts to choosing exactly one arc from
each disjunctive pair in such a way that the resulting graph G∗has no oriented cycles
and no oriented path has more than k vertices.
Now for a mixed vertex-colouring, we can construct from G a graph ⃗G in the same
way, while keeping the original arcs of G as they are. The mixed colouring problem
is then similar to a problem with some preassignments: the choice has already been
made for the arcs appearing in the original graph, and the question is whether one
can extend the partial solution to the whole of ⃗G.
5. Co-colouring
Another type of vertex-colouring has been introduced under the name of co-colouring
as a natural generalization of the basic model (see Gimbel et al. [24]). Up to now
the colour classes of colourings (the sets of vertices of the same colour) have
been independent (or stable) sets. We now allow each colour class to be either an
independent set or a clique, so a partition of the vertex-set V of a graph G = (V, E)
into p cliques and q independent sets is a co-colouring with p + q colours. The
smallest value of p + q for which such a partition exists is the co-chromatic number
of G. This type of colouring is motivated in particular by an application in robotics
(see Demange et al. [17]).
Suppose that we wish to schedule the moves of a robot which is required to pick
up a collection of items of different sizes along a storage line. The robot may pick
up several items during a trip and it has to pile them up: this implies that, to ensure
stability, larger items must be placed below smaller ones; in other words, during a
trip along the storage line the robot must pick up items in decreasing order of size.
Different assumptions can be made on the possible moves of the robot along the
storage line. We can number the stored items from 1 to n in order of decreasing
size, so the alignment of the items along the line corresponds to a permutation 
of {1, 2, . . . , n}. We construct the permutation graph G() corresponding to  by
assigning a vertex to each item and by linking vertices i and j if i > j and i comes
before j when we move from left to right along the line. So, in a move from left to
right, the robot can pick up items in increasing order of their numbers. The vertices
of G() corresponding to the items picked up during one trip form a independent set,
so minimizing the number of left-to-right trips to pick up all the items is equivalent
to partitioning the vertex-set V of G() into the minimum number of independent
sets. It is the basic vertex-colouring model.
If we now assume that the robot can also move from right to left, then the
items picked during any trip from right to left correspond to a clique in G(). So
minimizing the number of trips (with both directions allowed) amounts to ﬁnding the
co-chromatic number of G().

262
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
As an illustration, suppose that there are nine items stored in line in the order
926415738. A robot moving from left to right needs four trips to pick up all the items:
138
2457
9
6.
Since the problem corresponds to a permutation graph, there is a polynomial
algorithm to ﬁnd a minimum collection of trips. If we also allow trips from right
to left, we have a solution with three trips:
24578
369
1.
This corresponds to a minimum co-colouring. The problem is NP-hard, even in
the class of comparability graphs; there is, however, a polynomial 2-approximation
algorithm which guarantees that we use at most twice as many trips as necessary (see
Demange et al. [16]).
In Demange et al. [17] additional variations on the possible moves of the robot
are studied extensively and complexity results are given for these problems. They
consider in particular the situation in which each robot (starting from the left or from
the right) is allowed to make one move in one direction followed by a move in the
other direction; the items picked during such a double move form a clique and an
independent set in G(); each colour class thus deﬁnes a split graph – that is, a graph
whose vertex-set can be partitioned into a clique and an independent set. Partitioning
the vertex-set of a graph G into split graphs is the split colouring problem which has
been deﬁned and studied in Ekim and de Werra [18].
6. Colouring with preferences
In the models examined so far we had essentially rigid constraints that could not be
violated. But in almost all real situations there are some ‘soft’ constraints that may be
satisﬁed or not. When they are violated, a certain penalty is incurred and the problem
consists in ﬁnding a solution that minimizes the total penalty, or at least keeps it
within a given bound. This is precisely what can be done in the vertex-colouring
problem with preferences, which is another extension of the basic model.
We start with a graph G = (V, E) and we introduce a subset P of pairs vw (not
in E) on which some requirements are added. So we now have a graph G = (V, E; P)
in which P is a set of pairs with preferences, which we represent by dotted lines. Each
edge in E is called a strong edge. For each pair vw ∈P we have a positive penalty
ω(vw) which is counted whenever the preference is not satisﬁed.
In this ﬁrst model (called M1), the preference on vw could be that v and w should
have the same colour, otherwise the penalty ω(vw) is incurred. We want to ﬁnd a
vertex-colouring with the smallest possible total penalty or with a total penalty that
is below a given value W, and a minimum number of colours. As we can see, the
number k of colours need not be speciﬁed in M1. Figure 4 shows a colouring of a
graph with k = 3 colours and a total penalty of 2. The colours are indicated besides
the vertices and penalties are shown on the preference edges. No solution can be

12 Chromatic scheduling
263
3
2
3
1
1
2
3
2
4
Fig. 4.
found with a smaller penalty, even if we use more colours, since there are cycles with
exactly one strong edge.
When does a solution without penalty exist? This question has been studied for
a long time, and we have the classical result of Cartwright and Harary [7] that in a
graph G = (V, E; P) there exists a vertex-colouring satisfying all preferences if and
only if G contains no cycle with exactly one strong edge.
In M1, minimizing the number of colours remains a difﬁcult problem as can be
expected. We can however recognize the situations in which there is a colouring with
two colours that satisﬁes all preferences. As shown in Cartwright and Harary [7], a
graph G = (V, E; P) has a 2-colouring satisfying all preferences if and only if every
cycle has an even number of strong edges.
The model M1 is used in compilation, where one has to minimize the number of
registers used. The model with G = (V, E; P) has been exploited in Robillard [37]:
each variable of the computer programme to be compiled is associated with a vertex
of an associated graph. Whenever two variables have to be alive simultaneously
(because they appear in the same instruction of the programme), they are joined by
an edge. E is the set of these edges, and two variables whose vertices are joined by
an edge cannot be assigned to the same register. So ﬁnding a vertex-colouring of G
minimizing the number of colours gives us an assignment of variables to registers
with a minimum number of registers.
Specialists in computation use an operation called spilling. It amounts to intro-
ducing, for some variable x, another variable x′ which may be assigned to another
register; practically, one copies the content of variable x at some stage of the
execution of the programme into another variable x′, and uses x′ instead of x in the
next instructions. This operation is represented in G by splitting x into two vertices
x and x′, and linking x and x′ by a preference edge with penalty ω(xx′) equal to the
cost of copying the content of x into x′. In the resulting graph G = (V, E; P) we may
ﬁnd, as before, whether there is a vertex-colouring without penalty. If so, it means
that we can ﬁnd a register allocation without any spilling. Such an allocation may
however require a larger number of registers (colours) than are available, so we may
impose a bound on k (the number of available registers) and ﬁnd a vertex-colouring
with at most k colours and a minimum penalty. Such a solution will require some
spillings. For example, if three variables x, y, z have to be simultaneously alive, and
if no spilling is allowed, then three registers are needed. By introducing an additional
variable x′ (by splitting x into x and x′) we may use only two registers, but with a
penalty for the spilling since x and x′ get different colours. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.

264
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
3
2
1
1
2
1
ω(xx’)
y
z
x
y
z
x
x’
2
3 registers, no spilling
2 registers, 1 spilling
Fig. 5.
1
2
4
2
1
2
4
2
1
2
3
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
1
2
4
2
1
2
3
4
5
no penalty
(a)
penalty 1
(b)
penalty 4
(c)
Fig. 6.
A second model (M2) can also be considered. Here, in G = (V, E; P), the
preference edges vw in P are such that we would prefer to have c(v) ̸= c(w) in
a vertex-colouring, but if we happen to have c(v) = c(w) then a penalty ω(vw) is
incurred. In this model M2 the number k of colours is ﬁxed, since by using a sufﬁcient
number of colours one may always satisfy all preferences.
Such a situation occurs rather naturally in scheduling: two operations v and w
which are normally not simultaneous could be assigned to the same operator, but one
may get into trouble in case of any delay in v or w; so we prefer to assign v and w
to different operators, but if this is not possible then we pay a penalty ω(vw). The
smallest number k of colours for which a vertex-colouring without penalty exists is
the chromatic number of the graph obtained by introducing all pairs of P into E.
Finding a colouring with minimum penalty, for a ﬁxed number k, is the robust
colouring problem which is NP-hard in general (see Y´anez and Ram´ırez [43]). A 5-
colouring without penalty is shown in Fig. 6(a). In Figs. 6(b) and 6(c) an optimal
robust 4-colouring and an optimal robust 3-colouring are shown, with penalties 1
and 4. This problem is studied by Archetti et al. [2].
7. Bandwidth colouring
The central model of vertex-colouring is an ideal instrument for capturing incompati-
bilities between pairs of items to be scheduled, but it may not be sufﬁcient because of
the scheduling applications considered. The notion of incompatibility may be reﬁned
by saying more than just ‘a pair v, w of items must not be scheduled at the same time
period – that is, the corresponding vertices must not be assigned the same colour’.

12 Chromatic scheduling
265
We may also consider more quantiﬁed requirements by saying, for instance,
that two items v, w must be scheduled at periods that are separated from each
other by at least tvw periods. This is precisely the idea of bandwidth colouring
(see Prestwich [33]). One may imagine many applications of scheduling in which
operations requiring some set-up times must be separated by sufﬁciently many time
units.
A graph G = (V, E) is given, together with a collection of non-negative integer
values tvw assigned to the edges vw of E. We wish to ﬁnd a number k (generally as
small as possible) of colours to be used, and a partition of V into independent sets
S1, S2, . . . , Sk such that |c(v) −c(w)| > tvw for each edge vw ∈E, where c(u) is the
colour of u (that is, c(u) = j if u ∈Sj). If tvw = 0 for each edge vw, the requirement
simply means that S1, S2, . . . , Sk is a vertex-colouring of G.
Such a model may be extended in several ways. First, we could assign to each
vertex v a number ω(v) of consecutive colours; this is the interval colouring model,
which is able to handle items or operations that have different processing times.
In such a case we would have requirements of the form | f(v) −f(w)| ≥tvw, where
f(u) is the ﬁrst colour assigned to the vertex u.
In a more general formulation we could consider that each edge vw is an oriented
arc from v to w, and we introduce for each such arc a set Tvw of integer values that
are forbidden for the difference f(w) −f(v) – that is, for each arc vw we require that
f(w) −f(v) /∈Tvw. For instance, if Tvw = {0} for all arcs vw, and ω(v) = 1 for
all v ∈V, we get the basic vertex-colouring model. If we have an interval vertex-
colouring, then to avoid overlap of items v and w in the schedule, we must impose
the condition:
f(v) + ω(v) −1 < f(w)
or
f(w) + ω(w) −1 < f(v).
This means that Tvw = {−ω(w) + 1, . . . , −1, 0, 1, . . . , ω(v) −1} ensures that items v
and w are not simultaneously in process. To separate the two processing intervals for
v and w, we may just choose a larger set than before.
This general model has been considered initially for frequency assignment prob-
lems with possible interferences. The requirements are that on neighbouring emitters
the frequencies that have to be assigned to each one have forbidden values for their
differences.
Observe that the orientation given to each initial edge vw is arbitrary. If we choose
to have an arc wv instead of the arc vw, then we set:
Twv = −Tvw = {−a : a ∈Tvw}.
For such types of colourings, one can easily extend many classical upper bounds for
the chromatic number (see de Werra and Gay [12]).
In these frequency assignment problems it is interesting to distinguish the span
of the colouring constructed (the difference between the largest and the smallest
frequencies) and the order (the number of different frequencies). Consider, for

266
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
0
(a)
(b)
1
1
1
0
3
5
3
1
0
1
1
1
0
2
4
3
1
Fig. 7.
example, the graphs in Fig. 7, where the numbers on the edges vw correspond to the
values tvw (where |c(v) −c(w)| > tvw): Fig. 7(a) shows that a bandwidth colouring
c with minimum order 3 has span(c) = 5 −1 = 4, while Fig. 7(b) shows that a
bandwidth colouring c with minimum span 3 has order 4.
8. Edge-colouring
A well-known special case of the basic vertex-colouring problem is the edge-
colouring model. We are given a multigraph G = (V, E) and we want to partition
the edge-set into matchings M1, M2, . . . , Mp, so that no two edges in the same subset
Mi have a vertex in common. The smallest number p for which such a partition exists
is the chromatic index χ′(G) of G.
Let us consider the line graph L(G) of G, the graph obtained by assigning a vertex
ve to each edge e of G and joining two vertices ve and vf in L(G) by an edge if the
corresponding edges e, f in G are adjacent. Then there is a one-to-one correspondence
between the edge-colourings of G and the vertex-colourings of L(G).
Many applications of edge-colourings have been studied. Among these, the
class−teacher timetabling problem and the preemptive open shop scheduling models
are the most famous.
Although it would be conceivable to study edge-colourings as special vertex-
colourings, it seems to be extremely convenient to consider the edge-colourings of
G directly. One reason is that the situation is more naturally visualized in some
applications where G has a speciﬁc structure (such as being bipartite). Another reason
is that there are techniques (such as alternating chain methods) that provide useful
construction tools for edge-colourings, and these procedures are easily visualized
without going to L(G).
General properties of edge-colourings are presented in Chapter 5. Here we
restrict our attention to speciﬁc applications related to scheduling and timetabling.
The class−teacher timetabling problem is undoubtedly the most basic model, to
which a variety of additional constraints may be added, according to the needs of
concrete applications. We have a set T of teachers t1, t2, . . . , tn, a set CL of classes
c1, c2, . . . , cm (here a class is a group of students who follow exactly the same
programme), and a collection of one-period lectures; each lecture is given by a
speciﬁc teacher to a speciﬁc class.

12 Chromatic scheduling
267
The data of this problem may be represented by a bipartite multigraph. We asso-
ciate each teacher tj and each class ci to a vertex of the graph, and each one-period
lecture given by teacher tj to class ci is represented by an edge between ci and tj. We
thus obtain a bipartite multigraph G with CL as the left-hand set of vertices, and T as
the right-hand set. Let C = {1, 2, . . . , k} be the set of periods available. A timetable
is an assignment of one period in C to each lecture in such a way that no teacher and
no class is involved in more than one lecture at any period. This is an edge-colouring
of G.
If no other requirements are imposed, it is known that a timetable exists if and only
if the number of available periods is no less than the maximum load of all teachers
and all classes; here the load of a teacher or of a class is the number of lectures in
which the teacher or class is involved, and is the degree of the corresponding vertex
of G. This statement follows from K¨onig’s theorem which asserts that, for a bipartite
graph G = (V, E), χ′(G) = (G) = maxv∈V d(v). Many variations and extensions
of this basic timetabling model have been studied (see Burke et al. [6]).
Another classical application of edge-colouring in bipartite multigraphs is the
preemptive open shop scheduling problem: we are given a collection P = {P1,
P2, . . . , Pm} of processors together with a set J = {J1, J2, . . . , Jn} of jobs. Each job Jj
consists of operations O1j, O2j, . . . , Omj to be processed (with interruptions allowed)
on the processors in any order. We are given the processing time pij of Oij for each
operation on each processor. We usually assume that pij is a non-negative integer; if
pij = 0, the operation Oij does not exist. A schedule is an assignment of pij time units
on Pi (not necessarily consecutive) for each operation Oij, in such a way that at any
moment no processor is involved in more than one operation and no two operations
of the same job are in process.
We usually want to ﬁnd a schedule S with a minimum total completion time
Cmax(S). Clearly, Cmax(S) ≥max

maxi

j pij, maxj

i pij

. We may now associate
a vertex to each processor Pi and a vertex to each job Jj. Each operation Oij is
represented by pij parallel edges between the vertices associated to Pi and to Jj. We
recognize that if we identify the processors Pi of the open shop scheduling model
with the classes ci of the class−teacher timetabling model, and if we similarly iden-
tify the jobs Jj with the teachers tj, then by considering Oij as the set of lectures of tj to
ci, we can use the edge-colouring model to solve the open shop scheduling problem.
From K¨onig’s theorem we see that Cmax(S) = max

maxi

j pij, maxj

i pij

, and
that without any loss of generality we may restrict the occurrence of preemptions to
integer times.
Notice that there is also a non-preemptive open shop scheduling problem, where
no interruption is allowed during the execution of an operation Oij. The model to use
would then be an interval edge-colouring analogous to the interval vertex-colouring.
Minimizing Cmax(S) is then an NP-hard problem as soon as the number of processors
is at least 3 (see Gonzales and Sahni [25]). For two processors the problem remains
easy (see de Werra [11]).

268
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
9. Sports scheduling
Another classical application of edge-colouring is the tournament scheduling prob-
lem. In its most elementary version we are given a league of 2n teams numbered from
1 to 2n, and each team has to play exactly one game against every other team. This
situation is represented by a complete graph K2n on 2n vertices associated with the
teams, while each edge corresponds to a game involving the two teams associated to
its endpoints.
No team can play more than one game on each day, so the games that can be played
on the same day form a matching in K2n. Thus, ﬁnding a schedule for the n(2n −1)
games of the league corresponds to constructing an edge-colouring of K2n. At least
2n −1 days are needed, and it is known that χ′(K2n) = 2n −1, so a schedule in
2n −1 days can be found; it corresponds to an edge-colouring of K2n with matchings
M1, M2, . . . , M2n−1 and |Mi| = n for i = 1, 2, . . . , 2n −1.
A simple way of constructing such a schedule is to deﬁne each set Mi (the games
played on day i) as follows: team 2n plays againt team i, and team i + k plays against
team i−k for k = 1, 2, . . . , n−1, where the numbers i+k and i−k are taken (modulo
2n −1) as one of the numbers 1, 2, . . . , 2n −1. Figure 8 shows a ﬁve-day schedule
for a league of six teams.
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
day 1
day 2
day 3
day 4
day 5
Fig. 8.
We now introduce the idea of an oriented edge-colouring to formulate and solve
some related problems that arise in many situations. We assume that each of the 2n
teams has its own stadium. When a team plays in its home stadium, it is a Home game
(H) for this team, and when a team plays elsewhere it is an Away game (A). When a
schedule is constructed, we have an edge-colouring M1, M2, . . . , M2n−1, but we still
have to decide in which stadium each game should be played. We represent a game
played between teams i and j in the home stadium of team j by an arc ij oriented from
i to j. So constructing a schedule for such a sports league consists of determining an
edge-colouring of K2n and an orientation for each edge.
In general, one desires to have for each team a sequence of games that alternate as
regularly as possible between Home games and Away games. Perfect alternation for
all teams is not possible; as can be seen easily, we cannot have more than two teams
with perfect alternation. When two games for a team i scheduled on consecutive days
d and d+1 are both Home or both Away, we say that team i has a break on day d+1.
In other words, the minimum number of breaks in a schedule for 2n teams is at least
2n −2, and in fact, one can always construct a schedule where 2n −2 teams have

12 Chromatic scheduling
269
teams
1
2
3
4
5
6
M1
←−
61
−→
25
←−
34
1
A
A
H
A
H
H
M2
−→
62
−→
31
←−
45
2
H
H
A
H
A
A
M3
←−
63
−→
42
←−
51
days
3
A
H
A
A
H
H
M4
−→
64
−→
53
←−
12
4
H
A
H
H
A
A
M5
←−
65
−→
14
←−
23
5
A
H
A
H
A
H
oriented colouring
Home–Away pattern
Fig. 9.
exactly one break each and the two remaining teams have no break; this is clearly
optimal (see de Werra [10]). The construction is tabulated in Fig. 9 for a league of
2n = 6 teams; the arrow above each game indicates where the game is played (where
⃗ij stands for the arc ij). We have underlined the Hs and As corresponding to breaks:
teams 1 and 6 have no break, and all others have one break each.
In practice there are many additional requirements to be taken into account. One of
these is the fact that some stadia are not always available: for each day with n games, n
stadia are used and n stadia are unused. If the stadium of team i is not available on day
d, it means that the game played by team i must be an (A) for i, and the edge adjacent
to vertex i that receives colour d should be an arc ij for some j. In addition, it may be
necessary to schedule some games between teams i and j on one of certain speciﬁc
days; this gives another kind of list-colouring. There may be additional constraints
related to the geography of the league: the sequence of opponents of a given team i
may have to be arranged in such a way that team i does not have too many long dis-
tances to travel. And there are many more. So while the problem is basically still an
edge-colouring problem with orientations to determine, its difﬁculty may be greatly
increased, and other techniques such as integer programming or constraint program-
ming have to be used (see Rassmussen and Trick [34] and Kendall et al. [31]).
10. Balancing requirements
We have not considered the use of resources in the scheduling applications discussed
so far. However, one usually has some resources available in limited amounts.
For this reason, in our chromatic scheduling models consisting of a sequence of
k one-period schedules, it may be wise to balance the consumption of resources
among the k periods so as to reduce as much as possible the maximum consumption
in the different periods.
In the basic class−teacher timetabling problem, for instance, the number of
classrooms is limited. We consider them as the resources consumed by the lectures.
Assuming that the classrooms are all available during the k teaching periods of the

270
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
week, we should construct a timetable (here it is an edge-colouring M1, M2, . . . , Mk)
in such a way that maxi |Mi| is as small as possible, where the size |Mi| of the
matching Mi is precisely the number of classrooms needed during period i.
It is well known that whenever an edge-colouring M1, M2, . . . , Mk exists, there is a
balanced edge-colouring M′
1, M′
2, . . . , M′
k with −1 ≤|M′
i|−|M′
j| ≤1, for all i, j ≤k.
The construction of such a colouring can be easily achieved by trying to balance the
cardinalities of two matchings Mi and Mj with |Mj| −|Mi| ≥2. If G = (V, E) is the
bipartite graph associated to the class−teacher timetabling problem, and if k ≥(G)
is the number of teaching periods, we need ⌈|E|/k⌉classrooms. If the number c of
classrooms is given, then we can ﬁnd a timetable in max {(G), ⌈|E|/c⌉} periods.
We notice at this stage that the above reasoning assumes that lectures can be moved
arbitrarily inside the set C of teaching periods. As soon as we have lists L(e) of
available colours for some edges e, this may not work any more.
The above discussion shows that perfect balancing is always possible for the basic
edge-colouring problem. The same holds for vertex-colouring in claw-free graphs
(graphs that contain no K1,3 as an induced subgraph). The reason is that the union
of any two colour classes Si, Sj in a vertex-colouring of a claw-free graph induces a
subgraph that consists of even cycles and elementary paths, so that balancing between
Si and Sj is possible. It follows that perfect balancing is possible for any vertex-
colouring S1, S2, . . . , Sk.
However, for arbitrary graphs perfect balancing is not possible in general: in K1,3
any vertex-colouring with k = 2 colours has
|S1|−|S2|
 = 2. But using more colours
may help the balancing procedure; it has been shown by Hajnal and Szemer´edi [27]
that, for any graph G, there exists a balanced vertex-colouring with k colours when
k ≥(G) + 1; a shorter proof is given by Kierstead and Kostochka [32]. Notice
that the set of integers k for which a graph G admits a balanced vertex k-colouring
is not necessarily an interval; for example, the graph K3,3 in Fig. 10 has a balanced
2-colouring with S1 = {a, b, c}, S2 = {d, e, f}, and a balanced 4-colouring with S1 =
{a, b}, S2 = {c}, S3 = {d, e}, S4 = {f}, but no balanced 3-colouring.
a
b
c
d
e
f
Fig. 10.
For the practice of timetabling, we should also be able to solve the following
problem: for a ﬁxed number k of periods (colours), ﬁnd a schedule (a vertex-
colouring) S1, S2, . . . , Sk such that max1≤i≤k |Si| −min1≤j≤k |Sj| is minimum among
all possible vertex-colourings with k colours. Finding this optimal value is an NP-
hard problem in general, but polynomial algorithms exist for some types of graphs

12 Chromatic scheduling
271
such as trees (see Hertz and Ries [30]). Partial results on balancing in vertex-
colouring can be found in de Werra [8]. It has been shown in particular that if G
is a graph in which no vertex belongs to more than q maximal cliques, then any
vertex-colouring S1, S2, . . . , Sk can be transformed to satisfy:
|Si| −|Sj| ≤(q −2) min

|Si|, |Sj|

+ 1, for all i, j ≤k.
Another way of formulating this is to say that, for any k ≥χ(G), a graph G has a
k-colouring S1, S2, · · · , Sk with
|S1| ≤|S2| ≤. . . ≤|Sk| ≤(q −1)|S1| + 1.
More generally, we may wonder what can be done in the case where the amount
of resource available is not the same for each of the k periods of the schedule; for
instance, if hi is the amount of resource available at period i, does there always exist
a schedule represented by a vertex-colouring S1, S2, . . . , Sk with |Si| ≤hi, for i =
1, 2, . . . , k? This is generally a difﬁcult problem. It has been shown that, even if G
is the line graph of a bipartite graph G with (G) = 3, the problem of deciding
whether a colouring S1, S2, S3 exists with |Si| ≤hi for i = 1, 2, 3 is NP-complete (see
Even et al. [20]). However, if G is the line graph of a tree of bounded degree, then
a polynomial algorithm exists for ﬁnding such a colouring if it exists (see de Werra
et al. [13]).
Let us now return to the basic class−teacher timetabling problem for which the
model is an edge-colouring M1, M2, . . . , Mk in a bipartite multigraph G = (V, E).
We recall that the left-hand set of vertices corresponds to the m classes ci, and that
the right-hand set corresponds to the n teachers tj. For each pair ci, tj, let mG(ci, tj) be
the number of parallel edges between ci and tj in G: these represent the one-period
lectures of teacher tj to class ci. We assume now that we have to construct a timetable
for a week of k days and that s is the number of teaching periods in any day of
the week.
If G is the bipartite multigraph representing the data of our basic class−teacher
problem, then for a solution to exist we must have:
ks ≥(G).
(1)
A timetable corresponds to an edge-colouring M1, M2, . . . , Mks. For r = 1,
2, . . . , k, let Nr = rs
p=(r−1)s+1 Mp ⊆E. Then Nr is the set of lectures (edges)
assigned to the s periods of day r.
For a subset Nr of edges, we denote by dNr(x) the degree of the vertex x, and
by mNr(x, y) the number of edges between the vertices x and y in the subgraph of
G = (V, E) generated by Nr ⊆E.
In a basic class−teacher timetabling problem, represented by a bipartite multi-
graph G = (V, E) with a number k of days and s of teaching periods in a day
satisfying (2), we say that an edge-colouring M1, M2, . . . , Mks is perfectly balanced
(on k days) if it satisﬁes:
⌊|E|/ks⌋≤|Mt| ≤⌈|E|/ks⌉
(t = 1, 2 . . . , ks)
(2)

272
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
(the numbers of lectures scheduled at any period are all within 1 of each other)
and, for each r = 1, 2, . . . , k,
⌊|E|/k⌋≤|Nr| ≤⌈|E|/k⌉
(3)
(the total numbers of lectures scheduled on any day are all within 1 of each other).
Also,
⌊dG(ci)/k⌋≤dNr(ci) ≤⌈dG(ci)/k⌉
(i = 1, 2, . . . , m)
(4)
(the numbers of lectures involving class ci on any day are all within 1 of each other),
'
dG(tj)/k
(
≤dNr(tj) ≤
)
dG(tj)/k
*
( j = 1, 2, . . . , n)
(5)
(the numbers of lectures involving teacher tj on any day are all within 1 of each other),
and
'
mG(ci, tj)/k
(
≤mNr(ci, tj) ≤
)
mG(ci, tj)/k
*
(i = 1, 2, . . . , m; j = 1, 2, . . . , n) (6)
(the lectures of teacher tj to clas ci are spread uniformly among the k days, for all
teachers tj and all classes ci).
By analogy we say that the timetable associated with such an edge-colouring is also
perfectly balanced.
One can show (see de Werra [9]) that for the basic class−teacher model there
exists a perfectly balanced timetable on k days with s teaching periods per day, for any
choice of k, s satisfying ks ≥(G). As an example, consider the problem represented
in Fig. 11(a) by the array giving mG(ci, tj) in entry j, i; we have k = 3 and s = 2.
c1 c2 c3 c4
t1
4
1
2
1
1
1
t1
1
4
1
1
1
2
t1
4
1
1
2
1 1
N1
N2
N3
(a)
(b)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
(c)
Fig. 11.

12 Chromatic scheduling
273
Fig. 11(b) shows the sets Nr of lectures assigned to each day r ≤k (= 3), and
Fig. 11(c) shows the edge-colouring with ks = 6 colours representing the lectures
assigned for each period of the week; it is obtained by constructing a balanced edge-
colouring of each of the subgraphs generated by Nr. We see that the resulting edge-
colouring M1, M2, . . . , Mks of G satisﬁes (2).
Notice also that the above example admits a balanced timetable M′
1, M′
2, . . . , M′
5
with (G) = 5 periods (|M′
t| = 3, t = 1, 2, . . . , 5), but then the constraints (3) do not
hold with k = 3.
11. Compactness
There are many quality criteria that should be considered when we estimate the value
of a schedule. One of these is the compactness (see Br´elaz et al. [5]). Going back to
the basic (preemptive or non-preemptive) open shop problem, we may require that
the working periods of each processor be consecutive – that is, we may have idle
periods at the beginning and/or end of the set of k periods used. Similarly, we may
require that the periods during which some operation of a ﬁxed job Jj is in process be
consecutive (this does not imply that the periods of processing a single operation are
consecutive). If such a schedule can be found, we say that the schedule is compact,
because each job and each processor has a compact schedule; such schedules are
sometimes called ‘no wait’ schedules. But such a schedule (represented by an edge-
colouring of a graph G) may not always exist. For example, consider the case when
we have two processors and three jobs consisting each of one operation, with unit
processing time on each processor: in any edge-colouring with three colours, there
must be one job with a non-compact schedule (see Fig. 12(a) with an idle period
for J3). Observe, however, that there is a compact schedule that uses four colours, as
illustrated in Fig. 12(b).
P1
1
P2
J1
J2
J3
2
3
2
3
1
P1
P2
1
J1
J2
J3
2
3
2
3
4
(a)
(b)
Fig. 12.
In class−teacher timetabling, it is also desirable to have schedules that are compact
for each class (so idle times for the pupils between lectures are to be avoided), and
hopefully also for the teachers. So, if compact schedules cannot always be found, we
have to introduce a measure of distance to compactness that can be minimized, or at
least bounded.

274
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
For an edge-colouring c we denote by C(v, c) the set of colours assigned to the
edges adjacent to vertex v. The deﬁciency D(v, c) of a colouring c at a vertex v is the
minimum number of integers to be added to C(v, c) to form an interval. The deﬁciency
D(c) of an edge-colouring c of a graph G = (V, E) is the sum 
v∈V D(v, c). It has
been shown by Giaro [22] that ﬁnding an edge-colouring with minimum deﬁciency
is NP-hard, even if G is bipartite.
An edge-colouring of G with D(c) = 0 (so that D(v, c) = 0 for each v ∈V)
is sometimes called a consecutive colouring. We deﬁne the deﬁciency def(G) of
G as the minimum value of D(c) taken over all edge-colourings of G. An edge-
colouring c with D(c) = def(G) is called optimal. Figure 12 illustrates the fact
that def(K2,3) = 0, even if the deﬁciency of each edge-colouring of K2,3 with
three colours is strictly positive. Beside partial results obtained for bipartite graphs,
k-regular graphs, odd cycles, wheels and complete graphs (see Giaro et al. [23],
Schwartz [39] and Bouchard et al. [4]), very little is known about the deﬁciency
of an arbitrary graph.
Analogous to what was done for interval colourings, we may introduce the idea
of cyclic compactness: assuming that the schedule is to be repeated, we may require
that the colours assigned to edges adjacent to any vertex form a cyclic interval in C =
{1, 2, . . . , k}; this problem has been formulated and studied in de Werra and Solot [14]
and Altinakar et al. [1]. Some classes of graphs have been characterized for which
cyclic compact interval edge-colourings do exist, whatever the numbers of parallel
edges between pairs of vertices. This provides some families of non-preemptive open
shop problems with cyclic compactness requirements which can be solved by means
of edge-colouring techniques.
12. Conclusion
We have shown through the motivation of applications how numerous variations
and extensions of the basic vertex-colouring and edge-colouring models have been
introduced and studied. Our purpose was to give an idea of the many directions
that have been explored. The development of technologies will undoubtedly create a
need for unsuspected colouring models in the future, thus opening original avenues
of research.
In this chapter we have not concentrated on solution techniques; this was not our
aim. But we should not forget that for all the models presented here there is an urgent
need to develop efﬁcient algorithmic procedures that yield either ‘optimal’ solutions
(provided that one can reasonably deﬁne a concept of optimality), or at least good
approximations to such solutions. The necessity of providing such procedures is
enhanced by the fact that in all these applications we are dealing with graphs of
large size.
We hope that the above colouring models, which may be viewed as the core of
chromatic scheduling, will stimulate the interest of future researchers and users.

12 Chromatic scheduling
275
References
1. S. Altinakar, G. Caporossi and A. Hertz, On compact k-edge colorings: a polynomial time
reduction from linear to cyclic, Discrete Optimization 8 (2011), 502–512.
2. C. Archetti, N. Bianchessi and A. Hertz, A branch-and-price algorithm for the robust graph
coloring problem, Les Cahiers du Gerad, G-2011-75, Montr´eal, 2011.
3. M. Bouchard, M. ˇCangalovi´c and A. Hertz, About equivalent interval colorings of
weighted graphs, Discrete Appl. Math. 157 (2009), 3615–3624.
4. M. Bouchard, A. Hertz and G. Desaulniers, Lower bounds and a tabu search algorithm for
the minimum deﬁciency problem, J. Combin. Optimization 17 (2009), 168–191.
5. D. Br´elaz, Y. Nicolier and D. de Werra, Compactness and balancing in scheduling,
Zeitschrift f¨ur Operations Research 21 (1977), 65–73.
6. E. K. Burke, D. de Werra and J. Kingston, Applications to timetabling, Handbook of Graph
Theory (eds. J. L. Gross and J. Yellen), CRC Press (2004), 445–474.
7. D. Cartwright and F. Harary, Structural balance: a generalization of Heider’s theory,
Psychological Review 63 (1956), 277–293.
8. D. de Werra, A note on graph coloring, RAIRO, Revue Franc¸aise d’Automatique,
d’Informatique et de Recherche Op´erationnelle R-1 (1974), 49–53.
9. D. de Werra, A few remarks on chromatic scheduling, Combinatorial programming,
Methods and Applications (ed. B. Roy), D. Reidel (1975), 337–342.
10. D. de Werra, Some models of graphs for scheduling sports competitions, Discrete Appl.
Math. 21 (1988), 47–65.
11. D. de Werra, Graph theoretical models for preemptive scheduling, Advances in Project
Scheduling (eds. R. Slowinski and J. Weglarz), Elsevier (1989), 171–185.
12. D. de Werra and Y. Gay, Chromatic scheduling and frequency assignment, Discrete Appl.
Math. 49 (1994), 165–174.
13. D. de Werra, A. Hertz, D. Kobler and N. V. R. Mahadev, Feasible edge colorings of trees
with cardinality constraints, Discrete Math. 222 (2000), 61–72.
14. D. de Werra and Ph. Solot, Compact cylindrical chromatic scheduling, SIAM J. Discrete
Math. 4 (1991), 528–534.
15. M. Demange, D. de Werra, J. Monnot and V. Paschos, Time slot scheduling of compatible
jobs, J. Scheduling 10 (2007), 111–127.
16. M. Demange, T. Ekim and D. de Werra, On the approximation of min split coloring and
min cocoloring, J. Graph Algorithms and Appl. 10 (2006), 297–315.
17. M. Demange, T. Ekim and D. de Werra, A tutorial on the use of graph coloring for some
problems in robotics, Europ. J. Oper. Res. 192 (2009), 41–55.
18. T. Ekim and D. de Werra, On split-coloring problems, J. Combin. Optimization 10 (2005),
211–225.
19. P. Erd˝os, A. L. Rubin and H. Taylor, Choosability in graphs, Congr. Numer. 26 (1979),
125–157.
20. S. Even, A. Itai and A. Shamir, On the complexity of timetable and multicommodity ﬂow
problems, SIAM J. Comput. 5 (1976), 691–703.
21. M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson, Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of
NP-completeness, Freeman, 1979.
22. K. Giaro, The complexity of consecutive -coloring of bipartite graphs: 4 is easy, 5 is
hard, Ars Combin. 47 (1997), 287–298.
23. K. Giaro, M. Kubale and M. Malaﬁejski, Consecutive colorings of the edges of general
graphs, Discrete Math. 236 (2001), 131–143.
24. J. Gimbel, D. Kratsch and L. Stewart, On cocolourings and cochromatic numbers of
graphs, Discrete Appl. Math. 48 (1994), 111–127.

276
Dominique de Werra and Alain Hertz
25. T. Gonzales and S. Sahni, Open shop scheduling to minimize ﬁnish time, J. ACM 23
(1976), 665–679.
26. S. Gutner, The complexity of planar graph choosability, Discrete Math. 159 (1996),
119–130.
27. A. Hajnal and E. Szemer´edi, Proof of a conjecture of P. Erd˝os, Combinatorial Theory and
its Applications, Balatonf¨ured (eds. P. Erd˝os, A. R´enyi and V. T. S´os), North-Holland
(1970), 601–623.
28. M. M. Halld´orsson and G. Kortsarz, Multicoloring: problems and techniques, Math.
Foundations of Computer Science, LNCS 3153 (2004), 25–41.
29. P. Hansen, J. Kuplinski and D. de Werra, Mixed graph coloring, Math. Methods of
Operations Research 45 (1997), 145–160.
30. A. Hertz and B. Ries, On r-equitable colorings of trees and forests, Les Cahiers du Gerad,
G-2011-40, Montr´eal, 2011.
31. G. Kendall, S. Knust, C. C. Ribeiro and S. Urrutia, Scheduling in sports: an annotated
bibliography, Computers Oper. Res. 37 (2010), 1–19.
32. H. A. Kierstead and A. V. Kostochka, A short proof of the Hajnal–Szemer´edi theorem on
equitable coloring, Combin. Probab. Comput. 17 (2008), 265–270.
33. S. Prestwich, Constrained bandwidth multicoloration neighborhoods, Proc. Computa-
tional Symp. on Graph Coloring and its Generalizations, Ithaca (eds. D. S. Johnson,
A. Mehrotra and M. Trick), (2002), 126–133.
34. R. V. Rassmussen and M. A. Trick, The timetable constrained distance minimization
problem, Annals of Operations Research 171 (2006), 167–181.
35. B. Ries, Coloring some classes of mixed graph, Discrete Appl. Math. 155 (2007), 1–6.
36. B. Ries and D. de Werra, On two coloring problems in mixed graphs, Europ. J. Combin.
29 (2008), 712–725.
37. B. Robillard, V´eriﬁcation Formelle et Optimisation de l’Allocation de Registres, Ph.D.
Thesis, CNAM, Paris, 2010.
38. B. Roy, Nombre chromatique et plus longs chemins d’un graphe, RAIRO, Revue Franc¸aise
d’Automatique, d’Informatique et de Recherche Op´erationnelle 1 (1967), 129–132.
39. A. Schwartz, The deﬁciency of a regular graph, Discrete Math. 306 (2006), 1947–1954.
40. Y. N. Sotskov, A. Dolgui and F. Werner, Mixed graph coloring for unit-time job-shop
scheduling, Internat. J. Math. Algorithms 4 (2001), 289–323.
41. M. ˇCangalovi´c and J. A. M. Schreuder, Exact colouring algorithm for weighted graphs
applied to timetabling problems with lectures of different lengths, Europ. J. Operational
Research 51 (1991), 248–258.
42. M. Voigt, List colourings of planar graphs, Discrete Math. 120 (1993), 215–219.
43. J. Y´anez and J. Ram´ırez, The robust coloring problem, Europ. J. Operational Research
148 (2003), 546–558.

13
Graph colouring algorithms
THORE HUSFELDT
1. Introduction
2. Greedy colouring
3. Recursion
4. Subgraph expansion
5. Local augmentation
6. Vector colouring
7. Reductions
8. Conclusion
References
This chapter presents an introduction to graph colouring algorithms. The focus
is on vertex-colouring algorithms that work for general classes of graphs with
worst-case performance guarantees in a sequential model of computation. The
presentation aims to demonstrate the breadth of available techniques and is
organized by algorithmic paradigm.
1. Introduction
A straightforward algorithm for ﬁnding a vertex-colouring of a graph is to search
systematically among all mappings from the set of vertices to the set of colours, a
technique often called exhaustive or brute force:
Algorithm X (Exhaustive search) Given an integer q ≥1 and a graph G with vertex-
set V, this algorithm ﬁnds a vertex-colouring using q colours if one exists.
X1 [Main loop] For each mapping f : V →{1, 2, . . . , q}, do Step X2.
X2 [Check f] If every edge vw satisﬁes f(v) ̸= f(w), terminate with f as the
result.
■
This algorithm has few redeeming qualities, other than its being correct. We
consider it here because it serves as an opportunity to make explicit the framework
in which we present more interesting algorithms.

278
Thore Husfeldt
Model of computation
If G has n vertices and m edges, then the number of operations used by Algorithm X
can be asymptotically bounded by O(qn(n + m)), which we call the running time of
the algorithm.
To make such a claim, we tacitly assume a computational model that includes
primitive operations, such as iterating over all mappings from one ﬁnite set A to
another ﬁnite set B in time O(|B||A|) (Step X1), or iterating over all edges in time
O(n + m) (Step X2). For instance, we assume that the input graph is represented by
an array of sequences indexed by vertices; the sequence stored at vertex v contains
the neighouring vertices N(v), see Fig. 1. This representation allows us to iterate over
the neighbours of a vertex in time O(deg v). (An alternative representation, such as
an incidence or adjacency matrix, would not allow this.) Note that detecting whether
two graphs are isomorphic is not a primitive operation. The convention of expressing
computational resources using asymptotic notation is consistent with our somewhat
cavalier attitude towards the details of our computational model. Our assumptions
are consistent with the behaviour of a modern computer in a high-level programming
language. Nevertheless, we will explain our algorithms in plain English.
a
z
b
i
c
g
d
l
m
p
e
u
r
v
s
t
a
m
b
c
m
c
e
s
b
d
t
i
l
z
e
c
i
s
g
z
i
s
e
d
l
d
m
a
b
r
t
z
v
p
v
r
s
t
m
s
c
e
i
r
t
m
r
d
u
v
m
p
z
m
d
g
Fig. 1. A graph and its representation as an array of sequences
Worst-case asymptotic analysis
Note that we could have ﬁxed the colouring of a speciﬁc vertex v as f(v) = 0,
reducing Algorithm X’s running time to O(qn−1(n+m)). A moment’s thought shows
that this reasoning can then be extended to cliques of size r ≥1: search through all
n
r

induced subgraphs until a clique of size r is found, arbitrarily map these vertices
to {1, 2, . . . , r} and then let Algorithm X colour the remaining vertices. This reduces
the running time to O(qn−ω(G)nω(G)(n + m)), where ω(G) is the clique size. This
may be quite useful for some graphs. Another observation is that in the best case
the running time is O(n + m). However, we will normally not pursue this kind of
argument. Instead, we are maximally pessimistic about the input and the algorithm’s
underspeciﬁed choices. In other words, we understand running times as worst-case

13 Graph colouring algorithms
279
performance guarantees, rather than ‘typical’ running times or average running times
over some distribution.
Sometimes we may even say that Algorithm X requires time qn poly(n), where we
leave the polynomial factor unspeciﬁed in order to signal the perfunctory attention
we extend to these issues.
Overview and notation
Straightforward variants of Algorithm X can be used to solve some other graph
colouring problems. For instance, to ﬁnd a list-colouring, we restrict the range of
values for each f(v) to a given list; to ﬁnd an edge-colouring, we iterate over all
mappings f : E →{1, 2, . . . , q}.
Another modiﬁcation is to count the number of colourings instead of ﬁnding just
one. These extensions provide baseline algorithms for list-colouring, edge-colouring,
the chromatic polynomial, the chromatic index, and so forth. However, for purposes
of exposition, we present algorithms in their least general form, emphasizing the
algorithmic idea rather than its (sometimes quite pedestrian) generalizations. The
algorithms are organized by algorithmic technique rather than problem type, graph
class, optimality criterion, or computational complexity. These sections are largely
independent and can be read in any order, except perhaps for Algorithm G in
Section 2. The penultimate section takes a step back and relates the various colouring
problems to each other.
2. Greedy colouring
The following algorithm, sometimes called the greedy or sequential algorithm,
considers the vertices one by one and uses the ﬁrst available colour.
Algorithm G (Greedy vertex-colouring) Given a graph G with maximum degree 
and an ordering v1, v2, . . . , vn of its vertices, this algorithm ﬁnds a vertex-colouring
with maxi |{ j < i: vjvi ∈E }| + 1 ≤ + 1 colours.
G1 [Initialize] Set i = 0.
G2 [Next vertex] Increment i. If i = n + 1, terminate with f as the result.
G3 [Find the colours N(vi)] Compute the set C = 
j<i f(vj) of colours already
assigned to the neighbours of vi.
G4 [Assign the smallest available colour to vi] For increasing c = 1, 2, . . . , check
whether c ∈C. If not, set f(vi) = c and return to Step G2.
■
For the number of colours, it is clear that in Step G4, the value of c is at most
|C|, which is bounded by the number of neighbours of vi among v1, v2, . . . , vi−1. In
particular, Algorithm G establishes that χ(G) ≤(G) + 1.

280
Thore Husfeldt
For the running time, note that both Steps G3 and G4 take at most O(1 +
deg vi) operations. Summing over all i, the total time spent in Steps G3 and G4 is
asymptotically bounded by n + (deg v1 + deg v2 + · · · + deg vn) = n + 2m. Thus,
Algorithm G takes time O(n + m).
Optimal ordering
The size of the colouring computed by Algorithm G depends heavily on the vertex
ordering. Its worst-case behaviour is poor. For instance, it spends 1
2n colours on the
2-colourable crown graph shown in Fig. 2.
v2
v1
v4
v3
v6
v5
· · ·
· · ·
vn
vn−1
Fig. 2. The crown graph
On the other hand, for every graph there exists an ordering for which Algorithm G
uses an optimal number of colours; indeed, any ordering that satisﬁes f(vi) ≤f(vi+1)
for an optimal colouring f has this property. Since there are n! different orderings, this
observation is algorithmically quite useless. An ordering is perfect for a graph if, for
every induced subgraph, Algorithm G results in an optimal colouring; triangulated
graphs and comparability graphs always admit such an ordering, as shown by
Chv´atal [11].
Randomness
Algorithm G performs quite well on random graphs, whatever the vertex ordering.
For almost all n-vertex graphs, it uses n/(log n−3 log log n) colours, which is roughly
twice the optimum value (see [15]).
This suggests the following randomized algorithm. For a graph G, choose a vertex
ordering at random and then execute Algorithm G. For many problems, it is a sound
algorithmic design strategy to trade good average-case behaviour for good (expected)
worst-case behaviour in this way. However, for Algorithm G the result is quite poor:
for every ε > 0 there exist graphs with chromatic number nε for which the randomized
algorithm uses (n/ log n) colours with high probability, as shown by Kuˇcera [26].
Other orderings
In the largest-ﬁrst vertex-degree ordering introduced by Welsh and Powell [38], the
vertices are ordered such that deg v1 ≥deg v2 ≥· · · ≥deg vn. This establishes the
bound χ(G) ≤1 + maxi min{deg vi, i −1}, which is sometimes better than 1 + ,
such as in Fig. 3.

13 Graph colouring algorithms
281
v1
v2
v3
v4
v5
v6
Fig. 3.
Closely related in spirit is Matula’s smallest-last ordering [32], given as follows:
choose as the last vertex vn a vertex of minimum degree in G, and proceed recursively
with G −vn, see Fig. 4. With this ordering, the size of the resulting colouring is
bounded by the Szekeres–Wilf bound [36],
χ(G) ≤dgn(G) + 1 ,
where the degeneracy dgn(G) is the maximum over all subgraphs H of G of the
minimum degree δ(H). This ordering optimally colours crown graphs and many other
classes of graphs, and uses six colours on any planar graph.
largest-ﬁrst:
v6 v1 v4 v3 v2 v5
smallest-last:
v6 v4 v2 v1 v3 v5
Fig. 4.
Other orderings are dynamic, in the sense that the ordering is determined during the
execution of the algorithm, rather than in advance. For example, Br´elaz [6] suggests
choosing the next vertex from among those adjacent to the largest number of different
colours. Many other orderings have been investigated (see the surveys of Kosowski
and Manuszewski [25] and Maffray [31]). Many of them perform quite well on
instances that one may encounter ‘in practice’, but attempts at formalizing what this
means are quixotic.
2-colourable graphs
Of particular interest are those vertex orderings in which every vertex vi is adjacent
to some vertex vj with j < i. Such orderings can be computed in time O(m+n) using
basic graph-traversal algorithms. This algorithm is sufﬁciently important to be made
explicit.
Algorithm B (Bipartition)
Given a connected graph G, this algorithm ﬁnds a
2-colouring if one exists. Otherwise, it outputs an odd cycle.
B1 [Initialize] Let f(v1) = 1 and let Q (the ‘queue’) be an empty sequence. For each
neighbour w of v1, set p(w) = v1 (the ‘parent’ of w) and add w to Q.
B2 [Next vertex] If Q is empty, go to Step B3. Otherwise, remove the ﬁrst vertex
v from Q and set f(v) to the colour not already assigned to p(v). For each

282
Thore Husfeldt
neighbour w of v, if w is not yet coloured and does not belong to Q, then set
p(w) = v and add w to the end of Q. Repeat Step B2.
B3 [Verify 2-colouring] Iterate over all edges to verify that f(v) ̸= f(w) for every
edge vw. If so, terminate with f as the result.
B4 [Construct odd cycle] Let vw be an edge with f(v) = f(w) and let u be the
nearest common ancestor of v and w in the tree deﬁned by p. Output the path
w, p(w), p(p(w)), . . . , u, followed by the reversal of the path v, p(v), p(p(v)), . . . ,
u, followed by the edge vw.
■
Figure 5 shows an execution of Algorithm B ﬁnding a 2-colouring.
Fig. 5. Execution of Algorithm B
Algorithm B is an example of a ‘certifying’ algorithm: an algorithm that produces
a witness to certify its correctness, in this case an odd cycle if the graph is not
2-colourable. To see that the cycle constructed in Step B4 has odd length, note that
on the two paths w, p(w), p(p(w)), . . . , u and v, p(v), p(p(v)), . . . , u, each vertex has
a different colour from its predecessor. Since the respective endpoints of both paths
have the same colour, they must contain the same number of edges modulo 2. In
particular, their total length is even. With the additional edge vw, the length of the
resulting cycle is odd.
The order in which the vertices are considered by Algorithm B depends on the ﬁrst-
in ﬁrst-out behaviour of the queue Q. The resulting ordering is called breadth-ﬁrst.
An important variant uses a last-in ﬁrst-out ‘stack’ instead of a queue; the resulting
ordering is called depth-ﬁrst. Figure 6 shows the resulting behaviour on the graph
from Fig. 5.
Fig. 6. Execution of Algorithm B using depth-ﬁrst search

13 Graph colouring algorithms
283
Algorithm B works also for the list-colouring problem, provided that for each
vertex v the available list of colours L(v) has size at most 2. This observation leads to
a simple randomized exponential-time algorithm for 3-colouring, due to Beigel and
Eppstein [1].
Algorithm P (Palette restriction) Given a graph, this algorithm ﬁnds a 3-colouring
if one exists.
P1 [Forbid one colour at each vertex] For each vertex v, select a list L(v) of colours
available at v uniformly and independently at random from the three lists {1, 2},
{2, 3} and {1, 3}.
P2 [Attempt a 2-colouring] Try to solve the list-colouring instance given by L using
Algorithm B, setting f(v1) = min L(v1) in Step B1. If successful, terminate with
the resulting colouring. Otherwise, return to Step P1.
■
To analyze the running time, consider a 3-colouring f. For each vertex v, the colour
f(v) belongs to L(v) with probablity 2
3. Thus, with probability at least ( 2
3)n, the list
colouring instance constructed in step P1 has a solution. It follows that the expected
number of repetitions is ( 3
2)n, each of which takes polynomial time.
Wigderson’s algorithm
Algorithms B and G appear together in Wigderson’s algorithm [40].
Algorithm W (Wigderson’s algorithm) Given a 3-chromatic graph G, this algorithm
ﬁnds a vertex-colouring with O(√n) colours.
W1 [Initialize] Let c = 1.
W2 [(G) ≥⌈√n⌉] Consider a vertex v in G with deg v ≥⌈√n⌉; if no such vertex
exists, go to Step W3. Use Algorithm B to 2-colour the neighbourhood G[N(v)]
with colours c and c + 1. Remove N(v) from G and increase c by χ(G[N(v)]).
Repeat Step W2.
W3 [(G) < ⌈√n⌉] Use Algorithm G to colour the remaining vertices with the
colours c, c + 1, . . . , c + ⌈√n⌉.
■
Fig. 7 shows an execution of Algorithm W ﬁnding a 5-colouring of the 16-vertex
instance from Fig. 1.
The running time is clearly bounded by O(n + m). To analyze the number of
colours, we ﬁrst need to verify Step W2. Since G is 3-colourable, so is the subgraph
induced by N(v) ∪{v}. Now, if G[N(v)] requires three colours, then G[N(v) ∪{v}]
requires four, so G[N(v)] is 2-colourable and therefore Step W2 is correct. Note that
Step W2 can be run at most O(√n) times, each using at most two colours. Step W3
expends another ⌈√n⌉colours, according to Algorithm G.

284
Thore Husfeldt
Fig. 7. Execution of Algorithm W
Algorithm W extends naturally to graphs with χ(G) > 3. In this case, Step W2
calls Algorithm W recursively to colour (χ(G)−1)-colourable neighbourhoods. The
resulting algorithm uses O(n1−1/(1−χ(G))) colours.
3. Recursion
Recursion is a fundamental algorithmic design technique. The idea is to reduce a
problem to one or more simpler instances of the same problem.
Contraction
The oldest recursive construction for graph colouring expresses the chromatic
polynomial P(G, q) and the chromatic number χ(G) in terms of edge-contractions:
for non-adjacent vertices v, w and integer q = 0, 1, . . . , n,
P(G, q) = P(G ∪vw, q) + P(G/vw, q) ,
χ(G) = min{χ(G ∪vw), χ(G/vw)}
(see Chapter 3, Section 2.1). These ‘addition–contraction’ recurrences immediately
imply a recursive algorithm. For instance,
P(
, q) = P(
, q) + P(
, q)
= P(K4, q) + P(K3, q) = q(q −1)(q −2)

(q −3)(q −4) + 1

.
Note that the graphs at the end of the recursion are complete.
For sparse graphs, it is more useful to express the same idea as a ‘deletion–
contraction’ recurrence, which deletes and contracts edges until the graph is empty:
P(G, q) = P(G/e, q) −P(G −e, q)
(e ∈E) .
Many other graph problems beside colouring can be expressed by a deletion–
contraction recurrence. The most general graph invariant that can be deﬁned in this
fashion is the Tutte polynomial (see [5] and [18] for its algorithmic aspects).
v
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
v
3
3
3
3
3
1
2
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
5
4
4
4
4

13 Graph colouring algorithms
285
The algorithm implied by these recursions is sometimes called Zykov’s algorithm
[42]. Here is the deletion–contraction version.
Algorithm C (Contraction) Given a graph G, this algorithm returns the sequence of
coefﬁcients (a0, a1, . . . , an) of the chromatic polynomial P(G, q) = n
i=0 aiqi.
C1 [Base] If G has no edges then return the coefﬁcients (0, 0, . . . , 0, 1), correspond-
ing to the polynomial P(G, q) = qn.
C2 [Recursion] Pick an edge e and construct the graphs G′ = G/e and G′′ =
G −e. Call Algorithm C recursively to compute P(G′, q) and P(G′′, q)
as sequences of coefﬁcients (a′
0, a′
1, . . . , a′
n) and (a′′
0, a′′
1, . . . , a′′
n). Return
(a′
0 −a′′
0, a′
1 −a′′
1, . . . , a′
n −a′′
n), corresponding to the polynomial P(G/e, q) −
P(G −e, q).
■
To analyze the running time, let T(r) be the number of executions of Step C1 for
graphs with n vertices and m edges, where r = n + m. The two graphs constructed
in Step C2 have size n −1 + m −1 = r −2 and n + m −1 = r −1, respectively,
so T satisﬁes T(r) = T(r −1) + T(r −2). This is a well-known recurrence with
solution T(r) = O(ϕr), where ϕ = 1
2(1 + √5) is the golden ratio. Thus, Algorithm
C requires ϕn+m poly(n) = O(1.619n+m) time. A similar analysis for the algorithm
implied by the deletion–addition recursion gives ϕn+m poly(n), where m =
n
2

−m
is the number of edges in the complement of G.
These worst-case bounds are often very pessimistic. They do not take into account
that recurrences can be stopped as soon as the graph is a tree (or some other easily
recognized graph whose chromatic polynomial is known as a closed formula), or that
P factorizes over connected components. Moreover, we can use graph isomorphism
heuristics and tabulation to avoid some unnecessary recomputation of isomorphic
subproblems (see [18]). Thus, Algorithm C is a more useful algorithm than its
exponential running time may indicate.
Vertex partitions and dynamic programming
We turn to a different recurrence, which expresses χ(G) in terms of induced
subgraphs of G. By taking S to be a colour class of an optimal colouring of G, we
observe that every graph has an independent set of vertices S for which χ(G) =
1 + χ(G −S). Thus, we have
χ(G) = 1 + min χ(G −S) ,
(1)
where the minimum is taken over all non-empty independent sets S in G.
The recursive algorithm implied by (1) is too slow to be of interest. We expedite
it by using the fundamental algorithmic idea of dynamic programming. The central
observation is that the subproblems χ(G −S) for various vertex-subsets S appearing

286
Thore Husfeldt
in (1) are computed over and over again. It thus makes sense to store these 2n values
in a table when they are ﬁrst computed. Subsequent evaluations can then be handled
by consulting the table.
We express the resulting algorithm in a bottom-up fashion:
Algorithm D (Dynamic programming) Given a graph G, this algorithm computes a
table T with T(W) = χ(G[W]), for each W ⊆V.
D1 [Initialize] Construct a table with (initially undeﬁned) entries T(W) for each
W ⊆V. Set T(∅) = 0.
D2 [Main loop] List all vertex-subsets W1, W2, . . . , W2n ⊆V in non-decreasing
order of their size. Do Step D3 for W = W2, W3, . . . , W2n, then terminate.
D3 [Determine T(W)] Set T(W) = 1 + min T(W \ S), where the minimum is taken
over all non-empty independent sets S in G[W].
■
The ordering of subsets in the main loop D2 ensures that each set is handled before
any of its supersets. In particular, all values T(W\S) needed in Step D3 will have been
previously computed, so the algorithm is well deﬁned. The minimization in Step D3
is implemented by iterating over all 2|W| subsets of W. Thus, the total running time
of Algorithm D is within a polynomial factor of

W⊆V
2|W| =
n

k=0
n
k
	
2k = 3n .
(2)
This rather straightforward application of dynamic programming already provides
the non-trivial insight that the chromatic number can be computed in time exponential
in the number of vertices, rather than depending exponentially on m, χ(G), or a
superlinear function of n.
Maximal independent sets
To pursue this idea a little further we notice that S in (1) can be assumed to be
a maximal independent (stable) set – that is, it is not a proper subset of another
independent set. To see this, let f be an optimal colouring and consider the colour
class S = f −1(1). If S is not maximal, then repeatedly pick a vertex v that is not
adjacent to S, and set f(v) = 1.
By considering the disjoint union of 1
3k triangles, we see that there exist k-vertex
graphs with 3k/3 maximal independent sets. It is known that this is also an upper
bound, and that the maximal independent sets can be enumerated within a polynomial
factor of that bound (see [7], [34] and [37]). We therefore have the following
result:
Theorem 3.1 The maximal independent sets of a graph on k vertices can be listed in
time O(3k/3) and polynomial space.

13 Graph colouring algorithms
287
We can apply this idea to Algorithm D. The minimization in Step D3 now takes
the following form:
D3′ [Determine T(W)] Set T(W) = 1 + min T(W\S), where the minimum is taken
over all maximal independent sets S in G[W].
Using Theorem 3.1 with k = |W| for the minimization in Step D3′, the total
running time of Algorithm D comes within a polynomial factor of
n

k=0
n
k
	
3k/3 = (1 + 31/3)n = O(2.443n) .
For many years, this was the fastest-known algorithm for the chromatic number.
3-colouring
Of particular interest is the 3-colouring case. Here, it makes more sense to let
the outer loop iterate over all maximal independent sets and check whether the
complement is bipartite.
Algorithm L (Lawler’s algorithm)
Given a graph G, this algorithm ﬁnds a
3-colouring if one exists.
L1 [Main loop] For each maximal independent set S of G, do Step L2.
L2 [Try f(S) = 3] Use Algorithm B to ﬁnd a colouring f : V \ S →{1, 2} of G −S
if one exists. In that case, extend f to all of V by setting f(v) = 3 for each v ∈S,
and terminate with f as the result.
■
The running time of Algorithm L is dominated by the number of executions of L2,
which is 3n/3, by Theorem 3.1. Thus, Algorithm L decides 3-colourability in time
3n/3 poly(n) = O(1.442n) and polynomial space.
The use of maximal independent sets goes back to Christoﬁdes [10], while
Algorithms D and L are due to Lawler [28]. A series of improvements to these ideas
have further reduced these running times. At the time of writing, the best-known time
bound for 3-colouring is O(1.329n) by Beigel and Eppstein [1].
4. Subgraph expansion
The Whitney expansion [39] of the chromatic polynomial is
P(G, q) =

A⊆E
(−1)|A|qk(A) ;
see Chapter 3, Section 2 for a proof. It expresses the chromatic polynomial as
an alternating sum of terms, each of which depends on the number of connected

288
Thore Husfeldt
components k(A) of the edge-subset A ⊆E. Determining k(A) is a well-studied
algorithmic graph problem, which can be solved in time O(n + m) (for example,
by depth-ﬁrst search). Thus, the Whitney expansion can be evaluated in time
O(2m(n + m)).
A more recent expression (see [2]) provides an expansion over induced subgraphs:
Theorem 4.1 For W ⊆V, let g(W) be the number of non-empty independent sets in
G[W]. Then G can be q-coloured if and only if

W⊆V
(−1)|V\W|
g(W)
q > 0 .
(3)
Proof
For each W ⊆V, the term

g(W)
q counts the number of ways of selecting
q non-empty independent sets S1, S2, . . . , Sq, where Si ⊆W. For U ⊆V, let h(U)
be the number of ways of selecting q non-empty independent sets whose union is U.
Then (g(W))q = 
U⊆W h(U), so

W⊆V
(−1)|V\W|
g(W)
q =

W⊆V
(−1)|V\W| 
U⊆W
h(U)
=

U⊆V
h(U)

W⊇U
(−1)|V\W| = h(V) .
For the last step, note that the inner sum (over W, with U ⊆W ⊆V) vanishes except
when U = V, because there are as many odd-sized as even-sized sets sandwiched
between different sets, by the principle of inclusion–exclusion.
If h(V) is non-zero, then there exist independent sets S1, S2, . . . , Sq whose union
is V. These sets correspond to a colouring: associate a colour with the vertices in each
set, breaking ties arbitrarily.
■
For each W
⊆V, we can compute the value g(W) in time O(2|W|m) by
constructing each non-empty subset of W and testing it for independence. Thus,
the total running time for evaluating (3) is within a polynomial factor of 3n, just
as in the analysis (2) for Algorithm D; however, the space requirement here is only
polynomial. We can further reduce the running time to O(2.247n) by using dedicated
algorithms for evaluating g(W) from the literature (see [3]).
If exponential space is available, we can do even better. To that end, we ﬁrst
introduce a recurrence for g.
Theorem 4.2 Let W ⊆V. We have g(∅) = 0, and, for every v ∈W,
g(W) = g(W \ {v}) + g(W \ N(v)) + 1 ,
(4)
where N(v) is the neighbourhood of V.
Proof
Fix v ∈W. The non-empty independent sets S ⊆W can be partitioned into
two classes with v /∈S and v ∈S. In the ﬁrst case, S is a non-empty independent set
with S ⊆W\{v} and is thus accounted for by the ﬁrst term of (4). Consider the second
case. Since S contains v and is independent, it contains no vertex from N(v). Thus, S

13 Graph colouring algorithms
289
is a non-empty independent set with {v} ⊆S ⊆W \ N(v). The number of such sets
is the same as the number of (not necessarily non-empty) independent sets S′ with
S′ ⊆W \ N(v), because of the bijective mapping S →S′ where S′ = S \ {v}. By
induction, the number of such sets is g(W \ N(v)) + 1, where the ‘+1’ term accounts
for the empty set.
■
This leads to the following algorithm, due to Bj¨orklund et al. [3]:
Algorithm I (Inclusion–exclusion) Given a graph G and an integer q ≥1, this
algorithm determines whether G can be q-coloured.
I1 [Tabulate g] Set g(∅) = 0. For each non-empty subset W ⊆V in inclusion order,
pick v ∈W and set g(W) = g(W \ {v}) + g(W \ N[v]) + 1.
I2 [Evaluate (3)] If 
W⊆V(−1)|V\W|
g(W)
q > 0 output ‘yes’, otherwise ‘no’.
■
u
v
w
x
W
g
a2
a3
∅
0
0
0
{u}
1
−1
−1
{v}
1
−1
−1
{w}
1
−1
−1
{x}
1
−1
−1
{u, v}
2
4
8
{u, w}
2
4
8
{u, x}
2
4
8
W
g
a2
a3
{v, w}
2
4
8
{v, x}
3
9
27
{w, x}
3
9
27
{u, v, w}
3
−9
−27
{u, v, x}
4
−16
−64
{u, w, x}
4
−16
−64
{v, w, x}
5
−25
−125
V
6
36
216
Fig. 8. Execution of Algorithm I
Both Steps I1 and I2 take time 2n poly(n), and the algorithm requires a table with
2n entries. Fig. 8 shows the computations of Algorithm I on a small graph for q = 2
and q = 3, with aq(W) = (−1)|V\W|
g(W)
q. The sum of the entries in column
a2 is 0, so there is no 2-colouring. The sum of the entries in column a3 is 18, so a
3-colouring exists.
With slight modiﬁcations, Algorithm I can be made to work for other colouring
problems such as the chromatic polynomial and list-colouring, also in time and space
2n poly(n) (see [3]); currently, this is the fastest-known algorithm for these problems.
For the chromatic polynomial, the space requirement can be reduced to O(1.292n),
while maintaining the 2n poly(n) running time (see [4]).
5. Local augmentation
Sometimes a non-optimal colouring can be improved by a local change that recolours
some vertices. This general idea is the basis of many local search heuristics and also
several central theorems.

290
Thore Husfeldt
Kempe changes
An important example for edge-colouring establishes Vizing’s theorem, (G) ≤
χ′(G) ≤(G) + 1. Chapter 5 gives a modern and more general presentation of
the underlying idea, and our focus in the present chapter is to make the algorithm
explicit.
A colour is free at v if it does not appear on an edge at v. (We consider an edge-
colouring with (G) + 1 colours, so every vertex has at least one free colour.) A
(Vizing) fan around v is a maximal set of edges vw0, vw1, . . . , vwr, where vw0 is
not yet coloured and the other edges are coloured as follows. For j = 0, 1, . . . , r, no
colour is free at both v and wj. For j = 1, 2, . . . , r, the jth fan edge vwj has colour j and
the colours appearing around wj include 1, 2, . . . , j but not j + 1 (see Fig. 9(a)). Such
a fan allows a recolouring by moving colours as follows: remove the colour from vwj
and set f(vw0) = 1, f(vw1) = 2, . . . , f(vwj−1) = j. This is called downshifting from j
(see Fig. 9(b)).
(a)
v
w0
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
1
2
3
4
5
1
1
2
123
1
2
3
4
(b)
v
w0
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
1
2
3
4
5
(c)
v
w0
w1
w2
wj
wr
wr+1
1
2
j
0
j
0
0
j
0
r
r + 1
Fig. 9. (a) A fan (b) Downshifting from 3 (c) Step V7: colour j is free at wr+1
Algorithm V (Vizing’s algorithm) Given a graph G, this algorithm ﬁnds an edge
colouring with at most (G) + 1 colours in time O(nm).
V1 [Initialize] Order the edges arbitrarily e1, e2, . . . , em. Let i = 0.
V2 [Extend colouring to next edge] Increment i. If i = m + 1, then terminate.
Otherwise, let vw = ei.
V3 [Easy case] If a colour c is free at both v and w, then set f(vw) = c and return to
Step V2.
V4 [Find w0 and w1] Let w0 = w. Pick a free colour at w0 and call it 1. Let vw1 be
the edge incident with v coloured 1. (Such an edge exists because 1 is not also
free at v.)
V5 [Find w2] Pick a free colour at w1 and call it 2. If 2 is also free at v, then set
f(vw0) = 1, f(vw1) = 2, and return to Step V2. Otherwise, let vw2 be the edge
incident with v coloured 2. Set r = 2.

13 Graph colouring algorithms
291
V6 [Extend fan to wr+1] Pick a free colour at wr and call it r + 1. If r + 1 is also
free at v, then downshift from r, recolour f(vwr) = cr+1 and return to Step V2.
Otherwise, let vwr+1 be the edge incident with v coloured r + 1. If each colour
1, 2, . . . , r appears around wr+1, then increment r and repeat Step V6.
V7 [Build a {0, j}-path from wj or from wr+1] Let j ∈{1, 2, . . . , r} be a free colour at
wr+1 and let 0 be a colour free at v and different from j. Construct two maximal
{0, j}-coloured paths Pj and Pr+1 from wj and wr+1, respectively, by following
edges of alternating colours 0, j, 0, j, . . . (see Fig. 9(c)). (The paths cannot both
end in v.) Let k = j or r + 1 so that Pk does not end in v.
V8 [Flip colours on Pk] Recolour the edges on Pk by exchanging 0 and j. Downshift
from k, recolour f(vwk) = 0, and return to Step V2.
■
To see that this algorithm is correct, one needs to check that the recolourings in
Steps V6 and V8 are legal. A careful analysis was given by Misra and Gries [33].
For the running time, ﬁrst note that Step V6 is repeated at most deg v times, so the
algorithm eventually has to leave that step. The most time-consuming step is Step V7:
a {0, j}-path can be constructed in time O(n) if for each vertex we maintain a table
of incident edges indexed by colour. Thus the total running time of Algorithm V is
O(mn).
Another example from this class of algorithms appears in the proof of Brooks’s
theorem (see Chapter 2 and [8]), which relies on an algorithm that follows Algorithm
G but attempts to re-colour the vertices of bichromatic components whenever a fresh
colour is about to be introduced.
Random changes
There are many other graph colouring algorithms that fall under the umbrella of
local transformations. Of particular interest are local search algorithms that recolour
individual vertices at random. This idea deﬁnes a random process on the set of
colourings called the Glauber or Metropolis dynamics, or the natural Markov chain
Monte Carlo method. The aim here is not merely to ﬁnd a colouring (since q > 4,
this would be easily done by Algorithm G), but to ﬁnd a colouring that is uniformly
distributed among all q-colourings.
Algorithm M (Metropolis) Given a graph G with maximum degree  and a
q-colouring f0 for q > 4, this algorithm ﬁnds a uniform random q-colouring fT
in polynomial time.
M1 [Outer loop] Set T = ⌈qn ln 2n/(q −4)⌉. Do Step M2 for t = 1, 2, . . . , T, then
terminate.
M2 [Recolour a random vertex] Pick a vertex v ∈V and a colour c ∈{1, 2, . . . , q}
uniformly at random. Set ft = ft−1. If c does not appear among v’s neighbours,
then set ft(v) = c.
■

292
Thore Husfeldt
An initial colouring f0 can be provided in polynomial time because q >  + 1
– for example, by Algorithm G. To see that the choice of initial colouring f0 has no
inﬂuence on the result fT, we consider two different initial colourings f0 and f ′
0 and
execute Algorithm M on both, using the same random choices for v and c in each
step.
Let dt = |{ v: ft(v) ̸= f ′
t (v) }| be the number of disagreeing vertices after t
executions of Step M2. Each step can change only a single vertex, so |dt −dt−1| =
1, 0, or −1. We have dt = dt−1 + 1 only if ft−1(v) = f ′
t−1(v) but ft(v) ̸= f ′
t (v), so
exactly one of the two processes rejects the colour change. In particular, v must have
a (disagreeing) neighbour w with c = ft−1(w) ̸= f ′
t−1(w) or ft−1(w) ̸= f ′
t−1(w) = c.
There are dt−1 choices for w and therefore 2dt−1 choices for c and v. Similarly,
we have dt = dt−1 −1 only if ft−1(v) ̸= ft−1(v) and c does not appear in v’s
neighbourhood in either ft−1 or f ′
t−1. There are at least (q −2)dt−1 such choices
for c and v.
Thus, the expected value of dt can be bounded as follows:
E[dt] ≤E[dt−1] + (q −2)E[dt−1]
qn
−2E[dt−1]
qn
= E[dt−1]

1 −q −4
qn
	
.
Iterating this argument and using d0 ≤n, we have
E[dT] ≤n

1 −q −4
qn
	T
≤n exp

−T(q −4)
qn
	
≤n exp(−ln 2n) = 1
2 .
By Markov’s inequality, and because dT is a non-negative integer, we conclude that
Pr(fT = f ′
T) = Pr(dT = 0) ≥1 −Pr(dT ≥1) ≥1 −E[dT] ≥1
2 .
We content ourselves with this argument, which shows that the process is
‘sufﬁciently random’ in the sense of being memoryless. Informally, we can convince
ourselves that fT is uniformly distributed because we can assume that f ′
0 in the
above argument was sampled according to such a distribution. This intuition can be
formalized using standard coupling arguments for Markov chains; our calculations
above show that the ‘mixing time’ of Algorithm M is O(n log n).
Algorithm M and its variants have been well studied, and the analysis can be
much improved (see the survey of Frieze and Vigoda [13]). Randomized local search
has wide appeal across disciplines, including simulations in statistical physics and
heuristic methods in combinatorial optimization.
6. Vector colouring
We now turn to a variant of vertex-colouring that is particularly interesting from an
algorithmic point of view.

13 Graph colouring algorithms
293
Vector chromatic number
Let Sd−1 = { x ∈Rd : ∥x∥= 1}. A vector q-colouring in d ≤n dimensions is a
mapping x: V →Sd−1 from the vertex-set to the set of d-dimensional unit vectors
for which neighbouring vectors are ‘far apart’, in the sense that their scalar product
satisﬁes
⟨x(v), x(w)⟩≤−
1
q −1 ,
for vw ∈E.
The smallest such number q is called the vector chromatic number ⃗χ(G), which need
not be an integer. For instance, the vertices of the 3-chromatic cycle graph C5 can be
laid out on the unit circle in the form of a pentagram
. Then the angle between
vectors corresponding to neighbouring vertices is 4
5π, corresponding to the scalar
product −1/(√5 −1), so ⃗χ(C5) ≤√5 < 3.
Theorem 6.1 If G has clique number ω(G), then ω(G) ≤⃗χ(G) ≤χ(G).
Proof
For the ﬁrst inequality, let W be a clique in G of size r = ω(G) and consider
a vector q-colouring x of G. Let y = 
v∈W x(v). Then
0 ≤⟨y, y⟩≤r · 1 + r(r −1) ·

−
1
q −1
	
,
which implies that r ≤q.
For the second inequality, place the vertices belonging to each colour class at the
corners of a (q −1)-dimensional simplex. To be speciﬁc, let f : V →{1, 2, . . . , q} be
an optimal q-colouring and deﬁne x(v) = (x1, x2, . . . , xn) by
xi =
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩

(q −1)/q
1/2
if i = f(v),
−

q(q −1)
−1/2
if i ̸= f(v) and i ≤q,
0
if i > q .
Then we have
⟨x(v), x(v)⟩= q −1
q
+
q −1
q(q −1) = 1 ,
and for v and w with f(v) ̸= f(w) we have
⟨x(v), x(w)⟩= 2
q −1
q
	1/2
−

q
q −1
	1/2	
+
q −2
q(q −1) = −
1
q −1 .
Thus, x is a vector q-colouring, so ⃗χ(G) is at most q.
■
What makes vector colourings interesting from the algorithmic point of view is
that they can be found in polynomial time, at least approximately, using algorithms
based on semideﬁnite programming. The details behind those constructions lie far
outside the scope of this chapter (see G¨artner and Matouˇsek [14]).

294
Thore Husfeldt
Theorem 6.2 Given a graph G with ⃗χ(G) = q, a vector (q + ε)-colouring of G can
be found in time polynomial in n and log(1/ε).
For a graph with ω(G) = χ(G), 6.1 shows that the vector chromatic number
equals the chromatic number. In particular, it is an integer, and can be determined in
polynomial time using 6.2 with ε < 1
2. This shows that the chromatic numbers of
perfect graphs can be determined in polynomial time. The theory behind this result
counts as one of the highlights of combinatorial optimization (see Gr¨otschel, Lov´asz
and Schrijver [16]).
How does the vector chromatic number behave for general graphs? For q = 2,
the vectors have to point in exactly opposite directions. In particular, there can be
only two vectors for each connected component, so vector 2-colouring is equivalent
to 2-colouring.
But already for q = 3 the situation becomes more interesting, since there exist
vector 3-colourable graphs that are not 3-colourable. For instance, the Gr¨otzsch
graph, the smallest triangle-free graph with chromatic number 4, admits the vector
3-colouring shown in Fig. 10 as an embedding on the unit sphere. More complicated
constructions (that we cannot visualize) show that there exist vector 3-colourable
graphs with chromatic number at least n0.157 (see [12] and [22]).
v1
v7
v8
v9
v10
v11
v6
v3
v5
v2
v4
v1
v7
v10
v9
v8
v2
v11
v2
v4
v5
v6
v3
Fig. 10. Left: the Gr¨otzsch graph
Middle and right: a vector 3-colouring
Randomized rounding
Even though the gap between ⃗χ and χ can be large for graphs in general, vector
colouring turns out to be a useful starting point for (standard) colouring. The next
algorithm, due to Karger, Motwani and Sudan [22], translates a vector colouring into
a (standard) vertex-colouring using random hyperplanes.
Algorithm R (Randomized rounding of vector colouring)
Given a 3-chromatic
graph G with maximum degree , this algorithm ﬁnds a q-colouring in polynomial
time, where the expected size of q is E[q] = O(0.681 log n).
R1 [Vector colour] Set ε = 2 · 10−5 and compute a vector (3 + ε)-colouring x of G
using semideﬁnite programming. Let α ≥arccos(−1/(2 + ε)) be the minimum
angle in radians between neighbouring vertices.

13 Graph colouring algorithms
295
R2 [Round] Set
r = ⌈logπ/(π−α)(2)⌉
and construct r random hyperplanes H1, H2, . . . , Hr in Rn. For each vertex v, let
f(v) be the binary number brbr−1 · · · b1, where bi = 1 if and only if x(v) is on
the positive side of the ith hyperplane Hi.
R3 [Handle monochromatic edges recursively] Iterate over all edges to ﬁnd the set
of monochromatic edges M = {vw ∈E: f(v) = f(w)}. Recolour these vertices
by running Algorithm R recursively on G[M], with fresh colours.
■
Fig. 11. Left and middle: two hyperplanes
Right: the corresponding colouring
Figure 11 illustrates the behaviour of Algorithm R on the vector 3-colouring of the
Gr¨otzsch graph from Fig. 10. Two hyperplanes separate the vertices into four parts.
The resulting vertex-colouring with colours from {0, 1}2 is shown to the right. In this
example, the set M of monochromatic edges determined in Step M3 contains only
the single edge v10v11, drawn bold in the ﬁgure.
Algorithm R algorithm runs in polynomial time, because 6.2 ensures that Step R1
can be performed in polynomial time.
We proceed to analyze the size of the ﬁnal colouring. Step R2 uses the colours
{0, 1, . . . , 2r−1}, so the number of colours used in each Step R2 is
2r ≤(2)−1/ log(π/(π−α)) < (2)0.631 .
(5)
What is more difﬁcult is to bound the total number of recursive invocations. To this
end, we need to understand how fast the instance size, determined by the size of M
in Step R3, shrinks.
Let e be an edge whose endpoints received the vector colours x and y. Elementary
geometrical considerations establish the following result.
Theorem 6.3 Let x, y ∈Rd with angle ϕ (in radians). A random hyperplane in Rd
fails to separate x and y with probability 1 −ϕ/π.
The angle between the vectors x and y is at most α. (To gain some intuition of this,
if we ignore the error term ε, 6.3 shows that x and y end up on the same side of a
random hyperplane with probability 1 −α/π ≤1 −arccos(−1
2)/π = 1 −2π/3π
00
01
00
01
00
00
11
10
11
11
11
00
00

296
Thore Husfeldt
= 1
3.) The edge e is monochromatic if all r independent random hyperplanes fail to
separate x and y in Step R2. Thus,
Pr(e ∈M) ≤(1 −α/π)r ≤(π/(π −α))−r ≤1/2 .
By linearity of expectation, the expected size of M is
E[|M|] =

e∈E
Pr(e ∈M) ≤m/2 ≤1
4n .
Since each edge has two vertices, the expected number of vertices in the recursive
instance G[M] is at most 1
2n, and in general, for i > 2, the expected number of
vertices ni in the ith instance satisﬁes ni ≤1
2ni−1. In particular, nt ≤1 after t =
O(log n) rounds, at which point the algorithm terminates. With the bound (5) on the
number of colours used per round, we conclude that the total number of colours used
is O(0.631 log n) in expectation.
In terms of , Algorithm R is much better than the bound of  + 1 guaranteed by
Algorithm G. For an expression in terms of n, we are tempted to bound  by O(n),
but that just shows that the number of colours is O(n0.631 log n), which is worse than
the O(√n) colours from Algorithm W.
Instead, we employ a hybrid approach. Run Steps W1 and W2 as long as the
maximum degree of the graph G is larger than some threshold d, and then colour the
remaining graph using Algorithm R. The number of colours used by the combined
algorithm is of the order of (2n/d) + (2d)0.631 log n, which is minimized around
d = n1/1.631 with value O(n0.387).
Variants of Algorithm R for general q-colouring and with intricate rounding
schemes have been investigated further (see Langberg’s survey [27]). The current
best polynomial-time algorithm for colouring a 3-chromatic graph based on vector
colouring uses O(n0.208) colours, due to Chlamtac [9].
7. Reductions
The algorithms in this chapter are summarized in Table 1.
Not only do these algorithms achieve different running times and quality guaran-
tees, they also differ in which speciﬁc problem they consider. Let us now be more
precise about the variants of the graph colouring problem:
Decision Given a graph G and an integer q, decide whether G can be q-coloured.
Chromatic number Given a graph G, compute the chromatic number χ(G).
Construction Given a graph G and an integer q, construct a q-colouring of G.
Counting Given a graph G and an integer q, compute the number P(G, q) of
q-colourings of G.
Sampling Given a graph G and an integer q, construct a random q-colouring of G.

13 Graph colouring algorithms
297
Algorithm
Time
Problem
B Bipartition
O(n + m)
2-colouring
C Contraction
O(1.619n+m)
P(G, q)
D Dynamic programming
3n poly(n)
χ(G)
G Greedy
O(n + m)
((G) + 1)-colouring
I
Inclusion–exclusion
2n poly(n)
χ(G)
L Lawler’s algorithm
O(1.443n)
3-colouring
M Metropolis dynamics
poly(n)
random q-colouring (q > 4)
P Palette restriction
1.5n poly(n)
3-colouring
R Rounded vector colouring
poly(n)
O(0.681 log n)-colouring
for χ(G) = 3
V Vizing’s algorithm
O(mn)
edge-((G) + 1)-colouring
W Wigderson’s algorithm
O(n + m)
O(√n)-colouring for χ(G) = 3
X Exhaustive search
qn poly(n)
P(G, q)
Table 1. Algorithms discussed in this chapter
Chromatic polynomial Given a graph G, compute the chromatic polynomial – that
is, the coefﬁcients of the integer polynomial q →P(G, q).
Some of these problems are related by using fairly straightforward reductions.
For example, the decision problem is easily solved using the chromatic number by
comparing q with χ(G); conversely, χ(G) can be determined by solving the decision
problem for q = 1, 2, . . . , n. It is also clear that if we can construct a q-colouring,
then we can decide that one exists. What is perhaps less clear is the other direction.
This is seen by a self-reduction that follows the contraction algorithm, Algorithm C.
Reduction C (Constructing a colouring using a decision algorithm) Suppose that we
have an algorithm that decides whether a given graph G can be q-coloured. If G = Kn
and n ≤q, give each vertex its own colour and terminate. Otherwise, select two non-
adjacent vertices v and w in G. If G ∪vw cannot be q-coloured, then every q-colouring
f of G must have f(v) = f(w). Thus we can identify v and w and recursively ﬁnd a
q-colouring for G/vw. Otherwise, there exists a q-colouring of G with f(v) ̸= f(w),
so we recursively ﬁnd a colouring for G ∪vw.
■
Some of our algorithms work only for a speciﬁc ﬁxed q, such as Algorithm B for
2-colourability or Algorithm L for 3-colourability. Clearly, they both reduce to the
decision problem where q is part of the input. But what about the other direction?
The answer turns out to depend strongly on q: the decision problem reduces to
3-colorability, but not to 2-colorability.
Reduction L (q-colouring using 3-colouring) Given a graph G = (V, E) and an
integer q, this reduction constructs a graph H that is 3-colourable with colours
{0, 1, 2} if and only if G is q-colourable with colours {1, 2, . . . , q}.

298
Thore Husfeldt
First, to ﬁx some colour names, the graph H contains a triangle with the vertices
0, 1, 2. We assume that vertex i has colour i, for i = 0, 1, 2.
For each vertex v ∈V, the graph H contains 2q vertices v1, v2, . . . , vq and
v′
1, v′
2, . . . , v′
q. Our intuition is that the vis act as indicators for a colour in G in the
following sense: if vi has colour 1 in H then v has colour i in G. The vertices are
arranged as in Fig. 12(a); the right-most vertex is 1 or 2, depending on the parity
of q. The vertices v1, v2, . . . , vq are all adjacent to 2, and so must be coloured 0 or 1.
Moreover, at least one of them must be coloured 1, since otherwise, the colours for
v′
1, v′
2, . . . , v′
q are forced to alternate as 1, 2, 1, . . . , conﬂicting with the colour of the
right-most vertex.
Now consider an edge vw in G. Let v1, v2, . . . , vq and w1, w2, . . . , wq be the
corresponding ‘indicator’ vertices in H. For each colour i = 1, 2, . . . , q, the vertices
vi and wi are connected by a ‘fresh’ triangle as shown in Fig. 12(b). This ensures that
vi and wi cannot both be 1. In other words, v and w cannot have received the same
colour.
■
v′
1
v1
v′
2
v2
· · ·
· · ·
v′
q
vq
2
2 −q (mod 2)
(a)
wi
1
vi
(b)
Fig. 12.
The above reduction, essentially due to Lov´asz [30], can easily be extended to a
larger ﬁxed q > 3, because G is q-colourable if and only if G with an added ‘apex’
vertex adjacent to all other vertices is (q+1)-colourable. For instance, 4-colourability
is not easier than 3-colourability for general graphs.
Thus, all q-colouring problems for q ≥3 are (in some sense) equally difﬁcult.
This is consistent with the fact that the case q = 2 admits a very fast algorithm
(Algorithm B), whereas none of the others does.
Many constructions have been published that show the computational difﬁculty of
colouring for restricted classes of graphs. We will sketch an interesting example due
to Stockmeyer [35]: the restriction of the case q = 3 to planar graphs. Consider the
subgraph in Fig. 13(a), called a planarity gadget. One can check that this subgraph
has the property that every 3-colouring f satisﬁes f(E) = f(W) and f(N) = f(S).
Moreover, every partial assignment f to {N, S, E, W} that satisﬁes f(E) = f(W) and
f(N) = f(S) can be extended to a 3-colouring of the entire subgraph.
The gadget is used to transform a given (non-planar) graph G as follows. Draw
G in the plane and for each edge vw replace each edge intersection by the planarity
gadget. The outer vertices of neighbouring gadgets are identiﬁed, and v is identiﬁed

13 Graph colouring algorithms
299
with W in its neighbouring gadget (see Fig. 13(b)). The resulting graph is planar, and
it can be checked that it is 3-chromatic if and only if G is 3-chromatic. Thus, the
restriction to planar instances does not make 3-colourability computationally easier.
Unlike the case for non-planar graphs, this construction cannot be generalized to
larger q > 3, since the decision problem for planar graphs and every q ≥4 has
answer ‘yes’ because of the four-colour theorem.
N
W
S
E
(a)
(b)
v
w
↓
v
w
Fig. 13. A planarity gadget
Computational complexity
The ﬁeld of computational complexity relates algorithmic problems from various
domains to one another in order to establish a notion of computational difﬁculty.
The chromatic number problem was one of the ﬁrst to be analyzed in this fashion.
The following reduction, essentially from the seminal paper of Karp [23], shows that
computing the chromatic number is ‘hard for the complexity class NP’ by reducing
from the NP-hard satisﬁability problem for Boolean formulas on conjunctive normal
form (CNF). This implies that all other problem in the class NP reduce to the
chromatic number.
The input to CNF-Satisﬁability is a Boolean formula consisting of s clauses
C1, C2, . . . , Cs. Each clause Cj consists of a disjunction Cj = (lj1 ∨lj2 ∨· · · ∨ljk)
of literals. Every literal is a variable x1, x2, . . . , xr or its negation x1, x2, . . . , xr. The
problem is to ﬁnd an assignment of the variables to ‘true’ and ‘false’ that makes all
clauses true.
Reduction K (Satisﬁability using chromatic number) Given an instance C1, C2, . . . ,
Cs of CNF-Satisﬁability over the variables x1, x2, . . . , xr, this reduction constructs a
graph G on 3r + s + 1 vertices such that G can be coloured with r + 1 colours if and
only the instance is satisﬁable.
The graph G contains a complete subgraph on r + 1 vertices {0, 1, . . . , r}. In
any colouring these vertices receive different colours, say f(i) = i. The intuition
is that the colour 0 represents ‘false’, while the other colours represent ‘true’. For

300
Thore Husfeldt
each variable xi (1 ≤i ≤r) the graph contains two adjacent ‘literal’ vertices vi
and vi, both adjacent to all ‘true colour’ vertices {1, 2, . . . , r} except i. Thus, one of
the two vertices vi, vi must be assigned the ‘true’ colour i, and the other must be
coloured 0. The construction is completed with ‘clause’ vertices wj, one for each
clause Cj (1 ≤j ≤s). Let xi1, xi2, . . . , xik be the variables appearing (positively or
negatively) in Cj. Then wj is adjacent to {0, 1, . . . , r}\{i1, i2, . . . , ik}. This ensures that
only the ‘true’ colours {i1, i2, . . . , ik} are available at wj. Furthermore, if xi appears
positive in Cj, then wj is adjacent to vi; if xi appears negative in Cj, then wj is
adjacent to vi. Figure 14 shows the reduction for a small instance consisting of just
the clause C1 = (x1 ∨x2 ∨x3) and a valid colouring corresponding to the assignment
x1 = x3 = true, x2 = false; the edges of the clique on {0, 1, 2, 3} are not shown. Thus,
the only colours available to wj are those chosen by its literals.
■
Fig. 14. A 4-colouring instance corresponding to C1 = (x1 ∨x2 ∨x3)
Edge-colouring
A mapping f : E →{1, 2, . . . , q} is an edge-colouring of G if and only if it is a
vertex-colouring of the line graph L(G) of G. In particular, every vertex-colouring
algorithm can be used as an edge-colouring algorithm by running it on L(G). For
instance, Algorithm I computes the chromatic index in time 2m poly(n), which is the
fastest currently known algorithm. Similarly, Algorithm G ﬁnds an edge-colouring
with 2 −1 colours, but this is worse than Algorithm V. In fact, since  ≤χ′(G) ≤
 + 1, Algorithm V determines the chromatic index within an additive error of 1.
However, deciding which of the two candidate values for χ′(G) is correct is an NP-
hard problem, as shown by Holyer [19] for χ′(G) = 3, and by Leven and Galil [29]
for χ′(G) > 3.
Approximating the chromatic number
Algorithm V shows that the chromatic index can be very well approximated. In
contrast, approximating the chromatic number is much harder. In particular, it is
NP-hard to 4-colour a 3-chromatic graph (see [17]). This rules out an approximate
0
0
1
1
2
2
3
3
1 v1
0 v1
0 v2
2 v2
3 v3
0 v3
2
w1

13 Graph colouring algorithms
301
vertex-colouring algorithm with a performance guarantee as good as Algorithm V,
but is far from explaining why the considerable machinery behind (say) Algorithm
R results only in a colouring of size nc for 3-chromatic graphs. The best currently
known exponent is c = 0.204 (see [24]).
For sufﬁciently large ﬁxed q, it is NP-hard to ﬁnd an exp((q1/3))-colouring for
a q-colourable graph. If q is not ﬁxed, even stronger hardness results are known. We
saw in Section 6 that the polynomial-time computable function ⃗χ(G) is a lower bound
on χ(G), even though the gap can sometimes be large (say, χ(G) ≥n0.157 ⃗χ(G))
for some graphs. Can we guarantee a corresponding upper bound for ⃗χ? If not,
maybe there is some other polynomial-time computable function g so that we can
guarantee, for example, g(G) ≤χ(G) ≤n0.999g(G)? The answer turns out to be ‘no’
under standard complexity-theoretic assumptions: For every ε > 0, it is NP-hard to
approximate χ(G) within a factor n1−ε, as shown by Zuckerman [41].
Counting
The problem of counting the q-colourings is solved by evaluating P(G, q). Con-
versely, because the chromatic polynomial has degree n, it can be interpolated using
Lagrangian interpolation from the values of the counting problem at q = 0, 1, . . . , n.
Moreover, note that χ(G) ≥q if and only if P(G, q) > 0, so it is NP-hard to count the
number of q-colourings simply because the decision problem is known to be hard. In
fact, the counting problem is hard for Valiant’s counting class #P.
On the other hand, an important result in counting complexity [21] relates the
estimation of the size of a ﬁnite set to the problem of uniformly sampling from it. In
particular, a uniform sampler such as Algorithm M serves as a ‘fully polynomial
randomized approximation scheme’ (FPRAS) for the number of colours. Thus,
provided that q > 4, Algorithm M can be used to compute a value g(G) for
which
(1 −ε)g(G) ≤P(G, q) ≤(1 + ε)g(G)
with high probability in time polynomial in n and 1/ε, for any ε > 0. Much better
bounds on q are known (see the survey of Frieze and Vigoda [13]). Without some
bound on q, such an FPRAS is unlikely to exist because, with ε =
1
2, it would
constitute a randomized algorithm for the decision problem and would therefore
imply that all of NP can be solved in randomized polynomial time.
8. Conclusion
Together, the algorithms and reductions presented in this survey give a picture
of the computational aspects of graph colouring. For instance, 2-colouring admits
a polynomial time algorithm, while 3-colouring does not. In the planar case,
4-colouring is trivial, but 3-colouring is not. An almost optimal edge-colouring can be
found in polynomial time, but vertex-colouring is very difﬁcult to approximate. If q

302
Thore Husfeldt
is sufﬁciently large compared to (G) then the set of colourings can be sampled and
approximately counted, but not counted exactly. Finally, even the computationally
hard colouring problems admit techniques that are much better than our initial
Algorithm X.
None of these insights is obvious from the deﬁnition of graph colouring, so the
algorithmic perspective on chromatic graph theory has proved to be a fertile source
of questions with interesting answers.
References
1. R. Beigel and D. Eppstein, 3-coloring in time O(1.3289n), J. Algorithms 111 (2005),
168–204.
2. A. Bj¨orklund and T. Husfeldt, Exact algorithms for exact satisﬁability and number of
perfect matchings. Algorithmica 52 (2008), 226–249.
3. A. Bj¨orklund, T. Husfeldt and M. Koivisto, Set partitioning via inclusion–exclusion, SIAM
J. Comput. 39 (2009), 546–563.
4. A. Bj¨orklund, T. Husfeldt, P. Kaski and M. Koivisto, Covering and packing in linear space,
Inform. Process. Lett. 111 (2011), 1033–1036.
5. A. Bj¨orklund, T. Husfeldt, P. Kaski and M. Koivisto, Computing the Tutte polynomial in
vertex-exponential time, Proc. 49th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science (FOCS 2008), IEEE Computer Society (2008), 677–686.
6. D. Br´elaz, New methods to color the vertices of a graph, Comm. Assoc. Comput. Mach. 22
(1979), 251–256.
7. C. Bron and J. Kerbosch, Algorithm 457: ﬁnding all cliques of an undirected graph, Comm.
Assoc. Comput. Mach. 16 (1973), 575–577.
8. R. L. Brooks, On colouring the nodes of a network, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 37
(1941), 194–197.
9. E. Chlamtac, Approximation algorithms using hierarchies of semideﬁnite programming
relaxations, Proc. 48th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
(FOCS 2007), IEEE Computer Society (2007), 691–701.
10. N. Christoﬁdes, An algorithm for the chromatic number of a graph. Comput. J. 14 (1971),
38–39.
11. V. Chv´atal, Perfectly ordered graphs, Topics on Perfect Graphs (eds. C. Berge and
V. Chv´atal), Ann. Discrete Math. 21 (1984), 63–68.
12. U. Feige, M. Langberg and G. Schechtman, Graphs with tiny vector chromatic numbers
and huge chromatic numbers, SIAM J. Comput. 33 (2004), 1338–1368.
13. A. Frieze and E. Vigoda, A survey on the use of Markov chains to randomly sample
colorings, Combinatorics, Complexity and Chance, Oxford University Press, 2007.
14. B. G¨artner and J. Matouˇsek, Approximation Algorithms and Semideﬁnite Programming,
Springer, 2012.
15. G. Grimmett and C. McDiarmid, On colouring random graphs, Math. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc. 77 (1975), 313–324.
16. M. Gr¨otschel, L. Lov´asz and A. Schrijver, Geometric Algorithms and Combinatorial
Optimization, Springer, 1988.
17. V. Guruswami and S. Khanna, On the hardness of 4-coloring a 3-colorable graph, SIAM J.
Discrete Math. 18 (2004), 30–40.
18. G. Haggard, D. J. Pearce and G. Royle, Computing Tutte polynomials, Assoc. Comput.
Mach. Math. Software 37 (2010), Article 24.
19. I. Holyer, The NP-completeness of edge-coloring, SIAM J. Comput. 10 (1981), 718–720.

13 Graph colouring algorithms
303
20. S. Huang, Improved hardness of approximating chromatic number, Approximation,
Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, Springer
Lecture Notes Comput. Sci. 8096 (2013), 233–243.
21. M. Jerrum, L. G. Valiant and V. V. Vazirani, Random generation of combinatorial
structures from a uniform distribution, Theor. Comput. Sci. 43 (1986), 169–188.
22. D. R. Karger, R. Motwani and M. Sudan, Approximate graph coloring by semideﬁnite
programming, J. Assoc. Comput. Mach. 45 (1998), 246–265.
23. R. M. Karp, Reducibility among combinatorial problems, Complexity of Computer
Computations (eds. R. E. Miller and J. W. Thatcher), Plenum (1972), 85–103.
24. K. Kawarabayashi and M. Thorup, Combinatorial coloring of 3-colorable graphs, Proc.
53rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS 2012), IEEE
Computer Society (2012), 68–75.
25. A. Kosowski and K. Manuszewski, Classical coloring of graphs, Graph Colorings (ed.
M. Kubale), Amer. Math. Soc. Contemp. Math. 352 (2004), 1–20.
26. L. Kuˇcera, The greedy coloring is a bad probabilistic algorithm, J. Algorithms 12 (1991),
674–684.
27. M. Langberg, Graph coloring, Encyclopedia of Algorithms (ed. M. Kao), Springer (2008),
368–371.
28. E. L. Lawler, A note on the complexity of the chromatic number problem, Inform. Process.
Lett. 5 (1976), 66–67.
29. D. Leven and Z. Galil, NP completeness of ﬁnding the chromatic index of regular graphs,
J. Algorithms 4 (1983), 35–44.
30. L. Lov´asz, Coverings and coloring of hypergraphs, Proc. Fourth Southeastern Conference
on Combinatorics, Graph Theory, and Computing, Boca Raton, Congr. Numer. 8 (1973),
3–12.
31. F. Maffray, On the coloration of perfect graphs, Recent Advances in Algorithms and
Combinatorics, CMS Books Math., Springer (2003), 65–84.
32. D. W. Matula, A min–max theorem for graphs with applications to graph coloring, SIAM
Rev. 10 (1968), 481–482.
33. J. Misra and D. Gries, A constructive proof of Vizing’s Theorem, Inform. Proc. Lett. 41
(1992), 131–133.
34. J. W. Moon and L. Moser, On cliques in graphs, Israel J. Math. 3 (1965), 23–28.
35. L. Stockmeyer, Planar 3-colorability is polynomial complete, Assoc. Comput. Mach.
SIGACT News 5 (1973), 19–25.
36. G. Szekeres and H. S. Wilf, An inequality for the chromatic number of a graph, J. Combin.
Theory 4 (1968), 1–3.
37. E. Tomita, A. Tanaka and H. Takahashi, The worst-case time complexity for generating all
maximal cliques and computational experiments, Theor. Comput. Sci. 363 (2006), 28–42.
38. D. J. A. Welsh and M. B. Powell, An upper bound for the chromatic number of a graph
and its application to timetabling problems, Comput. J. 10 (1967), 85–86.
39. H. Whitney, A logical expansion in mathematics, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 38 (1932),
572–579.
40. A. Wigderson, Improving the performance guarantee for approximate graph coloring,
J. Assoc. Comput. Mach. 30 (1983), 729–735.
41. D. Zuckerman, Linear degree extractors and the inapproximability of Max Clique and
Chromatic Number, Theory of Computing 3 (2007), 103–128.
42. A. A. Zykov, On some properties of linear complexes (in Russian), Math. Sbornik 24
(1949), 163–188.

14
Colouring games
ZSOLT TUZA and XUDING ZHU
1.
Introduction
2.
Marking games
3.
Greedy colouring games
4.
Playing on the edge-set
5.
Oriented and directed graphs
6.
Asymmetric games
7.
Relaxed games
8.
Paintability
9.
Achievement and avoidance games
10. The acyclic orientation game
References
There are various kinds of two-person games in which the players construct
a colouring of a graph (or of a subgraph), and some additional games are
closely related to graph colourings. Here we describe several variants, most of
which deal with ‘maker–breaker games’. We also consider the game version of
list-colourings.
1. Introduction
The connection between graph colourings and game theory has its roots in the works
of P. M. Grundy in the latter ﬁeld as early as the 1930s. His research later motivated
the introduction of some graph invariants, one of which is discussed in detail in
Berge’s monograph [9]. For undirected graphs the analogous parameter is the Grundy
number, also called the online chromatic number, which we will consider in Section
9. But although Grundy colouring may be formulated in terms of games, it remains a
solitaire game in which the player aims at ﬁnding a solution that is as bad as possible.
In this chapter we mainly consider non-cooperative two-person games that either
construct colourings or are otherwise closely related to some kind of colouring
concept, even when they do not colour the graph.

14 Colouring games
305
A good starting point is the following maker–breaker game, which was introduced
by Brams [24] for planar graphs in 1981, and independently by Bodlaender [12] for
general graphs in 1991. Given a graph G, two players alternately colour vertices of
G from a set of colours, say {1, 2, . . . , k}. The two players are Alice (the maker) and
Bob (the breaker); each of them colours one uncoloured vertex at a time, under the
condition that monochromatic edges must not occur, Alice moving ﬁrst. Alice wins if
a proper k-colouring of the entire graph G is eventually obtained, whereas Bob wins
if a situation is reached where the neighbourhood of some uncoloured vertex contains
all the k colours of the palette. Certainly, if the number of colours is sufﬁciently large
(for example, if k = |V(G)|), then Alice surely wins the game.
This leads to the following deﬁnition. The game-chromatic number χg(G) of G is
the smallest number k for which Alice has a winning strategy.
For every graph the inequalities
χ(G) ≤χg(G) ≤(G) + 1
(1)
hold for the chromatic number χ, the game-chromatic number χg and the maximum
vertex-degree : a proper colouring with χg(G) colours is constructed by the end
of the game whenever Alice wins, and a free colour is available for any uncoloured
vertex whenever the number of colours exceeds the number of neighbours. The path
P4 of length 3 has χ = 2, but χg = 3, because if Alice colours a vertex with
colour 1 in her ﬁrst move, then Bob can assign colour 2 to the vertex at distance
2 from the vertex coloured ﬁrst. It follows that Brooks’s theorem cannot be extended
directly to the game-chromatic number, and that χg may exceed χ, even when G is
a path.
For some trees T, χg(T) can be as large as χ(T) + 2 – that is, χg(T) = 4 may
occur. For example, consider the colouring game played with colours α, β, γ on the
caterpillar of diameter 5 on 14 vertices (see Fig. 1(a)). No matter which vertex v Alice
colours ﬁrst, Bob can assign the same colour α to some vertex w at distance 3 from
v, giving the subtree in Fig. 1(b).
If Alice colours a vertex on the central path, its colour β must differ from α, and
then Bob can assign the third colour γ to a leaf adjacent to the last (uncoloured)
vertex of the central path, thereby winning the game. If Alice assigns colour β to a
leaf, Bob wins by assigning γ to the other leaf adjacent to the uncoloured middle
vertex. If Alice assigns colour α to a leaf, Bob assigns colour β to a leaf adjacent to
(a)
a
a
(b)
Fig. 1. A tree T with χg(T) = 4

306
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
the other vertex of the central path. This creates a double threat on the neighbour of
colour β, because Bob has a chance to assign colour γ to any of its two uncoloured
neighbours. The only way for Alice to eliminate this threat is to assign colour γ to the
neighbour of colour β. Now the other vertex on the central path has colours α, γ in its
neighbourhood, and still has an uncoloured leaf neighbour to which Bob can assign
colour β on his next move, hence winning the game. Actually, the upper bound of 4
is tight on trees. We show this in a stronger form in the next section.
We note that a completely different game would be obtained if the ﬁrst move
were made by Bob. For example, the ‘cocktail-party graph’ Kk,k −kK2, obtained
by omitting a perfect matching from Kk,k, has χg = k, since Bob can win for any
fewer than k colours by assigning to the matching pair of the vertex just coloured
the same colour that Alice used in her latest move. On the other hand, if Bob makes
the ﬁrst move, then Alice can assign a different colour to the matching pair of the
coloured vertex, and hence win with just two colours.
Most studies on the game-chromatic number concentrate on upper bounds for
classes of graphs. For a class H of graphs, let
χg(H) = max{χg(G) : G ∈H}.
Zhu [61] proved that if H is closed under the operations of taking disjoint unions and
adding K1 as a component, then χg(H) does not depend on who has the ﬁrst move.
Nevertheless, as the cocktail-party graph shows, for individual graphs it can make a
difference who starts the game. In this chapter we concentrate on games started by
Alice.
We observe further that χg(Kk,k) = 3. Indeed, after Alice’s ﬁrst move Bob’s
strongest answer is to assign a second colour to a vertex that is not adjacent to the
ﬁrst one; but then Alice can assign a third colour in the other vertex-class and thus
ensure that the colouring can be completed with three colours, no matter how Bob
plays. In fact, if we re-insert just one edge of the omitted 1-factor into Kk,k −kK2, we
already obtain a graph with χg = 3.
As a consequence of these examples, we deduce that the game-chromatic numbers
of subgraphs of G are not bounded above by χg(G).
A general upper bound
The acyclic chromatic number χa(G) of a graph G is the smallest integer k for which
G has a proper vertex k-colouring such that no cycle is 2-coloured. Dinski and Zhu
[19] proved the following result.
Theorem 1.1 For any graph G,
χg(G) ≤χa(G)(χa(G) + 1).
(2)
This upper bound is usually not sharp, but still the result offers a general approach
to proving that the members of some graph classes have bounded game-chromatic

14 Colouring games
307
number; for example, it trivially implies that χg ≤6 holds for all trees. More
interestingly, applying Borodin’s result [13] that χa(G) ≤5 holds for every planar
graph G, we deduce that the game-chromatic number of every planar graph is at
most 30.
Algorithmic complexity
Although we do not devote a separate section to this issue, we should say something
about it, as this was the main topic of Bodlaender’s seminal paper [12]. However,
Bodlaender concentrated on a somewhat different game on a graph, where a linear
ordering v1, v2, . . . , vn of the vertices is also given, together with the number of
colours, and the vertices have to be coloured in this ﬁxed order. He used the term
‘sequential colouring construction game’.
Bodlaender proved that, if the number of colours is at least 3, then it is PSPACE-
complete to decide which of the two players has a winning strategy in the sequential
colouring construction game, even when the input is restricted to graphs with
maximum degree at most 5. On the other hand, if just two colours are available,
the winner can be determined in time O(n + m).
We will return to complexity issues in Section 9.
2. Marking games
The colouring number col(G) of a graph G is deﬁned as
col(G) = min max
1≤i≤n(d−(vi) + 1),
where the minimum is taken over all vertex orderings v1, v2, . . . , vn, and d−(vi)
denotes the number of neighbours preceding vi in the vertex order under consider-
ation. The colouring number is an upper bound for χ(G) – a rather bad one in some
cases. The point is that, when we colour the graph in the order of increasing subscripts
according to an order that attains col(G), each vertex has fewer than col(G) coloured
neighbours at the time that it has to be coloured, and so there is always a free colour
available.
For the game version, consider the game in which Alice and Bob alternately select
vertices of G, constructing a vertex order in which the vertices with odd index are
chosen by Alice and those with even index are chosen by Bob. Alice’s goal is to
minimize max1≤i≤n d−(vi) + 1, while Bob’s goal is to maximize it. This leads to
deﬁne the game-colouring number of a graph G, denoted by colg(G), to be the value
of max1≤i≤n d−(vi) + 1 when both players play optimally.
This is an interesting parameter in its own right. However, the main purpose
of introducing it here is because it is an upper bound for the game-chromatic
number.
Theorem 2.1 For any graph G, χg(G) ≤colg(G).

308
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
In the play of a marking game we say that a vertex is marked if it has been chosen
by a player. If colg(G) = k, Alice has a strategy for playing so that, at any moment of
the game, any unmarked vertex has at most k −1 marked neighbours. In the maker–
breaker game Alice uses her strategy for the marking game to choose vertices to be
coloured, and she can then ensure that, at any moment of the game, any uncoloured
vertex has at most k −1 coloured neighbours. Thus, with k colours available, all the
vertices are eventually coloured. This argument proves Theorem 2.1.
As a signiﬁcant difference between χg and colg, it was proved by Wu and Zhu
[56] that, if H is a subgraph of G, then colg(H) ≤colg(G). Perhaps this more natural
behaviour – which is not satisﬁed by χg – is one reason why many upper bounds on
χg are proved by showing that they are valid for colg.
The game-colouring numbers for many classes of graphs were determined or
estimated by Faigle, Kern, Kierstead and Trotter [23]. The ﬁrst result of this kind
was that colg(F) ≤4 for every forest F. We sketch Alice’s winning strategy.
Alice must ensure that, after each of her moves, each unmarked subtree of F (that
is, each component of the subgraph of F induced by the currently unmarked vertices)
is joined by edges to at most two marked vertices; this property evidently holds after
the ﬁrst move, since just one vertex is marked. At any later stage Bob marks a vertex
inside some unmarked component T of F. After Bob’s move, the uncoloured vertices
of T induce one or more components. In any case, at most one of the components
has three coloured neighbours, while all the other components have at most two.
If Bob leaves a component with three marked neighbours, then Alice marks the
unique vertex separating them. This splits the component into at least three unmarked
components, and three of the components have two marked neighbours each. If Bob
leaves each component with at most two marked neighbours, then in some component
Alice marks a vertex adjacent to a marked vertex, or marks an arbitrary vertex if the
component has no marked neighbours. This strategy works because only one tree
component of the unmarked subforest requires special attention – namely, the one
for which Bob has created three marked neighbours.
Sidorowicz [53] showed that, if G contains cycles no two of which have a common
edge (a cactus), then colg(G) ≤5 and this upper bound is tight also for χg(G). More
generally, Junosza-Szaniawski and Ro˙zej [32] showed that if each edge is contained
in at most c cycles of G, then colg(G) ≤c + 4.
The activation strategy
A frequently used strategy in establishing upper bounds for colg is the so-called
‘activation strategy’. To use it for a graph G, we ﬁrst need to ﬁx a vertex order
v1, v2, . . . , vn of G. For a vertex v, let N<(v) be the set of neighbours preceding v
in the vertex order and N>(v) be the set of neighbours occurring after v. During the
play of the game Alice constructs a directed graph D with V(D) = V(G); this digraph
helps her to choose vertices in later moves. Initially, D has no arcs, and during play
arcs are added to D.

14 Colouring games
309
By ‘processing’ a vertex v, we mean the following self-calling procedure: If there
are no unmarked vertices, then stop (without doing anything). Assume that there are
unmarked vertices.
Step 1. If N<(v) contains no unmarked vertices and v is unmarked, then mark v and
stop.
Step 2. If N<(v) contains no unmarked vertices and v is marked, then mark the
unmarked vertex of smallest index and stop.
Step 3. Otherwise, let x be the unmarked vertex of smallest index in N<(v). If x has
an in-neighbour in D, then add an arc from v to x, mark x and stop. If x has
no in-neighbour in D, then add an arc from v to x and process x (that is, go to
Step 1, with v replaced by x).
The activation strategy is as follows:
On her ﬁrst move, Alice marks v1. Later, when Bob marks a vertex v, Alice
processes v.
Note that, when processing a vertex v, the procedure may repeatedly call itself
to process a sequence of vertices. In this sequence the vertices have decreasing
indices, so the procedure eventually ends. The procedure always ends by marking
an unmarked vertex, provided that there are still such vertices.
Suppose that Alice has just completed a move. We say that a vertex v is active if v
is incident to an arc of D, or if v and all vertices in N<(v) are marked.
The following observations follow easily from the processing procedure and the
activation strategy.
(a) Each marked vertex is active.
(b) If v is active and unmarked, then v has out-degree 1 in D.
(c) If v is active and w ∈N<(v) is unmarked, then v has out-degree 1 in D, and the
out-neighbour of v precedes or equals w.
(d) If a vertex w has in-degree 2 in D, then w is marked. Moreover, once a vertex w
is marked, no more arcs incident to w can be added to D. Hence each vertex of D
has in-degree at most 2.
To derive an upper bound on colg(G) by using the activation strategy, we need the
following result:
Assume that Alice has just completed a move and that v is unmarked, and suppose
that there are two sets A(v), B(v) of vertices for which the following properties
hold:
(i) N<(v) ⊆A(v); and
(ii) if u precedes v and there is a vertex w /∈B(v) for which u, v ∈N<(w), then
u ∈A(v).
Then v has at most 3|A(v)| + |B(v)| marked neighbours.
To prove this, we let P(v) be the set of marked vertices in N<(v) and Q(v) be the set
of marked vertices in N>(v). By (i), P(v) ⊆A(v). By (ii) and the observation above,

310
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
if w ∈Q(v) −B(v), then there is an arc wu in D such that either u = v or u ∈A(v). If
there is an arc wv in D, then v is active, and so there is an arc from v to A(v); so there
are at least |Q(v)| −|B(v)| arcs from (Q(v) −B(v)) ∪{v} to A(v). Since each vertex
u ∈A(v) has in-degree at most 2, we conclude that |Q(v)| −|B(v)| ≤2|A(v)|. Thus
the total number of marked neighbours of v is
|P(v)| + |Q(v)| ≤3|A(v)| + |B(v)|.
By this result, if v is unmarked at any moment of the game, and if the sets A(v)
and B(v) satisfy the conditions listed above, then v has at most 3|A(v)| + |B(v)| + 1
marked neighbours (since if Bob has just completed a move he could have marked a
further neighbour of v). Therefore, if A(v), B(v) satisfy the conditions above for each
vertex v of G, then
colg(G) ≤max
v∈V(G) 3|A(v)| + |B(v)| + 2.
A good vertex order of V(G) is crucial for good performance of the activation
strategy. If G is a chordal graph, then it has a vertex order in which N<(v) induces
a complete subgraph for each v. Under this vertex order, taking A(v) = N<(v) and
B(v) = ∅, we can easily verify that (i) and (ii) are satisﬁed. Hence
colg(G) ≤max
v∈V(G) 3|A(v)| + 2 = 3ω(G) −1.
In particular, if G is a k-tree, then colg(G) ≤3k + 2. By the monotonicity of colg(G)
this implies that the game-colouring number of any partial k-tree is bounded above
by 3k + 2. This upper bound is sharp for all k ≥2 (see [56]).
Planar and outerplanar graphs
When Brams invented the colouring game he was interested only in planar graphs.
One can easily see that four colours are not enough for the octahedron graph and ﬁve
colours are not enough for the icosahedron graph. Robert High then found a planar
graph for which six colours are not enough. Whether there is a universal ﬁnite upper
bound on the game-chromatic number of all planar graphs remained an open problem
for some time. The existence of such a bound was conjectured by Bodlaender and
proved by Kierstead and Trotter [35] with bound 33. This was subsequently improved
in a sequence of papers, and the current record of 17 is due to Zhu [60].
A further tool handling the game-colouring number is based on edge decomposi-
tion [58].
Theorem 2.2 If G1 and G2 are subgraphs of G with E(G) = E(G1) ∪E(G2), then
colg(G) ≤colg(G1) + (G2).
(3)
For the more restricted class of C4-free planar graphs, Borodin et al. [14] proved
that the edge-set can be decomposed into a forest and a subgraph with maximum

14 Colouring games
311
degree at most 6; colg ≤10 then follows by inequality (3). For the class of planar
graphs with girth at least 8, it was proved by Montassier et al. [43], and independently
by Wang [55], that the edge-set can be decomposed into a forest and a matching, so
colg ≤5.
From below, it is known that there exist planar graphs with colg ≥11 (see Wu and
Zhu [56]) and with χg ≥8 (see Kierstead and Trotter [35]).
As outerplanar graphs are all partial 2-trees, their game-colouring number is
bounded by 8. By observing that the edge-set of an outerplanar graph can be
decomposed into a forest and a graph of maximum degree 3, Guan and Zhu [26]
improved this to colg ≤7 (using inequality (3)), and this is sharp (see [38]). Since
χg(G) ≤colg(G), the game-chromatic number of outerplanar graphs is at most
7. Kierstead and Trotter [35] showed that there are outerplanar graphs with game-
chromatic number 6. It remains an open question as to whether there exists an
outerplanar graph with game-chromatic number 7.
Cartesian product graphs
Recall that the Cartesian product G 2 H of two graphs G and H has vertex-set V(G)×
V(H) and edge-set {(vw, v′w′) : v = v′ ∈V(G) and ww′ ∈E(H)} ∪{(vw, v′w′) :
vv′ ∈E(G) and w = w′ ∈V(H)}. Various graph invariants have the property
that their value on G 2 H is bounded above by some function of their values on
G and H.
Bartnicki et al. [8] proved that this is not the case for colouring games: χg is
unbounded on the Cartesian products of complete bipartite graphs Kq,q (recall that
χg(Kq,q) = 3 for all q ≥2) and colg is unbounded on the Cartesian products of
stars K1,q. On the other hand, Zhu [61] has proved that if H has acyclic chromatic
number k, and if joining to each vertex of G a set of |V(H)| neighbours of degree 1
gives a graph with game-colouring number m, then χg(G 2 H) ≤k(k + m −1). As
a consequence, the Cartesian product of two forests has game-chromatic number at
most 10, and the Cartesian product of two planar graphs has game-chromatic number
at most 105.
Game-perfect graphs
Recall from Chapter 7 that a perfect graph is deﬁned in terms of the equality
χ
= ω, which is required to hold for every induced subgraph. In this vein,
Andres [7] investigated the structure of graphs G for which χg(G′) = ω(G′) or
colg(G′) = ω(G′) is valid for every induced subgraph G′ of G. We call these
graphs (ω, χg)-perfect and (ω, colg)-perfect, respectively. (The terminology of [7]
is different, because other types of game-perfectness are also studied there.) It turns
out that these graphs admit a concise characterization in terms of forbidden induced
subgraphs.

312
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
Theorem 2.3
A graph is (ω, χg)-perfect if and only if it contains none of the graphs P4, C4,
K3 + 3K1, K2 + 2P3, (K1 + 2P3) ∪(K2 + 3K1), 2(K1 + 2P3) or 2(K2 + 3K1) as
an induced subgraph.
A graph is (ω, colg)-perfect if and only if it contains none of the graphs P4, C4,
2(K4 −e) or K1 + (K4 −e) as an induced subgraph.
3. Greedy colouring games
In each round of the maker–breaker game each player chooses an uncoloured vertex
and assigns a colour to it, whereas in the marking game each player just chooses an
unmarked vertex and no colour is involved. The greedy colouring game is, in some
sense, a game lying between these two. Here, each player chooses any uncoloured
vertex, but the chosen vertex has to be coloured with the smallest positive integer not
assigned to any of its neighbours. So the colours are positive integers and the chosen
vertices are coloured greedily. Alice’s goal is to minimize the largest used colour,
while Bob’s goal is to maximize it. The game Grundy number g(G) of a graph
G is the maximum colour used in playing the game when both players use optimal
strategies.
When playing the greedy colouring game, the player does not choose the colour.
However, the colour is a critical concern. It follows from the deﬁnition that g(G) ≤
colg(G), for every graph G. Therefore, g(F) ≤4 for any forest F, and g(G) ≤8
for any partial 2-tree G. Havet and Zhu [28] proved that g(F) ≤3 for any forest F,
and this bound is tight. For any partial 2-tree G, g(G) ≤7. Since there are trees T
for which χg(T) = 4, there are graphs G for which g(G) is strictly less than χg(G):
indeed, Havet and Zhu also proved that, for any positive integer k ≥2, there is a
graph G for which g(G) = k and χg(G) ≥2k −1. However, it is unknown whether
g(G) is always bounded by χg(G). It is also an open question as to whether χg(G)
is bounded by a function of g(G).
4. Playing on the edge-set
The edge-colouring version – equivalent to playing the original vertex version on
line graphs – was investigated ﬁrst by Cai and Zhu [15]. We adopt the commonly
used ‘prime’ notation for the edge versions of parameters and denote by χ′
g(G) the
smallest number of colours sufﬁcient for Alice to win.
The particular case of (1) when applied to line graphs means that
 ≤χ′(G) ≤χ′
g(G) ≤2 −1,
since each edge can share a vertex with at most 2 −2 other edges.
Vizing’s classic theorem tells us that the upper bound for χ′(G) can be improved
to  + 1 for all graphs (see Chapter 5). Estimates of this strength are not known

14 Colouring games
313
(and are not even valid) for the colouring game, although bounds of the form  + c,
for a constant c, have been established for several graph classes. One such result by
Cai and Zhu [15] states that, if G is a d-degenerate graph, then
col′
g(G) ≤(G) + 3d −1.
In particular, this inequality yields the upper bounds  + 6k −4 for graphs of
arboricity k,  + 3k −1 for partial k-trees,  + 14 for planar graphs,  + 5 for
outerplanar graphs and  + 2 for forests. It may also be the case that χ′
g(F) ≤
(F) + 1 holds for all forests F, and this has been proved except for  = 4 (see
Erd˝os et al. [22] and Andres [5]).
It is not true, however, that χ′
g ≤+c must hold for some suitably chosen constant
c. Beveridge et al. [10] proved the existence of an inﬁnite family of graphs G with
any large maximum degree, for which χ′
g ≥1.008(G). An important consequence
of this result is that it is substantially harder to win the colouring game for some
graphs than it is to list-colour them, since lists of size  + o() sufﬁce for the
latter, as  →∞. On the positive side, one can prove under some minimum-degree
conditions that χ′
g ≤(2 −ε), for some ε > 0 (see [10] for details). It remains a
conjecture that, for a suitably chosen ε > 0, the upper bound χ′
g(G) ≤(2 −ε)(G)
is valid for all graphs G.
The game Grundy index ′
g(G) of a graph G is the game Grundy number of its line
graph. The Grundy index ′(G) of G is the Grundy number of its line graph. Just as
for the game-chromatic index, we have
 ≤′
g(G) ≤′(G) ≤2 −1.
Zhang and Zhu [57] proved that if T is a tree with  ≥5, then ′
g(T) ≤ + 1;
if G is a partial 2-tree with  ≥11, then ′
g(G) ≤ + 4;
and if G is an outerplanar graph with  ≥14, then ′
g(G) ≤ + 3.
5. Oriented and directed graphs
An oriented graph is obtained from an undirected graph by assigning an orientation
to each of its edges; there is thus at most one arc between any two vertices, whereas
a directed graph may contain directed cycles of length 2. Below we consider two
oriented kinds of colouring games. For an oriented or directed graph we use the
notation D = (V, A), where V is the vertex-set and A is the arc-set.
Oriented graphs
A colour assignment ϕ : V →{1, 2, . . . , k} of an oriented graph D = (V, A) is an
oriented colouring if it is a proper vertex-colouring and all arcs between any two
colour classes are in the same direction; that is, if vw ∈A, then there does not exist
v′w′ ∈A with ϕ(v′) = ϕ(w) and ϕ(w′) = ϕ(v). Note that digraphs containing cycles
of length 2 do not admit any such colouring.

314
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
In accordance with this deﬁnition, in the oriented colouring game Alice and Bob
alternately assign colours ϕ(v) to vertices v of D under the following restrictions:
(i) If vw ∈A, then ϕ(w) ̸= ϕ(v);
(ii) If uw ∈A and wv ∈A, then ϕ(u) ̸= ϕ(v);
(iii) If vw ∈A and v′w′ ∈A, and if ϕ(v) = ϕ(w′), then ϕ(v′) ̸= ϕ(w).
Clearly, (i) and (iii) together require that the partial colouring obtained at each stage
should be an oriented colouring. The role of (ii) is to ensure that Bob cannot win the
game in a trivial way.
The oriented game-chromatic number ⃗χg(D) of D is the smallest number k for
which Alice has a winning strategy when the game is played with k colours; this
parameter was introduced by Neˇsetˇril and Sopena [44]. Unlike χg for undirected
graphs, the maximum value of ⃗χg(T) for oriented trees is not known.
Motivated by the marking game we may consider, for any uncoloured vertex v, the
set of coloured neighbours and the set of coloured vertices w at (directed) distance
2 from v (in either direction) for which the middle vertices of every length-2 path
between w and v is uncoloured. Using the strategy that proves χg(T) ≤4 for trees,
Alice can ensure that both of these sets have at most three elements. Combining this
idea with the construction of tournaments satisfying a certain adjacency/orientation
property, we can prove that ⃗χg is bounded above (by at most 19) on the class of
trees. Also, by using marking games, Kierstead and Tuza [37] proved the following
theorem.
Theorem 5.1 For each positive integer k, there is a constant C(k) for which the
oriented game-chromatic number of oriented partial k-trees is at most C(k).
Moreover, Kierstead and Trotter [36] proved the following theorem.
Theorem 5.2 For any positive integer k, orientations of graphs containing no
subdivision of Kk have bounded oriented game-chromatic number. In particular, the
oriented game-chromatic number of oriented planar graphs is bounded by a constant.
The problem of determining the exact value of ⃗χg appears to be much more difﬁcult
than that of χg. To indicate the complications, we quote the following result of
Neˇsetˇril and Sopena [44]: every oriented path and cycle has ⃗χg ≤7, and this bound
is sharp since there exist oriented paths with ⃗χg = 7.
Directed graphs
The oriented colouring game cannot be played on digraphs that contain 2-cycles.
For such digraphs, a natural game is given by the following rule: each vertex must
be assigned a colour different from those of its coloured in-neighbours. This rule
eliminates the danger originating from a monochromatic pair at distance 2, which
arose in the oriented version above.

14 Colouring games
315
This kind of colouring game was introduced by Andres [6]. It includes the
undirected version as a particular case, by replacing each edge vw in an undirected
graph by the two arcs vw and wv (a cycle of length 2), so we need not introduce any
new terminology: on a digraph D the minimum number of colours sufﬁcient for a
winning strategy for Alice is called the game-chromatic number χg(D). Analogously,
we introduce the game-colouring number colg(D), based upon the directed version of
the marking game. It is clear that, for all digraphs D and their underlying undirected
graphs GD, we have the inequalities
χg(D) ≤χg(GD)
and
colg(D) ≤colg(GD).
Here, strict inequality may hold when some arcs of D are not part of a symmetric pair.
For example, as proved by Andres [6], Alice can win the marking game with three
colours on any forest without 2-cycles – that is, χg(D) ≤colg(D) ≤3, whenever D
is an oriented forest. Andres also observed that inequality (3) has its analogue for the
directed game: if (D1, D2) is an arc decomposition of D, then
colg(D) ≤colg(D1) + +(D2),
where + denotes the maximum out-degree.
6. Asymmetric games
In this variant, one or both players may colour (or mark) more than one vertex at a
time – that is, in the game parametrized by a pair (a, b) of natural numbers, at each
step Alice colours or marks a vertices and then Bob colours or marks b vertices.
The ﬁrst systematic study of asymmetric colouring games was carried out by
Kierstead [34], but its roots date back to the earlier paper of Faigle, Kern, Kierstead
and Trotter [23]. The authors considered the case (a, b) = (1, 3) on trees, and proved
that Alice has a strategy in the marking game to keep the score below c log n, for
some constant c; this logarithmic upper bound is sharp, apart from the value of c. It
was also shown in [23] how this upper bound can be extended for any ﬁxed b ≥3;
these results were applied there to prove that colg = O(log n) in every class of graphs
whose edge-sets decompose into a bounded number of forests.
Kierstead [34] considered (a, b)-game-colourings and marking of forests. Let
χg(F; a, b) and colg(F; a, b) be the supremum taken over all forests, needed for Alice
to win in the colouring game and in the marking game. The characteristic ranges for
all positive integers a and b can be summarized as follows; they are the same if one
considers trees instead of forests.
Theorem 6.1 Assume that a, b are positive integers.
If a < b, then χg(F; a, b) = colg(F; a, b) = ∞.
If b ≤a < 2b, or (a, b) = (2, 1), then χg(F; a, b) = colg(F; a, b) = b + 3.
If 2b ≤a < 3b and b > 1, then χg(F; a, b) = b + 2 and colg(F; a, b) = b + 3.
If 3b ≤a, then χg(F; a, b) = colg(F; a, b) = b + 2.

316
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
Note that the range 2b ≤a < 3b exhibits cases where χg < colg.
For graphs in general, Kierstead and Yang [38] proved the following result.
Theorem 6.2
If G has an orientation with maximum out-degree k, then
colg(G; k, 1) ≤2k + 2.
By letting k = 1, we see that the game-colouring number of any forest (as well as
that of any graph with unicyclic components) is at most 4.
7. Relaxed games
For a positive integer d, Chou, Wang and Zhu [18] introduced the d-relaxed game.
It is played by Alice and Bob with the same rules as the original game, except
that the subgraphs induced by the monochromatic sets need not be independent but
are allowed to have maximum degree at most d. Let χd
g (G) denote the minimum
integer k for which Alice has a winning strategy on G when k colours are
available.
Not surprisingly, the extended ﬂexibility provided by the parameter d makes it
easier for Alice to win. A typical example is the class of trees and forests for which
χ2
g ≤2, by a theorem of He, Wu and Zhu [29]. In fact, there is a smooth transition
from the maximum game-chromatic number 4 for trees, which can be expressed in
the following uniform way: in the range 0 ≤d ≤2 all forests have χd
g ≤4 −d, and
this upper bound is sharp for each d.
For partial k-trees G, Dunn and Kierstead [20] proved that χd
g (G) ≤6k + 1, under
the assumption d ≥4k −1; the particular case k = 2 implies that χ7
g(G) ≤3 for
every outerplanar graph G. On the other hand, if d ≥2 and G is outerplanar, then
χd
g (G) ≤5, by [29]. It is not known in general, however, whether the assumption
d ≥7−k implies that χd
g (G) ≤k for all 2 ≤k ≤7 and all outerplanar graphs G. The
sharpness of this upper bound on χd
g (G) (if valid) is not known either. It is known
that the assumption d = 4 is not strong enough to ensure that χd
g (G) ≤2.
8. Paintability
We next consider the list-colouring version of the colouring game; list-colouring and
the choice number of a graph are discussed in Chapter 6. Let L be a list assignment
for a graph G: without loss of generality, we may assume that the set of colours is

v∈V(G) L(v) = {1, 2, . . . , q}. For i = 1, 2, . . . , q, let Li = {v : i ∈L(v)}. Then
the sequence (L1, L2, . . . , Lq) is another way of specifying the list assignment. An
L-colouring of G is equivalent to a sequence (S1, S2, . . . , Sq) of independent sets of
vertices that form a partition of V(G), and such that Si ⊆Li for all i = 1, 2, . . . , q.
This approach to list-colouring motivates the deﬁnition of the following game on a
graph G, which was introduced by Schauz [50], [51].

14 Colouring games
317
Let G be a graph and let f : V(G) →N be a mapping, where f(v) is the number of
permissible colours for v. The f-painting game on G is played by two players: Lister
and Painter.
1. In the ith round, Lister releases the set L′
i of uncoloured vertices that permit colour
i (that is, the yet-uncoloured subset of Li). Painter decides which of these vertices are
coloured with colour i, and hence speciﬁes Si.
2. If, at the end of some round an uncoloured vertex runs out of permissible colours –
that is, a vertex v appeared in f(v) sets L′
i and remains uncoloured – then the game
ends with Lister as the winner.
3. Otherwise, at the end of some round all vertices are coloured, the game ends, and
Painter is the winner.
Note that once coloured, a vertex does not participate further in the game and can be
considered as having been removed from the graph.
We say that G is f-paintable if Painter has a winning strategy in this game, and
that G is k-paintable if G is f-paintable for the constant function with f(v) = k for
all v. The paint number χp(G) of G is the minimum k for which G is k-paintable.
The following result can be easily derived from the deﬁnition, and is convenient
for inductive proofs.
A graph G is f-paintable if and only if f(v) ≥1 for each v ∈V(G) and, for any
subset U of V(G), there is an independent set X of G contained in U for which G −X
is (f −δU)-paintable, where δU(v) = 1 if v ∈U and δU(v) = 0 otherwise.
It follows from the deﬁnition that χp(G) ≥χl(G) for any graph G, where χl is the
list-chromatic number. There exist graphs G with χp(G) > χl(G). For example, for
any integer k ≥1, the theta graph θ2,2,2k, which consists of three paths of lengths
2, 2, 2k joining two vertices, is 2-choosable but not 2-paintable (see [62]). It is not
known whether, for a graph G, the difference χp(G) −χl(G) can be arbitrarily large.
Upper bounds
Many currently known upper bounds for the choice numbers of classes of graphs are
also upper bounds for their paint numbers. For example, the paint number of any
planar graph is at most 5 (see Schauz [50]), and the paint number of planar graphs
with girth at least 5 is at most 3 (see [50], [17]). Indeed, if an upper bound for χl(G)
is proved by induction, then it is likely that the proof can be adapted to a strategy for
Painter, establishing the same upper bound for χp(G).
One method to prove an upper bound for χl(G) is the kernel method:
if G has an orientation D for which each induced subdigraph has a kernel, and if
f(v) = d+
D(v) + 1 for every vertex v, then G is f-choosable (see Chapter 6).

318
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
The proof of this result actually shows that, under the condition above, G is
f-paintable: Painter simply selects a kernel Si in the subdigraph induced by L′
i in
each step. In particular, this implies that the line graph L(G) of a bipartite graph G is
(G)-paintable (see [50]).
Another method for proving an upper bound for χl(G) is to use the following result
of Alon and Tarsi [2]:
if G has an orientation D for which the numbers of Eulerian subdigraphs with odd
and even numbers of arcs are not equal, and if f(v) = d+
D(v) + 1 for every vertex v,
then G is f-choosable.
Schauz [52] proved that, under the same assumption, G is f-paintable, so any upper
bound for χl(G) proved by using the Alon–Tarsi theorem is also an upper bound for
χp(G). To mention one, Hladk´y, Kr´al’ and Schauz [30] gave a new proof of Brooks’s
theorem, based on the Alon–Tarsi theorem. This new proof yields an upper bound for
the paint number of graphs: G is -paintable if G is connected and is not a complete
graph or an odd cycle.
Some upper bounds for χl(G) are proved by the probabilistic method. If only
expectations are used in the proof, then the proof maybe de-randomized to give a
winning strategy for Painter.
For complete bipartite graphs, Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [21] proved that χl(Kn,n) ≤
log2 n + 2. The same upper bound also holds for the paint number. Let G be any
bipartite graph of order n. The following simple strategy for Painter to win the
(log2 n + 1)-painting game on G was given by Zhu [62]. Let A and B be the two
partite sets of G.
1. Initially, assign weight 1 to each vertex of G.
2. Each time Lister presents a set U of uncoloured vertices, Painter chooses the
independent set S = A ∩U or S = B ∩U, according to whichever has the larger total
weight, and then doubles the weight of each vertex in U \S. The vertices in S are then
coloured.
Since the weight of U \ S does not exceed that of S, the total weight of uncoloured
vertices is never increased; in particular, each uncoloured vertex has weight at most
2n. On the other hand, each time that a vertex is given a permissible colour but is not
coloured, its weight doubles. If an uncoloured vertex has been given k permissible
colours, then its weight is 2k ≤n, implying that k ≤log2 n. So if a vertex is given
log2 n + 1 colours, then it is coloured. The above strategy is thus a winning strategy
for Painter in the (log n + 1)-painting game on G. Thus χp(G) ≤log n + 1, and in
particular, χp(Kn,n) ≤log n + 2.
A similar argument shows that if G is a k-chromatic n-vertex graph, then χp(G) ≤
k log n + 1.

14 Colouring games
319
The online version of Ohba’s conjecture
A graph G is chromatic-choosable if χ(G) = χl(G), and is chromatic-paintable if
χp(G) = χ(G). Since χp(G) ≥χl(G) ≥χ(G), all chromatic-paintable graphs are
chromatic-choosable, but the converse is not true. It was conjectured by Ohba [46],
and proved by Noel, Reed and Wu [45], that graphs G with n ≤2χ(G) + 1 are
chromatic-choosable.
Kim et al. [39] proved that the complete multipartite graph G, with k parts of size
2 and one part of size 3, has χp(G) = k + 2. These are graphs G with n = 2χ(G) + 1
and are not chromatic-paintable. Nevertheless, Huang et al. [31] proposed the online
version of Ohba’s conjecture, as follows.
Online version of Ohba’s conjecture. Every graph G with χ(G) ≥1
2n is chromatic-
paintable.
This conjecture is largely open. Caraher et al. [16] proved the following result.
Theorem 8.1 If G is k-paintable and if n ≤kt/(t −1), then the graph G′ obtained
from G by adding an independent set T of t vertices is (k + 1)-paintable.
We may assume that each vertex of T is adjacent to every vertex of G. Denote by
Ri the set of uncoloured vertices after the ith move. For each vertex v, let fi(v) be the
number of remaining permissible colours of v after the ith move, and let
ρi(v) = max{0, |Ri ∩NG(v)| −fi(v) + 1}.
So f0(v) = k + 1 for each vertex v, and ρ0(v) = max{0, dG(v) −k}. Note that
if ρi(v) = 0, then after the ith move the number of permissible colours of v
exceeds the number of its uncoloured neighbours. In this case, the vertex v can be
ignored throughout the rest of the game, since it can never run out of permissible
colours.
We may assume that, for any i, the set of uncoloured vertices with i as a permissible
colour is not an independent set, since otherwise Painter can simply colour all these
vertices with colour i. The strategy for Painter to win the online (G′, k + 1)-list-
colouring game is simple:
In the ith move, let Li be the set of vertices with i as a permissible colour presented
by Lister. Painter ignores the vertices of T and uses his winning strategy for the
k-painting game on G to colour an independent set Si of G (contained in Li), with one
exception: if ρi−1(v) = 0 for each vertex v ∈T \ Li, then Painter colours the vertices
in T ∩Li with colour i.
Since the exceptional move is performed only once, and since each vertex of G has
one more permissible colour than is required in the k-painting game, the vertices of
G can never run out of permissible colours. Also, once the exceptional move is made,
each vertex in T is either coloured or can be ignored. So to show that this is indeed
a winning strategy for Painter, it sufﬁces to show that before the exceptional move is
made, no vertex in T can run out of permissible colours.

320
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
At the ith round, if the exceptional move is not carried out then (by the description
of the strategy), some vertex v ∈T is not contained in Li and hence has 0 ≤ρi(v) ≤
ρi−1(v) −1. Now suppose that a vertex v ∈T runs out of permissible colours before
the exceptional move. Then there are moves j1, j2, . . . , jk+1 such that v ∈Ljs for
s = 1, 2, . . . , k + 1. For each such s, there is a vertex w ∈T \ {v} for which 0 ≤
ρjs(w) ≤ρjs−1(w) −1. Therefore,
k + 1 ≤

w∈T−{v}
ρ0(w) = (t −1)(n −k).
This contradicts our assumption that n ≤kt/(t −1).
A consequence of Theorem 8.1 is that the online version of Ohba’s conjecture
holds for graphs with independence number 2. Kozik et al. [40] proved that the
conjecture also holds for graphs with independence number 3.
The fractional paint number
A q-tuple colouring ϕ of G assigns to each vertex v a set ϕ(v) of q colours so that
adjacent vertices receive disjoint colour sets. The fractional chromatic number χ∗(G)
of a graph G is the inﬁmum of the ratios p/q for which there exists a q-tuple colouring
that uses p colours in total.
A graph is called (a, b)-choosable if, for any list assignment L that assigns to each
vertex a set of a permissible colours, there is a b-tuple colouring ϕ with ϕ(v) ⊆L(v)
for each vertex v; in particular, ‘(a, 1)-choosable’ means a-choosable. The fractional
choice number χl∗(G) of G is the inﬁmum of the ratios a/b for which G is (a, b)-
choosable.
Given a graph G and two positive integers a, b, the b-tuple a-painting game on
G is deﬁned analogously to the f-painting game. In the ith round Lister reveals the
information as to which vertices can be coloured with colour i, and Painter then
decides which of these vertices should be so coloured. The difference is that each
vertex needs to be assigned b colours. If, at any moment of the game, a vertex v has
not been assigned b colours but runs out of permissible colours, then Lister wins the
game. Otherwise, at some round, each vertex is assigned b colours and Painter wins
the game.
The fractional paint number χp∗(G) of G is the inﬁmum of the ratios a/b for which
Painter has a winning strategy in the online (G, (a, b))-list-colouring game. It follows
from the deﬁnition that, for any graph G,
χ∗(G) ≤χl∗(G) ≤χp∗(G).
Alon, Tuza and Voigt [4] proved that the fractional choice number of a graph is
always equal to its fractional chromatic number. Gutowski [25] extended this by
proving the following result.
Theorem 8.2 For any graph G, χp∗(G) = χl∗(G).

14 Colouring games
321
Suppose that χ∗(G) = a/b and that ϕ is a b-tuple a-colouring of G. We shall prove
that, for any ε > 0, there exist sufﬁciently large integers a′, b′ for which a′/b′ <
a/b + ε and Painter has a winning strategy for the b′-tuple a-painting game on G.
The strategy for Painter is simple. Suppose that in the ith round, Lister presents a set
Li, and that there are p sets among L1, L2, . . . , Li−1 that are identical to Li, and let
p′ ≡p (mod a) with 1 ≤p′ ≤a. Then Painter’s choice is Si = Li ∩ϕ−1(p′). We
may consider the permissible colour i as identiﬁed with the colour p′ in the b-tuple
a-colouring of G. A key observation is the following:
for any vertex v and for any two different colours p′ and p′′, the number of permissible
colours of v that are identiﬁed with p′ and the number of permissible colours of v that
are identiﬁed with p′′ may differ by at most 2n.
Since the graph G is ﬁxed, the number 2n is constant. When a′ and b′ are
sufﬁciently large, this difference may be ignored – that is, counted in the ε factor. So,
roughly speaking, about b/a of the permissible colours of v are eventually assigned
to v, and Painter wins the game.
This argument extends the identity χ∗= χl∗to χ∗= χp∗. Nevertheless, χl∗
and χp∗behave in a somewhat different way – namely, as proved in [4], for each
graph G there exists a pair (a, b) of integers for which G is (a, b)-choosable with
b = a/χ∗(G). Consequently, in the deﬁnition of χl∗we can take ‘minimum’ instead
of ‘inﬁmum’. This is not valid for χp∗, as we really need the inﬁmum for some
graphs, despite the corresponding proof for χl∗being constructive.
9. Achievement and avoidance games
Unlike the games already discussed, in achievement and avoidance games the goal
of the two players is symmetrical. The players construct partial colourings together,
playing on a given graph G within a given colour bound k: at most k colours may
be used and monochromatic edges are forbidden. The players alternately colour
one uncoloured vertex at a time, and the game is over when no further legal
move is possible – either because the entire vertex-set is coloured, or because the
neighbourhood of each uncoloured vertex contains all the k colours.
The achievement game is won by the player who makes the last legal move, and the
avoidance game is lost by the player who makes the last legal move. These colouring
games were introduced by Harary and Tuza [27], motivated by the algorithmic
decision problem called Precolouring Extension (see [11] for the latter). An
instance of the algorithmic problem PrExt is a graph G = (V, E), a colour bound
k, and a precoloured set W ⊂V – that is, a partial colouring ϕW : W →N is
given, which is supposed to be a proper vertex-colouring of the subgraph induced by
W. The question to decide is whether G admits a proper k-colouring in which each
precoloured vertex v ∈W has its pre-assigned colour ϕW(v).
The most interesting particular cases of these games correspond to small values
of k. If k = 1, then the game terminates with a maximal independent set, and

322
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
the parity of its cardinality determines who is the winner. Schaefer [49] developed
hardness results and studied various games concerning Boolean satisﬁability, and
also gave three examples of natural games, one of which (Node Kayles) is exactly
our achievement game with k = 1. He proved that it is PSPACE-complete to decide
whether the ﬁrst player has a winning strategy. The same complexity was proved by
Bodlaender [12] for k = 2 – that is, where the game terminates with a non-extendable
bipartite subgraph of G.
Unlike the games discussed in previous sections, the case k = 1 already raises
enormous difﬁculties, even for some very simple types of graph. Recall that the
players in this game sequentially construct a maximal independent set. On a path
of given length the game is equivalent to a game known as Dawson’s chess, created
by T. R. Dawson in 1935. Dawson’s chess is played on a 3 × n chessboard, with n
white pawns in the ﬁrst row and n black pawns in the third row. Pawns move in the
standard way, except that capture is mandatory whenever possible.
The game on paths, with k = 1, is also known as Node Kayles. In the terminology
of game theory, achievement corresponds to ‘normal play’ (last player wins) whereas
avoidance corresponds to ‘mis`ere play’ (last player loses). (Dawson proposed the
latter.) The former game was solved after two decades by Guy and Smith (1956),
but the latter game has remained open, even after three-quarters of a century, in spite
of considerable efforts in game theory. The game with normal play can be analyzed
by computing the Grundy function; it turns out that the second player has a winning
strategy if and only if n ≡4, 8, 20, 24 or 28 (mod 34) or n = 14 or n = 34 – that is,
the score is ultimately periodic modulo 34.
As a rather vague intuition concerning reasons why the achievement game is
easier than the avoidance one, we mention a simple strategy for the former, based
on symmetry, that can be applied under certain conditions. Suppose that G has a cut-
vertex v with the property that G−v is the union of two disjoint graphs G1 and G2 for
which G−G1 ∼= G−G2 and some isomorphism between these two subgraphs maps v
onto itself. Then the ﬁrst player can win the achievement game with any given colour
bound k as follows: colour v ﬁrst, ﬁx an automorphism f : G →G with f(v) = v,
f(G1) = G2 and f(G2) = G1, and then copy the moves of the second player: thus, if
the second player assigns colour c to a vertex w ∈V(Gi), answer by assigning c to
f(w) ∈V(G3−i). An analogous winning strategy works for the second player if G is
the disjoint union of two isomorphic graphs, but there seems to be no similarly trivial
strategy for the avoidance game.
For a deeper discussion about why mis`ere play is much harder than normal play,
and for substantial partial results concerning the former, see [48] and some of the
papers cited there.
10. The acyclic orientation game
Finally, we discuss a game that involves no colours. Its original motivation was to
enable us to check efﬁciently whether a ‘hidden’ colouring of a graph is proper or

14 Colouring games
323
not. It is related to the fact that every proper colouring ϕ : V →N deﬁnes an
orientation without directed cycles in a natural way, from smaller colours to larger
ones. Should a monochromatic edge occur, its orientation remains undetermined.
The ﬁrst version of this game was introduced by Manber and Tompa [42]; here
we consider the following variation, presented by Aigner, Triesch and Tuza [1]. The
game is played on a simple undirected graph G by two players, Algy and Strategist.
At each step, Algy selects an edge vw ∈E and Strategist orients it either from w to v
or from v to w, as he chooses, but in such a way that no directed cycle occurs. The goal
is to identify an acyclic orientation of G unambiguously, and the game is over when
the actual partial orientation has a unique extension to an acyclic orientation of G.
Algy’s goal is to minimize the number of steps, while Strategist aims at maximizing
it. We denote by c(G) the number of steps when both players play optimally.
When played on a complete graph, the game ends with a linear ordering of
the vertices, and is thus equivalent to comparison sorting, where c(Kn) = (1 +
o(1))n log2 n. On the other hand, when played on a bipartite graph, Strategist may
even promise at the beginning to orient all but one edge from the ﬁrst vertex-class to
the second; this leaves the possibility of orienting the last edge in either way, yielding
c(G) = |E|. More generally, the same holds if G is the cover graph of a partially
ordered set. (A graph G is a cover graph if it admits an orientation ⃗G for which there
exists a partially ordered set P = (V, <) over the vertex-set V of G such that vw is an
arc in ⃗G if and only if v covers w in P – that is, v > w, and there is no u ∈V with
v > u > w.)
As proved in [1], the following general bounds are valid for all graphs G of order
n and independence number α :
n log2 nα −n log2 e + 1 + 1
2 log2 n < c(G) < αn (log2(n/α) + 1).
(4)
It follows in particular that, for any graph with n vertices and
n
2

−o(n2) edges,
c(G) = o(n2) as n →∞. On the other hand, for each ε < 1
2 there exists δ > 0 such
that, for every sufﬁciently large n, there exists a graph G with at least ( 1
2 −ε)n2 edges
and with c(G) ≥δn2.
A less explicit inequality is the information-theoretic lower bound c(G) ≥log2
a(G), where a(G) denotes the number of acyclic orientations of G. Interestingly,
a(G) can be expressed in terms of the chromatic polynomial P(G, λ) of G, as a(G) =
|P(G, −1)|, by a theorem of Stanley [54].
The above observation on bipartite graphs yields c(K⌈n/2⌉,⌊n/2⌋) = ⌊1
4n2⌋. Pikhur-
ko [47] proved that no graph of order n can require substantially more steps – that is,
c(G) ≤1
4n2 + o(n2). But from below, it is not known whether or not c(G) −1
4n2 can
be arbitrarily large; so far, no example has been found where the difference exceeds 1.
The typical value of c(G), however, grows much more slowly as a function of n :
Alon and Tuza [3] proved that, for any constant p ∈(0, 1), the random graph Gn,p
of order n with edge probability p satisﬁes c(Gn,p) = (n log n), with probability
1−o(1) as n →∞. A similar slowly growing (and slightly larger) upper bound holds
for an arbitrary edge probability function p = p(n) – namely, c(Gn,p) = O(n log3 n)

324
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
holds almost surely. The exponent 3 can be improved; it remains open as to whether
O(n log n) is a universal upper bound for all probability functions p(n).
We say that G = (V, E) is an exhaustive graph if c(G) = |E| – that is, if Strategist
can force Algy to probe all edges of G. Unlike the value of c(G), it is known (see
[1]) that for n ≥6, the number of edges in an exhaustive graph of order n is at most
⌊1
4n2⌋, and if n ≥7 then K⌈n/2⌉,⌊n/2⌋is the unique extremal graph.
The cover graphs mentioned earlier, which are necessarily triangle-free, show
that exhaustiveness is not a local property. However, it is proved in [1] that the
exclusion of induced cycles of length larger than 3 has a different effect: a chordal
graph is exhaustive if and only if it contains no K4 or P4 + K1 as an induced
subgraph.
As regards time complexity, Algy can design in polynomial time a sequence of
sufﬁcient questions fewer than the upper bound in the inequality 4 (see [1]). On
the other hand, Pikhurko [47] proved that c(G) is hard to compute, and is even
hard to approximate within arbitrary precision: c(G) admits no polynomial-time
approximation scheme unless P = NP. As an upper bound for the approximation ratio
achievable in polynomial time, only a O(n/log n)-approximation is known (see [47]),
and hence a wide gap remains to be narrowed.
As with several other games, it may turn out to be PSPACE-complete to determine
the winner for a generic input graph G and value k which is part of the input, but this
seems not to have been proved so far; on the other hand, it is known that a(G) is
#P-hard to compute (see [41]). A further open problem is to determine the
computational complexity of recognizing exhaustive graphs.
References
1. M. Aigner, E. Triesch and Zs. Tuza, Searching for acyclic orientations of graphs, Discrete
Math. 144 (1995), 3–10.
2. N. Alon and M. Tarsi, Colorings and orientations of graphs, Combinatorica 12 (1992),
125–134.
3. N. Alon and Zs. Tuza, The acyclic orientation game on random graphs, Random Structures
Algorithms 6 (1995), 261–268.
4. N. Alon, Zs. Tuza and M. Voigt, Choosability and fractional chromatic numbers, Discrete
Math. 165/166 (1997), 31–38.
5. S. D. Andres, The game chromatic index of forests of maximum degree  ≥5, Discrete
Appl. Math. 154 (2006), 1317–1323.
6. S. D. Andres, Lightness of digraphs in surfaces and directed game chromatic number,
Discrete Math. 309 (2009), 3564–3579.
7. S. D. Andres, On characterizing game-perfect graphs by forbidden induced subgraphs,
Contrib. Discrete Math. 7 (2012), 21–34.
8. T. Bartnicki, B. Breˇsar, J. Grytczuk, M. Kovˇse, Z. Miechowicz and I. Peterin, Game
chromatic number of Cartesian product graphs, Electron. J. Combin. 15 (2008), #R72.
9. C. Berge, Graphs, North-Holland, 1985.
10. A. Beveridge, T. Bohman, A. Frieze and O. Pikhurko, Game chromatic index of graphs
with given restrictions on degrees, Theoret. Comput. Sci. 407 (2008), 242–249.

14 Colouring games
325
11. M. Bir´o, M. Hujter and Zs. Tuza, Precoloring extension. I, Interval graphs, Discrete Math.
100 (1992), 267–279.
12. H. L. Bodlaender, On the complexity of some coloring games. Intern. J. Foundat. Comput.
Sci. 2 (1991), 133–147.
13. O. V. Borodin, On acyclic colorings of planar graphs, Discrete Math. 25 (1979), 211–236.
14. O. V. Borodin, A. V. Kostochka, N. N. Sheikh and G. Yu, M-degrees of quadrangle-free
planar graphs, J. Graph Theory 60 (2009), 80–85.
15. L. Cai and X. Zhu, Game chromatic index of k-degenerate graphs, J. Graph Theory 36
(2001), 144–155.
16. J. Carraher, S. Loeb, T. Mahoney, G. Puleo, M. Tsai and D. West, Extending graph
choosability results to paintability, manuscript, 2012.
17. T. Chang and X. Zhu, On-line 3-choosable planar graphs, Taiwanese J. Math. 16 (2012),
511–519.
18. C.-Y. Chou, W.-F. Wang and X. Zhu, Relaxed game chromatic number of graphs, Discrete
Math. 262 (2003), 89–98.
19. T. Dinski and X. Zhu, A bound for the game chromatic number of graphs, Discrete Math.
196 (1999), 109–115.
20. C. Dunn and H. A. Kierstead, A simple competitive graph coloring algorithm II,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 90 (2004), 93–106.
21. P. Erd˝os, L. Rubin and H. Taylor, Choosability in graphs, Congr. Numer. XXVI (1979),
125–157.
22. P. L. Erd˝os, U. Faigle, W. Hochst¨attler and W. Kern, Note on the game chromatic index of
trees, Theoret. Comput. Sci. 313 (2004), 371–376.
23. U. Faigle, U. Kern, H. A. Kierstead and W. T. Trotter, On the game chromatic number of
some classes of graphs, Ars Combin. 35 (1993), 143–150.
24. M. Gardner, Mathematical games, Sci. Amer. (April 1981), 23.
25. G. Gutowski, Mr. Paint and Mrs. Corrector go fractional, Electron. J. Combin. 18 (2011),
#R140.
26. D. J. Guan and X. Zhu, Game chromatic number of outerplanar graphs, J. Graph Theory
30 (1999), 67–70.
27. F. Harary and Zs. Tuza, Two graph-colouring games, Bull. Austral. Math. Soc. 48 (1993),
141–149.
28. F. Havet and X. Zhu, The game Grundy number of graphs, J. Combin. Optim. 25 (2013),
752–765.
29. W. He, J. Wu and X. Zhu, Relaxed game chromatic number of trees and outerplanar
graphs, Discrete Math. 281 (2004), 209–219.
30. J. Hladk´y, D. Kr´al and U. Schauz, Brooks’ theorem via the Alon–Tarsi theorem, Discrete
Math. 310 (2010), 3426–3428.
31. P. Huang, T. Wong and X. Zhu, Application of polynomial method to on-line colouring of
graphs, Europ. J. Combin. 33 (2012), 872–883.
32. K. Junosza-Szaniawski and Ł. Ro˙zej, Game chromatic number of graphs with locally
bounded number of cycles, Inform. Process. Letters 110 (2010), 757–760.
33. H. A. Kierstead, A simple competitive graph colouring algorithm, J. Combin. Theory (B)
78 (2000), 57–68.
34. H. A. Kierstead, Asymmetric graph coloring games, J. Graph Theory 48 (2005), 169–185.
35. H. A. Kierstead and W. T. Trotter, Planar graph coloring with an uncooperative partner,
J. Graph Theory 18 (1994), 569–584.
36. H. A. Kierstead and T. Trotter, Competitive colorings of oriented graphs, Electron.
J. Combin. 8 (2001), #R1.
37. H. A. Kierstead and Zs. Tuza, Marking games and the oriented game chromatic number
of partial k-trees, Graphs Combin. 19 (2003), 121–129.

326
Zsolt Tuza and Xuding Zhu
38. H. A. Kierstead and D. Yang, Very asymmetric marking games, Order 22 (2005), 93–107.
39. S. Kim, Y. Kwon, D. Liu and X. Zhu, On-line list colouring of complete multipartite
graphs, Electron. J. Combin. 19 (2012) #R41.
40. J. Kozik, P. Micek and X. Zhu, Towards on-line Ohba’s Conjecture, Europ. J. Combin. 36
(2014), 110–121.
41. N. Linial, Hard enumeration problems in geometry and combinatorics, SIAM J. Alg.
Discrete Methods 7 (1986), 331–335.
42. U. Manber and M. Tompa, The effect of the number of Hamiltonian paths on the
complexity of a vertex coloring problem, Proc. 22nd Symp. on Foundations of Computer
Science (FOCS) (Nashville, TN) (1981), 220–227.
43. M. Montassier, P. Ossona de Mendez, A. Raspaud and X. Zhu, Decomposing a graph into
forests, J. Combin. Theory (B) 102 (2012), 38–52.
44. J. Neˇsetˇril and E. Sopena, On the oriented game chromatic number, Electron. J. Combin.
8 (2001), #R14.
45. J. Noel, B. Reed and H. Wu, A proof of a conjecture of Ohba, J. Graph Theory (2013),
submitted.
46. K. Ohba, On chromatic-choosable graphs, J. Graph Theory 40 (2002), 130–135.
47. O. Pikhurko, Finding an unknown acyclic orientation of a given graph, Combin. Probab.
Comput. 19 (2010), 121–131.
48. T. E. Plambeck and A. N. Siegel, Mis`ere quotients for impartial games, J. Combin. Theory
(A) 115 (2008), 593–622.
49. T. J. Schaefer, On the complexity of some two-person perfect-information games,
J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 16 (1978), 185–225.
50. U. Schauz, Mr. Paint and Mrs. Correct, Electron. J. Combin. 16/1 (2009), #R77.
51. U. Schauz, A paintability version of the combinatorial Nullstellensatz, and list colorings
of k-partite k-uniform hypergraphs, Electron. J. Combin. 17/1 (2010), #R176.
52. U. Schauz, Flexible color lists in Alon and Tarsi’s theorem, and time scheduling with
unreliable participants, Electron. J. Combin. 17/1 (2010), #R13.
53. E. Sidorowicz, The game chromatic number and the game colouring number of cactuses,
Inform. Process. Letters 102 (2007), 147–151.
54. R. P. Stanley, Acyclic orientations of graphs, Discrete Math. 5 (1973), 171–178.
55. Y. Wang and Q. Zhang, Decomposing a planar graph with girth at least 8 into a forest and
a matching, Discrete Math. 311 (2011), 844–849.
56. J. Wu and X. Zhu, Lower bounds for the game colouring number of partial k-trees and
planar graphs, Discrete Math. 308 (2008), 2637–2642.
57. W. Zhang and X. Zhu, The game Grundy indices of graphs, J. Combin. Optim., to appear.
58. X. Zhu, The game coloring number of planar graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 75 (1999),
245–258.
59. X. Zhu, Game coloring number of pseudo partial k-trees, Discrete Math. 215 (2000),
245–262.
60. X. Zhu, Reﬁned activation strategy for the marking game, J. Combin. Theory (B) 98
(2008), 1–18.
61. X. Zhu, Game colouring Cartesian product of graphs, J. Graph Theory 59 (2008),
261–278.
62. X. Zhu, On-line list colouring of graphs, Electron. J. Combin. 16 (2009), #R127.

15
Unsolved graph colouring problems
TOMMY R. JENSEN and BJARNE TOFT
1. Introduction
2. Complete graphs and chromatic numbers
3. Graphs on surfaces
4. Degrees and colourings
5. Edge-colourings
6. Flow problems
7. Concluding remarks
References
Our book Graph Coloring Problems [85] appeared in 1995. It contains
descriptions of unsolved problems, organized into sixteen chapters. A large
number of publications on graph colouring have appeared since then, and in
particular around thirty of the 211 problems in that book have been solved. In
this chapter we review some of our favourite problems that remain unsolved.
1. Introduction
A main reason for the continued interest in the area of graph colouring is its wealth of
interesting unsolved problems. Many of these are easy to state, but seemingly difﬁcult
to solve. However they are not impossible, as the literature in the ﬁeld will testify.
The seven most striking results of the past twenty years are:
• the 5-list-colourability of planar graphs (dating back to V. G. Vizing in 1975 and
to P. Erd˝os, A. L. Rubin and H. Taylor in 1979) by Thomassen [159]
• the conﬁrmation by Robertson, Sanders, Seymour and Thomas [137] of the truth
of the four-colour theorem (F. Guthrie and A. De Morgan (1852))
• the asymptotic solution by Reed [134] of the problem as to whether for k ≥9
there are k-chromatic graphs without complete k-graphs and of maximum degree
k (V. G. Vizing (1968) and O. V. Borodin and A. V. Kostochka (1977))

328
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
• the proof by Chudnovsky, Robertson, Seymour and Thomas [39] of the strong
perfect graph conjecture of C. Berge around 1960
• the proof by Thomassen [161] of the weak 3-ﬂow conjecture of W. T. Tutte (1954)
and F. Jaeger (1988)
• the solution by Kostochka and Yancey [111] to the problem of critical graphs with
few edges (due to T. Gallai (1963) and O. Ore (1967))
• the description found by Borodin, Dvoˇr´ak, Kostochka, Lidick´y and Yancey [24]
of all 4-critical planar graphs with exactly four triangles (B. Gr¨unbaum (1963),
V. A. Aksenov (1974) and P. Erd˝os (1990)).
In addition to these major achievements there are many other important results –
in fact, thirty-one of the original 211 problems from the lists in Jensen and Toft [85]
were solved by 2013. The area continues to surprise, and if we had been asked in
1995 which problems would be solved ﬁrst our guesses would have been totally
wrong. Although graph colouring has its origins in the four-colour problem, the
latter’s solution does not diminish the interest. To cite W. T. Tutte from his 1978
paper [166], where he describes several difﬁcult colouring problems:
The Four Colour Theorem is the tip of the iceberg, the thin edge of the wedge and the
ﬁrst cuckoo of spring.
The subsequent advances bear witness to this.
2. Complete graphs and chromatic numbers
Hadwiger’s conjecture
As we saw in Chapter 4, the following conjecture was proposed by Hadwiger [74] in
1943.
Every k-chromatic graph can be transformed into a complete k-graph by successive
contractions of edges and deletions of edges and vertices.
If a graph H can be obtained from a graph G by successive contractions and
deletions, then H is a minor of G. Hadwiger’s conjecture thus suggests that any graph
with no complete k-graph as a minor is (k −1)-colourable. Hadwiger’s idea was
to create a new combinatorial classiﬁcation of graphs, different from the classical
topological classiﬁcation via embeddability in surfaces.
A more striking formulation of Hadwiger’s conjecture is this, where a class of
graphs is proper if it is not the class of all graphs:
For any proper minor-closed class of graphs the maximum chromatic number of
graphs in the class equals the number of vertices in the largest complete graph
belonging to the class.
In particular, this suggests that all planar graphs are 4-colourable, because the
complete graph K4 is the largest complete planar graph. Thus Hadwiger’s conjecture

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
329
may be seen as a far-reaching generalization of the four-colour theorem. In 1937
Wagner [170] proved that the 4-colourability of all planar graphs can be extended to
the 4-colourability of all graphs without K5 as a minor, thereby proving that the case
k = 5 of Hadwiger’s conjecture is equivalent to the four-colour theorem.
For k = 4, Hadwiger’s conjecture was proved by Hadwiger in his 1943 paper, and
independently by Dirac [43]. By a deep theorem of Robertson, Seymour and Thomas
[138], the case k = 6 is also equivalent to the four-colour theorem. Kawarabayashi
and Toft [96] proved that a 7-chromatic graph has K7 or K4,4 as a minor, and
Kawarabayashi [90] subsequently proved the corresponding statement with K4,4
replaced by K3,5.
Perhaps the most interesting special unsolved case of Hadwiger’s conjecture arises
by assuming that G is a graph with independence number α at most 2, so G contains
no three mutually non-adjacent vertices. In 1982 Duchet and Meyniel [46] observed
in general that, if G is a graph with n vertices, then G contains as a minor a complete
⌈n/(2α −1)⌉-graph. In particular, if α ≤2, then G contains a complete ⌈1
3n⌉-graph
as a minor.
The importance of this special case was ﬁrst pointed out by W. Mader who noticed
that, whereas the truth of Hadwiger’s conjecture would imply that if α ≤2, then G
contains a complete ⌈1
2n⌉-graph as a minor, it seems very difﬁcult to improve on the
lower bound of ⌈1
3n⌉for the order of a largest complete minor. P. D. Seymour has
asked for a proof of the existence of a number ε > 0 such that, if α ≤2, then G
contains a complete ⌈( 1
3 + ε)n⌉-graph as a minor. As far as we know, this problem is
still open. Partial results have been obtained by Plummer, Stiebitz and Toft [132] and
Pedersen and Toft [130]. Duchet and Meyniel’s original bound of ⌈n/(2α −1)⌉was
improved for α > 2 by Kawarabayashi, Plummer and Toft [92] to ⌈n/(2α −3
2)⌉, and
further by Kawarabayashi and Song [94] to ⌈n/(2α −2)⌉.
In an interesting paper, Kawarabayashi and Reed [93] showed that, for any ﬁxed
number k ≥2, there exist a constant N and an O(n2) algorithm which, for any input
graph G with at most n vertices, produces one of the following:
• a colouring of G with k −1 colours
• a Kk-minor of G
• a minor H of G with at most N vertices, for which χ(H) ≥k and H has no
Kk-minor.
In particular it follows that, for any ﬁxed k, the corresponding case of Hadwiger’s
conjecture is a ﬁnite problem, in the sense that it is sufﬁcient to check the ﬁnite set
of graphs with order at most N to ﬁnd or rule out a counter-example. However, for
the case k = 5 this does not imply a positive answer to the ﬁniteness part of the
four-colour problem (see Section 3), because Kawarabayashi and Reed [93] used the
four-colour theorem to prove the existence of the constant N above.
Borowiecki [29] asked about the extent to which Hadwiger’s conjecture may be
generalized to list-colourings. For k ≤4, every graph with list-chromatic number
k has Kk as a minor. Since there are planar graphs that are not list-4-colourable, as

330
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
shown by Voigt [169], the same correspondence does not hold for k > 4. In general,
Bar´at, Joret and Wood [13] proved that, for each t ≥1, there exists a list-(4t + 1)-
chromatic graph with no complete minor larger than K3t+1.
The Erd˝os–Faber–Lov´asz problem
In 1972 Erd˝os, Faber and Lov´asz posed the following problem and conjectured that
the answer is afﬁrmative.
Let G be the union of k complete graphs, each with at most k vertices, and suppose
that the intersection of any two of them is at most a single vertex. Can G be coloured
with k colours?
It is surprising that this innocent sounding problem is still open. Some advances have
been described by Romero and S´anchez-Arroyo [141].
A reformulation of the conjecture was studied by Klein and Margraf [103], who
observed that any graph G is the line graph of a linear simple hypergraph H, where
linear means that any two edges have at most one vertex in common, and simple
means that no hyperedge is a multiple edge. The smallest value of |V(H)| for such an
H is called the linear intersection number li(G) of G. They conjectured that χ(G) ≤
li(G) holds for all graphs G, and proved that this is equivalent to the Erd˝os–Faber–
Lov´asz conjecture. Moreover, Klein and Margraf proved for any graph G that their
conjecture holds for at least one of G and G, where G is the complement of G.
Another more direct and well-known equivalent version of the Erd˝os–Faber–
Lov´asz conjecture is the statement that, for any simple linear hypergraph H, the
chromatic index χ′(H) is bounded by the number of vertices in H.
Gy´arf´as’s forbidden subgraph conjecture
Gy´arf´as [71] and Sumner [158] made the following conjecture. In its statement, the
parameter ω(G) denotes the clique-number of G, the number of vertices in a largest
complete subgraph of G.
For any forest F, there exists a function fF : N →N, such that χ(G) ≤fF(ω(G)) if
G does not contain F as an induced subgraph.
A family G of graphs is called χ-bound if there exists a function f for which
χ(G) ≤f(ω(G)), for all G ∈G.
If G(H) denotes the family of all graphs that do not contain the graph H as an induced
subgraph, then the above conjecture suggests that G(H) is χ-bound when H is a
forest.
Erd˝os [48] proved that, for all g > 0 and all k > 0, there exist graphs of chromatic
number k without cycles of length less than g. So, for a family G(H) to be χ-bound,
the graph H has to be a forest.

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
331
For a forest F, Kierstead and Penrice [99] and Sauer [144] proved that the family
G(F) is χ-bound if and only if G(T) is χ-bound for each connected component T of
F. The conjecture was proved for stars, paths and brooms by Gy´arf´as [72], where a
broom (also called a comet) is obtained by identifying an end-vertex of a path with a
vertex of a star, and for trees of radius 2 by Kierstead and Penrice [100].
We may reformulate the Gy´arf´as–Sumner conjecture as follows.
The graphs G in the family of graphs G(T, K) that do not contain a ﬁxed tree T or a
ﬁxed complete graph K as induced subgraphs have bounded chromatic number.
A set of forbidden subgraphs {T, K} with this property is called heroic. Chudnovsky
and Seymour [40] characterized all ﬁnite heroic sets of graphs, provided that the
Gy´arf´as–Sumner conjecture is true. Their characterization states that a set of graphs
is heroic if and only if it contains a forest, the complement of a forest (such as a
complete graph), a complete multipartite graph or the complement of a complete
multipartite graph (also called a clique partition graph). They also considered a
corresponding problem for tournaments, where a heroic set may consist of just
one graph, and where a colouring of a tournament has colour classes consisting of
transitive subtournaments.
The classes of graphs G(Pn), where Pn is a path on n vertices, have been
investigated with respect to their colouring complexity by Broersma, Golovach,
Paulusma and Song [33]. The existence of a polynomial algorithm for k-colouring
graphs in G(Pn) seems unknown for k = 3 and n ≥7, for k = 4 and n = 6 and 7, for
k = 5 and n = 6 and 7, and for k ≥6 and n = 6.
Double-critical graphs
The following question arises as a special case of the Erd˝os–Lov´asz Tihany
conjecture from 1968 (see [85]).
Let G be a connected graph in which the removal of any two adjacent vertices
together with all their incident edges results in a (χ(G) −2)-colourable graph. Must
G be a complete graph?
A connected graph G for which χ(G−v−w) ≤χ(G)−2 for any edge vw ∈E(G)
is called double-critical.
The Erd˝os–Lov´asz Tihany conjecture is the following statement.
Let ω(G) < χ(G) = s + t −1 (s, t ≥2). Then G contains two disjoint subgraphs G1
and G2 for which χ(G1) ≥s and χ(G2) ≥t.
The case s = 2 is the question for double-critical graphs.
The Erd˝os–Lov´asz Tihany conjecture has been proved for quasi-line graphs (where
the neighbourhood of each vertex is the complement of a bipartite graph), and also for
graphs of independence number 2, by Balogh, Kostochka, Prince and Stiebitz [12].
Another relaxation of the conjecture has been obtained by Stiebitz [155], replacing

332
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
the chromatic number by the so-called colouring number. The precise statement of
the result is: let ω(G) < χ(G) = s + t −1 (s, t ≥2). Then G contains two disjoint
subgraphs G1 and G2 for which either χ(G1) ≥s and col(G2) ≥t, or col(G1) ≥s
and χ(G2) ≥t.
The double-critical graph problem is open for k ≥6. Instead of requiring that
G be complete, one might relax the condition to G having a complete minor of the
desired size. The cases k = 6, 7 and 8 have been obtained for this relaxation (see [91]
and [4]).
An interesting equivalent version of the double-critical graph question was
formulated by Stehlik [152] in terms of hypergraphs with the Helly property – that
is, whenever some hyperedges intersect pairwise, then they all have a non-empty
intersection. The covering number of a hypergraph is the smallest size of a set of
vertices that intersects every hyperedge.
Let H be any hypergraph with the Helly property. If the covering number decreases
by 2 whenever two disjoint hyperedges are removed from H, is it then true that H
consists entirely of disjoint hyperedges?
Adaptive colouring
Let f be any integer-valued function deﬁned on the edge-set of a graph G. An
(improper) colouring of the vertices of G is called adaptive to f if, for every edge
vw of G, the colour assigned to v or w differs from f(vw). The adaptive chromatic
number χad(G) is the least number k for which G allows, for each such function f,
a colouring adaptive to f and using colours 1, 2, . . . , k. The following questions were
posed by Hell and Zhu [78].
What is the value of the adaptive chromatic number χad(Kn) of the complete graph
Kn with n vertices?
Is it true that Kn has the smallest adaptive chromatic number among all graphs with
chromatic number n?
Is there a function F such that χ(G) ≤F(χad(G)) holds for all graphs G?
It is clear that χad(G) ≤χ(G) is true for every graph, since a usual k-colouring is
adaptive to all functions f as above. Hell and Zhu [78] proved a few other additional
close ties and similarities between the two parameters:
• If G is connected, then χad(G) = 2 if and only if G −e is bipartite for some edge
e of G.
• For any numbers k, g ≥3, there exists a graph G without cycles of length less than
g for which χad(G) = χ(G) = k.
• For each k ≥3, it is an NP-hard problem to decide, with a graph G as the input,
whether χad(G) ≤k.
However, in contrast to Brooks’s theorem [34] (see Chapter 2), the maximum
adaptive chromatic number grows no faster than the square-root of the maximum

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
333
degree. Hell and Zhu proved that χad(G) ≤⌈√e(2 −1)⌉, where  is the maximum
degree of G. This bound was improved by Molloy and Thron [125] to the best-
possible χad(G) ≤(1 + ε)
√
, for every ε > 0. In particular, this implies an upper
bound χad(Kn) ≤√n for the complete graph Kn. A similar upper bound for χad(Kn)
also follows from earlier results of Gy´arf´as and Erd˝os [73]. Robert ˇS´amal and
Alexander Kostochka independently proved the lower bound χad(Kn) ≥√n/ ln n
for large enough n.
In an informative paper, Hell, Pan, Wong and Zhu [77] proved that the four-fold
direct (or ‘Cartesian’) product K4
n of the complete graph Kn has adaptive chromatic
number n. This again is in contrast to the behaviour of the chromatic number, which
never increases when we form direct products (see also Problem 11.1 of [85]). They
conjectured that in general, for any graph G, there exists a number d for which
χad(Gd) = χ(G).
If G is planar, then χad(G) ≤4; this follows from the four-colour theorem. It
was also proved in a list-colouring version, without using the four-colour theorem,
by Esperet, Montassier and Zhu [51], thereby answering a further question raised by
Hell and Zhu [78].
The list-colouring version of the third question above was answered afﬁrmatively
by Molloy and Thron [124]. Adaptive list-colourings have also been studied by
Kostochka and Zhu [112] and by Montassier, Raspaud and Zhu [126].
3. Graphs on surfaces
The four-colour problem
Interesting accounts have continued to appear with new views on different aspects of
the four-colour problem, such as the books by Fritsch and Fritsch [58] and Wilson
[172]. The following questions remain.
Is there a short proof of the four-colour theorem (that every planar graph is 4-
colourable) which can be checked in detail by hand by a competent mathematician
in at most two weeks?
Is there a short argument, independent of known proofs of the four-colour theorem,
to demonstrate that the four-colour problem is a ﬁnite problem, in the sense that
there exists a number N for which a smallest counter-example must have at most N
vertices?
Is there a proof of the four-colour theorem, perhaps neither short nor easily
checkable, which is not based on the method of ﬁnding an unavoidable set of
reducible conﬁgurations?
Francis Guthrie’s famous four-colour problem has a letter from Augustus De
Morgan to W. R. Hamilton in 1852 as its earliest written source. It became the four-
colour theorem 124 years later, when a computer-aided proof was obtained by Appel
and Haken [10] and Appel, Haken and Koch [11]. One might have thought that

334
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
the story would end here. But new and sometimes surprising facts are continually
being discovered surrounding the early history, and also concerning the possibilities
of ﬁnding proofs that are simpler according to speciﬁc criteria.
Recently McKay [120] discovered a printed publication of the four-colour problem
which was earlier than the 1860 anonymous book review by De Morgan. A letter
signed only by the initials ‘F.G.’ appeared in the Athenæum already in 1854 (see
[60]), and read as follows:
Tinting maps. – In tinting maps, it is desirable for the sake of distinctness to use as
few colours as possible, and at the same time no two conterminous divisions ought to
be tinted the same. Now, I have found by experience that four colours are necessary
and sufﬁcient for this purpose, – but I cannot prove that this is the case, unless the
whole number of divisions does not exceed ﬁve. I should like to see (or know where I
can ﬁnd) a general proof of this apparently simple proposition, which I am surprised
never to have met with in any mathematical work.
F.G.
The identity of the author is not known with certainty. Authors whose interests
touched on the map-colour problem included Francis Guthrie’s brother Frederick,
and an illustrious explorer and mapmaker Francis Galton, both of whom shared the
same initials. It appears likely that Francis or Frederick Guthrie was actually the
author of the note.
In September 2004 Gonthier [67] and B. Werner completed a proof of the four-
colour theorem, which they adapted from the proof of Robertson, Seymour, Sanders
and Thomas [137]. It was written in a sufﬁciently basic formalization to make it
checkable by the general mathematical theorem-proving software Coq, which had
been developed during the 1980s and 1990s at several institutions in France. They
reported that Coq was able to verify the correctness of this proof. (See also the article
by Knight [105].)
The proof given by Robertson, Seymour, Sanders and Thomas is simpler than
the original one by Appel and Haken [10], not only by exhibiting a much smaller
unavoidable set of reducible conﬁgurations, but also by avoiding the use of ‘ring-
reduction’ arguments ﬁrst introduced by Bernhart [18]. A qualitatively even simpler
proof was described by Steinberger [154] in 2010. Although Steinberger’s proof
involves a much larger unavoidable set of 2822 conﬁgurations, it avoids the
use of more complicated C-reducibility techniques and applies only the simpler
D-reducibility method; the existence of such a four-colour proof relying entirely on
D-reducibility was ﬁrst conjectured in 1975 by Stromquist [157] in his Ph.D. thesis.
The ﬁniteness question for the four-colour problem may have been considered
ﬁrst by H. Heesch, who wrote a letter to G. Ringel in 1953 explaining the basic
idea of step-wise extending an unavoidable set of conﬁgurations into a large enough
ﬁnite such set, all members of which were reducible. According to Bigalke [19],
Heesch told Ringel that it had occurred to him in 1935-36 that a proof of the ﬁniteness
of the four-colour problem might be obtained in this way. The idea, known as the
ﬁnitization of the four-colour problem (see Wilson [172]), led Heesch in 1970 to

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
335
propose a particular unavoidable set of 8900 conﬁgurations, so that a computational
conﬁrmation of the conjectured reducibility of all of them would produce a proof
of the four-colour problem, after a large (but ﬁnite) amount of effort. The question
about an upper bound N on the order of a smallest 5-chromatic counter-example
differs from Heesch’s question in the respect that, even if the existence of N were
known and hence the proof of the four-colour theorem were reduced to a ﬁnite task,
this does not immediately imply the truth of the four-colour theorem. (Compare this
with the discussion in the previous section of the ﬁniteness of Hadwiger’s conjecture
for graphs with a ﬁxed chromatic number.)
Each proof of the four-colour theorem described above is based on an idea,
implicitly used back in 1879 by A. B. Kempe. This is to establish by Euler’s
formula that at least one element of a collection of possible constituents is present
in any given graph or map, and then to apply a ‘reduction’ to show that no such
conﬁguration appears in a smallest example that is not 4-colourable. It appears likely
that such collections must be fairly large and that the actual calculations are infeasible
without the aid of computers. Several such proofs are available by now, and it is a
controversial issue among mathematicians (albeit to a much lesser extent than in the
1970s) as to whether computer-assisted proofs can be considered valid. Whether or
not every correct proof of the four-colour theorem must be too long to be checked
in every detail by a human, it would be interesting to see proofs based on different
approaches, such as by algebraic means, as suggested by work of G. D. Birkhoff
and (later) W. T. Tutte, or by using other powerful methods, such as advanced
probabilistic methods.
Steinberg’s 3-colour problem
As reported by Aksionov and Melnikov [3], the following question was asked by
R. Steinberg in 1975.
Assume that no cycle in a planar graph has length 4 or 5. Does it follow that the
graph can be 3-coloured?
Following a suggestion by P. Erd˝os in 1991, several authors have attempted to ﬁnd
the smallest possible value of k for which a planar graph must be 3-colourable if it
contains no cycles of any length 4, 5, . . . , k. Abbott and Zhou [1] in 1991 were the
ﬁrst to prove the existence of such a number k, and they gave k ≤11 as a bound.
In 1995 the bound was improved to k ≤9 by Sanders and Zhao [143], and then to
k ≤8 by Salavatipour [142] in 2002, and to k ≤7 by Borodin, Glebov, Raspaud and
Salavatipour [27] in 2005. In 2009 Borodin, Glebov, Montassier and Raspaud [26]
proved the currently best result, that if a planar graph contains neither 5-cycles nor
7-cycles, nor any pair of 3-cycles that share an edge, then it can be 3-coloured.
A stronger conjecture by Borodin, Glebov, Jensen and Raspaud [25] suggests
that if a planar graph contains no 3-cycle that shares an edge with a 4-cycle or a
5-cycle, then it can be 3-coloured; this suggests a common strengthening of

336
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
Steinberg’s problem and the theorem of Gr¨otzsch [69] that every planar graph with
no 3-cycle is 3-colourable. They proved that if a planar graph contains no 3-cycle
which shares an edge with a cycle of length at most 9, then it can be 3-coloured.
Several related theorems and conjectures are found in the informative survey by
Borodin [23] on the general theme of planar graph colouring.
Zhao [175] extended Erd˝os’s suggestion to higher surfaces, proving that for any
ﬁxed surface S there is a constant k such that, if a graph without any cycles of length
4, 5, . . . , k is embeddable in S, then it can be 3-coloured.
Ringel’s earth–moon problem
What is the largest chromatic number f2 that any union of two planar graphs can
have?
The equivalent dual problem, asked in 1959 by Ringel [135], deals with a map of
‘countries’, each consisting of one connected region on the earth and one connected
region on the moon. The aim is to colour the regions, using as few colours as possible,
so that the two parts of each country receive the same colour, and so that any two
regions sharing a common border receive different colours.
Ringel [135] noted the bounds 8 ≤f2 ≤12, where the lower bound was improved
to 9 by T. Sulanke in 1974, as ﬁrst reported by Gardner [64]. An inﬁnite class of
critical 9-chromatic graphs of thickness 2 was constructed by Boutin, Gethner and
Sulanke [30]. In general, the thickness of a graph G is the smallest number t for which
there are t planar graphs whose union is G. For the maximum chromatic number ft of
graphs of thickness t, the known bounds are 6t −2 ≤ft ≤6t, for t ≥3.
Motivated by the difﬁculty of computing both the thickness (proved NP-hard by
Mansﬁeld [117]) and the chromatic number of a given graph, Albertson, Boutin and
Gethner [6], [7] compiled catalogues of known bounds for both parameters, as well
as the fractional chromatic number, when restricted to special classes of graphs.
Several extensions of Ringel’s earth–moon problem to higher surfaces were
discussed by Jackson and Ringel [82].
Barnette’s conjecture
Every simple planar 3-colourable graph allows a partitioning of its vertex-set into
the vertex-sets of two induced forests.
The original conjecture, posed by Barnette [14], was stated dually in terms of the
existence of a Hamiltonian cycle in any 3-connected bipartite cubic planar graph.
An early partial result in 1975 by Goodey [68] implies the truth of the conjecture
for maximal planar graphs in which each vertex has degree 4 or 6. This was extended
by Feder and Subi [54], who proved that if a maximal planar graph G allows a
3-colouring in which all vertices of degree larger than 6 receive the same colour,
then the conjecture is true for G.

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
337
Holton, Manvel and McKay [81] proved the conjecture in its original formulation
for every 3-connected planar bipartite cubic graph with at most 64 vertices. Among
other results, Aldred, Bau, Holton and McKay [8] showed that every 3-connected
planar cubic graph with at most 176 vertices and with all faces of size at most 6
is Hamiltonian, independently of the bipartiteness condition. The bound 176 was
improved to 250 by Brinkmann, McKay and von Nathusius [31].
Kelmans [97] proved that Barnette’s conjecture is equivalent to the following
interesting stronger statement: for any two edges e1 and e2 that belong to the
boundary of a common face in a 3-connected bipartite cubic planar graph G, there
exists a Hamiltonian cycle in G containing e1 but not e2.
The square of planar graphs
If a graph is planar with maximum degree 3, can its vertices be coloured with seven
colours, so that all vertices at distance 1 or 2 receive different colours?
This question was asked in 1977 by Wegner [171], who observed that seven colours
is best possible, by subdividing a non-triangular edge of a triangular prism, and who
proved that eight colours would be sufﬁcient.
Various authors have mentioned a positive solution to Wegner’s problem by
C. Thomassen, obtained in 2001. However, according to the survey paper published
in 2008 by Kramer and Kramer [113], the problem is still considered open. It seems
open as to whether six colours are always sufﬁcient when we restrict attention to the
special case of 3-connected graphs.
An interesting variation applies to planar graphs of arbitrary maximum degree. It
requires, for some natural number d, that vertices are coloured differently when their
distance is precisely equal to d. There is no upper bound on the number of colours
needed when d is even, but the situation appears much more complicated when d is
odd. For d = 1, we of course retrieve the four-colour problem. For d = 3 Neˇsetˇril and
Ossona de Mendez [127] have proved the ﬁrst known (and very large) upper bound
on the number of colours that are sufﬁcient in a colouring, and they have presented
an example for which six colours are needed for d = 3; this may be the best lower
bound at present. In fact Neˇsetˇril and Ossona de Mendez proved upper bounds for all
odd d ≥3; their bounds depend on d and are extremely large, even for d = 3.
The game-chromatic number and Brams’s problem
In April 1981 Martin Gardner publicised the following problem as one of several
short problems in his column in Scientiﬁc American.
Let G be a graph and let k be a positive integer, and suppose that the following two-
person game is played on G. Alice and Bob alternate turns, with Alice having the ﬁrst
move. Both players know G and k from the beginning. A move consists in choosing a
vertex v from G that has not yet been assigned a colour and assigning to v a colour

338
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
from 1, 2, . . . , k distinct from the colours assigned previously (by either player) to the
vertices adjacent to v. The game stops with Alice the winner if G has been coloured
after |V(G)| moves. Bob is the winner if, at some point of the game, there is a vertex
that cannot be assigned a colour – that is, the vertex is already adjacent to vertices
coloured with all k colours.
The game-chromatic number χg(G) is the least number k for which Alice has a
winning strategy. If Alice has a winning strategy for G using k colours, does she also
then have a winning strategy with k+1 colours? What is the least number k for which
Alice has a winning strategy for all planar graphs?
The part of this problem that involves planar graphs is due to Steven Brams, a
professor of politics at New York University. Brams is a game theory expert who
invented the game for planar maps, thinking about possible alternative proofs of the
four-colour theorem. The problem came up in correspondence with Martin Gardner
[63] in late 1980. In a later letter to Gardner in October 1980 Lloyd Shapley showed
that k ≥6 (with ﬁve colours for the map of the dodecahedron: Bob wins if he always
colours the opposite face of Alice’s last choice with the same colour), and Robert
High improved the bound to 7. Brams and Gardner contemplated that there might
exist no least k for planar graphs.
As far as we know, a proof that there is a least number k for which Alice has a
winning strategy for all planar graphs was ﬁrst given by Kierstead and Trotter [101]
in 1993. In a more recent paper, Bartnicki, Grytczuk, Kierstead and Zhu [15] gave 8
and 17 as the best-known lower and upper bounds for the least k for which Alice has
a winning strategy for planar graphs, with a proof that k = 18 sufﬁces.
For graphs in general, the delightful paper [15] contains the following intriguing
remark:
It is not clear what inﬂuence increasing the number of colours has on the colouring
game. Suppose that Alice wins with k colours on a graph G. Then it would seem
trivial that she should also win on G with k +1 colours. But can you prove it? As yet,
nobody has been able to do so!
For more on graphs and games, see Chapter 14.
Albertson’s 4-colour problem
Let S be a surface. Is there a constant MS such that, if G is embeddable on S, then
G −X is 4-colourable for some subset X ⊆V(G) with at most MS vertices? In
particular, does this hold for the torus T with MT = 3?
These questions were asked by Albertson [5] in 1981. Not much recent progress has
been achieved on either of them.
DeVos, Kawarabayashi and Mohar [42] proved the similar general statement for
5-list-colourability: there is a constant k such that, for every graph G embedded in S,
there exists a vertex-set U with at most k vertices for which G−U is 5-list-colourable.

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
339
The similar statement with 4-list-colourability instead of 5-list-colourability is false,
since there exist non-4-list-colourable planar graphs that may be drawn in any number
of copies on any surface, as proved by Voigt [169] and Mirzakhani [121].
The similar question for 3-colourability of triangle-free graphs on S, which by
Gr¨otzsch’s theorem [69] has a positive answer when S is the plane, was answered
afﬁrmatively by Kawarabayashi and Thomassen [95].
We are not aware of similar results concerning the 4-list-colourability of triangle-
free graphs, or the 3-list-colourability of graphs with girth at least 5. Both of these
results hold for the plane; the former follows easily from Euler’s formula and the
latter was proved by Thomassen [160].
4. Degrees and colourings
Edge-disjoint placements
Let G1 and G2 be graphs with the same number n of vertices, and suppose that their
maximum degrees (G1) and (G2) satisfy
((G1) + 1)((G2) + 1) ≤n + 1.
Does it follow that there exists a graph on n vertices which is an edge-disjoint union
of a copy of G1 and a copy of G2?
This question was asked independently by Bollob´as and Eldridge [20], [21] and
by Catlin [35], [36]. A positive answer would extend considerably the classical
colouring theorem of Hajnal and Szemer´edi [75], which states that if G has maximum
degree  and exactly k(+1) vertices, then there exists a colouring of G with +1
colours in which each colour class has size k. A short proof of this theorem was given
by Kierstead and Kostochka [98].
The case when one of the maximum degrees is at most 2 was solved afﬁrmatively
by Aigner and Brandt [2]. So if a graph on n vertices has minimum degree at least
1
3(2n −1), then it contains as a subgraph every graph on n vertices of maximum
degree at most 2. For maximum degree 3 and sufﬁciently large n a positive solution
was given by Csaba, Shokoufandeh and Szemer´edi [41].
Kaul, Kostochka and Yu [89] proved that the conclusion holds under the extra
assumption that min{(G1), (G2)} ≥300, and the stronger condition
((G1) + 1)((G2) + 1) ≤3
5n + 1.
For graphs with large maximum degree their result improves a theorem of Sauer and
Spencer [145] stating that the conclusion follows for all G1 and G2 satisfying
(G1)(G2) < 1
2n.
A generalization of the problem to hypergraph packing was studied by R¨odl,
Ruci´nski and Taraz [140].

340
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
Reed’s ω--χ conjecture
If G has maximum degree  and contains no complete subgraph with more than ω
vertices, then
χ(G) ≤

1
2( + 1) + 1
2ω

.
This conjecture was posed by Reed [133] in 1998 and quickly became popular. The
idea behind it is to combine the obvious lower and upper bounds
ω ≤χ(G) ≤ + 1
into an improved upper bound obtained as a convex combination of them. For ω ≥
the conjectured bound is trivial, and for ω =  −1 the truth follows from Brooks’s
theorem [34].
In the special case ω =  = 2 we must round up the average of ω and  + 1, due
to odd cycles. Classical constructions by Gallai [61] of 4-critical graphs with  = 4
and ω = 2, and graphs obtained as joins of these with complete graphs, show in
general that either rounding up is necessary, or the weight of the  + 1 term must be
increased in the convex combination.
If ω is as small as possible – that is, in the non-trivial case when G is triangle-
free and ω = 2 – the best possible bound by A. Johansson (unpublished, see
[123]) is
χ(G) ≤c · 
log ,
where c > 0 is a constant, and shows that the conjecture is true when  is large
enough.
Reed [133] also made a second conjecture for  ≥3:
χ(G) ≤2
3( + 1) + 1
3ω.
By giving more weight to the trivial upper bound  + 1 in the convex combination,
rounding is avoided. As one of the ﬁrst positive results, Reed proved that there exists
a constant a, with 0 < a < 1, for which
χ(G) ≤(1 −a)( + 1) + aω, for  ≥3.
The following stronger ‘local version’ of Reed’s conjecture was conjectured by
King [102] in his Ph.D. thesis in 2009. For a vertex v of G, let ω(v) denote the size
of a largest complete subgraph of G that contains v. King’s conjecture is
χ(G) ≤max
v∈V(G)

1
2(dG(v) + 1 + ω(v))

.
Chudnovsky, King, Plumettaz and Seymour [38] proved this conjecture for quasi-line
graphs – graphs with the property that the neighbourhood of each vertex induces the
complement of a bipartite graph. It is easy to see that all line graphs are quasi-line

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
341
graphs. Edwards and King [47] have suggested an even stronger ‘superlocal version’
of Reed’s conjecture.
The total colouring conjecture
Let G be a simple graph with maximum degree . Then it is possible to colour the
edges and vertices of G with  + 2 colours in such a way that no two adjacent or
incident elements in V(G) ∪E(G) receive the same colour.
There has been some controversy about the priority to this conjecture, as described
by Soifer [150]. In 1964 the conjecture was proposed by V. G. Vizing in graph theory
seminars at the Academy of Sciences in Akademgorodok (outside Novosibirsk),
organized by A. A. Zykov. It was independently proposed by M. Behzad at the same
time, and its ﬁrst written appearence is in Behzad’s Ph.D. thesis [17] at Michigan
State University in 1965. The controversy arising from this has been addressed by
Stiebitz, Scheide, Toft and Favrholdt [156].
In 1968 Vizing [167] published a paper containing a wealth of problems, including
the total graph colouring conjecture for multigraphs, which suggests that (G) +
μ(G) + 1 colours sufﬁce in a simultaneous colouring of the vertices and edges
of a multigraph G with maximum degree (G) and maximum multiplicity μ(G).
A natural stronger conjecture is that χ′(G) + 1 colours sufﬁce for all multigraphs.
Unfortunately, Vizing [167] used the term ‘chromatic index’ to denote the least
number of colours needed in a simultaneous colouring of vertices and edges! This
number is now commonly called the total chromatic number, denoted by χ′′, and a
simultaneous colouring of the vertices and edges of a graph is called a total colouring,
following Behzad.
A further strengthening when χ′ ≥ + 3 was proposed by Goldberg [66]:
A graph G with χ′(G) ≥(G) + 3 satisﬁes χ′′(G) = χ′(G).
We observe that Goldberg’s conjecture says that any graph G with χ′(G) ≥
(G) + 2 satisﬁes χ′(G) = W(G), where W(G) is the density of G (see Section 5).
Goldberg [66] noticed that any critical graph G with χ′(G) =
W(G) satisﬁes
χ′′(G) = χ′(G): we ﬁrst take a (k −1)-edge-colouring of G −e, where e is an
edge of G and k = χ′(G). He then proved (see Stiebitz, Scheide, Toft and Favrholdt
[156]) that none of the k −1 colours is missing at two distinct vertices of G. So we
can colour each vertex v of G, using a colour that is missing at v, and we can colour
e with colour k. This results in a total colouring of G with k colours.
We may also ask, as an analogue of Goldberg’s conjecture, whether every graph
satisﬁes χ′′(G) ≤max{(G) + 2, W(G)}?
It is folklore that any graph G satisﬁes χ′′(G) ≤χ′ℓ(G) + 2, where χ′ℓ(G) is the
list-chromatic index of G (see Section 5). In 1997 Borodin, Kostochka and Woodall
[28] used list-colouring arguments to show that χ′′(G) ≤3
2 + 1 for graphs G with

342
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
maximum degree  ≥2. One year later, Molloy and Reed [122] used probabilistic
arguments to show that χ′′ ≤ + 1026 for simple graphs.
Clearly, there is a list variant for the total chromatic number, and Borodin,
Kostochka and Woodall [28] conjectured that the total list-chromatic number equals
the total chromatic number.
Critical graphs with many edges or high degrees
Let k ≥4 be an integer. A graph is k-critical if it has chromatic number k and every
proper subgraph is (k −1)-colourable.
If Fk(n) is the largest number of edges of a k-critical graph on n vertices, does
lim
n→∞Fk(n)/n2
exist? Is F6(n) = 1
4n2 + n, for n ≡2(mod 4)?
If δk(n) is the largest minimum degree of a k-critical graph on n vertices, does there
exist a constant c > 0 for which δ4(n) ≥cn? What are the orders of magnitude of
δ4(n) and δ5(n)?
Critical graphs were ﬁrst deﬁned and used by G. A. Dirac, when he studied for his
Ph.D. degree at the University of London around 1950. In 1949 he met Paul Erd˝os,
whose ﬁrst reaction was to ask about the maximum number of edges in these minimal
graphs. Dirac observed that the join of two odd cycles of equal length is a 6-critical
graph with many edges: no better examples have since been found. For |V(G)| = n,
the number of edges is 1
4n2 + n. Jensen and Toft [85] conjectured, however, that this
is not the best possible value.
For k = 4, it is known that
lim inf
n→∞F4(n)/n2 ≥1
16,
and for k = 5 the corresponding value is
4
31, as proved by Toft [162]. Jensen [84]
observed the general upper bound
Fk(n) ≤
k −2
2(k −1)n2, for all n and k with n > k ≥4.
For the largest minimum degree in critical graphs the above examples of Dirac
show that δ6(n) ≥1
2n for n ≡2(mod 4). Simonovits [149] and Toft [163] proved
that δ4(n) ≥cn1/3. This may be the best order of magnitude, but it seems difﬁcult to
prove this. As for the order of magnitude of δ5(n), there is no reasonable guess.
Erd˝os [50] asked speciﬁcally about the existence of regular 4-critical graphs.
The only 3-regular example is K4, by Brooks’s theorem [34]. On the other hand,
Gallai [61] constructed an inﬁnite family of 4-regular examples. An inﬁnite family

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
343
of 5-regular 4-critical graphs was constructed by Jensen [84]. Examples of regular
4-critical graphs of even degrees 6 to 16 were found by Dobrynin, Melnikov and
Pyatkin [44], [45]. We are not aware of any examples of 4-critical graphs that are
regular of odd degree 7 or more.
Probability colouring
Assume that (p1, p2, . . . , pk) is a probability distribution on the set {1, 2, . . . , k} – that
is, pi ≥0 for 1 ≤i ≤k, and k
i=1 pi = 1. Let the vertices of G be coloured randomly
and independently so that each vertex of G receives colour i with probability pi, for
i = 1, 2, . . . , k. For m ≥0, let Pm
G be the probability of at most m monochromatic
edges. As usual,  denotes the maximum degree.
Is Pm
G maximized by the uniform distribution pi = 1/k when k = k(G, m) is large
enough – say, whenever k ≥f(, m) for some function f?
Is there a structural characterization of those graphs G for which, for each k > 0,
the probability P0
G
of a proper colouring
is maximized by the uniform
distribution?
If, for all k and m, the probability Pm
G is maximized by the uniform distribution, then
G is called P-uniform.
Is there a a structural characterization of P-uniform graphs?
We note that
Pm
G =

f

v∈V(G)
pf(v),
where the sum is over all mappings f : V(G) →{1, 2, . . . , k} for which there are at
most m edges xy with f(x) = f(y). Permutations of the colours do not change this
probability, and so Pm
G may be expressed as a symmetric polynomial in p1, p2, . . . , pk.
We also note in particular that
P0
G = χ(G, k)k−|V(G)| when (p1, p2, . . . , pk) = (1/k, 1/k, . . . , 1/k),
where χ(G, k) is the chromatic polynomial of G.
Fadnavis [52] and her Ph.D. advisor P. Diaconis asked the ﬁrst question above, and
she proved that the answer is afﬁrmative for m = 0 if the number of colours satisﬁes
k > 6.3 × 1054. For G = K1,n and m = 0 it sufﬁces that k ≥n + 1. Diaconis
had conjectured that the answer to the second question above is afﬁrmative when G
is claw-free – that is, when K1,3 is not an induced subgraph. This conjecture was also
proved by Fadnavis.
The graph K1,4 is not P-uniform, as witnessed by m = 0 and k = 2. Fadnavis [52]
exhibited a claw-free graph on 19 vertices which is not P-uniform (for values m = 30
and k = 2), but proved that all complete graphs and cycles are P-uniform.

344
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
5. Edge-colourings
In this and the following section we no longer restrict our attention to simple
graphs. Accordingly the term ‘graph’ is used more generally to denote a multigraph
– that is, two vertices may be joined by more than one edge, but loops do not
occur.
Goldberg’s conjecture
The density W(G) of a graph G is deﬁned by
W(G) = max{
0
|E(H)|
⌊1
2|V(H)|⌋
1
: H ⊆G, |V(H)| ≥2}.
The following conjecture was proposed independently by Goldberg [65] and Sey-
mour [148] in the 1970s. A detailed account of its history is given in Stiebitz, Scheide,
Toft and Favrholdt [156].
Every graph G satisﬁes χ′(G) ≤max{(G) + 1, W(G)}.
This conjecture can be stated in different equivalent ways, as follows.
Every graph G satisﬁes χ′(G) ∈{(G), (G) + 1, W(G)}.
Every graph G satisﬁes, for each r ∈N,
χ′(G) ≤max{(2r + 3)(G) + 2r
2r + 2
, W1(G), W2(G), . . . , Wr(G)},
where Wr(G) = max{⌈|E(H)|/r⌉: H ⊆G, |V(H)| = 2r + 1} (Gupta [70]).
Let G be a χ′-critical graph (that is, χ′(H) < χ′(G) for every proper subgraph H
of G), let χ′(G) = k + 1 for an integer k ≥(G) + 1, let e be an edge of G, and
let ϕ be an edge-colouring of G −e with k colours. Then no colour is missing at two
distinct vertices of G with respect to ϕ. (Andersen [9]).
Every χ′-critical graph G with χ′(G) ≥(G) + 2 has odd order and satisﬁes
2|E(G)| = (χ′(G) −1)(|V(G)| −1) + 2
(Stiebitz, Scheide, Toft and Favrholdt [156]).
The conjecture of Goldberg and Seymour is one of the most important conjectures
in edge-colouring theory. It generalizes Vizing’s theorem in a strong way, by showing
that there are only three possible values for the chromatic index of an arbitrary
graph. While it appears unknown whether the density W(G) can be computed in
polynomial time, the parameter κ(G) = max{(G), W(G)} can be determined in
polynomial time: this follows from Edmonds’s matching polytope theory and the
theory of anti-blocking polyhedra (see Schrijver [146]). So Goldberg’s conjecture
supports the following conjecture of Hochbaum, Nishizeki and Shmoys [79]:

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
345
There is a polynomial-time algorithm that colours the edges of any graph G with at
most χ′(G) + 1 colours.
Results related to Goldberg’s conjecture were discussed by Stiebitz, Scheide, Toft
and Favrholdt [156]. In particular, Goldberg’s conjecture was conﬁrmed for graphs
with at most 15 vertices, and also for graphs with maximum degree at most 15.
Gupta’s version of Goldberg’s conjecture is true for 1 ≤r ≤6. Furthermore, it
is known that every graph G satisﬁes
χ′(G) ≤max{(G) +

((G) −1)/2, W(G)}.
Whether Goldberg’s conjecture holds for all planar graphs is unknown.
The Berge–Fulkerson conjecture
This conjecture is attributed to C. Berge (see Seymour [147]), but it ﬁrst appeared in
print in Fulkerson [59]:
Every bridgeless cubic graph G contains a family of six perfect matchings such that
each edge of G is contained in precisely two of them.
An equivalent form of it is that χ′(2G) = 6 for every bridgeless cubic graph. The
conjecture was extended by Seymour [148] to the generalized Fulkerson conjecture:
Every r-graph G satisﬁes χ′(2G) = 2r.
Here, an r-graph is an r-regular graph G such that, for each X ⊆V(G) with an odd
number of vertices, there are at least r edges in G with precisely one endpoint in
X. Since the fractional chromatic index of every r-graph G is χ′∗(G) = r, there are
integers t for which χ′(tG) = tr (see Stiebitz, Scheide, Toft and Favrholdt [156]).
Seymour’s conjecture suggests that in general t = 2 is one of these integers.
The following seemingly weaker version of the Berge–Fulkerson conjecture was
proposed by Berge (personal communication from F. Jaeger in 1994). It is easy to see
that this conjecture is implied by the Berge–Fulkerson conjecture, and Mazzuoccolo
[119] proved that the two conjectures are actually equivalent.
Every bridgeless cubic graph G contains a family of ﬁve perfect matchings such that
each edge of G is contained in at least one of them.
We note that Frink’s proof [57] of Petersen’s theorem [131] tells us that each edge
of a cubic bridgeless graph is contained in a perfect matching (see also K¨onig’s book
[110]). On the other hand, it is not known whether Berge’s conjecture holds, even
with ‘ﬁve’ replaced by any other ﬁxed number. For a positive integer k, deﬁne
mk(G) = max
2
|
k
i=1
Mi|/|E(G)| : M1, M2, . . . , Mk are perfect matchings of G
3
.

346
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
Clearly, m1(G) =
1
3 and Berge’s conjecture suggests that m5(G) = 1. For the
Petersen graph P, we have
m2(P) = 3
5, m3(P) = 4
5, m4(P) = 14
15, m5(P) = 1,
and Patel [129] made the following conjecture:
Every bridgeless cubic graph G satisﬁes mk(G) ≥mk(P), for 1 ≤k ≤5.
Patel proved that this conjecture is implied by the Berge–Fulkerson conjecture,
and thus, by the result of Mazzuoccolo, the two conjectures are equivalent. Lower
bounds on mk(G) for 2 ≤k ≤5 were established by Kaiser, Kr´al’ and Norine [87]:
in particular, they veriﬁed the case k = 2 of the conjecture. The paper by Fouquet
and Vanherpe [56] provides some partial results related to the perfect matching index
of bridgeless cubic graphs – that is, the minimum number of perfect matchings that
cover all edges.
For the Petersen graph P, only twelve edges can be covered with three perfect
matchings, but thirteen edges can be covered with three matchings. Rizzi [136]
proved that if G is a simple graph with (G) ≤3, then there are three matchings
M1, M2 and M3 for which |M1 ∪M2 ∪M3| ≥6
7|E(G)|. The max edge t-colouring
problem is to colour the largest possible number of edges of a graph G in a proper
way using t colours; the complexity of this problem was studied by Feige, Ofek and
Wieder [55].
There is another attractive formulation of the Berge–Fulkerson conjecture in terms
of even graphs – that is, graphs in which all vertices have even degree. That the
following conjecture is equivalent to the Berge–Fulkerson conjecture was proved by
Jaeger [83]:
Every bridgeless graph G contains a family of six even subgraphs such that each
edge of G is contained in exactly four of them.
Hao, Niu, Wang, Zhang and Zhang [76] proved that a cubic graph G satisﬁes
χ′(2G) = 6 if and only if there are two edge disjoint matchings M1 and M2 such
that χ′(G −Mi) ≤3 for i = 1, 2 and M1 ∪M2 is the edge-set of a cycle. They used
this to verify the Berge–Fulkerson conjecture for certain families of snarks.
The relation between the Berge–Fulkerson conjecture and shortest cycle cover
problems has been investigated by Fan and Raspaud [53]. They also drew attention
to the following implication of the Berge–Fulkerson conjecture which has become
known as the Fan–Raspaud conjecture:
Every bridgeless cubic graph contains three perfect matchings with empty
intersection.
If a cubic graph has a family of six perfect matchings covering each edge twice,
then the intersection of any three of them must be empty. On the other hand, even

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
347
the existence of an integer k ≥3 for which every bridgeless cubic graph contains k
perfect matchings with empty intersection is not clear.
The list-chromatic index
The following list-colouring conjecture, suggested independently by various
researchers (including V. G. Vizing, M. O. Albertson, K. Collins, A. Tucker,
R. P. Gupta, B. Bollob´as and A. J. Harris) is the most popular problem in edge-
colouring theory. It ﬁrst appeared in print in a paper by Bollob´as and Harris [22].
Let G be a graph with χ′(G) = k, and let each edge of G be assigned a list of k
colours. Then it is possible to colour the edges of G so that each edge receives a
colour from its list.
The study of list-colouring problems for graphs was initiated in the 1970s by
Vizing [168], and independently by Erd˝os, Rubin and Taylor [49]. The list-chromatic
index χ′ℓ(G) of a graph G is the least number k for which, whenever we assign a
list of k colours to each edge of G, there is a proper colouring of the edges of G for
which each edge receives a colour from its list. By deﬁnition, every graph G satisﬁes
χ′(G) ≤χ′ℓ(G) and the list-colouring conjecture suggests that equality holds. In
contrast, the gap between the chromatic number and the list-chromatic number can
be arbitrarily large, even for bipartite graphs, as observed by Vizing [168] and Erd˝os,
Rubin and Taylor [49].
One of the most spectacular results about edge-colourings from the 1990s is the
veriﬁcation by Galvin [62] of the list-colouring conjecture for the class of bipartite
graphs – that is, the proof that χ′(G) = χ′ℓ(G) for every bipartite graph G. This
particular case of the list-colouring conjecture is due to J. Dinitz (see Chetwynd and
H¨aggkvist [37]).
Borodin, Kostochka and Woodall [28] obtained an attractive generalization of
Galvin’s landmark theorem, allowing lists of different lengths, where an edge e with
ends u and v has a list of length max{dG(u), dG(v)}. Based on this they proved that
χ′ℓ(G) ≤

3
2(G)

for all graphs G. The list-colouring conjecture has been veriﬁed for the class of simple
graphs, at least asymptotically, by Kahn [86], who proved that every simple graph
G satisﬁes χ′ℓ(G) = (G) + o((G)). The following conjecture, posed by Bojan
Mohar, deals with list-colourings of χ′-critical class 2 graphs – that is, simple graphs
G for which χ′(G) = (G)+1 and χ′(H) < χ′(G), whenever H is a proper subgraph
of G.
Suppose that G is a χ′-critical graph of class 2, and for each edge of G there is a
list of (G) colours. Then the edges of G can be properly coloured so that each edge
receives a colour from its list unless all the lists are equal to each other.

348
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
6. Flow problems
A k-ﬂow in a graph (also called a ‘nowhere-zero k-ﬂow’ for emphasis) is an
assignment to each edge of a direction and of a ﬂow value in {1, 2, . . . , k −1}, so
that the net ﬂow entering and leaving each vertex is 0. The concept of a k-ﬂow was
introduced by Tutte [164], who showed that a plane graph allows a k-ﬂow if and only
if its dual graph is vertex-k-colourable. A comprehensive survey of k-ﬂows written
by Lov´asz [115] is available on-line (see also Chapter 9).
Tutte’s 5-ﬂow conjecture
The following conjecture was posed by Tutte [164] in 1954:
Every graph without bridges allows a 5-ﬂow.
Kochol [108] proved that if the 5-ﬂow conjecture is false, then a smallest counter-
example is a cyclically 6-edge-connected cubic graph – that is, a 3-regular graph for
which, whenever fewer than six edges are deleted, the remaining graph has at most
one component that contains a cycle.
A bound on the possible order of a counter-example was obtained by Steffen [151],
who proved Tutte’s 5-ﬂow conjecture for all graphs with fewer than 44 vertices. As
a consequence, the conjecture is true for all graphs embeddable on a surface with
Euler characteristic at least −3. A result by Kochol [109] shows that the girth of a
smallest counter-example is at least 9. Since the order of a (3, 9)-cage is known (see
[32]), this improves Steffen’s lower bound to 58 vertices, and the bound on the Euler
characteristic to −10.
An interesting equivalent reformulation of the 5-ﬂow conjecture, stated in terms
of a parity condition, is due to Matamala and Zamora [118]. Let F be a subgraph of
a graph G. Then F is called a (1, 2)-factor of G if each vertex of G is a vertex of F
of degree 1 or 2. An edge of G is called F-balanced if it is either an edge of F or
its ends have the same degree in F. If every cycle of G contains an even number of
F-balanced edges, then F is called an even subgraph. Matamala and Zamora [118]
proved that a cubic graph without bridges allows a 5-ﬂow if and only if it contains an
even (1, 2)-factor.
As a common weakening of Tutte’s 5-ﬂow and 4-ﬂow conjectures (see below),
Kochol [106] observed that if a cubic graph has no bridge and does not contain the
Petersen graph as a minor, then it allows a 5-ﬂow.
Hochst¨attler [80] related Tutte’s k-ﬂow problems to Hadwiger’s conjecture by
extending both problems to the more general setting of regular matroids (see, for
example, Oxley [128]).
Tutte’s 4-ﬂow conjecture
The following conjecture, formally a strengthening of the four-colour theorem, was
made by Tutte [165] in 1966.

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
349
Every graph without a bridge and without a subdivision of the Petersen graph as a
subgraph allows a 4-ﬂow.
When restricted to cubic graphs, the existence of a 4-ﬂow becomes equivalent
to the 3-colourability of edges. The truth of the conjecture in this special case was
proved by Robertson, Seymour and Thomas [139], with a proof extending the proof
by Robertson, Sanders, Seymour and Thomas [137] of the four-colour theorem.
A 4-ﬂow in a graph is equivalent to a covering of its edges by two subgraphs,
each of which is an edge-disjoint union of cycles. Thus, many statements about
4-ﬂows have equivalent reformulations in terms of cycle covers. The excellent
monograph by Zhang [173] presents several additional connections between Tutte’s
k-ﬂow conjectures and other theorems and conjectures on ﬂows and cycle covers in
graphs. Such connections were also explored by Kaiser and ˇSkrekovski [88].
Extending these ideas from graphs to regular matroids, Lai, Li and Poon [114]
showed (using the four-colour theorem) that if a regular matroid without a co-loop (a
singleton circuit in the dual matroid) does not allow a 4-ﬂow, then it contains a minor
that is either K5 or the matroid dual of K5. In particular, this proves the conjecture of
Jensen and Toft [85] that every graph without a bridge and without a K5-minor has a
4-ﬂow.
Tutte’s 3-ﬂow conjecture
According to a survey by Steinberg [153] on the three-colour problem, the following
3-ﬂow conjecture was made by Tutte in 1972. Its restriction to the planar case is
dually equivalent to Gr¨otzsch’s theorem [69].
Every graph without a bridge and without an edge-cut of size 3 allows a 3-ﬂow.
A weaker conjecture by Jaeger [83], called ‘the weak 3-ﬂow conjecture’, states that
there exists a number λ for which every graph of edge-connectivity at least λ allows a
3-ﬂow. This conjecture has been proved by Thomassen [161] for λ = 8, and improved
to λ = 6 by Lov´asz, Thomassen, Wu and Zhang [116]. Tutte’s conjecture corresponds
to λ = 4 in the weak 3-ﬂow conjecture. However, Kochol [107] proved that Tutte’s
conjecture already follows from the case λ = 5 in the weak 3-ﬂow conjecture.
Similar to a k-ﬂow in a graph, except with non-integral ﬂow values, a circular
r-ﬂow for a real number r ≥2 is deﬁned as an assignment to each edge of a direction
and of a ﬂow value in the interval [1, r −1], for which the net ﬂow entering and
leaving each vertex is 0. According to Zhang [174], L. A. Goddyn and P. D. Seymour
have conjectured that, for each ε > 0, there exists a number λ for which every
graph of edge-connectivity at least λ allows a circular (2 + ε)-ﬂow. Klostermeyer
and Zhang [104] proved Goddyn and Seymour’s conjecture for planar graphs. The
general theorem on circular ﬂows by Thomassen [161] implies, for each positive
natural number k, that if a graph has large enough edge-connectivity, then it allows
a circular ﬂow in which all ﬂow values are either 1 or 1 + 1/k, thus proving the
conjecture also for the general case (personal communication from C. Thomassen).

350
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
7. Concluding remarks
As indicated in this chapter, even though many important graph-colouring problems
have been solved, there is a large variety of interesting unsolved problems still
around. We made a selection, mostly guided by our own taste, and mostly from our
book [85] in updated form. As for historical remarks about the problems, the original
book is usually a more comprehensive source.
The state of the art for edge-colourings is described in Stiebitz, Scheide, Toft
and Favrholdt [156]. This book also contains a chapter with twenty attractive edge-
colouring conjectures. Here we have used formulations from [156], as well as
from [85].
Probabilistic methods play a fast-growing role in the development of combinatorial
mathematics. These we have to some degree neglected. For those wishing insight into
this side of colouring theory we strongly recommend the excellent book by Molloy
and Reed [123], as well as the well-written book by Beck [16], which is a rich source
of how the probabilistic method, in a game-theoretic setting, may be used to obtain
exact results by ‘derandomization’.
Graph colouring theory ﬂourishes as never before, and we hope and expect to see
solutions and partial solutions to several of the above problems in the near future.
The area continues to show surprising developments, and it is hard to predict which
problems will ﬁnd solutions. Tutte’s iceberg is still there, with many beautiful hidden
secrets waiting for discovery just beneath the surface.
References
1. H. L. Abbott and B. Zhou, On small faces in 4-critical planar graphs, Ars Combin. 32
(1991), 203–207.
2. M. Aigner and S. Brandt, Embedding arbitrary graphs of maximum degree two,
J. London Math. Soc. 48 (1993), 39–51.
3. V. A. Aksionov and L. S. Melnikov, Essay on the theme: the three-color problem,
Combinatorics (eds. A. Hajnal and V. T. S´os), Colloq. Math. Soc. J´anos Bolyai 18,
North-Holland (1978), 23–34.
4. B. Albar and D. Gonc¸alves, On triangles in Kr-minor free graphs, arXiv:1304.5468v1,
2013.
5. M. O. Albertson, Open problem 2, Theory and Applications of Graphs (eds. G. Chartrand
et al.), Wiley (1981), 609.
6. M. O. Albertson, D. L. Boutin and E. Gethner, The thickness and chromatic number of
r-inﬂated graphs, Discrete Math. 310 (2010), 2725–2734.
7. M. O. Albertson, D. L. Boutin and E. Gethner, More results on r-inﬂated graphs:
Arboricity, thickness, chromatic number and fractional chromatic number, Ars Math.
Contemp. 4 (2011), 5–24.
8. R. E. L. Aldred, S. Bau, D. A. Holton and B. D. McKay, Nonhamiltonian 3-connected
cubic planar graphs, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 13 (2000), 25–32.
9. L. D. Andersen, On edge-colourings of graphs, Math. Scand. 40 (1977), 161–175.
10. K. Appel and W. Haken, Every planar map is four colorable, Part I: Discharging, Illinois
J. Math. 21 (1977), 429–490.

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
351
11. K. Appel, W. Haken and J. Koch, Every planar map is four colorable, Part II: Reducibility,
Illinois J. Math. 21 (1977), 491–567.
12. J. Balogh, A. V. Kostochka, N. Prince and M. Stiebitz, The Erd˝os–Lov´asz Tihany
conjecture for quasi-line graphs, Discrete Math. 309 (2012), 3985–3991.
13. J. Bar´at, G. Joret and D. R. Wood, Disproof of the list Hadwiger conjecture, Electron.
J. Combin. 18 (2011), 232.
14. D. Barnette, Conjecture 5, Recent Progress in Combinatorics (ed. W. T. Tutte), Proc.
Third Waterloo Conference on Combinatorics, May 1968, Academic Press (1969), 343.
15. T. Bartnicki, J. Grytczuk, H. A. Kierstead and X. Zhu, The map-coloring game, Amer.
Math. Monthly 114 (2007), 793–803.
16. J. Beck, Combinatorial Games, Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications 114,
Cambridge University Press, 2008; paperback edn., 2011.
17. M. Behzad, Graphs and Their Chromatic Numbers, Ph.D. thesis, Michigan State
University, 1965.
18. A. Bernhart, Six rings in minimal ﬁve color maps, Amer. J. Math. 69 (1947), 391–412.
19. H.-G. Bigalke, Heinrich Heesch, Kristallgeometrie, Parkettierungen, Vierfarben-
forschung, Birkh¨auser Verlag (1988), 155.
20. B. Bollob´as and S. E. Eldridge, Problem, Proc. Fifth British Combinatorial Conference
(Aberdeen, 1975) (eds. C. St.J. A. Nash-Williams and J. Sheehan), Utilitas Math. (1976),
690.
21. B. Bollob´as and S. E. Eldridge, Packings of graphs and applications to computational
complexity, J. Combin. Theory (B) 25 (1978), 105–124.
22. B. Bollob´as and A. J. Harris, List-colourings of graphs, Graphs Combin. 1 (1985),
115–127.
23. O. V. Borodin, Colorings of plane graphs: a survey, Discrete Math. 313 (2013), 517–539.
24. O. V. Borodin, Z. Dvoˇr´ak, A. V. Kostochka, B. Lidick´y and M. P. Yancey, Planar 4-critical
graphs with four triangles, Europ. J. Combin. 41 (2014), 138–151.
25. O. V. Borodin, A. N. Glebov, T. R. Jensen and A. Raspaud, Planar graphs without
triangles adjacent to cycles of length from 3 to 9 are 3-colorable, Sib. Elektron. Mat.
Izv. 3 (2006), 428–440.
26. O. V. Borodin, A. N. Glebov, M. Montassier and A. Raspaud, Planar graphs without
5- and 7-cycles and without adjacent triangles are 3-colorable, J. Combin. Theory (B) 99
(2009), 668–673.
27. O. V. Borodin, A. N. Glebov, A. Raspaud and M. R. Salavatipour, Planar graphs without
cycles of length from 4 to 7 are 3-colorable, J. Combin. Theory (B) 93 (2005), 303–311.
28. O. V. Borodin, A. V. Kostochka and D. R. Woodall, List edge and list total colourings of
multigraphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 71 (1997), 184–204.
29. M. Borowiecki, Research problem 172, Discrete Math. 121 (1993), 235–236.
30. D. L. Boutin, E. Gethner and T. Sulanke, Thickness-two graphs, part one: new nine-
critical graphs, permuted layer graphs, and Catlin’s graphs, J. Graph Theory 57 (2008),
198–214.
31. G. Brinkmann, B. D. McKay and U. von Nathusius, Backtrack search and look-ahead
for the construction of planar cubic graphs with restricted face sizes, MATCH Commun.
Math. Comput. Chem. 48 (2003), 163–177.
32. G. Brinkmann, B. D. McKay and C. Saager, The smallest cubic graphs of girth nine,
Combin. Probab. Comput. 5 (1995), 1–13.
33. H. Broersma, P. A. Golovach, D. Paulusma and J. Song, Updating the complexity status
of coloring graphs without a ﬁxed induced linear forest, Theoret. Comput. Sci. 414
(2012), 9–19.
34. R. L. Brooks, On colouring the nodes of a network, Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 37
(1941), 194–197.

352
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
35. P. A. Catlin, Embedding Subgraphs and Coloring Graphs under Extremal Degree
Conditions, Ph.D. thesis, Ohio State University, 1976.
36. P. A. Catlin, Embedding subgraphs under extremal degree conditions. Proc. 8th South-
Eastern Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Computing (Baton Rouge,
1977), Congr. Numer. 19 (1977), 139–145.
37. A. G. Chetwynd and R. H¨aggkvist, A note on list colourings, J. Graph Theory 13 (1989),
87–95.
38. M. Chudnovsky, A. D. King, M. Plumettaz and P. D. Seymour, A local strengthening of
Reed’s omega, Delta, chi conjecture for quasi-line graphs, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 27
(2013), 95–108.
39. M. Chudnovsky, N. Robertson, P. D. Seymour and R. Thomas, The strong perfect graph
theorem, Ann. of Math. (2) 164 (2006), 51–229.
40. M. Chudnovsky and P. D. Seymour, Extending the Gy´arf´as–Sumner conjecture, J. Com-
bin. Theory (B) 105 (2014), 11–16.
41. B. Csaba, A. Shokoufandeh and E. Szemer´edi, Proof of a conjecture of Bollob´as and
Eldridge for graphs of maximum degree three, Combinatorica 23 (2003), 35–72.
42. M. DeVos, K. Kawarabayashi and B. Mohar, Locally planar graphs are 5-choosable,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 98 (2008), 1215–1232.
43. G. A. Dirac, A property of 4-chromatic graphs and some remarks on critical graphs,
J. London Math. Soc. 27 (1952), 85–92.
44. A. A. Dobrynin, L. S. Melnikov and A. V. Pyatkin, Regular 4-critical graphs of even
degree, J. Graph Theory 46 (2004), 103–130.
45. A. A. Dobrynin, L. S. Melnikov and A. V. Pyatkin, Erd˝os regular graphs of even degree,
Discuss. Math. Graph Theory 27 (2007), 269–279.
46. P. Duchet and H. Meyniel, On Hadwiger’s number and the stability number, Graph The-
ory (ed. B. Bollob´as), Annals of Discrete Mathematics, North-Holland (1982), 71–73.
47. K. Edwards and A. D. King, A superlocal version of Reed’s conjecture, arXiv:1208.5188,
2012.
48. P. Erd˝os, Graph theory and probability, Canad. J. Math. 11 (1959), 34–38.
49. P. Erd˝os, A. I. Rubin and H. Taylor, Choosability in graphs, Proc. West-Coast Conf. on
Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Computing, Congr. Numer. XXVI (1979), 125–157.
50. P. Erd˝os, On some aspects of my work with Gabriel Dirac, Graph Theory in Memory
of G. A. Dirac (eds. L. D. Andersen et al.), Annals of Discrete Mathematics 41, North-
Holland (1989), 111–116.
51. L. Esperet, M. Montassier and X. Zhu, Adapted list coloring of planar graphs, J. Graph
Theory 62 (2009), 127–138.
52. S. Fadnavis, A generalization of the birthday problem and the chromatic polynomial,
arXiv:1105.0698v2, 2011.
53. G. Fan and A. Raspaud, Fulkerson’s conjecture and circuit covers, J. Combin. Theory (B)
61 (1994), 133–138.
54. T. Feder and C. Subi, On Barnette’s conjecture, Electron. Colloq. Comput. Complexity
15 (2006).
55. U. Feige, E. Ofek and U. Wieder, Approximating Maximum Edge Coloring in Multi-
graphs, Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci. 2462 (2002), 108–121.
56. J. L. Fouquet and J. M. Vanherpe, On the perfect matching index of bridgeless cubic
graphs, arXiv:0904.1296, 2009.
57. O. Frink, A proof of Petersen’s theorem, Ann. Math. 27 (1926), 491–493.
58. R. Fritsch and G. Fritsch, The Four Color Theorem: History, Topological Foundations
and Idea of Proof, Springer, 1998.
59. D. R. Fulkerson, Blocking and anti-blocking pairs of polyhedra, Math. Program. 1
(1971), 168–194.

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
353
60. F. G., Tinting maps, Athenæum 1389 (June 1854), 726.
61. T. Gallai, Kritische Graphen I, Publ. Math. Inst. Hungar. Acad. Sci. 8 (1963), 165–192.
62. F. Galvin, The list chromatic index of a bipartite multigraph, J. Combin. Theory (B) 63
(1995), 153–158.
63. M. Gardner, Martin Gardner Papers, Stanford University Department of Special
Collections, SC 647, Box 52, Folder 6, 1980.
64. M. Gardner, Mathematical games, Scientiﬁc American 242 (February 1980), 14–21.
65. M. K. Goldberg, On multigraphs of almost maximal chromatic class (in Russian),
Diskret. Analiz 23 (1973), 3–7.
66. M. K. Goldberg, Edge-coloring of multigraphs; recoloring technique, J. Graph Theory 8
(1984), 123–137.
67. G. Gonthier, Formal proof – the four-color theorem, Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 55 (11)
(2008), 1382–1393.
68. P. R. Goodey, Hamiltonian circuits in polytopes with even sides, Israel J. Math. 22
(1975), 52–56.
69. H. Gr¨otzsch, Zur Theorie der diskreten Gebilde, VII: Ein Dreifarbensatz f¨ur dreikreisfreie
Netze auf der Kugel, Wiss. Z. Martin-Luther-U., Halle-Wittenberg, Math.-Nat. Reihe 8
(1959), 109–120.
70. R. P. Gupta, On the chromatic index and the cover index of a multigraph, Theory and
Applications of Graphs (Michigan, 1976) (eds. A. Donald and B. Eckmann), Lecture
Notes in Math. 642, Springer (1978), 91–110.
71. A. Gy´arf´as, On Ramsey covering-numbers, Inﬁnite and Finite Sets, (Keszthely 1973)
(eds. A. Hajnal, R. Rado and V. T. S´os), Coll. Math. Soc. J´anos Bolyai 10, North-Holland
(1975), 801–816.
72. A. Gy´arf´as, Problems from the world surrounding perfect graphs, Zastos. Mat. XIX
(1987), 413–441.
73. A. Gy´arf´as and P. Erd˝os, Split and balanced colorings of complete graphs, Discrete Math.
200 (1999), 79–86.
74. H. Hadwiger, ¨Uber eine Klassiﬁkation der Streckenkomplexe, Vierteljschr. Naturforsch.
Ges. Z¨urich 88 (1943), 133–143.
75. A. Hajnal and E. Szemer´edi, Proof of a conjecture of Erd˝os, Inﬁnite and Finite Sets (eds.
P. Erd˝os, A. R´enyi and V. T. S´os), Coll. Math. Soc. J´anos Bolyai 10, North Holland
(1970), 601–623.
76. R. Hao, J. Niu, X. Wang, C. Q. Zhang and T. Zhang, A note on Berge–Fulkerson coloring,
Discrete Math. 309 (2009), 4235–4240.
77. P. Hell, Z. Pan, T.-L. Wong and X. Zhu, Adaptable chromatic number of graph products,
Discrete Math. 309 (2009), 6153–6159.
78. P. Hell and X. Zhu, On the adaptable chromatic number of graphs, Europ. J. Combin. 29
(2008), 912–921.
79. D. S. Hochbaum, T. Nishizeki and D. B. Shmoys, A better than ‘best possible’ algorithm
to edge color multigraphs, J. Algorithms 7 (1986), 79–104.
80. W. Hochst¨attler, A Hadwiger Conjecture for Hyperplane Arrangements, Technical report
feu-dmo018.09, FernUniversit¨at Hagen, 2009.
81. D. A. Holton, B. Manvel and B. D. McKay, Hamiltonian cycles in cubic 3-connected
bipartite planar graphs, J. Combin. Theory (B) 38 (1985), 279–297.
82. B. Jackson and G. Ringel, Variations on Ringel’s earth–moon problem, Discrete Math.
211 (2000), 233–242.
83. F. Jaeger, Nowhere-zero ﬂow problems, Selected Topics in Graph Theory 3 (eds.
L. W. Beineke and R. J. Wilson), Academic Press (1988), 71–95.
84. T. R. Jensen, Dense critical and vertex-critical graphs, Discrete Math. 258 (2002), 63–84.

354
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
85. T. R. Jensen and B. Toft, Graph Coloring Problems, Wiley, 1995.
86. J. Kahn, Asymptotically good list-colorings, J. Combin. Theory (A) 73 (1996), 1–59.
87. T. Kaiser, D. Kr´al’ and S. Norine, Unions of perfect matchings in cubic graphs, Topics in
Discrete Mathematics (eds. M. Klazar et al.), Springer (2006), 225–230.
88. T. Kaiser and R. ˇSkrekovski, Cycles intersecting edge-cuts of prescribed sizes, SIAM
J. Discrete Math. 22 (2008), 861–874.
89. H. Kaul, A. V. Kostochka and G. Yu, On a graph packing conjecture by Bollob´as,
Eldridge and Catlin, Combinatorica 28 (2008), 469–485.
90. K. Kawarabayashi, Minors in 7-chromatic graphs, preprint.
91. K. Kawarabayashi, A. S. Pedersen and B. Toft, Double-critical graphs and complete
minors, Electron. J. Combin. 17 (2010), R87.
92. K. Kawarabayashi, M. D. Plummer and B. Toft, Improvements of the theorem of Duchet
and Meyniel on Hadwiger’s conjecture, J. Combin. Theory (B) 95 (2005), 152–167.
93. K. Kawarabayashi and B. A. Reed, Hadwiger’s conjecture is decidable, Proc. 41st Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’09 (2009), 445–454.
94. K. Kawarabayashi and Z.-X. Song, Independence number and clique minors, J. Graph
Theory 56 (2007), 219–226.
95. K. Kawarabayashi and C. Thomassen, From the plane to higher surfaces, J. Combin.
Theory (B) 102 (2012), 852–868.
96. K. Kawarabayashi and B. Toft, Any 7-chromatic graph has K7 or K4,4 as a minor,
Combinatorica 25 (2005), 327–353.
97. A. K. Kelmans, Constructions of cubic bipartite 3-connected graphs without Hamiltonian
cycles, Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. 158 (1994), 127–140.
98. H. A. Kierstead and A. V. Kostochka, A short proof of the Hajnal–Szemer´edi theorem on
equitable colouring, Combin. Probab. Comput. 17 (2008), 265–270.
99. H. A. Kierstead and S. G. Penrice, Recent results on a conjecture of Gy´arf´as, Proc. 21st
S.-E. Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Computing (Baton Rouge, 1990)
(eds. F. Hoffman et al.), Congr. Numer. 79 (1990), 182–186.
100. H. A. Kierstead and S. G. Penrice, Radius two trees specify χ-bounded classes, J. Graph
Theory 18 (1994), 119–129.
101. H. A. Kierstead and W. T. Trotter, Planar graph coloring with an uncooperative
partner, Planar Graphs (ed. W. T. Trotter), DIMACS Series in Discrete Mathemat-
ics and Theoretical Computer Science 9, American Mathematical Society (1993),
85–93.
102. A. D. King, Claw-free Graphs and Two Conjectures on ω, , and χ, Ph.D. thesis, McGill
University, 2009.
103. H. Klein and M. Margraf, A remark on the conjecture of Erd˝os, Faber and Lov´asz,
J. Geom. 88 (2008), 116–119.
104. W. Klostermeyer and C. Q. Zhang, (2+ε)-coloring of planar graphs with large odd-girth,
J. Graph Theory 33 (2000), 109–119.
105. W. Knight, Computer generates veriﬁable mathematics proof, New Scientist Breaking
News, 19 April 2005.
106. M. Kochol, Cubic graphs without a Petersen minor have nowhere-zero 5-ﬂows, Acta
Math. Univ. Comenian. (N.S.) 68 (1999), 249–252.
107. M. Kochol, An equivalent version of the 3-ﬂow conjecture, J. Combin. Theory (B) 83
(2001), 258–261.
108. M. Kochol, Reduction of the 5-ﬂow conjecture to cyclically 6-edge-connected snarks,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 90 (2004), 139–145.
109. M. Kochol, Restrictions on smallest counterexamples to the 5-ﬂow conjecture, Combi-
natorica 26 (2006), 83–89.

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
355
110. D. K¨onig, Theorie der Endlichen und Unendlichen Graphen, Akademische Verlagsge-
sellschaft M. B. H. Leipzig, 1936; reprinted by Chelsea, 1950, and B. G. Teubner, 1986;
English transl., Birkh¨auser, 1990.
111. A. V. Kostochka and M. P. Yancey, Ore’s conjecture on color-critical graphs is almost
true, arXiv:1209.1050, 2012.
112. A. V. Kostochka and X. Zhu, Adapted list coloring of graphs and hypergraphs, SIAM
J. Discrete Math. 22 (2008), 398–408.
113. F. Kramer and H. Kramer, A survey on the distance-colouring of graphs, Discrete Math.
308 (2008), 422–426.
114. H.-J. Lai, X. Li and H. Poon, Nowhere zero 4-ﬂow in regular matroids, J. Graph Theory
49 (2005), 196–204.
115. L. Lov´asz, Tutte’s ﬂow conjectures, tlovering.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2012/06/ laszloes-
say.pdf, 2012.
116. L. Lov´asz, C. Thomassen, Y. Wu and C. Q. Zhang, Nowhere-zero 3-ﬂows and modulo
k-orientations, J. Combin. Theory (B) 103 (2013), 587–598.
117. A. Mansﬁeld, Determining the thickness of graphs is NP-hard, Math. Proc. Cambridge
Philos. Soc. 93 (1983), 9–23.
118. M. Matamala and J. Zamora, Nowhere-zero 5-ﬂows and even (1,2)-factors, Graphs
Combin. 29 (2013), 609–616.
119. G. Mazzuoccolo, The equivalence of two conjectures of Berge and Fulkerson, J. Graph
Theory 68 (2011), 125–128.
120. B. D. McKay, A note on the history of the four-colour conjecture, J. Graph Theory 72
(2013), 361–363.
121. M. Mirzakhani, A small non-4-choosable planar graph, Bull. Inst. Combin. Appl. 17
(1996), 15–18.
122. M. Molloy and B. A. Reed, A bound on the total chromatic number, Combinatorica 18
(1998), 241–280.
123. M. Molloy and B. A. Reed, Graph Colouring and the Probabilistic Method, Algorithms
and Combinatorics 23, Springer-Verlag, 2002.
124. M. Molloy and G. Thron, The adaptable choosability number grows with the choosability
number, Discrete Math. 311 (2011), 2268–2271.
125. M. Molloy and G. Thron, An asymptotically tight bound on the adaptable chromatic
number, J. Graph Theory 71 (2012), 331–351.
126. M. Montassier, A. Raspaud and X. Zhu, An upper bound on adaptive choosability of
graphs, Europ. J. Combin. 30 (2009), 351–355.
127. J. Neˇsetˇril and P. Ossona de Mendez, Grad and classes with bounded expansion III.
Restricted graph homomorphism dualities, Europ. J. Combin. 29 (2008), 1012–1024.
128. J. G. Oxley, Matroid Theory (2nd edn.), Oxford University Press, 2006.
129. V. Patel, Unions of perfect matchings in cubic graphs and implications of the Berge–
Fulkerson conjecture, CDAM Research Report LSE-CDAM-2006-06, 2006.
130. A. S. Pedersen and B. Toft, A basic elementary extension of the Duchet-Meyniel theorem,
Discrete Math. 310 (2010), 480–488.
131. J. Petersen, Die Theorie der regul¨aren Graphs, Acta Math. 15 (1891), 193–220.
132. M. D. Plummer, M. Stiebitz and B. Toft, On a special case of Hadwiger’s conjecture,
Discuss. Math. Graph Theory 23 (2003), 333–363.
133. B. A. Reed, ω, , and χ, J. Graph Theory 27 (1998), 177–212.
134. B. A. Reed, A strengthening of Brooks’ theorem, J. Combin. Theory (B) 76 (1999),
136–149.
135. G. Ringel, F¨arbungsprobleme auf Fl¨achen und Graphen, Math. Monographien 2, VEB
Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, 1959.

356
Tommy R. Jensen and Bjarne Toft
136. R. Rizzi, Approximating the maximum 3-edge-colorable subgraph problem, Discrete
Math. 309 (2009), 4166–4170.
137. N. Robertson, D. P. Sanders, P. D. Seymour and R. Thomas, The four-colour theorem,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 70 (1997), 2–44.
138. N. Robertson, P. D. Seymour and R. Thomas, Hadwiger’s conjecture for K6-free graphs,
Combinatorica 13 (1993), 279–361.
139. N. Robertson, P. D. Seymour and R. Thomas, Tutte’s edge-colouring conjecture,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 70 (1997), 166–183.
140. V. R¨odl, A. Ruci´nski and A. Taraz, Hypergraph packing and graph embedding, Combin.
Probab. Comput. 8 (1999), 363–376.
141. D. Romero and A. S´anchez-Arroyo, Advances on the Erd˝os–Faber–Lov´asz conjecture,
Combinatorics, Complexity and Chance: A Tribute to Dominic Welsh (eds. G. Grimmett
and C. McDiarmid), Oxford Univ. Press (2007), 285–298.
142. M. R. Salavatipour, The three color problem for planar graphs, Technical report CSRG-
458, Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, July 2002.
143. D. P. Sanders and Y. Zhao, A note on the three color problem, Graphs Combin. 11 (1995),
91–94.
144. N. W. Sauer, Vertex partition problems, Combinatorics, Paul Erd˝os is Eighty, 1 (eds.
D. Mikl´os, V. T. S´os and T. Sz˝onyi), Bolyai Society Mathematical Studies, J´anos Bolyai
Mathematical Society (1993), 361–377.
145. N. W. Sauer and J. H. Spencer, Edge-disjoint placements of graphs, J. Combin. Theory
(B) 15 (1978), 295–302.
146. A. Schrijver, Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedra and Efﬁciency, Algorithms and
Combinatorics 24, Springer, 2003.
147. P. D. Seymour, Some unsolved problems on 1-factorizations of graphs, Graph Theory
and Related Topics (Waterloo, Ontario, 1977) (eds. J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty),
Academic Press (1979), 367–368.
148. P. D. Seymour, On multi-colorings of cubic graphs, and conjectures of Fulkerson and
Tutte, Proc. London Math. Soc. 38 (1979), 423–460.
149. M. Simonovits, On colour-critical graphs, Studia Sci. Math. Hungar. 7 (1972), 67–81.
150. A. Soifer, The Mathematical Coloring Book, Springer, 2009.
151. E. Steffen, Tutte’s 5-ﬂow conjecture for graphs of nonorientable genus 5, J. Graph Theory
22 (1996), 309–319.
152. M. Stehlik, Minimal connected τ-critical hypergraphs, Graphs Combin. 22 (2006),
421–426.
153. R. Steinberg, The state of the three color problem, Quo Vadis, Graph Theory? (eds.
J. Gimbel, J. W. Kennedy and L. V. Quintas), Annals of Discrete Math. 55, North-Holland
(1993), 211–248.
154. J. P. Steinberger, An unavoidable set of D-reducible conﬁgurations, Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc. 362 (2010), 6633–6661.
155. M. Stiebitz, A relaxed version of the Erd˝os–Lov´asz Tihany conjecture, manuscript, TU
Ilmenau, 2011.
156. M. Stiebitz, D. Scheide, B. Toft and L. M. Favrholdt, Graph Edge Coloring, Wiley, 2012.
157. W. R. Stromquist, Some Aspects of the Four Color Problem, Ph.D. thesis, Harvard
University, 1975.
158. D. P. Sumner, Subtrees of a graph and chromatic number, Theory and Applications of
Graphs, Proc. 4th. International Graph Theory Conference (Kalamazoo, 1980) (eds.
G. Chartrand et al.), Wiley (1981), 557–576.
159. C. Thomassen, Every planar graph is 5-choosable, J. Combin. Theory (B) 62 (1994),
180–181.

15 Unsolved graph colouring problems
357
160. C. Thomassen, A short list color proof of Gr¨otzsch’s theorem, J. Combin. Theory (B) 88
(2003), 189–192.
161. C. Thomassen, The weak 3-ﬂow conjecture and the weak circular ﬂow conjecture,
J. Combin. Theory (B) 102 (2012), 521–529.
162. B. Toft, On the maximal number of edges of critical k-chromatic graphs, Studia Sci.
Math. 5 (1970), 461–470.
163. B. Toft, Two theorems on critical 4-chromatic graphs, Studia Sci. Math. 7 (1972), 83–89.
164. W. T. Tutte, A contribution to the theory of chromatic polynomials, Canad. J. Math. 6
(1954), 80–91.
165. W. T. Tutte, On the algebraic theory of graph colourings, J. Combin. Theory 1 (1966),
15–50.
166. W. T. Tutte, Colouring problems, Math. Intelligencer 1 (1978), 72–75.
167. V. G. Vizing, Some unsolved problems in graph theory (in Russian), Uspekhi Mat. Nauk.
23 (1968), 117–134; English transl. in Russian Math. Surveys 23 (1968), 125–141.
168. V. G. Vizing, Colouring the vertices of a graph in prescribed colours (in Russian), Diskret.
Analiz 29 (1976), 3–10.
169. M. Voigt, List colourings of planar graphs, Discrete Math. 120 (1993), 215–219.
170. K. Wagner, ¨Uber eine Eigenschaft der ebenen Komplexe, Math. Ann. 114 (1937),
570–590.
171. G. Wegner, Graphs with Given Diameter and a Coloring Problem, Technical report,
University of Dortmund, 1977.
172. R. Wilson, Four Colors Sufﬁce: How the Map Problem was Solved (revised color edn.),
Princeton Science Library, 2014.
173. C. Q. Zhang, Integer Flows and Cycle Covers of Graphs, Marcel Dekker, 1997.
174. C. Q. Zhang, Circular ﬂows of nearly Eulerian graphs and vertex-splitting, J. Graph
Theory 40 (2002), 147–161.
175. Y. Zhao, 3-coloring graphs embedded in surfaces, J. Graph Theory 32 (2000), 140–143.

Notes on contributors
Lowell Beineke is Schrey Professor of Mathematics at Indiana University–Purdue
University Fort Wayne (IPFW), where he has worked since receiving his Ph.D.
degree from the University of Michigan under the guidance of Frank Harary. His
graph theory interests include topological graph theory, line graphs, tournaments,
decompositions and vulnerability. He has published over a hundred papers in graph
theory and has served as Editor of the College Mathematics Journal. With Robin
Wilson he has co-edited ﬁve books in addition to the three earlier volumes in this
series. Recent honours include an award instituted in his name by the College of Arts
and Sciences at IPFW and a Certiﬁcate of Meritorious Service from the Mathematical
Association of America.
Csilla Bujt´as received her Ph.D. degree in 2009. She is currently an associate
professor at the University of Pannonia in Veszpr´em in Hungary, and is a member
of the research laboratory ‘Discrete Mathematical Structures and Algorithms’. Her
main ﬁeld of interest is graph and hypergraph theory from both a structural and
algorithmic viewpoint: this includes graph colouring, general models of hypergraph
colouring, independence and domination.
Dominique de Werra is Honorary Professor of Operations Research at the Ecole
Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne in Switzerland, where he taught graph and
network theory and operations research. His special interests are in the applications of
graphs to scheduling and timetabling, with an emphasis on sports-league schedules.
He serves as an associate editor of several journals, including Discrete Applied
Mathematics, and is the author of more than two hundred papers on graphs and their
applications.
Alain Hertz holds a diploma in mathematical engineering and obtained his Ph.D.
degree in operations research from the ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne in
Switzerland. Since 2001, he has been a professor at the department of mathematics
and industrial engineering at the ´Ecole Polytechnique in Montr´eal. He is also
member of the multi-disciplinary GERAD research group that includes nearly sixty

Notes on contributors
359
researchers and experts in operations research and discrete mathematics. He is the
author of almost two hundred scientiﬁc publications, and his main research areas
are combinatorial optimization, graph theory, algorithmics, and the development of
decision aid systems for scheduling and distribution problems.
Thore Husfeldt received his Ph.D. degree in computer science at Aarhus Uni-
versity, Denmark, for a thesis on the computational complexity of data struc-
tures. More recently, his research has focused on algorithms for computationally hard
problems – in particular, fundamental graph problems. He is a professor of computer
science at Lund University in Sweden and an associate professor at IT University
of Copenhagen in Denmark.
Bill Jackson received his Ph.D. degree from the University of Waterloo, Canada, in
1978 and then returned to England as a postdoctoral research fellow at the University
of Reading. He has lectured at the University of London since 1980 and is currently
Professor of Mathematical Sciences at Queen Mary. He has served on the British
Combinatorial Committee and is a member of the Egerv´ary Research Group at
E¨otv¨os University in Budapest. His research interests lie in graph theory, matroid
theory and discrete geometry.
Tommy R. Jensen is an associate professor of mathematics at Kyungpook National
University in Daegu, Republic of Korea. He received his Ph.D. degree from the
University of Southern Denmark and his habilitation degree from the University of
Hamburg in Germany. His main research interests include cycles and colourings of
graphs.
Ross J. Kang received his D.Phil. degree in 2008 from the University of Oxford.
Following brief stints at McGill University, Durham University, CWI Amsterdam and
Utrecht University, he is currently assistant professor at the Institute of Mathematics,
Astrophysics and Particle Physics (IMAPP) at Radboud University Nijmegen,
Netherlands. Aside from graph colouring, his research interests include probabilistic
and extremal combinatorics, discrete geometry and random graph theory.
Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi is a professor at the National Institute of Informatics in
Japan. His research interests are anything related to graphs, especially algorithmic
graph theory, structural graph theory, sports scheduling, graph database, AI and
machine learning. More recently, he has tackled several practical problems for large
graphs, including social networks and web graphs. Since 2012 he has been leading
a research centre with more than 65 people, whose purpose is to apply theoretical
research to hard practical problems.
Hong-Jian Lai is a professor of mathematics at West Virginia University. He
received his Ph.D. degree in mathematics at Wayne State University under Paul
Catlin, and was a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Waterloo under Adrian
Bondy. His research interests are mainly in graph theory, with an emphasis on

360
Notes on contributors
supereulerian graphs, Hamiltonian line graphs and claw-free graphs, nowhere-zero
ﬂows, group connectivity and group colorings.
Rong Luo is an associate professor of mathematics at West Virginia University,
from where he received his Ph. D. degree in 2002. Before returning there as a faulty
member, he worked for ten years at Middle Tennessee State University. His primary
research interests are in graph colorings, ﬂows, and combinatorial matrix theory.
Colin McDiarmid is Professor of Combinatorics at the University of Oxford and
a tutorial fellow of Corpus Christi College. He served for several years on the
British Combinatorial Committee, was recently Senior Tutor at Corpus and Head
of the Department of Statistics in Oxford, and has been on the Editorial Board of
many journals, including Combinatorics Probability and Computing, and Random
Structures and Algorithms. He has had a good crop of graduate students, and has
published around 150 papers in mathematical journals. Recurring themes in his
research over many years have been graph colouring, algorithms, and random graphs
of various kinds.
Jessica McDonald is an assistant professor in the Department of Mathematics and
Statistics at Auburn University. She received her Ph.D. degree from the University
of Waterloo in 2009 and held an NSERC postdoctoral fellowship at Simon Fraser
University, Canada, prior to joining the faculty at Auburn. Her research interests are
centred on graph theory, with two topics of particular interest being edge colouring
and immersion.
Bojan Mohar has a Canada Research Chair and is a professor at Simon Fraser
University, Canada, and at the University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. He has published
over two hundred research papers, in topological graph theory, graph minors, graph
colouring, graph algorithms and algebraic graph theory, and is co-author with
Carsten Thomassen of a monograph Graphs on Surfaces. In 1990 he was awarded
the Slovenian national prize for exceptional achievements in science, and in 2009
received the Ambassador of Science Award of the Republic of Slovenia. He is an
elected member of the Engineering Academy of Slovenia.
Alexander Soifer is a professor of mathematics, ﬁlm studies and art history at the
University of Colorado at Colorado Springs. In 1978 he left Russia in search of
freedom, and in 1988 was charmed by Paul Erd˝os into switching from group theory to
Euclidean Ramsey theory and Erd˝osian discrete geometry. His three hundred papers
and ten books include The Mathematical Coloring Book, and he co-authored and
edited Ramsey Theory Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow. He is President of the World
Federation of National Mathematics Competitions, which presented him with the
Paul Erd˝os Award at its 2006 Congress in Cambridge University. He is publisher and
editor of the quarterly journal Geombinatorics.

Notes on contributors
361
Michael Stiebitz is a graduate of the Humboldt University in Berlin, and since
1992 he has been Professor of Combinatorics at the Institute for Mathematics at
the Technical University Ilmenau. His main research interests lie in graph colouring
theory, and particularly in the structure of critical graphs. He has co-authored Graph
Edge Coloring: Vizing’s Theorem and Goldberg’s Conjecture.
BjarneToft obtained his Ph.D. degree from the University of London in 1970
and has taught mathematics at the University of Southern Denmark in Odense for
more than forty years. His main mathematical interests are in graph theory and
the history and popularization of mathematics. He is the author of around seventy
publications, including the book Graph Coloring Problems, written with Tommy
Jensen, containing two hundred unsolved problems. His popular lectures included
a ‘Golden Days in Copenhagen’ lecture at the Royal Library and a lecture for long-
term inmates in Nyborg State Prison. Since 2012 he has been chairman of the Danish
Mathematical Society.
Nicolas Trotignon graduated in economics and statistics in 1995 and in mathematics
(French aggregation) in 1997. From 1998 to 2005 he was a teacher of mathematics.
His Ph.D. degree, defended in 2004, was about perfect graphs and was written
under the supervision of Fr´ed´eric Maffray. In 2005 he became an assistant professor
in computer science at the Universit´e Panth´eon-Sorbonne, and obtained a position
as a CNRS researcher in 2008, in LIAFA, University Paris Diderot. Since 2011 he
has been a CNRS researcher at LIP, Ecole Normale Sup´erieure de Lyon. His main
interests are in algorithmic graph theory. He has published about twenty papers, about
half of which deal directly with perfect graphs.
Zsolt Tuza is a research professor at the Alfr´ed R´enyi Institute of Mathematics, Hun-
garian Academy of Sciences (formerly at the Computer and Automation Institute),
and also professor and head of the Research Laboratory ‘Discrete Mathematical
Structures and Algorithms’ at the University of Pannonia, Veszpr´em, Hungary. He
won a gold medal at the International Mathematical Olympiad in 1972, and has
published over 350 research papers on a wide range of topics: graph and hypergraph
colouring, extremal set theory, packing and covering, structural graph domination,
scheduling and bin packing, structural process control, developmental systems, and
more.
Margit Voigt is a professor of mathematics at the University of Applied Sciences
in Dresden, Germany. After studying at the University of Jena she worked there for
several years in the optimization of optical systems. She moved to the Technical
University Ilmenau in 1991, where she acquired her Ph.D. degree. After a post-
doctoral position (habilitation) she was a lecturer in Ilmenau until 2004. Her research
interests and publications are in graph theory, and more speciﬁcally in graph
colourings.

362
Notes on contributors
Vitaly I. Voloshin is a professor of Troy University, Alabama. For many years
he worked at Moldova State University and at the Institute of Mathematics and
Informatics of the Moldovan Academy of Sciences in the former Soviet Union,
before moving to the United States in 2002. His research areas include graph and
hypergraph colouring, theory, algorithms and applications. In 1993 he originated the
direction of mixed hypergraph colouring, and there are now more than two hundred
publications on the subject, including the author’s Fields Institute Monograph
Coloring Mixed Hypergraphs: Theory, Algorithms and Applications.
Robin Wilson is an emeritus professor of pure mathematics at the Open University,
UK, and emeritus professor of geometry at Gresham College, London. After graduat-
ing from Oxford, he received his Ph.D. degree in number theory from the University
of Pennsylvania. He has written and co-edited many books on graph theory and
the history of mathematics, including Introduction to Graph Theory, Four Colors
Sufﬁce and Combinatorics: Ancient & Modern. His combinatorial research interests
formerly included graph colourings and now focus on the history of combinatorics.
An enthusiastic populariser of mathematics, he has won two awards for his expository
writing from the Mathematical Association of America.
Cun-Quan Zhang is Eberly Professor of Mathematics at West Virginia University,
where he has taught since receiving his Ph.D. degree from Simon Fraser University
under the guidance of Brian Alspach. His graph theory interests are mainly in
chromatic graph theory and structural graph theory including graph colouring,
integer ﬂow, cycle covering and decomposition, matching covering, spanning trees,
Hamiltonian cycles and paths, and related optimisation problems. He has published
over eighty papers in graph theory, and has written two monographs, Integer Flows
and Cycle Covers of Graphs and Circuit Double Cover of Graphs.
Xuding Zhu is a Chinese National Chair Professor at Zhejiang Normal University.
He received his Ph.D. degree from the University of Calgary in 1991. He did
postdoctoral research at Simon Fraser University and the University of Bielefeld and
worked for many years at National Sun Yat-sen University in Taiwan before moving
to Zhejiang Normal University in mainland China in 2010. His research interests are
mainly in chromatic graph theory and he has published about two hundred research
papers on a wide range of topics, including circular colouring and circular ﬂow,
fractional colouring, game colouring, online list-colouring, graph homomorphisms,
graph decomposition, chromatic Ramsey theory, etc.

Index
1-factorization conjecture 106
2-core of graph 221
2-join of graph 143
2-section graph of hypergraph 237
3-ﬂow conjecture 183, 185, 328, 349
4-ﬂow conjecture 183, 185, 348
4-list-colourability 123
5-ﬂow conjecture 183, 187, 348
5-list colourability 122
5-list-colourability of planar graphs 327
6-realizable set 70
a.a.s. 200
achievement game 321
activation strategy 308
active vertex in game 309
acyclic chromatic number 29, 306
acyclic colouring 29
acyclic list-chromatic number 29
acyclic orientation game 322
acyclically choosable graph 29
adaptive chromatic number 332
adjacency lemma 106
adjacent edges 2
adjacent vertices 2
adjacent vertices in hypergraph 231
Albertson’s 4-colour problem 338
algorithm 79, 81, 109, 277ff
almost chromatic number 169
alternating path 97
Andersen’s conjecture 107
anti-concentration 208
anticonnected graph 139
antihole 138
antipath 139
anti-Sterboul cycle 235
arc 7
Artemis graph 154
asymmetric games 315
asymptotically almost surely 200
average degree conjecture 107
avoidance game 321
away game 268
balanced edge 348
balanced edge-colouring 270
balanced hypergraph 235
balanced partition 144, 213
bandwidth colouring 265
Barnette’s conjecture 336
basic graph 141, 142
batch colouring problem 258
Berge graph 138
Berge trigraph 152, 153
Berge-Fulkerson conjecture 345
bicolourable hypergraph 231
bi-hypergraph 243
bimodality 28
bipartite graph 3
bipartite representation of hypergraph
236
bipartition algorithm 281
block 8, 37
block of Steiner system 246

364
Index
blossom algorithm 109
boundary 191
bounded orientation 188
Brams’s problem 337
breadth-ﬁrst ordering 282
bridge 9
Brooks R. L. 50
Brooks’s theorem 10, 36ff, 37, 39
broom 331
brute force algorithm 277
cardinality of edge 231
Cartesian product 5, 311
centre 143
characteristic polynomial 65
choice number 12, 115
choice ratio 130
choice-perfect graph 133
choosability 88
choosability conjectures 118
choosable graph 12, 115
chromatic index 11, 94, 116, 223
chromatic index of hypergraph 235
chromatic inversion of hypergraph 244
chromatic number of graph 9, 131
chromatic number of hypergraph 231
chromatic number of surface 11ff
chromatic number of the plane 162, 165
chromatic polynomial 56ff
chromatic polynomial of hypergraph 231
chromatic root 60
chromatic scheduling 255ff
chromatic spectrum of hypergraph 244
chromatic-choosable graph 319
circuit 3
circular chromatic number 26
circular colouring 26
circular ﬂow 189
circular ﬂow index 26
circular hypergraph 231, 240
class 1 graph 105, 223
class 2 graph 105, 223
classiﬁcation problem 96, 105
class–teacher timetabling 256, 266, 271
claw-free graph 60, 85, 116
clean hole 151
cleaning technique 152
clique 2
clique number 2, 45
clique partition graph 331
closed walk 3
co-chromatic number 261
co-colouring 261
collapsible graph 191, 193
colour bounded hypergraph 248
colour class of hypergraph 231
colour list 12
colourable mixed hypergraph 243
colour-critical 19
colouring games 304ff
colouring graphs on surfaces 13ff
colouring number of graph 224, 307
colouring number of hypergraph 231
colouring of graph 9, 139
colouring of hypergraph 231
colouring of mixed hypergraph 233
colouring random graphs 199ff
colouring rate 208
colouring type 167
colouring with preferences 262
colouring-ﬂow duality 25
combinatorial algorithm 156
combinatorial Nullstellensatz 119
comet 331
compactness 273
complement 2-join 143
complement of graph 1
complete bipartite graph 4
complete graph 4
complete subset 139
complete uniform hypergraph 231
component 3
concentration 205
conjugate 63
connected component 3
connected graph 3

Index
365
connectivity 9
consecutive colouring 274
contains 138
contractible 6
contractible conﬁguration 191
contraction algorithm 284
contraction of an edge 6,155
contraction-critical graph 75
core of graph 106, 221
cover graph 323
covering number of hypergraph 332
C-perfect hypergraph 239
critical edge 106
critical graph 10, 40, 41, 107, 342
critical hypergraph 235
critical multigraph conjecture 107
crown graph 280
cubic graph 2
cut-edge 9
cut-vertex 8
cycle 3, 58
cycle double cover 194
cycle graph 4
cycle in hypergraph 235
cycle matroid 65
cycle space minor 196
cyclic compactness 274
cyclic interval colouring problem 258
cycloid 240
Dawson’s chess 322
decomposition 138, 142
decomposition theorem 138
defective colour 103
deﬁciency of graph 274
degeneracy 281
degenerate chromatic number 31
degenerate colouring 30, 31
degenerate graph 117
degenerate list-chromatic number 31
degree of vertex 2
degree of vertex in hypergraph 236
deletion of edge 5
deletion of vertex 5
deletion/contraction lemma 57
dense random graphs 202
density of graph 344
depth-ﬁrst ordering 282
diameter of graph 3
dichotomy of edge-colouring 108
digraph 7, 118
Dirac’s theorem 10
directed graph 7
disconnected graph 3
disjunctive pair 261
distance 3
domain of colouring 96
dominant pair 155
double diamond 147
double split graph 141
double star cutset 144
double-critical graph 331
doubled graph 142
dynamic programming 285
edge 1
edge of hypergraph 230
edge-chromatic number 11
edge-colouring 11, 94ff, 116, 223, 266,
344
edge-colouring algorithm 298
edge-colouring games 312
edge-colouring property in hypergraph
236
edge-connected 186
edge-connectivity 9
edge-critical graph 106
edge-disjoint placements 339
edge-list colouring 125
edge-set 1
edge-width 21
Edmonds’s blossom algorithm 109
Edmonds’s matching polytope theorem
108
elementary set 96
end-block 38

366
Index
end-vertex 2
equitable chromatic number 51, 222
equitable chromatic threshold 222
equitable colouring 51
equivalence of ﬂows 183
Erd˝os–Faber–Lov´asz problem 330
Erd˝os–Lov´asz Tihany conjecture 331
Erd˝os–R´enyi random graphs 201
Euler genus 18
Euler’s formula 18
Eulerian digraph 120
Eulerian graph 3
Eulerian trail 3
even 2-join 143
even pair 154
even subgraph 348
even-faced embedding 27
exhaustive search algorithm 277
expose-and-merge algorithm 208
extra-k-connected graph 76
extreme graph 103
factorization 106
fan 98, 290
fan inequality 100
Fan–Raspaud conjecture 346
feasible partition 244
ﬁnite projective plane 246
ﬁnitization of the four-colour problem
334
ﬁve-colour theorem 183
ﬂow 181ff, 348
ﬂow double covering 195
ﬂow index 26, 189
ﬂow polynomial 64
ﬂow problems 348
forbidden cycle 123
forest 3
four-colour problem 13, 333
four-colour theorem 16, 183, 327, 328
fractional choice number 320
fractional chromatic index 108
fractional colouring 89
fractional paint number 320
fringe of graph 221
Gallai–Roy theorem 260
game Grundy index 313
game-chromatic number 305, 315, 337
game-colouring number 307, 315
game-perfect graphs 311
games on digraphs 314
-connected 191
generalized theta graph 62
geometric graph 161ff
girth of graph 3
Gn,m model 200
Gn,p model 199
Goldberg’s conjectures 341, 345
Goldberg–Seymour conjecture 95, 101,
108
good colouring of hypergraph 237
good partition 142
graph 1
graph colouring algorithms 277ff
graph minor 74
greedy algorithm 204
greedy colouring 279
greedy colouring games 312
Gr¨otzsch’s theorem 23
group ﬂow 181
group structure 193
growth constant 219
Grundy index 313
Grundy number 304
Gy´arf´as’s forbidden subgraph conjecture
330
Gy´arf´as–Sumner conjecture 331
Hadwiger’s conjecture 73ff, 221, 328
Haj´os sum 41
Hamiltonian graph 3
Hasse diagram 250
Heawood problem 14
Heawood’s formula 18
Helly property 332

Index
367
hereditary property 224
Hilton graph 106
Hilton’s overfull conjecture 106
historical basic classes 141
hole 138
home game 268
homeomorphic graphs 6
homogeneous pair 143
host graph of hypergraph 231
hyperedge 230
hypergraph 230
hypergraph colouring 230ff
hyperstar 231
hypertree 231, 240
immersion 87
imperfect graph 137
imperfect hypergraph 239
impoverished graph 155
improper chromatic number 225
improper colouring 225, 242
inaccessible cardinal 176
incident 231
incident vertex and edge 2
inclusion–exclusion algorithm 289
in-degree 7, 118
independence number 2, 231
independence number conjecture
107
independent set 2, 85
independent set in hypergraph 231
independently-1-tough graph 62
induced subdigraph 118
induced subgraph 5
induced subhypergraph 239
inﬂation 131
integer ﬂow 181ff
internally disjoint paths 8
interval hypergraph 231, 240
I-regular colouring of hypergraph 238
isolated vertex 2
isomorphic graphs 2
join 2
join of graphs 5
k-choosable graph 12, 14, 115
k-colourable graph 9
k-colour-critical 19
k-connected graph 8
k-contraction-critical graph 75
k-critical graph 10, 19, 40, 342
k-degenerate colouring 30
k-degenerate graph 117
k-dimensional tree 4
k-edge-colourable graph 11
Kempe change 38, 97
Kempe equivalent colourings 110
kernel 118
kernel method 317
kernel-perfect digraph 118
k-ﬂow 182, 348
Kierstead path 98
Klein bottle 20
k-linked graph 77
k-list-colourable 12
k-list-critical graph 52
K¨onig property 236
K¨onig’s theorem 12, 94
k-regular graph 2
k-tree 4
largest-ﬁrst ordering 280
Lawler’s algorithm 287
L-colourable 115
L-colouring 12, 14, 114, 131
L-critical 132
leaf 2
leap for a path 148
l-edge-connected graph 9
length of walk 3
line graph 116
linear intersection number 330
list 14
list-assignment 114
list-chromatic index 116, 347

368
Index
list-chromatic number 12, 14, 50, 115,
131
list-colourable 115
list-colouring 12, 14, 88, 114ff
list-colouring of hypergraph 238
list-colouring problem 258
list-critical graph 52, 132
list-edge-colouring conjecture 116
list-square-colouring conjecture 117
local tension 27
locally planar graph 21
log concavity 59
loop 1
Lov´asz’s perfect graph theorem 141
lower chromatic number of hypergraph
244
major vertex 149
maker–breaker game 305
marked vertex in game 308
matching polytope 108
matroid 65
maximal independent set 286
maximal Kierstead 98
maximum average degree 122
maximum density 217
maximum independent set 38
measurable chromatic number 172
Menger’s theorem 8, 9
Metropolis algorithm 291
minimal list-critical 132
minimally imperfect graph 138
minor 6, 74, 328
minor vertex 149
missing colours 96
mixed graph colouring 260
mixed hypergraph 233, 243
mod-k-ﬂow 182
modulo k-orientation 186, 188, 190
monostar 239
monotone graph invariant 40
Mosers spindle 163
multicolouring problem 256
multiple edges 1
multiple edges of hypergraph 230
multiple of graph 103
multivariate Tutte polynomial 66
near-triangulation 15
neighbour 2
neighbourhood 2
neighbourhood in hypergraph 231
neighbours in hypergraph 231
Node Kayles 322
non-orientable surface 18
non-path 2-join 143
non-restrictive function 248
non-separable graph 8
nowhere-zero ﬂow 182, 184
null graph 4
odd 2-join 143
odd complete minor 82
odd conjecture 82
odd edge-connected 186
odd wheel 155
oddness of graph 187
Ohba’s conjecture 319
online chromatic number 304
open shop scheduling 266
optimal ordering 280
order of graph 1
order of hypergraph 230
order of separation 76
Ore’s conjecture 43
orientable surface 18
orientation 118
oriented game-chromatic number 314
out-degree 7, 118
overfull graph 106
packing density 218
paintability 316
painting game 317
palette restriction 283
pancyclic graph 3
parallel reduction operation 67
parity-breaking path 83

Index
369
partial edge-colouring 96
partial subhypergraph 236
partite sets 3
partitioning a set 164
path 3, 138
path cobipartite graph 154
path double-split graph 154
path graph 4
perfect graph 137ff
perfect graph theorem 140
perfect graph theorem for hypergraphs
236
perfect hypergraph 239
phantom vertices 248
phase transition 201, 211
planar bipartite graph 121
planar graph games 310
planar graph growth constant 219
planar hypergraph 237
planarity gadget 298
polychromatic number of the plane 162,
163, 167
polymer 63
Potts model 201
Potts model partition function 66
precedence constraints 260
precolouring extension 128, 321
probability colouring 343
product of ﬂows 184
proper class 328
P-uniform graph 343
random Cayley graph 216
random geometric graph 217
random graph theory 199
random regular graph 214
randomized rounding 294
realization of a trigraph 153
realizing a distance 162
reduction algorithms 297
Reed’s conjecture 341
regular graph 2
regular inﬁnite cardinal 176
relaxed games 316
replicating a vertex 140
replication lemma 140
restriction of hypergraph 235
Richter’s planar graph problem 126, 127
ring graph 121
Ringel’s earth–moon problem 336
Ringel–Youngs theorem 11
Rounded vector colouring 294
Roussel–Rubio lemma 148
satisﬁability 299
school timetabling problem 256, 266
separation 76
sequential colouring algorithm 37
series reduction operation 67
set of chromatic cardinalities 176
set system 230
Shannon’s theorem 95
sharp threshold 211
shortest-path detector 152
skew cutset 144
skew partition 144
smallest-last ordering 281
spanning subgraph 5
sparse random graphs 208
SPGT 137
spilling 263
split colouring problem 262
split graph 262
sports scheduling 268
square of graph 117, 337
stability number 2, 203, 231
stable set 2
stable set in hypergraph 231
stably bounded hypergraph 234, 247
star chromatic number 31
star colouring 31
star cutset 143
Stechkin’s construction 167
Steinberg’s 3-colour problem 335
Steinberg’s conjecture 125
Steiner system 246
strong choice-perfect graph 132

370
Index
strong chromatic number of hypergraph
237
strong colouring of hypergraph 237
strong component 7
strong digraph 7
strong limit 176
strong perfect graph theorem 137, 138,
328
strongly connected digraph 7
subdivision of an edge 6
subdivisions 86
subgraph 5
subgraph conditioning 215
subgraph expansion of chromatic
polynomial 59
sum of ﬂows 184
support 182
surface non-separating edge-width 21
switchable pair 153
Tashkinov tree 97, 98
Tashkinov’s theorem 98
tension 27
thickness of graph 336
three-colour theorem 183
threshold 211
total chromatic number 223, 341
total colouring 223
total colouring conjecture 341
total graph 116
totally odd subdivision 86
tough graph 61
traceable graph 3
trail 3
transversal of hypergraph 236
tree 3, 58
tree decomposition 79
tree-width 4
triangle-free graph 124
triangularly connected 192
trigraph 153
trivial graph 1
Tutte plane 69
Tutte polynomial 68
Tutte’s conjectures 182
Tutte’s ﬂow conjectures 328, 348, 349
type of graph 27
underlying graph 118
uniform hypergraph 231
uniform inﬂation 118, 131
union of graphs 5
uniquely colourable hypergraph 245
unit-distance graph 162
unsolved graph-colouring problems
327ff
upper chromatic number of hypergraph
238
useful decomposition 142
vector chromatic number 293
vector colouring 292
vertex colouring 9
vertex of digraph 7
vertex of graph 1
vertex of hypergraph 230
vertex-set 1
Vizing fan 98
Vizing’s adjacency lemma 106
Vizing’s algorithm 290
Vizing’s conjectures 107
Vizing’s theorem 95
walk 2
weak colouring of hypergraph 232
weak perfect graph theorem 140, 236
weighted graph 131
wheel 58
Whitney expansion 287
width of tree decomposition 79
Wigderson’s algorithm 283
WKBGSF 157
Wonderful lemma 148
worst-case asymptotic analysis 278
Zermelo–Fraenkel–Solovay system of
axioms 176
zero-free interval 61
zero-sum 191

