Michael Barr
Charles Wells
Toposes, Triples
and Theories
Version 1.1
10 September 2000
Copyright 2000 by Michael Barr and Charles Frederick Wells.
This version may be downloaded and printed in unmodiﬁed form for private use
only. It is available at http://www.cwru.edu/artsci/math/wells/pub/ttt.html
and ftp.math.mcgill.ca/pub/barr as any of the ﬁles ttt.dvi, ttt.ps, ttt.ps.zip,
ttt.pdf, ttt.pdf.zip.

Michael Barr
Peter Redpath Professor Emeritus of Mathematics, McGill University
barr@barrs.org
Charles Wells
Professor Emeritus of Mathematics, Case Western Reserve University
Aﬃliate Scholar, Oberlin College
charles@freude.com

To Marcia and Jane

Contents
Preface
vi
1. Categories
1
1.1
Deﬁnition of category
1
1.2
Functors
11
1.3
Natural transformations
16
1.4
Elements and Subobjects
20
1.5
The Yoneda Lemma
26
1.6
Pullbacks
29
1.7
Limits
35
1.8
Colimits
48
1.9
Adjoint functors
54
1.10
Filtered colimits
67
1.11
Notes to Chapter I
71
2. Toposes
74
2.1
Basic Ideas about Toposes
74
2.2
Sheaves on a Space
78
2.3
Properties of Toposes
86
2.4
The Beck Conditions
92
2.5
Notes to Chapter 2
95
3. Triples
97
3.1
Deﬁnition and Examples
97
3.2
The Kleisli and Eilenberg-Moore Categories
103
3.3
Tripleability
109
3.4
Properties of Tripleable Functors
122
3.5
Suﬃcient Conditions for Tripleability
128
3.6
Morphisms of Triples
130
3.7
Adjoint Triples
135
3.8
Historical Notes on Triples
142
4. Theories
144
4.1
Sketches
145
4.2
The Ehresmann-Kennison Theorem
149
4.3
Finite-Product Theories
152
4.4
Left Exact Theories
158
4.5
Notes on Theories
170
iv

5. Properties of Toposes
173
5.1
Tripleability of P
173
5.2
Slices of Toposes
175
5.3
Logical Functors
178
5.4
Toposes are Cartesian Closed
183
5.5
Exactness Properties of Toposes
186
5.6
The Heyting Algebra Structure on Ω
193
6. Permanence Properties of Toposes
198
6.1
Topologies
198
6.2
Sheaves for a Topology
203
6.3
Sheaves form a topos
209
6.4
Left exact cotriples
211
6.5
Left exact triples
215
6.6
Categories in a Topos
220
6.7
Grothendieck Topologies
226
6.8
Giraud’s Theorem
231
7. Representation Theorems
240
7.1
Freyd’s Representation Theorems
240
7.2
The Axiom of Choice
245
7.3
Morphisms of Sites
249
7.4
Deligne’s Theorem
256
7.5
Natural Number Objects
257
7.6
Countable Toposes and Separable Toposes
265
7.7
Barr’s Theorem
272
7.8
Notes to Chapter 7
274
8. Cocone Theories
277
8.1
Regular Theories
277
8.2
Finite Sum Theories
280
8.3
Geometric Theories
282
8.4
Properties of Model Categories
284
9. More on Triples
291
9.1
Duskin’s Tripleability Theorem
291
9.2
Distributive Laws
299
9.3
Colimits of Triple Algebras
304
9.4
Free Triples
309
Bibliography
317
Index
323

Preface
Preface to Version 1.1
This is a corrected version of the ﬁrst (and only) edition of the text, published by
in 1984 by Springer-Verlag as Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften
278. It is available only on the internet, at the locations given on the title page.
All known errors have been corrected. The ﬁrst chapter has been partially
revised and supplemented with additional material. The later chapters are es-
sentially as they were in the ﬁrst edition. Some additional references have been
added as well (discussed below).
Our text is intended primarily as an exposition of the mathematics, not a
historical treatment of it. In particular, if we state a theorem without attribution
we do not in any way intend to claim that it is original with this book. We
note speciﬁcally that most of the material in Chapters 4 and 8 is an extensive
reformulation of ideas and theorems due to C. Ehresmann, J. B´enabou, C. Lair
and their students, to Y. Diers, and to A. Grothendieck and his students. We
learned most of this material second hand or recreated it, and so generally do not
know who did it ﬁrst. We will happily correct mistaken attributions when they
come to our attention.
The bibliography
We have added some papers that were referred to in the original text but
didn’t make it into the bibliography, and also some texts about the topics herein
that have been written since the ﬁrst edition was published. We have made no
attempt to include research papers written since the ﬁrst edition.
vi

vii
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the following people who pointed out errors in the ﬁrst
edition: D. ˇCubri´c, Samuel Eilenberg, Felipe Gago-Cuso, B. Howard, Peter John-
stone, Christian Lair, Francisco Marmolejo, Colin McLarty, Jim Otto, Vaughan
Pratt, Dwight Spencer, and Fer-Jan de Vries.
When (not if) other errors are discovered, we will update the text and increase
the version number. Because of this, we ask that if you want a copy of the text,
you download it from one of our sites rather than copying the version belonging
to someone else.
Preface to the First Edition
A few comments have been added, in italics, to the original preface. As its title
suggests, this book is an introduction to three ideas and the connections between
them.
Before describing the content of the book in detail, we describe each
concept brieﬂy. More extensive introductory descriptions of each concept are in
the introductions and notes to Chapters 2, 3 and 4.
A topos is a special kind of category deﬁned by axioms saying roughly that
certain constructions one can make with sets can be done in the category. In that
sense, a topos is a generalized set theory. However, it originated with Grothen-
dieck and Giraud as an abstraction of the properties of the category of sheaves
of sets on a topological space. Later, Lawvere and Tierney introduced a more
general idea which they called “elementary topos” (because their axioms were
ﬁrst order and involved no quantiﬁcation over sets), and they and other math-
ematicians developed the idea that a theory in the sense of mathematical logic
can be regarded as a topos, perhaps after a process of completion.
The concept of triple originated (under the name “standard constructions”)
in Godement’s book on sheaf theory for the purpose of computing sheaf cohomol-
ogy. Then Peter Huber discovered that triples capture much of the information
of adjoint pairs. Later Linton discovered that triples gave an equivalent approach
to Lawvere’s theory of equational theories (or rather the inﬁnite generalizations
of that theory). Finally, triples have turned out to be a very important tool for
deriving various properties of toposes.
Theories, which could be called categorical theories, have been around in one
incarnation or another at least since Lawvere’s Ph.D. thesis. Lawvere’s original
insight was that a mathematical theory—corresponding roughly to the deﬁnition
of a class of mathematical objects—could be usefully regarded as a category with

viii
structure of a certain kind, and a model of that theory—one of those objects—
as a set-valued functor from that category which preserves the structure. The
structures involved are more or less elaborate, depending on the kind of objects
involved. The most elaborate of these use categories which have all the structure
of a topos.
Chapter 1 is an introduction to category theory which develops the basic
constructions in categories needed for the rest of the book.
All the category
theory the reader needs to understand the book is in it, but the reader should
be warned that if he has had no prior exposure to categorical reasoning the book
might be tough going. More discursive treatments of category theory in general
may be found in Borceux [1994], Mac Lane [1998], and Barr and Wells [1999];
the last-mentioned could be suitably called a prequel to this book.
Chapters 2, 3 and 4 introduce each of the three topics of the title and develop
them independently up to a certain point. Each of them can be read immediately
after Chapter 1. Chapter 5 develops the theory of toposes further, making heavy
use of the theory of triples from Chapter 3. Chapter 6 covers various fundamen-
tal constructions which give toposes, with emphasis on the idea of “topology”,
a concept due to Grothendieck which enables us through Giraud’s theorem to
partially recapture the original idea that toposes are abstract sheaf categories.
Chapter 7 provides the basic representation theorems for toposes. Theories are
then carried further in Chapter 8, making use of the representation theorems and
the concepts of topology and sheaf. Chapter 9 develops further topics in triple
theory, and may be read immediately after Chapter 3. Thus in a sense the book,
except for for Chapter 9, converges on the exposition of theories in Chapters 4
and 8. We hope that the way the ideas are applied to each other will give a
coherence to the many topics discussed which will make them easier to grasp.
We should say a word about the selection of topics. We have developed the in-
troductory material to each of the three main subjects, along with selected topics
for each. The connections between theories as developed here and mathematical
logic have not been elaborated; in fact, the point of categorical theories is that
it provides a way of making the intuitive concept of theory precise without using
concepts from logic and the theory of formal systems. The connection between
topos theory and logic via the concept of the language of a topos has also not
been described here. Categorical logic is the subject of the book by J. Lambek
and P. Scott [1986] which is nicely complementary to our book.
Another omission, more from lack of knowledge on our part than from any
philosophical position, is the intimate connection between toposes and algebraic
geometry. In order to prevent the book from growing even more, we have also
omitted the connection between triples and cohomology, an omission we particu-
larly regret. This, unlike many advanced topics in the theory of triples, has been

ix
well covered in the literature. See also the forthcoming book, Acyclic Models, by
M. Barr.
Chapters 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7 thus form a fairly thorough introduction to the theory
of toposes, covering topologies and the representation theorems but omitting the
connections with algebraic geometry and logic. Adding chapters 4 and 8 provides
an introduction to the concept of categorical theory, again without the connection
to logic. On the other hand, Chapters 3 and 9 provide an introduction to the
basic ideas of triple theory, not including the connections with cohomology.
It is clear that among the three topics, topos theory is “more equal” than
the others in this book. That reﬂects the current state of development and, we
believe, importance of topos theory as compared to the other two.
Foundational questions
It seems that no book on category theory is considered complete without some
remarks on its set-theoretic foundations. The well-known set theorist Andreas
Blass gave a talk (published in Gray [1984]) on the interaction between category
theory and set theory in which, among other things, he oﬀered three set-theoretic
foundations for category theory. One was the universes of Grothendieck (of which
he said that one advantage was that it made measurable cardinals respectable in
France) and another was systematic use of the reﬂection principle, which probably
does provide a complete solution to the problem; but his ﬁrst suggestion, and one
that he clearly thought at least reasonable, was: None. This is the point of view
we shall adopt.
For example, we regard a topos as being deﬁned by its elementary axioms,
saying nothing about the set theory in which its models live. One reason for our
attitude is that many people regard topos theory as a possible new foundation
for mathematics. When we refer to “the category of sets” the reader may choose
between thinking of a standard model of set theory like ZFC and a topos satisfying
certain additional requirements, including at least two-valuedness and choice.
We will occasionally use procedures which are set-theoretically doubtful, such
as the formation of functor categories with large exponent. However, our conclu-
sions can always be justiﬁed by replacing the large exponent by a suitable small
subcategory.
Terminology and notation
With a few exceptions, we usually use established terminology and standard
notation; deviations from customary usage add greatly to the diﬃculties of the

x
reader, particularly the reader already somewhat familiar with the subject, and
should be made only when the gain in clarity and eﬃciency are great enough to
overcome the very real inconvenience they cause. In particular, in spite of our
recognition that there are considerable advantages to writing functions on the
right of the argument instead of the left and composing left to right, we have
conformed reluctantly to tradition in this respect: in this book, functions are
written on the left and composition is read right to left.
We often say “arrow” or “map” for “morphism”, “source” for “domain” and
“target” for “codomain”.
We generally write “αX” instead of “αX” for the
component at X of the natural transformation α, which avoids double subscripts
and is generally easier to read. It also suppresses the distinction between the
component of a natural transformation at a functor and a functor applied to a
natural transformation. Although these two notions are semantically distinct,
they are syntactically identical; much progress in mathematics comes about from
muddying such distinctions.
Our most signiﬁcant departures from standard terminology are the adoption
of Freyd’s use of “exact” to denote a category which has all ﬁnite limits and
colimits or for a functor which preserves them and the use of “sketch” in a sense
diﬀerent from that of Ehresmann. Our sketches convey the same information
while being conceptually closer to naive theories.
There are two diﬀerent categories of toposes: one in which the geometric
aspect is in the ascendent and the other in which the logic is predominant. The
distinction is analogous to the one between the categories of complete Heyting
algebras and that of locales. Thinking of toposes as models of a theory emphasizes
the second aspect and that is the point of view we adopt. In particular, we use the
term “subtopos” for a subcategory of a topos which is a topos, which is diﬀerent
from the geometric usage in which the right adjoint is supposed an embedding.
Historical notes
At the end of many of the chapters we have added historical notes. It should
be understood that these are not History as that term is understood by the
historian. They are at best the raw material of history.
At the end of the ﬁrst draft we made some not very systematic attempts to
verify the accuracy of the historical notes. We discovered that our notes were
divided into two classes: those describing events that one of us had directly partic-
ipated in and those that were wrong! The latter were what one might conjecture
on the basis of the written record, and we discovered that the written record is
invariably misleading. Our notes now make only statements we could verify from

xi
the participants. Thus they are incomplete, but we have some conﬁdence that
those that remain have some relation to the actual events.
What is expected from the reader
We assume that the reader is familiar with concepts typically developed in
ﬁrst-year graduate courses, such as group, ring, topological space, and so on.
The elementary facts about sheaves which are needed are developed in the book.
The reader who is familiar with the elements of category theory including adjoint
functors can skip nearly all of Chapter 1; he may need to learn the element
notation introduced in Section 1.4 and the square bracket notation deﬁned in
Sections 1.6 and 1.7.
Most of the exercises provide examples or develop the theory further. We
have mostly avoided including exercises asking for routine veriﬁcations or giving
trivial examples. On the other hand, most routine veriﬁcations are omitted from
the text; usually, in a proof, the basic construction is given and the veriﬁcation
that it works is left to the reader (but the ﬁrst time a veriﬁcation of a given
type is used it is given in more detail). This means that if you want to gain a
thorough understanding of the material, you should be prepared to stop every
few sentences (or even every sentence) and verify the claims made there in detail.
You should be warned that a statement such as, “It is easy to see...” does not
mean it is necessarily easy to see without pencil and paper!
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Barry Jay, Peter Johnstone, Anders Linn´er, John A. Power
and Philip Scott for reading portions of the manuscript and making many correc-
tions and suggestions for changes; we are particularly grateful to Barry Jay, who
up to two weeks before the ﬁnal printout was still ﬁnding many obscurities and ty-
poes and some genuine mathematical errors. We have beneﬁted from stimulating
and informative discussions with many people including, but not limited to Marta
Bunge, Radu Diaconescu, John W. Duskin, Michael Fourman, Peter Freyd, John
Gray, Barry Jay, Peter Johnstone, Andr´e Joyal, Joachim Lambek, F. William
Lawvere, Colin McLarty, Michael Makkai and Myles Tierney. We would like to
give especial thanks to Roberto Minio who expended enormous eﬀort in turn-
ing a string of several million zeroes and ones into the text you see before you;
John Aronis also helped in this endeavor, which took place at Carnegie-Mellon
University with the encouragement and cooperation of Dana Scott.
We are also grateful to Beno Eckmann, who brought us together at the
Forschungsinstitut f¨ur Mathematik, ETH Z¨urich.
If Eilenberg and Mac Lane

xii
were the fathers of categorical algebra, Eckmann was in a very real sense the
godfather. Many of the most important developments in categorical algebra and
categorical logic took place in the oﬃces of the Forschungsinstitut, which was
then on Zehnderweg.
Portions of this book were written while both authors were on sabbatical
leave from their respective institutions. The ﬁrst author was supported during
the writing by grants from the National Science and Engineering Research Coun-
cil, by a team grant from the Minist`ere de l’´Education du Qu´ebec and by a grant
to the Groupe Interuniversitaire en ´Etudes Cat´egories, also from the Minist`ere de
l’´Education du Qu´ebec. The second author was partially supported by DOE con-
tract DE-AC01-80RA5256. In addition we received considerable free computing
time from the McGill University Computing Centre.

xiii
Chapter dependency chart
9
5
3
      @
@
@
@
@
@
2
1
      6
7
8
             4
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@


1
Categories
1.1 Deﬁnition of category
A category C consists of two collections, Ob(C ), whose elements are the objects
of C , and Ar(C ), the arrows (or morphisms or maps) of C . To each arrow
is assigned a pair of objects, called the source (or domain) and the target (or
codomain) of the arrow. The notation f: A −→B means that f as an arrow
with source A and target B. If f: A −→B and g: B −→C are two arrows, there
is an arrow g ◦f: A −→C called the composite of g and f. The composite is
not deﬁned otherwise. We often write gf instead of g ◦f when there is no danger
of confusion. For each object A there is an arrow idA (often written 1A or just
1, depending on the context), called the identity of A, whose source and target
are both A. These data are subject to the following axioms:
1. for f: A −→B,
f ◦idA = idB ◦f = f;
2. for f: A −→B, g: B −→C, h: C −→D,
h ◦(g ◦f) = (h ◦g) ◦f
A category consists of two “collections”, the one of sets and the one of arrows.
These collections are not assumed to be sets and in many interesting cases they
are not, as will be seen. When the set of arrows is a set then the category is said
to be small. It follows in that case that the set of objects is also a set since there
is one-one correspondence between the objects and the identity arrows.
While we do not suppose in general that the arrows form a set, we do usually
suppose (and will, unless it is explicitly mentioned to the contrary) that when we
ﬁx two objects A and B of C , that the set of arrows with source A and target B
is a set. This set is denoted HomC(A, B). We will omit the subscript denoting
the category whenever we can get away with it. A set of the form Hom(A, B)
is called a homset. Categories that satisfy this condition are said to be locally
small.
Many familiar examples of categories will occur immediately to the reader,
such as the category Set of sets and set functions, the category Grp of groups
1

2
1 Categories
and homomorphisms, and the category Top of topological spaces and continuous
maps. In each of these cases, the composition operation on arrows is the usual
composition of functions.
A more interesting example is the category whose objects are topological
spaces and whose arrows are homotopy classes of continuous maps. Because ho-
motopy is compatible with composition, homotopy classes of continuous functions
behave like functions (they have sources and targets, they compose, etc.) but are
not functions. This category is usually known as the category of homotopy types.
All but the last example are of categories whose objects are sets with mathe-
matical structure and the morphisms are functions which preserve the structure.
Many mathematical structures are themselves categories. For example, one can
consider any group G as a category with exactly one object; its arrows are the
elements of G regarded as having the single object as both source and target.
Composition is the group multiplication, and the group identity is the identity
arrow. This construction works for monoids as well. In fact, a monoid can be
deﬁned as a category with exactly one object.
A poset (partially ordered set) can also be regarded as a category: its objects
are its elements, and there is exactly one arrow from an element x to an element
y if and only if x ≤y; otherwise there are no arrows from x to y. Composition
is forced by transitivity and identity arrows by reﬂexivity. Thus a category can
be thought of as a generalized poset. This perception is important, since many
of the fundamental concepts of category theory specialize to nontrivial and often
well-known concepts for posets (the reader is urged to ﬁll in the details in each
case).
In the above examples, we have described categories by specifying both their
objects and their arrows. Informally, it is very common to name the objects only;
the reader is supposed to supply the arrows based on his general knowledge. If
there is any doubt, it is, of course, necessary to describe the arrows as well.
Sometimes there are two or more categories in general use with the same objects
but diﬀerent arrows. For example, the following three categories all have the same
objects: complete sup-semilattices, complete inf-semilattices, complete lattices.
Further variations can be created according as the arrows are required to preserve
the top (empty inf) or bottom (empty sup) or both.
Some constructions for categories
A subcategory D of a category C is a pair of subsets DO and DA of the
objects and arrows of C respectively, with the following properties.
1. If f ∈DA then the source and target of f are in DO.

1.1 Deﬁnition of category
3
2. If C ∈DO, then idC ∈DA.
3. If f, g ∈DA are a composable pair of arrows then g ◦f ∈DA.
The subcategory is full if for any C, D ∈DO, if f: C −→D in C , then
f ∈DA. For example, the category of Abelian groups is a full subcategory of the
category of groups (every homomorphism of groups between Abelian groups is a
homomorphism of Abelian groups), whereas the category of monoids (semigroups
with identity element) is a subcategory, but not a full subcategory, of the category
of semigroups (a semigroup homomorphism need not preserve 1).
One also constructs the product C × D of two categories C and D in the
obvious way: the objects of C × D are pairs (A, B) with A an object of C and
B an object of D. An arrow
(f, g): (A, B) −→(A′, B′)
has f: A −→A′ in C and g: B −→B′ in D. Composition is coordinatewise.
To deﬁne the next concept, we need the idea of commutative diagram. A
diagram is said to commute if any two paths between the same nodes compose
to give the same morphism. The formal deﬁnition of diagram and commutative
diagram is given in 1.7.
If A is any object of a category C , the slice category C /A of objects of C
over A has as objects all arrows of C with target A. An arrow of C /A from
f: B −→A to g: C −→A is an arrow h: B −→C making the following diagram
commute.
B
C
-
h
A
f
@
@
@@
R
g
    	
In this case, one sometimes writes h: f −→g over A.
It is useful to think of an object of Set/A as an A-indexed family of disjoint
sets (the inverse images of the elements of A). The commutativity of the above
diagram means that the function h is consistent with the decomposition of B and
C into disjoint sets.
Deﬁnitions without using elements
The introduction of categories as a part of the language of mathematics has
made possible a fundamental, intrinsically categorical technique: the element-free
deﬁnition of mathematical properties by means of commutative diagrams, limits

4
1 Categories
and adjoints. (Limits and adjoints are deﬁned later in this chapter.) By the use
of this technique, category theory has made mathematically precise the unity of a
variety of concepts in diﬀerent branches of mathematics, such as the many prod-
uct constructions which occur all over mathematics (described in Section 1.7) or
the ubiquitous concept of isomorphism, discussed below. Besides explicating the
unity of concepts, categorical techniques for deﬁning concepts without mention-
ing elements have enabled mathematicians to provide a useful axiomatic basis for
algebraic topology, homological algebra and other theories.
Despite the possibility of giving element-free deﬁnitions of these constructions,
it remains intuitively helpful to think of them as being deﬁned with elements.
Fortunately, this can be done: In Section 1.4, we introduce a more general notion
of element of an object in a category (more general even when the category is
Set) which in many circumstances makes categorical deﬁnitions resemble familiar
deﬁnitions involving elements of sets, and which also provides an explication of
the old notion of variable quantity.
Isomorphisms and terminal objects
The notion of isomorphism can be given an element-free deﬁnition for any
category: An arrow f: A −→B in a category is an isomorphism if it has an
inverse, namely an arrow g: B −→A for which f ◦g = idB and g ◦f = idA. In
other words, both triangles of the following diagram must commute:
A
B
-
f
A
B
-
f
?
id
?
id
g
    	
In a group regarded as a category, every arrow is invertible, whereas in a poset
regarded as a category, the only invertible arrows are the identity arrows (which
are invertible in any category).
It is easy to check that an isomorphism in Grp is what is usually called an
isomorphism (commonly deﬁned as a bijective homomorphism, but some newer
texts give the deﬁnition above). An isomorphism in Set is a bijective function,
and an isomorphism in Top is a homeomorphism.
Singleton sets in Set can be characterized without mentioning elements, too.
A terminal object in a category C is an object T with the property that for
every object A of C there is exactly one arrow from A to T. It is easy to see

1.1 Deﬁnition of category
5
that terminal objects in Set, Top, and Grp are all one element sets with the only
possible structure in the case of the last two categories.
Duality
If C is a category, then we deﬁne C op to be the category with the same objects
and arrows as C , but an arrow f: A −→B in C is regarded as an arrow from B
to A in C op. In other words, for all objects A and B of C ,
HomC(A, B) = HomC op(B, A)
If f: A −→B and g: B −→C in C , then the composite f ◦g in C op is by deﬁnition
the composite g ◦f in C . The category C op is called the opposite category of
C .
If P is a property that objects or arrows in a category may have, then the
dual of P is the property of having P in the opposite category. As an example,
consider the property of being a terminal object. If an object A of a category C
is a terminal object in C op, then HomC(B, A) has exactly one arrow for every
object B of C . Thus the dual property of being a terminal object is the property:
Hom(A, B) has exactly one arrow for each object B.
An object A with this
property is called an initial object. In Set and Top, the empty set is the initial
object (see “Fine points” on page 7). In Grp, on the other hand, the one-element
group is both an initial and a terminal object.
Clearly if property P is dual to property Q then property Q is dual to property
P. Thus being an initial object and being a terminal object are dual properties.
Observe that being an isomorphism is a self-dual property.
Constructions may also have duals. For example, the dual to the category of
objects over A is the category of objects under A. An object is an arrow from
A and an arrow from the object f: A −→B to the object g: A −→C is an arrow
h from B to C for which h ◦f = g.
Often a property and its dual each have their own names; when they don’t
(and sometimes when they do) the dual property is named by preﬁxing “co-”.
For example, one could, and some sources do, call an initial object “coterminal”,
or a terminal object “coinitial”.
Deﬁnition of category by commutative diagrams
The notion of category itself can be deﬁned in an element-free way.
We
describe the idea behind this alternative deﬁnition here, but some of the sets we

6
1 Categories
construct are deﬁned in terms of elements. In Section 1.6, we show how to deﬁne
these sets without mentioning elements (by pullback diagrams).
Before giving the deﬁnition, we mention several notational conventions that
will recur throughout the book.
1. If X and Y are sets, p1: X ×Y −→X and p2: X ×Y −→Y are the coordinate
projections.
2. If X, Y and Z are sets and f: X −→Y , g: X −→Z are functions,
(f, g): X −→Y × Z
is the function whose value at a ∈X is (f(a), g(a)).
3. If X, Y , Z, and W are sets and f: X −→Z, g: Y −→W are functions, then
f × g: X × Y −→Z × W
is the function whose value at (a, b) is (f(a), g(b)). This notation is also
used for maps deﬁned on subsets of product sets (as in 4 below).
A category consists of two sets A and O and four functions d0, d1: A −→O,
u: O −→A and m: P −→A, where P is the set
{(f, g) | d0(f) = d1(g)}
of composable pairs of arrows for which the following Diagrams 1–4 commute.
For example, the left diagram of 2 below says that d0 ◦p1 = d0 ◦m. We will treat
diagrams more formally in Section 1.7.
O
d0
@
@
@@
R
A
O
-
u
A
 u
?
idO
d1
    	
(1)
This says that the source and target of idX is X.
A
O
-
d0
P
A
-
p2
?
m
?
d0
A
O
-
d1
P
A
-
p1
?
m
?
d1
(2)

1.1 Deﬁnition of category
7
This says that the source of f ◦g is that of g and its target is that of f.
A
idA
@
@
@
@
@
@@
R
A
P
-
(u ◦d0, 1)
A
 (1, u ◦d1)
?
m
idA
       	
(3)
This characterizes the left and right identity laws.
In the next diagram, Q is the set of composable triples of arrows:
Q = {(f, g, h) | d1(h) = d0(g) and d1(g) = d0(f)}
P
A
-
m
Q
P
-
1 × m
?
m × 1
?
m
(4)
This is associativity of composition.
It is straightforward to check that this deﬁnition is equivalent to the ﬁrst one.
The diagrams just given actually describe geometric objects, namely the clas-
sifying space of the category.
Indeed, the functions between O, A, P and Q
generated by u, d0, d1, m and the coordinate maps form a simplicial set trun-
cated in dimension three. The reader needs no knowledge of simplicial sets for
this text.
Fine points
Note that a category may be empty, that is have no objects and (of course)
no arrows. Observe that a subcategory of a monoid regarded as a category may
be empty; if it is not empty, then it is a submonoid. This should cause no more
diﬃculty than the fact that a submonoid of a group may not be a subgroup. The
basic reason is that a monoid must have exactly one object, while a subcategory
need not have any.
It is important to observe that in categories such as Set, Grp and Top in which
the arrows are actually functions, the deﬁnition of category requires that the
function have a uniquely speciﬁed domain and codomain, so that for example

8
1 Categories
in Top the continuous function from the set R of real numbers to the set R+ of
nonnegative real numbers which takes a number to its square is diﬀerent from the
function from R to R which does the same thing, and both of these are diﬀerent
from the squaring function from R+ to R+.
A deﬁnition of “function” in Set which ﬁts this requirement is this: A func-
tion is an ordered triple (A, G, B) where A and B are sets and G is a subset of
A×B with the property that for each x ∈A there is exactly one y ∈B such that
(x, y) ∈G. This is equivalent to saying that the composite
G ⊂→A × B −→A
is an isomorphism (the second function is projection on the ﬁrst coordinate).
Then the domain of the function is the set A and the codomain is B.
As a
consequence of this deﬁnition, A is empty if and only if G is empty, but B may
or may not be empty. Thus there is exactly one function, namely (∅, ∅, B), from
the empty set to each set B, so that the empty set is the initial object in Set,
as claimed previously. (Note also that if (A, G, B) is a function then G uniquely
determines A but not B. This asymmetry is reversed in the next paragraph.)
An equivalent deﬁnition of function is a triple (A, G∗, B) where G∗is the
quotient of the disjoint union A + B by an equivalence relation for which each
element of B is contained in exactly one equivalence class. In other words, the
composite
B −→A + B −→→G∗
is an isomorphism, where the ﬁrst arrow is the inclusion into the sum and the
second is the quotient mapping. This notion actually corresponds to the intu-
itive picture of function frequently drawn for elementary calculus students which
illustrates the squaring function from {−2, −1, 0, 1, 2} to {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} this way:
−2
2
4
−1
1
1
0
0
2
3
The set G is called the graph and G∗the cograph of the function. We will see
in Section 1.8 that the graph and cograph are dual to each other.

1.1 Deﬁnition of category
9
Exercises 1.1
1. Show that the following deﬁnition of category is equivalent to the deﬁnition
given in this section. In this deﬁnition, to say that an element e has the identity
property means that for all f and g, e ◦f = f whenever e ◦f is deﬁned and
g ◦e = g whenever g ◦e is deﬁned.
This is the alternative deﬁnition: A category is a set with a partially deﬁned
binary operation denoted “◦” with the following properties:
(a) the following statements are equivalent:
(i) f ◦g and g ◦h are both deﬁned;
(ii) f ◦(g ◦h) is deﬁned;
(iii) (f ◦g) ◦h is deﬁned;
(b) if (f ◦g) ◦h is deﬁned, then (f ◦g) ◦h = f ◦(g ◦h);
(c) for any f, there are elements e and e′ with the identity property for which
e ◦f and f ◦e′ are deﬁned.
2. Verify that the following constructions produce categories.
(a) For any category C , the arrow category Ar(C ) of arrows of C has as
objects the arrows of C , and an arrow from f: A −→B to g: A′ −→B′ is a pair
of arrows h: A −→A′ and k: B −→B′ making the following diagram commute:
B
B′
-
k
A
A′
-
h
?
f
?
g
(b) The twisted arrow category of C is deﬁned the same way as the arrow
category except that the direction of k is reversed.
3. (a) Show that h: f −→g is an isomorphism in the category of objects of C
over A if and only if h is an isomorphism of C .
(b) Give an example of objects A, B and C in a category C and arrows f: B
−→A and g: C −→A such that B and C are isomorphic in C but f and g are
not isomorphic in C /A.
4. Describe the isomorphisms, initial objects, and terminal objects (if they exist)
in each of the categories in Exercise 2.

10
1 Categories
5. Describe the initial and terminal objects, if they exist, in a poset regarded as
a category.
6. Show that any two terminal objects in a category are isomorphic by a unique
isomorphism.
7. (a) Prove that for any category C and any arrows f and g of C such that
the target of g is isomorphic to the source of f, there is an arrow f ′ which (i) is
isomorphic to f in Ar(C ) and (ii) has source the same as the target of g. (Ar(C )
is deﬁned in Exercise 2 above.)
(b) Use the fact given in (a) to describe a suitable deﬁnition of domain, codo-
main and composition for a category with one object chosen for each isomorphism
class of objects of C and one arrow from each isomorphism class of objects of
Ar(C ). Such a category is called a skeleton of C .
8. A category is connected if it is possible to go from any object to any other
object of the category along a path of “composable” forward or backward arrows.
Make this deﬁnition precise and prove that every category is a union of disjoint
connected subcategories in a unique way.
9. A preorder is a set with a reﬂexive, transitive relation deﬁned on it. Explain
how to regard a preorder as a category with at most one arrow from any object
A to any object B.
10. (a) Describe the opposite of a group regarded as a category. Show that it is
isomorphic to, but not necessarily the same as, the original group.
(b) Do the same for a monoid, but show that the opposite need not be
isomorphic to the original monoid.
(c) Do the same as (b) for posets.
11. An arrow congruence on a category C is an equivalence relation E on the
arrows for which
(i) fEf ′ implies that f and f ′ have the same domain and codomain.
(ii) If fEf ′ and gEg′ and f ◦g is deﬁned, then (f ◦g)E(f ′ ◦g′).
There are more general congruences in which objects are identiﬁed. These are
considerably more complicated since new composites are formed when the target
of one arrow gets identiﬁed with the source of another.
(a) Show that any relation R on the arrows of C generates a unique congru-
ence on C .

1.2 Functors
11
(b) Given a congruence E on C , deﬁne the quotient category C /E in the
obvious way (same objects as C ) and show that it is a category. This notation
conﬂicts with the slice notation, but context should make it clear. In any case,
quotient categories are not formed very often.
(Thus any set of diagrams in C generate a congruence E on C with the
property that C /E is the largest quotient in which the diagrams commute.)
12. Show that in a category with an initial object 0 and a terminal object 1,
0 ∼= 1 if and only if there is a map 1 −→0.
1.2 Functors
Like every other kind of mathematical structured object, categories come equipped
with a notion of morphism. It is natural to deﬁne a morphism of categories to
be a map which takes objects to objects, arrows to arrows, and preserves source,
target, identities and composition.
If C and D are categories, a functor F: C −→D is a map for which
1. if f: A −→B is an arrow of C , then Ff: FA −→FB is an arrow of D;
2. F(idA) = idFA; and
3. if g: B −→C, then F(g ◦f) = Fg ◦Ff.
If F: C −→D is a functor, then F op: C op −→Dop is the functor which does
the same thing as F to objects and arrows.
A functor F: C op −→D is called a contravariant functor from C to D.
In this case, F op goes from C to Dop. For emphasis, a functor from C to D is
occasionally called a covariant functor.
F: C −→D is faithful if it is injective when restricted to each homset, and it
is full if it is surjective on each homset, i.e., if for every pair of objects A and B,
every arrow in Hom(FA, FB) is F of some arrow in Hom(A, B). Some sources
use the phrase “fully faithful” to describe a functor which is full and faithful.
F preserves a property P that an arrow may have if F(f) has property P
whenever f has. It reﬂects property P if f has the property whenever F(f) has.
For example, any functor must preserve isomorphisms (Exercise 1), but a functor
need not reﬂect them.
Here are some examples of functors:
1. For any category C , there is an identity functor idC: C −→C .

12
1 Categories
2. The categories Grp and Top are typical of many categories considered in
mathematics in that their objects are sets with some sort of structure on
them and their arrows are functions which preserve that structure. For any
such category C , there is an underlying set functor U: C −→Set which
assigns to each object its set of elements and to each arrow the function
associated to it. Such a functor is also called a forgetful functor, the
idea being that it forgets the structure on the set. Such functors are always
faithful and rarely full.
3. Many other mathematical constructions, such as the double dual functor
on vector spaces, the commutator subgroup of a group or the fundamental
group of a path connected space, are the object maps of functors (in the
latter case the domain is the category of pointed topological spaces and
base-point-preserving maps). There are, on the other hand, some canonical
constructions which do not extend to maps.
Examples include the cen-
ter of a group or ring, and groups of automorphisms quite generally. See
Exercise 8 and Exercise 9.
4. For any set A, let FA denote the free group generated by A. The deﬁn-
ing property of free groups allows you to conclude that if f: A −→B is
any function, there is a unique homomorphism Ff: FA −→FB with the
property that Ff ◦i = j ◦f, where i: A −→FA and j: B −→FB are the
inclusions. It is an easy exercise to see that this makes F a functor from
Set to Grp. Analogous functors can be deﬁned for the category of monoids,
the category of Abelian groups, and the category of R-modules for any ring
R.
5. For a category C , HomC = Hom is a functor in each variable separately,
as follows: For ﬁxed object A, Hom(A, f): Hom(A, B) −→Hom(A, C) is
deﬁned for each arrow f: B −→C by requiring that Hom(A, f)(g) = f ◦g
for g ∈Hom(A, B); this makes Hom(A, −): C −→Set a functor. Similarly,
for a ﬁxed object B, Hom(−, B) is a functor from C op to Set; Hom(h, B)
is composition with h on the right instead of on the left. Hom(A, −) and
Hom(−, B) are the covariant and contravariant hom functors, respec-
tively. Hom(−, −) is also a Set-valued functor, with domain C op × C . A
familiar example of a contravariant hom functor is the functor which takes
a vector space to the underlying set of its dual.
6. The powerset (set of subsets) of a set is the object map of an important
contravariant functor P from Set to Set which plays a central role in this
book. The map from PB to PA induced by a function f: A −→B is the

1.2 Functors
13
inverse image map; precisely, if B0 ∈PB, i.e. B0 ⊆B, then
Pf(B0) = {x ∈A | f(x) ∈B0}
The object function P can also be made into a covariant functor, in at least
two diﬀerent ways (Exercise 6).
7. If G and H are groups considered as categories with a single object, then a
functor from G to H is exactly a group homomorphism.
8. If P and Q are posets, a functor from P to Q is exactly a nondecreasing
map. A contravariant functor is a nonincreasing map.
Isomorphism and equivalence of categories
The composite of functors is a functor, so the collection of categories and
functors is itself a category, denoted Cat. If C and D are categories and F: C
−→D is a functor which has an inverse G: D −→C , so that it is an isomorphism
in the category of categories, then naturally C and D are said to be isomorphic.
However, the notion of isomorphism does not capture the most useful sense
in which two categories can be said to be essentially the same; that is the notion
of equivalence. A functor F: C −→D is said to be an equivalence if it is full
and faithful and has the property that for any object B of D there is an object
A of C for which F(A) is isomorphic to B. The deﬁnition appears asymmetrical
but in fact given the axiom of choice if there is an equivalence from C to D then
there is an equivalence from D to C (Exercise 11).
The notion of equivalence captures the perception that, for example, for most
purposes you are not changing group theory if you want to work in a category of
groups which contains only a countable number (or ﬁnite, or whatever) of copies
of each isomorphism type of groups and all the homomorphisms between them.
Statements in Section 1.1 like, “A group may be regarded as a category with
one object in which all arrows are isomorphisms” can be made precise using the
notion of equivalence: The category of groups and homomorphisms is equivalent
to the category of categories with exactly one object in which each arrow is an
isomorphism, and all functors between them. Any isomorphism between these
categories would seem to require an axiom of choice for proper classes.
Comma categories
Let A , C and D be categories and F: C −→A , G: D −→A be functors. From
these ingredients we construct the comma category (F, G) which is a general-
ization of the slice A /A of a category over an object discussed in Section 1.1.

14
1 Categories
The objects of (F, G) are triples (C, f, D) with f: FC −→GD an arrow of A and
C, D objects of C and D respectively. An arrow (h, k): (C, f, D) −→(C′, f ′, D′)
consists of h: C −→C′ and k: D −→D′ making
GD
GD′
-
Gk
FC
FC′
-
Fh
?
f
?
f ′
commute. It is easy to verify that coordinatewise composition makes (F, G) a
category.
When A is an object of A , we can consider it as a functor A: 1 −→A . Then
the comma category (IdA , A) is just the slice A /A deﬁned in Section 1.1. The
category of arrows under an object is similarly a comma category.
Each comma category (F, G) is equipped with two projections p1: (F, G) −→
C projecting objects and arrows onto their ﬁrst coordinates, and p2: (F, G) −→D
projecting objects onto their third coordinates and arrows onto their second.
Exercises 1.2
1. Show that functors preserve isomorphisms, but do not necessarily reﬂect them.
2. Use the concept of arrow category to describe a functor which takes a group
homomorphism to its kernel.
3. Show that the following deﬁne functors:
(a) the projection map from a product C × D of categories to one of them;
(b) for C a category and an object A of C , the constant map from a category
B to C which takes every object to A and every arrow to idA;
(c) the forgetful functor from the category C /A of objects over A to C which
takes an object B −→A to B and an arrow h: B −→C over A to itself.
4. Show that the functor P of Example 6 is faithful but not full and reﬂects
isomorphisms.
5. Give examples showing that functors need not preserve or reﬂect initial or
terminal objects.

1.2 Functors
15
6. Show that the map which takes a set to its powerset is the object map of at
least two covariant functors from Set to Set: If f: A −→B, one functor takes a
subset A0 of A to its image f!(A0) = f(A0), and the other takes A0 to the set
f∗(A0) = {y ∈B | if f(x) = y then x ∈A0} = {y ∈B | f −1(y) ⊆A0}
Show that f −1(B) ⊆A if and only if B ⊆f∗(A) and that A ⊆f −1(B) if and only
if f!(A) ⊆B.
7. Show that the deﬁnition given in Example 4 makes the free group construction
F a functor.
8. Show that there is no functor from Grp to Grp which takes each group to its
center. (Hint: Consider the group G consisting of all pairs (a, b) where a is any
integer and b is 0 or 1, with multiplication
(a, b)(c, d) = (a + (−1)bc, b + d)
the addition in the second coordinate being mod 2.
9. Show that there is no functor from Grp to Grp which takes each group to its
automorphism group.
10.
Show that every category is equivalent to its skeleton (see Exercise 7 of
Section 1.1).
11. Show that equivalence is an equivalence relation on any set of categories.
(This exercise is easier to do after you do Exercise 7 of Section 1.3).
12. (a) Make the statement “a preordered set can be regarded as a category
in which there is no more than one arrow between any two objects” precise by
deﬁning a subcategory of the category of categories and functors that the category
of preordered sets and order-preserving maps is equivalent to (see Exercise 9 of
Section 1.1).
(b) Show that, when regarded as a category, every preordered set is equivalent
to a poset.
13. An atom in a Boolean algebra is an element greater than 0 but with no
elements between it and 0.
A Boolean algebra is atomic if every element x
of the algebra is the join of all the atoms smaller than x. A Boolean algebra
is complete if every subset has an inﬁmum and a supremum. A CABA is a
complete atomic Boolean algebra. A CABA homomorphism is a Boolean algebra

16
1 Categories
homomorphism between CABA’s which preserves all infs and sups (not just ﬁnite
ones, which any Boolean algebra homomorphism would do). Show that the op-
posite of the category of sets is equivalent to the category of CABA’s and CABA
homomorphisms.
14. An upper semilattice is a partially ordered set in which each ﬁnite sub-
set (including the empty set) of elements has a least upper bound. Show that
the category of upper semilattices and functions which preserve the least upper
bound of any ﬁnite subset (and hence preserve the ordering) is equivalent to
the category of commutative monoids in which every element is idempotent and
monoid homomorphisms.
15. Show that the arrow and twisted arrow categories of Exercise 2 of Section 1.1
are comma categories.
16. Show neither that the category Set of sets nor the category Ab of abelian
groups is equivalent to its opposite category.
(Hint: Find a property of the
category for which the dual property is not satisﬁed.)
1.3 Natural transformations
In topology, a homotopy from f: A −→B to g: A −→B is given by a path in B
from fx to gx for each element x ∈A such that the paths ﬁt together continuously.
A natural transformation is analogously a deformation of one functor to another.
If F: C −→D and G: C −→D are two functors, λ: F −→G is a natural
transformation from F to G if λ is a collection of arrows λC: FC −→GC, one
for each object C of C , such that for each arrow g: C −→C′ of C the following
diagram commutes:
FC′
GC′
-
λC′
FC
GC
-
λC
?
Fg
?
Gg
The arrows λC are the components of λ.
The natural transformation λ is a natural equivalence if each component
of λ is an isomorphism in D.
The natural map of a vector space to its double dual is a natural transforma-
tion from the identity functor on the category of vector spaces and linear maps to
the double dual functor. When restricted to ﬁnite dimensional vector spaces, it

1.3 Natural transformations
17
is a natural equivalence. As another example, let n > 1 be a positive integer and
let GLn denote the functor from the category of commutative rings with unity
to the category of groups which takes a ring to the group of invertible n × n
matrices with entries from the ring, and let Un denote the group of units functor
(which is actually GL1). Then the determinant map is a natural transformation
from GLn to Un. The Hurewicz transformation from the fundamental group of a
topological space to its ﬁrst homology group is also a natural transformation of
functors.
Functor categories
Let C and D be categories with C small. The collection Func(C , D) of func-
tors from C to D is category with natural transformations as arrows. If F and
G are functors, a natural transformation λ requires, for each object C of C , an
element of HomD(FC, GC), subject to the naturality conditions. If C is small,
there is no more than a set of such natural transformations F −→G and so this
collection is a set. If λ: F −→G and µ: G −→H are natural transformations, their
composite µ ◦λ is deﬁned by requiring that its component at C to be µC ◦λC.
Of course, Func(C , D) is just HomCat(C , D), and so is already a functor in each
variable to Set. It is easy to check that for any F: D −→E ,
Func(C , F): Func(C , D) −→Func(C , E )
is actually a functor and not only a Set-function, and similarly for Func(F, C ),
so that in each variable Func is actually a Cat-valued functor.
We denote the hom functor in Func(C , D) by Nat(F, G) for functors F, G: C
−→D. A category of the form Func(C , D) is called a functor category and is
frequently denoted DC especially in the later chapters on sheaves.
Notation for natural transformations
Suppose there are categories and functors as shown in this diagram:
B
C
-
H
D
R
F

G
⇓λ
E
-
K
Note that in diagrams, we often denote a natural transformation by a double
arrow: λ: F ⇒G.

18
1 Categories
Suppose λ: F −→G is a natural transformation. Then λ induces two natural
transformations Kλ: KF −→KG and λH: FH −→GH. The component of Kλ
at an object C of C is
K(λC): KFC −→KGC
Then Kλ is a natural transformation simply because K, like any functor, takes
commutative diagrams to commutative diagrams. The component of λH at an
object B of B is the component of λ at HB. λH is a natural transformation
because H is deﬁned on morphisms.
We should point out that although the notations Kλ and λH look formally
dual, they are quite diﬀerent in meaning.
The ﬁrst is the result of applying
a functor to a value of a natural transformation (which is a morphism in the
codomain category) while the second is the result of taking the component of a
natural transformation at a value of a functor. Nonetheless, the formal properties
of the two quite diﬀerent operations are the same. This is why we use the parallel
notation when many other writers use distinct notation. (Compare the use of
⟨f, v⟩for f(v) by many analysts.) Thus advances mathematics.
Exercise 6 below states a number of identities which hold for natural transfor-
mations. Some of them are used later in the book, particularly in triple theory.
Exercises 1.3
1. Show how to describe a natural transformation as a functor from an arrow
category to a functor category.
2. What is a natural transformation from one group homomorphism to another?
3. Let R: C −→D be a functor. Show that f 7→Rf is a natural transformation
HomC(C, −) −→HomD(RC, R(−)) for any object C of C .
4. (a) Show that the inclusion of a set A into the free group FA generated by
A determines a natural transformation from the identity functor on Set to the
functor UF where U is the underlying set functor.
(b) Find a natural transformation from FU: Grp −→Grp to the identity func-
tor on Grp which takes a one letter word of FUG to itself. Show that there is
only one such.
5. In Section 1.2, we mentioned three ways of deﬁning the powerset as a func-
tor. (See Exercise 6.) For which of these deﬁnitions do the maps which take
each element x of a set A to the set {x} (the “singleton” maps) form a natural
transformation from the identity functor to the powerset functor?

1.3 Natural transformations
19
6. Let categories and functors be given as in the following diagram.
B
C
R
F

G
D
R
H

K
Suppose κ: F −→G and µ: H −→K are natural transformations.
(a) Show that this diagram commutes:
KF
KG
-
Kκ
HF
HG
-
Hκ
?
µF
?
µG
(b) Deﬁne µκ by requiring that its component at B be µGB ◦HκB, which
by (a) is KκB ◦µFB. Show that µκ is a natural transformation from H ◦F
to K ◦G. This deﬁnes a composition operation, called application, on natural
transformations. Although it has the syntax of a composition law, as we will
see below, semantically it is the result of applying µ to κ. In many, especially
older works, it is denoted µ∗κ, and these books often use juxtaposition to denote
composition.
(c) Show that Hκ and µG have the same interpretation whether thought of
as instances of application of a functor to a natural transformation, resp. evalu-
ation of a natural transformation at a functor, or as examples of an application
operation where the name of a functor is used to stand for the identity natural
transformation. (This exercise may well take longer to understand than to do.)
(d) Show that application as deﬁned above is associative in the sense that if
(µκ)β is deﬁned, then so is µ(κβ) and they are equal.
(e) Show that the following rules hold, where ◦denotes the composition of
natural transformations deﬁned earlier in this chapter. These are called Gode-
ment’s rules. In each case, the meaning of the rule is that if one side is deﬁned,
then so is the other and they are equal. They all refer to the diagram below, and
the name of a functor is used to denote the identity natural transformation from
that functor to itself. The other natural transformations are κ: F1 −→F2, λ: F2
−→F3, µ: G1 −→G2, and ν: G2 −→G3.
A
B
-
E
C
-
F2
U
F1

F3
⇓κ
⇓λ
D
-
G2
U
G1

G3
⇓µ
⇓ν
E
-
H

20
1 Categories
(i) (The interchange law) (ν ◦µ)(λ ◦κ) = (νλ) ◦(µκ)
(ii) (H ◦G1)κ = H(G1κ).
(iii) µ(F1 ◦E) = (µF1)E.
(iv) G1(λ ◦κ)E = (G1λE) ◦(G1κE).
(v) (µF2) ◦(G1κ) = (G2κ) ◦(µF1).
7. Show that two categories C and D are equivalent if and only if there are
functors F: C −→D and G: D −→C such that G ◦F is naturally equivalent to
idC and F ◦G is naturally equivalent to idD.
1.4 Elements and Subobjects
Elements
One of the important perceptions of category theory is that an arrow x: T
−→A in a category can be regarded as an element of A deﬁned over T. The
idea is that x is a variable element of A, meaning about the same thing as the
word “quantity” in such sentences as, “The quantity x2 is nonnegative”, found
in older calculus books.
One must not get carried away by this idea and introduce elements every-
where. One of the main beneﬁts of category theory is you don’t have to do things
in terms of elements unless it is advantageous to. In 3.3.1 is a construction that
is almost impossible to understand in terms of elements, but is very easy with the
correct conceptual framework. On the other hand, we will see many examples
later in which the use of elements leads to a substantial simpliﬁcation. The point
is not to allow a tool to become a straitjacket.
When x: T −→A is thought of as an element of A deﬁned on T, we say that
T is the domain of variation of the element x. It is often useful to think of x
as an element of A deﬁned in terms of a parameter in T. A related point of view
is that x is a set of elements of A indexed by T. By the way, this is distinct from
the idea that x is a family of disjoint subsets of T indexed by A, as mentioned
in 1.1.
The notation “x ∈T A” is a useful quick way of saying that x is an element
of A deﬁned on T. This notation will be extended when we consider subobjects
later in this section.
If x ∈T A and f: A −→B, then f ◦x ∈T B; thus morphisms can be regarded
as functions taking elements to elements. The Yoneda Lemma, Theorem 2 of the
next section, says (among other things) that any function which takes elements

1.4 Elements and Subobjects
21
to elements in a coherent way in a sense that will be deﬁned precisely “is” a
morphism of the category. Because of this, we will write f(x) for f ◦x when it is
helpful to think of x as a generalized element.
Note that every object A has at least one element idA, its generic element.
If A is an object of a category C and F: C −→D is a functor, then F takes
any element of A to an element of FA in such a way that (i) generic elements
are taken to generic elements, and (ii) the action of F on elements commutes
with change of the domain of variation of the element. (If you spell those two
conditions out, they are essentially the deﬁnition of functor.)
Isomorphisms can be described in terms of elements, too: An arrow f: A −→B
is an isomorphism if and only if f (thought of as a function) is a bijection between
the elements of A deﬁned on T and the elements of B deﬁned on T for all objects
T of C . (To get the inverse, apply this fact to the element idA: A −→A.) And a
terminal object is a singleton in a very strong sense—for any domain of variation
it has exactly one element.
In the rest of this section we will develop the idea of element further and use
it to deﬁne subobjects, which correspond to subsets of a set.
Monomorphisms and epimorphisms
An arrow f: A −→B is a monomorphism (or just a “mono”, adjective
“monic”), if f (i.e., Hom(T, f)) is injective (one to one) on elements deﬁned on
each object T—in other words, for every pair x, y of elements of A deﬁned on T,
f(x) = f(y) implies x = y.
In terms of composition, this says that f is left cancelable, i.e, if f ◦x = f ◦y,
then x = y. This has a dual concept: The arrow f is an epimorphism (“an
epi”, “epic”) if it is right cancelable. This is true if and only if the contravariant
functor Hom(f, T) is injective (not surjective!) for every object T. Note that
surjectivity is not readily described in terms of generalized elements.
In Set, every monic is injective and every epic is surjective (onto). The same
is true of Grp, but the fact that epis are surjective in Grp is moderately hard to
prove (Exercise 6). On the other hand, any dense map, surjective or not, is epi
in the category of Hausdorﬀspaces and continuous maps.
An arrow f: A −→B which is “surjective on elements”, in other words for
which Hom(T, f) is surjective for every object T, is necessarily an epimorphism
and is called a split epimorphism. An equivalent deﬁnition is that there is an
arrow g: B −→A which is a right inverse to f, so that f ◦g = idB. The Axiom of
Choice is equivalent to the statement that every epi in Set is split. In general, in
categories of sets with structure and structure preserving functions, split epis are
surjective and (as already pointed out) surjective maps are epic (see Exercise 11),

22
1 Categories
but the converses often do not hold. We have already mentioned Hausdorﬀspaces
as a category in which there are nonsurjective epimorphisms; another example
is the embedding of the ring of integers in the ﬁeld of rational numbers in the
category of rings and ring homomorphisms. As for the other converse, in the
category of groups the (unique) surjective homomorphism from the cyclic group
of order 4 to the cyclic group of order 2 is an epimorphism which is not split.
An arrow with a left inverse is necessarily a monomorphism and is called a
split monomorphism. Split monos in Top are called retractions; in fact the
word “retraction” is sometimes used to denote a split mono in any category.
The property of being a split mono or split epi is necessarily preserved by any
functor. The property of being monic or epic is certainly not in general preserved
by any functor. Indeed, if Ff is epi for every functor F, then f is necessarily a
split epi. (Exercise 10.)
Notation: In diagrams, we usually draw an arrow with an arrowhead at its
tail:
)−→
to indicate that it is a monomorphism. The usual dual notation for an epimor-
phism is
−→→
However in this book we reserve that latter notation for regular epimorphisms to
be deﬁned in 1.8.
Subobjects
We now deﬁne the notion of subobject of an object in a category; this idea
partly captures and partly generalizes the concept of “subset”, “subspace”, and
so on, familiar in many branches of mathematics.
If i: A0 −→A is a monomorphism and a: T −→A, we say a factors through
i (or factors through A0 if it is clear which monomorphism i is meant) if there is
an arrow j for which
A0
A
-
i
a
@
@
@@
R
T
?
j
(1)

1.4 Elements and Subobjects
23
commutes. In this situation we extend the element point of view and say that
the element a of A is an element of A0 (or of i if necessary). This is written
“a ∈T
A A0”. The subscript A is often omitted if the context makes it clear.
Lemma 1.
Let i: A0 −→A and i′: A′
0 −→A be monomorphisms in a category C .
Then A0 and A′
0 have the same elements of A if and only if they are isomorphic
in the category C /A of objects over A, in other words if and only if there is an
isomorphism j: A −→A′ for which
A′
0
A
-
i′
i
@
@
@@
R
A0
?
j
(2)
commutes.
Proof. Suppose A0 and A′
0 have the same elements of A.
Since i ∈A0
A
A0, it
factors through A′
0, so there is an arrow j: A0 −→A′
0 such that (2) commutes.
Interchanging A0 and A′
0 we get k: A′
0 −→A0 such that i ◦k = i′. Using the fact
that i and i′ are monic, it is easy to see that j and k must be inverses to each
other, so they are isomorphisms.
Conversely, if j is an isomorphism making (2) commute and a ∈T
A A0, so that
a = i ◦u for some u: T −→A0, then a = i′ ◦j ◦u so that a ∈T
A A′
0. A similar
argument interchanging A0 and A′
0 shows that A0 and A′
0 have the same elements
of A.
Two monomorphisms which have the same elements are said to be equiva-
lent. A subobject of A is an equivalence class of monomorphisms into A. We
will frequently refer to a subobject by naming one of its members, as in “Let A0
)−→A be a subobject of A”.
In Set, each subobject of a set A contains exactly one inclusion of a subset
into A, and the subobject consists of those injective maps into A which has that
subset as image. Thus “subobject” captures the notion of “subset” in Set exactly.
Any map from a terminal object in a category is a monomorphism and so
determines a subobject of its target. Because any two terminal objects are iso-
morphic by a unique isomorphism (Exercise 6 of Section 1.1), that subobject
contains exactly one map based on each terminal object.
We will henceforth
assume that in any category we deal with, we have picked a particular terminal
object (if it has one) as the canonical one and call it “the terminal object”.

24
1 Categories
Global elements
In the category of sets, an element in the ordinary sense of a set B is essentially
the same thing as an arrow from the terminal object of Set to B. In general,
an arrow in some category from the terminal object to some object is called a
global element of that object, for reasons which will become apparent in the
next paragraph. In most categories which arise in practice, except Set, an object
is not determined by its global elements. For example, in Grp, each group has
exactly one global element.
A more interesting example arises in connection with continuous functions.
This example is worth studying in detail because it illustrates and motivates
much of sheaf theory. Let A be a topological space and let R denote the set of
real numbers. Let O(A) denote the category whose objects are the open sets of
A and whose arrows are the inclusion maps of one open set into another. Let
C: O(A)op −→Set denote the contravariant functor which takes each open set U
to the set of real-valued continuous functions deﬁned on U, and to each inclusion
of an open set U of A into an open set V associates the map from C(V ) to C(U)
which restricts a continuous function deﬁned on V to U. An important point
about these restriction maps is that they are not in general surjective—that is,
there are in general functions deﬁned on an open set which cannot be extended
to a bigger open set. Think of f(x) = 1/x, for example.
This functor C is an object in the category F = Func(O(A)op, Set). The
terminal object of F is the functor which associates a singleton set to each open
set of A and the only possible map to each arrow (inclusion map) of O(A). It
is a nice exercise to prove that a global element of C is precisely a continuous
real-valued function deﬁned on all of A.
Exercises 1.4
1.
Describe initial objects using the terminology of elements, and using the
terminology of indexed families of subsets.
2. Show that in Set, a function is injective if and only if it is a monomorphism
and surjective if and only if it is an epimorphism.
3. Show that every epimorphism in Set is split. (This is the Axiom of Choice.)
4. Show that in the category of Abelian groups and group homomorphisms, a
homomorphism is injective if and only if it is a monomorphism and surjective if
and only if it is an epimorphism.

1.4 Elements and Subobjects
25
5.
Show that neither monos nor epis are necessarily split in the category of
Abelian groups.
6.
Show that in Grp, every homomorphism is injective if and only if it is a
monomorphism and surjective if and only if it is an epimorphism. (If you get
stuck trying to show that an epimorphism in Grp is surjective, see the hint on
p.21 of Mac Lane [1971].)
7. Show that all epimorphisms are surjective in Top, but not in the category of
all Hausdorﬀspaces and continuous maps.
8. Show that the embedding of an integral domain (assumed commutative with
unity) into its ﬁeld of quotients is an epimorphism in the category of commutative
rings and ring homomorphisms. When is it a split epimorphism?
9.
Show that the following two statements about an arrow f: A −→B in a
category C are equivalent:
(i) Hom(T, f) is surjective for every object T of C .
(ii) There is an arrow g: B −→A such that f ◦g = idB.
Furthermore, show that any arrow satisfying these conditions is an epimor-
phism.
10. Show that if Ff is epi for every functor F, then f is a split epi.
11. Let U: C −→Set be a faithful functor and f an arrow of C . (Note that the
functors we have called “forgetful”—we have not deﬁned that word formally—are
obviously faithful.) Prove:
(a) If Uf is surjective then f is an epimorphism.
(b) If f is a split epimorphism then Uf is surjective.
(c) If Uf is injective then f is a monomorphism.
(d) If f is a split monomorphism, then Uf is injective.
12. A subfunctor of a functor F: C −→Set is a functor G with the properties
(a) GA ⊆FA for every object A of C .
(b) If f: A −→B, then F(f) restricted to G(A) is equal to G(f).
Show that the subfunctors of a functor are the “same” as subobjects of the
functor in the category Func(C , Set).

26
1 Categories
1.5 The Yoneda Lemma
Elements of a functor
A functor F: C −→Set is an object in the functor category Func(C , Set):
an “element” of F is therefore a natural transformation into F. The Yoneda
Lemma, Lemma 1 below, says in eﬀect that the elements of a Set-valued functor
F deﬁned (in the sense of Section 1.4) on the homfunctor Hom(A, −) for some
object A of C are essentially the same as the (ordinary) elements of the set FA.
To state this properly requires a bit of machinery.
If f: A −→B in C , then f induces a natural transformation from Hom(B, −)
to Hom(A, −) by composition: the component of this natural transformation at
an object C of C takes an arrow h: B −→C to h ◦f: A −→C. This construction
deﬁnes a contravariant functor from C to Func(C , Set) called the Yoneda map
or Yoneda embedding.
It is straightforward and very much worthwhile to
check that this construction really does give a natural transformation for each
arrow f and that the resulting Yoneda map really is a functor.
Because Nat(−, −) is contravariant in the ﬁrst variable (it is a special case
of Hom), the map which takes an object B of C and a functor F: C −→Set
to Nat(Hom(B, −), F) is a functor from C × Func(C , Set) to Set. Another such
functor is the evaluation functor which takes (B, F) to FB, and (g, λ), where g: B
−→A ∈C and λ: F −→G is a natural transformation, to Gg ◦λB. Remarkably,
these two functors are naturally isomorphic; it is in this sense that the elements
of F deﬁned on Hom(B, −) are the ordinary elements of FB.
Lemma 1.
[Yoneda] The map φ: Nat(Hom(B, −), F) −→FB deﬁned by φ(λ) =
λB(idB) is a natural isomorphism of the functors deﬁned in the preceding para-
graph.
Proof. The inverse of φ takes an element u of FB to the natural transformation
λ deﬁned by requiring that λA(g) = Fg(u) for g ∈Hom(B, A). The rest of proof
is a routine veriﬁcation of the commutativity of various diagrams required by the
deﬁnitions.
The ﬁrst of several important consequences of this lemma is the following
embedding theorem. This theorem is obtained by taking F in the Lemma to be
Hom(A, −), where A is an object of C ; this results in the statement that there is
a natural bijection between arrows g: A −→B and natural transformations from
Hom(B, −) to Hom(A, −).

1.5 The Yoneda Lemma
27
Theorem 2.
[Yoneda Embeddings]
1. The map which takes f: A −→B to the induced natural transformation
Hom(B, −) −→Hom(A, −)
is a full and faithful contravariant functor from C to Func(C , Set).
2. The map taking f to the natural transformation
Hom(−, A) −→Hom(−, B)
is a full and faithful functor from C to Func(C op, Set).
Proof. It is easy to verify that the maps deﬁned in the Theorem are functors.
The fact that the ﬁrst one is full and faithful follows from the Yoneda Lemma
with Hom(A, −) in place of F. The other proof is dual.
The induced maps in the Theorem deserve to be spelled out.
If f: S −→
T, the natural transformation corresponding to f given by (i) has component
Hom(f, A): Hom(T, A) −→Hom(S, A) at an object A of C —this is composing by
f on the right. If x ∈T A, the action of Hom(f, A) “changes the parameter” in
A along f.
The other natural transformation corresponding to f is Hom(T, f): Hom(T, A)
−→Hom(T, B); since the Yoneda embedding is faithful, we can say that f is
essentially the same as Hom(−, f). If x is an element of A based on T, then
Hom(T, f)(x) = f ◦x.
Since “f is essentially the same as Hom(−, f)”, this
justiﬁes the notation f(x) for f ◦x introduced in Section 1.4.
The fact that the Yoneda embedding is full means that any natural transfor-
mation Hom(−, A) −→Hom(−, B) determines a morphism f: A −→B, namely
the image of idA under the component of the transformation at A. Spelled out,
this says that if f is any function which assigns to every element x: T −→A an
element f(x): T −→B with the property that for all t: S −→T, f(x ◦t) = f(x) ◦t
(this is the “coherence condition” mentioned in Section 1.4) then f “is” (via the
Yoneda embedding) a morphism, also called f to conform to our conventions,
from A to B. One says such an arrow exists “by Yoneda”.
In the same vein, if g: 1 −→A is a morphism of C , then for any object T, g
determines an element g( ) of A deﬁned on T by composition with the unique
element from T to 1, which we denote ( ). This notation captures the perception
that a global element depends on no arguments. We will extend the functional
notation to more than one variable in Section 1.7.

28
1 Categories
Universal elements
Another special case of the Yoneda Lemma occurs when one of the elements
of F deﬁned on Hom(A, −) is a natural isomorphism. If β: Hom(A, −) −→F is
such a natural isomorphism, the (ordinary) element u ∈FA corresponding to it
is called a universal element for F, and F is called a representable functor,
represented by A. It is not hard to see that if F is also represented by A′, then
A and A′ are isomorphic objects of C . (See Exercise 4, which actually says more
than that.)
The following lemma gives a characterization of universal elements which in
many books is given as the deﬁnition.
Lemma 3.
Let F: C −→Set be a functor. Then u ∈FA is a universal element
for F if and only if for every object B of C and every element t ∈FB there is
exactly one arrow g: A −→B such that Fg(u) = t.
Proof. If u is such a universal element corresponding to a natural isomorphism
β: Hom(A, −) −→F, and t ∈FB, then the required arrow g is the element
(β−1B)(t) in Hom(A, B). Conversely, if u ∈FA satisﬁes the conclusion of the
Lemma, then it corresponds to some natural transformation β: Hom(A, −) −→F
by the Yoneda Lemma. It is routine to verify that the map which takes t ∈FB
to the arrow g ∈Hom(A, B) given by the assumption constitutes an inverse in
Func(C , Set) to βB.
In this book, the phrase “u ∈FA is a universal element for F” carries with
it the implication that u and A have the property of the lemma. (It is possible
that u is also an element of FB for some object B but not a universal element
in FB.)
As an example, let G be a free group on one generator g.
Then g is the
“universal group element” in the sense that it is a universal element for the
underlying set functor U: Grp −→Set (more precisely, it is a universal element
in UG). This translates into the statement that for any element x in any group
H there is a unique group homomorphism F: G −→H taking g to x, which is
exactly the deﬁnition of “free group on one generator g”.
Another example which will play an important role in this book concerns
the contravariant powerset functor P: Set −→Set deﬁned in Section 1.2. It is
straightforward to verify that a universal element for P is the subset {1} of
the set {0, 1}; the function required by the Lemma for a subset B0 of a set
B is the characteristic function of B0. (A universal element for a contravariant
functor, as here—meaning a universal element for P: Setop −→Set—is often called
a “couniversal element”.)

1.6 Pullbacks
29
Exercises 1.5
1. Find a universal element for the functor
Hom(−, A) × Hom(−, B): Setop −→Set
for any two sets A and B. (If h: U −→V , this functor takes a pair (f, g) to
(h ◦f, h ◦g).)
2. (a) Show that an action of a group G on a set A is essentially the same thing
as a functor from G regarded as a category to Set.
(b) Show that such an action has a universal element if and only if for any
pair x and y of elements of A there is exactly one element g of G for which gx = y.
3. Are either of the covariant powerset functors deﬁned in Exercise 6 of Sec-
tion 1.2 representable?
4. Let F: C −→Set be a functor and u ∈FA, u′ ∈FA′ be universal elements for
F. Show that there is a unique isomorphism φ: A −→A′ such that Fφ(u) = u′.
5.
Let U: Grp −→Set be the underlying set functor, and F: Set −→Grp the
functor which takes a set A to the free group on A. Show that for any set A, the
covariant functor HomSet(A, U(−)) is represented by FA, and for any group G,
the contravariant functor HomGrp(F(−), G) is represented by UG.
1.6 Pullbacks
The set P of composable pairs of arrows used in Section 1.1 in the alternate
deﬁnition of category is an example of a “ﬁbered product” or “pullback”.
A
pullback is a special case of “limit”, which we treat in Section 1.7. In this section,
we discuss pullbacks in detail.
Let us consider the following diagram D in a category C .
A
C
-
f
B
?
g
(1)
We would like to objectify the set {(x, y) | f(x) = g(y)} in C ; that is, ﬁnd
an object of C whose elements are those pairs (x, y) with f(x) = g(y). Observe

30
1 Categories
that for a pair (x, y) to be in this set, x and y must be elements of A and B
respectively deﬁned over the same object T.
The set of composable pairs of arrows in a category (see Section 1.1) are a
special case in Set of this, with A = B being the set of arrows and f = d0, g = d1.
Thus we must consider commutative diagrams like
A
C
-
f
T
B
-
y
?
x
?
g
(2)
In this situation, (T, x, y) is called a commutative cone over D based on
T, and the set of commutative cones over D based on T is denoted Cone(T, D) .
A commutative cone based on T over D may usefully be regarded as an element
of D deﬁned on T. In Section 1.7, we will see that a commutative cone is actually
an arrow in a certain category, so that this idea ﬁts with our usage of the word
“element”.
Our strategy will be to turn Cone(−, D) into a functor; then we will say that
an object represents (in an informal sense) elements of D, in other words pairs
(x, y) for which f(x) = g(y), if that object represents (in the precise technical
sense) the functor Cone(−, D).
We make will make Cone(−, D) into a contravariant functor to Set: If h: W
−→T is an arrow of C and (T, x, y) is a commutative cone over (1), then
Cone(h, D)(T, x, y) = (W, x ◦h, y ◦h)
which it is easy to see is a commutative cone over D based on W.
An element (P, p1, p2) of D which is a universal element for Cone(−, D) (so
that Cone(−, D) is representable) is called the pullback or the ﬁber product
of the diagram D. The object P is often called the pullback, with p1 and p2
understood. As the reader can verify, this says that (P, p1, p2) is a pullback if
A
C
-
f
P
B
-
p2
?
p1
?
g
(3)

1.6 Pullbacks
31
commutes and for any element of D based on T, there is a unique element of P
based on T which makes
A
C
-
f
P
B
-
p2
?
?
g
p1
T
y
HHHHHHH
H
j
x
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
AAU
@
@
@@
R
(4)
commute.
Thus there is a bijection between the elements of the diagram D
deﬁned on T and the elements of the ﬁber product P deﬁned on T. When a
diagram like 4 has this property it is called a pullback diagram.
The Cone functor exists for any category, but a particular diagram of the
form 1 need not have a pullback.
Proposition 1. If Diagram 3 is a pullback diagram, then the cone in Diagram 2
is also a pullback of Diagram 1 if and only if the unique arrow from T to P making
everything in Diagram 4 commute is an isomorphism.
Proof. (This theorem actually follows from Exercise 4 of Section 1.5, but we
believe a direct proof is instructive.) Assume that (2) and (3) are both pullback
diagrams. Let u: T −→P be the unique arrow given because 3 is a pullback
diagram, and let v: P −→T be the unique arrow given because 2 is a pullback
diagram. Then both for g = u ◦v: P −→P and g = idP it is true that p1 ◦g = p1
and p2 ◦g = p2. Therefore by the uniqueness part of the deﬁnition of universal
element, u ◦v = idP. Similarly, v ◦u = idT, so that u is an isomorphism between
T and P making everything commute. The converse is easy.
The preceding argument is typical of many arguments making use of the
uniqueness part of the deﬁnition of universal element.
We will usually leave
arguments like this to the reader.
A consequence of Proposition 1 is that a pullback of a diagram in a category
is not determined uniquely but only up to a “unique isomorphism which makes
everything commute”. This is an instance of a general fact about constructions
deﬁned as universal elements which is made precise in Proposition 1 of Section 1.7.

32
1 Categories
Notation for pullbacks
We have deﬁned the pullback P of Diagram 1 so that it objectiﬁes the set
{(x, y) | f(x) = g(y)}.
This ﬁts nicely with the situation in Set, where one
pullback of (1) is the set {(x, y) | f(x) = g(y)} together with the projection
maps to A and B, and any other pullback is in one to one correspondence with
this one by a bijection which commutes with the projections. This suggest the
introduction of a setlike notation for pullbacks: We let [(x, y) | f(x) = g(y)]
denote a pullback of (1). In this notation, f(x) denotes f ◦x and g(y) denotes g ◦y
as in Section 1.4, and (x, y) denotes the unique element of P deﬁned on T which
exists by deﬁnition of pullback. It follows that p1(x, y) = x and p2(x, y) = y,
where we write p1(x, y) (not p1((x, y))) for p1 ◦(x, y).
The idea is that square brackets around a set deﬁnition denotes an object of
the category which represents the set of arrows listed in curly brackets—“repre-
sents” in the technical sense, so that the set in curly brackets has to be turned
into the object map of a set-valued functor.
The square bracket notation is
ambiguous. Proposition 1 spells out the ambiguity precisely.
We could have deﬁned a commutative cone over (1) in terms of three arrows,
namely a cone (T, x, y, z) based on T would have x: T −→A, y: T −→B and z: T
−→C such that f ◦x = g ◦y = z. Of course, z is redundant and in consequence
the Cone functor deﬁned this way would be naturally isomorphic to the Cone
functor deﬁned above, and so would have the same universal elements.
(The
component of the natural isomorphism at T takes (T, x, y) to (T, x, y, f ◦x)).
Thus the pullback of (1) also represents the set {(x, y, z) | f(x) = g(y) = z},
and so could be denoted [(x, y, z) | f(x) = g(y) = z]. Although this observation
is inconsequential here, it will become more signiﬁcant when we discuss more
general constructions (limits) deﬁned by cones.
There is another way to construct a pullback in Set when the map g is monic.
In general, when g is monic, {(x, y) | f(x) = g(y)} ∼= {x | f(x) ∈g(B)}, which
in Set is often denoted f −1(B). In general, a pullback along a subobject can be
interpreted as an inverse image which as we will see is again a subobject.
The pullback Diagram 3 is often regarded as a sort of generalized inverse image
construction even when g is not monic. In this case, it is called the “pullback of
g along f”. Thus when P is regarded as the ﬁber product, the notion of pullback
is symmetrical in A and B, but when it is regarded as the generalized inverse
image of B then the diagram is thought of as asymmetrical.
A common notation for the pullback of (1) reﬂecting the perception of a
pullback as ﬁber product is “A ×C B”.

1.6 Pullbacks
33
The subobject functor
In this section, we will turn the subobject construction into a contravariant
functor, by using the inverse image construction described above. To do this, we
need to know ﬁrst that the inverse image of a monomorphism is a monomorphism:
Lemma 2.
In any category C , in a pullback diagram (3), if g is monic then so
is p1.
Proof. Consider the diagram below, in which the square is a pullback.
A
C
-
f
P
B
-
p2
?
p1
?
g
T
y
@
@
@@
R
x
@
@
@@
R
(5)
Then P = [(x, y) | fx = gy]. To show that p1 is monic is the same as showing
that if (x, y) ∈T P and (x, y′) ∈T P then y = y′. But if (x, y) and (x, y′) are in
P, then g(y) = f(x) = g(y′), so y = y′ since g is monic.
To turn the subobject construction into a functor, we need more than that
the pullback of monics is monic. We must know that the pullback of a subobject
is a well-deﬁned subobject. In more detail, for A in C , Sub A will be the set
of subobjects of A. If f: B −→A, then for a subobject represented by a monic
g: U −→A, Sub(f)(g) will be the pullback of g along f. To check that Sub(f) is
well-deﬁned, we need:
Theorem 3.
If g: U )−→A and h: V )−→A determine the same subobject, then
the pullbacks of g and h along f: B −→A represent the same subobjects of B.
Proof. This follows because the pullback of g is [y | f(y) ∈P
A U] and the pullback
of h is [y | f(y) ∈P
A V ], which has to be the same since by deﬁnition a subobject
is entirely determined by its elements.
The veriﬁcation that Sub(f) is a functor is straightforward and is omitted.

34
1 Categories
Exercises 1.6
1. Show how to describe the kernel of a group homomorphism f: G −→H as the
pullback of f along the map which takes the trivial group to the identity of H.
2. Give an example of a pullback of an epimorphism which is not an epimorphism.
3. Prove that an arrow f: A −→B is monic if and only if the diagram
A
B
-
f
A
A
-
idA
?
idA
?
f
is a pullback.
4.
(a) Suppose that
A
C
-
f
B
?
g
is a diagram in Set with g an inclusion. Construct a pullback of the diagram as
a ﬁber product and as an inverse image of A along f, and describe the canonical
isomorphism between them.
(b) Suppose that g is injective, but not necessarily an inclusion. Find two
ways of constructing the pullback in this case, and ﬁnd the isomorphism between
them.
(c) Suppose f and g are both injective. Construct the pullback of Diagram 2
in four diﬀerent ways: (i) ﬁber product, (ii) inverse image of the image of g along
f, (iii) inverse image of the image of f along g, (iv) and the intersection of the
images of f and g. Find all the canonical isomorphisms.
(d) Investigate which of the constructions in (c) coincide when one or both
of f and g are inclusions.
5. When g is monic in diagram (1), redeﬁne “Cone” so that
(a) Cone(T, D) = {(x, z) | z ∈B and f(x) = z}, or equivalently
(b) Cone(T, D) = {x | f(x) ∈B}.

1.7 Limits
35
Show that each deﬁnition gives a functor naturally isomorphic to the Cone
functor originally deﬁned.
6. Identify pullbacks in a poset regarded as a category. Apply this to the powerset
of a set, ordered by inclusion.
7. For two subobjects g: U −→A and h: V −→A, say that U ≤V (or g ≤h) if
g factors through h. Show that this makes the set of subobjects of A a partially
ordered set with a maximum element.
8. In a diagram
D
E
-
A
B
-
?
?
F
-
C
-
?
?
(a) Show that if both small squares are pullbacks, so is the outer square.
(b) Show that if the outer square and right hand square are pullbacks, so is
the left hand square.
1.7 Limits
Graphs
A limit is the categorical way of deﬁning an object by means of equations
between elements of given objects. The concept of pullback as described in Sec-
tion 1.6 is a special case of limit, but suﬃciently complicated to be characteristic
of the general idea. To give the general deﬁnition, we need a special notion of
“graph”. What we call a graph here is what a graph theorist would probably call
a “directed multigraph with loops”.
Formally, a graph G consists of two sets, a set O of objects and a set A of
arrows, and two functions d0, d1: A −→O. Thus a graph is a “category without
composition” and we will use some of the same terminology as for categories: O
is the set of objects (or sometimes nodes) and A is the set of arrows of the
graph; if f is an arrow, d0(f) is the source of f and d1(f) is the target of f.
A homomorphism F: G −→H from a graph G to a graph H is a function
taking objects to objects and arrows to arrows and preserving source and target;
in other words, if f: A −→B in G , then F(f): F(A) −→F(B) in H .
It is clear that every category C has an underlying graph which we denote
|C |; the objects, arrows, source and target maps of |C | are just those of C .

36
1 Categories
Moreover, any functor F: C −→D induces a graph homomorphism |F|: |C | −→
|D|. It is easy to see that this gives an underlying graph functor from the
category of categories and functors to the category of graphs and homomorphisms.
Diagrams
A diagram in a category C (or in a graph G —the deﬁnition is the same) is
a graph homomorphism D: I −→|C | for some graph I . I is the index graph
of the diagram. Such a diagram is called a diagram of type I . For example,
a diagram of the form of 1 of Section 1.6 (which we used to deﬁne pullbacks) is
a diagram of type I where I is the graph
1 −→2 ←−3
D is called a ﬁnite diagram if the index category has only a ﬁnite number
of nodes and arrows.
We will write D: I −→C instead of D: I −→|C |; this conforms to standard
notation.
Observe that any object A of C is the image of a constant graph homomor-
phism K: I −→C and so can be regarded as a degenerate diagram of type I .
If D and E are two diagrams of type I in a category C , a natural transfor-
mation λ: D −→E is deﬁned in exactly the same way as a natural transformation
of functors (which does not involve the composition of arrows in the domain cat-
egory anyway); namely, λ is a family of arrows
λi: D(i) −→E(i)
of C , one for each object i of I , for which
D(j)
E(j)
-
λj
D(i)
E(i)
-
λi
?
D(e)
?
E(e)
(1)
commutes for each arrow e: i −→j of I .
Commutative cones and limits
A commutative cone with vertex W over a diagram D: I −→C is a natural
transformation α from the constant functor with value W on I to D. We will

1.7 Limits
37
refer to it as the “cone α: W −→D”. This amounts to giving a compatible family
{αi} of elements of the vertices D(i) based on W. This commutative cone α is
an element (in the category of diagrams of type I ) of the diagram D based on
the constant diagram W. The individual elements αi (elements in C ) are called
the components of the element α.
Thus to specify a commutative cone with vertex W, one must give for each
object i of I an element αi of D(i) based on W (that is what makes it a cone)
in such a way that if e: i −→j is an arrow of I , then D(e)(αi) = αj (that makes
it commutative). This says that the following diagram must commute for all e: i
−→j.
D(i)
D(j)
-
D(e)
W
αi
    	
αj
@
@
@@
R
(2)
Note that in Section 1.6 our deﬁnition of commutative cone for pullbacks
does not ﬁt our present deﬁnition, since we give no arrow to C in Diagram 2.
Of course, this is only a technicality, since there is an implied arrow to C which
makes it a commutative cone. This is why we gave an alternative, but equivalent
construction in terms of three arrows in Section 1.6.
Just as in the case of pullbacks, an arrow W ′ −→W deﬁnes a commutative
cone over D with vertex W ′ by composition, thus making Cone(−, D): C −→Set
a contravariant functor. (Cone(W, D) is the set of commutative cones with vertex
W.) Then a limit of D, denoted lim D, is a universal element for Cone(−, D).
Any two limits for D are isomorphic via a unique isomorphism which makes
everything commute. This is stated precisely by the following proposition, whose
proof is left as an exercise.
Proposition 1.
Suppose D: I −→C is a diagram in a category C and α: W
−→D and β: V −→D are both limits of D. Then there is a unique isomorphism
u: V −→W such that for every object i of I , αi ◦u = βi.
The limit of a diagram D objectiﬁes the set
{x | x(i) ∈D(i) and for all e: i −→j, D(e)(x(i)) = x(j)}
and so will be denoted
[x | x(i) ∈D(i) and for all e: i −→j, D(e)(x(i)) = x(j)]
As in the case of pullbacks, implied arrows will often be omitted from the
description. In particular, when y ∈T B and g: A −→B is a monomorphism we

38
1 Categories
will often write “y ∈A” or if necessary ∃x(g(x) = y) when it is necessary to
specify g.
By taking limits of diﬀerent types of diagrams one obtains many well known
constructions in various categories. We can recover subobjects, for example, by
noting that the limit of the diagram g: A −→B is the commutative cone with
vertex A and edges idA and g. Thus the description of this limit when g is monic
is [(x, y) | gx = y] = [y | y ∈A], which is essentially the same as the subobject
determined by g since a subobject is determined entirely by its elements.
In
other words, the monomorphisms which could be this limit are precisely those
equivalent to (in the same subobject as) g in the sense of Section 1.6.
A category C is complete if every diagram in the category has a limit. It is
ﬁnitely complete if every ﬁnite diagram has a limit. Set, Grp and Top are all
complete.
Products
A discrete graph is a graph with no arrows. If the set {1, 2} is regarded as a
discrete graph I , then a diagram of type I in a category C is simply an ordered
pair of objects of C . A commutative cone over the diagram (A, B) based on T
is simply a pair (x, y) of elements of A and B. Commutativity in this case is a
vacuous condition.
Thus a limit of this diagram represents the set {(x, y) | x ∈A, y ∈B} and is
called the product of A and B. It is denoted A × B = [(x, y) | x ∈A, y ∈B].
The object B × A = [(y, x) | y ∈B, x ∈A] is diﬀerently deﬁned, but it is
straightforward to prove that it must be isomorphic to A × B.
It follows from the deﬁnition that A × B is an object P together with two
arrows p1: P −→A and p2: P −→B with the property that for any elements x of
A and y of B based on T there is a unique element (x, y) of A × B based on T
such that p1(x, y) = x and p2(x, y) = y. These arrows are conventionally called
the projections, even though they need not be epimorphisms. Conversely, any
element h of A × B based on T must be of the form (x, y) for some elements of A
and B respectively based on T: namely, x = p1(h) and y = p2(h). In other words,
there is a canonical bijection between Hom(T, A×B) and Hom(T, A)×Hom(T, B)
(this is merely a rewording of the statement that A × B represents {(x, y): x ∈
A, y ∈B}).
Note that (x, x′) and (x′, x) are distinct elements of A × A if x and x′ are
distinct, because p1(x, x′) = x, whereas p1(x′, x) = x′. In fact, (x, x′) = (p2, p1) ◦
(x, x′).

1.7 Limits
39
If f: A −→C and g: B −→D, then we deﬁne
f × g = (f ◦p1, g ◦p2): A × B −→C × D
Thus for elements x of A and y of B deﬁned on the same object, (f ×g)(x, y) =
(f(x), g(y)).
It should be noted that the notation A × B carries with it the information
about the arrows p1 and p2. Nevertheless, one often uses the notation A × B to
denote the object P; the assumption then is that there is a well-understood pair
of arrows which make it the genuine product. We point out that in general there
may be no canonical choice of which object to take be X ×Y , or which arrows as
projections. There is apparently such a canonical choice in Set but that requires
one to choose a canonical way of deﬁning ordered pairs.
In a poset regarded as a category, the product of two elements is their inﬁmum,
if it exists. In a group regarded as a category, products don’t exist unless the
group has only one element. The direct product of two groups is the product in
Grp and the product of two topological spaces with the product topology is the
product in Top. There are similar constructions in a great many categories of sets
with structure.
The product of any indexed collection of objects in a category is deﬁned analo-
gously as the limit of the diagram D: I −→C where I is the index set considered
as the objects of a graph with no arrows and D is the indexing function. This
product is denoted Q
i∈I Di, although explicit mention of the index set is often
omitted. Also, the index is often subscripted as Di if that is more convenient.
One particular case of a product is the product over the empty index set; this is
necessarily a terminal object (Exercise 1).
There is a general associative law for products which holds up to isomorphism;
for example, for any objects A, B and C, (A×B)×C is isomorphic to A×(B×C),
and both are isomorphic to A×B ×C, meaning the product over a three-element
index set with D1 = A, D2 = B and D3 = C.
There is certainly no reason to expect two objects in an arbitrary category
to have a product. A category has products if any indexed set of objects in
the category has a product. It has ﬁnite products if any ﬁnite indexed set of
objects has a product. By an inductive argument (Exercise 2), it is suﬃcient for
ﬁnite products to assume an empty product and that any pair of objects has a
product. Similar terminology is used for other types of limits; in particular, a
category C has ﬁnite limits or is left exact if every diagram D: I −→C in
which I is a ﬁnite graph, has a limit. A functor is left exact if it preserves ﬁnite
limits; it is continuous if it preserves limits of all small diagrams. A category has
designated ﬁnite limits if it has the additional structure of an operation that

40
1 Categories
takes each ﬁnite diagram to a speciﬁc limit cone over that diagram. One deﬁnes
categories with designated products, designated limits, designated pullbacks, and
so on, in the same manner.
Algebraic structures in a category
The concept of product allows us to deﬁne certain notions of abstract algebra
in a category. Thus a binary operation on an object A of a category is an arrow
m: A × A −→A (so of course, the product must exist). For elements x, y of A
deﬁned on T, we write xy for m(x, y) just as in sets. Observe that the expression
xy is deﬁned only if x and y are elements of A deﬁned on the same object. We
will use inﬁx notation for symbols for binary operations such as +.
The operation m is commutative if xy = yx for all elements x and y of A;
spelled out, m(x, y) = m(y, x) for all elements x and y of A deﬁned on the same
object. The operation is associative if (xy)z = m(m(x, y), z) = m(x, m(y, z)) =
x(yz) for all elements x, y, and z deﬁned on the same object.
Thus a group in a category is an object G of the category together with an
associative binary operation on G, a function i: G −→G, and a global element
e of G with the properties that e()x = xe() = x and xi(x) = i(x)x = e for all
x ∈G. (In notation such as “e()x”, the element () is assumed to have the same
domain as x.) Abelian groups, rings, R-modules, monoids, and so on can all be
deﬁned in this way.
Equalizers
The equalizer of two arrows f, g: A −→B (such arrows are said to be paral-
lel) is the object [x ∈A | f(x) = g(x)]. As such this does not describe a commu-
tative cone, but the equivalent expression [(x, y) | x ∈A, y ∈B, f(x) = g(x) = y]
does describe a commutative cone, so the equalizer of f and g is the limit of the
diagram
A
f
−−→
−−→
g
B
We will also call it Eq(f, g). In Set, the equalizer of f and g is of course the
set {x ∈A | f(x) = g(x)}. In Grp, the kernel of a homomorphism f: G −→H is
the equalizer of f and the constant map at the group identity.

1.7 Limits
41
Equivalence relations and kernel pairs
In Set, an equivalence relation E on a set A gives rise to a quotient set A/E,
the set of equivalence classes. In this section, we will explore the two concepts
(equivalence relations and kernel pairs) in an arbitrary category. In exercises here
and in Section 1.8 we explore their connection with the concept of coequalizer,
which is deﬁned there. In a category C that has ﬁnite limits, an equivalence
relation on an object A is a subobject (u, v): E −→A × A which is reﬂexive,
symmetric and transitive: for any elements x, y, z of A based on T, the following
must be true:
1. (x, x) ∈T E.
2. If (x, y) ∈T E then so is (y, x).
3. If (x, y) and (y, x) are both in E then so is (x, z).
These deﬁnitions can be translated into statements about diagrams (see Ex-
ercise 19).
The two projections
E −→
−→A
of an equivalence relation E )−→A × A are also called the equivalence relation.
Exercise 18 describes conditions on a parallel pair of arrows which make it an
equivalence relation, thus giving a deﬁnition which works in categories without
products.
Related to this is the concept of kernel pair. If f: A −→B is any arrow of
C , a parallel pair of arrows h: K −→A, k: K −→A is a kernel pair for f if
f ◦h = f ◦k and whenever s, t: L −→A is a pair of arrows for which f ◦s = f ◦t,
then there is a unique arrow j: L −→K for which s = h ◦j and t = k ◦j. K is the
pullback of f along itself and h and k are the projections (Exercise 20). Thus
K = [(x, x′) | f ◦x = f ◦x′]. In Set, an equivalence relation (u, v) is the kernel
pair of its class map.
Existence of limits
The existence of some limits sometimes implies the existence of others. We
state a theorem giving the most useful variations on this theme.
Proposition 2.
(a) In any category C , the following are equivalent:
(i) C has all ﬁnite limits.

42
1 Categories
(ii) C has a terminal object, all equalizers of parallel pairs, and all binary
products.
(iii) C has a terminal object and all pullbacks.
(b) A category C has all limits if and only if it has all equalizers of parallel
pairs and all products.
Proof. For (a), that (i) implies (iii) is trivial, and that (iii) implies (ii) follows
from Exercise 4.
The construction that shows (ii) implies (i) and the construction for the hard
half of (b) are essentially the same.
With a terminal object and binary products, we get, by induction, all ﬁnite
products. Given a diagram D: I −→C , with I a non-empty ﬁnite graph, we
let A = Q
i∈ObI Di and B = Q
α∈ArI cod α. We deﬁne two arrows f, g: A −→B
by pα ◦f = α ◦pdom α and pα ◦g = pcod α. This means that the following diagrams
commute.
D dom α
D cod α
-
α
Q
i∈ObI Di
Q
α∈ArI cod α
-
f
?
pdom α
?
pα
Q
i∈ObI Di
Q
α∈ArI cod α
-
g
D cod α
pcod α
@
@
@@
R
pα
    	
If E
h
−−→Q Di is an equalizer of f and g, then f ◦h = g ◦h expresses the fact
that h: E −→D is a cone, while the universal mapping property into the equalizer
expresses the universality of that cone. As for the empty cone, its limit is the
terminal object.
By suitable modiﬁcations of this argument, we can show that a functor pre-
serves ﬁnite limits if and only if it preserves binary products, the terminal object
and equalizers.
Preservation of limits
Let D: I −→C be a diagram and F: C −→B be a functor. Let d: lim D −→D
be a universal element of D. We say that F preserves lim D if Fd: F(lim D) −→
FD is a universal element of FD. The following proposition gives an equivalent
condition for preserving a limit.

1.7 Limits
43
Proposition 3.
F preserves the limit of D if and only if FD has a limit
d′: lim FD −→FD and there is an isomorphism g: F(lim D) −→lim FD with
the property that for any object T,
Cone(T, D)
Cone(FT, FD)
-
F
Hom(T, lim D)
Hom(FT, F(lim D))
-
F
?
Hom(T, A)
?
Hom(FT, d′)
    	
Hom(FT, lim FD)
Hom(FT, g)
@
@
@@
R
?
Hom(FT, Fd)
commutes.
The proof is trivial, but we include this diagram because it is analogous to a
later diagram (Diagram (3), Section 5.3) which is not so trivial.
Requiring that lim FD ∼= F(lim D) is not enough for preservation of limits
(see Exercise 16).
Given any arbitrary class of diagrams each of which has a limit in C , the
functor F preserves that class of limits if it preserves the limit of each diagram
in that class.
We say, for example, that F preserves all limits (respectively
all ﬁnite limits) if it preserves the limit of every diagram (respectively every
ﬁnite diagram). F preserves products (respectively ﬁnite products) if F preserves
the limit of every discrete diagram (respectively every ﬁnite discrete diagram).
To preserve ﬁnite products it is suﬃcient to preserve terminal objects and each
product of two objects.
A functor which preserves ﬁnite limits is called left exact. This coincides
with the concept with the same name when the functor goes from a category of
R-modules to Ab.
A functor F: C −→B creates limits of a given type if whenever D: I −→C
is a diagram of that type and d: lim FD −→FD is a universal element of FD,
then there is a unique element u: X −→D for which Fu = d and moreover u is a
universal element of D. The underlying set functor from Grp to Set creates limits.
For example, that it creates products is another way of stating the familiar fact
that given two groups G and H there is a unique group structure on G×H (really
on UG × UH) making it the product in Grp.
F reﬂects limits of a given type if whenever D: I −→C is a diagram of that
type, d: lim FD −→FD is a universal element of FD and c is a cone to D for
which Fc = d, then c is a universal element of D.

44
1 Categories
Exercises 1.7
1. Show that an object T is the terminal object if and only if it is the product
of the empty set of objects.
2. (a) Let A, B and C be objects in a category. Show how (A × B) × C) and
A × (B × C) can both be regarded as the product of A, B and C (by ﬁnding
appropriate projection maps), so that they are isomorphic.
(b) Let C be category with an empty product and with the property that
any two objects have a product. Show that C has all ﬁnite products.
(c) If you really care, state and prove a general associative law saying that
any way of meaningfully parenthesizing a sequence of objects of a category with
products gives a product which is isomorphic to that given by any other way of
parenthesizing the same sequence.
3. Show that in a category with a terminal object 1, the product A × 1 exists
for any object A and is (up to isomorphism) just A itself equipped with the
projections id: A −→A and (): A −→1.
4. Prove that in a category with ﬁnite products, the equalizer of
A
f
−−→
−−→
g
B
is the pullback of
A
A × B
-
(id, g)
A
?
(id, f)
if it exists, and in a category with a terminal object, the product of objects A
and B is the pullback of
A
1
-
B
?
if it exists.

1.7 Limits
45
5. (a) Let C be a category and A an object of C . Show that the product of two
objects in the category C /A of objects over A is their pullback over A in C.
(b) Show that the functor C /A −→C which takes B −→A to B creates
pullbacks.
6.
Call a non-empty graph connected if it is not the disjoint union of two
non-empty subgraphs.
(a) Show that the forgetful functor A /A −→A preserves the limits of dia-
grams over connected graphs (which are called connected diagrams).
(b) Show that the category of ﬁelds and homomorphisms of ﬁelds has limits
of connected diagrams and no others.
7. Show that if D is left exact and F: D −→C preserves ﬁnite limits, then the
comma category (C , F) is left exact.
8. Prove Proposition 1.
9. Let A be a topological space and let O(A) denote the set of open sets of
A partially ordered by inclusion considered as a category. Show that O(A) has
ﬁnite limits. Does O(A) have all limits?
10. A monomorphism is regular if it is the equalizer of two arrows. (The dual
notion is called regular epi, not ”coregular”).
Recall from Section 1.4 that a
regular epimorphism is denoted in diagrams by a double-headed arrow:
−→→
We have no special notation for regular monos nor for ordinary epis. The reason
for this asymmetry is basically one of convenience. In most of the situations in
this book we are interested in ordinary monos, but only regular epis. Actually, in
toposes where much of our attention will be focused, all epis and all monos will
be regular.
(a) Show that any arrow whose domain is the terminal object 1 is a regular
mono.
(b) Show that the pullback of a regular mono is a regular mono.
11. Let D: I −→Set be a diagram in Set. Let ∗be a ﬁxed one-element set.
Show that the set of all cones over D with vertex ∗, equipped with the correct
projections, can be interpreted as lim D. (This proves that Set is complete).
12. Show that Grp and Top are complete.

46
1 Categories
13. Let D: I −→C be a diagram, and let A be an object of C . Then DA =
Hom(A, D(−)) is a diagram in Set. Let Cone(A, D) denote the set of cones over
D with vertex A. Show that the limit of DA in Set is the cone α: (Cone(A, D)
−→DA with αi (for i an object of I ) deﬁned by αi(β: A −→D) = βi, for
β ∈(Cone(A, D).
14. Show that representable functors preserve limits. (Hint: Use Exercises (11)
and (13) A direct proof is also possible.)
15. Let D: I −→C be a diagram and let α: W −→D be a cone over D. For any
object A of C , let Hom(A, α): Hom(A, W) −→Hom(A, D(−)) denote the cone
with vertex Hom(A, W) which is deﬁned by Hom(A, α)i = Hom(A, αi). Show
that if Hom(A, α) is a limit of Hom(A, D(−)) for every object A of C , then α: W
−→D is a limit of D. (Of course the converse is true by Exercise 14.)
16. Let C be the category of inﬁnite sets and maps between them. Show that
the covariant powerset functor P which takes a map to its image function makes
P(A×B) isomorphic to PA×PB for any objects A and B but does not preserve
products.
17. Suppose that the category A has ﬁnite limits. Show that the kernel pair
of any arrow is an equivalence relation. Hint: you will have to use the universal
mapping properties of limits.
18. A more general deﬁnition of equivalence relation is this: a pair u: E −→A,
v: E −→A of arrows is jointly monic if for any f, g: B −→E, uf = ug and
vf = vg imply that f = g. Such a pair makes E an equivalence relation on A if
for each object B the subset of Hom(B, A) × Hom(B, A) induced by Hom(B, E)
is an equivalence relation (in the usual sense) on Hom(B, A). Show that this is
equivalent to the deﬁnition in the text when the product A × A exists in the
category.
19. Show that a relation (u, v): R −A × A in a category with ﬁnite limits is
transitive if and only if, for the pullback
R
A
-
P
R
-
?
?
it is true that (v ◦pi, u ◦p2) ∈R.

1.7 Limits
47
20. Show that h, k: K −→A is a kernel pair of f: A −→B if and only if this
diagram is a pullback:
A
B
-
f
K
A
-
k
?
h
?
f
21. (a) Show that the underlying functor from the category of groups creates
limits.
(b) Do the same for the category of compact Hausdorﬀspaces and continuous
maps.
22. Show that if F: C −→D is an equivalence of categories, and U: D −→A
creates limits, then UF reﬂects limits.
23. Show that if E is an equivalence relation on A, then E × E is an equivalence
relation on A × A.
24. Let F: B −→D and G: C −→D be functors. Show that the following diagram
is a limit in the category of categories. Here (F, G) is the comma category as
deﬁned in Section 1.2.
B
Ar(D)
C
(F, G)
     	
?
@
@
@
@@
R
D
?
F
dom
     	
cod
@
@
@
@@
R
D
?
G
25. Show that if A and B are categories and D: I −→Func(A , B) a diagram,
and for each object A of A the diagram D ◦ev(A) gotten by evaluating at A has
a limit, then these limits make up the values of a functor which is the limit of D
in the functor category. Conclude that if B is complete, so is Func(A , B).

48
1 Categories
26. Suppose that A is a category and that B is a subcategory of Func(A op, Set)
that contains all the representable functors. This means that the Yoneda embed-
ding Y of A op into the functor category factors through B by a functor y: A op
−→B. Suppose further that a class C of cones is given in A with the property
that each functor in B takes every cone in C to a limit cone. Show that yop: A
−→Bop takes every cone in to a limit cone.
1.8 Colimits
A colimit of a diagram is a limit of the diagram in the opposite category. Spelled
out, a commutative cocone from a diagram D: I −→C with vertex W is a
natural transformation from D to the constant diagram with value W.
The
set of commutative cocones from D to an object A is Hom(D, A) and becomes
a covariant functor by composition. A colimit of D is a universal element for
Hom(D, −).
For example, let us consider the dual notion to “product”. If A and B are
objects in a category, their sum (also called coproduct) is an object Q together
with two arrows i1: A −→Q and i2: B −→Q for which if f: A −→C and g: B
−→C are any arrows of the category, there is a unique arrow ⟨f, g⟩: Q −→C for
which ⟨f, g⟩◦i1 = f and ⟨f, g⟩◦i = 2 = g. The arrows i1 and i2 are called the
coproduct injections although they need not be monic. Since Hom(A + B, C) ∼=
Hom(A, C) × Hom(B, C), ⟨f, g⟩represents an ordered pair of maps, just as the
symbol (f, g) we deﬁned when we treated products in Section 1.7.
The sum of two sets in Set is their disjoint union, as it is in Top. In Grp the
categorical sum of two groups is their free product; on the other hand the sum of
two abelian groups in the category of abelian groups is their direct sum with the
standard inclusion maps of the two groups into the direct sum. The categorical
sum in a poset regarded as a category is the supremum. The categorical sum
of two posets in the category of posets and non-decreasing maps is their disjoint
with no element of the one summand related to any element of the second.
The coequalizer of two arrows f, g: A −→B is an arrow h: B −→C such that
(i) h ◦f = h ◦g, and
(ii) if k: B −→W and k ◦f = k ◦g, then there is a unique arrow u: C −→W for
which u ◦h = k.
The coequalizer of any two functions in Set exists but is rather complicated
to construct. If K is a normal subgroup of a group G, then the coequalizer of
the inclusion of K into G and the constant map at the identity is the canonical
map G −→G/K.

1.8 Colimits
49
The dual concept to “pullback” is “pushout”, which we leave to the reader to
formulate.
The notion of a functor creating or preserving a colimit, or a class of colimits,
is deﬁned analogously to the corresponding notion for limits.
A functor that
preserves ﬁnite colimits is called right exact, and one that preserves colimits of
all small diagrams is called cocontinuous. In general, a categorical concept that
is deﬁned in terms of limits and/or colimits is said to be deﬁned by “exactness
conditions”.
Regular monomorphisms and epimorphisms
A map that is the equalizer of two arrows is automatically a monomorphism
and is called a regular monomorphism. For let h: E −→A be an equalizer of
f, g: A −→B and suppose that k, l: C −→E are two arrows with h ◦k = h ◦l. Call
this common composite m. Then f ◦m = f ◦h ◦k = g ◦h ◦k = g ◦m so that, by
the universal mapping property of equalizers, there is a unique map n: C −→E
such that h ◦n = m. But k and l already have this property, so that k = n = l.
The dual property of being the coequalizer of two arrows is called regular
epimorphism. In many familiar categories (monoids, groups, abelian groups,
rings, . . . ) the regular epimorphisms are the surjective mappings, but it is less
often the case that the injective functions are regular monomorphisms. Of the four
categories mentioned above, two (groups and abelian groups) have that property,
but it is far from obvious for groups.
Regular categories
A category A will be called regular if every ﬁnite diagram has a limit, if
every parallel pair of arrows has a coequalizer and if whenever
C
D
-
k
A
B
-
f
?
g
?
h
is a pullback square, then h a regular epimorphism implies that g is a regular
epimorphism.
Weaker deﬁnitions are sometimes used in the literature.
The
property required of regular epis is sometimes described by the phrase, “Regular
epis are stable under pullback.” Some related ideas are deﬁned on page 240.

50
1 Categories
In Set and in many other familiar categories (groups, abelian groups, rings,
categories of modules, etc., the regular epics are characterized as the surjective
homomorphisms and these are closed in this way under pulling back. However,
many familiar categories are not regular. For example neither the category of
topological spaces and continuous maps, nor the category of posets and order
preserving maps, is regular. If you know what an equational theory is, it is useful
to know that the category of models of any equational theory is always regular
(and exact, see below for the deﬁnition).
Proposition 1.
In a regular category, every arrow f can be written as f = m ◦e
where m is a monomorphism and e is a regular epimorphism.
Proof. The obvious way to proceed is to begin with an arrow f: A −→A′ and form
the kernel pair of f, which can be described symbolically as {(a, b) | fa = fb}.
If this kernel pair is K(f)
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
A, then let g: A −→B be the coequalizer of d0
and d1. Since f ◦d0 = f ◦d1, the universal mapping property of coequalizers
implies there is a unique h: B −→A′ such that h ◦g = f. Now g is a regular
epimorphism by deﬁnition. If you try this construction in the category of sets
or groups or, . . . , you will discover that h is always monic and then f = h ◦
g is the required factorization.
There are, however, categories in which such
an h is not always monic.
We will now show that in a regular category, it
is. Actually, a bit less than regularity suﬃces. It is suﬃcient that a pullback
of a regular epimorphism be an epimorphism. Call an arrow a weakly regular
epimorphism if it is gotten as a composite of arrows, each of which is gotten
by pulling back a regular epimorphism. Since a pullback stacked on top of a
pullback is a pullback, it follows that weakly regular epimorphisms are both
closed under pullback (Exercise 8) and under composition and since a pullback
of a regular epimorphism is an epimorphism, every weakly regular epimorphism
is an epimorphism. Next note that since A −→→B is a regular epimorphism,
f × 1: A × A −→B × A is a weakly regular epimorphism since
B × A
B
-
p1
A × A
A
-
p1
?
f × 1
?
f
is a pullback. Similarly, 1×f: B ×A −→B ×B and hence f ×f: A×A −→B ×B
is a weakly regular epimorphism. Let K(h)
e0
−−−→
−−−→
e1
A be the kernel pair of g. The

1.8 Colimits
51
fact that h ◦g ◦d0 = f ◦d0 = f ◦d1 = h ◦g ◦d1, together with the universal mapping
property of K(h) implies the existence of an arrow k: K(f) −→K(h) such that
the left hand square in the diagram
A × A
B × B
-
- g × g
K(f)
K(h)
-
k
?
(d0, d1)
A′ × A′
-
h × h
A′
-
?
(1, 1)
?
(e0, e1)
commutes. The right hand square and the outer squares are pullbacks by def-
inition—they have the universal mapping properties of the kernel pairs. By a
standard property of pullbacks, the left hand square is also a pullback. But g × g
is a weakly regular epimorphism and hence so is k. Now in the square
A
B
-
g
K(f)
K(h)
-
k
?
d0
?
d1
?
e0
?
e1
we have e0 ◦k = g ◦d0 = g ◦d1 = e1 ◦k and k is epic and therefore e0 = e1. But
that means that h is monic, which ﬁnishes the argument.
Equivalence relations and exact categories
Let A be a category with ﬁnite limits. If A is an object, a subobject (d0, d1): E
−→A × A is called an equivalence relation if it is
ER–1.
reﬂexive: there is an arrow r: a −→E such that d0 ◦r = d1 ◦r = id;
ER–2.
symmetric: there is an arrow s: E −→E such that s◦d0 = d1 and s◦d1 = d0;
ER–3.
transitive: if
E
A
-
p1
T
E
-
q1
?
q2
?
p2
is a pullback, there is an arrow t: T −→E such that p1 ◦t = p1 ◦q1 and
p2 ◦t = p2 ◦q2.

52
1 Categories
The interpretation of the last point is that E ⊆A × A, so is a set of ordered
pairs (a1, a2); T ⊆E ×E, so T is a set of ordered 4-tuples (a1, a2, a3, a4) such that
(a1, a2) ∈E and (a3, a4) ∈E and the condition p1 ◦q2 = p2 ◦q1 simply expresses
a3 = a4. Then the condition p1 ◦t = p1 ◦q1 means that t(a1, a2, a3, a4) has ﬁrst
coordinate a1 and p2 ◦t = p2 ◦q2 means that the second coordinate is a4. So taken
all together, this says that when (a1, a2) ∈E, (a3, a4) ∈E and a2 = a3, then
(a1, a4) ∈E, which is just transitivity in the usual sense.
If f: A −→A′ is an arrow, then the kernel pair of f is an equivalence relation.
It is internally the relation a1 ∼a2 if and only if fa1 = fa2. We say that an
equivalence relation is eﬀective if it is the kernel pair of some arrow. Another
term for eﬀective equivalence relation is congruence.
A category is called exact if it is regular and if every equivalence relation is
eﬀective.
Proposition 2.
Suppose A is a regular, respectively exact, category. Then for
any object A the slice A /A is regular, respectively exact.
Proof. Let us write [b: B −→A] for an object of A /A. Suppose f: [b: B −→A]
−→[b′: B′ −→A] is an arrow such that f: B −→B′ is a regular epimorphism in
A . Then there is a pair of arrows B′′
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
B whose coequalizer is f. Then we
have the diagram
[b ◦d0 = b ◦d1: B′′ −→A]
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
[b: B −→A]
f
−−→[b′: B′ −→A]
which is a coequalizer in A /A so that f is a regular epimorphism there. Con-
versely, suppose that f: [b: B −→A] −→[b′: B′ −→A] is a regular epimorphism in
A /A. Then we have a coequalizer
[b′′: B′′ −→A]
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
[b: B −→A]
f
−−→[b′: B′ −→A]
Given g: B −→C such that g ◦d0 = g ◦d1, it is easy to see that we have a morphism
(g, b): [b: B −→A] −→[p2, C × A]. Moreover,
(g, b) ◦d0 = (g ◦d0, b ◦d0) = (g ◦d1, b′′) = (g ◦d1, b ◦d1) = (g, b) ◦d1
so that there is a unique (h, k): [b′: B′ −→A] −→[p2: C ×A −→A] with (h, k) ◦f =
(g, b). This implies that h ◦f = g and k ◦f = b. Thus h: B′ −→C satisﬁes
h ◦f = g. If h′ were a diﬀerent map for which h′ ◦f = g, then (h′, k) would be a

1.8 Colimits
53
second map for which (h′, k) ◦f = (g, b), contradicting uniqueness. Thus far we
have shown that f is a regular epic in A if and only if it is so in A /A. If we
have [b: B −→A]
f
−−→[b′: B′ −→A]
g
←−−[c′, C′] and if
C′
B′
-
g
C
B
-
g′
?
f ′
?
f
is a pullback, then it is immediate that for c = c′ ◦f ′ = b′ ◦g ◦f ′ = b′ ◦f ◦g′ = b ◦g′
the square
[c′: C′ −→A]
[b′: B′ −→A]
-
g
[c: C −→A]
[b: B −→A]
-
g′
?
f ′
?
f
is a pullback in A . If f is regular epic in A /A it is so in A ; hence f ′ is regular
epic in A and therefore is so in A /A. This proves it for regular categories.
For exact categories, the argument is similar. The previous discussion amounts
to showing that pullbacks and coequalizers are the same in A and A /A. As a
matter of fact, the full story is that all colimits are the same. Not all limits are;
however all pullbacks are and that is all that is used in the deﬁnition of exact
category. For example, the terminal object in A /A is [id: A −→A] and that is
not the terminal object of A (unless A = 1, in which case A /A is equivalent to
A ). See Exercise 6 below.
Exercises 1,8
1. Given two arrows f: A −→C and g: B −→D, then there is a unique arrow
f + g: A + B −→C + D for which (f + g) ◦i1 = i1 ◦f and similarly for the second
index. Write a formula for f + g in terms of pointed brackets. (Compare the
deﬁnition of f × g in Section 1.7.)
2. Let G be a group with subgroup K (not necessarily normal in G). Describe
the coequalizer of the inclusion of K in G and the constant map taking everything
in K to the identity.
3. Show that coequalizers of any two parallel arrows exist in Set and Grp.

54
1 Categories
4. (Coequalizers can be big). Let 1 denote that category with one object and
one arrow, and 2 the category with two objects and exactly one identity arrow,
going from one object to the other. There are exactly two functors from 1 to
2. Show that their coequalizer in the category of categories and functors is the
monoid (N, +) regarded as a category with one object.
5.
(a) Show that a coequalizer of two parallel arrows is an epimorphism.
(b) Show that the converse of (a) is true in Set and Grp, but not in general.
6. Prove:
(a) If an equivalence relation is eﬀective and has a coequalizer then it is the
kernel pair of its coequalizer.
(b) If an epimorphism is regular and has a kernel pair then it is the coequalizer
of its kernel pair. (Warning: a parallel pair it coequalizcs need not be its kernel
pair.)
7. Let C be a small category. Show that any functor F: C op −→Set is a colimit
of representable functors. (Hint: The required graph I is constructed as follows.
An object of I is a pair (C, c) where c ∈FC. Thus the set of objects of I is the
disjoint union of all the individual sets FC over all the objects of C . A morphism
in I from (C, c) to (C′, c′) is a morphism f: C −→C′ such that Ff(c′) = c.
The diagram D: I −→Func(C , Set) is deﬁned by D(C, c) = Hom(−, C) and
Df = Hom(−, f). Of course we have cheated a bit in calling the morphisms f as
they must also be indexed by the names of their domain and codomain.)
8. Prove the following laws of exponents for the element notation introduced in
Section 1.5:
(a) For all objects T1 and T2, ∈T1+T2 = ∈T1 × ∈T2 (an element of A deﬁned on
T1 + T2 is the same as a pair of elements of A, one deﬁned on T1, and the other
on T2).
(b) For all objects A1 and A2, ∈A1×A2 = ∈A1 × ∈A2.
1.9 Adjoint functors
Adjunction of group underlying function
Let A be a set and G be a group. We have noted that for any function from A
to G, in other words for any element of HomSet(A, UG), there is a unique group

1.9 Adjoint functors
55
homomorphism from the free group FA with basis A to G which extends the
given function. This is thus a bijection
HomGrp(FA, G) −→HomSet(A, UG)
The inverse simply restricts a group homomorphism from FA to G to the
basis A. Essentially the same statement is true for monoids instead of groups
(replace FA by the free monoid A∗) and also for the category of abelian groups,
with FA the free abelian group with basis A.
The bijection just mentioned is a natural isomorphism β of functors of two
variables, in other words a natural isomorphism from the functor HomGrp(F(−), −)
to HomSet(−, U(−)). This means precisely that for all functions f: B −→A and
all group homomorphisms g: G −→H,
HomGrp(FB, H)
HomSet(B, UH)
-
β(B, H)
HomGrp(FA, G)
HomSet(A, UG)
-
β(A, G)
6
HomGrp(Ff, g)
6
HomSet(f, Ug)
(1)
commutes.
The free group functor and the underlying set functor are a typical pair of
“adjoint functors”. Formally, if A and D are categories and L: A −→D and
R: D −→A are functors, then L is left adjoint to R and R is right adjoint to L
if for every objects A of A and B of D there is an isomorphism
HomA (A, RB) ∼= HomD(LA, B)
which is natural in the sense of diagram 1. Informally, elements of RB deﬁned
on A are essentially the same as element of B deﬁned on LA.
If f: A −→RB, the arrow g: LA −→B corresponding to it under the natural
isomorphism is called the transpose or adjoint transpose of f. The arrow f is
also called the transpose of g; usually there is no doubt which is meant, although
the word can indeed be ambiguous.
Unit and counit
In particular, if L is left adjoint to R and A is an object of A , then corre-
sponding to idLA in HomA (LA, LA) there is an arrow ηA: A −→RLA; the arrows
ηA form a natural transformation from the identity functor on A to R ◦L. This

56
1 Categories
natural transformation η is the unit of the adjunction of L to R. A similar trick
also produces a natural transformation ϵ: L ◦R −→idD called the counit of the
adjunction. The unit and counit essentially determine the adjunction completely
(Exercise 15).
Examples
We give a number of examples here and some more in the exercises.
1. If A is a set, let 2A denote the category of subsets of A ordered by inclusion.
If f: A −→B is a function, the direct image functor which assigns to each
A0 ⊆A its image f!(A0) is left adjoint to the inverse image functor f −1: 2B
−→2A; see Exercise 6 of Section 1.2.
It follows also from that exercise
that the f∗deﬁned there is right adjoint to f −1. Observe that y ∈f!(A0)
(a statement without quantiﬁers) if and only if there exists an x ∈A0
such that f(x) = y (a statement with an existential quantiﬁer). Universal
quantiﬁers may also be introduced using ∗. In this way, quantiﬁers may be
introduced into the language of a topos. However we will not be doing that.
See Lambek and Scott [1984].
2. If A is a ﬁxed set, the functor from Set to Set which takes any set B to B×A
is left adjoint to the functor which takes a set T to the set HomSet(A, T) of
functions from A to T. In other words,
HomSet(B × A, T) ∼= HomSet(B, HomSet(A, T))
The counit of this adjunction is the map from HomSet(A, B) × A to B
which takes a pair (f, x) to its value f(x) and so is called the evaluation
map. Note the formal similarity between the evaluation map and the modus
ponens rule of logic.
3. Let A be an equationally deﬁned category of algebraic structures (You can
skip this example if you don’t know about equationally deﬁned theories.
They will be treated in detail later.) For example, a group is a set with one
nullary operation e (the unit element), one unary operation (which takes an
element to its inverse), and one binary operation (the group multiplication),
subiect to the equations
xe() = e()x = x
xx−1 = x−1x = e()
and
(xy)z = x(yz)

1.9 Adjoint functors
57
which hold for all x, y, z in the group.
Such a category A has an underlying set functor U: A −→Set and it can be
proved that U has a left adjoint F: Set −→A . It follows from adjointness
(Exercise 16) that for any set X and any function g: X −→UA where A is
any object of A , there is a unique arrow g′: FX −→A for which
X
UFX
-
ηX
g
@
@
@@
R
UA
?
Ug′
commutes. Thus FX deserves to be called the “free A -structure on X”.
Exercises 1, 2, 3, 7 and 8 give concrete descriptions of the adjoints for
special cases of equationally deﬁned categories.
Lest the reader get the idea that all underlying set functors have adjoints,
we mention the category of ﬁelds, whose underlying set functor does not have
an adjoint. An interesting case is that of torsion abelian groups. If we ﬁx an
exponent d and look at all groups satisfying xd = 1, there is an adjoint that takes
a set S to the direct sum of S many copies of Z/dZ, but on the full category,
there is no adjoint.
Representability and adjointness
The statement that L is left adjoint to R immediately implies that for each
object A of A , the object LA of B represents the functor HomA (A, R(−)): B
−→Set. The universal element for this representation, which must be an element
of HomA (A, RLA), is the unit ηA. Dually, the object RB with universal element
ϵA represents the contravariant functor Hom(L(−), B). The following theorem is
a strong converse to these facts.
Theorem 1.
[Pointwise construction of adjoints] Let A and B be categories.
(a) If R: B −→A is a functor such that the functor HomA (A, R(−)) is repre-
sentable for every object A of A , then R has a left adjoint.
(b) If L: A −→B is a functor such that HomB(L(−), B) is representable for
every object B of B, then L has a left adjoint.
With little more work, one can prove parametrized versions of these results.

58
1 Categories
Theorem 2.
Let A , B, and X be categories.
(a) If R: X ×B −→A is a functor such that the functor HomB(A, R(X, −)): B
−→Set is representable for every objects A ∈Ob(A ) and X ∈Ob(X ), then
there is a unique functor L: A × X op −→B such that
HomA (−, R(−, −)) ∼= HomB(L(−, −), −)
as functors A op × X × B −→Set.
(b) If L: A × X op −→B is a functor such that HomB(L(−, X), B): A −→Set
is representable for all objects B ∈Ob(B) and X ∈Ob(X ), then there is
a unique functor R: X × B −→A such that
HomA (−, R(−, −)) ∼= HomB(L(−, −), −)
as functors A op × X × B −→Set.
Proof. The two statements are dual, so we will prove the ﬁrst. First, choose an
object function L: Ob(A ) × Ob(X ) −→Ob(B) such that HomA (A, R(X, B)) ∼=
HomB(L(A, X), B) for all A ∈Ob(A ), X ∈Ob(X ), and B ∈Ob(B). Now we
want to make L into a functor. Choose arrows f: A −→A′ and g: X′ −→X. Now
for any B ∈Ob(B) we have a diagram
HomA (A, R(X, B))
HomB(L(A, X), B)
-
∼=
HomA (A′, R(X′, B))
HomB(L(A′, X′), B)
-
∼=
?
HomA (f, R(g, B))
(2)
There is thus a unique arrow φ(f, g, B): HomB(L(A′, X′), B) −→HomB(L(A, X), B)
that makes the square commute. Moreover, since both the isomorphisms and
HomA (f, R(g, B)) are natural with respect to B, we conclude that φ(f, g, B) is
as well. By the Yoneda lemma, there is a unique arrow we call L(f, g): L(A, X)
−→L(A′, X′) such that φ(f, g, B) = HomB(L(f, g), B). If now we have f ′: A′
−→A′′ and g′: X′′ −→X′ we can stack another diagram of shape 2 on top of that
one to show that L(f, g) ◦L(f ′, g′) = L(f ◦f ′, g′ ◦g). The fact that L preserves
identities is even easier.
One of the most important properties of adjoints is their limit preservation
properties.

1.9 Adjoint functors
59
Proposition 3.
Let L: A −→B be left adjoint to R: B −→A .
Then R
preserves the limit of an any diagram in B that has a limit and L preserves the
colimit of any diagram in A that has a colimit.
Proof. This follows from Exercise 14 of Section 1.7, but a direct proof is short
and instructive: Suppose that D: I −→B is a diagram and that B −→D is a
limit cone. Given a cone A −→RD, the adjunction gives a cone LA −→D by
applying the adjunction to each element of the cone. The universality gives an
arrow LA −→C and then the adjunction gives A −→UC. We can summarize
this argument as follows:
Cone(A, RD) ∼= Cone(LA, D) ∼= Hom(LA, B) ∼= Hom(A, RB)
We note that underlying functors in algebra tend to have left adjoints and
thereby preserve limits, but rarely have a right adjoint or preserve colimits.
Existence of adjoints
Freyd’s Adjoint Functor Theorem (Theorem 4 below) is a partial converse to
Corollary 3. To state it, we need a new idea.
Suppose R: D −→C is a functor. R satisﬁes the solution set condition if
for each object A of C there is a set S (the solution set for A) of pairs (y, B)
with y: A −→RB in C with the property that for any arrow d: A −→RD there
is an element (y, B) of S and an arrow f: B −→D for which
A
RB
-
y
d
@
@
@@
R
RD
?
Rf
commutes.
If C is small, then S can be taken to be the set of all pairs (y, B) with y: A
−→RB for all arrows y of C and objects B of D. (Then f can, for example, be
taken to be idD.) On the other hand, if R is already known to have a left adjoint
L then S can be taken to be the singleton set with B = LA and y = ηA.
If the singleton {(y, B)} is a solution set for R, y satisﬁes the existence but
not necessarily the uniqueness property of the deﬁnition of universal element for
the functor Hom(A, R(−)) (Section 1.5). In that case we will say that y is a
weak universal arrow for R and A. (A universal element of Hom(A, R(−)) is
called a universal arrow for R and A.)

60
1 Categories
Theorem 4.
[Freyd] Let D be a category with all limits. Then a functor R: D
−→C has a left adjoint if and only if R preserves all limits and satisﬁes the
solution set condition.
Proof. Let A be an object of C . In order to construct the left adjoint L, it is
enough by Theorem 1 and the deﬁnition of representable functor (Section 1.5)
to construct a universal element for Hom(A, R(−)). We ﬁrst construct an object
WA and a weak universal arrow ζA: A −→RWA. Then we will use equalizers
cleverly to get uniqueness.
The construction of WA is reminiscent of the way one proves that a poset
with all infs and a maximum has all sups (to get the sup of a set, take the inf of
all the elements bigger than everything in the set). The equalizer construction is
not necessary for posets because uniqueness is automatic there.
WA is deﬁned to be the product indexed by all (y, B) ∈S of the objects B.
WA comes equipped with a projection WA −→B for each pair (y, B) ∈S, and
R preserves the fact that WA is a product with these projections. The arrows y
collectively induce ζA: A −→RWA. Given d: A −→RD, let (y, B) ∈S and h: B
−→D be an arrow for which Rh ◦y = d, and p the projection of WA onto B
indexed by (y, B). Then for f = h ◦p, Rf ◦ζA = d so that ζA is a weak universal
arrow.
To attain the uniqueness condition in the deﬁnition of universal arrow, we
construct a subobject LA of WA with the property that ζA factors through
RLA via a map ηA: A −→RLA. It is easy to set that any such ηA is also a weak
universal arrow. The idea is to make LA as small as possible so as to obtain the
uniqueness property.
The natural thing to do would be to take LA to be the intersection of all the
equalizers of maps f1, f2: WA −→D such that Rfi ◦ζA = d for all d: A −→RD.
The trouble is that these equalizers may not form a set. This is where the clever
part of the proof is: Let U = {u: WA −→WA | Ru ◦ζA = ζA}. U is a set, in fact
a submonoid of the endomorphism monoid of WA. (By dcﬁnition of category,
Hom(A, B) is a set for any objects A and B). Then deﬁne w: LA −→WA to
be collective equalizer [z ∈WA | u(z) = v(z) for all u, v ∈U], and let ηA: A
−→RLA be the map induced by the facts that Rw must be an equalizer and ζA
equalizes the image of U under R. Clearly ηA is a weak universal arrow, and it
is easy to see that to get the uniqueness property we had to equalize at least the
elements of U. We now show that equalizing the elements of U is enough.
Suppose d: A −→RD and for i = 1, 2, gi: LA −→D have the property that
Rgi ◦ηA = d. Let e: E −→LA be the equalizer of g1 and g2 , so the horizontal
part of the following commutative diagram, in which v and z have yet to be

1.9 Adjoint functors
61
constructed, is an equalizer:
RE
RLA
-
Re
ν
       	
A
?
RD
d
@
@
@
@
@
@@
R
ηA
Rz
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
I
RWA
?
Rw
-
Rg1
-
Rg2
Since Re is an equalizer, there is an arrow v making the upper left triangle
commute as shown, and because ζA = Rw ◦ηA is a weak universal arrow, there
is an arrow z making Rz ◦ζA = V . It is easy to see that wez ∈U, whence
wezw = w. Because w is monic, this means that zw is a right inverse to e, which
implies that g1 = g2 as required.
The solution set condition is often shown to be satisﬁed in practice by using
a cardinality condition. For example, if U is the underlying functor from Grp to
Set, in constructing a solution set for a particular set A one can clearly restrict
one’s attention to maps A −→UG (G a group) with the property that the image
of A generates G.
Since the cardinality of such a group is bounded by some
cardinal α, a solution set for A consists of all those pairs (y, B), where B ranges
over the distinct (up to isomorphism) groups of cardinality ≤a and y over all
functions from A to RB for all such B.
Kan extensions
If A , C and D are categories and F: D −→C is a functor, then F induces a
functor
Func(F, A ): Func(C , A ) −→Func(D, A )
which takes a functor G: C −→A to G ◦F (like any homfunctor) and a natural
transformation λ: G −→H to λF: G ◦F −→H ◦F. The left Kan extension of
a functor T: D −→A along F is a functor LF(T): C −→A with the property

62
1 Categories
that there is for each G: C −→A a bijection
Nat(LF(T), G) −→Nat(T, G ◦F)
which is natural in G.
In the presence of suﬃcient colimits in A one can construct the Kan extension
of a functor T: D −→A provided that D is a small category.
We give the
construction and leave the detailed veriﬁcations (which are not trivial!) to the
reader.
Given F: D −→C and T: D −→A , we must construct LF(T): C −→A . For
any object C of C , the functor F determines a comma category (F, C) which has
a projection p onto D. We deﬁne LF(T)(C) to be the colimit of the composite
T ◦p: (F, C) −→A . An arrow f: C −→C′ in C determines a functor from (F, C)
to (F, C′) which by the universal property of colimits determines a map
LF(T)(f): LF(T)(C) −→LF(T)(C′)
This makes LF(T) a functor.
Deﬁne the natural transformation η: T −→LF(T) ◦F by requiring that for
each object D of D, ηD is the element of the colimiting cocone to LF(T)(F(D))
at the object (D, idFD, FD) of the comma category (F, FD).
For each G: C
−→A , the required bijection
Nat(LF(T), G) −→Nat(T, G ◦F)
takes λ: LF(T) −→G to (λF)◦η. Conversely, given a natural transformation µ: T
−→GF and an object C of C , there is a cocone from T ◦p to GC whose element
at an object (D, g, C) of (F, C) is
Gg ◦µD: TD −→GFD
This induces a map λC: LF(T)(C) −→GC; these are the components of a natural
transformation λ: LF(T) −→G. The inverse of the bijection just given takes µ
to the λ thus constructed.
We have immediately from Theorem 1 (the pointwise construction of adjoints):
Proposition 5.
In the notation of the preceding paragraphs, if every functor
T: D −→A has a left Kan extension along F, then Func(F, A ): Func(C , A )
−→Func(D, A ) has a left adjoint.
Note that by the construction given of Kan extensions, the hypothesis of
Proposition 5 will be true if A is cocomplete.
Right Kan extensions can be deﬁned similarly. A detailed construction of
right Kan extensions is given in Mac Lane [1971].

1.9 Adjoint functors
63
Exercises 1.9
1. Show that the following construction describes the adjoint to the underlying
functor Ab −→Set: The adjoint takes a set S to the set of all ﬁnite sums
X
s∈S
nss
where for each s ∈S, ns is an integer, but in any given sum, only ﬁnitely many of
them are non-zero. The abelian group structure is just term-wise addition (and
subtraction).
2. Show that the adjoint to the underlying functor CommMon −→Set takes a set
S to the set of all terms
Q
s∈S
sns
where for each s ∈S, ns is a non-negative integer, but in any given product, only
ﬁnitely many of them are non-zero.
3. Show that the adjoint to the underlying set functor CommRing −→Set can be
described as the composite of adjoints in Exercise 1 and Exercise 2. In detail: if
S is a set, then the free commutative ring, which we will call Z[S] since it is, in
fact the ring of polynomials in S is gotten by ﬁrst forming the free commutative
monoid generated by S and then the free abelian group generated by that. It is
still a monoid, since the distributive law of multiplication tells us how to multiply
sums of monomials. The general process by which two such free functors can be
composed was ﬁrst studied by Jon Beck under the name “distributive laws” [Beck,
1969].
4. Let A: C −→C ×C be the diagonal functor. Find left and right adjoints to A.
Assume that C has whatever limits and colimits you need. These are examples
of Kan extensions along the (unique) functor 1 + 1 −→1.
5. Show that if two composable functors each have a left adjoint, then so does
their composite.
6. Show that the functor which takes a set to its set of nonempty ﬁnite subsets
and a function to its direct image function is the left adjoint to the underlying
functor from the category of upper semilattices (see Exercise 14 of Section 1.2).
7. Find left and right adjoints for the functor which takes an R-module (any
ﬁxed ring R) to its underlying Abelian group.

64
1 Categories
8. (a) For a ﬁxed group G, let G −Act denote the category of G-actions and
equivariant maps. Let U be the forgetful functor. Construct a left adjoint for U.
(Hint: it takes a set A to G × A.)
(b) What about a right adjoint?
9. (a) Show that the underlying set functor from Top to Set has a left adjoint
which takes a set to that set regarded as a discrete topological space.
(b) Show that the underlying set functor in (a) also has a right adjoint.
10. Deﬁne four functors π0, U: Cat −→Set and D, G: Set −→Cat as follows:
(i) For any category C , UC is the set of objects of C . For a functor F, UF is
what F does to objects.
(ii) For a category C , π0(C ) is the set of connected components of C —two
objects x and y are in the same component if and only if there is a ﬁ-
nite sequence x = x0, x1, . . . , xn = y of objects of C and a ﬁnite sequence
a1, . . . an−1 of arrows of C with for each i = 1, . . . , n−1, either ai: xi −→xi+1
or, ai: xi+1 −→xi. A functor F induces π0F in the obvious way (it is easy
to see that a functor takes a component into a component).
(iii) For any set A, DA is the category whose set of objects is A and whose only
arrows are identity arrows (DA is the discrete category on A). DF for
a function F takes an object x to F(x) and is forced on arrows.
(iv) For a set A, GA is the category whose objects are the elements of A, with
exactly one arrow between any two elements. (It follows that every arrow
is an isomorphism. - i.e., GA is a groupoid). What G does to functions is
forced.
Prove that: π0 is left adjoint to D, D is left adjoint to U, and U is left adjoint
to G.
11. Show that the “underlying graph functor” U: Cat −→Grph deﬁned in Sec-
tion 1.7 has a left adjoint. (Hint: If G is a graph, FG will have the same objects
as G, and nonidentity arrows will be “composable sequences” of arrows of G.)
12. Assume that L: C −→D is left adjoint to R: D −→C . Prove:
(a) R is faithful if and only if the counit ϵD is epic for every object D of D.
(Hint: The map which Yoneda gives from the natural transformation Hom(−D)
−→Hom(R(−), RD) −→Hom(LR(−), D) must be the counit at D. Now reread
the deﬁnition of epimorphism in Section 1.4).

1.9 Adjoint functors
65
(b) R is full if and only if the counit is a split monic at every object of D.
(c) L is faithful if and only if the unit is monic for every object of C .
(d) L is full if and only if the unit is a split epic at every object of C .
(e) R is an equivalence of categories if and only if the unit and counit are
both natural isomorphisms.
(f) If R is an equivalence of categories, then so is L and moreover then L is
also a right adjoint to R.
13. Show that if A is a category with ﬁnite products and A is an object of A ,
then the functor from the slice category (see Section 1.1) A /A −→A that sends
the object B −→A to B—the so-called forgetful functor—has a right adjoint,
B 7→B × A −→A.
14. Let Mon denote the category of monoids and homomorphisms and Cat the
category of categories and functors.
Deﬁne L: Mon −→Cat as follows: For a
monoid M, the objects of LM are the elements of M. An arrow is a pair (k, m)
of elements of M; it has domain m and codomain km. Composition is given by
the formula
(k′, km) ◦(k, m) = (k′k, m)
If h: M −→N is a homomorphism, Lh(k, m) = (hk, hm). Construct a left adjoint
for L.
15. (a) Show that if L: C −→D is left adjoint to R: D −→C with unit η and
counit ϵ, then Rϵ ◦ηR is the identity natural transformation on R and ϵL ◦Lη is
the identity natural transformation on L.
(b) Show that if L: C −→D and R: D −→C are functors and η: idC −→R ◦L
and ϵ: L ◦R −→idD are natural transformations satisfying the conclusion of (a),
then L is left adjoint to R and η and ϵ are the unit and counit of the adjunction.
16. (a) Show that if L and R are as in (a) of Exercise 15 then for any objects A
of C and B of D and any arrow f: A −→RB of C there is a unique arrow g: LA
−→B of D for which Rg ◦ηA = f. (This generalizes a well-known property of
free groups).
(b) State a dual version of (a) using ϵ.
17. A full subcategory D of a category C is reﬂective if the inclusion has a left
adjoint, which is called the reﬂector.
(a) Show that D is a reﬂective subcategory of C if and only if for each object
A of C there is an object LA of D and an arrow e: A −→LA with the property

66
1 Categories
that if f: A −→B is any arrow with B an object of D then there is a unique
arrow h: LA −→B for which f = h ◦e.
(b) Show that if D is a reﬂective subcategory of C then the reﬂector takes
an object B of D to an object isomorphic to B.
(c) If D is a reﬂective subcategory of C with inclusion I and reﬂector L,
show that an object C of C is isomorphic to an object coming from D if and
only if for each object D′ of D the counit ILD′ −→D′ induces Hom(D′, D) ∼=
Hom(ILD′, D).
(d) Show that the category of Abelian groups is a reﬂective subcategory of
the category of groups.
(e) Show that the category of ﬁnite sets is not a reﬂective subcategory of the
category of all sets.
18. Show that a functor R: C −→Set being representable is equivalent to the
solution set condition being satisﬁed uniquely with a singleton solution set
19.
Here is another way of organizing the proof of Freyd’s Adjoint Functor
Theorem.
(a) Show that U: D −→C has an adjoint if and only if for each object C of
C , the comma category (C, U) has an initial object.
(b) Show that if D has and U preserves limits, then (C, U) is complete.
(Compare Exercise 7 of Section 1.7.)
(c) Show that the solution set condition is equivalent to (C, U) having a weak
initial set, that is a small set of objects with the property that every object is the
codomain of at least one morphism whose domain lies in that set.
(d) Show that a category with products and a weak initial set has a weak
initial object.
(e) Show that if A is a weak initial object and E −→A the simultaneous
equalizer of all the endomorphisms, then E is initial.
(f) Deduce Freyd’s adjoint functor theorem (usually known as the G(eneral)
A(djoint) F(unctor) T(heorem) to distinguish it from the SAFT or Special Ad-
joint Functor Theorem which follows.)
20. A category is said to be well powered if every object has only a small set
of subobjects. A set {Qi} of objects of a category is said to be a cogenerating
set if for any pair of objects C and D of the category and any pair of distinct
morphisms f, a: C −→D, there is at least one Qi and one morphism h: D −→Qi
with hf ̸= hg.

1.10 Filtered colimits
67
(a) Show that a set {Qi} of objects of a complete category is a cogenerating
set if and only if every object has a monomorphism into some product of those
objects (allowing repetitions).
The Special Adjoint Functor Theorem states that a functor that preserves
limits and whose domain is well powered, complete and has a cogenerating set has
a left adjoint. Demonstrate this theorem by following the steps below. Assume
the hypotheses in each of the steps. The organization of this proof is due to G.
M. Kelly.
(b) Show that it is suﬃcient to prove that a category satisfying the hypotheses
has a weak initial set. (See the preceding exercise.)
(c) Show that every object has a unique smallest subobject.
(d) Show that every object which its own smallest subobject can be embed-
ded into a product of members of the cogenerating set in which there are no
repetitions. (Hint: Consider a diagram
A0
Q Qi
-
A
Q Qi
-
6
6
6
6
@
@
@
@@
R
in which the bottom right corner is an irredundant product, i.e., a product with
no repetitions.)
(e) Show that the set of all subobjects of irredundant products of members
of the cogenerating set forms a weak initial set.
(f) Conclude the SAFT.
1.10 Filtered colimits
The path category of a graph
In a graph G , a path from a node i to a node j of length n is a sequence
(α1, α2, . . . , αn) of (not necessarily distinct) arrows for which
(i) source(α1) = i,
(ii) target(αi−1) = source(αi) for i = 2, . . . , n, and

68
1 Categories
(iii) target(αn) = j.
By convention, for each node i there is a unique path of length 0 from i to i that
is denoted (). It is called the empty path at i. We will write α = αn ◦· · · ◦α1. If
also β = βm◦· · · ◦β1 is a path from j −→k, then we let β◦α = βm◦· · · ◦β1◦αn◦· · · ◦α1.
The empty path is an identity for this operation and it is clear that the paths
form a category, called the path category of G . We will make no use of this
category, however, but we do need the notion of path in the discussion of ﬁltered
colimits below.
Filtered colimits
Suppose D: I −→C is a diagram. For a path α: i −→j of the form
i = i0
α1
−−−→i1
α2
−−−→· · ·
αn
−−−→in = j
and a diagram D: I −→C , deﬁne Dα = Dαn ◦· · · ◦Dα2 ◦Dα1. We also deﬁne
D on the empty path at i to be idDi. It is clear that if α: i −→j and β: j −→k
are paths, then D(β ◦α) = Dβ ◦Dα.
A diagram D: I −→C is called ﬁltered if
(i) Given two objects i and j of I , there is an object k and paths α: i −→k
and β: j −→k;
(ii) Given two paths i
α
−−→
−−→
β
j there is an object k and a path γ: j −→k such
that Dγ ◦Dα = Dγ ◦Dβ.
The slight awkwardness of this deﬁnition is the price we must pay for using
index graphs instead of index categories.
A colimit taken over a ﬁltered diagram is called a ﬁltered colimit. The main
signiﬁcance is that ﬁltered colimits commute with ﬁnite limits in Set and many
other interesting categories.
The following theorem is stated as it is in case you know what a ﬁnitary
equational theory is.
Theorem 1.
For any equational theory Th, the underlying set functor on the
category of models preserves ﬁltered colimits.
Proof. We will prove this for the special case of abelian groups. The only property
of abelian groups used is that every operation is ﬁnitary, that is a function of only
ﬁnitely many arguments. Suppose D: I −→Ab is a ﬁltered diagram. Let U: Ab

1.10 Filtered colimits
69
−→Set be the underlying set functor. Form the disjoint union S
I∈Ob(I ) UDi. If
x is an element of UDi we will denote it by ⟨x, i⟩to keep track of the disjoint
union. Now make the identiﬁcation ⟨x, i⟩= ⟨x′, i′⟩if there is an object j ∈I
and there are paths α: i −→j and α′: i′ −→j such that UDαx = UDα′x′.
This is an equivalence relation. It is obviously symmetric and reﬂexive. If also
⟨x′, i′⟩= ⟨x′′, i′′⟩, then there is a j′ ∈I and β: i′ −→j′ and β′: i′′ −→j′ such that
Dβx′ = Dβ′x′′. There is a k ∈I and paths γ: j −→k and γ′: j′ −→k′. Finally
there is an l ∈I and a path δ: k −→l such that Dδ ◦D(γ ◦α′) = Dδ ◦D(γ′ ◦β).
The diagram in question looks like:
Dα′
    
Dj
Dα
@
@
@@
R
Di
Di′
Dβ′
    
Dj′
Dβ
@
@
@@
R
Di′′
Dγ′
    
Dk
Dγ
@
@
@@
R
Dl
-
Dδ
Then
UD(δ ◦γ ◦α)x = (UDδ ◦UDγ ◦UDα)x = (UDδ ◦UDγ ◦UDα′)x′
= (UDδ ◦UDγ′ ◦UDβ)x′ = (UDδ ◦UDγ′ ◦UDβ′)x′′
= UD(δ ◦γ′ ◦β′)x′′
Now, given two elements ⟨x, i⟩and ⟨x′, i′⟩, we add them by ﬁnding a j ∈I
and paths α: i −→j and α′: i′ −→j. Then we deﬁne ⟨x, i⟩+ ⟨x′i′⟩= ⟨UDαx +
UDαx′, j⟩. The proofs that this does not depend on the choice of paths and gives
an associative addition are left to the reader. The 0 element is ⟨0, i⟩for any i.
Since all the Dα are group homomorphisms, all the 0 elements are identiﬁed, so
this makes sense. Similarly, we can take −⟨x, i⟩= ⟨−x, i⟩. The associativity, the

70
1 Categories
fact that ⟨0, i⟩is a 0 element and that −⟨x, i⟩is the negative of ⟨x, i⟩all have to
be veriﬁed. We leave these details to the reader as well. What we want to do
is show that the set C of these pairs with this notion of equality is the colimit
of UD and, when it is given the group structure described above, it is also the
colimit of D. We actually show the latter, since the argument for the former is a
proper subset.
First observe that there is a cocone u: D −→A deﬁned by ux = ⟨x, i⟩when
x ∈Di. This is a group homomorphism since to form the sum ⟨x, i⟩+ ⟨x′, i⟩we
can take the empty path from i −→i and then the sum is ⟨x + x′, i⟩. It is a cone
since for any α: i −→j in I , ux = ⟨x, i⟩= ⟨Dαx, j⟩= u⟨Dαx⟩. If f: D −→A
is any other cone, deﬁne v: C −→A by v⟨x, i⟩= (fi)x. Suppose ⟨x, i⟩= ⟨x′, i′⟩.
There a j and paths α: i −→j and α′: i′ −→j such that Dαx = Dα′x′. Then
v⟨x, i⟩= ⟨fi⟩x = ⟨fj ◦Dα⟩x = ⟨fj ◦dα′⟩x′ = v⟨x′, j′⟩
and so v is well deﬁned. Evidently, v ◦u = f and v is the unique arrow with that
property. Till now, we have not used the group structure on A and this argument
shows that this is the colimit in Set. But A is an abelian group and the elements
of the cone are group homomorphisms. For ⟨x, i⟩, ⟨x′, i′⟩∈C, choose j and α: i
−→j and α: i′ −→j. Then
v(⟨x, i⟩+ ⟨x′, i′⟩) = v(Dαx + Dα′x′) = (fj)(Dαx + Dα′x′)
= (fj)(Dαx) + (fj)(Dα′x′) = (fi)x + (fi′)x′
This shows that v is a group homomorphism and shows that u: D −→C is the
colimit in Ab. But, as remarked, a subset of this argument shows that Uu: UD
−→UC is the colimit in Set and so U preserves this colimit.
The following result is actually a special case of the fact that ﬁltered colimits
commute with all ﬁnite limits.
Proposition 2.
Suppose f: D −→E is a natural transformation between two
ﬁltered diagrams from I to the category of models such that fi: Di −→Ei is
monomorphism for each i ∈Ob(I ). Then the induced map colim D −→colim E
is also monic.
Proof. Suppose ⟨x, i⟩and ⟨x′, i′⟩are two elements of colim D such that ⟨(fi)x, i⟩=
⟨(fi′)x′, i′⟩in colim E. Then there is a j and paths α: i −→j and α′: i′ −→j such
that ⟨Eα◦(fi)x, j⟩= ⟨Eα′◦(fi′)x′, j⟩. But naturality implies that Eα◦fi = fj◦Dα
and Eα′ ◦fi′ = fj ◦Dα′, so this equation becomes fj ◦Dαx = fj ◦Dα′x′. Since
fj is monic, this means that Dαx = Dα′x′ so that ⟨x, i⟩= ⟨x′, i′⟩.

1.11 Notes to Chapter I
71
Theorem 3.
In the category of models of a ﬁnitary equational theory, every
object is a ﬁltered colimit of ﬁnitely presented objects.
Proof. We will do this for the category of groups. We could do abelian groups,
except it is too easy because a ﬁnitely generated abelian groups is ﬁnitely pre-
sented. So let G be a group. For each ﬁnite set of elements of i ∈G, let Fi be the
free group generated by i. For each ﬁnite set of relations j that are satisﬁed by
the elements of i, let D(ij) be Fi modulo those relations. Make the set of pairs
ij into a graph in which there is a single arrow ij −→i′j′ if i ⊆i′ and j ⊆j′.
This is obviously a poset, so write ij ≤i′j′ when there is such a map. If there
is, then the inclusion induces an inclusion Fi −→Fj and since j ⊆j′, there is an
induced map (not necessarily injective) D(ij) −→D(i′j′). Since the union of two
ﬁnite sets is ﬁnite and there is at most one path between any two nodes of the
graph, D is a ﬁltered diagram in the category of groups. It is left to the reader
to verify that G is its colimit.
1.11 Notes to Chapter I
Development of category theory
Categories, functors and natural transformations were invented by S. Eilen-
berg and S. Mac Lane (announced in “The general theory of natural equivalences”
[1945] in order to describe the connecting homomorphism and the long exact se-
quence in ˇCech homology and cohomology. The problem was this: homology was
deﬁned in the ﬁrst instance in terms of a cover. If the cover is simple, that is if
every non-empty intersection of a ﬁnite subset of the cover is a contractible space
(as actually happens with the open star cover of a triangulated space), then that
homology in terms of the cover is the homology of the space and that is the end
of the matter. What is done in ˇCech theory, in the absence of a simple cover, is to
form the direct limit of the homology groups over the set of all covers directed by
reﬁnement. This works ﬁne for deﬁning the groups but gives no information on
how to deﬁne maps induced by, say, the inclusion of a subspace, not to mention
the connecting homomorphism. What is missing is the information that homol-
ogy is natural with respect to reﬁnements of covers as well as to maps of spaces.
Fortunately, the required condition was essentially obvious and led directly to the
notion of natural transformation. Only, in order to deﬁne natural transformation,
one ﬁrst had to deﬁne functor and in order to do that, categories.
The other leading examples of natural transformations were the inclusion of
a vector space into its second dual and the commutator quotient of a group.

72
1 Categories
Somewhat surprisingly, in view of the fact that the original motivation came
from algebraic topology, is the fact that the Hurewicz homomorphism from the
fundamental group of a space to the ﬁrst homology group of that space was not
recognized to be an example until later.
Later, Steenrod would state that no paper had inﬂuenced his thinking more
than “The general theory of natural equivalences”. He explained that although
he had been searching for an axiomatic treatment of homology for years and that
he of course knew that homology acted on maps (or vice versa, if you prefer) it
had never occurred to him to try to base his axiomatics on this fact.
The next decisive step came when Mac Lane [1950] discovered that it was
possible to describe the cartesian product in a category by means of a universal
mapping property. In fact, he described the direct sum in what was eventually
recognized as an additive category by means of two mapping properties, one
describing it as a product and the other describing it as a sum. Mac Lane also
tried to axiomatize the notion of Abelian category but that was not completely
successful. No matter, the universal mapping property described by Mac Lane
had shown that it was possible to use categories as an aid to understanding.
Later on, Grothendieck succeeded in giving axioms for Abelian categories [1957]
and to actually prove something with them—the existence of injectives in an
Abelian category with suﬃcient higher exactness properties. Thus Grothendieck
demonstrated that categories could be a tool for actually doing mathematics
and from then on the development was rapid. The next important step was the
discovery of adjoint functors by Kan [1958] and their use as an eﬀective tool in
the study of the homootopy theory of abstract simplicial sets.
After that the mainstream of developments in category theory split into
those primarily concerned with Abelian categories (Lubkin [1960], Freyd [1964],
Mitchell [1964], which are interesting but tangential to our main concerns here,
and those connected with the theories of triples and toposes of which we have
more to say later.
Elements
Although the thrust of category theory has been to abstract away from the use
of arguments involving elements, various authors have reintroduced one form or
another of generalized element in order to make categorical arguments parallel to
familiar elementwise arguments; for example, Mac Lane [1971, V111.4] for Abelian
categories and Kock [1981, part II] for Cartesian closed categories. It is not clear
whether this is only a temporary expedient to allow older mathematicians to argue
in familiar ways or will always form a permanent part of the subject. Perhaps

1.11 Notes to Chapter I
73
elements will disappear if Lawyers succeeds in his goal of grounding mathematics,
both in theory and in practice, on arrows and their composition.
An altogether deeper development has been that of Mitchell [1972] and others
of the internal language of a topos (developed thoroughly in a more general setting
by Makkai and Reyes [1977]). This allows one to develop arguments in a topos
as if the objects were sets, speciﬁcally including some use of quantiﬁers, but with
restricted rules of deduction.
Limits
Limits were originally taken over directed index sets—partially ordered sets
in which every pair of elements has a lower bound. They were quickly generalized
to arbitrary index categories. We have changed this to graphs to reﬂect actual
mathematical practice: index categories are usually deﬁned ad hoc and the com-
position of arrows is rarely made explicit. It is in fact totally irrelevant and our
replacement of index categories by index graphs reﬂects this fact. There is no
gain—or loss—in generality thereby, only an alignment of theory with practice.

2
Toposes
A topos is, from one point of view, a category with certain properties charac-
teristic of the category of sets. A topos is not merely a generalized set theory,
but the very elementary constructions to be made in this chapter are best under-
stood, at least at ﬁrst, by looking at what the constructions mean in Set. From
another point of view, a topos is an abstraction of the category of sheaves over a
topological space. This latter aspect is described in detail in this chapter.
Other treatments of toposes and sheaves are given by Johnstone [1977], Mac Lane
and Moerdijk [1992] and McLarty [1993].
2.1 Basic Ideas about Toposes
Deﬁnition of topos
We will take two properties of the category of sets—the existence of all ﬁnite
limits and the fact that one can always form the set of subsets of a given set—as
the deﬁning properties for toposes.
For a ﬁxed object A of a category E with ﬁnite limits, −×A is a functor from
E to itself; if f: B −→B′, then f ×A is the arrow (f ◦p1, p2): B×A −→B′×A. By
composition, we then have a contravariant functor Sub(−× A): E −→Set. The
power object of A (if it exists) is an object PA which represents Sub(−× A),
so that HomE (−, PA) ≃Sub(−× A) naturally.
This says precisely that for
any arrow f: B′ −→B, the following diagram commutes, where φ is the natural
isomorphism.
HomE (B′, PA)
Sub(B′ × A)
-
φ(A, B′)
HomE (B, PA)
Sub(B × A)
-
Uφ(A, B)
?
HomE (f, PA)
?
Sub(f × A)
(1)
The deﬁnition of PA says that the “elements” of PA deﬁned on B are es-
sentially the same as the subobjects of B × A. In Set, a map f from B to the
74

2.1 Basic Ideas about Toposes
75
powerset of A is the same as a relation from B to A (b is related to a if and
only if a ∈f(b)), hence the same as a subset of B × A. When B is the terminal
object (any singleton in Set), the “elements” of PA deﬁned on B are the subsets
of A ≃1 × A; thus PA is in fact the powerset of A.
In general, if the category has a terminal object 1 and P(1) exists, then Sub
is represented by P(1), since 1 × A ∼= A. This object P(1) is studied in detail in
Section 2.3.
Deﬁnition. A category E is a topos if E has ﬁnite limits and every object
of E has a power object.
We will assume that PA is given functionally on ObE (it is determined up
to isomorphism in any case). This means that for each object A of E , a deﬁnite
object PA of E is given which has the required universal mapping property.
The deﬁnition of toposes has surprisingly powerful consequences. (For ex-
ample, toposes have all ﬁnite colimits.) Probably the best analogy elsewhere in
mathematics in which a couple of mild-sounding hypotheses pick out a very nar-
row and interesting class of examples is the way in which the Cauchy-Riemann
equations select the analytic functions from all smooth functions of a complex
variable.
The properties of toposes will be developed extensively in this Chapter and
in Chapters 5 and 6. However, the rest of this section and the next are devoted
to examples.
Examples of toposes
(i) The category Set is evidently a topos. As we have already pointed out, if
X is a set, we can take PX to be the set of all subsets of X, but that does not
determine a unique topos structure on Set since we have a choice of φ in diagram
(1). The natural choice is to let φ: Hom(1, PB) −→Sub(B) be the identity map
(thinking of an arrow from 1 to PB as an element of PB), but we could be
perverse and let φ of an element of the powerset be its complement.
(ii) To see a more interesting example, let G be a group and let G-Set be
the category of all sets on which G acts.
The morphisms are equivariant G
homomorphisms. The existence of ﬁnite (in fact, all) limits is an easy exercise.
They are calculated “pointwise”. If X is a G-set, let PX denote the set of all
subsets of X with G action given by gX0 = {gx | x ∈X0}. Note that a global
element of PX is a G-invariant subset of X.
Actually, the category of actions by a given monoid, with equivariant maps,
is a topos. That will follow from the discussion of functor categories below, since

76
2 Toposes
such a category is the same as a Set-valued functor category from a monoid
regarded as a category with one object.
Functor categories
An important example of toposes are Set-valued functor categories. In order to
prove that these categories are toposes, a number of elementary facts about them
are needed. A guiding principle in this development is the fact that Func(C , D)
inherits most of its properties from D (Exercise 25 of Section 1.7).
In this section, C is a ﬁxed small category and E = Func(C op, Set). We will
outline the proof that E is a topos. Of course, everything we say in this section
is true of Func(C , Set), but because of the applications we prefer to state it this
way.
Each object C of C determines an evaluation map λC: E −→Set, where
λC(F) = FC and for γ: F −→G, λC(γ) = γC.
Proposition 1.
For each object C of C , the evaluation preserves all limits and
colimits. I.e.,“limits and colimits in E are computed pointwise”. In particular,
E is complete and cocomplete.
In other words, if D: I −→E is a diagram in E , then (lim D)(C) = lim(D(C)).
The proof is in Exercise 25 of Section 1.7.
Corollary 2.
For a ﬁxed object E, the functor −× E: E −→E commutes with
all colimits.
Proof. The property claimed for this functor is valid when E = Set by Exercise 6,
and the Proposition allows one to extend it to an arbitrary functor category.
The fact that Sub is representable in a topos (by P(1)) means that it takes
colimits to limits.
(Exercise 14 of Section 1.7).
In particular, Sub(P Ai) =
Q Sub(Ai) and if
A
p1
−−−→
−−−→
p2
B
c
−−→C
(2)
is a coequalizer in a topos, then
Sub(A)
Sub p1
←−−−−−−
←−−−−−−
Sub p2
Sub(B)
Sub c
←−−−−−Sub(C)
(3)
is an equalizer. The ﬁrst is easy to see in Set, but a direct proof of the second fact
in Set, not using the fact that Sub is representable, is surprisingly unintuitive.
As a step toward proving that E is a topos, we prove the fact just mentioned
for E .

2.1 Basic Ideas about Toposes
77
Proposition 3.
If D: I −→E is a diagram in E , then
Sub(colim D) ≃lim(Sub(D))
Proof. We use repeatedly the fact that the result is true in Set because there
Sub is representable by the two-element set. Let F = colim FD. For an object
i of I , the cocone FDi −→F gives a cone Sub(F) −→Sub(FDi) which in turn
gives Sub(F) −→lim Sub(FDi). Now to construct an arrow going the other way,
let EDi ⊆FDi be a compatible family of subobjects, meaning that whenever i
−→j
Edi
Edj
-
FDi
FDj
-
6
6
is a pullback. Let E = colim EDi. Since colimits preserve monos (by Propo-
sition 1, since they do so in Set), E is a subfunctor of F.
This gives a map
lim Sub(FDi) −→Sub(F). Finally, to see that both composites are the identity,
it suﬃces to see that all those constructions are identical to the ones carried out
in SetOb(C ), for which the result follows from Proposition 1 since it is true in Set.
Theorem 4.
E is a topos.
Proof. Finite limits, indeed all limits, exist by Proposition 1. As for P, for a
functor E, let PE be deﬁned by letting PE(A) be the set of subfunctors of
Hom(−, A) × E. It is straightforward to verify that PE is a functor.
We must show that subfunctors of F × E are in natural one to one corre-
spondence with natural transformations from F to PE. We show this ﬁrst for F
representable, say F = Hom(−, A). We have
Nat(F, PE) = Nat(Hom(−, A), PE) ≃PE(A)
= Sub(Hom(−, A) × E) = Sub(F × E)
The case for general F follows from Proposition 3 and the fact that F is a colimit
of representable functors (Exercise 7, Section 1.8).
Exercises 2.1
1. Prove that the product of two toposes is a topos.
2. Let B = PA in Diagram (1); the subobject of PA×A corresponding to idPA is
denoted ∈A (it is the “element of” relation in Set). Prove that for any subobject

78
2 Toposes
U −→A × B there is a unique arrow ΦU: A −→PB which makes the following
diagram a pullback.
∈B
PB × B
-
U
A × B
-
?
?
ΦU × idB
3. An object B of a category is injective if for any subobject A0 −→A and arrow
f: A0 −→B there is an arrow ef: A −→B extending f. Prove that in a topos any
power object is injective. (Hint: Every subobject of A0 × B is a subobject of
A × B. Now use Exercise 2.)
4. Show that in diagram (2) in Set, if X is an equivalence relation and c is the
class map, then Sub c in diagram (3) takes a set of equivalence classes to its union.
What are Sub p1 and Sub p2?
5. Complete the proof of Proposition 3.
6.
Show that if X is a set, the functor −× X: Set −→Set commutes with
colimits. (Hint: Show that −× X is left adjoint to (−)X and use Corollary 2 of
Section 1.9).
2.2 Sheaves on a Space
Categories of sheaves were the original examples of toposes. In this section we
will consider sheaves over topological spaces in some detail and prove that the
category of sheaves over a ﬁxed space is a topos. In Section 5.1, we give Grothen-
dieck’s generalization of the concept of sheaf. He invented it for use in algebraic
geometry, but we will use it as the fundamental tool in building the connection
between toposes and theories.
Let X be a topological space and O(X) the category of open sets of X and
inclusions. As we have seen, the category Func(O(X)op, Set) is a topos. An object
of this category is called a presheaf on X, and the topos is denoted Psh(X). If
the open set V is contained in the open set U, the induced map from FU to FV
is denoted F(U, V ) and is called a restriction map. In fact, we often write x|V
instead of F(U, V )x for x ∈FU. This terminology is motivated by the example
of rings of continuous functions mentioned on page 24.
A presheaf is called a sheaf if it satisﬁes the following “local character” con-
dition: If {Ui} is an open cover of U and xi ∈FUi is given for each i in such a

2.2 Sheaves on a Space
79
way that xi|Ui ∩Uj = xj|Ui ∩Uj for all i and j, then there is a unique x ∈FU
such that x|Ui = xi.
The full subcategory of Psh(X) whose objects are the sheaves on X is denoted
Sh(X).
Examples
(i) For each topological space Y , the functor which assigns to each open set
U of X the set of continuous functions from U to Y can easily be seen to be a
sheaf.
(ii) Given a topological space Y and continuous map p: Y −→X, for each
open U in X let Γ(U, Y ) denote the set of all continuous maps s: U −→Y such
that p ◦s is the inclusion of U in X.
These are called sections of p.
Then
Γ(−, Y ): O(X)op −→Set is a sheaf, called the sheaf of sections of p. We will
see below (Theorem 3) that every sheaf arises this way.
The deﬁnition of sheaf is expressible by an exactness condition:
Proposition 1.
F: O(X)op −→Set is a sheaf if and only if for every open set
U and for every open cover {Ui} of U, the following diagram is an equalizer.
FU −→Q(FUi)
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
Q F(Ui ∩Uj)
In this diagram, the left arrow is induced by restrictions. As for d0 and d1,
they are the unique arrows for which the diagrams
FUi
F(Ui ∩Uj)
-
Q(FUi)
Q F(Ui ∩Uj)
-
d0
?
pi
?
pij
FUi
F(Ui ∩Uj)
-
Q(FUi)
Q F(Ui ∩Uj)
-
d1
?
pj
?
pij
commute. The bottom arrows are the restriction maps.
Proof. Exercise.

80
2 Toposes
Sheaf categories are toposes
Theorem 2.
Sh(X) is a topos.
Proof. We know Func(O(X)op, Set) has limits, so to see that Sh(X) has ﬁnite
limits, it is suﬃcient to show that the limit of a diagram of sheaves is a sheaf.
This is an easy consequence of Proposition 1 and is omitted.
The method by which we proved that Set-valued functor categories are toposes
suggests that we deﬁne P(F) to be the functor whose values at U is the set of
subsheaves (i.e., subobjects in Sh(X)) of F×Hom(−, U). Since O(X) is a partially
ordered set, the sheaf G = F ×Hom(−, U) has a particularly simple form, namely
G(V ) = F(V ) if V ⊆U and G(V ) is empty otherwise. Thus we write F|U for
F × Hom(−, U). Hence (PF)U is the set of subsheaves of F|U. It is necessary
to show that this deﬁnes a sheaf (it is clearly a presheaf).
Let {Ui} be a cover of U. Suppose for each i we have a subsheaf Gi of F|Ui
such that Gi|Ui ∩Uj = Gj|Ui ∩Uj. Deﬁne G so that for all V ⊆U,
Q Gi(Ui ∩V )
Q F(Ui ∩V )
-
GV
FV
-
?
?
(1)
is a pullback. For other open sets V , GV is of course empty. Restriction maps
are induced by the pullback property. It is clear that G is a subfunctor of F.
We ﬁrst show that G|Uj = Gj. For V ⊆Uj, the fact that Gi(Ui ∩Uj) =
Gj(Ui∩Uj) implies that Gi(V ∩Uj) = Gj(V ∩Uj). Thus we have the commutative
diagram
Q Gi(Ui ∩V ) = Q Gi(Uj ∩V )
Q F(Ui ∩V )
-
GjV
FV
-
?
?
Gj(Uj ∩V ) = GjV
F(Uj ∩V ) = FV
-
?
?
in which the top middle node is also Q Gi(Uj ∩V ), the outer rectangle is a
pullback and the middle arrow is a mono as Gi is a subfunctor of F. It follows

2.2 Sheaves on a Space
81
from Exercise 12 that the left square is a pullback too. But that pullback is G(V )
by deﬁnition.
To see that G is a subsheaf, let {Vk} be a cover of V .
By Proposition 1
we need to show that the top row of the following diagram is an equalizer. By
Exercise 11(a) it is suﬃcient to show that the left square in the diagram is a
pullback.
FV
Q FVk
-
GV
Q GVk
-
?
?
Q F(Vk ∩Vl)
Q G(Vk ∩Vl)
?
-
-
-
-
(2)
In the following commutative cube,
FV
Q FVk
-
GV
Q GVk
-
?
?
@
@
@@
R
    	
    
@
@
@
@
I
Q F(Ui ∩V )
Q F(Ui ∩Vk)
-
Q Gi(Ui ∩V )
Q Gi(Ui ∩Vk)
-
?
?
I
II
III
the square labelled I is a pullback by the deﬁnition of G and because G|Ui = Gi.
Number III is a product of squares which are pullbacks from the deﬁnition of
G. Finally II is a product of squares, each of which is the left hand square in a
diagram of type (2) above with Gi replacing G and is a pullback because Gi is
a sheaf (see Exercise 11(b)). It follows from Exercise 8 of Section 1.6 that the
outer square is a pullback, which completes the proof.

82
2 Toposes
Sheaﬁﬁcation
In the rest of this section, we outline some functorial properties of toposes of
sheaves. These results follow from more general results to be proved later when
we discuss Grothendieck topologies, and so may be skipped. However, you may
ﬁnd considering this special case ﬁrst helpful in understanding and motivating
the ideas introduced later. We give only the constructions involved in the proofs;
the veriﬁcations are left as exercises.
We saw in example (ii) that any space over X deﬁnes a sheaf on X. Given a
presheaf F on X we will construct a space LF and a continuous map (in fact local
homeomorphism) p: LF −→X for which, for an open set U of X, the elements
of FU are sections of p (when F is a sheaf). Thus we need somehow to ﬁnd the
points of LF that lie over a particular point x of X. We construct the set of such
points by using colimits.
Form the diagram of sets and functions consisting of all those sets FU for all
open U which contain x and all the restriction maps between them. This diagram
is actually a directed system. The colimit in Set of this diagram is denoted Fx
and called the stalk or ﬁber of F at x. An element of Fx is an equivalence class
of pairs (U, s) where x ∈U and s ∈FU. The equivalence relation is deﬁned
by requiring that (U, s) ∼= (V, t) if and only if there is an open set W such that
x ∈W ⊆U ∩V and s|W = t|W. The equivalence class determined by (U, s) is
denoted sx and is called the germ determined by s at x. Thus s determines a
map bs from U to Fx which takes x to sx.
Now let LF be the disjoint union of all the stalks of F. We topologize LF
with the topology generated by the images of all the maps bs for all open U in
X and all sections s ∈FU. These images actually form a basis (Exercise 5).
LF comes equipped with a projection p: LF −→X which takes sx to x. This
projection p is continuous and is in fact a local homeomorphism, meaning that
for any y in LF there is an open set V of LF containing y for which the image
of p|V is an open set in X and p|V is a homeomorphism from V to p(V ). To see
this, let U be an open set containing p(y) and deﬁne V = bs(U), where y is the
equivalence class containing (U, s). Note that LF is not usually Hausdorﬀ, even
when X is.
If f: F −→G is a map of presheaves, then f induces (by the universal property
of colimits) a map fx: Fx −→Gx for each x ∈X, and so a map Lf: LF −→LG.
It is a nice exercise to see that Lf is continuous and that this makes L a functor
from Psh(X) to Top/X.
LF is called the total space of F (or just the “space” of F). (Many people
follow the French in calling the total space the “espace ´etal´e”. It is wrong to call
it the “´etale space” since “´etale” is a diﬀerent and also mathematically signiﬁcant

2.2 Sheaves on a Space
83
word.) We will denote by LH /X the category of spaces (E, p) over X with p a
local homeomorphism.
The function Γ deﬁned in Example (ii) above also induces a functor (also
called Γ) from the category Top/X of spaces over X to Psh(X): If E and E′ are
spaces over X and u: E −→E′ is a map over X, then Γ(u) is deﬁned to take a
section s of the structure map of E to u ◦s. It is easy to see that this makes Γ a
functor. Note that for E over X, Γ(E) is a presheaf, hence a functor from O(X)op
to Set; its value Γ(E)(U) at an open set U is customarily written Γ(U, E).
Theorem 3. L is left adjoint to Γ. Moreover, L is a natural equivalence between
Sh(X) and LH /X.
Proof. We will construct natural transformations η: id −→Γ ◦L and ϵ: L ◦Γ −→id
for which Γϵ ◦ηΓ = id and ϵL ◦Lη = id, from which the adjointness will follow
(Exercise 15 of Section 1.9).
Let F be a presheaf on X.
On an open set U of X, deﬁne the natural
transformation ηF by requiring that (ηF)U take an element s of FU to the
section bs. On the other hand, for a space E over X, the continuous map ϵE is
deﬁned to take an element sx of L(Γ(E)) to s(x). The necessary veriﬁcations are
left to the reader, as is the proof that when F is a sheaf, ηF is an isomorphism,
and when p: E −→X is a local homeomorphism, ϵE is a homeomorphism over
X. The latter two facts prove that L is a natural equivalence between Sh(X) and
LH /X.
The functor Γ ◦L: Psh(X) −→Sh(X) is called the sheaﬁﬁcation functor.
Corollary 4.
For any topological space X, LH /X is a topos.
Corollary 5.
Sh(X) is a reﬂective subcategory of Psh(X).
Proof. The reﬂector is the sheaﬁﬁcation functor.
Change of base space
Any continuous function between topological spaces induces a pair of functors
between the sheaf categories which are adjoint.
Given a continuous function f: X −→Y and a sheaf F on X, the direct
image functor f∗: Sh(X) −→Sh(Y ) is deﬁned to be the restriction of
Func(f −1, Set): Func(O(X)op, Set) −→Func(O(Y )op, Set)
Note that f −1 is a functor from O(Y )op to O(X)op. Thus f∗is composition with
f −1.

84
2 Toposes
On the other hand, given a local homeomorphism p: E −→Y , f ∗(E) is deﬁned
to be the pullback
X
Y
-
f
f ∗(E)
E
-
?
?
p
so that f ∗(E) = {(x, e) | fx = pe}. It is easy to see that the map (x, e) −→x is a
local homeomorphism. On sections, f ∗takes a section s of p deﬁned on an open
set V of Y to the map which takes x ∈f −1(V ) to (x, sfx).
Proposition 6.
f ∗is left adjoint to f∗. Moreover, f ∗preserves all ﬁnite limits.
Note that f ∗perforce preserves all colimits since it has a right adjoint.
Proof. f ∗is the restriction of the pullback functor from Top/Y to Top/X, which
has as a left adjoint composing with f (the proof is easy). Thus it preserves limits
in Top/Y ; but ﬁnite limits in LH /Y are the same as in Top/Y (again easy).
There is a natural map from E to f∗◦f ∗(E) whose component on an open set
V of Y takes a section s in Γ(V, E) to the function s ◦f: f −1(V ) −→E, which by
deﬁnition is an element of Γ(V, f∗◦f ∗(E)).
On the other hand, let F be a sheaf on X and let x ∈X. For any open V of Y
for which x ∈f −1(V ), we have a map from Γ(f −1(V )), F) to the stalk Fx, hence
a map from Γ(V, f∗(F)) (which is, by deﬁnition, the same as Γ(f −1(V ))) to Fx.
This directed system deﬁnes a map tx from the stalk of f∗(F) at fx to the stalk of
F at x. We then deﬁne a natural transformation from f ∗f∗to the identity which
takes a section s of f ∗f∗(F) deﬁned on U to the section of F which takes x ∈U to
tx(s(x)). These two natural transformations satisfy the hypotheses of Exercise 15
of Section 1.9, so that f ∗is left adjoint to f∗. The detailed veriﬁcations, which
get a bit intricate, are left to the reader. This is a special case of adjoints of
functors induced by maps of theories. The general situation will be dealt with in
Chapter 8.
A geometric morphism between toposes is a functor f: E −→E ′ with a
left adjoint f ∗which preserves ﬁnite limits.
The functor f is usually written
f∗, and f ∗is called its “inverse image”. Thus a continuous map f: X −→Y of
topological spaces induces a geometric morphism from Sh(X) to Sh(Y ). We will
study geometric morphisms in detail in Chapter 6.
Exercises 2.2
1.
(a) Verify that Examples (i) and (ii) really are sheaves.

2.2 Sheaves on a Space
85
(b) Show that Example (i) is a special case of Example (ii). (Hint: Consider
the projection from Y × X to X.)
2. Prove Proposition 1.
3. Show that L is a functor.
4. Show that a subfunctor of a sheaf need not be a sheaf.
5. Let F be a presheaf on a topological space X. Show that the images bs(U) for
all open sets U in X and all sections s ∈FU form a basis for a topology on LF.
6. Carry out the veriﬁcations that prove Theorem 3. (You have to prove that for
each F, ηF is a natural transformation, and for each p, ϵp is a continuous map;
that η and ϵ are natural transformations; and that they satisfy the requirements
in (a) of Exercise 15 of Section 1.9.)
7. Using the notation of the preceding exercise, prove that ϵE is an isomorphism
if and only if p: E −→X is a local homeomorphism, and ηF is an isomorphism if
and only if F is a sheaf.
8. Show that two sheaves over the same space can have the same stalks at every
point without being the same sheaf. (Hint: Look at a double covering of a circle
versus two single circles lying over a circle.)
9. Prove that the pullback of a local homeomorphism is a local homeomorphism.
10. Show that every point of a topological space X induces a geometric morphism
from Set to Sh(X) which takes a sheaf over X to its stalk over the point.
11. Consider the diagram
A′
B′
-
A
B
-
?
?
g
‘
C′
C
?
h
-
-
-
-
in which we assume the left square commutes, and h ◦di = d′
i ◦g, i = 1, 2. (We
often say that such a square commutes serially, a notion which we will use a
lot in later chapters.)

86
2 Toposes
(a) Show that if the bottom row is an equalizer and the left square is a
pullback, then the top row is an equalizer.
(b) Show that if the top row is an equalizer, the bottom row has both com-
posites the same, and f is monic, then the left square is pullback.
12. Consider the diagram
A′
B′
-
A
B
-
?
?
g
C′
-
C
-
f
?
(a) Show that if both squares are pullbacks then so is the outer rectangle.
(b) Show that if the outer rectangle is a pullback and f and g are jointly
monic, then the left square is a pullback. (f and g are jointly monic if f(x) = f(y)
and g(x) = g(y) implies that x = y. Such a square is called a mono square.)
2.3 Properties of Toposes
In this section and the next, we will state and prove those basic properties of
toposes which can conveniently be proved without using triple theory.
In the following, E is a topos with power-object function P.
Functoriality of P
Proposition 1. Let A and B be categories and Φ: A op×B −→Set be a functor.
Let F: ObA −→ObB be a function such that for each object A of A there is a
natural (in B) equivalence
Φ(A, B) ≃Hom(FA, B)
Then there is a unique way of extending F to a functor (also denoted F) A −→B
in such a way that the above equivalence is a natural equivalence in both A and
B.

2.3 Properties of Toposes
87
Proof. Fix a morphism f: A′ −→A. We have a diagram of functors on B
Φ(A′)
Hom(FA′, −)
-
∼=
Φ(A, −)
Hom(FA, −)
-
∼=
?
Φ(f, −)
?
in which the right arrow is deﬁned by the indicated isomorphisms to make the dia-
gram commute. The result is a natural (in B) transformation from Hom(FA, −)
to Hom(FA′, −) which is induced by a morphism we denote Ff: FA′ −→FA.
The naturality in A and the functoriality of F are clear.
Proposition 2.
P has a unique extension to a functor from E op to E with the
property that for any arrow g: A′ −→A, the following diagram commutes. Here,
φ is the natural isomorphism of Section 2.1.
HomE (B, PA)
Sub(B × A)
-
φ(A, B)
HomE (B, PA′)
Sub(B × A′)
-
φ(A′, B)
6
Hom(B, Pg)
6
Sub(idB × g)
(1)
Proof. Apply Proposition 1 above with A = E , B = E op, and F = Pop.
It is worthwhile to restate what we now know about P in view of the deﬁnition
of Sub. If s: U −→B × A is a subobject and [s] = Φ−1(s): B −→PA is the
corresponding element of PA, then diagram (1) of Section 2.1 says that for an
arrow f: B′ −→B, the element [s]f of PA deﬁned on B′ corresponds via the
adjunction to Sub(f × idB)(s) which is the pullback of s along f × idB. On the
other hand, given g: A′ −→A, then according to diagram (1) of this section, the
element Pg(s) of PA′ corresponds to Sub(idB × g)(s), which is the pullback of s
along idB × g.
Proposition 3.
Pop: E −→E op is left adjoint to P: E op −→E .
Proof. The arrow A × B −→B × A which switches coordinates induces a natural
isomorphism from the bifunctor whose value at (B, A) is Sub(B × A) to the
bifunctor whose value at (B, A) is Sub(A × B).
This then induces a natural
isomorphism
HomE (B, PA) ≃HomE (A, PB) = HomE op(PB, A)

88
2 Toposes
which proves the Proposition.
We sometimes say, “P is adjoint to itself on the left.”
The subobject classiﬁer
Since A ≃A × 1, the subobject functor is represented by P(1). This object
is so important in a topos that it deserves its own name, which is traditionally
Ω. It follows from the Yoneda Lemma that Ωhas a representative subobject
true: Ω0 −→Ωwith the property that for any object A and any subobject a: A0
−→A there is a unique map χa: A −→Ωsuch that a is the pullback of true along
χa. This means that there is a map A0 −→Ω0 (whose nature will be clariﬁed by
Proposition 4) for which the following diagram is a pullback:
A
Ω
-
χa
A0
Ω0
-
?
a
?
true
Proposition 4.
Ω0 is the terminal object.
Proof. For a given object A, there is at least one map from A to Ω0, namely the
map u given by the following pullback:
A
Ω
-
χ(idA)
A
Ω0
-
u
?
idA
?
true
(2)
To see that u is the only map, suppose v: A −→Ω0 is another map. Then this
diagram is a pullback (see Exercise 3 of Chapter 1.6):
A
Ω
-
true ◦v
A
Ω0
-
v
?
idA
?
true
The uniqueness part of the universal mapping property of Ωsays that true ◦v =
χ(idA), which is true ◦u by diagram (2). Since true is mono, this means u = v.
It follows that every object has exactly one map to Ω0.

2.3 Properties of Toposes
89
Ωis called the subobject classiﬁer. In Set, any two element set is a subob-
ject classiﬁer in two diﬀerent ways, depending on which of the two elements you
take to be true. If for each set A you take PA to be the actual set of subsets
of A, then the preceding construction makes the subobject classiﬁer the set of
subsets of a singleton set with true taking the value of the nonempty subset. The
subobject classiﬁer in a category of G-sets is a two element set with the trivial
action, and comments similar to those just made apply here too. As we will see,
in most toposes Ωis not nearly so simple.
The following result is a consequence of Exercise 10, page 45.
Corollary 5.
Every monomorphism in a topos is regular.
The singleton map
We will deﬁne a special arrow {}: A −→PA which in the case E = Set is the
map taking x to the singleton set containing x. Its importance lies in the fact that
composing with {} internalizes the construction of the graph of a function, for if
f: B −→A, then {}f: B −→PA corresponds to the subobject [(b, a) | a = f(b)]
of B × A, which in Set is in fact the graph of f. (Thus by this deﬁnition, the
graph of f in Set is the set of ordered pairs (b, f(b)) regarded as a subobject of
B × A, so that the graph carries with it the information about the codomain of
f as well as its domain.)
The fact that {}f should correspond to the graph of f suggests the way to
construct {}. Let γ be the natural transformation from HomE (−, A) to Sub(−×
A) deﬁned by having γB take f: B −→A to the subobject (idB, f): B −→B × A.
Observe in the ﬁrst place that if (idB, f) ◦u = (idB, f) ◦v, then (u, fu) = (v, fv)
so that (idB, f) is indeed monic. To show that γ is a natural transformation
translates into showing that for any arrow g: B′ −→B,
Sub(g × A)(idB, f) = (idB′, fg)
By deﬁnition of Sub, that requires showing that the following diagram is a
pullback, which is easy.
B′
B′ × A
-
(id′
B, fg)
B
B × A
-
(idB, f)
6
g
6
g × A

90
2 Toposes
Now let γ be the natural transformation
γ: HomE (−, A) −→Sub(−× A) ≃HomE (−, PA)
Let {}: A −→PA be the corresponding arrow given by the Yoneda Lemma. Recall
that according to the proof of the Yoneda Lemma, for f: B −→A, γB(f) = {}f.
The following proposition just says that a morphism is determined by its
graph.
Proposition 6.
{} is monic.
Proof. If f, f ′: B −→A are two morphisms for which (idB, f): B −→B × A and
(idB, f ′): B −→B × A give equivalent subobjects, then there is an isomorphism
j of B for which (j, fj) = (idB, f ′), whence f = f ′. Since by construction {}f
corresponds by adjunction to the subobject (idB, f): B −→B × A, {} must be
monic.
Equivalence relations
As observed in Exercise 6 of Section 1.8, the kernel pair of a regular epimor-
phism is an eﬀective equivalence relation. In a topos, the converse is true:
Theorem 7.
In a topos, every equivalence relation is eﬀective.
Proof. Let E be an equivalence relation on A. E is a subobject of A × A, so
corresponds to an arrow [ ]E: A −→PA (which in Set is the class map). An
element of A deﬁned on T is sent to the subobject of T × A (element of PA
deﬁned on T) which is the pullback of the diagram
T × A
A × A
-
a × idA
E
?
Thus if a ∈T A and (t, a′) ∈V T × A, then (t, a′) ∈V [a]E if and only if
(a ◦t, a′) ∈V E. This fact is used twice in the proof below.
To show that E is the kernel pair of [ ]E, we must show that if a1 and a2
are elements of A deﬁned on T then [a1]E = [a2]E if and only if (a1, a2) ∈E.
To see this, let (t, a): V −→T × A be an element of T × A deﬁned on V . The
corresponding subset of Hom(V, T × A) is
[a1]E = {(t, a) | (a1 ◦t, a) ∈E};

2.3 Properties of Toposes
91
[a2]E is deﬁned similarly.
If [a1]E = [a2]E, let V = T, t = idT, and a = a2.
By reﬂexivity, (idT, a2) ∈[a2]E, hence belongs to [a1]E.
Therefore (a1, a2) =
(a1 ◦idT, a2) ∈E.
For the converse, suppose (a1, a2) ∈E. Then for all t: V −→T, (a1 ◦t, a2 ◦t) ∈
E.
Suppose (t, a) ∈[a1]E (deﬁned on V ), then (a1 ◦t, a) ∈E and therefore
by symmetry and transitivity, (a2 ◦t, a) ∈E. Hence [a1]E ⊆[a2]E. The other
inclusion follows by symmetry. This shows that E is the kernel pair of [ ]E.
Exercises 2.3
1. Let G: B −→A be a functor and F: ObA −→ObB be a function such that
for each A ∈A there is a natural (in B) equivalence
Hom(A, GB) ≃Hom(FA, B)
Use Proposition 1 to show that F has a unique extension to a functor left ad-
joint to G. (This gives a second proof of the pointwise construction of adjoints,
Section 1.9).
2. Prove that in a topos an arrow which is both a monomorphism and an epi-
morphism is an isomorphism. (Hint: Use Corollary 5.)
3. (Interchanging true and false). Describe how to deﬁne P in Set so that the
subobject classiﬁer is the set of subsets of a one-element set and the value of true
is the empty set.
4. Let X be a topological space. If U is open in X, deﬁne Ω(U) to be the set of
open subsets of U. If V ⊆U, let Ω(U, V )(W) = W ∩V .
(a) Show that Ωis a sheaf, and is the subobject classiﬁer in Sh(X).
(b) What is {}?
5. Suppose that for each object A of a topos there is a map jA: Sub(A) −→Sub(A)
with the property that whenever
B0
B
-
-
A0
A
-
-
?
?

92
2 Toposes
is a pullback, then there is a pullback
jB(B0)
B
-
-
jA(A0)
A
-
-
?
?
where the top arrow is the inclusion.
Use the Yoneda lemma to show that show that these functions constitute a
natural endomorphism of P.
6.
(a) Show that if M is a monoid and E is the topos of left M actions and
equivariant maps, then Ωis the set of left ideals of M, with action mL = {n |
nm ∈L}.
(b) Show that in E , Ωhas exactly two global elements.
2.4 The Beck Conditions
The Beck conditions are useful technical conditions concerning inverse images
and forward images induced by inclusions.
A mono a: A0 −→A induces a set function a ◦−: Sub(A0) −→Sub(A) by
composition, taking the subobject determined by u: A1 −→A0 to the subobject
determined by a ◦u.
Proposition 1.
[The Beck Condition, external version] Let
A
B
-
f
A0
B0
-
f0
?
a
?
b
be a pullback. Then
Sub A
Sub B

Sub f
Sub A0
Sub B0
Sub f0
?
a ◦−
?
b ◦−

2.4 The Beck Conditions
93
commutes.
Proof. This translates into proving that if both squares in the following diagram
are pullbacks, then so is the outer rectangle. That is Exercise 12(a) of Section 2.3.
B1
B0
-
A1
A0
-
?
?
B
-
b
A
-
a
?
f
Observe that in Set, A0 is the inverse image of B0 along f.
The object PA is said to “internalize” Sub(A). For a given monic a: A0 −→A,
there is an arrow ∃a: PA0 −→PA which internalizes a ◦−in the same sense. To
construct ∃a, we ﬁrst observe that a ◦−induces an arrow
(B × a) ◦−: Sub(B × A0) −→Sub(B × A)
for any object B.
Proposition 2. (−×a) is a natural transformation from Sub(−×A0) to Sub(−×
A).
Proof. Suppose f: B′ −→B is given. Then the diagram
B × A0
B × A
-
B × a
B′ × A0
B′ × A
-
B′ × a
?
f × A0
?
f × A
is a pullback (easy exercise), so that by Proposition 1,
Sub(B′ × A0)
Sub(B′ × A)
-
(B′ × a) ◦−
Sub(B × A0)
Sub(B × A)
-
(B × a) ◦−
?
Sub(f × A0
?
Sub(f × A)
commutes as required for (−× a) to be a natural transformation.
Deﬁnition. If a: A0 −→A is monic, ∃a: PA0 −→PA is the arrow induced by the
natural transformation
HomE (−, PA0) ≃Sub(−× A0) −→Sub(−× A) ≃HomE (−, PA)
∃a takes an element of PA0 to the element of PA regarded as the same subobject.

94
2 Toposes
Proposition 3.
[The Beck condition, internal version] If
A
B
-
f
A0
B0
-
f0
?
?
a
?
?
b
(ii)
is a pullback, then
PA
PB

Pf
PA0
PB0
Pf0
?
∃a
?
∃B
commutes.
What the Beck condition really says is that if X is a subobject of B0, f −1(X)
is unambiguously deﬁned.
Proof. If (ii) is a pullback, then so is
C × A
C × B
-
C × A0
B × B0
-
?
?
so by Proposition 1,
Sub(C × A)
Sub(C × B)

Sub(C × A0)
Sub(C × B0)

?
?
commutes. Hence because diagram (1) of Section 2.1 commutes,
HomE (C, PA)
HomE (C, PB)

HomE (C, PA0)
HomE (C, PB0)

?
?
commutes, so that (iii) commutes by deﬁnition of ∃a.

2.5 Notes to Chapter 2
95
Exercises 2.4
1. Show that for any object A in a topos, ∃idA = idPA.
2. Show that for any monic a: A0 −→A in a topos, Pa ◦∃a = idA0.
2.5 Notes to Chapter 2
The development of topos theory resulted from the conﬂuence of two streams of
mathematical thought from the sixties. The ﬁrst of these was the development
of an axiomatic treatment of sheaf theory by Grothendieck and his school of
algebraic geometry. This axiomatic development culminated in the discovery by
Giraud that a category is equivalent to a category of sheaves for a Grothendieck
topology if and only if it satisﬁes the conditions for being what is now called a
Grothendieck topos (section 6.8).The main purpose of the axiomatic development
was to be able to deﬁne sheaf cohomology. This purpose was amply justiﬁed by
Deligne’s proof of the Weil conjectures [1974].
The second stream was Lawvere’s continuing search (which, it is probably
only a slight exaggeration to state, had characterized his career to that date) for
a natural way of founding mathematics (universal algebra, set theory, category
theory, etc.) on the basic notions of morphism and composition of morphisms. All
formal (and naive) presentations of set theory up to then had taken as primitives
the notions of elements and sets with membership as the primitive relation. What
Lawvere had in mind for set theory was to take sets and functions as the primitives
(and you don’t really need the sets if you are interested in reducing the number of
primitives to a minimum—see Exercise 1 of Chapter 1.1) and the partial operation
of composition as the basic relation.
In a formal way it is clear that this can always done by deﬁning the terminal
object 1 and then an element as a morphism with domain 1. Subobjects and
membership can be readily deﬁned and it is clear that set theory can be recovered.
However, Lawvere did not have in mind a slavish translation of Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory into categorical language, but rather a treatment in which functions
were clearly the fundamental notion. See Lawvere [1965] for an example of this.
The closest he had come prior to 1969 was the notion of a hyperdoctrine which
is similar to that of a topos except that PA is a category rather than an object
of the ambient category.
The foundation of mathematics on the concept of function or arrow as prim-
itive is revolutionary, but no more revolutionary than the introduction of set

96
2 Toposes
theory was early in the century. The idea of constructing a quotient space with-
out having to have an ambient space including it, for example, was made possible
by the introduction of set theory, in particular by the advent of the rather dubi-
ous idea that a set can be an element of another set. There is probably nothing
in the introduction of topos theory as foundations more radical than that.
In the fall of 1969, Lawvere and Tierney arrived together at Dalhousie Uni-
versity and began a research project to study sheaf theory axiomatically. To be a
possible foundation for set theory, the axioms had to be elementary—which Gi-
raud’s axioms were not. The trick was to ﬁnd enough elementary consequences
of these axioms to build a viable theory with.
The fact that a Grothendieck topos has arbitrary colimits and a set of gener-
ators allows free use of the special adjoint functor theorem to construct adjoints
to colimit-preserving functors. Lawvere and Tierney began by assuming explic-
itly that some of these adjoints existed and they and others pared this set of
hypotheses down to the current set.
They began by deﬁning a topos as a category with ﬁnite limits and colimits
such that for each f: A −→B the functor
f ∗: E /A −→E /B
gotten by pulling back along f has a right adjoint and that for each object A
, the functor E op −→Set which assigns to B the set of partial maps B to A is
representable. During the year at Dalhousie, these were reduced to the hypothesis
that E be cartesian closed (i.e. that
−× A: E −→E /A
have a right adjoint) and that partial functions with codomain 1 (that is, sub-
objects) be representable. Later Mikkelsen showed that ﬁnite colimits could be
constructed and Kock that it was suﬃcient to assume ﬁnite limits and power
objects.
The resulting axioms, even when the axioms for a category are included,
form a much simpler system on which to found mathematics than the Zermelo-
Fraenkel axioms. Moreover, they have many potential advantages, for example
in the treatment of variability.
It has been shown that the topos axioms augmented by axioms of two-
valuedness and choice give a model of set theory of power similar to that of
Zermelo-Fraenkel, but weaker in that all the sets appearing in any axiom of the
replacement schema must be quantiﬁed over sets rather than over the class of all
sets. See Mitchell [1972] and Osius [1974, 1975].

3
Triples
From one point of view, a triple is an abstraction of certain properties of algebraic
structures. From another point of view, it is an abstraction of certain properties
of adjoint functors (Theorem 1 of Section 3.1). Triple theory has turned out to be
an important tool for studying toposes. In this chapter, we develop those parts
of the theory we need to use in developing topos theory. In Chapter 9, we present
additional topics in triple theory.
3.1 Deﬁnition and Examples
A triple T = (T, η, µ) on a category C is an endofunctor T: C −→C together with
two natural transformations η: idC −→T, µ: TT −→T subject to the condition
that the following diagrams commute.
T
=
@
@
@
@@
R
T
T 2
-
Tη
T
 ηT
?
µ
=
     	
T 2
T
-
µ
T 3
T 2
-
Tµ
?
µT
?
µ
(1)
In these diagrams, T n means T iterated n times. As explained in Section 1.3,
the component of µT at an object X is the component of µ at TX, whereas the
component of Tµ at X is T(µX); similar descriptions apply to η.
The terms “monad”, “triad”, “standard construction” and “fundamental con-
struction” have also been used in place of “triple”.
Examples
The reader will note the analogy between the identities satisﬁed by a triple
and those satisﬁed by a monoid. In fact, the simplest example of a triple involves
monoids:
97

98
3 Triples
(i) Let M be a monoid and deﬁne T: Set −→Set by TX = M ×X. Let ηX: X
−→M × X take x to (1M, x) and µX: M × M × X −→M × X take (m, n, x) to
(mn, x). Then the associative and unitary identities follow from those of M.
(ii) In a similar way, if R is a commutative ring and A an associative unitary
R-algebra, there is a triple on the category of R-modules taking M to A ⊗M.
The reader may supply η and µ.
(iii) A third example is obtained by considering an object C in a category C
which has ﬁnite sums, and deﬁning T: C −→C by TX = X + C. Take ηX: X
−→X + C to be the injection into the sum and µX: X + C + C −→X + C to be
idX + ∇, where ∇is the codiagonal—the map induced by idC.
(iv) If C is a category with arbitrary products and D is an object of C , we
can deﬁne a triple T = (T, η, µ) on C by letting TC = DHom(C,D). To deﬁne T
on arrows, as well as to deﬁne η and µ, we establish some notation which will
be very useful later. For u: C −→D, let ⟨u⟩: TC −→D be the corresponding
projection from the product. Then for f: C′ −→C, we must deﬁne
Tf: DHom(C′,D) −→DHom(C,D)
The universal mapping property of the product is such that the map Tf is
uniquely determined by giving its projection on every coordinate.
So if v: C
−→D, deﬁne ⟨v⟩◦Tf = ⟨v ◦f⟩. The proof of functoriality is trivial. We deﬁne
ηC: C −→TC by ⟨u⟩◦ηC = u and µ: T 2C −→TC by ⟨u⟩◦µC = ⟨⟨u⟩⟩. We
could go into more detail here, but to gain an understanding of the concepts, you
should work out the meaning of the notation yourself. Once you have facility with
the notation, the identities are trivial to verify, but they were mind-bogglingly
hard in 1959 using elements. You might want to try to work these out using
elements to see the diﬃculty, which comes in part because the index set is a set
of functions.
(v) More generally, if C is a category with arbitrary products and D is a set
of objects of C , let
TC = Q{D | D ∈D, f: C −→D}
This deﬁnes T on objects. The remainder of the construction is similar to the
one above and is left to the reader.
(vi) An example of a diﬀerent sort is obtained from the free group construc-
tion. Let T: Set −→Set take X to the underlying set of the free group generated
by X. Thus TX is the set of equivalence classes of words made up of symbols x
and x−1 for all x ∈X; the equivalence relation is that generated by requiring that
any word containing a segment of the form xx−1 or of the form x−1x be equivalent
to the word obtained by deleting the segment. We will denote the equivalence

3.1 Deﬁnition and Examples
99
class of a word w by [w], and we will frequently say “word” instead of “equiva-
lence class of words”. The map ηX takes x to [x], whereas µX takes a word of
elements of TX, i.e., a word of words in X, to the word in X obtained by drop-
ping parentheses. For example, if x, y and z are in X, then [xy2z−1] and [z2x2]
are in TX, so w = [[xy2z−1][z2x2]] ∈TTX, and µX(w) = [xy2zx2] ∈TX. There
are many similar examples based on the construction of free algebraic structures
of other sorts. Indeed, every triple in Set can be obtained in essentially that way,
provided you allow inﬁnitary operations in your algebraic structures.
Sheaves
In this section we describe the ﬁrst triple ever explicitly considered. It was
produced by Godement, who described the construction as the standard con-
struction of an embedding of a sheaf into a “ﬂabby” sheaf (faisceau ﬂasque).
In Example (2) of Section 2.2, we described how to construct a sheaf Γ given
any continuous map p: Y −→X of topological spaces. If each ﬁber of p (that is,
each set p−1(x) for x ∈X) is endowed with the structure of an Abelian group
in such a way that all the structure maps +: Y ×X Y −→Y , 0: X −→Y (which
assigns the 0 element of p−1(x) to x), and −: Y −→Y are continuous, then the
sheaf of sections becomes in a natural way an Abelian group. In the same way,
endowing the ﬁbers with other types of algebraic structure (rings or R-modules
are the examples which most often occur in mathematical practice) in such a way
that all the structure maps are continuous makes the sheaf of sections become
an algebraic structure of the same kind. In fact a sheaf of Abelian groups is an
Abelian group at three levels: ﬁbers, sections, and as an Abelian group object in
the category Sh(X). (See Exercise 11).
If Y is retopologized by the coarsest topology for which p is continuous (so
all ﬁbers are indiscrete), then every section of p is continuous. In general, given
any set map p: Y −→X, using the coarsest topology this way produces a sheaf
Rp which in fact is the object part of a functor R: Set/|X |−→Sh(X), where
|X | is the discrete space with the same points as X. (See Exercise 9). The
resulting sheaf has the property that all its restriction maps are surjective. Such
a sheaf is called ﬂabby, and Godement was interested in them for the purpose
of constructing resolutions of objects to compute homology groups with.
For each sheaf F, Godement constructed a sheaf TF (which turns out to be
ﬂabby) which deﬁnes the object map of the functor part of a triple, as we will
describe. Let Y be the disjoint union of the stalks of F, and let p: Y −→X take
the stalk Fx to x. Topologize Y by the coarsest topology for which p is continuous
and let TF be the sheaf of sections of Y . (Compare the construction of LF in
Section 2.2).

100
3 Triples
Evidently, TFU = P{Fx | x ∈U}. Deﬁne ηF: F −→F by requiring that
ηF(s) be the equivalence class containing s in the stalk at x. Then ηF is monic
because of the uniqueness condition in the deﬁnition of sheaf (Exercise 8). Deﬁn-
ing µ is complicated. We will postpone that until we have shown how adjoint
pairs of functors give rise to triples; then we will factor T as the composite of a
pair of adjoints and get µ without further work.
If F is an R-module, then so is TF (Exercise 10). In this case, iterating T
gives Godement’s standard resolution.
Adjunctions give triples
The diﬃculty in verifying the associative identity for µ in examples like the
group triple, as well as the fact that every known triple seemed to be associated
with an adjoint pair, led P. Huber [1961] to suspect and prove:
Theorem 1.
Let U: B −→C have a left adjoint F: C −→B with adjunction
morphisms η: id −→UF and ϵ: FU −→id. Then T = (UF, η, UϵF) is a triple on
C .
Proof. The unitary identities
UF
=
@
@
@
@
@@
R
UF
UFUF
-
ηUF
UF
UFη
?
UϵF
=
      	
(2)
are just ηU ◦Uϵ = id evaluated at F (see Exercise 15 of Section 1.9) and U applied
to Fη ◦ϵF = id, respectively. The associative identity
UFUF
UF
-
UϵF
UFUFUF
UFUF
-
UϵUFF
?
UFUϵF
?
UϵF
(3)

3.1 Deﬁnition and Examples
101
is U applied to the following diagram, which is then evaluated at F:
FU
Id
-
ϵ
FUFU
FU
-
ϵFU
?
FUϵ
?
ϵ
(4)
At an object Y , this last diagram has the form
FUY
Y
-
ϵY
FUX
X
-
ϵX
?
FUf
?
f
(5)
(for X = FUY and f = ϵY ) which commutes because ϵ is natural. (This is an
example of part (a) of Exercise 6 of Section 1.3).
The group triple of example (vi) of course arises from the adjunction of the
underlying set functor and the free group functor. We will see in Section 3.2 that
in fact every triple arises from an adjoint pair (usually many diﬀerent ones).
The factorization in the case of the triple for sheaves we began to construct
above is T = RU, where U: Sh(X) −→Set/|X| has U(F) = S Fx and R: Set/|X|
−→Sh(X) is the functor deﬁned previously. Then R is left adjoint to U and
produces a triple T = (T, η, UϵR).
Cotriples
A cotriple in a category B is a triple in Bop. Thus G = (G, ϵ, δ) (this is
standard notation) is a cotriple in B if G is an endofunctor of B, and ϵ: G −→id,
δ: G −→G2 are natural transformations satisfying the duals to the diagrams (1)
above. (Thus a cotriple is the opposite of a triple, not the dual of a triple. The
dual of a triple—in other words, a triple in Catop—is a triple.)
Proposition 2.
Let U: B −→C have a left adjoint F: C −→B with adjunction
morphisms η: id −→UF and ϵ: FU −→id. Then G = (FU, ϵ, FηU) is a cotriple
on B.
Proof. This follows from Theorem 1 and the observation that U is left adjoint to
F as functors between Bop and C op with unit ϵ and counit η.

102
3 Triples
Exercises 3.1
1. Let P denote the functor from Set to Set which takes a set to its powerset and
a function to its direct image function (Section 1.2). For a set X, let ηX take an
element of X to the singleton containing x, and let µX take a set of subsets of
X (an element of PX) to its union. Show that (P, η, µ) is a triple in Set. (Hint:
compare Exercise 6 of Section 1.9).
2.
Let R be any commutative ring.
For each set X, let TX be the set of
polynomials in a ﬁnite number of variables with the variables in X and coeﬃcients
from R. Show that T is the functor part of a triple (µ is deﬁned to “collect
terms”).
3. An ordered binary rooted tree (OBRT) is a binary rooted tree (assume trees
are ﬁnite in this problem) which has an additional linear order structure (referred
to as left/right) on each set of siblings. An X-labeled OBRT (LOBRT/X) is one
together with a function from the set of terminal nodes to X. Show that the
following construction produces a triple in Set: For any set X, TX is the set of
all isomorphism classes of LOBRT/X. If f: X −→Y , then Tf is relabeling along
f (take a tree in TX and change the label of each node labeled x to f(x)). ηX
takes x ∈X to the one-node tree labeled x, and µX takes a tree whose labels are
trees in TX to the tree obtained by attaching to each node the tree whose name
labels that node.
4.
Let B be the category of sets with one binary operation (subject to no
conditions) and functions which preserve the binary operation.
(a) Show that the triple of Exercise 3 arises from the underlying set functor
B −→Set and its left adjoint.
(b) Give an explicit description of the cotriple in B induced by the adjoint
functors in (a).
5. Give an explicit description of the cotriple in Grp induced by the underlying
set functor and the free group functor.
6. Let M be a monoid and G = Hom(M, −): Set −→Set. If X is a set and f: M
−→X, let ϵX(f) = f(1) and [δX(f)](m)(n) = f(mn) for m, n ∈M. Show that
δ and ϵ are natural transformations making (G, ϵ, δ) a cotriple in Set.
7. Show that if T is any triple on C and A is an object of C , and there is at
least one mono A −→TA, then ηA is monic. (Hint: If m is the monic, put Tm
into a commutative square with η and use a unitary identity.)

3.2 The Kleisli and Eilenberg-Moore Categories
103
8. Prove that ηF as deﬁned in the section on sheaves is monic.
9. Complete the proof that R, deﬁned in the section on sheaves, is a functor.
10. Show that the functors R and U constructed in the section on sheaves have
the properties that R is left adjoint to U and that if F is an R-module in the
category of sheaves of sets over the underlying space, then so is TF.
11. Show that the following three statements about a sheaf F on a topological
space X are equivalent:
(i) Every ﬁber of F is an Abelian group in such a way that the structure
maps (addition, negation and picking out 0) are continuous in the total space of
F.
(ii) For every open U of X, FU is an Abelian group in such way that all the
restriction maps are homomorphisms.
(iii) F is an Abelian group object in the category Sh(X). (See Section 1.7.)
3.2 The Kleisli and Eilenberg-Moore Categories
After Huber proved Theorem 1 of Section 3.1, P. J. Hilton conjectured that
every triple arises from an adjoint pair. The answer was provided more or less
simultaneously, using two distinct constructions, by Eilenberg and Moore [1965]
and by H. Kleisli [1965].
Theorem 1.
Let T = (T, η, µ) be a triple on C . Then there is a category B and
an adjoint pair F: C −→B, U: B −→C, such that T = UF, η: id −→UF = T is
the unit and µ = UϵF where ϵ is the counit of the adjunction.
Proof. Construction 1 (Kleisli). The insight which makes this construction work
is that if a category B′ and an adjoint pair F: C −→B′, U: B′ −→C exist with
T = UF, then the full subcategory B of B′ of objects of the form FA for A an
object of C must, by deﬁnition, have the property that
HomB(FA, FB) ∼= HomC(A, UFB) = HomC(A, TB)
This is the clue that enables us to deﬁne B in terms of the given data C and T.
The category B will have the same objects as C . For arrows, set HomB(A, B) =
HomC(A, TB). If f: A −→TB ∈HomB(A, B) and g: B −→TC ∈HomB(B, C),
then we let g ◦f ∈HomB(A, C) be the composite
A
f
−−→TB
Tg
−−−→T 2C
µC
−−−−→TC

104
3 Triples
The identity arrow on an object A is ηA. It is an elementary exercise, using the
associative and unitary identities (and naturality) to see that these deﬁnitions
make B a category.
The functor U: B −→C is deﬁned by UA = TA; if f: A −→B ∈HomB(A, B),
then Uf is deﬁned to be
TA
Tf
−−−→T 2B
µB
−−−−→TB
F is deﬁned by FA = A; if f: A −→B ∈HomC(A, B), Ff is the composite
A
ηA
−−−→TA
Tf
−−−→TB
which is the same as
A
f
−−→B
ηB
−−−→TB
The required equivalence HomC(A, UB) ∼= HomB(FA, B) is the same as HomC(A, TB) ∼=
HomB(A, B), which is true by deﬁnition. The rest is left as an exercise.
Observe that Kleisli’s category is in some sense as small as it could be be-
cause it makes F surjective on objects. This observation can be made precise
(Proposition 2 below and Exercise 5).
The Kleisli category is denoted K (T).
Construction 2 (Eilenberg-Moore). The category constructed by Eilenberg
and Moore is in eﬀect all the possible quotients of objects in Kleisli’s category.
Of course, we have to say this using only the given ingredients, so the deﬁnition
is in terms of a map a: TA −→A which is to be thought of as underlying the
quotient map:
A T-algebra is a pair (A, a) where A is an object of C and a: TA −→A an
arrow of C subject to the condition that these two diagrams commute:
A
TA
-
ηA
idA
@
@
@@
R
A
?
a
TA
A
-
a
T 2A
TA
-
Ta
?
µA
?
a
(1)
The arrow a is the structure map of the algebra.

3.2 The Kleisli and Eilenberg-Moore Categories
105
A map f: (A, a) −→(B, b) of B is a map f: A −→B of C for which
A
B
-
f
TA
TB
-
Tf
?
a
?
b
(2)
commutes.
The category of T-algebras and T-algebra maps is denoted C T. Deﬁne UT: C T
−→C by UT(A, a) = A and UTf = f, and F T: C −→C T by F TA = (TA, µA),
F Tf = Tf.
Most of the proof that this produces a pair of adjoint functors
for which the conditions of the theorem hold is straightforward. The required
adjunction
α: HomC T((UFC, µC), (C′, c′)) −→HomC(C, C′)
takes a morphism h: UFC −→C′ of algebras to h ◦ηC and its inverse takes g: C
−→C′ to c′ ◦UFg .
It is worthwhile to examine the deﬁnition when T is the group triple. Here, a
is a set map from the underlying set of the free group on A to A. The deﬁnition
xy = a([xy]), where x and y are elements of A, so that [xy] is an element of
TA, gives a multiplication on A which in fact makes A a group—this follows
with some diagram-chasing from the diagrams in (1) (Exercise 3). The identity
element is a([ ]). Observe that associativity does not follow from the right hand
diagram in (1): associativity is built into the deﬁnition of TA as consisting of
strings of elements.
The right diagram in (1) says that if you take a string
of free-group elements, in other words a string of strings, then you can either
multiply each string out using the multiplication of the group A, then multiply
the resulting elements together, or you can ﬁrst erase parentheses, making one
long string, and then multiply it out—either way gives you the same result.
In other words, substitution commutes with evaluation, which is the essence of
algebraic manipulation.
Conversely, in the case of the group triple, every group can be represented as
an algebra for the triple: For a group G, use the quotient map UFG −→G which
takes a string to its product in G.
As suggested by the discussion in the proof of the theorem, we have a sim-
ple description of the Kleisli category. In this proposition we use the common
convention of describing as an embedding any functor which is faithful and takes
non-isomorphic objects to non-isomorphic objects (a much stronger condition
than merely reﬂecting isomorphisms; the underlying functor from groups to sets

106
3 Triples
reﬂects isomorphisms without having that property). This convention exempliﬁes
the categorical imperative that the actual identity of the objects is irrelevant.
Proposition 2.
K (T) is embedded in C T as the full subcategory generated by
the image of F.
Proof. The embedding is Φ: K (T) −→C T deﬁned by Φ(A) = (TA, µA), and for
f: A −→TB, Φ(f) is the composite
TA
Tf
−−−→T 2B
µB
−−−−→TB
The Eilenberg-Moore comparison functor
Proposition 2 is only part of the story. In fact, K (T) is initial and C T is
ﬁnal among all ways of factoring T as an adjoint pair. We will describe how this
works with C T and leave the other part to you (Exercise 5).
Suppose we have F: C −→B, U: B −→C , with F left adjoint to U and unit
and counit η: id −→UF, ϵ: FU −→id, with T = (T = UF, η, UϵF). Let UT: C T
−→C , F T: C −→C T be the adjoint pair given by Construction 2 of the proof of
Theorem 1. The Eilenberg-Moore comparison functor is the functor Φ: B
−→C T which takes B to (UB, UϵB) and f to Uf. It is easy to see that this really
is a functor, and in fact the only functor for which UT ◦Φ = U and Φ ◦F = F T.
This says CT is the terminal object in the category of adjoint pairs which induce
T (Exercise 5).
The Eilenberg-Moore functor is in many important cases an isomorphism or
equivalence of categories, a topic which is pursued in Sections 3.3 and 3.4.
Coalgebras for a cotriple
If G = (G, ϵ, δ) is a cotriple in a category C , the construction of the Eilenberg
Moore category of algebras of G regarded as a triple in C op yields, when all arrows
are reversed, the category CG of coalgebras of G. Precisely, a G-coalgebra is a
pair (A, α) with α: A −→GA for which the following diagrams commute:
A
GA
ϵA
idA
@
@
@
@
I
A
6
a
GA
A
 a
G2A
GA
Ga
6
δA
6
a
(3)

3.2 The Kleisli and Eilenberg-Moore Categories
107
A morphism f: (A, α) −→(B, β) is an arrow f: A −→B for which Gf ◦α = β◦f.
We will prove in Section 3.5 that when a functor has both a left and a right
adjoint, the corresponding categories of algebras and coalgebras are isomorphic.
Our major use of cotriples in this book will be based on the fact that the category
of coalgebras for a left exact cotriple (meaning the functor is left exact) in a topos
is itself a topos.
Exercises 3.2
1. Let T = (T, η, µ) be a triple, A and B be objects of the underlying category.
(a) Show that (TA, µA) is an algebra for T. (Such algebras are called free.)
(b) Show that for any f: A −→B, Tf is an algebra map from (TA, µA) to
(TB, µB).
(c) Show that µA is an algebra morphism from (TTA, µTA) to (TA, µA).
2. (Manes) Let C be a category. Show that the following data:
(i) A function T: Ob(C ) −→Ob(C );
(ii) for each pair of objects C and D of C a function Hom(C, TD) −→
Hom(TC, TD), denoted f 7→f ∗;
(iii) for each object C of C a morphism ηC: C −→TC;
subject to the conditions:
(i) For f: C −→TD, f = ηTD ◦f ∗;
(ii) for any object C, (ηC)∗= idTC;
(iii) for f: C −→TD and g: D −→TE, (g∗◦f)∗= g∗◦f ∗;
are equivalent to a triple on C . (Hint: An elegant way to attack this exercise
is to use the data to deﬁne the Kleisli category for the triple, using the pointwise
adjunction construction (Theorem 1 of Section 1.9) to get the adjoint pair whose
corresponding triple is the one sought.)
3. Show that if T is the group triple, the Eilenberg-Moore comparison functor
Φ: Grp −→SetT is an isomorphism of categories.
4. Let T be a triple in a category C . Let (C, c) be an algebra for T and let B be
a subobject of C. Show that a map b: TB −→B is an algebra structure on B for

108
3 Triples
which inclusion is an algebra map if and only if
B
C
-
TB
TC
-
?
b
?
c
commutes, and that there cannot be more than one such map b. (This says in
eﬀect that B “is” a subalgebra if and only if it is “closed under the operations”—
in other words, c(TB) ⊆B. In Section 6.4, we give a condition for a subobject
of a coalgebra of a left exact cotriple in a topos to be a subcoalgebra.)
5. For a given triple T in a category C , let E be the category in which an object
is a category B together with an adjoint pair of functors F: C −→B, U: B −→C
which induces the triple T via Theorem 1 of Section 3.1, and in which an arrow
from (B, F, U) to (B′, F ′, U ′) is a functor G: B −→B′ for which U ◦G = U ′ and
G ◦F ′ = F. Show that K (T) is the initial object in E and C T is the terminal
object.
6. Show that the coalgebras for the cotriple deﬁned in Exercise 6 of Section 3.1
form a category isomorphic to the category of sets acted on on the right by M.
7. Show that for a triple T in a category C each of the following constructions
give a category K isomorphic to the Kleisli category.
(a) K is the full subcategory of C T whose objects are the image of F T, i.e.
all objects of the form (F TC, µC), C an object of C .
(b) K op is the full subcategory of Func(C T, Set) whose objects are of the
form HomC(C, UT(−)), C an object of C .
Linton used the second deﬁnition, in which F T does not appear, to study
algebraic theories in the absence of a left adjoint to the underlying functor.
8.
(Linton) Let T = (T, η, µ) be a triple in C .
Let K be the Kleisli cate-
gory of T and FT: C −→K be the left adjoint to UT: K −→C . Let H: C T
−→Func(K op, Set) denote the functor which takes (C, c) to the restriction of
HomC T(−, (C, c)) to K , where K is regarded as a subcategory of C T as in
Exercise 7(a) above. Prove that the diagram
C
Func(C op, Set)
-
Yoneda
C T
Func(K op, Set)
-
H
?
UT
?
Func(F op
T , Set)

3.3 Tripleability
109
is a pullback.
3.3 Tripleability
In this section we will be concerned with the question of deciding when a func-
tor U: B −→C with a left adjoint has the property that the Eilenberg-Moore
category for the corresponding triple is essentially the same as B.
To make this precise, a functor U which has a left adjoint for which the corre-
sponding Eilenberg-Moore comparison functor Φ is an equivalence of categories
is said to be tripleable. If Φ is full and faithful, we say that U is of descent
type (and if it is tripleable, that it is of eﬀective descent type). We will often
say B is tripleable over C if there is a well-understood functor U: B −→C . Thus
Grp is tripleable over Set, for example (Exercise 3 of Section 3.2).
In this section we state and prove a theorem due to Beck giving conditions on
a functor U: B −→C which insure that it is tripleable. Variations on this basic
theorem will be discussed in Sections 3.4 and 9.1. Before we can state the main
theorem, we need some background.
Reﬂecting isomorphisms
A functor U reﬂects isomorphisms if whenever Uf is an isomorphism, so
is f. For example, the underlying functor U: Grp −→Set reﬂects isomorphisms—
that is what you mean when you say that a group homomorphism is an iso-
morphism if and only if it is one to one and onto. (Warning: That U reﬂects
isomorphisms is not the same as saying that if UX is isomorphic to UY then X
is isomorphic to Y —for example, two groups with the same number of elements
need not be isomorphic). Observe that the underlying functor U: Top −→Set
does not reﬂect isomorphisms.
Proposition 1.
Any tripleable functor reﬂects isomorphisms.
Proof. Because equivalences of categories reﬂect isomorphisms, it is suﬃcient to
show that, for any triple T in a category C , the underlying functor U: C T −→C
reﬂects isomorphisms. So let f: (A, a) −→(B, b) have the property that f is an

110
3 Triples
isomorphism in C . Let g = f −1. All we need to show is that
B
A
-
g
TB
TA
-
Tg
?
b
?
a
(1)
commutes. This calculation shows that:
a ◦Tg = g ◦f ◦a ◦Tg = g ◦b ◦Tf ◦Tg
= g ◦b ◦T(f ◦g) = g ◦b ◦T(id) = g ◦b◦
Contractible coequalizers
A parallel pair in a category is pair of maps with the same domain and
codomain:
A
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
B
(2)
The parallel pair above is contractible (or split) if there is an arrow t: B
−→A with
d0 ◦t = id
and
d1 ◦t ◦d0 = d1 ◦t ◦d1
A contractible coequalizer consists of objects and arrows
A
B
-
d1
R
d0
I
t
C
R
d
I
s
(3)
for which
(i) d0 ◦t = id,
(ii) d1 ◦t = s ◦d,
(iii) d ◦s = id, and
(iv) d ◦d0 = d ◦d1.
We will eventually see that any Eilenberg-Moore algebra is a coequalizer of a
parallel pair which becomes contractible upon applying UT.

3.3 Tripleability
111
Proposition 2.
(a) A contractible coequalizer is a coequalizer.
(b) If (3) is a contractible coequalizer in a category C and F: C −→D is any
functor, then
FA
FB
-
Fd1 R
Fd0
I
Ft
FC
R
Fd
I Fs
(4)
is a contractible coequalizer.
(c) If
A
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
B
d
−−→C
(5)
is a coequalizer, then the existence of t making
A
−→
−→
←−
t
B
(6)
a contractible pair forces the existence of s making (5) a contractible coequalizer.
Proof. To show (a), let f: B −→D with f ◦d0 = f ◦d1. The unique g: C −→D
required by the deﬁnition of coequalizer is f ◦s (“To get the induced map, compose
with the contraction s”). It is straightforward to see that f = g ◦d, and g is
unique because d is a split epimorphism. Statement (b) follows from the fact
that a contractible coequalizer is deﬁned by equations involving composition and
identities, which functors preserve. A coequalizer which remains a coequalizer
upon application of any functor is called a absolute coequalizer; thus (a) and
(b) together say that a contractible coequalizer is an absolute coequalizer.
As for (c), if t exists, then by assumption, d1 ◦t coequalizes d0 and d1, so there
is a unique s: C −→B with s ◦d = d1 ◦t. But then
d ◦s ◦d = d ◦d1 ◦t = d ◦d0 ◦t = d
and d is epi, so d ◦s = id.
If U: B −→C , a U-contractible coequalizer pair is a pair of morphisms
as in (2) above for which there is a contractible coequalizer
UA
UB
-
Ud1 R
Ud0
I
t
C
R
d
I
s
(7)
in C .

112
3 Triples
Proposition 3.
Let U: B −→C be tripleable and
B′
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
B
(8)
be a U-contractible coequalizer pair. Then (8) has a coequalizer d: B −→B′′ in
B and
UB′
Ud0
−−−−→
−−−−→
Ud1
UB
Ud
−−−→UB′′
(9)
is a coequalizer in C .
Before beginning the proof, we need some terminology for commutative dia-
grams. A diagram like
A′
B′
A
B
?
k
?
l
-
e
-
f
-
g
-
h
is said to commute serially if g ◦k = l ◦e and h ◦k = l ◦f. (The arrows are
matched up in accordance with the order they occur in the diagram). In more
complicated diagrams the analogous convention will be understood. For example,
A′
B′
A
B
-
f0
-
f1
-
g0
-
g1
?
k0
?
k1
?
l0
?
l1
will be said to commute serially if gi ◦kj = lj ◦fi for all four possible choices of
i, j = 0, 1.
Proof. Proof of Proposition 3. (This proof was suggested by J. Beck). As in
Proposition 1, let B = C T. Thus we are given a pair
(C′, c′)
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
(C, c)
(10)

3.3 Tripleability
113
and we suppose
C′
C
-
d1
R
d0
I
t
C′′′′
R
d
I
s
(11)
is a contractible coequalizer in C . Then by Proposition 2(b), all three rows of
the following diagram (in which we have not yet deﬁned c′′) are contractible
coequalizers.
TC′
TC
TTC′
TTC
TC′′
-
TTC′′
-
TTd
C′
C
?
c′
?
c
C′′
-
-
d
Td
?
c′′
-
TTd0
-
TTd1
-
Td0
-
Td1
-
d0
-
d1
?
Tc′
?
µC′
?
Tc
?
µC
?
Tc′′
?
µC′′
(12)
The lower left square commutes serially because d0 and d1 are algebra maps
by assumption. This implies that d ◦c coequalizes T(d0) and (T(d1). Using the
fact that the middle row is a coequalizer, we deﬁne c′′ to be the unique arrow
making the bottom right square commute. By the proof of Proposition 2(a) (“To
get the induced map, compose with the contraction”) we have
c′′ = d ◦c ◦Ts
a fact we will need in the proof of Proposition 4.
We ﬁrst prove that c′′ is a structure map for an algebra. The upper right square
commutes serially, the square with the µ’s because µ is a natural transformation,
and the one with Tc and Tc′′ because it is T of the bottom right square. Using
this and the fact that c is a structure map, we have
c′′ ◦µc′′ ◦T 2d = c′′ ◦Tc′′ ◦T 2d
so, since T 2d is an epimorphism (it is split),
c′′ ◦Tc′′ = c′′ ◦µc′′
The unitary law for algebras is obtained by replacing the top row of (12)
by the bottom row and the vertical arrows by ηc′, ηc, and ηc′′, and using a

114
3 Triples
similar argument. We know d is an algebra map because the bottom right square
commutes.
Finally, we must show that (C′′, c′′) is a coequalizer, so suppose f: (C, c) −→
(E, e) coequalizes d0 and d1. Then because C′′ is their coequalizer in C , there is
a unique arrow u: C′′ −→E for which f = u ◦d. We need only to prove that the
right square in
C
C′′
-
d
TC
TC′′
-
Td
?
c
?
c′′
E
-
u
TE
-
Tu
?
?
e
commutes. This follows from the fact that the left square and the outer rectangle
commute and Td is epi.
Note that we have actually proved that UT creates coequalizers of UT-contracti-
ble pairs.
Algebras are coequalizers
A parallel pair is said to be reﬂexive if the two arrows have a common right
inverse. A reﬂexive coequalizer diagram is a coequalizer of a reﬂexive parallel
pair.
Proposition 4.
Let T be a triple on C . Then for any (A, a) in C T,
(TTA, µTA)
µA
−−−−→
−−−−→
Ta
(TA, µA)
(13)
is a reﬂexive U-contractible coequalizer pair whose coequalizer in C is (A, a).
Proof. The associative law for µ implies that µA is an algebra map, and the
naturality of µ implies that Ta is an algebra map. It follows from the identities
for triples and algebras that
TTA
TA
-
Ta
R
µA
I ηTA
A
R
a
I
ηA
(14)
is a contractible coequalizer. Thus by Proposition 3, there is an algebra structure
on A which coequalizes µA and Ta in C T. As observed in the proof of that
proposition, the structure map is
a ◦µA ◦TηA = a

3.3 Tripleability
115
as claimed.
The common right inverse for Ta and µA is TηA:
Ta ◦TηA = T(a ◦ηA) = T(id) = id
by the unitary law for algebras and
µA ◦T(ηA) = U(ϵFA ◦FηA) = U(id) = id
by Exercise 15, Section 1.9. The naturality of µ implies that Tη is an algebra
map.
Corollary 5.
If, given
B
U
−−−→
←−−−
F
C
(15)
F is left adjoint to U, then for any object B of B,
FUFUB
ϵFUB
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
FUϵB
FUB
(16)
is a reﬂexive U-contractible coequalizer pair.
Proof. UϵF is an algebra structure map by Exercise 1 of Section 3.2 and the
deﬁnition of CT. Thus by Proposition 4, it is the coequalizer of the diagram
underlying (16). The common right inverse is FηU.
Beck’s Theorem
We will now prove a number of lemmas culminating in two theorems due to
Beck. Theorem 9 characterizes functors U for which the comparison functor is
full and faithful, and Theorem 10 characterizes tripleable functors.
In the lemmas, we speak of an adjoint pair (15) with associated triple T in C
and cotriple G in B.
Lemma 6.
The diagram
C
ηC
−−−→TC
ηTC
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
ηTC
T 2C
(17)
is an equalizer for every object C of C if and only if ηC is a regular mono for all
objects C of C .

116
3 Triples
Proof. If (17) is an equalizer then obviously ηC is regular mono. Suppose ηC is
regular mono; then we have some equalizer diagram of the form
C
ηC
−−−→TC
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
C′
(18)
It is suﬃcient to show that for any element w of TC, d0 and d1 agree on w if
and only if ηTC and TηC agree on w.
(i) If d0 ◦w = d1 ◦w, then w = ηC ◦g for some g, so
ηTC ◦w = ηTC ◦ηC ◦g = TηC ◦ηC ◦g = TηC ◦w
(ii) If ηTC ◦w = TηC ◦w, then TηTC ◦Tw = T 2ηC ◦Tw. But
TC
TηC
−−−−−→T 2C
TηTC
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
T 2ηC
T 3C
(19)
is a contractible equalizer, with contractions µC and µTC. Thus Tw = TηC ◦h
for some h, so that Td0 ◦Tw = Td1 ◦Tw. Hence in the diagram below, which
commutes because η is a natural transformation, the two composites are equal.
TC′′
TTC
-
Tw
C′′
TC
-
w
?
ηC′′
?
TC′
C′
ηTC
?
ηC′
-
d0
-
d1
-
Td0
-
Td1
(20)
It follows from the fact that ηC′ is (regular) mono that d0 ◦w = d1 ◦w.
Dually, we have
Corollary 7.
ϵB is a regular epi for every object B of B if and only if
FUFUB
FUϵB
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
ϵFUB
FUB
ϵB
−−−→B
(21)
is a coequalizer for every object B of B.

3.3 Tripleability
117
Lemma 8.
For all objects B and B′ of B,
HomB(FUB, B′) ∼= HomC T(ΦFUB, ΦB′)
where Φ: B −→C T is the comparison functor. (In other words, “Φ is full and
faithful on arrows out of free objects”).
Proof. We have,
HomB(FUB, B′) ∼= HomC(UB, UB′)
∼= HomC(UB, UT(UB′, UϵB′))
∼= HomC T(F T(UB), (UB′, UϵB′))
∼= HomC T((TUB, µUB), (UB′, UϵB′))
∼= HomC T(ΦFUB, ΦB′)◦
Theorem 9.
[Beck] Φ is full and faithful if and only if ϵB is a regular epi for
all objects B of B.
Proof. UϵB is the structure map of an algebra in C T by Exercise 1, and so by
Proposition 4 is a coequalizer of a parallel pair with domain in the image of F T,
hence in the image of Φ. Since Φ(ϵB) = UϵB, it follows from Exercise 9 that if
Φ is full and faithful, then ϵB is a regular epi.
Conversely, suppose ϵB is a regular epi. If f, g: B −→B′ in B and Uf = Ug,
then FUf = FUg and this diagram commutes:
‘B
B
FUB
FUB′
?
ϵB
?
ϵB′
-
FUf
-
FUg
-
f
-
g
Thus since ϵB is epi, f = g. Hence Φ is faithful.
Under the hypothesis, (21) is a U-contractible coequalizer diagram by Corol-
laries 5 and 7. Since UT ◦Φ = U, applying Φ to (21) gives a UT-contractible
coequalizer diagram. It follows that the horizontal edges of the diagram below
are equalizers; the top row homsets are computed in B and the bottom row in
C T. The vertical arrows are those induced by Φ; by Lemma 8, the middle and

118
3 Triples
right one are isomorphisms. Thus the left one is an isomorphism, too, proving
the Proposition.
Hom(ΦB, ΦB′)
Hom(ΦFUB, ΦB′)
-
Hom(B, B′)
Hom(FUB, B′)
-
?
?
Hom(ΦFUFUB, ΦB′)
Hom(FUFUB, B′)
?
-
-
-
-
Theorem 10.
[Beck’s Precise Tripleability Theorem] U: B −→C is tripleable
if and only if
(i) U has a left adjoint.
(ii) U reﬂects isomorphisms.
(iii) B has coequalizers of reﬂexive U-contractible coequalizer pairs and U
preserves them.
Proof. If U is tripleable it has a left adjoint F by deﬁnition and it satisﬁes (ii)
and (iii) by Propositions 1 and 3. (Note that in fact B has and U preserves the
coequalizers of all U-contractible parallel pairs, not merely reﬂexive ones—that
is the way Beck originally stated the theorem).
Now, to do the other direction, we know (16) is a reﬂexive U-contractible
coequalizer pair, so by (iii) it has a coequalizer B′. Since ϵB coequalizes (16)
(because ϵ is a natural transformation), we know that there is an arrow f making
FUFUB
FUB
-
ϵFUB
-
FUϵB
B′
-
ϵB
@
@
@@
R
B
?
f
commute. However, as observed in the proof of Corollary 5, UϵB is coequalizer
of U of this diagram, so Uf is an isomorphism. Hence f is an isomorphism, so
ϵB is a regular epi, so that Φ is full and faithful by Theorem 9.
The argument just given that f is an isomorphism can easily be used to show
that in fact any functor U satisfying (ii) and (iii) must reﬂect coequalizers of
reﬂexive U-contractible coequalizer pairs (Exercise 1).
For any object (C, c) of C T, we must ﬁnd an object B of B for which Φ(B) ∼=
(C, c). Now Φ of the following diagram is (13),
FUFC
Fc
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
ϵFC
FC

3.3 Tripleability
119
so it is a reﬂexive U-contractible coequalizer.
Thus by assumption there is a
coequalizer B for which the sequence underlying
FUFC
Fc
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
ϵFC
FC −→B
is
UFUFC
UFc
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
UϵFC
UFC −→UB
By Proposition 4, this last diagram is UT of a coequalizer diagram in C T with
coequalizer (C, c). Since UT reﬂects such coequalizers and UT ◦Φ = U, it follows
that Φ(B) ∼= (C, c), as required.
Theorem 10 is the precise tripleability theorem as distinct from certain theo-
rems to be discussed in Section 3.5 which give conditions for tripleability which
are suﬃcient but not necessary. Theorem 10 is commonly known by its acronym
“PTT”.
Other conditions suﬃcient for tripleability are discussed in Section 9.1.
We extract from the last paragraph of the proof of the PTT the following
proposition, which we need later. This proposition can be used to provide an
alternate proof of the equivalence of C T and B in the PTT (see Exercise 12 of
Section 1.9).
Proposition 11.
If U: B −→C has a left adjoint and B has coequalizers of
reﬂexive U-contractible coequalizer pairs, then the comparison functor Φ has a
left adjoint.
Proof. The object B constructed in the last paragraph of the proof of Theorem 10
requires only the present hypotheses to exist. Deﬁne Ψ(C, c) to be B. If g: (C, c)
−→(D, d), then the diagram
FUFD
FD
FUFC
FC
?
FUFg
?
Fg
ΨD
-
ΨC
-
?
Ψg
-
Fc
-
ϵFC
-
Fd
-
ϵFD
commutes serially, the top square because c and d are structure maps and the
bottom one because ϵ is a natural transformation. Thus it induces a map Ψ(g).
It is straightforward to check that this makes Ψ a functor which is left adjoint to
the comparison functor Φ.

120
3 Triples
Compact Hausdorﬀspaces
We illustrate the use of the PTT by proving that compact Hausdorﬀspaces
are tripleable over Set. This fact was actually proved by F. E. J. Linton before
Beck proved the theorem, using an argument which, after suitable generalization,
became Duskin’s Theorem of Section 9.1.
The underlying set functor U from the category CptHaus of compact Hausdorﬀ
spaces and continuous maps to Set has a left adjoint β, where βX is the Stone-
˘Cech compactiﬁcation of the set X considered as a discrete space.
Proposition 12.
U is tripleable.
Proof. The statement that U reﬂects isomorphisms is the same as the statement
that a bijective continuous map between compact Hausdorﬀspaces is a home-
omorphism, which is true. A pair d0, dl: C′ −→C of continuous maps between
compact Hausdorﬀspaces has a coequalizer in Top which is necessarily preserved
by the underlying set functor since that functor has a right adjoint (the functor
which puts the indiscrete topology on a set X).
The quotient is compact and will be Hausdorﬀif and only if the kernel pair is
closed. Thus we will be ﬁnished if we show that the kernel pair of this coequalizer
is closed. That kernel pair is the equivalence relation generated by R (the relation
which is the image of C′ in C × C). By Exercise 2(c) below, the kernel pair is
R ◦Rop. Now R is closed in C × C (it is the image of a map of a compact space
into a Hausdorﬀspace), and so is compact Hausdorﬀ. Hence the ﬁber product
R ×C Rop is compact Hausdorﬀ, so is closed in C × C × C. R ◦Rop is the image
of that space in the Hausdorﬀspace C × C and so is closed, as required.
The functor part of this triple takes a set to the set of ultraﬁlters on it. The
functor which takes a set to the set of ﬁlters on it is also part of a triple, the
algebras for which are continuous lattices (Day [1975], Wyler [1981]). Continuous
lattices are also algebras for a triple in the category of topological spaces and
elsewhere. Another example of this last phenomenon of being the category of
algebras for triples in diﬀerent categories is the category of monoids, which is
tripleable over Set and also (in three diﬀerent ways) over Cat (Wells [1980]).
Exercises 3.3
1. Show that a functor U: B −→C which reﬂects isomorphisms has the property
that if a diagram D in B has a colimit and X is a cocone from D in B for
which UX is a colimit of UD, then X is a colimit of D. Do the same for limits.
(These facts are summarized by the slogan: “A functor that reﬂects isomorphisms

3.3 Tripleability
121
reﬂects all limits and colimits it preserves.” This slogan exaggerates the matter
slightly: The limits and colimits in question have to be assumed to exist.)
2. (Suggested in part by Barry Jay.) A parallel pair d0, dl: X′ −→X in Set
determines a relation R on X , namely the image of (d0, dl): X′ −→X × X.
Conversely, a relation R on a set S deﬁnes a parallel pair from R to S (the two
projection maps).
(a) Show that a relation R in Set determines a reﬂexive parallel pair if and
only if it contains the diagonal.
(b) Show that a relation R in Set determines a contractible pair if and only if
each equivalence class [x] in the equivalence a relation E generated by R contains
an element x∗with the property that xEx′ if and only if xRx∗and x′Rx∗.
(c) Show that the parallel pair determined by an ordering on a set is con-
tractible if and only if every connected component of the coequalizer ordered set
has a maximum element.
(d) Show that an equivalence relation in Set is always contractible.
(e) Show that if R is the relation determined by any contractible parallel pair
in Set , then E = R ◦Rop is the equivalence relation generated by R.
3. Show that the algebra map c′′ constructed in the proof of Proposition 3 is the
only structure map TC′′ −→C′′ which makes d an algebra map.
4. Prove that Diagram (19) is a contractible coequalizer.
5. Show that the Eilenberg-Moore comparison functor is the only functor Φ:B
−→C T for which U T ◦Φ = U and Φ ◦F = FT. (Hint: Show that for B ∈ObB,
Φ(B) must be (UB, b) for some arrow b: UFUB −→UB), and then consider this
diagram:
UFUFUB
UFUB
-
UFb
UFUB
UB
-
UϵB
?
ηUFUB
?
ηUB
UFUB
UB
-
b
?
UϵFUB
?
b

122
3 Triples
6. Let U be a functor with left adjoint F. Then the comparison functor for
the induced triple is an isomorphism of categories (not merely an equivalence)
if and only if U reﬂects isomorphisms and creates coequalizers for reﬂexive U-
contractible coequalizer pairs. (Compare Exercise 22 of Section 1.7.)
7.
A subcategory CO of a category C is reﬂective (or reﬂexive) if the inclu-
sion functor has a left adjoint. Show that the inclusion functor of a reﬂective
subcategory is tripleable.
8. Show that an equivalence of categories reﬂects isomorphisms.
9. Show that if H is a full and faithful functor and Hf is the coequalizer of a
parallel pair with domain in the image of H, then f is a coequalizer.
3.4 Properties of Tripleable Functors
In this section we describe various properties a tripleable functor must have.
Some of these are useful in the development of topos theory, and as necessary
conditions for tripleability they are also useful in showing that certain functors
are not tripleable, as we will illustrate.
Completeness of categories of algebras
If T = (T, η, µ) is a triple in a category C , then the category C T of algebras
is “as complete as C is”, in the following sense:
Theorem 1.
Let T be a triple in C . Then U T: C T −→C creates limits. Hence
any tripleable functor reﬂects limits.
Proof. In the following, we write U for U T for simplicity. Let D: I −→C T be
a diagram, and let C be the limit of U ◦D in C . We must ﬁnd an algebra
structure map c: TC −→C making (C, c) the limit of D, and that structure must
be unique. Let n be an object of I . Then Dn is a structure (UD(n), αn). Let
βn: C −→U(D(n)) be the element of the limit cone corresponding to n. Then
the elements (αn) ◦(Tβn) form a cone from TC to UD and so induce an arrow
c: TC −→C which is the required algebra structure. The fact that the resulting
structure is a T-algebra follows from the jointly monic nature of the elements βn.

3.4 Properties of Tripleable Functors
123
For example, associativity follows from the diagram
TC
TUDn
-
T 2C
T 2UDn
-
C
UDn
-
βn
?
c
?
αn
??
??
To see that (C, c) is the limit, suppose we have a cone with elements
γn: (C′, c′) −→Dn = (UDn, αn)
Applying U, this gives a cone from C′ to UDn, which induces an arrow C −→C
by the fact that C is a limit. The left square in the following diagram must then
commute because the βn are a jointly monic family. That means that the map
C′ −→C is an algebra map as required.
C′
C
-
TC′
TC
-
?
e′
?
UDn
-
βn
TUDn
-
?
e
?
αn
(1)
Corollary 2.
If U: B −→C is tripleable and C is complete, then so is B.
Note that U in the preceding corollary need not create limits, since B might
be equivalent to but not isomorphic to C T.
In Section 9.3 we will describe suﬃcient conditions for proving B cocomplete.
Banach spaces
The fact that a subobject is a subalgebra if and only if it is closed under the
operations (Exercise 4 of 3.2) is a useful necessary condition for tripleability. We
apply this criterion to Banach spaces.
Let Ban denote the category whose objects are real Banach spaces and whose
morphisms are linear maps which to not increase the norm. Let U: Ban −→Set
be the functor that takes a space B to its unit ball {b ∈B | |B| ≤1} and maps

124
3 Triples
to their restriction. We will show that U reﬂects isomorphisms and has a left
adjoint, but is nevertheless not tripleable.
U reﬂects isos: Suppose f: B −→C is such that Uf is an isomorphism. The
proof repeatedly uses the fact that for any b ∈B, b/ |b| is in UB. Thus f is
injective (if f(b) = 0 then Uf must take b/ |b| to 0) and surjective (if c ∈C then
c/ |c| is the image of some b ∈UB, so c is the image of b |c|). It is also necessary
to show that f −1 preserves the norm, which will follow if we show that f preserves
the norm. Let b ∈B and n = |f(b/ |b|)|. Then
f(b/(n |b|) = (1/n)f(b)/ |b|)
must be in UC because its norm is 1. Since f is injective and Uf is surjective
onto UC, b/(n |b|) is in UB, whence n ≥1. Since f does not increase norms,
n ≤1, so n = 1. Thus f preserves norms, as required.
The left adjoint to U assigns to a set X the set FX of all functions f: X −→R
for which Σ(x∈X) |f(x)| ≤∞. The norm |f(x)| = Σ |f(x)| makes FX a Banach
space. It is in fact l1(X), where X is regarded as a measure space with atomic
measure.
The identities for an algebra for the triple induced by F and U imply by a
somewhat long but straightforward agrument that for a given Banach space C,
the induced algebra structure c = UϵC: UFUC −→UC is deﬁned for f ∈FUC
by
c(f) = Σ(x∈X) x |f(x)|
Then if C is the closed interval [−1, 1], the only f ∈FUC for which c(f) = 1 is
the function with value 1 at 1 and 0 elsewhere, and the only f with c(f) = −1
are the functions with value −1 at 1 and 0 elsewhere, and with value 1 at −1 and
0 elsewhere. Letting B = (−1, 1), this implies that c(FUB) ⊆B, which means
by Exercise 4 of 3.2 that there is an algebra structure on the open interval that
agrees with c. But the open interval (−1, 1) with the usual addition and scalar
multiplication is not the closed ball of any Banach space, so U is not tripleable.
Even worse is the three-point algebra [0, 1]/(0, 1), which is the coequalizer of
the inclusion of (0, 1) in [0, 1] and the zero map. It is instructive to work out the
algebra structure on this algebra.
Tripleability over Set
A useful necessary condition for tripleability over Set is the following propo-
sition.

3.4 Properties of Tripleable Functors
125
Proposition 3.
If U: B −→Set is a tripleable functor, then the pullback of a
regular epi in B is a regular epi.
Proof. If c is a regular epi in B, then it is the coequalizer of its kernel pair
(Corollary 2 and Exercise 6 of Section 1.8). This kernel pair induces an equiva-
lence relation in Set which, like any such, is split. Hence by Proposition 2(c) of
Section 3.3, c is a U-contractible coequalizer. Hence Uc is a regular epi in Set.
Let b be the pullback of c along an arrow f. Then Ub is a regular epi in Set since
U preserves pullbacks and the pullback of a regular epi is a regular epi in Set.
Ub is then the class map of an equivalence relation and so b is a U-contractible
coequalizer in B. Since U is tripleable, the PTT implies that b is regular.
Corollary 4.
The category Cat of small categories and functors is not tripleable
over Set.
(Note that this means there is no functor from Cat to Set which is tripleable—
in particular, neither of the functors which take a category to its set of objects
or its set of arrows.)
Proof. Let 1 denote the category with one object and one arrow, and 2 the
category with two objects and exactly one non-identity morphism f, going from
one object to the other. There are two functors from 1 to 2, and to form their
coequalizer is to identify the domain and codomain of f. In this coequalizer, we
must have the arrows f 2, f 3, and so on, and there is no reason for any equalities
among them, so the coequalizer is the monoid (N, +) regarded as a category with
one object. Thus the arrow 2 −→N is a regular epi. See Exercise 12.
Now let M )−→N denote the submonoid of even integers. Let 2 (as opposed
to 2) denote 1 + 1, that is the category with two objects and no nonidentity
arrows. It is easy to see that
2
N
-
2
M
-
?
?
?
?
(2)
is a pullback and that the top arrow is not a regular epi.
(It is a notable phenomenon that a functor may merge objects and therefore
make arrows compose with each other that never dreamed of composing before
the functor was applied.
This makes colimits in Cat hard to understand and
is probably the main reason why the oft-expressed notion that a category is a
“monoid with many objects” has only limited fruitfulness—in contrast to the
very suggestive idea that a category is a generalized poset.)

126
3 Triples
On the other hand, Cat is tripleable over the category Grph of graphs. The
left adjoint L to the underlying functor U: Cat −→Grph is deﬁned by making LG
(for a graph G) the category whose nonidentity arrows are all composable paths
of arrows of G. (Exercise 11 of Section 1.9.) Composition is concatenation of
paths. Identity arrows are empty paths.
That U reﬂects isomorphisms is the familiar fact that the inverse of a bijective
functor is a functor.
Finally, suppose
A −→
−→B
(3)
is a pair of functors for which
UA −→
−→UB
d
−−→G
(4)
is a contractible coequalizer. In particular, it is an absolute coequalizer, so ap-
plying UL gives a coequalizer
ULUA −→
−→ULUB
ULd
−−−−−→ULG
(5)
If b: LUB −→B is the map corresponding to the given category structure on B
(taking a composable path to its composite), then by the coequalizer property
there is a map g making the following diagram commute.
UB
G
-
d
ULUB
ULG
-
ULd
?
Ub
?
g
(6)
and it is easy to see from the universal property of coequalizers that both hori-
zontal arrows are surjective. A straightforward check using that surjectivity then
shows that deﬁning composition of arrows a and b of ULG by a ◦b = g(a, b) and
identity arrows as images of identity arrows in UB makes G a category. Then d
is a functor which is the required coequalizer.
Grph is also tripleable over sets; this follows from Exercise 10 below and
Exercise 1 in Section 3.5. Thus the composite of two tripleable functors need not
be tripleable. For another example, see Exercise 11 below. In the next section we
will state theorems giving circumstances under which the composite of tripleable
functors is tripleable.

3.4 Properties of Tripleable Functors
127
Exercises 3.4
10. Show that Grph is isomorphic to the category of set-valued actions of the
monoid M with multiplication table
i
s
t
i
i
s
t
s
s
s
t
t
t
s
t
(Hint: If M acts on X, X is the set of arrows of a graph and sx and tx are its
source and target.)
11.
(a) Show that the inclusion of the category of torsion-free Abelian groups
into the category of Abelian groups is tripleable. (Hint: Try Exercise 7 of Sec-
tion 3.3.)
(b) Show that the category of Abelian groups is tripleable over Set.
(c) Show that the underlying set functor from the category of torsion-free
Abelian groups to Set has a left adjoint (hint: restrict the free-Abelian-group
functor).
(d) Show that the functor in (c) reﬂects isomorphisms.
(e) Show that the functor in (c) is not tripleable.
(Hint: The two maps
(m, n) 7→m + 2n and (m, n) 7→m from Z ⊕Z −→Z determine a U-split equiva-
lence relation but are not the kernel pair of anything).
12. Using the notation of Corollary 4, we have the commutative diagram
2
N
-
F
H
@
@
@@
R
Z/2Z
?
G
We have already seen that F is a regular epi. Show that G is a regular epi and
H is not, so that the composite of regular epis need not be one. This destroys a
very reasonable sounding conjecture.

128
3 Triples
3.5 Suﬃcient Conditions for Tripleability
We deﬁne two useful suﬃcient doncitions on a functor which make it tripleable,
which in addition allow us to give circumstances under which the composite of
tripleable functors is tripleable.
Such a composite can fail to be tripleable if the ﬁrst functor applied fails to
lift contractible coequalizers to contractible coequalizers. However, the composite
might still be tripleable if the second functor lifts all coequalizers. This motivates
the following two deﬁnitions.
A functor U: B −→C satisﬁes the hypotheses of the “VTT” (Vulgar Triplea-
bility Theorem) if it has a left adjoint, reﬂects isomorphisms, and if any reﬂexive
U-contractible coequalizer pair is already a contractible coequalizer in B. Since
contractible coequlizers are preserved by any functor, it follows that if U satisﬁes
the VTT it must be tripleable.
U satisﬁes the hypotheses of the “CTT” (Crude Tripleability Theorem) if U
has a left adjoint and reﬂects isomorphisms, B has coequalizers of those reﬂexive
pairs (f, g) for which (Uf, Ug) is a coequalizer and U preserves those coequalizers.
Such a functor is clearly tripleable.
Proposition 1.
Suppose U1: A −→B and U2: B −→C .
(a) If U1 and U2 both satisfy CTT (respectively VTT) then so does U2 ◦U1.
(b) If U1 satisﬁes CTT, U2 satisﬁes PTT and U3: C −→D satisﬁes VTT,
then U3 ◦U2 ◦U1 is tripleable.
Proof. Easy.
The following proposition is a diﬀerent sort, imposing hypotheses on the cat-
egories involved which imply the existence of an adjoint. A pointed category is
a category with an object 0 which is both initial and terminal. This implies that
for any two objects A and B there is a (necessarily unique) arrow from A to B
that factors through 0. The category of groups, for example, is pointed.
Proposition 2.
Let A be a complete cocomplete pointed category, let U: B
−→A be tripleable, and let C be a small category. Deﬁne V : Func(C , B) −→A
by taking a functor Ψ to the product of all objects UΨ(C) of A over all objects
C of C. Then V is tripleable.
Outline of proof. We will refer repeatedly to the following diagram, in which S
is the set of objects of C and i is the inclusion. In the direction from Func(C , B)

3.5 Suﬃcient Conditions for Tripleability
129
to A , both routes represent a factorization of V , and the square commutes.
Func(S, B)
Func(S, A )
-
Func(S, U)
Func(C , B)
Func(C , A )
?
Func(i, B)
-
Func(C , U)

Func(C , F)
6
Kan
?
Func(i, A )
-
Q (VTT)
A

diagonal
F is the left adjoint of U, so Func(C , F) os the left adjoint of Func(C , U). The
left adjoint of Func(i, A ) exists by Kan extensions because A is cocomplete
(see Section 1.9). The functor Q takes a functor F: S −→A to the product
of all its values; it is easy to see that the diagonal map (takes an object of A
to the constant functor with that object as value) is the left adjoint. Thus by
composition, V has a left adjoint.
The left vertical arrow preserves colimits because colimits (like limits) are
computed pointwise. Thus it satisﬁes the coequalizer condition of CTT. Note that
it might not have a left adjoint, although it will have one (use Kan extensions) if
B is also cocomplete. Func(S, U) satisﬁes the coequalizer condition of PTT by
a similar argument. The pointedness of A implies that Q satisﬁes VTT. This
works as follows: If T: S −→A and C is an object of C (element of S), then
there is a canonical embedding TC −→Q T of C (which is the product of all the
objects TC′) induced by the identity map on TC and the point maps from TC
to all the objects TC′. This makes the composite
TC −→Q T
proj
−−−−→TC
the identity. This enables one to transfer the maps involved in a U-split coequal-
izer in A up to Func(S, A ), verifying VTT. Thus V factors into a composite of
functors satisfying the coequalizer conditions of CTT, PTT and VTT in that
order, so it satisﬁes the PTT.
The observation using pointedness above, applied to V instead of to Q, yields
the proof that V reﬂects isomorphisms. It follows that V satisﬁes the CTT, hence
is tripleable.
Exercises 3.5
1. Show that if M is any monoid, the underlying functor to Set from the category
of actions by M on sets and equivariant maps is tripleable.

130
3 Triples
2. Same as preceding exercise for the category of R-modules for any ﬁxed ring
R.
3. Show that the functor L of Exercise 14 of Section 1.9 is tripleable.
4. (a) Show that any map 1 −→0 in a category is an isomorphism.
(b) Show that if a category has 1 and equalizers and if Hom(1, −) is never
empty, then 1 is initial.
3.6 Morphisms of Triples
In this section, we deﬁne a notion of morphism of triples on a given category in
such a way that functors between Eilenberg-Moore categories that commute with
the underlying functors correspond bijectively with morphisms of triples. In the
process of proving this, we will describe (Proposition 1) a method of constructing
morphisms of triples which will be used in Section 3.7.
Let T = (T, η, µ) and T′ = (T ′η′, µ′) be triples on a category C . A morphism
of triples α: T −→T′ is a natural transformation α: T −→T ′ making diagrams
(1) and (2) below commute. In (2), the notation α2 denotes αα in the sense of
Exercise 6 of Section 1.3. Thus α2 is the morphism T ′α ◦αT which, because α is
a natural transformation, is the same as αT ′ ◦Tα.
T
T ′
-
α
Id
η
    	
η′
@
@
@@
R
(1)
T
T ′
-
α
TT
T ′T ′
-
α2
?
µ
?
µ′
(2)
The following proposition gives one method of constructing morphisms of triples.
We are indebted to Felipe Gago-Couso for ﬁnding the gap in the statement and
proof in the ﬁrst edition and for ﬁnding the correct statement.

3.6 Morphisms of Triples
131
Proposition 1.
In the notation of the preceding paragraphs, let σ: TT ′ −→T ′
be a natural transformation for which
T ′
TT ′
-
ηT ′
id
@
@
@@
R
T ′?
σ
(3)
and
TT ′
T ′
-
σ
TTT ′
TT ′
-
µT ′
?
Tσ
?
σ
T ′T ′
T ′
-
µ′
TT ′T ′
TT ′
-
Tµ′
?
σT ′
?
σ
(a)
(b)
(4)
commute. Let α = σ ◦Tη′: T −→T ′. Then α is a morphism of triples.
Proof. That (1) commutes follows from the commutativity of
T ′
TT ′
-
Id
T
-
η
?
η′
?
Tη′
ηT ′
id
@
@
@
@@
R
T ′?
σ
(5)
In this diagram, the square commutes because η is a natural transformation and
the triangle commutes by (3).

132
3 Triples
The following diagram shows that (2) commutes.
?
Tη′T
TT
T
-
µ
TTT ′
TTη′
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
TT ′
Tη
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
1
-
µT ′
-
Tσ
TT ′TT ′
TT ′T ′
-
TTT ′
TT ′
?
Tη′TT ′
?
-
TT ′σ
2
3
TT ′
id
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
Tη′T ′
-
Tµ′
6
T ′T
T ′TT ′
-
T ′Tη′
TT ′T
-
TT ′Tη′
?
σT
-
T ′σ
T ′T ′
T ′
-
µ′
?
σ
?
σTT ′
?
σT ′
4
5
7
(6)
In this diagram, square 1 commutes because µ is a natural transformation,
squares 2 and 3 because Tµ′ is and squares 4 and 5 because σ is. The commu-
tativity of square 6 is a triple identity and square 7 is diagram 4(b). Finally,
diagram 4(a) above says that σ ◦µT ′ = σ ◦Tσ which means that although the
two arrows between TTT ′ and TT ′ are not the same, they are when followed by
σ, which makes the whole diagram commute.
Squares 1 through 5 of diagram (6) are all examples of part (a) of Exercise 6,
Section 1.3. For example, to see how square 1 ﬁts, take B, C and D of the
exercise to be C , F = id, G = T ′, H = T 2 and K = T, and κ = η′, µ = µ. Then
square 1 is η′µ.
Corollary 2.
With T and T′ as in Proposition 1, suppose σ: T ′T −→T ′ is such
that σ ◦σT ′ = σ ◦T ′µ, σ ◦µT ′ = µ′ ◦Tσ, and σ ◦T ′η = id. Then α = σ ◦ηT: T
−→T ′ is a morphism of triples.
Proof. This is Proposition 1 stated in Catop (which means: reverse the functors
but not the natural transformations).

3.6 Morphisms of Triples
133
Theorem 3.
There is a bijection between morphisms α: T −→T′ and functors
V : C T′ −→C T for which
C T′
C T
-
F
UT′
@
@
@@
R
C
?
UT
(7)
commutes. The bijection preserves composition.
Proof. Suppose α: T −→T′ is a morphism of triples. Deﬁne U α: C T′ −→C T by
U α(A, a: T ′A −→A) = (A, a ◦αA)
and for an algebra map f: A −→B, U αf = f. U α(A, a) is a T-algebra: The
unitary law follows from (1) and the other law from the commutativity of this
diagram:
TA
T ′A
-
αA
TTA
TT ′A
-
TηA
?
µA
T ′T ′A
T ′A
-
T ′a
TA
-
Ta
?
?
αA
?
αT ′A
?
µ′A
A
-
a
?
?
a
α2A
@
@
@
@
@@
R
1
3
2
4
(8)
Here triangle 1 commutes by deﬁnition of α2, square 2 because α is a natural
transformation, square 3 is diagram (2), and square 4 because α is a structure
map (diagram (1), Section 3.2).
Seeing that U α is a functor is left as an exercise, as is the functoriality of the
operation which associates U α to α.
Conversely, suppose that V : C T′ −→C T is a functor making (7) commute.
If we apply V to the free algebra (T ′A, µ′A), the result must be a T-algebra
(T ′A, σA) with the same underlying object T ′A. The fact that σA is a T-algebra
structure map means immediately that σ is a natural transformation and it sat-
isﬁes the hypotheses of Proposition 1. Hence α = σ ◦Tη′: T −→T ′ is a morphism
of triples, as required.

134
3 Triples
We will conclude by showing that the association α 7→U α is inverse to V 7→
σ ◦Tη′. One direction requires showing that for α: T −→T ′ and any object A,
αA = µ′A ◦αT ′A ◦Tη′A. This follows from the commutativity of the following
diagram, in which the square commutes because α is a natural transformation,
the triangle commutes by deﬁnition and the bottom row is the identity by the
deﬁnition of triple.
T ′A
T ′T ′A
-
T ′η′A
TA
TT ′A
-
Tη′A
?
αA
?
T ′A
-
µ′A
@
@
@
@@
R
ηT ′A
(9)
The other direction is more complicated. Suppose we are given V . We must show
that for any T′-algebra (A, a),
V (A, a) = (A, a ◦σA ◦Tη′A)
(10)
where by deﬁnition σA is the T-algebra structure on T ′A obtained by applying
V to the free algebra (T ′A, µ′A).
In the ﬁrst place,
µ′A: (T ′2A, µ′T ′A) −→(T ′, µ′A)
is a morphism of T′-algebras, so because of (7), µ′ is also a morphism of the
T-algebras (T ′2A, σT ′A) −→(T ′A, σA). This says that the square in the diagram
below commutes. Since the triangle commutes by deﬁnition of triple, (10) is true
at least for images under T of free T ′-algebras.
TT ′A
TT ′T ′A
-
Tη′T ′A
id
@
@
@
@
@@
R
TT ′A
?
Tµ′A
T ′A
-
σA
T ′T ′A
-
σT ′A
?
µ′A
(11)
Now by Proposition 4, Section 3.3, for any T′-algebra (A, a),
(T ′2A, µ′T ′A)
η′A
−−−−→
−−−−→
T ′A
(T ′A, µ′A)
a
−−→(A, a)
(12)

3.7 Adjoint Triples
135
is a U-contractible coequalizer diagram. Applying Uα (where α = σ ◦Tη′) must
give a U-contractible coequalizer diagram since Uα commutes with the underlying
functors. Because (10) is true of images of free algebras, that diagram is
(T ′2A, σT ′A)
η′A
−−−−→
−−−−→
T ′A
(T ′A, σA)
a
−−→(A, a)
(13)
where b = a ◦σA ◦Tη′A.
Since V also commutes with underlying functors,
applying V to (12) also gives a U-contractible coequalizer pair, with the same
left and middle joints as (13) (that is how σ was deﬁned). Its coequalizer must
be V (A, a) since the underlying functors create coequalizers. Thus (10) follows
as required.
Exercises 3.6
1. Show that for a given category C , the triples in C and their morphisms form
a category.
2. Show that U α as deﬁned in the proof of Theorem 3 is a functor.
3. Let T be the Abelian group triple and T′ the free group triple. What is the
triple morphism α corresponding to the inclusion of Abelian groups into groups
given by Theorem 3?
3.7 Adjoint Triples
In this section, we state and prove several theorems asserting the existence of
adjoints to certain functors based in one way or another on categories of triple
algebras.
These are then applied to the study of the tripleability of functors
which have both left and right adjoints.
Induced Adjoints
Theorem 1.
In the following diagram (not supposed commutative) of categories
and functors,
B
B′
-
W
C
F
@
@
@
@
@
I
U
@
@
@
@@
R
F ′
     
U ′
     	

136
3 Triples
suppose that
(i) F is left adjoint to U,
(ii) F ′ is left adjoint to U ′,
(iii) WF is naturally isomorphic to F ′,
(iv) U is tripleable, and
(v) W preserves coequalizers of U-contractible pairs.
Then W has a right adjoint R for which UR ∼= U ′.
Proof. We will deﬁne R by using Corollary 2 of Section 3.6. Let the triples cor-
responding to the adjunctions be T = (T, η, µ) and T′ = (T ′, η′, µ′) respectively.
As usual, suppose that B = C T and U = UT. Deﬁne σ: T ′T −→T so that
U ′WF
U ′F ′
-
∼=
U ′WUF
U ′F ′UF
-
∼=
?
U ′WϵF
?
σ
commutes.
Applying U ′W to diagram (4) of Section 3.1 and evaluating at F gives a
diagram which, when the isomorphism of (iii) is applied, shows that σ ◦σT =
σ◦T ′µ. An analogous (easier) proof using (2) of Section 3.1 shows that σ◦T ′η = id.
Thus by Corollary 2 of Section 3.6, α = σ ◦η′T: T −→T ′ is a morphism of triples.
The required functor R is B′ −→C T′ −→C T, where the ﬁrst arrow is the
comparison functor and the second is the functor V induced by α.
For an object B′ of B′, we have, applying the deﬁnitions of R, the comparison
functor Φ′ for U ′, and the functor V determined by α, the following calculation:
URB′ = UV ΦB′ = UV (U ′B′, U ′ϵ′B′)
= U(U ′B′, U ′ϵ′B′ ◦αU ′B′) = U ′B′,
so UR = U ′ as required.
We now show that R is right adjoint to W insofar as free objects are concerned,
and then appeal to the fact that algebras are coequalizers. (Compare the proof
of Theorem 9 of Section 3.3). The following calculation does the ﬁrst: For C an
object of C and B′ an object of B′,
Hom(WFC, B′) ∼= Hom(F ′C, B′)
∼= Hom(C, U ′B′) ∼= Hom(C, URB′) ∼= Hom(FC, RB′)◦

3.7 Adjoint Triples
137
Now any object of B has a presentation
FC2 −→
−→FC1 −→B
(∗)
by a U-contractible coequalizer diagram. Since U is tripleable, (∗) is a coequalizer.
Thus the bottom row of the diagram
Hom(B, RB′)
Hom(FC1, RB′)
-
Hom(WB, B′)
Hom(WFC1, B′)
-
?
Hom(FC2, RB′)
Hom(WFC2, B′)
?
-
-
-
-
is an equalizer. By (v), W preserves coequalizers of U- contractible pairs, so the
top row is an equalizer. The required isomorphism of Homsets follows.
Theorem 2.
In the following diagram (not supposed commutative) of categories
and functors,
B
B′
-
W
C
F
@
@
@
@
@
I
U
@
@
@
@@
R
F ′
     
U ′
     	
(a) Suppose that
(i) F is left adjoint to U,
(ii) F ′ is left adjoint to U ′,
(iii) WF is naturally isomorphic to F ′,
(iv) U is of descent type, and
(v) B has and W preserves coequalizers of U-contractible coequalizer pairs.
Then W has a right adjoint R for which UR ∼= U ′.
(b) Suppose that
(i) F is left adjoint to U,
(ii) F ′ is left adjoint to U ′,
(iii) U ′W is naturally isomorphic to U,
(iv) U ′ is of descent type, and
(v) B has coequalizers.
Then W has a left adjoint L for which LF ′ ∼= F.
Proof.

138
3 Triples
(a) We must show that the hypothesis in Theorem 1 that U is tripleable can
be weakened to the assumption that it is of descent type. Consider the diagram
C
C T
B
B′
-
W
-
Ψ
-
Φ
F T
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
I
UT
@
@
@
@
@
@@
R
6
F
?
U
F ′
       
U ′
       	
in which the left adjoint Ψ exists because B has coequalizers (Proposition 11,
Section 3.3).
Theorem 1 implies that W ◦Ψ has a right adjoint S: B′ −→C T. To apply
Theorem 1 we need to know that W ◦Ψ ◦F T ∼= F ′. This follows from the given
fact W ◦F ∼= F ′ and the fact that the counit of the adjunction between Φ and Ψ
must be an isomorphism by Exercise 12 of Section 1.9.
From this we have for objects A of C T and B′ of B′ that
Hom(ΦΨA, SB′) ∼= Hom(WΨΦΨA, B′)
∼= Hom(WΨA, B′) ∼= Hom(A, SB′)◦
Thus by Exercise 7(c) of Section 1.9, every object of the form SB′ is ΦB for some
B in B. Since Φ is full and faithful, this allows the deﬁnition of a functor R: B′
−→B for which S = Φ ◦W.
The following calculation then shows that R is right adjoint to W:
Hom(WB, B′) ∼= Hom(WΨΦB, B′) ∼= Hom(ΦB, SB′)
∼= Hom(ΦB, ΦRB′) ∼= Hom(B, RB′)◦
(b) If F ′C is an object in the image of F ′, then we have
Hom(F ′C, WB) ∼= Hom(C, U ′WB)
∼= Hom(C, UB) ∼= Hom(FC, B)
which shows that FC represents the functor Hom(F ′C, W−).
Moreover, the
Yoneda lemma can easily be used to show that maps in B′ between objects in the
image of F ′ give rise to morphisms in B with the required naturality properties.
Thus we get a functor L deﬁned at least on the full subcategory whose objects
are the image of F ′. It is easily extended all of B′ by letting
F ′C2 −→
−→F ′C1 −→B′

3.7 Adjoint Triples
139
be a coequalizer and deﬁning LB′ so that
FC2 −→
−→FC1 −→LB′
is as well. The universal mapping property of coequalizers gives, for any object
B of B the diagram below in which both lines are equalizers,
Hom(B′, WB)
Hom(F ′C1, WB)
-
Hom(LB′, B)
Hom(FC1, B)
-
?
Hom(F ′C2, WB)
Hom(FC2, B)
∼=
?
∼=
-
-
-
-
from which the adjointness follows.
Theorem 3.
[Butler] In the situation
C
C ′
B
B′
-
W
6
F
?
U
6
F ′
?
U ′
-
V

G
(a) Suppose:
(i) F is left adjoint to U,
(ii) F ′ is left adjoint to U ′,
(iii) W ◦F ∼= F ′ ◦V ,
(iv) G is right adjoint to V ,
(v) U is of descent type, and
(vi) B has and W preserves coequalizers of U-contractible coequalizer pairs.
Then W has a right adjoint.
(b) Suppose:
(i) F is left adjoint to U,
(ii) F ′ is left adjoint to U ′,
(iii) V ◦U ∼= U ′ ◦W,
(iv) G is left adjoint to V ,
(v) U ′ is of descent type, and

140
3 Triples
(vi) B has coequalizers.
Then W has a left adjoint.
.
Proof.
(a) Apply Theorem 2(a) to the diagram
B
B′
-
W
C
F
@
@
@
@
@
I
U
@
@
@
@@
R
F ′V
     
GU ′
     	
(b) Apply Theorem 2(b) to the diagram
B
B′
-
W
C ′
FG
@
@
@
@
@
I
V U
@
@
@
@@
R
F ′
     
U ′
     	
Adjoint triples
By an adjoint triple in a category C , we mean
(i) A triple T = (T, η, µ) in C ,
(ii) A cotriple G = (G, ϵ, δ) in C , for which
(iii) T is left adjoint to G.
We say in this case that T is left adjoint to G.
A functor U: B −→C is adjoint tripleable if it is tripleable and cotripleable
(the latter means that U op: Bop −→C op is tripleable). Theorem 5 below implies,
among other things, that an adjoint tripleable functor results in an adjoint triple.

3.7 Adjoint Triples
141
Proposition 4.
Let U: B −→C a functor, and suppose B has either U-
contractible equalizers or U-contractible coequalizers. Then U is adjoint tripleable
if and only if it has left and right adjoints and reﬂects isomorphisms.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove a weakened version of this proposition which is suﬃcient
to prove Theorem 5 below. Then we will use Theorem 5 to prove the version as
stated.
Assume that B has both U-contractible equalizers and U-contractible coequal-
izers. The existence of both adjoints implies that they are preserved, so that the
(weakened) proposition follows from PTT.
Theorem 5.
Let T be a triple in C and suppose that T has a right adjoint G.
Then G is the functor part of a cotriple G in C for which C T is equivalent to CG
and the underlying functor UT has left and right adjoints which induce T and G
respectively.
Conversely, let U: B −→C be a functor with right adjoint R and left adjoint
L. Let T = (T, η, µ) be the triple induced by L and U and G = (G, ϵ, δ) the cotriple
in C induced by U and R. Then T is left adjoint to G and the category C T of
T-algebras is equivalent to the category CG of G-coalgebras.
Proof. To prove the ﬁrst statement, let G be right adjoint to T and consider the
diagram
C T
C
-
UT
C
F T
@
@
@
@
@
I
UT
@
@
@
@@
R
T
     
G
     	
Theorem 1 implies that UT has a right adjoint RT: C −→C T for which UT ◦
RT = G. By the weak version of Proposition 4, UT is tripleable and cotripleable.
Hence C T is equivalent to CG.
To do the converse, the adjunction between T and G is seen from the calcu-
lation
Hom(ULC, C′) ∼= Hom(LC, RC′) ∼= Hom(C, URC′)
Now the ﬁrst half of the theorem yields a right adjoint RT to UT which induces
G, so C T is equivalent to CG.
We now complete the proof of Proposition 4. Assume that B has U-contractible
coequalizers. (The proof in the case that B has U-contractible equalizers is dual.)
The existence of a right adjoint to U means that U preserves them, so that U is
tripleable by PTT. Hence B is equivalent to C T. The second part of Theorem 5

142
3 Triples
then implies that B is equivalent to C G, so that B must have U-contractible
equalizers.
We saw in Section 3.1 that for any monoid M, the functor M × (−) is the
functor part of a triple in Set. This functor has the right adjoint Hom(M, −), so
is part of an adjoint triple, and the underlying functor SetM −→Set is adjoint
tripleable. Analogously, if K is a commutative ring and R a K-algebra, then
R ⊗K −: ModK −→ModK has a right adjoint HomK(R, −) and so gives rise to
an adjoint triple. The algebras for this triple are the modules over the K-algebra
R (R modules in which the action of K commutes with that of R). If K = Z, we
just get R-modules.
In Section 6.7 we will make use of the fact that in a topos, functor categories
(functors from a category object to the topos) are adjoint tripleable. Exercise 1
asks you to prove this for Set. The general situation is complicated by the problem
of how to deﬁne that functor category in a topos.
Exercises 3.7
1. Let C be a small category and E the category of functors from C to Set.
There is an underlying functor E −→Set/Ob(C ).
Show that this functor is
adjoint tripleable. (Hint: One way to approach this is to use the Yoneda lemma
to determine what the left or right adjoint must be on objects of the form 1
−→Ob(C ) and then use the fact that a set is a coproduct of its elements and left
and right adjoints preserve colimits and limits respectively.)
2. Deduce the Yoneda lemma from Exercise 1.
3.8 Historical Notes on Triples
It is very hard to say who invented triples. Probably many scientiﬁc discoveries
are like that. The ﬁrst use of them was by Godement [1958] who used the ﬂabby
sheaf cotriple to resolve sheaves for computing sheaf cohomology. He called it
the “standard construction” and presumably intended by that nothing more than
a descriptive phrase. It seems likely that he never intended to either create or
name a new concept.
Nonetheless Huber [1961] found these constructions useful in his homotopy
theory and now did name them standard constructions. He also provided the
proof that every adjoint pair gave rise to one, whatever it was called. He com-
mented later that he proved that theorem because he was having so much trouble

3.8 Historical Notes on Triples
143
demonstrating that the associative identity was satisﬁed and noticed that all his
standard constructions were associated with adjoints.
As remarked in Section 3.2, Kleisli [1965] and independently Eilenberg-Moore
[1965] proved the converse. Although Hilton had conjectured the result, it was
Kleisli [1964] who had an application. He wanted to show that resolutions using
resolvent pairs (essentially pairs of adjoint functors) and those using triples give
the same notion of resolution. Huber’s construction gave the one direction and
Kleisli’s gave the other.
Eilenberg and Moore also gave them the name by which they are known here:
triples. Although we do not regard this name as satisfactory we do not regard the
proposed substitutes as any better. In this connection, it is worth mentioning
that when asked why they hadn’t found a better term, Eilenberg replied that
they hadn’t considered the concept very important and hadn’t thought it worth
investing much time in trying to ﬁnd a good name. (By contrast, when Cartan-
Eilenberg [1956] was composed, the authors gave so much thought to naming
their most important concept that the manuscript had blanks inserted before the
ﬁnal preparation, when they ﬁnally found the exact term.)
At the same time, more or less, Applegate [1965] was discovering the con-
nection between triples and acyclic models and Beck [1967] (but the work was
substantially ﬁnished in 1964) was discovering the connection with homology.
In addition, Lawvere [1963] had just found out how to do universal algebra by
viewing an algebraic theory as a category and an algebra as a functor. Linton
was soon to connect these categories with triples. In other words triples were
beginning to pervade category theory but it is impossible to give credit to any
one person. The next important step was the tripleableness theorem of Beck’s
which in part was a generalization of Linton’s results. Variations on that theo-
rem followed (Duskin [1969], Par´e [1971]) and acquired arcane names, but they
all go back to Beck and Linton. They mostly arose either because of the failure
of tripleableness to be transitive or because of certain special conditions.
Butler’s theorems—Theorem 3 above includes somewhat special cases of two
of them—are due to a former McGill University graduate student, William Butler.
They consisted of a remarkable series of 64 theorems, 12 on the existence of
adjoints and 52 on various technical results on tripleableness and related questions
such as when a functor is of descent type.
These theorems have never been
published and, as a matter of fact, have remained unveriﬁed, except by Butler,
since 1971. Within the past two years, they have been independently veriﬁed and
substantially generalized in his doctoral thesis: [1984], by another student, John
A. Power, who found a few minor mistakes in the statements.

4
Theories
In this chapter, we explicate the naive concept of a mathematical theory, such as
the theory of groups or the theory of ﬁelds, in such a way that a theory becomes
a category and a model for the theory becomes a functor based on the category.
Thus a theory and a model become instances of mathematical concepts which are
widely used by mathematicians. This is in contrast to the standard treatment of
the topic (see Shoenﬁeld [1967], Chang and Keisler [1973]) in which “theory” is
explicated as a formal language with rules of deduction and axioms, and a model
is a set with structure which corresponds in a speciﬁc way with the language and
satisﬁes the axioms. Our theories should perhaps have been called “categorical
theories”; however, the usage here is now standard among category theorists.
Our theories are, however, less general than the most general sort of theory
in mathematical logic.
We will construct a hierarchy of types of theories, consisting of categories with
various amounts of structure imposed on them. For example, we will construct
the theory of groups as the category with ﬁnite products which contains the
generic group object, in the sense to be deﬁned precisely in Section 4.1. (The
deﬁnition of group object using representable functors mentioned in Section 1.7
does not require that the category have ﬁnite products but we do not know how
to handle that more general type of theory.) On the other hand, a theory of
ﬁelds using only categories with ﬁnite products cannot be given, so one must
climb further in the hierarchy to give the generic ﬁeld.
In this chapter we consider the part of the hierarchy which can be developed
using only basic ideas about limits. In the process we develop a version of Ehres-
mann’s theory of sketches suitable for our purposes. This chapter may be read
immediately after Chapter 1, except for Theorem 5 of Section 4.3. The theories
higher in the hierarchy (in particular including the theory of ﬁelds) require the
machinery of Grothendieck topologies and are described in Chapter 8.
A brief description of this hierarchy and its connections with diﬀerent types
of logical systems has been given by Lawvere [1975]. Makkai and Reyes [1977]
provide a detailed exposition of the top of the hierarchy. Ad´amek and Rosiˇcky
[1994] present much modern material on theories and their model categories not
covered here. Barr and Wells [1999] is more elementary and gives many examples
of the use of sketches in computing science.
144

4.1 Sketches
145
4.1 Sketches
Groups
An FP-category is a category with ﬁnite products, and an FP-functor be-
tween FP-categories is a functor which preserves ﬁnite products. The FP theory
of groups should be an FP-category G containing a group object G which is
generic in the sense that every group object in any FP-category is the image of
G under a unique FP-functor from G to the category.
We will begin by constructing the FP-theory of groups from the ground up,
so to speak, but then interrupt ourselves for a diﬀerent approach which makes it
obvious that the theory thus constructed is uniquely determined.
To construct the FP-theory of groups, we must have an object representing
the group, powers of that object, morphisms representing the projection maps
from those powers, and morphisms representing the operations (identity, inverse,
multiplication). A law like the associative law is stated by requiring that two
maps (representing the two ways of multiplying) in the category are equal.
Thus we need a category containing an object G and all its powers, speciﬁcally
including G0, which is the terminal object. It must have morphisms m: G2 −→G,
i: G −→G and u: G0 −→G as operations. Each power Gk must have k projections
pi: Gk −→G, and for each k and n each n-tuple of maps Gk −→G induces a
map Gk −→Gn. A category containing all these maps must contain all their
composites; for example the composites m ◦m × 1 and m ◦1 × m: G3 −→G. The
group laws are equivalent to requiring that the following diagrams commute:
G
id
@
@
@@
R
G
G × G
-
1 × u
G

u × 1
?
m
id
    	
(1)
1
G
-
G
G × G
-
(1, i)
?
?
m
G
1

G
(i, 1)
?
(2)

146
4 Theories
and
G2
G
-
m
G3
G2
-
m × 1
?
1 × m
?
m
(3)
The commutativity of these diagrams, of course, forces many other pairs of
arrows of the category to be equal.
At ﬁrst sight, it seems reasonably clear that the data we have given determine
a unique category G . Assuming that that is the case, it is easy to see that giving
a group object in a category with ﬁnite products (in other words, giving a model
of the theory of groups in such a category) is the same as giving a ﬁnite-product-
preserving functor from G to the category.
However, there are complications in carrying out the construction of G (even
more so in the case of multi-sorted algebraic structures, about which more below).
These diﬃculties are analogous to the diﬃculties in constructing the free group on
a set as consisting of equivalence classes of strings: they are not insurmountable,
but a construction using the adjoint functor theorem is much less fussy.
Sketches
In this section, we introduce some machinery (sketches) which will enable us
to give, in Section 4.3, a formal construction of G and analogous categories by
embedding the given data in a functor category and deﬁning G to be the smallest
subcategory with the required properties (having ﬁnite products in the case of
groups). Our sketches are conceptually similar to, but diﬀerent in detail from
those of Ehresmann (see the historical notes in Section 4.5). Note that sketches
here have only cones. Sketches in many texts also have cocones (we consider this
possibility in detail in Chapter 8); in those texts what we call sketches may be
called projective sketches.
Recall that a graph G consists of a set of vertices denoted G0 and a set of
arrows denoted G1 together with the operators d0, d1: G1 −→G0 which assign to
each arrow its source and target. Cones and diagrams are deﬁned for graphs in
exactly the same way as they are for categories. Note that we have carefully
distinguished between cones and commutative cones and between diagrams and
commutative diagrams.
Commutative cones and diagrams of course make no
sense for graphs.
By a sketch we mean a 4-tuple S = (G , U, D, C) where G is a graph, U: G0
−→G1 is a function which takes each object A of G0 to an arrow from A to A,

4.1 Sketches
147
D is a class of diagrams in G and C is class of cones in G . Each cone in C goes
from some vertex to some diagram; that diagram need not be in D; in fact in
general it is necessary to allow diagrams which are not in D as bases of cones.
An FP-sketch is a sketch in which the cones are discrete; that is, there are
no arrows between two distinct vertices of the base.
If S ′ is another sketch, a morphism of S into S ′ = (G ′, U ′, D′, C′) is a
graph homomorphism h: G −→G ′ such that h ◦U = U ′ ◦h, every diagram in D is
taken to a diagram in D′, and every cone in C is taken to a cone in C′.
If C is a category, the underlying sketch S = (G , U, D, C) of C has as
graph the underlying graph of C , for U the map which picks out the identity
arrows of C , takes D to be the class of all commutative diagrams of C and for C
all the limit cones.
A model for a sketch S in a category C is then a sketch morphism from S
into the underlying sketch of C . It follows that a model forces all the diagrams
of the sketch to commute and all the cones of the sketch to be limit cones (hence
commutative cones).
The models in C form a category. The morphisms are “natural” transforma-
tions, deﬁned in just the same way as natural transformations of functors (whose
deﬁnition, after all, makes no use of composition in the domain category). The
models of S in Set will be denoted Mod(S ). The category of graph morphisms
from S to Set which take all the diagrams to commutative diagrams will be
denoted throughout the book as SetS .
The sketch of the theory of groups
We may construct a suitable FP-sketch for the theory of groups using the data
given above. The objects of the graph of the sketch should be 1 = G0, G = G1,
G2 and G3. Note that these are just formal names for objects at this point. We
will shortly introduce cones to force a model in the sense just deﬁned to take
them to the powers of one object. These powers are just those needed to state
the various group laws.
The sketch for groups must have the following arrows, besides the identity
arrows required by the deﬁnition of sketch:
(i) Three arrows m: G2 −→G, i: G −→G and u: 1 −→G for the operations.
(ii) Projection arrows for cones pi: G2 −→G, (i = 1, 2) and qi: G3 −→G, (i =
1, 2, 3). In each case the cone is to the discrete diagram all of whose nodes are G.
(iii) An arrow G −→1.

148
4 Theories
(iv) ri: G −→G2, (i = 1, 2), which will be forced to be id × u and u × id
respectively. To allay any confusion, we should make it perfectly clear that G2 is
in no sense yet a product. Thus the ri have to be explicitly assumed.
(v) si: G −→G2, (i = 1, 2), to be (id, i) and (i, id)).
(vi) ti: G3 −→G2, (i = 1, 2), to be (q1, q2) and (q2, q3).
(vii) ni: G3 −→G2, (i = 1, 2), to be id × m and m × id.
As its designated cones, it must have the cones given in (ii) above and the
empty cone deﬁned on 1. Its diagrams must be diagrams (1) through (3) above
(with arrows renamed as just described) and forcing diagrams such as
G  p1
id
    	
G2
G
-
p2
G
1
-
?
r1
?
u
which will force the r1 in models to be id × u,
G
G2
 p1
G3
G
-
q2
?
q1
6
6
p2
t1
@
@
@@
R
which will force t1 to be (q1, q2), and
G  p1
G  q1
?
id
G2
G
-
p2
G3
G2
-
t2
?
n1
?
m
which will force n1 to be id × m.
The preceding construction is involved, but the principle behind it is straight-
forward. You need
(i) an object to be the generic algebraic structure (group in the example
above);
(ii) objects to be the powers needed to deﬁne the operations and state the
laws;

4.2 The Ehresmann-Kennison Theorem
149
(iii) arrows for identities, for the operations, and for the cones forcing the
powers to be actual powers; and
(iv) diagrams to state the laws.
In the process of constructing these diagrams you may need
(v) arrows composed out of operations and projections.
The deﬁnition in (v) requires additional diagrams such as the last three in the
deﬁnition of groups above.
It should be clear that algebraic structures with ﬁnitary operations satisfying
universal equations (unlike ﬁelds, for example, where one needs statements like
“x = 0 or xx−1 = 1”) can all be modeled in this way.
More complicated algebraic structures may be modeled by an FP-sketch, too.
As an example, consider the category of all M-actions for all monoids M. An
object is a pair (M, A) where M is a monoid which acts on the set A. A morphism
(f, φ): (M, A) −→(M ′, A′) has f a monoid homomorphism and φ a set map for
which f(m)(φ(a)) = φ(ma) for m ∈M and a ∈A. (One can deﬁne the category
of all modules (R, M) where R is a ring and M is an R-module analogously).
The sketch for monoid actions will have to contain objects M and A and objects
representing M n for n = 0, 2, 3 as well as products of certain powers of M with
A.
The sketch for a theory for groups, for example, is essentially a direct trans-
lation of the ingredients that go into the usual deﬁnition of groups in a textbook.
However, the sketch which results is not a category, and so we cannot use the
machinery of category theory to study the resulting models. In Section 4.3, using
the Ehresmann-Kennison theorem from Section 4.2, we show how to achieve our
original goal of producing a theory of groups which is itself a category, in fact the
category generated in a strong sense by the sketch constructed above.
4.2 The Ehresmann-Kennison Theorem
This section is devoted to proving the following theorem, due independently to
Ehresmann [1967a], [1967b] and Kennison [1968]. A generalization to base cate-
gories other than Set was proved by Freyd and Kelly [1972].
Theorem 1.
Let S be a small sketch. Then Mod(S ) is a reﬂective subcategory
of SetS .
Proof. We follow Kennison’s original proof, which was stated for S a category
and for models which preserve all limits; but it works without change in the
present case. Ehresmann proved a much more general theorem of which this is a
special case.

150
4 Theories
It is necessary to construct a left adjoint for the inclusion of Mod(S ) in SetS .
We will do this using the adjoint functor theorem.
Limits in SetS are constructed pointwise in exactly the same way as for
functor categories (see Exercise 25 of Section 1.7). It is necessary to show that a
limit of a diagram of morphisms (objects in SetS ) takes the diagrams which are
part of the structure of S to commutative diagrams; but that is an easy exercise.
To show that inclusion preserves all limits requires showing that a morphism
constructed as a limit of a diagram of models takes cones to limit cones. This
follows easily in exactly the same way as it does for a limit of ordinary functors
(Exercise 2).
We need the following lemma to get the solution set condition.
Lemma 2.
Let S be a small sketch, and F: S −→Set a function on the objects
of S . There is a cardinal ℵwith the following property: If M is any model of
S with the property that F(A) ⊆M(A) for every object A of S , then there is a
model c
F of S for which for every object A of S ,
(i) F(A) ⊆c
F(A) ⊆M(A), and
(ii) The cardinality of c
F(A) is less than ℵ.
Given the lemma, let E ∈SetS , let M be a model, and let λ: E −→M be a
natural transformation. Let F be the function whose value on an object A is the
image of λA. The lemma provides a cardinal ℵ(F) with the property that F is
contained in a model c
F ⊆M whose cardinality at each object of S is at most
ℵ(F). Now let ℵbe the sup of the ℵ(F) as F varies over all object functions
which are quotients of E. Then a solution set for E will be the set of all natural
transformations φi: E −→Mi for all models Mi for which for all objects A of S ,
the cardinal of Mi(A) is less than or equal to ℵ.
Proof. Proof of Lemma 2. For any such F as in the hypothesis, deﬁne a function
F # on objects by
F #(A) = S{Mf(FB) | f: B −→A}
(union over all arrows into A) and a function F ∗by
F ∗(A) = S{x ∈Q FDi | MDdxi = xj for all d: i −→j ∈I }
the union over all those cones from A to D: I −→G which are in the set C of
cones of S . (G is the underlying graph of S and each cone is to some diagram
D: I −→G deﬁned on some index category I .)
For the purpose of understanding F ∗, observe that since M is a model, if α: A
−→D is a cone, then Mα: MA −→MD is a limit cone in Set, whence
MA = {x ∈Q MDi | MDdxi = xj for all d: i −→j ∈I}

4.2 The Ehresmann-Kennison Theorem
151
and xi = Mαi(x) for x ∈MA.
For any given F, let m denote the smallest cardinal which is greater than
(i) The cardinality of the set of arrows of S ;
(ii) the cardinality of F(A) for every object A of S ; and
(iii) the cardinality of I for every cone A −→D(I) of S .
Clearly, F #(A) has cardinality less than m and it is not much harder to see
that F ∗(A) has cardinality less than mm (one is quantifying over sets—the sets
of projections αi—of cardinality less than m).
We construct a transﬁnite sequence of maps Fα, beginning with F0 = F. For
an ordinal α, if Fα has been deﬁned, then fα+1 = (Fα)#∗. If α is a limit ordinal,
then for each object A,
Fα(A) = S{Fβ(A) | β < α}
According to the observations in the preceding paragraph, at each stage of
this construction the bound m on the cardinality of the sets F(A) may do no
more than exponentiate—and this bound is a function of S and the function F
we started with, but independent of M.
Now let c
F = Fγ, where γ is the smallest ordinal of cardinality greater than
the cardinality of the set of all arrows of S . (Note that γ is a limit ordinal). If
we can show c
F is the object function of a model, we are done.
In the ﬁrst place, if f: B −→A, then Mf(c
F(B) ⊆c
F(A). For if x ∈c
F(B),
then x ∈Fβ(B) for some ordinal β < γ, whence Mf(x) ∈Fβ+1(A) ⊆c
F(A). Thus
one can deﬁne c
F(f) to be the restriction of Mf to c
F(B) and make c
F a morphism
of sketches.
To show that c
F preserves the limits in the sketch S , let α: A −→D be a cone
of S , where D: I −→G. If x ∈c
F(A), then x ∈MA, so for each d: i −→j in I,
MDdxi = xj, so c
FDdxi = xj because c
FDd is the restriction of MDd. Hence
c
F(A) ⊆{x ∈Q c
FDi | c
FDdxi = xj for all d: i −→j in I} = lim c
FD
Conversely, suppose x ∈Q c
FDi has the property that c
FDdxi = xj for all
d: i −→j in I. For each i, xi ∈c
FDi, so there is some ordinal βi⟨γ for which
xi ∈FβiDi. Now since x ∈MA, xi = Mαi(x), and we can assume that if αi = αj
then βi = βj. (For it is perfectly possible that I have greater cardinality than the
set of arrows of S ). Thus the set of all βi has cardinality less than or equal to the
cardinality of the set of arrows of S . That means there is a single ordinal β < γ
for which xi ∈FβDi for all objects i of I. Thus it follows from the deﬁnition that
x ∈Fβ+1(A) ⊆c
F(A) which must therefore be lim c
FD.

152
4 Theories
Note: Exercise 1 shows that the information in the proof of the lemma yields
a more precise description of the left adjoint.
Exercises 4.2
1. Let E ∈SetS , let M be a model of S , and let λ: F −→S be a natural
transformation.
(i) Show that the model c
F constructed above is the smallest submodel of M
through which λ factors. We say λ is dense if c
F = M.
(ii) Prove that if α, β: M −→N are natural transformations of models, λ is
dense, and α ◦λ = β ◦λ, then α = β.
(iii) Let φi: E −→Mi be the solution set for E constructed in the text. Then
the φi determine a map E −→Q Mi; let c
E be the smallest model through which
this map factors. Show that the function E −→c
E is the object function of a left
adjoint to the inclusion of Mod(S ) in SetS .
2. Let A be a category and C be a class of diagrams in A , each of which has a
limit in A . Suppose that I is index category and D: I −→SetA a diagram of
functors such that each value of D preserves all the limits in the class C. Show
that lim D also preserves the limits in C.
(Note that the functor category is
complete because Set is (see Exercise 25 of Section 1.7).)
4.3 Finite-Product Theories
Given an FP-sketch S , we want to construct the FP-category which will be the
theory generated by the sketch. Letting X be the unknown theory, let us discover
properties it must have until enough of them emerge to characterize it.
X will be the generic model of S , so there will be a sketch morphism m: S
−→X .
Moreover, composing with m should induce a bijection between the
models of X considered as a sketch with all its product cones and the models
of S . Now because X is a category and its cones are products, by Yoneda we
can get a canonical embedding y: X op −→Mod(X ): For an object X of X ,
y(X)(X′) = Hom(X, X′). Then y(X) is a model because representable functors
preserve limits and—like all functors—preserve commutative diagrams. With the
requirement that m induce an equivalence between Mod(X ) and Mod(S ), this
produces the following diagram of sketch morphisms, in which e is the equivalence
and u = e ◦y ◦mop by deﬁnition. The composite across the top is the Yoneda

4.3 Finite-Product Theories
153
embedding Y .
SetS
-
-
SetX
-
?
Setm
S op
Mod(S )
-
u
X op
Mod(X )
-
y
6
mop
?
e
(1)
Because e is an equivalence, m has to be an epimorphism in the category of
sketches. This would seem to mean that every object in X is a product of objects
in S . Moreover, Y , hence y, is full and faithful and X op is closed under ﬁnite
sums and contains the image of S op. This suggests that we try to construct X
by deﬁning u and letting X op be the full FP-subcategory generated by the image
of u. We will construct u by constructing X in the special case that S has no
cones, and then bootstrap up to the FP case using Kennison’s theorem.
Theorem 1.
Given a sketch S with no cones (i.e., a graph with diagrams)
there is a category C and a model m: S −→C such that composition with m is
an equivalence between SetS and SetC.
Proof. We constructed the free category for a graph with no diagrams in Ex-
ercise 11 of Section 1.9. Here, C can be obtained as a quotient category from
this free category by factoring out the smallest congruence making every diagram
commute (see Exercise 11 of Section 1.1). Then m is the map into the free cat-
egory followed by the quotient map. The required equivalence follows from the
deﬁnition of “free” and “quotient”.
In this case, u is the composite Setm ◦j ◦mop, where j: C op −→SetC is the
Yoneda embedding. u has the Yoneda-like property that for any model F: S
−→Set,
(Y)
Hom(u(S), F) ∼= F(S)◦
This follows since m is full and faithful and uS = Hom(mS, m(−)); then use
Yoneda. Note that, as the composite of full and faithful functors, u is full and
faithful.
To get the case when S does have nontrivial cones, we must have a map u: S
−→Mod(S ) rather than into SetS . We have a map u1: S op −→SetS , namely
the map constructed above called u for sketches with no cones (when S has no
cones it is the u we want because then SetS = Mod(S )). We take u to be k ◦u1,
where k is the adjoint to the inclusion of Mod(S ) in SetS given by Kennison’s
Theorem (Section 4.2). It is a trivial consequence of adjointness that property
(Y) continues to hold in this case.

154
4 Theories
As suggested in our heuristic argument at the beginning of the section, we
deﬁne FP(S ), the FP-theory generated by S , to be the full FP-subcategory
of Mod(S )op generated by the image of uop. In the rest of this section, we will
use the factorization
S op
Mod(S )
-
u
FP(S )op
mop
@
@
@@
R
v
    	
(2)
where v is the inclusion.
A theorem on adjoints
To see that FP(S ) has the same models as S , we need the following theorem.
Theorem 2.
In the diagram of categories and functors,
X
Y

F
X0
Y0
F0
?
I
6
L
?
J
(3)
suppose that L is left adjoint to J. Then
(a) If I is full and faithful, F has a left adjoint E and FJ naturally equivalent
to IF0, then E0 = LEI is left adjoint to F0;
(b) If J is full and faithful, F has a right adjoint R, I has a left adjoint
K and KF is equivalent to F0L, then there is a functor (unique up to natural
isomorphism) R0: X0 −→Y0 for which JR0 ∼= RI; R0 is right adjoint to F0.
Proof. For (a),
Hom(LEIX0, Y0) ∼= Hom(EIX0, JY0) ∼= Hom(IX0, FJY0)
∼= Hom(IX0, IF0Y0) ∼= Hom(X0, F0Y0)◦
As for (b), ﬁrst note that since J is full and faithful, LJL ∼= L so that we
have,
Hom(JLY, RIX0) ∼= Hom(FJLY, IX0) ∼= Hom(KFJLY, X0)
∼= Hom(F0LJL, X0) ∼= Hom(F0LY, X0)
∼= Hom(KFY, X0) ∼= Hom(FY, IX0)
∼= Hom(Y, RIX0)◦

4.3 Finite-Product Theories
155
Therefore, by Exercise 7(c) of Section 1.9, there is a unique Y0 which we will
denote R0X0, for which JY0 ∼= RIX0. Veriﬁcation of the adjunction equation is
easy, so that R0 extends to a right adjoint to F0 by the pointwise construction of
adjoints.
Properties of morphisms of FP-sketches
Theorem 3. Let f: S1 −→S2 be a morphism of FP-sketches. Then composition
with f deﬁnes a functor f ∗: Mod(S2) −→Mod(S1) which has a left adjoint f#.
Moreover, if ui = vi ◦mop
i
is the embedding of S op
i
into Mod(Si), then there
is a functor FP(f)op which is the unique functor making the middle square in
the diagram commute. Moreover, every functor from FP(S1)op to FP(S2)op that
makes the top square commute is naturally isomorphic to FP(f)op.
Proof. We have the following diagram:
Mod(S1)
Mod(S2)
FP(S1)op
FP(S2)op
-
FP(f)op
?
r1
?
r2
S op
1
S op
2
-
f op
?
mop
1
?
mop
2
SetS1
SetS2
6
?
6
?
-
f#

f∗
-
f!

f∗
(4)
In this diagram, the lower f ∗is induced by composing with f, and since f takes
cones to cones, f ∗restricts to a map with the same name on models. f! is the left
Kan extension (Section 1.9). The inclusions of models into the functor categories
have left adjoints by Kennison’s theorem, and f# exists by Theorem 2(a).
The commutativity f# ◦u1 = u2 ◦f op follows from this computation, where
the last two isomorphisms follow from property (Y):
Hom(f#u1(X), M2) ∼= Hom(u1(X), f ∗M2) ∼= Hom(u1(X), M2 ◦f)
∼= M2(f(X)) ∼= Hom(u2(f(X)), M2)◦
Here X an object of S1 and M2 a model of S2.

156
4 Theories
Since f# is a left adjoint, it preserves colimits, whence f op
# preserves limits.
Moreover, f op
# (S1) ⊆S2 ⊆FP(S2), FP(S1) is the full closure of S1 under ﬁnite
products and FP(S2) is full and closed under ﬁnite products, so it follows that
f#(FP(S1)op) ⊆FP(S2)op. We let FP(f)op be the restriction of f#. Clearly it
makes both squares commute. Uniqueness for the middle one follows from the
fact that v2 is monic, and uniqueness up to natural isomorphism for the top one
from the fact that FP(S1)op is the FP-subcategory generated by the image of
mop
1 .
Theorem 4.
Let S be an FP-sketch. Then m is a model of S . Moreover, any
model of S in a category C with ﬁnite products has an extension along m to a
model of FP(S ) in C . This extension is unique up to isomorphism in the functor
category. Furthermore, Mod(S ) is equivalent to Mod(FP(S )), where FP(S )) is
considered a sketch whose cones are all the ﬁnite product cones.
Proof. Just as in Exercise 26 of Chapter 1.7, if u embeds S into a subcategory
of SetS , then uop preserves everything that every functor in that subcategory
preserves. It follows that uop and hence m is a model of S . Now let S1 = S and
S2 = C in Theorem 3. The fact that C is a category and has ﬁnite products and
u2 is a functor and preserves ﬁnite products implies that C is equivalent to FP(C ).
(Note that FP(S ) is the closure of S under two operations—composition of
arrows and ﬁnite products—and C is closed under both of them).
Fine points
Observe that models of a sketch S which happens to be a category with ﬁnite
products and whose cones happen to be all ﬁnite product cones are the same as
FP-functors from the category.
It follows from the fact that Mod(S ) is equivalent to Mod(FP(S )) that m
is both mono and epi in the category of FP-sketches. Nevertheless, m need not
be surjective on objects, nor reﬂect isomorphisms (a property more relevant than
injectivity on objects). For example, the embedding of the sketch for groups into
the theory of groups is not surjective, since the latter has all powers of G.
As for reﬂecting isomorphisms, consider the sketch obtained from the sketch
for groups by adding an arrow G −→G2 and a diagram forcing m to be invertible.
This forces all the powers of G to be isomorphic.
Single-sorted theories
An FP-theory Th is single-sorted (or an algebraic theory) if there is an
object G of Th with the property that every object of Th is a power of G. Most

4.3 Finite-Product Theories
157
of the familiar categories in mathematics which are categories of models of FP-
theories are actually models of single-sorted theories. This includes examples like
groups, rings, monoids, R-modules for a ﬁxed ring R (each element of the ring is
a unary operation), and even unlikely looking examples such as the category of
all modules (but not the category of all monoid actions (Exercise 2)).
A set of objects in an FP-theory Th is a set of sorts for the theory if Th is the
smallest FP-subcategory of Th containing the set of objects. The examples just
mentioned, especially the last, illustrate that the number of sorts for a theory is
not well-deﬁned, although single-sorted is well-deﬁned. Even though the category
of all modules can be presented as algebras for a single sorted theory, that is
conceptually not the most reasonable way to present it.
Single-sorted FP-algebras are tripleable over sets
The proof of the following theorem requires material from Chapters 3, 8 and
9, but we include it here because of the connection it makes between theories and
tripleability.
Theorem 5.
The category of models in Set of an FP-theory Th is tripleable
over Set if and only if it is the category of models of a single-sorted FP-theory.
Proof. We make use of Theorem 5 of Section 9.1. The category of models of an
FP-theory is exact, as we will see in Section 8.4. If Th is single-sorted, then its
generating object (lying in the category of models via the embedding u given
above) is a regular projective generator. The converse follows immediately from
Theorem 5 of Section 9.1.
Exercises 4.3
1. Show that mop in diagram (2) is full and faithful (but, as pointed out in the
text, not necessarily either injective or surjective on objects).
2. Show that the category of all modules (deﬁned analogously to the category
of all monoid actions deﬁned in Section 4.1) is given by a single-sorted theory.
(Hint: The underlying set of (R, M) where R is a ring and M is an R-module is
R × M).
3.
Show that if Th is a single sorted FP-theory, and Mod(Th) the category
of models of Th, then Th is equivalent to the full subcategory of Mod(Th)op
consisting of the ﬁnitely generated free algebras.

158
4 Theories
Note: The following two exercises require familiarity with Theorem 5 above,
parts of Section 3.4 and Theorem 5 of Section 9.1.
1.
Show that the category of all monoid actions (for all monoids) deﬁned in
Section 4.1 is the category of models of an FP-theory but not of a single-sorted
FP-theory. (Use Theorem 5, and show that it cannot have a single projective
generator. Remember the set acted upon can be empty. Or else use the following
exercise.)
2.
(a) Prove that if A is a set of sorts for a theory Th, then Mod(Th) is tripleable
over SetA.
(b) Prove that the full subcategory of SetA consisting of functions whose
values are either always empty or never empty satisﬁes VTT (see Section 3.5)
over Set, with underlying functor taking a function to the product of its values.
(Its left adjoint takes a set to a constant function.)
(c) Prove that the following three statements about an FP-theory Th are
equivalent:
(i) Th is equivalent to a single-sorted FP-theory.
(ii) If M is a model of Th in Set, then either MA is empty for every object
A of Th or MA is nonempty for every object A of Th.
(iii) The underlying functor Mod(Th) −→Set reﬂects isomorphisms. (Hint:
Show that if Th is generated by a single object X then evaluation at X reﬂects
isomorphisms).
3. Show that the elements of the free algebra on n generators for a single sorted
theory are in 1-1 correspondence with the set of n-ary operations. (Hint: The
n-ary operations are the maps Gn −→G in Th which are the same as arrows G
−→Gn in the category of models. Now use adjointness.)
4.4 Left Exact Theories
An LE-category is a left exact category, i.e. a category which has all ﬁnite limits.
An LE-functor between LE-categories is one which preserves ﬁnite limits. An
LE-sketch is a sketch, all of whose cones are over ﬁnite diagrams.
Given an LE-sketch S , we can construct the LE-theory associated to S ,
denoted LE(S ), in exactly the same way that we constructed FP(S ) in Sec-
tion 4.3. As there, we also get a generic LE-model m: S −→LE(S ) and we can
prove the following two theorems. In Theorem 1, vi is deﬁned as in Section 4.3.

4.4 Left Exact Theories
159
Theorem 1.
Let f: S1 −→S2 be a morphism of LE-sketches. Then f induces
a map f ∗: Mod(S2) −→Mod(S1) which has a left adjoint f#. Moreover, if, for
i = 1, 2, ui = vi ◦mop
i
is the embedding of S op
i
into Mod(Si), then there is a
functor LE(f)op which is the unique functor making the bottom square in the
following diagram commute. Moreover, any functor from LE(S1)op to LE(S2)op
that makes the top square commute must be naturally isomorphic to LE(f)op.
Mod(S1)
Mod(S2)
LE(S1)op
LE(S2)op
-
LE(f)op
?
r1
?
r2
S op
1
S op
2
-
f op
?
mop
1
?
mop
2
-
f#

f∗
Theorem 2.
Let S be a LE-sketch. Then any model of S in an LE-category
C has an extension along m to a model of LE(S ) in C . This model is unique
up to isomorphism in the functor category. Moreover, Mod(S ) is equivalent to
Mod(LE(S )) where the latter is considered a sketch whose cones are all the cones
over ﬁnite diagrams.
The following corollary is immediate from Theorem 2.
Corollary 3.
Every FP-theory has an extension to an LE-theory which has the
same models in any LE-category.
Thus for example there is an LE-theory of groups. Besides the powers of the
generic group G, it contains constructions which can be made from the powers
of G and the arrows in the FP-theory by forming ﬁnite limits. Since the models
preserve these limits, and homomorphisms of groups are just natural transforma-
tions of the models, it follows that homomorphisms in a ﬁxed LE-category must
preserve all constructions which can be made on the groups using ﬁnite limits
in the theory of groups. For example, homomorphisms must preserve the subset
{(x, y) | xy = yx} of the product of a group with itself, since the latter is an
equalizer in the LE-theory of groups. Another example is the subset consisting
of elements whose order divides 2 (or any other ﬁxed integer). This subset is
the equalizer of the homomorphism which is identically 1 and the squaring map,
both of which can be expressed in the theory of groups.

160
4 Theories
The center of a group can be described as {x ∈G | for all y ∈G, xy = yx}.
This does not have the form of a limit because of the universal quantiﬁer inside
the deﬁnition. Moreover, there can be no clever way to express the center as a
ﬁnite limit, because it is not preserved by homomorphisms.
In chapter 8, we are going to study in some detail the properties of categories
of models. However, one important property of models of LE-theories will be
used before that and we give the result here.
We must begin with a deﬁnition. A diagram D: I −→C is called ﬁltered if
(i) given any two objects i and j of I there is a third object k to which i
and j both map, and
(ii) given two arrows
I
f
−−→
−−→
g
J
of I there is an arrow h: j −→k such that D(h) ◦D(f) = D(h) ◦D(g).
The slight awkwardness of this deﬁnition is the price we must pay for using
index graphs instead of index categories. We believe it is worth it for the reasons
mentioned at the end of Chapter 1. “endcomment“endcommentA colimit taken
over a ﬁltered diagram is called a ﬁltered colimit. The main signiﬁcance is that
ﬁltered colimits commute with limits in Set and many other interesting categories
(Exercise 1).
Theorem 4.
The category of set-valued models of a left exact theory has ar-
bitrary limits and all ﬁltered colimits; moreover, these are preserved by the set-
valued functors of evaluation at the objects of the theory.
Proof. Let Th be an LE-theory. If {Mi} is a diagram of models, the fact that
limits commute with limits implies that the pointwise limit lim Mi is a model
and is evidently the limit of the given diagram. Similarly, the fact that ﬁnite
limits commute with ﬁltered colimits implies that the ﬁltered colimit of models is
a model. To say that these limits and ﬁltered colimits are computed “pointwise”
is the same thing as saying that they are preserved by the evaluation.
Finitely presented algebras
A ﬁnitely presented algebra for an equational theory (that is, a single-
sorted FP-theory) is an algebra which is a coequalizer of two arrows between
ﬁnitely generated free algebras. Since the LE theory associated with an equational
theory is the ﬁnite limit closure of the sketch in the dual of the category of models,
it can also be viewed as the dual of the ﬁnite colimit closure of the category of
ﬁnitely generated free algebras in the category of algebras and hence contains

4.4 Left Exact Theories
161
every ﬁnitely presented algebra.
Moreover, it clearly consists of exactly that
category if and only if that category is cocomplete.
Theorem 5.
Let C be the category of algebras for an equational theory. Then
the category of ﬁnitely presented algebras is ﬁnitely cocomplete, hence is the dual
of the associated LE theory.
Proof. We let F(n) denote the free algebra on n generators for a ﬁnite integer n.
Since the sum of coequalizer diagrams is a coequalizer and the sum of ﬁnite free
algebras is ﬁnite free, it is evident that this category has ﬁnite sums. So we must
show that in any coequalizer diagram
A′ −→
−→A −→A′′
if A′ and A are ﬁnitely presented, so is A′′. Consider the picture
F(m)
F(n)
F(m′)
F(n′)
A
-
D
A′
-
D
-
D0
-
D1
-
D0
-
D1
?
d0
A′′?
d
?
d0
in which the two rows and the column are coequalizers. The properties of free-
ness, in conjunction with the fact that D: F(n) −→A is surjective, allow us to
ﬁnd arrows d0, d1: F(n′) −→F(n) making the diagram serially commutative. Fur-
thermore, by replacing the top row by the sum of the top row and the second,
making the di be the identity on the second component, everything remains as
is and now both pairs of di have a common right inverse in such a way that
the diagram remains serially commutative. By applying the same trick to the
top row we can suppose that the top row is also a reﬂexive coequalizer. Thus
the result follows from the following lemma whose proof we leave as an exercise
(Exercise 5).
Lemma 6.
In any category, if the top row and right column are reﬂexive co-
equalizers and the middle column is a reﬂexive parallel pair, then the diagonal

162
4 Theories
sequence is a coequalizer.
B
A
-
D
B′
A′
-
D
6
6
C′ 
-
-
??
??
A′′?
d
Examples of LE-theories
The main point of LE-theories is that many mathematical structures are mod-
els of LE-theories. In the remainder of this section, we will show that
(i) posets and order-preserving maps,
(ii) categories and functors,
(iii) LE-categories and LE-functors, and
(iv) toposes and logical functors
are all categories of models of LE-theories. None of these is the category of
models of an FP-theory (see Exercise ??).
Toposes are the subject of Chapter 2, and logical functors are deﬁned in
Section 5.3. We deﬁne them below to maintain the independence of this chapter
from Chapter 2.
We ﬁrst observe that to make an arrow f: B −→A become a mono in all the
LE-models of the sketch, one only need add the cone
A
B
-
f
A
A
-
UA
?
UA
?
f
f
@
@
@@
R

4.4 Left Exact Theories
163
to the set of cones of the sketch. This is shorthand for saying, “Add the cone
with vertex A whose base is the diagram
A
B
-
f
A
?
f
and whose transition arrows are UA, UA and f to the sketch”. The diagram then
must become a pullback in any model (and UA must become idA), forcing f to
be monic. (Note that this cone is made up of data already given in the sketch).
Similarly, to construct a pullback of a diagram
B
C
-
g
A
?
f
where the objects and arrows are already in the diagram, one adds an object P
and arrows p1: P −→A, p2: P −→B, and p3: P −→C and makes these data a
cone of the sketch.
To force the following diagram
E
e
−−→A
f
−−→
−−→
g
B
to become an equalizer in the models, one must add a cone with vertex E and
arrows to the diagram
A
f
−−→
−−→
g
B
The latter diagram must not be included as one of the diagrams in the sketch
as that would obviously force f = g.
One can construct other limits in a similar way. In the sequel, that is what
we mean when we say that a sketch must have an arrow “which is to be a monic”
or an object “which is to be a limit” of some given diagram.
Thus we can describe the sketch for posets as containing the following items.
(i) An object S, which will become the underlying set of the poset.
(ii) An object S2 to be the product of S and S.

164
4 Theories
(iii) An object R (the relation) and a monic i: R −→S2.
To force R to be reﬂexive, you need an object ∆, a monic δ: ∆−→S2 and a
cone forcing it to be the equalizer of the projections. Then add an arrow r: ∆
−→R and a diagram
∆
R
-
r
δ
@
@
@@
R
S2?
i
You could instead construct a common right inverse to the projections of R
onto S but we need ∆anyway.
For antisymmetry, add an arrow S2 −→S2 and a diagram forcing it to be the
switching map. Then add an arrow s: R −→R and a diagram forcing it to be the
restriction of the switching map. With this you can add an object A and a cone
forcing it to be the ﬁber product R×S R where the ﬁrst projection is UR and the
second is s. Thus A must become the set
{(r, r′) | (r, r′) ∈R and (r′, r) ∈R}
Note that A must become a subobject of R in the model (the pullback of
a monic is a monic), and so a subobject of S2.
Antisymmetry is simply the
requirement that there is a monic e from A to ∆and a diagram forcing the
inclusion of A in S2 to factor through it.
Transitivity can be attained by constructing the pullback
P = [(r1, r2, r3) | (r1, r2) ∈R and (r2, r3) ∈R]
and an arrow p: P −→R with a diagram forcing p(r1, r2, r3) = (r1, r3).
We will see in Chapter 8 (Theorem 1 of Section 8.4) that, since the category
of posets is not regular, it cannot be expressed as models of an FP-theory.
Categories
The work of constructing a sketch whose models are categories was essentially
done in Section 1.1, where categories were deﬁned by commutative diagrams.
Thus the sketch for categories must contain objects A (to be the set of arrows),
O (to be the set of objects) P, and Q, along with arrows di: A −→O, (i = 0, 1),
u: O −→A and m: P −→A, cones making P = [(f, g) | d0(f) = d1(g)] and
Q = [(f, g, h) | d0(f) = d1(g) and d0(g) = d1(h)]

4.4 Left Exact Theories
165
It must also contain the diagrams (i) through (iv) of Section 1.1; to include
these diagrams, we have to add the four arrows in those diagrams not already
in the sketch, such as 1 × m, and diagrams forcing those four arrows to be what
they should be, in much the same way as we added arrows to get the FP-sketch
for groups in Section 4.1. We omit the details. (Note that we do not need to
add arrows to be idO or idA because of the incorporation of the function U in the
deﬁnition of sketch).
By omitting some of these arrows, you get a sketch for the category of graphs
and morphisms of graphs. However, that category is actually given by an FP-
theory (see Exercise 2).
Left exact categories
By adding appropriate data to the LE-theory of categories, one can force
the models to be left exact categories with designated limits; the morphisms of
models are exactly the functors that preserve the designated limits.
To get left exactness, we force the existence of a terminal object and of pull-
backs. We do pullbacks in considerable detail as an example of how to do other
constructions later; the terminal object is done by similar methods (but more
easily) and is omitted.
To the sketch for categories we add an object CC, which is to be the set of
pairs of arrows with common codomain, i.e.,
CC = {(f, g) ∈A × A | d1(f) = d1(g)};
an object CD, which is to be the set of pairs of arrows with common domain;
and CS, which is to be the set of commutative squares. Thus CC and CD must
be the vertices of the following ones:
A
O
-
d1
CC
A
-
cc2
?
cc1
?
d1
A
O
-
d0
CD
A
-
cd2
?
cd1
?
d0
Similarly, CS must be a cone which in an interpretation becomes
[(f, g, h, k) | d0(f) = d0(g),d1(h) = d1(k), d1(f) = d0(h),
d1(g) = d0(k), and m(h, f) = m(k, g)]◦

166
4 Theories
This comes equipped with four projections si: CS −→A. (Don’t confuse these
pullbacks with the pullbacks which we are trying to force the existence of in the
models.)
We also add an arrow t: CS −→CC which projects a commutative square
onto its lower right half; this is forced by adding the diagram
A
CS
-
cc1
CS
A
-
s4
?
s3
?
cc2
t
@
@
@@
R
to the sketch.
Forming the pullback of something in CC must be an arrow λ: CC −→CD;
on this we must impose equations forcing the codomains of the two arrows which
make up λ(f, g) to be the domains of f and g respectively. These are the diagrams
A
A
CC
CD
-
λ
?
cci
?
cdi
O
-
d0

d1
for i = 1, 2.
To get the pullback condition, any commutative square must have a unique
arrow to the appropriate pullback square with the appropriate commutativity
conditions. The existence of the arrow is assured by including an arrow θ: CS
−→A in the sketch which for a given commutative square S = (f, g, h, k) makes
everything in the following diagram commute. Note that this diagram, unlike the
ones above, is intended to be in a model, not in the sketch.
S3
S4
-
h
S1
S2
-
g
?
f
?
k
λ(h, k)
θ(S)
@
@
@@
R
r
    	
s
    

4.4 Left Exact Theories
167
Here, r = cd1(λ(t(S))) and s = cd2(λ(t(S))).
To make everything in the preceding diagram commute requires several dia-
grams to be added to the sketch. These diagrams must
(i) force the domain of θ(S) to be the upper left corner of S;
(ii) force the codomain of θ(S) to be the upper left corner of λ(t(S));
(iii) and make the two triangles in the preceding diagram commute.
In some cases, arrows and other diagrams deﬁning them must be added to
the sketch before these diagrams are included. For example, the diagram which
makes the upper triangle commute is the right diagram below, where the left
diagram deﬁnes u.
CD
A
-
cd2
CC
S
 t
?
λ
A2
 p1
A
-
θ
6
p2
u
@
@
@@
R
A2
A
-
m
s2
@
@
@@
R
S
?
u
Finally, to get the uniqueness of θ, we must deﬁne an object SS in the sketch
that is to represent all sextuples of arrows in the following conﬁguration
S3
S4
-
h
S1
S2
-
g
?
f
?
k
λ(h, k)
u
@
@
@@
R
v
@
@
@@
R
r
    	
s
    
for which r ◦u = r ◦v = f and s ◦u = s ◦v = g (which requires adding a certain
cone and some diagrams to the sketch) and an arrow α: SS −→A, along with
diagrams forcing α(a) to equal both u and v.
Toposes
A topos is an LE-category with the property that for each object X there
is an object PX (the power object of X) and a subobject e: ∈X )−→X × PX
with the property that if u: U )−→X × B is any subobject of X × B for which

168
4 Theories
(i) this diagram
∈X
X × PX
-
-
U
X × B
-
-
u
?
Ψ(u)
?
idX × ΦU
(1)
is a pullback, and
(ii) if u′: U ′ )−→X × B determines the same subobject as u, then Ψ(u) =
Ψ(u′) and Φ(u) = Φ(u′). (This is equivalent to the deﬁnition in Chapter 2: the
subobject ∈X is in fact a universal element for the functor Sub (X, ×(−)), which
is therefore representable.)
Toposes with designated limits and designated power objects are also models
of an LE-theory. One obtains them by adding some data determining the power
object and ∈to the sketch for LE-categories just given.
The ﬁrst thing we need is an object M of the sketch which is to consist of all
the monic arrows in A. This can be constructed as an equalizer of two arrows
from A to CD, one which takes f: X −→Y to the pullback of
X
Y
-
f
X
?
f
and another which takes f to
X
X
X
-
idX
?
idX
Both these arrows can be constructed by techniques used above.
We also need an arrow P: O −→O which should take an object (element of
O) to its power object, adn an arrow E: O −→M along with diagrams forcing
the domain of E(X) to be X and the codomain to be X × PX.
Another equalizer construction will produce an object S of monos along with
a speciﬁc representation of the codomain of the mono as a product of two objects;
in other words,
S = {(u, X, B) | u is monic, codomain of u is X × B}

4.4 Left Exact Theories
169
The universal property of ∈then requires an arrow φ: S −→A along with diagrams
forcing the domain of φ(u, X, B) to be B and the codomain to be PX. Further
constructions will give an arrow from A to A taking f: B −→PX to (idX, f).
From these ingredients it is straightforward to construct an arrow β: S −→CD
that takes u: U −→X × B to
∈X
X × PB
-
X × B
?
idX × φ(u)
The appropriate diagram then forces the pullback of this to be (1).
The
uniqueness of φ(u) can be obtained by a construction similar to that which gave
the uniqueness of the arrow to a pullback.
Perhaps the most eﬃcient way to make φ and ψ be invariant on subobjects is
to construct an object T consisting of all diagrams of the form
U
X × B
-
u
v
@
@
@@
R
V
6
?
with all four arrows monic.
(In a model the arrows between U and V must
become inverse to each other). Then add to the sketch arrows φ′: T −→A and
ψ′: T −→A and diagrams forcing φ′(u, v) = φ(u) = φ(v) and similarly for ψ.
Exercises 4.4
1. Suppose D: I −→Set is a ﬁltered diagram. On the set U = S DI deﬁne a
relation R by letting xRy for x ∈DI and y ∈DJ if and only if there is an object
K and maps f: I −→K and g: J −→K such that Df(x) = Dg(y).
(i) Show that R is an equivalence relation.
(ii) Show that the set of equivalence classes together with the evident maps
DI −→U −→U/R is the colimit of D.
(iii) Show that if J is a ﬁnite graph and E: J −→Hom(I , Set) is a diagram,
then colim: Hom(I , Set) −→Set preserves the limit of E.
2. One can construct an LE-theory for graphs by omitting some of the arrows,
cones and diagrams in the theory for categories, as suggested in the text, or by

170
4 Theories
constructing an FP-theory along the lines suggested in Exercise 10 of section
3.4 and then constructing the LE-completion of that theory. Are the resulting
theories equivalent (or even isomorphic) as categories?
3. Show that the category of right-exact small categories and right-exact functors
is the category of models of an LE-theory.
4. Show that neither of these subcategories of Set is the category of models of
an LE-theory:
(a) The full subcategory of ﬁnite sets;
(b) The full subcategory of inﬁnite sets.
(See Exercise 3 of Section 8.3.)
5. Prove Lemma 6. (Hint: Use representable functors to reduce it to the dual
theorem for equalizers in Set. It is still a fairly delicate diagram chase.)
4.5 Notes on Theories
The motivating principle in our study of theories is: turn the mathematician’s
informal description of a type of structure into a mathematical object which can
then be studied with mathematical techniques. The fruitfulness of the subject
comes from the interplay between properties of the description (the theory, or
syntax) and properties of the objects described (the models, or semantics). That
LE theories are closed under ﬁltered colimits is an example of this (Theorem 4
of Section 4.4). Many other properties are given in Theorem 1 of Section 8.4.
In classical model theory, of which a very good presentation is found in [Chang
and Keisler, 1973], the theory consists of a language, rules of inference and axioms;
thus the theory is an object of formal logic. The models are sets with structure.
The natural notion of morphism is that of elementary embedding. The reason
for this is that inequality is always a stateable predicate.
In our treatment, the theory is a category with certain properties (FP, LE, etc.
as in Chapter 4) and extra structure (a topology, as in Chapter 8), the models
are functors to other categories with appropriate structure, and morphisms of
models are natural transformations of these functors. This almost always gives
the correct class of morphisms.
Categorical theories were devmloped in two contexts and from two diﬀerent
directions. One was by Grothendieck and his school in the context of classifying
toposes (Grothendieck [1964]). These are, essentially, our geometric theories as
in Chapter 8. The other source was the notion of (ﬁnitary) equational theories

4.5 Notes on Theories
171
due to Lawvere [1963]; they are our single-sorted FP theories. Thus these two
sources provided the top and bottom of our hierarchy.
The Grothendieck school developed the idea of the classifying topos for a type
of structure in the late 1950’s. Because of the name, we assume that they were
developed by analogy with the concept of classifying space in topology.
In the 1960’s, Lawvere invented algebraic theories (our single-sorted FP the-
ories) quite explicitly as a way of describing algebraic structures using categories
for theories and functors for models. His work is based on the concept of G.
Birkhoﬀ’s equational classes. Of course, Birkhoﬀdid not describe these in terms
of categories, nor was his concept of lattice useful in this connection. The latter
was primarily useful for describing the classes of subobjects and quotient objects.
Models were described in semantic terms and it seems never to have occurred to
anyone before Lawvere that the theory of groups could be thought of as a generic
group. Lawvere’s seminal observation that the theory of groups, for example, is a
category with a group object, that a group in Set is a product preserving functor
and that a morphism of groups is a natural transformation of functors is an idea
of a diﬀerent sort, rather than just an extension of existing ones.
Lawvere’s work was limited to ﬁnitary equational theories, and it was Linton
[1966], [1969a] who extended it to inﬁnitary theories (not covered in this book)
and made precise the relation with triples. It became clear very early that the
study of inﬁnitary theories becomes much more tractable via the Lawvere-Linton
approach.
Lawvere alluded to multisorted FP theories in his thesis and even asserted
– incorrectly – that the category of algebras for a multisorted theory could be
realized as algebras for a single-sorted theory. Multisorted algebraic theories have
recently found use in theoretical computer science; see Barr and Wells [1999].
An early attempt at extending theories beyond FP was Freyd’s “essentially
algebraic theories” [1972], which are subsumed by our LE theories. The idea of
deﬁning algebraic structures in arbitrary categories predates Lawvere’s work; for
example Eckmann-Hilton [1962]. See also B´enabou [1968], [1972].
Somewhere along the line it became clear that algebraic theories had clas-
sifying toposes and that Lawvere’s program of replacing theories by categories,
models by functors and morphisms by natural transformations of those functors
could be extended well beyond the domain of equational theories.
Ehresmann introduced sketches in the late 1960’s as a way of bringing the
formal system closer to the mathematician’s naive description. (Our notion of
sketch is even more naive than his. However, the kinship is clear and we are only
too happy to acknowledge the debt.) The development of the categorical approach
to general theories constituted the major work of the last part of his career.
The presentation in Bastiani-Ehresmann [1973] (which contains references to his

172
4 Theories
earlier work) is probably the best starting place for the interested reader. Our
description of sketches and induced theories is very diﬀerent from Ehresmann’s.
In particular, he constructs the theory generated by a sketch by a direct transﬁnite
induction rather than embedding in models and using Kennison’s Theorem. (See
Kelly [1982] for a general report on the use of transﬁnite induction in this area.)
Ehresmann’s sketches are based on graphs with partial composition rather
than simply graphs, but as is clear from our treatment in Section 4.1, the tran-
sition is straightforward.
The connection between logical theories and categorical theories was explored
systematically by Makkai and Reyes (two logicians!)
[1977] who showed that
when restricted to geometric theories the two were entirely interchangeable. See
also Lambek and Scott [1986] and Bunge [1983].
With the advent of toposes and geometric morphisms from Lawvere-Tierney,
the theory of geometric theories reached its full fruition. What was left was only
to ﬁll in the holes – special cases such as regular and ﬁnite sum theories. This
was more or less clear to everyone (see Lawvere [1975]) but we have the ﬁrst
systematic treatment of it.

5
Properties of Toposes
In this chapter we will develop various fundamental properties of toposes. Some
of these properties are familiar from Set; thus, every topos has ﬁnite colimits
and has internal homsets (is Cartesian closed). Others are less familiar, but are
technically important; an outstanding example of this sort of property is the fact
that if E is a topos then so is the category E /A of objects over an object A of E .
Our treatment makes substantial use of triple theory as developed in Chapter 3.
5.1 Tripleability of P
Theorem 1.
[Par´e] P: E op −→E is tripleable.
Proof. We will use the Crude Tripleability Theorem (Section 3.5). P has a left
adjoint, namely Pop (Proposition 3 of Section 2.3). E op has coequalizers of re-
ﬂexive pairs, indeed all coequalizers, because E has all ﬁnite limits. The other
properties, that P reﬂects isomorphisms and preserves coequalizers of reﬂexive
pairs, follow from Lemmas 4 and 5 below.
Before proving these lemmas, we illustrate the power of this theorem with:
Corollary 2.
Any topos has ﬁnite colimits.
Proof. By Theorem 1 of 3.4, a category of algebras E T for a triple T on a category
E has ﬁnite limits if E does, but E op having limits is equivalent to E having
colimits.
The same argument implies that a topos has colimits of any class of diagrams
that it has limits of. The converse of this is also true (Exercise 1).
Observe that for any topos E , the functor T = P◦P is a covariant endofunctor
of E . Since T is the composite of a functor and its right adjoint, it is the functor
part of a triple (T, η: 1 −→T, µ: T 2 −→T).
Lemma 3.
For any object A of E , ηA: A −→PPA is monic.
Proof. The singleton map {}: A −→PA is monic by Proposition 1 of Section 2.3,
so {} ◦{}: A −→TA is also monic. The Lemma then follows from Exercise 7 of
section 3.1.
173

174
5 Properties of Toposes
Lemma 4.
P reﬂects isomorphisms.
Proof. Suppose f: B −→A in E and suppose Pf is an isomorphism. Then so is
PPf. In the commutative diagram
PPA
PPB

PPf
A
B

f
?
?
ηA
?
?
ηB
(1)
the vertical arrows are monic by Lemma 3, so f is monic. Since for any object
C of E , HomE (C, Pf) is essentially the same (via the natural isomorphism φ
of Section 2.1) as Sub(C × f), the fact that Pf is an isomorphism means that
Sub f: Sub A −→Sub B is an isomorphism in Set, i.e., a bijection.
Now A is a subobject of A via the identity and B is a subobject of A via f,
which we now know is monic. It is easy to see that Sub f(A) = Sub f(B) is the
subobject idB: B −→B, so since Sub f is a bijection, idA: A −→A and f: B −→A
determine the same subobject of A. It follows easily that f is an isomorphism.
Lemma 5.
P preserves the coequalizers of reﬂexive pairs. In fact, it takes them
to contractible coequalizers.
Proof. This elegant proof is due to Par´e. A coequalizer diagram of a reﬂexive
pair in E op is an equalizer diagram
A
f
−−→B
g
−−→
−−→
h
C
(2)
in E in which g and h are split monos. All these diagrams are pullbacks:
A
B
-
f
A
A
-
1
?
1
?
f
B
C
-
h
A
B
-
f
?
f
?
g
B
C
-
h
B
B
-
1
?
1
?
h
(3)

5.2 Slices of Toposes
175
Hence, by the Beck condition and the fact that ∃idA = idPA, these diagrams
commute:
PA
PB
-
∃f
PA
PA
-
1
6
1
6
Pf
PB
PC
-
∃h
PA
PB
-
∃f
6
Pf
6
Pg
PB
PC
-
∃h
PB
PB
-
1
6
1
6
Ph
(4)
It follows from this that
PC
Pg
−−−→
−−−→
Ph
PB
Pf
−−−−→PA
(5)
is a contractible coequalizer, with its contraction given by ∃f and ∃h.
Exercises 5.1
1. Show that a topos has colimits corresponding to whatever class of limits it
has and conversely. (Hint: To have a limit (resp. colimit) for all diagrams based
on a graph I is to have a left (resp. right) adjoint to the diagonal—or constant
functor—functor E −→Func(I , E ). Use the Butler Theorem 3 of 3.7 and the
tripleability of E op −→E to derive the two directions.)
2. Prove that (5) is a contractible coequalizer diagram.
5.2 Slices of Toposes
Recall from Section 1.1 that if C is a category and A an object of C , the category
C /A, called the slice of C by A, has as objects arrows C −→A and morphisms
commutative triangles.
The following theorem is heavily used in proving the embedding theorems of
Chapter 7.
Theorem 1.
If E is a topos and A an object of E , then E /A is a topos.
Proof. E /A has a terminal object, namely the identity on A, and the map E /A
−→E creates pullbacks (Exercise 5 of Section 1.7), so E /A has ﬁnite limits.
We must construct a power object for each object of E /A.
The product of objects B −→A and C −→A in E /A is the pullback B ×A C,
which is an object over A, and for any object X −→A of E /A, Sub(X −→A)

176
5 Properties of Toposes
is the same as Sub(X) in E . Thus given an object f: B −→A of E /A, we must
construct an object P(B −→A) which represents Sub(B ×A C) regarded as a
functor of objects g: C −→A of E /A. The key to the proof lies in representing
the pullback B ×A C as the equalizer [(b, c) | (b, fb, c) = (b, gc, c)], thus given as
the equalizer:
B ×A C
d
−−→B × C
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
B × A × C
Now suppose we are given the arrow
C
C′
-
A
@
@
@@
R
    	
in E /A. We have a serially commutative diagram in which both rows are equal-
izers of reﬂexive pairs:
B ×A C′
B × C′
-
d
B ×A C
B × C
-
d
?
?
B × A × C′
B × A × C
?
-
d0 -
d1
-
d0 -
d1
Applying P to this diagram gives rise to the diagram in which by Lemma 5
of the preceding section the rows are contractible coequalizers. After Hom(1, −)
is applied, we get
Sub(B × A × C)
Sub(B × C)

Sub(B × A × C′)
Sub(B × C′)

?
?
Sub(B ×A C)
-
Sub(B ×A C′)
-
?
-
d0
-
d1
-
d0
-
d1
(∗)

5.2 Slices of Toposes
177
in which by the external Beck condition the rows are contractible coequalizers
with contractions d0 ◦−, so this diagram commutes serially too. Thus
Hom(C, P(B × A))
Hom(C, PB)

Hom(C′, P(B × A))
Hom(C′, PB)

?
?
-
d0
-
d1
-
d0
-
d1
is serially commutative and has contractible pairs as rows. By the adjunction
between E and E /A (see Exercise 13 of Section 1.9), the following is a serially
commutative diagram of contractible pairs:
Hom(C −→A, P(B × A) × A −→A)
Hom(C −→A, PB × A −→A)

Hom(C′ −→A, P(B × A) × A −→A)
Hom(C′ −→A, PB × A −→A)

?
?
-
d0
-
d0
-
d1
-
d1
It follows from the Yoneda lemma that we have a contractible pair
P(B × A) × A −→A ←−−−−−PB × A −→A
−−−−−→
−−−−−→
in E /A. Coequalizers exist in E /A; they are created by the underlying functor to
E . Using the facts that Hom functors, like all functors, preserve the coequalizers
of contractible pairs, and subobjects in E /A are identical to subobjects in E , it
is easy to see from diagram (*) above that the coequalizer of the above parallel
pair represents Sub(B ×A −).
Exercise 5.2
1. Assuming, as we establish in the next section, that pullbacks of regular epis
are regular epis, show that E −→E /A is faithful if and only if A −→1 is epi.
(Hint: consider, for
B −→
−→C
the diagram
B
C
A × B
A × C
?
?
-
-
-
-

178
5 Properties of Toposes
and use regularity.)
5.3 Logical Functors
Two sorts of functors between toposes have proved to be important.
Logical
functors are those which preserve the structure given in the deﬁnition of a topos.
They will be discussed in this section.
The other kind is geometric functors,
which arise as an abstraction of the map induced by a continuous map between
topological spaces on the corresponding categories of sheaves of sets. They will
be discussed in Section 6.5.
A functor L which preserves the structure of a topos must be left exact (pre-
serve ﬁnite limits) and preserve power objects in the sense that L applied to each
power object must represent in a strong sense speciﬁed below the corresponding
subobject functor in the codomain category. To make sense of this, note that
any functor L: E −→E ′ induces by restriction a function (also denoted L) from
HomE (A, B) to HomE ′(LA, LB) for any objects A and B of E . Furthermore, if
L is left exact (hence preserves monos and products in particular), it takes any
subobject U )−→A × B to a subobject LU )−→LA × LB.
In the following deﬁnition, we put a prime on P or φ to indicate that it is
part of the structure of E ′.
A functor L: E −→E ′ between toposes is called logical if it preserves ﬁnite
limits and if for each object B, there is an isomorphism
βB: Hom(−, LPB) −→Sub(−× LB)
such that the following diagram commutes (φ is the natural transformation in
diagram (1) of Section 2.1).
Sub(A × B)
Sub(LA × LB)
-
Hom(A, PB)
Hom(LA, LPB)
-
L
?
φ(A, B)
?
(βB)A
(1)
Of course, the deﬁnition implies that for every object B of E, LPB is isomor-
phic to P′LB. We will see below that in fact the induced isomorphism is natural
in B.

5.3 Logical Functors
179
Proposition 1.
A functor L: E −→E ′ is logical if and only if for each object
B of E there is an isomorphism αB: LPB −→P′LB for which the induced map
γB: Hom(A, PB) −→Hom(LA, P′LB) deﬁned by γB(f) = αB ◦Lf for f: A
−→PB preserves φ in the sense that
Sub(A × B)
Sub(LA × LB)
-
Hom(A, PB)
Hom(LA, LPB)
-
γB
?
φ(A, B)
?
φ′(LA, LB)
(2)
commutes.
Proof. If L is logical, so that (1) commutes, deﬁne αB to be the unique isomor-
phism making the triangle in (3) below commute. There is one, since LPB and
P′LB represent the same functor.
Sub(A × B)
Hom(A, PB)
-
L
?
φ(A, B)
Hom(LA, LPB)
Hom(LA, P′LB)
-
Hom(LA, αB)
Sub(LA × LB)
βB
@
@
@
@
@@
R
φ′(LA, LB)
      	
-
(3)
The arrow along the top of (3) is γB, so (2) commutes.
Conversely, given the arrows αB, deﬁne β by requiring that the triangle in
(3) commute; then (1) commutes as required. β is natural in X because both
small squares in (4) below commute for any f: X −→Y :
Hom(X, P′LB)
Hom(Y, P′LB)

Hom(X, LPB)
Hom(Y, LPB)

?
Hom(X, αB)
?
Hom(Y, αB)
Sub(X × LB)
Sub(Y × LB)

?
φ(X, LB)
?
φ(Y, LB)
(4)

180
5 Properties of Toposes
Proposition 2.
If L: E −→E ′ is logical, then P′ ◦L is naturally isomorphic to
Lop ◦P.
Proof. In fact, the α of Proposition 1 is a natural isomorphism. In view of the
way that α is deﬁned in terms of γ, the naturality follows from the fact that the
top face in diagram (5) below commutes for any g: B −→C. This in turn follows
from the fact that all the other faces commute and φ and φ′ are isomorphisms.
The left and right faces commute by deﬁnition of P and P′. The bottom face
commutes because L preserves monos and pullbacks.
Sub(A × C)
Sub(LA × LC)
-
Hom(A, PC)
Hom(LA, P′LC)
-
γC
?
φ(A, C)
?
φ′(LA, LC)
Hom(A, Pg)
@
@
@
@@
R
Hom(LA, P′Lg)
     	
Sub(A × g)
     
Sub(LA × Lg)
@
@
@
@
@
I
Sub(A × B)
Sub(LA × LB)
-
Hom(A, PB)
Hom(LA, P′LB)
-
γB
?
φ(A, B)
?
φ′(LA, LB)
(5)
Proposition 3.
Logical functors preserve the subobject classiﬁer.
Proof. A logical functor preserves the terminal object since it preserves ﬁnite
limits, and the subobject classiﬁer is P1.
Proposition 4.
Logical functors preserve ﬁnite colimits.
Proof. Let L: E −→E ′ be a logical functor. Since P has a left adjoint, it preserves
ﬁnite limits, so L ◦P preserves ﬁnite limits. Hence by Proposition 2, P′ ◦Lop
preserves ﬁnite limits. Since P′ is tripleable, it reﬂects limits (Proposition 1 and
Exercise 1 of Section 3.3); hence Lop: E op −→E ′op must preserve ﬁnite limits.
Thus L preserves ﬁnite colimits.

5.3 Logical Functors
181
Proposition 5.
A logical functor L has a right adjoint if and only if it has a
left adjoint.
Proof. If L has a right adjoint, then apply Butler’s Theorem 3(a) of Section 3.7
to this diagram to conclude that Lop has a right adjoint, whence L has a left
adjoint.
E
E ′
-
L
E op
E ′op
-
Lop
6
Pop
?
P
6
P′op
?
P′
(6)
A similar argument using Butler’s Theorem 3(b) of Section 3.7 yields the other
implication.
Theorem 6.
Let A∗be the functor which takes an object B of E to the object
B × A −→A (the arrow is projection) of E /A, and an arrow f: B −→C to
f × idA: B × A −→C × A. Then A∗
(i) is right adjoint to the forgetful functor,
(ii) is logical,
(iii) has a right adjoint A∗, and
(iv) is faithful if and only if A −→1 is epi.
Proof. (i) is Exercise 13 of Section 1.9 and (iii) follows from (ii) by Proposition 5.
To prove (ii), observe ﬁrst that A∗clearly preserves limits. For a given object C
−→A of E /A and an object B of E , diagram (1) becomes the diagram below.
Sub(C × B)
Sub(C × B × A −→A)
-
Hom(C, PB)
Hom(C × A −→A, PB × A −→A)
-
A∗
?
φ(C, B)
?
β(C, B)
(7)
The lower right corner really is the set of subobjects of the product of C × A
−→A and B × A −→A in E /A, since that product is the pullback [(c, a, b, a) |
a = a] = C × B × A. The bottom arrow takes a subobject u to (u, p2).
An arrow in the upper right corner must be of the form (u, p2) for some u: C×A
−→PB).
We deﬁne β by requiring that β(C, B)(u, p2) to be the subobject
(φ(C × A, B)(u)) of Sub(C × B × A). Then β is natural in B: given g: B′ −→B,
the commutativity condition requires that
P(idC, g, p2)(φ(u), p2) = (φ(Pg(u)), p2)

182
5 Properties of Toposes
which follows because φ is a natural isomorphism and so commutes with the
functor C × −× A.
We must show that (7) commutes. If f: C −→PB, the northern route around
the diagram takes f to φ(C × A, B)(f, p2), whereas the southern route takes it
to (φ(C, B)f, p2). These are the same since φ commutes with the functor −× A.
This completes the proof of (ii). (iii) is immediate from (i), (ii) and Proposition 5.
Finally, we must prove (iv). If A −→1 is epi, then since B × −has a right
adjoint, it preserves epis and we conclude that A × B −→B is also epi. Now we
must show that if f ̸= g then A × f ̸= A × g. This follows from the fact just
noted and the fact that this diagram commutes:
B
C
A × B
A × C
?
proj
?
proj
-
A × f
-
A × g
-
f
-
g
(8)
Conversely, if f: A −→1 is not epi, consider g, h: 1 −→B with g ◦f ̸= h ◦f.
Then
A × g = A × h: A −→A × 1 −→A × B
which contradicts faithfulness.
xThe right adjoint A∗is often called Q
A, and the forgetful functor, which is
left adjoint to A∗, is called ΣA. This is because an object B −→A of E /A can be
thought of as an indexed family {Ba: a ∈A} of sets. In Set, ΣA(B −→A), which
of course is B, is the union of the family and Q
A(B −→A) is the product of
the family. The two notations are both useful and suggest diﬀerent, but equally
correct, aspects of the story.
An object A for which A −→1 is epi is said to have global support. (Think
of a sheaf of continuous functions to see why).
Corollary 7.
If f: A −→B in E , then the pullback functor f ∗: E /B −→E /A
which takes g: X −→B to the pullback
A
B
-
f
P
X
-
?
?
g
has left and right adjoints.

5.4 Toposes are Cartesian Closed
183
Proof. This follows from Theorem 6 by observing that for an object A −→B of
E /B, (E /B)/(A −→B) = E /A.
Corollary 8.
In a topos, pullbacks commute with colimits. In particular, the
pullback of an epimorphism is an epimorphism.
Proof. The ﬁrst sentence follows from Corollary 7. Given f: A −→B epi,
B
B
-
id
A
B
-
f
?
f
?
id
must be a pushout. Applying the functor B′ ×B −, which preserves pushouts, to
that diagram gives
B′
B′
-
id
B′ ×B A
B′
-
?
?
id
which must therefore be a pushout. Hence the map B′ × A −→B′ must be epi.
Exercises 5.3
1. Show that in Set, A∗(g: C −→A) can be taken to be the set of all functions
from A to C which split g, or alternatively as the product of the ﬁbers of g.
5.4 Toposes are Cartesian Closed
A category is cartesian closed if the functor Hom(−× A, B) is representable.
The representing object is denoted BA, so that
Hom(C × A, B) ≃Hom(C, BA)
for all objects C of E . The object BA is called the exponential of B by A. The
notation BA is used because the global elements of BA, by the adjunction, are
just the elements of Hom(A, B).

184
5 Properties of Toposes
The general elements of BA can also be thought of as functions. If f ∈T BA,
y ∈T A, deﬁne f(y) = ev A(f, y), where ev A: BA × A −→B is the counit of
the adjunction (see Exercise 2). This notation has been developed extensively,
for example in Kock [1981]. It can conﬂict with our notation f(y) = f ◦y if T
happens to be the same as A; Kock’s treatment shows how to handle this conﬂict.
Theorem 1.
A topos is cartesian closed.
We will give two constructions of the exponential. One is an easy consequence
of the existence of a right adjoint to the functor A∗(= A × −) of Section 5.3; the
other constructs BA as an equalizer, from which it follows that logical functors
preserve the construction.
The ﬁrst construction follows from the observation that in Set, in the notation
of Section 5.3, A∗(B × A −→A) is the set of functions from A to B × A which
split the structure map of B × A −→A and this is just the set of all maps A to
B. This suggests trying A∗(B × A −→A) as a candidate for BA, which works
because of the following sequence of calculations:
Hom(C × A, B) ≃Hom(C × A −→A, B × A −→A)
= Hom(A∗C, B × A −→A) ≃Hom(C, A∗(B × A −→A))◦
For the second construction, consider the canonical presentation
PPPPB
∈(PPB)
−−−−−−−−→
−−−−−−−−→
PP(∈B)
PPB
∈B
−−−−→B
(1)
of the object B in E op (Section 3.3). Writing f, g and h for the three maps and
B′ = PB, B′′ = PPPB this becomes an equalizer
B
f
−−→PB′
g
−−→
−−→
h
PB′′
(2)
in E .

5.4 Toposes are Cartesian Closed
185
For any objects B and C, let φ(B, C): Hom(C, PB) −→Sub(B × C) be the
natural isomorphism. Because it is an isomorphism, the middle and lower hori-
zontal arrows in the following diagram are uniquely deﬁned:
Hom(A × C, PB′)
Hom(A × C, PB′′)
-
Hom(A × C, g)
6
φ(B′, A × C)−1
6
φ(B′′, A × C)−1
Hom(C, P(B′ × A))
Hom(C, P(B′′ × A))
-
Sub(B′ × A × C)
Sub(B′′ × A × C)
-
6
φ(B′ × A, C)
6
φ(B′′ × A, C)
(3)
Let
gA: P(B′ × A) −→P(B′′ × A)
be the map induced by the bottom arrow of (3) via the Yoneda lemma. In the
same way, deﬁne hA: P(B′ × A) −→P(B′′ × A), and let the exponential BA be
deﬁned by requiring that
BA −→P(B′ × A)
gA
−−−→
−−−→
hA
P(B′′ × A)
(4)
be an equalizer.
It remains to prove that Hom(C, BA) is naturally isomorphic, as a functor of
C, to Hom(A × C, B). This follows from applying Hom(A × C, −) to diagram (2)
and Hom(C, −) to diagram (4). Both give equalizer diagrams since Hom(C, −)
preserves equalizers.
But the parallel pairs of arrows being equalized in the
diagrams thus obtained are naturally isomorphic by (3) (for g) and the analog of
(3) for h. Thus the left sides must be naturally isomorphic, as required.
Corollary 2.
Logical functors preserve exponentials.
The most common deﬁnition of topos in the literature is that it is a cartesian
closed category with ﬁnite limits and a subobject classiﬁer. Exercises 3 and 4 of
this section show that our deﬁnition is equivalent to the usual one.
Exercises 5.4
1. Show that for any object X of any topos, PX = ΩX.

186
5 Properties of Toposes
2. Identify the counit AB × B −→A in the category of sets. (Hint: this counit
in any cartesian closed category is called ev.)
3. Let f: B −→C be an arrow in a topos. Show that Pf: PC −→PB corresponds
by the adjunction deﬁning ΩB to the arrow
ev ◦(1 × f): PC × B −→Ω
where ev is the arrow of Exercise 2.
4. Use Exercise 3 to prove that a cartesian closed category with a subobject
classiﬁer and all ﬁnite left limits is a topos.
5. Construct the following isomorphisms in any Cartesian closed category in such
a way that they are natural in both variables.
(a) (B × C)A ∼= BA × CA.
(b) (CA)B ∼= C(A×B).
6. Show that in a cartesian closed category, if f, g ∈T BA and y ∈T A, then
(f, g)(y) = (f(y), g(y)). (This notation assumes that the isomorphism in Exer-
cise 5(a) is the identity map.)
7. Show that Cartesian closed categories are models of an LE-theory.
5.5 Exactness Properties of Toposes
In this section we deduce a number of facts about maps in a topos, most of which
have to do in some way with colimits.
Epi-mono factorizations
Lemma 1.
If f: A −→B is an epimorphism in a topos, and i: B −→C is any
map, then the induced map A ×C A −→B ×C B is epi.
Proof. The functor A ×C −commutes with colimits, hence preserves epimor-
phisms. Thus the induced map f × 1: A ×C A −→B ×C A is epi. Similarly, the
induced map 1 × f: B ×C A −→B ×C B is epi, so their composite is too.
An epi-mono factorization of an arrow f: A −→B in a category is a repre-
sentation f = m ◦e where m is mono and e is epi. It is easy to see that in a topos,
the representation is essentially unique (Exercises 1 and 3). The codomain of e
is called the image of f (see Exercise 5).

5.5 Exactness Properties of Toposes
187
Theorem 2.
If f: A −→B is any arrow in a topos, then f has an epi-mono
factorization.
Proof. Given f: A −→B, construct its kernel pair (h, k) and the coequalizer q: A
−→C of its kernel pair. Then because f coequalizes its kernel pair, there is an
arrow i as in Figure 1 below, and i has a kernel pair (u, v). Since q coequalizes
the kernel pair of f, there is an arrow r as in the ﬁgure.
C × C
C
A × A
A
?
r
?
q
B
-
i
B
-
f
?
=
-
h-
k
-
u-
v
(1)
By Lemma 1, r is an epimorphism. Since q coequalizes h and k, u ◦r = v ◦r,
so u = v. Thus, because the two arrows in its kernel pair are the same, i is a
monomorphism. The required factorization is then f = i ◦q.
Exactness properties
Proposition 3.
Every epimorphism in a topos is regular.
Proof. Assume f in Figure 1 is epi. Then the map i must also be epi. It is mono,
as we proved, so is regular mono (Corollary 4 of Section 2.3). But a map which is
both regular mono and epi is an isomorphism. Hence f is a coequalizer, namely
of its kernel pair, as required.
Proposition 3 and preceding results imply that a complete topos is a regular
category (see Section 1.8.
The set of subobjects of an object forms a partially ordered set, and so one
may ask when a pair of subobjects has an intersection (greatest lower bound) or
union (least upper bound). In a category with ﬁnite limits, intersections always
exist: the intersection of subobjects B and C of D is the pullback
C
D
-
A
B
-
?
?
(2)
in which all the arrows are monomorphisms because the pullback of a mono is a
mono.
Unions, however, are harder. In general categories, they are not colimits in a
simple way (see Exercise 11). In a topos, however, the situation is quite simple.

188
5 Properties of Toposes
Proposition 4.
In a topos, the union of any two subobjects B and C of an
object D is the image of the arrow from B + C to D induced by the inclusions of
B and C in D:
B + C
D
-
B ∪C
@
@
@@
R
    
(3)
Proof. Trivial.
Proposition 5.
Suppose that (2) is a pullback diagram in which all arrows are
mono. Then the induced arrow B +A C −→D is monic.
Proof. The idea of the proof is to show that B +A C is isomorphic to B ∪C, so
that the induced arrow is the inclusion. Construct the kernel pair of the arrow
from B + C to D in diagram (3):
(B + C) × (B + C) −→
−→B + C −→B ∪C
(4)
The resulting diagram is a coequalizer, by Theorem 2 and Proposition 4. Since
the pullback commutes with colimits,
(B + C) ×D (B + C) ≃B ×D B + B ×D C + C ×D B + C ×D C
= B + B ∩C + C ∩B + C◦
However, a map coequalizes the two arrows B + B ∩C + C ∩B + C −→B + C
if and only if it coequalizes the two arrows B ∩C −→B + C (because the two
arrows agree on the ﬁrst and last components and interchange the middle two).
So
B ∩C −→
−→B + C −→B ∪C
is a coequalizer. This means that
C
B ∪C
-
B ∩C
B
-
?
?
(5)
is a pushout (as well as a pullback) diagram, hence B ∪C = B +A C, as required.
As an application of Proposition 5, we have

5.5 Exactness Properties of Toposes
189
Theorem 6.
A functor between toposes which preserves monomorphisms, ﬁnite
products and cokernel pairs is left exact.
Proof. Let F: E −→E ′ satisfy the conditions of the theorem. It is suﬃcient to
show that F preserves equalizers. So let
A −→B −→
−→C
be an equalizer. An easy argument using elements shows that this is equivalent
to the following diagram being an equalizer.
A −→B −→
−→B × C
Then the two maps to B × C are monic (split by the projection onto B). It
is easily seen that we have a pullback
B
B × C
-
-
A
B
-
-
?
?
?
?
It follows from Proposition 5 that
B +A B −→B × C
is monic. Applying F, we have
FA
FB
-
-
FA
FB
-
-
6
6
FB +FA FB
FB × FC
6
6
-
-
-
-
The lower row is an equalizer because in a topos every mono is the equalizer
of its cokernel pair. An easy diagram chase shows that the upper row must be
an equalizer, too.
Since a topos has colimits, it has an initial object 0. As in Set, where 0 is the
empty set, the initial object is the codomain of just one arrow, its own identity
arrow. An initial object with this property up to equivalence is said to be strict.
Proposition 7.
If f: A −→0, then A ∼= 0.
Proof. Given f: A −→0, (f, idA): A −→0×A is split monic. Since A×−commutes
with colimits, A × 0 ≃0, so A −→0 is a split monic. But any map to 0 is epic,
so A is isomorphic to 0.

190
5 Properties of Toposes
Corollary 8.
Any map 0 −→A is monic.
Proof. Its kernel pair is 0 ×A 0 −→0.
Exercises 5.5
1. A factorization system in a category consists of two classes M and E of
arrows with the properties that
(i) Both M and E contain all identity arrows and are closed under composi-
tion with isomorphisms on both sides.
(ii) Every arrow can be factored as an arrow of E followed by an arrow of M.
(iii) (“Diagonal ﬁll-in property”). In any diagram
J
B
-
m
A
I
-
e
?
?
with m ∈M and e ∈E, there is a unique arrow from I to J making both triangles
commute.
Formulate the way in which the factorization in (ii) is unique and prove it.
2.
(a) Show that in any factorization system any map which satisﬁes the
diagonal ﬁll-in property with respect to every map of M belongs to E. That is,
if f has the property that whenever there is a commutative square
C
D
-
e
A
B
-
f
?
?
with m ∈M, then there is an arrow from B to C making both triangles commute,
then f belongs to E. (Hint: Let f = m ◦e with e ∈E and m ∈M. Consider the
square
·
·
-
m
·
·
-
f
?
e
?
id
g
    	

5.5 Exactness Properties of Toposes
191
and then the square
·
·
-
m
·
·
-
e
?
e
?
m
gm
      	
id
      	
and use the uniqeness property of the diagonal ﬁll-in.)
Conclude
(b) Every map in M ∩E is an isomorphism and every isomorphism belongs
to M ∩E.
(c) E is closed under composition.
(d) In a pushout square,
·
·
-
e′
·
·
-
e
?
?
if e ∈E, then so is e′.
(e) If M consists of monos, then every split epi belongs to E.
Of course, the duals of all these properties also hold.
3. Show that in a factorization system in which either the class E consists of all
the epis or the class M consists of all the monos, the uniqueness of the diagonal
ﬁll-in does not have to be assumed, only its existence.
4. Show that in a regular category the monos and regular epis form a factorization
system. (Hint: The hypothesis is too strong; all that is needed is that a pullback
of a regular epi be an epi.)
5. The image of an arrow f: C −→B in a category, if it exists, is a subobject
I of B through which f factors, with the property that if f factors through any
subobject J of B, then I is a subobject of J. Prove that a topos has images.
6. Prove that the construction in diagram (3) makes B∪C the least upper bound
of the subobjects B and C.

192
5 Properties of Toposes
7. Show that there is a factorization system in the category of topological spaces
in which E consists of quotient maps with dense images and M consists of in-
jective maps to closed subspaces. Show that there are maps in E which are not
epimorphisms.
8. Find at least three other factorization systems in the category of topological
spaces and continuous maps.
9. Show that in a topos, f + g is an isomorphism if and only if f and g are.
10. Prove that an object in a topos is the initial object if and only if it has
exactly one subobject.
11. The group Z2 × Z2 has three subgroups of order two.
(a) Show that the union of any two of them in the subobject lattice of Z2×Z2
is the whole group.
(b) Show that the pushout in the category of all groups of any two subgroups
of order 2 over their intersection is an inﬁnite group generated by two generators
of order 2.
(Hint: The group of isometries of the metric space of integers is
inﬁnite and is generated by two elements of order 2, namely rotation around 0
and rotation around 1/2.)
12. Let E be a topos and O the full subcategory of subobjects of 1.
(a) Show that O is a reﬂective subcategory of E . (Hint: Take an object X
to the image of X −→1.)
(b) Show that the left adjoint L of the inclusion I in (a) preserves products.
(Hint: Use the fact that the pullback of an epi is an epi.)
13. Use the previous exercise and the results of Section 5.3 to show that for any
object A of a topos E , the canonical functor Sub(A) −→E /A has a left adjoint
which preserves products.
14. Let f: A −→B be an arrow in a topos. Let P f and Q f be the left and
right adjoints of the pullback functor f ∗of Corollary 7.
(a) Show that f induces an arrow f −1: Sub B −→Sub A by pulling back which
is the restriction of f ∗.
(b) Show that the restriction of Q f is a right adjoint ∀f: Sub A −→Sub B
to f −1.
(c) Show that f −1 has a left adjoint ∃f. (Hint: Deﬁne ∃f to be ∃i where ∃is
deﬁned as in Section 2.4 and i is the inclusion of Imf in B.)

5.6 The Heyting Algebra Structure on Ω
193
15. (The doctrinal diagram). Show that in the following diagram in which the
arrows are all deﬁned above,
(a) ∃f ◦L ∼= L ◦P f,
(b) I ◦∀f ∼= Q f ◦I,
(c) f ∗◦I ∼= I ◦f −1, and
(d) f −1 ◦L ∼= L ◦f ∗.
Sub A
Sub B′
E/A
E/B
-
f ∗
	
P f
I
Q f
	
∃f
I
∀f
-
f −1
?
L
6
I
6
I
?
L
5.6 The Heyting Algebra Structure on Ω
Heyting algebras
Intuitionistic logic is a weakening of classical logic intended to allow only
“positive” proofs; in other words, proof by contradiction is ruled out. Just as the
concept of Boolean algebra results from abstracting the properties of “and”, “or”
and “not” in classical logic, the concept of Heyting algebra arises by abstract-
ing the properties of “and”, “or” and “implies” (the latter must be taken as a
primitive in intuitionistic logic) in the logic developed by Brouwer, Heyting and
others (see A. S. Troelstra [1977]). Intuitionistic logic arises naturally in toposes;
it is not the result of a philosophical position on the part of those who do topos
theory, although many people interested in constructive mathematics have been
attracted to the subject.
A Heyting algebra is a lattice with some extra structure.
We denote the
inﬁmum of a and b in a lattice by a ∧b and the supremum by a ∨b. The ordering
is denoted by ≤. The maximum and minimum elements of the lattice, if they

194
5 Properties of Toposes
exist, are T and F respectively. Then a Heyting algebra is a lattice with a
minimum and an additional binary operation “→” satisfying the requirement
that for all elements a, b and c, c ≤a →b if and only if a ∧c ≤b.
This deﬁnition has a number of consequences. A Heyting algebra has a maxi-
mum element, namely F →F. The operation →has the properties that if a ≤b
then b →c ≤a →c and c →a ≤c →b; this last fact means that for ﬁxed a,
a →−is a functor (regarding the lattice as a category) which is right adjoint
to a ∧−. Thus a Heyting algebra is a lattice with minimum which is Cartesian
closed as a category.
For any element a in a Heyting algebra, one deﬁnes ¬a as a →F.
The
operation ¬ has only some of the properties of the classical “not”. For example,
a ≤¬¬a, but one cannot prove that ¬¬a ≤a, that a∨¬a = T, or the DeMorgan
laws. In the exercises, you are asked to verify these and other facts about Heyting
algebras.
There are two important types of examples of Heyting algebras.
(i) Any Boolean algebra is naturally a Heyting algebra, deﬁning a →b to be
¬a ∨b.
(ii) The lattice of open sets of any topological space X is a Heyting algebra.
Here, meet and join are intersection and union, and A →B is the interior of
(X −A) ∪B. A spxecial case of this, useful for constructing counterexamples, is
the Sierpinski space: the set S = {0, 1} with the empty set, S and {1} as the
only open sets.
The lattice of open dense subsets of a topological space, together with the
empty set, also forms a Heyting algebra in the same way.
More information on Heyting algebras may be found in Rasiowa and Sikorski
[1963], where they are called “pseudocomplemented lattices”.
The Heyting algebra structure on Ω
For an object A of a topos, intersection and union of subobjects make Sub(A)
a lattice. Both operations induce functions Sub(A) × Sub(A) −→Sub(A), thus
functions from
Hom(A, Ω) × Hom(A, Ω) ∼= Hom(A, Ω× Ω)
to Hom(A, Ω). These two functions are natural in A: Suppose X and Y are sub-
objects of B and f: A −→B. We must show that Sub(f)(X ∪Y ) = Sub(f)(X) ∪
Sub(f)(Y ) and similarly for intersection. Now Sub(f)(X) is computed by pulling
back along f.
The intersection and union are respectively a pullback and a
pushout in E (diagram 5, Section 5.5) and the pullback functor has both a left

5.6 The Heyting Algebra Structure on Ω
195
and a right adjoint by Corollary 7, Section 5.3. Thus it takes limits and colimits
in E /B to limits and colimits in E /A. Colimits in E /A are the same as colimits
in E . As for limits, if D is a diagram in E /A, a limit of D in E /A is the same as
the limit of D −→A in E , which is the sort of limit we have here. Thus Sub(f)
preserves intersection and union, as required.
Since the induced maps Hom(A, Ω× Ω) −→Hom(A, Ω) are therefore natural,
Yoneda gives us binary operations ∧: Ω× Ω−→Ωand ∨: Ω× Ω−→Ω.
The order relation and the arrow operation are obtained this way: The equal-
izer
[(B, C) | B ∩C = B] = [(B, C) | B ≤C]
of the two maps ∧and the ﬁrst projection from Ω× Ωto Ωis a subobject of
Ω× Ωand so corresponds to a pullback
1
Ω
-
≤
Ω× Ω
-
?
?
→
(1)
Because Hom(A, −) preserves pullbacks and Sub(A) ∼= Hom(A, Ω), the order
relation
≤A= {(B, C) | B ⊆C ⊆A}
on Sub(A) for any object A is then obtained by pulling back:
1
Hom(A, Ω)
-
≤A
Hom(A, Ω) × Hom(A, Ω)
-
?
?
→A
(2)
The following lemma follows immediately from the deﬁnitions.
Lemma 1.
Let x and y be elements of Ωdeﬁned on A. Let the corresponding
subobjects of A be B and C respectively. Then:
(a) x ≤y if and only if B ≤A C.
(b) The subobject corresponding to x ∧y is B ∧C.
(c) The subobject corresponding to x ∨y is B ∨C.
(d) The subobject corresponding to x →y is B →C.

196
5 Properties of Toposes
Lemma 2.
If B and C are subobjects of A, then the following are equivalent:
(e) B ≤A C
(f) B →A C = A.
Proof. B ≤A C is equivalent to x ≤y by Lemma 1(a). That is equivalent to
x →y = true (diagram (1)), which is equivalent to B →C = A by Lemma 1(d).
Lemma 3.
If B, C and D are subobjects of A, then
(g) D ∧(B →A C) = D ∧B →D D ∧C, and
(h) D ≤B →A C if and only if D ∧B ≤D D ∧C.
Proof. Intersecting by D is pulling back along the inclusion of D in A, and a
pullback of a pullback is a pullback; that proves (a). By Lemma 2, D ≤A B →A C
if and only if D ∧(B →A C) = D. By (a) and Lemma 1 applied to Sub(D), that
is true if and only if D ∧B ≤D D ∧C.
From now on, we will drop the subscript A on the relation ≤A and the oper-
ation →A on Sub(A).
Theorem 4.
For any object A in a topos E , Sub(A) is a Heyting algebra with
the operations deﬁned above.
Proof. The minimum is evidently the subobject 0 −→A. Sub(A) is a lattice, so
all that is necessary is to prove that D ≤B →C if and only if D ∧B ≤C. If
D ≤B →C, then D∧B ≤D∧C ≤C by Lemma 2(b). Conversely, if D∧B ≤C,
then clearly D ∧B ≤D ∧C because ∧is the greatest lower bound operation;
then the result follows from Lemma 2(b) again.
Corollary 5. Ωis a Heyting algebra, with minimum the unique element 0 −→Ω
and ∧, ∨and →as deﬁned above.
Proof. This follows immediately from Lemma 1.
When the Heyting algebra in Ωis that of a Boolean algebra, we call the topos
Boolean. This is equivalent to saying that every subobject of an object has a
complement.
The category of sheaves over a topological space is a topos whose subobject
classiﬁer is the sheaf whose value at an open set U is the set of open subsets
of U, with restriction given by intersection. (Exercise 4 of Section 2.3.) The
natural Heyting algebra structure on that sheaf is the Heyting algebra structure
of Corollary 5.

5.6 The Heyting Algebra Structure on Ω
197
Exercises 5.6
1. Prove the following facts about Heyting algebras:
(a) F →F is the maximum of the lattice.
(b) If a ≤b then b →c ≤a →c and c →a ≤c →b.
(c) a →b = T if and only if a ≤b.
(d) b ≤a →b.
(e) a ∧(a →b) = a ∧b. Hence a ∧(a →b) ≤b.
(f) a ∧¬a = F.
(g) a ≤¬¬a.
(h) ¬a = ¬¬¬a
(i) a ≤b implies ¬b ≤¬a
2. Show that a ﬁnite lattice can be made into a Heyting algebra by a suitable
choice of “→” if and only if it is distributive. Show also that every chain is a
Heyting algebra. What is the double negation of an element in the latter case?
3. (Freyd) Show that the category of Heyting algebras is a Mal’cev category:
that means that there is a ternary operation µ(a, b, c) with the properties that
µ(a, a, c) = c and µ(a, b, b) = a. To deﬁne µ, ﬁrst deﬁne
a ↔b = (a →b) ∧(b →a)
and then let
µ(a, b, c) = ((a ↔b) ↔c) ∧(a ↔(b ↔c))

6
Permanence Properties of Toposes
This chapter is concerned with certain constructions on a topos which yield a
topos. We have already seen one such construction: a slice E /A of a topos E is
a topos. The most important construction in this chapter is that of the category
of “sheaves” in a topos relative to a “topology”. When the topos is a category of
presheaves on a space and the topology is the “canonical” one, the “sheaves” are
ordinary sheaves. The category of sheaves in a topos (relative to any topology,
canonical or not) turns out to be a topos.
The concept of topology is an abstraction of the concept of all coverings, which
at one level of abstraction is a “Grothendieck topology” and at a higher level is
a “topology on a topos”. An important connection with logic is signalled by the
fact that the double negation operator on a topos is a topology in this sense.
We ﬁnd it convenient here to start with the more abstract (but easier to
understand) idea of a topology on a topos ﬁrst. Later in the chapter we talk about
Grothendieck topologies and prove Giraud’s Theorem (Theorem 1 of Section 6.8)
which characterizes categories of sheaves for a Grothendieck topology.
We will also consider categories of coalgebras for a left exact cotriple in a topos,
and of algebras for an idempotent left exact triple. Both these categories are also
toposes (the latter are actually sheaves for a topology) and the constructions
yield an important factorization theorem (Section 6.5) for geometric morphisms.
6.1 Topologies
A topology on a category with pullbacks is a natural endomorphism j of the
contravariant subobject functor which is
(i) idempotent: j ◦j = j,
(ii) inﬂationary: A0 ⊆jA0 for any subobject A0 of an object A (where we
write jA0 for jA(A0) as we will frequently in the sequel), and
(iii) order-preserving: if A0 and A1 are subobjects of A and A0 ⊆A1, then
jA0 ⊆jA1.
See Exercise 1 for the independence of (ii) and (iii).
198

6.1 Topologies
199
When j is a topology on a category in which subobjects are representable
by an object Ω, then using the Yoneda Lemma, j induces an endomorphism of
Ωwhich is idempotent, inﬂationary and order-preserving, and conversely such
an endomorphism induces a topology on the category. A topology in this sense
on Ωcan be given an equational deﬁnition in terms of intersection and truth
(Exercise 4).
A subobject A0 of an object A is j-closed in A if jA(A0) = A0 and j-dense
in A if jA(A0) = A. Observe that jA(A0) is j-closed by idempotence, and A
is j-dense in A because j is inﬂationary. When j is understood, we often write
“dense ” and “closed”.
A topology is superﬁcially like a closure operator on a topological space. How-
ever, it does not preserve ﬁnite unions (in fact we will see later that it does
preserve ﬁnite intersections) and to this extent the terminology “dense” and
“closed” is misleading. However, it is standard in the literature, so we retain
it.
Let’s start with some examples.
(a) This example shows how the pasting property of a sheaf motivated the def-
inition of topology. Let X be a topological space and E the category of presheaves
(functors from the opposite of the open set lattice to Set) on X. Let F be a
presheaf. Deﬁne an endofunction jF of the set of subfunctors of F by requir-
ing that for an open set U of X and a subfunctor G of F, jF(G)(U) is the set
of elements x ∈FU for which there is a cover {Ui −→U} such that for all i,
x|Ui ∈G(Ui).
It is easy to see that if U ⊆V and y ∈jF(G)(V ) then the restriction of y in
FU is in jF(G)(U), so that jF(G) is really a subfunctor of F. Then the maps jF
are the components of a natural endomorphism of the subobject functor which
is a topology on E .
To verify this requires proving that j is a natural transformation and that it
satisﬁes (i)-(iii) of the deﬁnition of topology. We prove the hardest, naturality,
at the end of this section and leave the rest to you.
(b) In any topos, ¬¬ is a topology (Exercise 5). The proof is implicit in the
results and exercises to Section 5.6. We will see that when a topos is regarded as a
theory, then the sheaves for the double-negation topology force a Booleanization
of the theory. Those familiar with logic should note that the word “force” is used
advisedly (see Tierney [1976]).
(c) In any topos, if U )−→1, there is a “least destructive” topology j for which
j0 = U, namely that which for a subobject A0 )−→A has jA(A0) = A0 ∪A × U
(note A × U )−→A × 1 = A). This has the property that if U ≤V ≤1 then V is
closed in 1.

200
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
(d) Topologies exist in categories which are not toposes, too.
There is a
topology on the category of Abelian groups which assigns to each subgroup B of
an Abelian group A the subgroup
{a ∈A | there is a positive integer n for which na ∈B}
This subgroup is the kernel of the composite
A −→A/B −→
A/B
t(A/B)
where t denotes the torsion subgroup.
We should think of jA(B) as the set of all elements of A which are “almost
in” B. Equivalently, it may be thought of as elements which are “almost zero”
mod B. Topologies on additive categories are often called torsion theories .
Properties of topologies
We state here some technical lemmas which will be used many times later.
Lemma 1.
If
‘500
A0
A
-
-
B0
B
-
-
?
?
f
(1)
is a pullback, then there is a (necessarily unique) arrow jB(B0) −→jA(A0) for
which
jA(A0)
A
-
-
jB(B0)
B
-
-
?
?
f
(2)
is also a pullback.
Proof. Follow A0 around the two paths of the following diagram.
Sub A
Sub B
-
Sub A
Sub B
-
?
jA
?
jB
Exercise 2 gives a converse to Lemma 1.

6.1 Topologies
201
Lemma 2.
Let C be a category with a topology j, A be an object of C and
B, C, D be subobjects of A. Then
(a) If C ⊆B, then jB(C) = B ∩jA(C).
(b) If C ⊆B, then jB(C) ⊆jA(C).
(c) B ⊆jA(B) is dense and jA(B) ⊆A is closed.
(d) The “diagonal ﬁll-in property” of a factorization system is satisﬁed: if
B
A
-
-
D
C
-
-
?
?
?
?
(3)
is a commutative square of monos with the top arrow dense and the bottom arrow
closed, then C ⊆B.
(e) If f: A′ −→A is any map in C and B is dense (resp. closed) in A, then
f −1(B) is dense (resp. closed) in A′.
(f) If B and C are both dense (resp. closed) in A then B ∩C is dense (resp.
closed) in A.
(g) If C ⊆B ⊆A and both inclusions are dense (resp. closed), then C is
dense (resp. closed) in A.
(h) jA(B) is characterized uniquely by the facts that B is dense in jA(B) and
jA(B) is closed in A.
Proof. (a) is a special case of Lemma 1 (if you ever get stuck trying to prove
something about a topology, try using the fact that a topology is a natural trans-
formation) and (b) is immediate from (a). (c) is immediate from (a) applied to
B ⊆jA(B). For (d), apply j in the diagram to get
B
jA(B)
-
- =
D
jC(D)
-
-
?
?
?
?
A
-
-
C
-
- =
?
?
from which the conclusion is immediate. The “dense” half of (e) is a special case
of Lemma 1, and the other half is true in any factorization system (Exercise 2 of
Section 5.5). Exactly the same is the case for (f), while both parts of (g) are true
in any factorization system. Finally (h) follows from the uniqueness of image in a
factorization system. The factorization system is on the category with the same
objects as C and the monos as maps.

202
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Proposition 3.
Let B and C be subobjects of A. Then jA(B ∩C) = jA(B) ∩
jA(C).
Proof. It follows from Lemma 2(f) that B ∩C is dense in jA(B)∩jA(C) and that
jA(B) ∩jA(C) is closed in A. By Lemma 2(h), this characterizes jA(B ∩C).
Proposition 4.
In a category with pullbacks which has a topology j, suppose the
left vertical arrow in the following commutative square is a dense mono, and the
right vertical arrow is a closed mono.
B
A
-
B0
Ao
-
?
?
?
?
(4)
Then there is a map from B to A0 making both triangles commute.
Proof. The inverse image (pullback) of A0 is closed in B by Lemma 2(e) and
dense because it contains B0, so that the inverse image is B. The conclusion now
follows easily.
Naturality of j for spatial sheaves
Here we outline the proof that the map j of Example (a) is natural. We must
prove that if F and F ′ are presheaves and λ: F −→F ′ is a natural transformation,
then
Sub F ′
Sub F ′
-
jF ′
Sub F
Sub F
-
jF
6
Sub λ
6
Sub λ
(5)
commutes.
If G′ is a subfunctor of F ′, then G = Sub λ(G′) if for each open U, GU is the
inverse image of G′U along λU. This is because limits are constructed pointwise
in a functor category like E .
Using this notation, it is necessary to show that for every open U, the inverse
image of jF ′(G′)(U) along λU is jF(G)(U). To see this, suppose y ∈jF ′(G′)(U)
and λU(x) = y for some x ∈FU. Then on some cover {Ui} of U, y|Ui ∈G′Ui for
every i. Then by deﬁnition, x|Ui ∈GUi and so x ∈jF(G)(U). Conversely, it is
clear that if x ∈jF(G)(U) then λ(x) ∈jF ′(G′)(U).

6.2 Sheaves for a Topology
203
Exercises 6.1
1. Find an idempotent endomorphism of the three element chain which is in-
ﬂationary but not order-preserving and one which is order-preserving but not
inﬂationary.
2. Suppose that for each object A of a topos there is an idempotent, inﬂationary,
order-preserving map jA: Sub A −→Sub A with the property that whenever
B0
B
-
-
A0
A
-
-
?
?
is a pullback, then there is an arrow jA(A0) −→jB(B0) for which
jB(B0)
B
-
-
jA(A0)
A
-
-
?
?
is also a pullback.
Show that these functions constitute a natural endomorphism of P and so
induce a topology on the topos.
3. Prove that the natural transformation j of Example (a) is a topology.
4. Prove that a topology on a category in which subobjects are representable can
be given as an endomorphism j of the representing object which is idempotent,
takes true to true, and commutes with intersection.
5. Use the results and exercises of Section 5.6 to show that there is a topology j
on any topos such that for any subobject A0 ⊆A, jA0 = ¬¬A0.
6.2 Sheaves for a Topology
In this section we deﬁne what it means for an object in a topos to be a sheaf for
a topology on the topos, and construct an “associated sheaf functor”.

204
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Separated objects
Let j be a topology on a topos.
An object A is j-separated (or simply
“separated” if j is understood) if A is a closed subobject of A×A via the diagonal.
We will form the separated quotient of an object A.
Proposition 1.
Let R(A) be the closure of A in A × A. Then for any object
B, an element (f, g) ∈B RA if and only if the equalizer of f and g is dense in B.
Proof. If B0 is that equalizer then the outer square and hence by Lemma 1 of
Section 6.1 the right hand square of
A
R(A)
-
-
B0
jB(B0)
-
-
?
?
A × A
-
-
B
-
-
?
?
(f, g)
are pullbacks. The conclusion is now evident.
Corollary 2.
R(A) is an equivalence relation on A.
Proof. Reﬂexivity and symmetry are clear. If (f, g) and (g, h) are elements of
R(A) deﬁned on B then the equalizer of f and h contains the intersection of those
of f and g and g and h, each of which is dense. But by Lemma 2(f) of 6.1 the
intersection of two dense subobjects is dense.
In Abelian groups we form the torsion-free quotient by factoring out the ele-
ments which are “almost zero”. In analogy with this construction, we will form
the separated quotient of A by identifying pairs of elements which are “almost
equal”. Thus we form the quotient
R(A) −→
−→A −→→S(A)
which we can do because equivalence relations in a topos are eﬀective. Note that
A is separated if and only if A = SA.
Proposition 3.
S(A) is j-separated. If A )−→B, then S(A) )−→S(B).
Proof. The diagram
SA
SA × SA
-
-
RA
A × A
-
-
?
?

6.2 Sheaves for a Topology
205
is a pullback (standard because RA is the kernel pair of A −→SA). It follows
from the fact that the pullback of an epi is an epi that the image of RA in SA×SA
is the diagonal SA. If we apply j we get the pullback
j(SA × SA)(SA)
SA × SA
-
-
RA = j(A × A)(RA)
A × A
-
-
?
?
and the vertical arrows are epic so that j(SA × SA)(SA) = SA. Thus SA is
separated. As for the second assertion, when A )−→B is monic, the diagram
B
B × B
-
A
A × A
-
?
?
?
?
is a pullback. Then apply j to get a pullback
RB
B × B
-
RA
A × A
-
?
?
?
?
Since RA and RB are equivalence relations on A and B, respectively, it follows
from Exercise 4 that SA −→SB is mono.
Sheaves for a topology
An object in a topos is absolutely closed for a topology j if it is j-closed
as a subobject of any separated object. An object A in a topos is a sheaf for a
topology j if it is j-separated and absolutely closed.
For any object A, let FA denote the object S(j(PSA)(SA)) (using the sin-
gleton map to include SA in PSA). We will show that FA is a sheaf and that
F is the left adjoint of the inclusion of the full subcategory of sheaves. F is the
associated sheaf functor (or sheaﬁﬁcation).

206
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Proposition 4.
If A is separated, the map A −→FA is a j-dense mono. If A
is a sheaf, then A −→FA is an isomorphism.
Proof. Let A be separated.
A is included in j(PA)(A), so by Proposition 3,
SA = A is included in S(j(PA)(A)) which is FA because A is separated.
To show that the inclusion is dense, let B = j(PA)(A) and let C be the inverse
image of A along the map B −→FA, as in the diagram
A
C
-
A
FA
-
B = j(PA)(A)
-
?
?
?
?
Apply j to this diagram using Lemma 1 of Section 6.1 and the top row becomes
the identity on B so the bottom row must also become the identity because the
vertical arrows are epic.
Lemma 5.
Let B0 −→B be a j-dense inclusion. Then any map B0 −→A can
be extended to a map B −→FA.
Proof. In the diagram
SA
PSA
B0
B
-
-
(dense)
?
A
?
?
j(SA)
-
-
-
(closed)
       	
FA = S(j(SA))
?
(in which j means j(PSA)), the rightmost vertical arrow exists because power
objects are injective (Exercise 3 of Section 2.1) so the diagonal arrow exists by
Lemma 2(d) of Section 6.1.
Proposition 6. Two maps to a separated object which agree on a dense subobject
are equal.

6.2 Sheaves for a Topology
207
Proof. Consider the diagram
A
A × A
-
-
(diagonal)
B0
B
-
-
(dense)
?
?
where the right arrow is induced by the given arrows. By Lemma 2(d) of Sec-
tion 6.1, that arrow factors through the diagonal, as required.
Proposition 7.
Let A be separated and B0 −→B be a j-dense inclusion. Then
any map B0 −→FA can be extended to a unique map B −→FA.
Proof. Consider the diagram
A
FA
-
C
B0
-
?
?
B
-
(dense)
where the square is a pullback. The composite along the top is a dense inclusion
by Proposition 4, and the fact that the composite of dense maps is dense. The
requisite map from B to FA exists by Lemma 5. That map and the map from
B0 to FA agree on C and so are equal by Proposition 6. The uniqueness follows
similarly.
The following proposition shows that the essence of being a sheaf has survived
our process of abstraction.
Proposition 8.
(a) A separated object A is a sheaf if and only if whenever B0 −→B is dense
then any map B0 −→A has an extension to a map B −→A.
(b) An arbitrary object A is a sheaf if and only if whenever B0 −→B is dense
then any map B0 −→A has a unique extension to a map B −→A.
Remark: It follows readily from this proposition that if j is the topology of
Example (a) of Section 6.1, then the category of sheaves on X is the same as the
category of j-sheaves in the presheaf category.
Proof. If A is a sheaf, these follow from Propositions 4 and 7.

208
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Now suppose that the map extension condition holds. Let d0, d1: RA −→A be
the kernel pair of the map A −→SA. The equalizer of d0 and d1 is the diagonal of
A×A, which is dense in RA. Then by the version of the map extension condition
in (b), d0 = d1; hence A is separated.
Suppose m: A −→B is monic with B separated. Since any subobject of a
separated object is separated (Exercise 5), we may replace B by the j-closure of
A and suppose without loss of generality that A )−→B is dense. The diagram
A
B
-
-
A
B
-
-
?
?
in which the vertical arrows are identities has a diagonal ﬁll-in making the upper
triangle commute given by the map extension condition. As for the lower triangle,
it commutes when restricted to the dense subobject A. With B separated, this
implies that the lower triangle commutes, whence A = B, as required.
Theorem 9.
For any object A in a topos, FA is a sheaf, and F is a functor
which is left adjoint to the inclusion of the full subcategory of sheaves in the topos.
Proof. FA is clearly separated; that it is a sheaf then follows from Propositions 7
and 8.
Any map A −→B to a sheaf gives a unique map SA −→B, which by Propo-
sition 7 extends to a unique map FA −→FB = B; this gives the adjunction.
To show that F is a functor, it is suﬃcient to use pointwise construction of
adjoints (Section 1.9).
Exercises 6.2
1. Give an example of a presheaf which is j-closed in the sense of Example (a)
of Section 6.1 which is nevertheless not a sheaf.
2. Show that the product of dense monos is dense and the product of closed
monos is closed.
3. Suppose B0 −→B is a j-dense inclusion with B j-separated. Prove that a map
B −→A whose restriction to B0 is monic is itself monic.

6.3 Sheaves form a topos
209
4. Show that in a serially commutative diagram
E′
A′
E
A
?
?
?
?
B′
-
B
-
?
-
-
-
-
with both rows kernel pair/coequalizers and E = E′ ×A′ (A × A), then B −→B′
is monic.
5.
(a) Show that if A −→B is monic and B is separated then A is separated.
(b) Show that if A −→B is a dense mono where B is a sheaf then B = FA.
6. Show that if j is the topology of Example (iii) of Section 6.1 and E is the
category of sheaves on a topological space, then Shj(E ) is the category of sheaves
on the complement of the open set U.
7. Show that S is the object map of a functor which is left adjoint to the inclusion
of separated objects.
6.3 Sheaves form a topos
The full subcategory of sheaves for a topology jin a topos E is denoted Ej. In
this section we will prove that Ej is a topos. We will also prove that F, which
we now know is left adjoint to inclusion, is left exact, so that the inclusion is a
geometric morphism.
The power object for sheaves
Using Yoneda, let τA: PA −→PA denote the map induced by the natural
transformation j(A × −): Sub(A × −) −→Sub(A × −). Then evidently τA is
an idempotent endomorphism of PA. Let PjA denote the splitting object—the
equalizer of τA and the identity. Then for any object B, Hom(B, PjA) consists
of the j-closed subobjects of A × B.
Proposition 1.
Let B0 )−→B be a j-dense mono. Then for any object A,
pulling back along A × B0 −→A × B gives a one to one correspondence between
j-closed subobjects of A × B and j-closed subobjects of A × B0.
Proof. Since A × B0 is dense in A × B, it is suﬃcient to prove this when A = 1.
If B1 )−→B0 is j-closed, then B2 = jB(B1) )−→B is a j-closed subobject of B.

210
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Lemma 2(a) of Section 6.1 says that B0 ∩jB(B1) = jB0(B1), which is B1 since B1
is closed in B0. If B3 ∩B0 = B1 also, we would have two diﬀerent factorizations
of B1 )−→B as dense followed by closed, which is impossible by Exercise 2 of
Section 5.5.
Proposition 2.
PjA is a j-sheaf.
Proof. We use the characterization of sheaves of Proposition 8 of Section 6.2,
which requires us to show that when B0 is a dense subobject of B, the map
Hom(B, PjA) )−→Hom(B0, PjA)
is an isomorphism. The left side (respectively the right side) represents the set
of j-closed subobjects of A × B (respectively A × B0). By Proposition 1, those
two sets are in bijective correspondence via pullback.
Theorem 3. Ej is a topos in which, for a sheaf A, PjA represents the subobjects.
Proof. It follows from the diagonal ﬁll-in property (Lemma 2(d) of Section 6.1)
that a subobject of a sheaf is a sheaf if and only if it is j-closed. Thus for a sheaf
A, PjA represents the subsheaves of A. Finite limits exist because the inclusion
of the subcategory has a left adjoint.
Exactness of F
We show here that the functor F is exact, which is equivalent to showing that
the inclusion of Ej into E is a geometric morphism. We begin with:
Proposition 4.
The separated reﬂector S preserves products and monos.
Proof. That S preserves monos is Proposition 3 of Section 6.2.
The product of dense monos is dense (Exercise 2 of Section 6.2). It follows that
for an object A, A×A −→RA×RA is dense, so that RA×RA ⊆R(A×A). Since
products commute with reﬂexive coequalizers, we have the following commutative
diagram, in which both rows are coequalizers:
R(A × A)
A × A
RA × RA
A × A
?
?
=
?
?
S(A × A)
-
SA × SA
-
=
?
-
-
-
-
Since A×A is dense in RA×RA and RA×RA is closed in A×A×A×A (Exercise 2
of Section 6.2), it follows from Lemma 2(h) of Section 6.1 that RA × RA =
R(A × A). The required isomorphism follows immediately from the uniqueness
of coequalizers.

6.4 Left exact cotriples
211
Proposition 5.
F preserves products and monos.
Proof. By the preceding proposition it is enough to show that F restricted to the
category of separated objects preserves products and monos. That it preserves
monos is obvious. Now let A and B be separated. It is clear from Exercise 2 of
Section 6.2 that A × B is dense in FA × FB and that the latter is a sheaf. It
follows from that and from Exercise 5 of Section 6.2 that FA × FA is F(A × B).
Theorem 6.
F is left exact.
Proof. F is a left adjoint so preserves cokernel pairs. The theorem then follows
from Proposition 5 above and Theorem 6 of Section 5.5.
Remark. S is not usually left exact. This shows that the full exactness prop-
erties of a topos are required in this theorem. Various other combinations of
exactness properties have been proposed as a non-additive analog of a category
being Abelian (sets of properties which taken together with additivity would im-
ply abelianness) but none of these proposals would appear to allow the proof of
a theorem like Theorem 6 of Section 5.5.
Let E and F be toposes. Recall from Section 2.2 that a functor u: E −→F
is a geometric morphism if u has a left adjoint u∗and u∗is left exact. We will
see in Section 7.3 that morphisms of sites induce geometric morphisms. At this
point we wish merely to observe that the left adjoint F constructed above is left
exact, so that:
Corollary 7.
If j is a topology on the topos E and Ej the category of j-sheaves,
then the inclusion Ej −→E is a geometric morphism.
6.4 Left exact cotriples
A cotriple G = (G, ϵ, δ) in which G is a left exact functor is called a left exact
cotriple. In this section, we will prove:
Theorem 1. Let E be a topos and G a left exact cotriple in E . Then the category
EG of coalgebras of G is also a topos.
The proof requires a sequence of propositions. In these propositions, E and G
satisfy the requirements of the theorem. Note that G, being left exact, preserves
pullbacks and products.
It is not hard to show that when a cotriple is left exact we can speak of a
subobject of a coalgebra being a subcoalgebra without ambiguity. See Exercise 1.

212
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Proposition 2.
Let (A, α) be a coalgebra for G and B a subobject of A. Then
B is a subcoalgebra if and only if the inverse image of GB along α is B.
Proof. If the inverse image of GB along α is B, let the coalgebra structure β: B
−→GB be the restriction of α to B. This satisﬁes the required coalgebra identities
because G2B −→G2A is monic. To say that inclusion is a coalgebra map requires
this diagram
GB
GA
-
Gi
B
A
-
-
i
?
β
?
α
(1)
to commute, but in fact it is a pullback by assumption.
Conversely, suppose we are given β for which (1) commutes. We must show
that for any (variable) element α: T −→A of A for which α(a) ∈GB is actually
in B. This follows from the fact that a = ϵA(α(a)) (where ϵ is the counit of the
cotriple) which is an element of B because a natural transformation between left
exact functors takes an element of a subobject to an element of the corresponding
subobject.
Now let (A, α) and (b, β) be coalgebras. Let
Φ(α, β): Sub(A × B) −→Sub(A × B)
be deﬁned by requiring that for a subobject C of A × B,
GC
GA × GB
-
-
Φ(C)
A × B
-
-
?
?
α × β
(2)
where we write Φ(C) for Φ(α, β)(C), is a pullback.
Proposition 3.
Let (A, α) and (B, β) be coalgebras and C a subobject of A×B.
Then ΦC is a subcoalgebra of A × B. It is the largest subcoalgebra contained in
C; in particular, C is a subcoalgebra if and only if C = ΦC.
Proof. Since α × β is a coalgebra structure on A × B (Exercise 3), it suﬃces by
Proposition 2 to show that we can ﬁll in the upper left diagonal arrow in the

6.4 Left exact cotriples
213
diagram below so that the diagram commutes.
GC
GA × GB
-
Φ(C)
A × B
-
-
?
?
α × β
α × β
     	
δ
     
δA × δB
@
@
@
@
@
I
G2C
G2A × G2B
-
G(Φ(C))
GA × GB
-
-
?
?
Gα × Gβ
This follows immediately from the fact that all squares in the diagram commute
and the inner square is a pullback. The rest is left as Exercise 4.
Proposition 4.
Φ(α, β) is natural with respect to maps f: (B′, β′) −→(B, β) in
EG.
Proof. Naturality is equivalent to the requirement that the upper square in the
diagram below must commute. Here, C is a subobject of A × B and C′ is the
inverse image of C along A × f.
GC′
GA × GB′
-
Φ(C′)
A × B′
-
-
?
?
α × β′
@
@
@@
R
A × f
    	
    
GA × Gf
@
@
@
@
I
GC
GA × GB
-
Φ(C)
A × B
-
-
?
?
α × β

214
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
The inner and outer squares are pullbacks by deﬁnition. The bottom square is
G applied to the pullback in the deﬁnition of the subobject functor and hence
is a pullback because G is left exact. It follows that the upper square composed
with the inner square is a pullback. Since the inner square is too, so is the top
one, which therefore commutes.
Let R: E −→EG be the right adjoint to U: EG −→E .
Corollary 5.
There is a map Φ(α): RPA −→RPA for which
Hom((B, β), Φ(α)) = Φ(α, β)
Proof. Yoneda.
We can now prove Theorem 1.
Finite limits exist in EG because they are
created by the underlying functor U: EG −→E . To prove this you use the same
sort of easy argument as in proving Exercise 3.
The power object P(Aα) for a coalgebra (A, α) is deﬁned to be the equalizer
of Φ(α) and the identity map on RPA. Since
Sub(A × B) ∼= Hom(B, PA) ∼= Hom((B, β), RPA)
the theorem follows from Proposition 3 and Corollary 5.
Observe that R is a geometric morphism. Its left adjoint is easily seen to be
faithful, as well. We will see later that any geometric morphism with a faithful
left adjoint arises from a cotriple in this way.
A nice application of the theorem is a new proof, much simpler than that
in Section 2.1, that the functor category SetC is a topos for any small category
C . This follows from two observations: (i) If S is the set of objects of C , then
SetS = Set/S, which is very easily seen to be a topos. (ii) The map SetC −→SetS
induced by the forgetful functor is adjoint tripleable (Section 3.7), hence SetC is
equivalent to the category of coalgebras of an (evidently) left exact cotriple on
Set/S.
Exercises 6.4
1. Let G = (G, ϵ, δ) be a left exact cotriple and (A, α) be a G-coalgebra. Show
that a subobject A0 of A “is” a subcoalgebra if and only if there is a commutative
square
GA0
GA
-
A0
A
-
-
?
?

6.5 Left exact triples
215
where the right arrow is the coalgebra structure map, in which case that square
is a pullback. Conclude that there is at most one subcoalgebra structure on a
subobject of an algebra, namely the left arrow in this square.
2. Show that if F and G are product-preserving functors, λ: F −→G a natural
transformation, then for any objects A and B for which A×B exists, λ(A×B) =
λA × λB.
3. Show that if (G, ϵ, δ) is a left exact cotriple on a category with products and
(A, α) and (B, β) are coalgebras, then so is (A × B, α × β).
4.
Verify the third sentence of Proposition 3.
(Hint: Follow the map Φ(C)
−→GC by ϵC.)
6.5 Left exact triples
A left exact triple in a topos induces a topology on the topos for which the
objects of the form TA are sheaves. We will use this construction and the topos of
coalgebras of a cotriple discussed in the preceding section to obtain a facotrization
theorem for geometric morphisms.
Given a left exact triple T = (T, ηµ) in a topos E , deﬁne for each object A a
function jA: Sub A −→Sub A in this way: for a subobject A0 of A, jA(A0) is the
inverse image of TA0 along ηA. In other words,
TA0
TA
-
-
jA(A0)
A
-
-
?
?
ηA
(1)
must be a pullback. (Note the lower arrow, hence the upper, must be monic
because T is left exact.)
We will prove that these maps jA form a topology on E . The following lemmas
assume that T is a left exact triple, E is a category with ﬁnite limits, and j is
deﬁned as above.
Lemma 1.
Whenever
B0
B
-
-
A0
A
-
-
?
?
(2)

216
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
is a pullback, then so is
jB(B0)
B
-
-
jA(A0)
A
-
-
?
?
(3)
Proof. This can be read oﬀthe following square in much the same way that the
naturality of Φ was deduced from (3) of Section 6.4.
TA0
TA
-
jA(A0)
A
-
?
?
@
@
@
R
   	
   
@
@
@
I
TB0
TB
-
jB(B0)
B
-
?
?
(4)
In this square, the inner and outer squares are pullbacks by deﬁnition and the
bottom square because T is left exact.
Lemma 2.
A0 ⊆jA(A0) for any subobject A0 of an object A.
Proof. Use the universal property of pullbacks on ηA0 and the inclusion of A0 in
A.
Lemma 3.
For any subobject A0 of an object A, TjA(A0) = jTA(TA0) = TA0.
Proof. To prove that TjA(A0) = TA0, apply T to (1) and follow it by µ, getting
TA
TTA
-
TηA
TjA(A0)
TTA0
-
?
?
?
TA
-
µA
TA0
-
µA0
?
?
(5)
The right vertical map from TA to TA is the identity, so TjA(A0) −→TTA0
−→TA0 −→TA is the inclusion. Cancelling the top and bottom arrows then
shows that the left vertical arrow is an inclusion. This shows that TjA(A0) ⊆
TA0, while the opposite inclusion is evident from Lemma 2.

6.5 Left exact triples
217
To show that jTA(TA0) = TA0, consider the following similar diagram.
TA
TTA
-
ηTA
TA0
TTA0
-
ηTA0
?
?
?
TA
-
µTA
TA0
-
µA0
?
?
(6)
In the same way as for (5), the left and right vertical arrows from top to bottom
are identities. This means the outer square is a pullback, so by Exercise 12 of
Section 2.2, the upper square is too, as required.
Lemma 4.
If A0 )−→A1 )−→A then jA(A0) ⊆jA(A1).
Proof. Easy consequence of the universal property of pullbacks.
Lemma 5.
A0 )−→A is j-dense if and only if there is an arrow from A to TA0
making I rotated the following, to be compatible
A
TA
-
ηA
A0
TA0
-
ηA0
?
?
?
?
    
(7)
commute.
Proof. If jA(A0) = A, then there is a pullback diagram of the form
A
TA
-
‘ηA
A
TA0
-
?
?
id
?
?
(8)
(Notice the subtle point here: jA(A0) is deﬁned as a subobject of A, which
means that if it equals A the top arrow must be the identity). This gives the
diagonal arrow in (7) and makes the lower triangle commute; but then the upper
one does too since the bottom arrow is monic.
Conversely, if there is such a diagonal arrow, taking it as the left arrow in (8)
is easily seen to make (8) a pullback, as required.

218
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Theorem 6. Given a left exact triple T in a topos E , the maps jA deﬁned above
form a topology on E for which each object of the form TA is a j-sheaf.
Proof. That j is a natural transformation follows from Lemma 1 and Exercise 5 of
Section 2.3. Lemma 2 shows that j is inﬂationary, Lemma 3 that it is idempotent
(because the diagrams corresponding to (1) for jA and jjA become the same) and
Lemma 4 that it is order-preserving.
We use Proposition 8 of Section 6.2 to show that TA is a sheaf. Assume that
B0 is a dense subobject of an object B and f: B0 −→TA is given. We must ﬁnd
a unique extension B −→TA. This follows from the following diagram, in which
g is the arrow given by Lemma 5.
g@@
R
B0
B
  	
TB0
?
ηB0
TTA
-
Tf
TA
-
f
6
µA
?
ηTA
(9)
The required map is µA ◦Tf ◦g. It is straightforward to show that it is the
unique map which gives f when preceded by the inclusion of B0 in B.
Factorization of geometric morphisms
Now suppose that U = U∗: E ′ −→E is a geometric morphism with inverse
image map U ∗. Like any adjoint pair, U determines a triple T = U∗◦U ∗, η, µ)
on E . Let j be its topology induced as in Theorem 6, and Ej the category of
j-sheaves.
Proposition 7.
For any object A of E ′, UA is a j-sheaf.
Proof. We again use Proposition 8 of Section 6.2. Suppose that B0 )−→B is
dense and f: B0 −→UA. We get a diagram very much like (9):
g@@
R
B0
B
  	
TB0
?
ηB0
TUA
-
Tf
UA
-
f
6
UϵA
?
ηTUA
(10)

6.5 Left exact triples
219
Here, u is given by Lemma 5 and UϵA◦ηUA = id by Exercise 15 of Section 1.9.
It follows that UϵA ◦Tf ◦u is the required arrow.
We now have a factorization of the given geometric morphism through Ej into
two geometric morphisms.
E ′
E
Ej
V ∗
     	
F
@
@
@
@
@
I
V∗
     
incl
@
@
@
@@
R
-
U∗

U ∗
Here, V∗is U∗regarded as going into Ej and V ∗is U ∗composed with inclusion.
Theorem 8.
V ∗is cotripleable.
Proof. V ∗is left exact by assumption, and so preserves all equalizers (and they
exist because Ej is a topos). So all we need to show is that it reﬂects isomorphisms.
Suppose f: A −→B in Ej is such that V ∗(f) is an isomorphism.
In the
following diagram, ∆is the diagonal map, T ′ = V∗◦V ∗, and d0 and d1 are the
projections from the ﬁber product. All the vertical maps are components of the
unit η corresponding to the adjunction of V ∗and V∗.
T ′A
T ′A ×T ′B T ′A
-
T ′(∆)
A
A ×B A
-
-
∆
?
?
T ′A
A
-
d0
-
d1
-
T ′d0
-
T ′d1
T ′B
-
T ′f
B
-
f
?
?
The composite across the top is f and T ′f is an isomorphism by assumption,
so T ′d0 = T ′d1. This means T ′(∆) is an isomorphism. But A is a j-sheaf, so it
is j-separated, meaning the left square is a pullback. (Note that as far as objects
of Ej are concerned, T ′ is the triple determined by U and its left adjoint). That
means that ∆is an isomorphism, so f is monic. That means that by the same
argument the right square is a pullback, so f is an isomorphism.
Thus every sheaf category in a topos is the category of coalgebras for a left
exact cotriple, and every geometric morphism is the composite of the cofree map
for a left exact cotriple followed by the inclusion of its category of coalgebras as
a sheaf category in the codomain topos.

220
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Exercises 6.5
1. Use Lemma 3 to give a direct proof that any object of the form TA is separated.
2. If j is a topology on a topos E , the inclusion of the category of sheaves in E
and its left adjoint the sheaﬁﬁcation functor F given by Theorem 9 of Section 6.2
produce a triple T = (T, η, µ) in E .
(a) Show that µ is an isomorphism. (A triple for which µ is an isomorphism
is said to be idempotent ).
(b) Show that the topology induced by that triple is j.
3. Show that the Kleisli and Eilenberg-Moore categories of an idempotent triple
are equivalent.
6.6 Categories in a Topos
We will deﬁne category objects in a category E with ﬁnite limits by commuta-
tive diagrams as in Section 1.1. Functors between such category objects have
a straightforward deﬁnition.
What is more interesting is that functor from a
category object C in E to E itself may be deﬁned even though E is not itself a
category object in E . It turns out (as in Set) that the category of such E -valued
functors is a topos when E is a topos.
Category objects
A category object in E is C = (C, C1, d0, d1, u, c), where C is the object of
objects, C1 is the object of morphisms, d0: C1 −→C is the domain map, d1: C1
−→C is the codomain map, u: C −→C1 the unit map, and c: C2 −→C1 the
composition. Here, C2 is the ﬁber product [(f, g) | d0(f) = d1(g)]. In general,
Cn = [(f1, . . . , fn) | d1(fi) = d0(fi+1), i = 1, . . . , n −1], the object of composable
n-tuples of maps of C . These objects and maps must satisfy the following laws:
(i) d0 ◦u = d1 ◦u = idC.
(ii) The following diagrams commute:
C1
C
-
d0
C2
C1
-
p2
?
c
?
d1
C1
C
-
d1
C2
C1
-
p1
?
c
?
d0

6.6 Categories in a Topos
221
(in other words, d0(c(f, g)) = d0(g) and d1(c(f, g)) = d1(f) for all elements (f, g)
of C1),
(iii) c(c × id) = c(id × c): C3 −→C1, and
(iv) c(ud1, id) = c(id, ud0) = id: C1 −→C1.
In general, we will use the notation that when a letter denotes a category
object, that letter with subscript 1 denotes its arrows. The maps d0, d1 and u
will always be called by the same name.
An internal functor F: C −→D between category objects of E is a pair
of maps F: C −→D and F1: C1 −→D1 which commutes with all the structure
maps: F ◦d0 = d0 ◦F1, F ◦d1 = d1 ◦F1, F1 ◦u = u ◦F, and F1 ◦c = c ◦(F1 × F1).
It is straightforward to show that the category of category objects and functors
between them form a category Cat(E ).
E -valued functors
There are two approaches to the problem of deﬁning the notion of an E -
valued functor from a category object C in a topos E to E . They turn out to be
equivalent. One is a generalization of the algebraic notion of monoid action and
the other is analogous to the topological concept of ﬁbration. We describe each
construction in Set ﬁrst and then give the general deﬁnition.
The algebraic approach is to regard C as a generalized monoid. Then a Set-
valued functor is a generalization of the notion of monoid action. Thus if F: C
−→Set and f: A −→B in C , one writes fx for Ff(x) when x ∈FA and shows
that the map (f, x) −→fx satisﬁes laws generalizing those of a monoid action:
(1A)x = x and (fg)x = f(gx) whenever fg and gx are deﬁned. This map (f, x)
−→fx has a ﬁber product as domain: x must be an element of d0(f). Moreover,
it is a map over C.
Guided by this, we say a left C -object is a structure (A, φ, ψ) where φ: A
−→C, and ψ: C1 ×C A −→A, where C1 ×C A = [(g, a) | a ∈A, g ∈C1 and
φ(a) = d0(g)], for which
(i) ψ(u(φ(a)), a) = a for all elements a of A,
(ii) φψ(g, a) = d1(g) whenever φ(a) = d0(g), and
(iii) ψ(c(f, g), a) = ψ(f, ψ(g, a)) for all (f, g, a) for which a ∈A, f, g ∈C1
and φ(a) = d0(g), d1(g) = d0(f).
A morphism of left C -objects is a map over C which commutes with φ and ψ
in the obvious way. In Set, given a functor G: C −→Set, A would be the disjoint
union of all the values of G for all objects of C , φ(x) would denote the object C
for which x ∈GC, and ψ(x, g) would denote G(g)(x).

222
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Contravariant functors can be handled by considering right C -objects.
The other approach, via ﬁbrations, takes the values of a functor F: C −→
E and joins them together in a category over C .
The result has a property
analogous to the homotopy lifting property (Exercise ??) and is a particular
type of “opﬁbration”.
The general notion of opﬁbration (for Set) is given in
Exercise 2 and will not be used in this book (see Gray [1974]).
(The corresponding object for contravariant functors to E —i.e. presheaves—
is a “ﬁbration.” These ideas were discovered by Grothendieck, who was primarily
interested in presheaves. What we call opﬁbrations he called coﬁbrations.)
The way this construction works in Set is this: Given F: C −→Set, construct
the category D whose objects are the elements of the (disjoint) sets FC for objects
C of C . If you were explaining to someone the way F works, you might draw, for
each element x of FC and f: C −→C′, an arrow from x to Ff(x). These arrows
are the arrows of D. They compose in the obvious way, and there is an obvious
map from D to C . Then for C ∈Ob(C ), FC is the inverse image of C under
that map.
This has to be approached more indirectly in a topos. Given a topos E and
a category object C of E , a morphism φ: D −→C of category objects is a split
discrete opﬁbration if
C1
C
-
d0
D1
D
-
d0
?
φ1
?
φ
is a pullback. This says that the set of arrows of D is exactly the set
[(g, d) | g ∈C1, d ∈D, and d0(g) = φ(d)]
Furthermore, the identiﬁcation as a pullback square means that d0(g, d) = d
(because the top arrow must be the second projection) and similarly φ1(g, d) = g
(hence φ(d1(g, d)) = d1(g)).
It follows that for each object d of D and each arrow g out of φ(d) in C , there
is exactly one arrow of D over g with domain d; we denote this arrow (g, d). This
property will be referred to as the unique lifting property of opﬁbrations.
A split discrete opﬁbration over C is thus an object in E /C; we deﬁne a
morphism of split discrete opﬁbrations over C to be just a morphism in E /C.
Proposition 1.
Let E be a left exact category and C a category object of E .
Then the category of split discrete opﬁbrations over C is equivalent to the category
of left C objects. When E = Set, they are equivalent to the functor category SetC.

6.6 Categories in a Topos
223
Proof. Suppose φ: D −→C is a split discrete opﬁbration. Then D1 = C1 ×C D
and d1: D1 −→D. We claim that (D, φ, d1) is a left C action. All the veriﬁcations,
including that morphisms of split discrete opﬁbrations are taken to morphisms
of left C actions, make use of the unique lifting property. We show two of the
required properties and leave the others to you.
We show ﬁrst that d1(u(φd), d) = d. Observe that φ1(u(φd), d) = u(φd) =
φ1(ud) and d0(u(φd), d) = d = d0(ud). Therefore by the unique lifting property,
ud = (u(φd), d). The result follows from the fact that d1(ud) = d.
We also need
d1(c(f, g), d) = d1(f, d1(g, d))
where d0(f) = d1(g) and d0(g) = φd. Now the arrows (c(f, g), d) and c((f, d1(g, d)), (g, d))
(composition in D) both have domain d and lie over c(f, g). Therefore they are
the same arrow, so d1 of them is the same.
Going the other way, suppose that (A, φ, ψ) is a left C -object.
Let D =
C1 ×C A = [(g, a) | d0(g) = φ(a)]. Then the top part of the following serially
commutative diagram
C1
C
D
A
-
p2
?
p1
?
φ
	
(uφ, idA)

ψ
R
u
-
d0
I
d1
is a category object with composition taking ((g, a), (g′, a′)) to (c(g, g′), a), and φ
is a morphism of category objects. The veriﬁcation of all the laws is tedious but
straightforward. It is then immediate from the deﬁnition of D that (φ, p1) is an
split discrete opﬁbration.
Suppose (A, φ, ψ) is a left C -object in Set. Then deﬁne a functor F: C −→Set
by requiring that for an object C of C , FC = φ−1(C). If x ∈FC and g: C
−→D, set Fg(x) = ψ(g, x).
If (A′, φ′, ψ′) is another left C -object and λ: A
−→A′ is a morphism, then λ corresponds to a natural transformation between
the corresponding functors whose component at C is the restriction of λ to FC
(which is a subset of A). That this construction gives an equivalence between the
category of left C -objects and SetC follows directly from (i)-(iii) in the deﬁnition
of left C -object and the deﬁnition of morphism.

224
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Left C -objects form a topos
We will now bring in heavy artillery from several preceding sections to show
that the category of left C -objects and their morphisms form a topos.
Let C be a category object in the topos E and let T: E /C −→E /C be the
functor which takes A −→C to C1 ×C A −→C and f: A −→B over C to
C1 ×C f. Let η be the natural transformation from idE to T whose component at
an object s: A −→C is η(s: A −→C) = (us, idA). Let µ: T 2 −→T be the natural
transformation whose component at A −→C is (c, idA). It then follows directly
from the deﬁnition of left C -objects and morphisms thereof that (T, η, µ) is a
triple and that the category of Eilenberg-Moore algebras (φ: A −→C, ψ) is the
category of left C -objects.
Now come the heavy cannon. By the constructions of Theorem 6 and Corol-
lary 7 of Section 5.3, T factors as the top row of
E /C
(d0)∗
−−−−−→
←−−−−−
Q d0
E /C1
P d1
−−−−−→
←−−−−−
(d1)∗
E /C
where the bottom row forms a right adjoint to T. Thus by Theorem 5 of Sec-
tion 3.7, T is adjoint tripleable and the category of left C -objects is the category
of coalgebras for a cotriple whose functor is G = Q d0 ◦(d1)∗. G has a left adjoint,
so gives a left exact cotriple. Hence by Theorem 1 of Section 6.4, we have:
Theorem 2.
For any category object C of a topos E , the category of left C -
objects (equivalently the category of split discrete opﬁbrations of C ) is a topos.
It is natural to denote the category of left C -objects by E C.
Theorem 3.
Any category object functor f: C −→C ′ induces a functor f #: E C ′
−→E C which is the restriction of the pullback functor f ∗. Moreover, f # has left
and right adjoints.
Proof. That pulling back a split discrete opﬁbration produces a split discrete
opﬁbration is merely the statement that pulling back a pullback gives a pull-
back. The reader may alternatively deﬁne f # on left C ′-objects by stipulating
that f #(A′, φ′, ψ′) = (A, φ, ψ), where A = [(c, a′) | fc = φ′a′], φ is the ﬁrst
projection, and ψ(g, (c, a′)) (where necessarily d0(g) = c and φa′ = fc) must be
d1(g), ψ′(f(g), a′)).

6.6 Categories in a Topos
225
The square
E /C′
E /C
-
f ∗
E C′
E C
-
f #
?
U ′
?
U
commutes, where the vertical arrows are the underlying functors from triple alge-
bras. (They are in fact inclusions). Since the bottom arrow has both a left and a
right adjoint, so does the top one by Butler’s Theorems (Section 3.7, Theorem 3).
When C′ is the trivial category object with C′ = C′
1 = 1, then E C ′ is E and
the induced map E −→E C (where C is some category object) has left and right
adjoints denoted lim→C and lim←C respectively. When E is Set they are in fact
the left and right Kan extensions. Notice that this says that, given a set function
f: Y −→I, then the existence of Q f −1(i) (which is a completeness property—Y
and I can both be inﬁnite) depends only on the fact that in Set we have ﬁnite
limits and a power object. Thus the existence of P is a powerful hypothesis.
Exercises 6.6
1. A simplicial object in a category E is a functor S: ∆op −→E where ∆is
the category whose objects are the ﬁnite sets {1, 2, . . . , n} for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . and
whose arrows are the order-preserving maps between these sets. Prove that the
category of category objects and functors between them in a left exact category
E is equivalent to a full subcategory of the category of simplicial objects in E .
2. Let F: D −→C be a functor between categories (in Set). If A is an object of
C , the ﬁber DA over C is the subcategory of D consisting of all objects mapping
to A and all arrows mapping to 1A. Its inclusion into D is denoted JA. F is an
opﬁbration if for each f: A −→B in C there is a functor f ∗: DA −→DB and a
natural transformation θf: JA −→JB ◦f ∗with every component lying over f, for
which for any arrow m: D −→E in D lying over f there is a unique arrow f ∗(D)
−→E making
D
E
-
m
f ∗(D)
(θf)D
@
@
@@
R
    	

226
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
commute. The opﬁbration is split if (1A)∗= 1(DA) and g∗◦f ∗= (g ◦f)∗whenever
g ◦f is deﬁned. It is discrete if the ﬁbers DA are all sets—i.e., their only arrows
are identity arrows. (“Split” is also called “split normal,” the normal referring to
preservation of identities). A functor between opﬁbrations over C is a functor in
Cat/C (it does not have to preserve ∗).
(a) Show that, for Set, a split discrete opﬁbration as deﬁned in the text is
the same as that deﬁned here.
(b) Show that the subcategory of split opﬁbrations over C and functors which
commute with ∗is equivalent to the category of functors from C to Cat and natural
transformations.
(c) Show that opﬁbrations have the “homotopy lifting property”: If G and H
are functors from A to C , F: D −→C is an opﬁbration, λ: G −→H is a natural
transformation, and G = F ◦G′ for some functor G′: A −→D, then there is a
functor H′: A −→D such that H = F ◦H′ and a natural transformation λ′: G′
−→H′.
3. (Categorical deﬁnition of opﬁbration). Let F: D −→C be a functor. Let 2
denote the category with two objects 0 and 1 whose only nonidentity arrow u
goes from 0 to 1. Let S be the functor from Hom(2, D) to the comma category
(F, 1C) which takes M: 2 −→D to (M(0), F(M(u)), F(M(1))) (you can ﬁgure
out what it does to arrows of Hom(2, D), which are natural transformations).
Show that F is an opﬁbration if and only if S has a left adjoint which is also a
right inverse of S.
6.7 Grothendieck Topologies
A Grothendieck topology on a category is a generalization of the concept of all
open covers of all open sets in a topological space.
A sieve (called “crible” by some authors—“crible” is the French word for
“sieve”) on an object A is a family of arrows with codomain A. We will use the
notation {Ai −→A} for a sieve, the i varying over an unspeciﬁed index set. We
will follow the convention that diﬀerent sieves have possibly diﬀerent index sets
even if the same letter i is used, unless speciﬁcally stated otherwise.
The set of ﬁber products {Ai ×A Aj}, where i and j both run over the index
set of the sieve, will be used repeatedly in the sequel. If f: A −→B and {Ai
−→A} is a sieve on A, we write f|Ai for the composite of the projection Ai −→A
followed by f, and f|Ai ×A Aj for the composite of Ai ×A Aj −→A followed by f.
A sieve {Ai −→A} reﬁnes a sieve {Bj −→A} if every arrow in the ﬁrst
factors through at least one arrow in the second.

6.7 Grothendieck Topologies
227
A Grothendieck topology in a left exact category A is a family of sieves,
called covers, with the following properties.
(i) For each object A of A , idA is a sieve.
(ii) (Stability) If {Ai −→A} is a cover and B −→A is an arrow, then {B×AAi
−→B} is a cover.
(iii) (Composability) If {Ai −→A} is a cover, and for each i, {Aij −→Ai} is
a cover, then {Aij −→A} is a cover.
A Grothendieck topology is saturated if whenever {Ai −→A} is a sieve and
for each i, {Aij −→Ai} is a sieve for which {Aij −→A} (doubly indexed!) is a
cover, then {Ai −→A} is a cover. It is clear that each Grothendieck topology
is contained in a unique saturated Grothendieck topology. It follows from (ii)
(stability) that the saturation contains all the sieves which have a reﬁnement in
the original topology.
Reﬁnement is also deﬁned for topologies: one topology reﬁnes another if every
cover in the saturation of the second is in the saturation of the ﬁrst.
A site is a left exact category together with a speciﬁc saturated Grothendieck
topology. A morphism of sites is a left exact functor between sites which takes
covers to covers.
Some examples of sites:
(a) The category of open sets of a ﬁxed topological space together with all
the open covers of all open sets.
(b) Any left exact category together with all the universal regular epimor-
phisms, each regarded as a sieve containing a single arrow.
(“Universal” or
“stable” means preserved under pullbacks.)
(c) A sieve {fi: Ai −→A} is an epimorphic family if and only if whenever
g ̸= h are two maps from A to B, there is at least one index i for which g◦fi ̸= h◦fi.
If epimorphic families are stable under pullbacks, they form a site.
If C is any category, an object of SetC op is called a presheaf, a terminology
used particularly when C is a site.
If f: A1 −→A2 in A and a ∈A2, then,
motivated by the discussion of sheaves on a topological space in Section 2.2, we
write a|A1 for Ff(a). (We recommend this notation—it makes the theory much
more manageable.)
Let S = {Ai −→A} be a sieve in a category C . If F: C op −→Set is a presheaf,
we say that F is S-separated if FA −→Q FAi is injective and that F is an
S-sheaf if
FA −→Q FAi −→
−→
Q F(Ai ×A Aj)

228
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
is an equalizer. This generalizes the sheaf condition for topological spaces given
by Proposition 1, Section 2.2. Stated in terms of restrictions, F is S-separated
if whenever a, a′ ∈FA with the property that for every i, a|Ai = a′|Ai, then
a = a′. F is an S-sheaf if in addition for every tuple of elements ai ∈Ai with
the property that ai|Ai ×A Aj = aj|Ai ×A Aj, there is a (unique) element a ∈FA
such that a|Ai = ai.
It is straightforward to see that a sieve S is an epimorphic family if every
representable functor Hom(−, B) is S-separated, and we say that S is a regular
or eﬀective epimorphic family if every representable functor is an S-sheaf.
Both epimorphic and regular epimorphic families are called stable or universal
if they remain epimorphic (respectively regular epimorphic) when pulled back.
In any category, stable epimorphic families, and also stable regular epimorphic
families, form a Grothendieck topology.
Note that since every epimorphism in a topos is universal and regular by
Corollary 8 of Section 5.3 and Proposition 3 of Section 5.5, the class of all epi-
morphisms in a topos forms a Grothendieck topology on the topos. However,
epimorphic families in a topos need not be regular unless the topos has arbitrary
sums.
A site A determines a topology j on SetA op as follows. If F is a presheaf in
SetA op and F0 is a subpresheaf, then jF0 = jF(F0) is the functor whose value
at A consists of all a ∈FA for which there is a cover {Ai −→A} such that
a|Ai ∈F0Ai for all i.
Proposition 1.
j as constructed above is a topology on SetA op.
Proof.
(i) Naturality translates into showing that if the left square below is a pullback
then so is the right one.
G0
G
-
-
F0
F
-
-
?
?
jG0
G
-
-
jF0
F
-
-
?
?
Suppose a ∈jG0A, b ∈FA have the same image in GA. We must show
b ∈jF0A. Let {Ai −→A} witness that a ∈jG0(A). In other words, a|Ai ∈G0Ai

6.7 Grothendieck Topologies
229
for all i. Now consider this pullback diagram:
G0Ai
GAi
-
F0Ai
FAi
-
?
?
We know a|Ai ∈G0Ai and that b|Ai ∈FAi for all i. They must have the
same image in GAi, so b|Ai ∈F0Ai. Therefore b ∈jF0(A).
(ii) The inﬂationary property follows from the fact that idA is a cover.
(iii) The monotone property is a trivial consequence of the deﬁnition.
(iv) Idempotence follows from the composition property for covers.
Conversely, given a topology j on SetA op, we can construct a Grothendieck
topology on A as follows. Any sieve {Ai −→A} determines a subfunctor R of
Hom(−, A) deﬁned for an object B by letting RB be the set of f: B −→A for
which for some i, there is a factorization B −→Ai −→A of f. This is the same
as saying R is the union of the images of Hom(−, Ai) in Hom(−, A). Then we
say {Ai −→A} is a covering sieve for the Grothendieck topology if R is j-dense.
Proposition 2. For any topology j, the deﬁnition just given produces a Grothen-
dieck topology on A .
The proof is straightforward and will be omitted.
The two constructions given above produce a one to one correspondence be-
tween saturated Grothendieck topologies on A and topologies on SetA op. We
make no use of this fact and the proof is uninteresting, so we omit it.
Proposition 3.
Let A be a site and j the corresponding topology on SetA op.
Then a presheaf F is a j-sheaf if and only if it is an S-sheaf for every sieve S of
the topology.
Proof. Let F be an S-sheaf for every cover S of the site. Let G0 −→G be a dense
inclusion of presheaves. We must by Theorem 8 of Section 6.2 construct for any
α0: G0 −→F a unique extension α: G −→F.
Let A be an object of A . Since G0 is dense in G, for all a ∈GA there is a cover
{Ai −→A} with the property that a|Ai ∈G0Ai for each i. Thus α0A(a|Ai) ∈FAi
for each i. Moreover,
(a|Ai)|Ai ×A Aj = a|Ai ×A Aj = (a|Aj)|Ai ×A Aj

230
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
so applying α0A, it follows that α0A(a|Ai) ∈FA and thus determines the required
arrow α.
To prove the converse, ﬁrst note that the class of covers in a Grothendieck
topology is ﬁltered with respect to reﬁnement: if {Aj −→A} and {Ak −→A} are
covers then {Aj ×A Ak −→A} is a cover reﬁning them.
Now suppose F is a sheaf. For each object A, deﬁne F +A to be the colimit
over all covers of A of the equalizers of
Q FAi −→
−→
Q F(Ai ×A Aj)
It is easy to see that F + is a presheaf. We need only show that F = F +.
To do that it is suﬃcient to show that F + is separated and F −→F + is dense.
The latter is obvious. As for the former, it follows from the deﬁnition of j that
F + is separated if and only if whenever {Ai −→A} is a cover and a1, a2 ∈F +A
with a1|Ai = a2|Ai for all i, then a1 = a2. Since F is a sheaf, F + satisﬁes this
condition.
Now suppose a1, a2 ∈F +A and there is a cover {Ai −→A} for which a1|Ai =
a2|Ai for all i. (In this and the next paragraph, restriction always refers to F +).
By deﬁnition of F +, there is a cover {Aj −→A} for which a1|Aj ∈FAj and a
cover {Ak −→A} for which a2|Ak ∈FAk for all k.
Next let {Al −→A} be a cover simultaneously reﬁning {Ai −→A}, {Aj
−→A} and {Ak −→A}. Then a1|Al = a2|Al for all l because {Al −→A} reﬁnes
{Ai −→A}. a1|Al ∈FAl and a2|Al ∈FAl because {Al −→A} reﬁnes both {Aj
−→A} and {Ak −→A}. Thus the two elements are equal in F +A because they
are equal at a node in the diagram deﬁning F +A. Hence F + is separated, as
required.
Special types of Grothendieck topologies
A topology for which every representable functor is a sheaf is called standard,
or subcanonical. Note that for a standard topology, if L is sheaﬁﬁcation and Y
is the Yoneda embedding, then LY = Y . Thus when a site is standard, it is fully
embedded by y into its own category of sheaves. This embedding plays a central
role in the proof of Giraud’s Theorem in Section 6.8 and in the construction of
cocone theories in Chapter 8.
The canonical Grothendieck topology on a left exact category is the ﬁnest
(most covers) subcanonical topology.
Proposition 4.
The following are equivalent for a Grothendieck topology.
(a) The covers are eﬀective epimorphic families.

6.8 Giraud’s Theorem
231
(b) The representable functors are sheaves for the topology.
(c) The functor y = LY , where L is sheaﬁﬁcation, is full and faithful.
Proof. (a) is equivalent to (b) by deﬁnition. If (b) is true, LY = Y and Y is full
and faithful, so (c) is true.
If (c) is true, for a given cover let R be the subfunctor of Y A constructed
above. Then R is j-dense in Y A. Apply L to the diagram
Y B
R
Y A
-
-
?
Then the top line becomes equality so we have, from (c),
Hom(LY A, LY B) ∼= Hom(A, B)
∼= Hom(Y A, Y B) −→Hom(R, Y B) −→Hom(LR, LY B)
∼= Hom(LY A, LY B)
with composites all around the identity. Hence (a), and therefore (b), is true.
Exercises 6.7
1. Prove that the empty sieve is an eﬀective epimorphic family over the initial
object, and that it is universally so if and only if the initial object is strict.
2. Show that the following are equivalent for a Grothendieck topology.
(a) The covers are epimorphic families.
(b) The representable functors are separated presheaves for the topology.
(c) The functor y = LY , where L is sheaﬁﬁcation, is faithful.
6.8 Giraud’s Theorem
Any topos E is a site with respect to the canonical topology. Giraud’s Theorem
as originally stated says that certain exactness conditions on a category plus the
requirement that it have a set of generators (deﬁned below) are equivalent to
its being the category of sheaves over a small site. It is stated in this way, for
example, in Makkai and Reyes [1977], p. 53 or in Johnstone [1977], p. 17.
Our Theorem 1 below is stated diﬀerently, but it is in essence a strengthening
of Giraud’s Theorem.

232
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
If C is a category, a subset U of the objects of C is a set of (regular)
generators for C if for each object C of C the set of all morphisms from objects
of U to C forms a (regular) epimorphic family. We say that U is a conservative
generating family if for any object C and proper subobject C0 ⊆C, there is an
object G ∈U and an element c ∈G C for which c /∈G C0. See Exercise 4 for the
relationships among these conditions.
Sums in a category are disjoint if for any objects A and B, the commutative
diagram
A
B
0
   	
@
@
@
R
A + B
@
@
@
R
   	
(in which the arrows to A+B are the canonical injections) is a pullback, and the
canonical injections are monic. Sums are universal if they are preserved under
pullback.
Recall from Exercise 4 of 5.5 that a regular category is a category with ﬁnite
limits in which regular epis are stable under pullback.
A Grothendieck topos is a category which
(i) is complete;
(ii) has all sums and they are disjoint and universal;
(iii) is regular with eﬀective equivalence relations; and
(iv) has a small set of regular generators.
We do not yet know that a Grothendieck topos is a topos, but that fact will
emerge.
Theorem 1.
(Giraud) The following are equivalent:
(a) E is a Grothendieck topos;
(b) E is the category of sheaves for a small site;
(c) E is a topos with arbitrary sums and a small set of generators.
Proof. That (b) implies (c) is clear because a sheaf category is a reﬂective sub-
category of a functor category. Earlier results, taken together with Exercise 4,
show that (c) implies (a). For example, we have shown in Theorem 7 of 2.3 that
equivalence relations are eﬀective. In Corollary 8 of 5.3 we showed that pullbacks
have adjoints from which the disjoint stable sums and epis follow.
The proof that (a) implies (b) is immediate from the following proposition.

6.8 Giraud’s Theorem
233
Proposition 2.
Let E be a Grothendieck topos, and C a left exact subcategory
containing a (regular) generating family of E , regarded as a site on the topology
of all sieves which are regular epimorphic families in E . Then E is equivalent
to Sh(C ). Moreover, if C is closed under subobjects, then the topology on C is
canonical.
Proof. The proof consists of a succession of lemmas, in which E and C satisfy the
hypotheses of the Proposition. We begin by showing that the regular epimorphic
families form a topology.
Lemma 3.
Every regular epimorphic family in a Grothendieck topos is stable.
Proof. A regular epimorphic family {Ei −→E} in a category with all sums is
characterized by the fact that
X
(Ei ×E Ej) −→
−→
X
Ei −→E
is a coequalizer. Given the stable sums, this is equivalent to the assertion that
(
X
Ei) ×E (
X
Ei) −→
−→
X
Ei −→E
is a coequalizer, which implies that P Ei −→E is a regular epi. Since both sums
and regular epis are stable, so is this condition.
In the rest of this section, we use Y , L, and y = LY as deﬁned in 6.7. We
show eventually that y is left exact and cocontinuous and deduce that it is an
equivalence.
Corollary 4.
For every object E of E , Y (E) is a sheaf.
Proof. Since every cover is a regular epimorphic family in E , it follows from the
deﬁnition of covers that representable functors are sheaves.
Lemma 5.
y(0) = 0.
Proof. The stable sums in E imply that 0 is a strict initial object. For any object
C of C , Y (0)(C) = Hom(C, 0) = ∅unless C = 0 in which case it is a singleton.
If 0 is not an object of C , this is the constantly null functor which is initial
in the functor category, so that its associated sheaf y(0) is initial in the sheaf
category. If 0 is an object of C , then y(0) can readily be seen to be initial, from
the deﬁnition of initial, as soon as we observe that F(0) = 0 for every sheaf F.
Since 0 is covered by the empty sieve, we have, for any sheaf F, an equalizer
F(0) −→Q() −→
−→
Q()
in which the empty products have a unique element so that F(0) does too.

234
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
Lemma 6.
y preserves sums.
Proof. We must show that if E = P Ei, then P Y Ei −→Y E is a dense inclusion
(in the presheaf category) so that the sheaf associated to the ﬁrst is the second.
It is an inclusion because Ei×E Ej = 0, the injections into the sum are mono, and
Y preserves limits. Evaluating this at C in C (remember that Y is Hom-functor-
valued), we must show that for any f: C −→E, there is a cover {Ck −→C}
such that f|Ck ∈P Hom(Ck, Ei). This means that for each k there is an i with
f|Ck ∈Hom(Ck, Ei).
Given f, let
C
P Ei
-
Cj
Ej
-
fj
?
?
?
?
be a pullback. The objects Cj may not be in C , but for each one there is a
regular epimorphic family (hence cover) {Cjk −→Cj} with all Cjk in C because
C contains a generating family. (Observe that the second subscript k varies over
an index set which depends on the ﬁrst subscript j). Since C = P Cj, {Cj −→C}
is a cover of C. Hence the doubly indexed sieve {Cjk −→C} is a cover of C in
C . Furthermore, f|Cjk = fj|Cjk, which is in Hom(Cjk, Ej).
Lemma 7.
y preserves regular epis.
Proof. The argument is similar to the above. Given E′ −→→E an element f ∈
Hom(C, E) will not necessarily lift to an element of Hom(C, E′), but will do so
on a cover of C, namely a cover {Ci −→C′} by objects in C of the object C′
gotten by pulling f back
E
E
-
-
C′
C
-
-
?
f ′
?
f
Lemma 8.
y preserves coequalizers.
Proof. It preserves limits because L and Y do. We also know that it preserves
sums and images and hence unions (even inﬁnite unions). The constructions used
in Exercise 5 are therefore all preserved by y, so y preserves the construction of

6.8 Giraud’s Theorem
235
equivalence relations. Thus if
A
h
−−→
−−→
k
B
c
−−→C
is a coequalizer, y takes the kernel pair of c (which is the equivalence relation
generated by h and k) to the kernel pair of yc. Since yc is regular epi, it is the
coequalizer of yh and yk.
Lemma 9.
y is full and faithful.
Proof. The faithfulness follows immediately from the fact that C contains a set
of regular generators for E and that the covers are regular epimorphic families.
As for the fullness, the deﬁnition of y implies that when C is an object of C ,
Hom(yC, yE) ∼= Hom(C, E). The universal property of colimits, together with
the fact that these are preserved by y allows one to extend this conclusion easily
to the case that C belongs to the colimit closure of C which is E .
Lemma 10.
Every sheaf F is a coequalizer of a diagram of the kind
X
(yC′
k) −→
−→
X
(yCi) −→F
Proof. This is a trivial consequence of the fact that every functor, hence every
sheaf is a colimit of a diagram of representables.
Lemma 11.
If C is closed in E under subobjects, then every cover in C is also
a cover in E .
Proof. Let {Ci −→C} be a cover in C . As seen in Exercise 4 of 5.5, a regular
category has a factorization system using regular epis and monos. The regular
image in E of P Ci −→C is a subobject C0 ⊆C which, by hypothesis, belongs
to C . If C0 ̸= C, the family is not regular epimorphic.
Now we can ﬁnish the proof of Proposition 2. We already know that y is full
and faithful. Let F be a sheaf and represent it by a diagram as in Lemma 10
above. The fact that y preserves sums implies that there is a coequalizer
yE1 −→
−→yE0 −→F
and the fact that y is full means the two arrows from E1 to E0 come from maps
in E . Letting E be the coequalizer of those maps in E , it is evident that yE ∼= F.
Hence y is an equivalence.
The last sentence of the proposition follows from Lemma 11.
It should remarked in connection with this theorem that if E has a small reg-
ular generating set, C can be taken to be small by beginning with the generating

236
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
set and closing it under ﬁnite products and subobjects. However, nothing in the
proof requires C to be small and it could even be taken to be E itself. Of course,
in that case, it may be thought that the functor category and the reﬂector L may
not necessarily exist, but this is a philosophical, not a mathematical objection.
For those who care, we remark that it is a topos in a larger universe. More-
over, the “reﬂection principle” guarantees that the theorem is valid even in the
category of all sets.
Theorem 12. Any left exact cocontinuous functor between Grothendieck toposes
is the left adjoint part of a geometric morphism.
Proof. We need only show that the right adjoint exists. But Grothendieck toposes
are complete with generators so the Special Adjoint Functor Theorem guarantees
the existence.
A category whose Yoneda embedding has a left adjoint is called total. If
the left adjoint is also left exact, the category is called lex total. Freyd and
Street have characterized Grothendieck toposes as lex total categories satisfying a
mild size restriction [Street, 1981]. Street [1983] characterizes lex total categories
in terms of conditions on epimorphic families generalizing the requirements in
Giraud’s theorem of having universal eﬀective epimorphisms. Total categories are
cocomplete in a strong sense. Street [1983] says of them that they are “...precisely
the the algebraic and topological categories at which traditional category theory
was aimed.”
Some of the more obvious relations among these various notions appear in the
theorem below.
Theorem 13. Let E be a category. Then each of the following properties implies
the next. Moreover, (iv) plus the existence of a generating set implies (i).
(i) E is a Grothendieck topos,
(ii) E is lex total,
(iii) y: E −→Sh(E ) is an equivalence,
(iv) E is a complete topos.
Proof. We prove that (ii) implies (iii), which requires the most argument, and
leave the others as exercises.
Suppose E is lex total. Then Y : E −→Psh(E ) has a left exact left adjoint Y #.
It follows from results of Section 6.5 that E is a cocomplete topos. Let I: Sh(E )
−→Psh(E ) be the inclusion with left adjoint L, and as before, let y = LY . We will
use the fact that y preserves colimits; this follows from the fact that it preserves
sums and (regular because E is a topos) epis, and, as we will see in Section 7.6,
Propositions 1 and 2, that is enough in a countably complete topos. To show

6.8 Giraud’s Theorem
237
that y is an equivalence, it is enough to show that every sheaf F is isomorphic
to yE for some object E of E . Since every presheaf is a colimit of representables
IF = colim Y Ei, so
F = LIF = colim LY Ei = colim yEi = y colim Ei
as required.
We make no attempt here to investigate the reverse implications. Exercises 6
and 7 give an example of a complete topos that lacks a small generating set.
Exercises 6.8
1. We have deﬁned a sieve and thus a cover in terms of collections {Ai −→A}.
There is another way. Let us say that a Giraud sieve on A is a subfunctor
of the representable functor Hom(−, A). Say that a collection of Giraud sieves
forms a Giraud topology if it includes the identity sieve on every object and is
invariant under pullback and composition. Further say that a sieve (in the sense
used previously in this book) {Ai −→A} is saturated if whenever an arrow B
−→A factors through one of the arrows in the sieve, it already is one of the arrows
in the sieve. Show that there is a one-to-one correspondence between saturated
sieves and Giraud sieves on an object A. Conclude that topologies and Giraud
topologies are equivalent.
2. Let C be a site and E = Sh(C ).
(a) Show that there is a presheaf which assigns to each object the set of
Giraud sieves on that object and that that is the subobject classiﬁer Ωin the
presheaf category.
(b) Show that the presheaf Ωj that assigns to each object the set of Giraud
covers is a sheaf and in fact the subobject classiﬁer in the sheaf category.
(c) Show that the topology j (which, recall, can be viewed as an endomor-
phism of Ω) is the classifying map of Ωj.
3. Let C be a site and E = Shv(C ). Prove that a Grothendieck topology on
E is contained in the ¬¬ topology if and only if no cover in the Grothendieck
topology is empty.
4. (a) Show that in a category C a set U of objects is a set of generators if and
only if when f, g: C −→B are distinct then there is an element c ∈G C for some
G ∈U for which f(c) ̸= g(c).
(b) Show that any regular generating family is conservative.

238
6 Permanence Properties of Toposes
(c) Show that in a category with equalizers, any conservative generating
family is a generating family.
(d) Show that in a topos any generating family is conservative. (Hint: every
mono is regular.)
(e) Show that in a complete topos, every epimorphic family is regular; hence
the converse of (b) is true and every generating family is regular.
5. Let E be a countably complete (hence countably cocomplete) topos and R ⊆
A × A a relation on an object A. If S1 and S2 are two relations on A, then the
composite of S1 and S2 is, as usual, is the image of the pullback S1 ×A S2 where
S1 is mapped to A by the second projection and S2 by the ﬁrst.
(a) Let S = R ∪∆∪Rop. Show that S is the reﬂexive, symmetric closure of
R.
(b) Let E be the union of the composition powers of S. Show that E is the
equivalence relation generated by R.
(Hint: Pullbacks, unions and countable sums are all preserved by pulling
back.)
6.
By a measurable cardinal α is meant a cardinal number for which there
is an ultraﬁlter f with the property that if any collection {Ui}, i ∈I is given
for which #(I) < α, and each Ui ∈f, then ∩Ui ∈f.
Call such an f an α-
measure. It is not known that measurable cardinals exist, but for this exercise,
we will assume not only that they exist, but that there is a proper class of them.
So let α1, α2, . . . , αω, . . . (indexed by all ordinals) be an increasing sequence of
measurable cardinals and f1, f2, . . . , fω, . . . a corresponding sequence of ultraﬁlters.
Assume the following (known) property of measurable cardinals: they are strongly
inaccessible, meaning they cannot be reached by operations of product, sum or
exponentiation involving fewer, smaller cardinals.
Deﬁne, for any set S and ultraﬁlter f a functor FS = colim SU, U ∈f. Note
that the diagonal map S −→SU induces a function S −→FS, which is, in fact,
the component at S of a natural transformation.
(a) Show that the functor F is left exact.
(b) Show that if α is measurable, f an α-measure and #(S) < α, then S
−→FS is an isomorphism.
(c) Show that if Fi is deﬁned as above, using the ultraﬁlter fi on αi, then
there is a sequence Hi of left exact endofunctors on Set deﬁned by Hj+1 = Fj ◦Hj
and Hj = colim Hk, k < j when j is a limit ordinal.

6.8 Giraud’s Theorem
239
(d) Show that for any set S there is an i dependent on S such that for j > i,
Gj(S) −→Gi(S) is an isomorphism.
(e) Conclude that there is a left exact functor H: Set −→Set whose values
are not determined by the values on any small subcategory.
(f) Show that there is a left exact cotriple on Set × Set whose functor part is
given by G(S, T) = (S × HT, T) for which the category of algebras does not have
a set of generators and hence is not a Grothendieck topos.
7. Let C be a proper class and G be the free group generated by C. (If you don’t
like this, we will describe an alternate approach later. Meantime continue.) Let
E be the category of those G-sets which have the property that all but a small
subset of the elements of C act as the identity automorphism. Show that E is a
complete topos which does not have a small generating set.
An alternate approach to the same category is to take as an object a 3-tuple
(S, C0, f) in which S is a set, C0 a sub-set of C and f: C0 −→Aut(S) a function.
Morphisms are deﬁned so as to make this the category of G-sets as deﬁned above.
Although set-theoretically unassailable, this approach seems conceptually much
less clear.
As a matter of historical interest, this category was one of the earliest known
examples to show the necessity of the solution set condition in the GAFT. The
evident underlying set functor is easily seen to lack an adjoint while satisfying all
the other conditions. We believe it is due to Freyd.
8. Prove that if U is a set of regular generators for a category C , then every
object of C is a colimit of an indexed family of objects of U.

7
Representation Theorems
7.1 Freyd’s Representation Theorems
In this section we prove a number of theorems due to Freyd representing toposes
into various special classes of toposes. The development follows Freyd [1972] very
closely.
Terminology
We deﬁne several related concepts which will be used in Chapters 7 and 8. We
have put all the deﬁnitions here, although they are not all used in this section,
because some of the terminology varies in the literature.
A functor is regular if it is left exact and preserves regular epis (but it
need not preserve all coequalizers.)
An exact category is a category which
has ﬁnite limits and ﬁnite colimits. An exact functor is one which preserves
ﬁnite limits and colimits, i.e., it is left and right exact. In the past the term
“exact category” has been used to denote a regular category which has eﬀective
equivalence relations (every equivalence relation is the kernel pair of some arrow),
and regular functors have also been called exact functors, but we will not use that
terminology.
A pretopos is a left exact category with eﬀective equivalence relations which
has ﬁnite sums which are disjoint and stable and in which every morphism factors
as a composite of a stable regular epimorphism and a monomorphism.
The
corresponding type of morphism is a near exact functor which is left exact and
preserves regular epimorphisms and ﬁnite sums. The main import of the work
of Makkai and Reyes [1977] is that pretoposes correspond to a broad class of
theories in the sense of model theory in mathematical logic.
Booleanness
A topos E is Boolean if for every subobject A of an object B, A ∨¬A ∼= B.
In the following proposition, 2 denotes 1 + 1.
Proposition 1.
The following are equivalent for a topos E :
240

7.1 Freyd’s Representation Theorems
241
(a) E is Boolean.
(b) Every subobject of an object in E has a complement.
(c) The Heyting algebra structure on Ωas deﬁned in Section 5.6 is a Boolean
algebra.
(d) If false: 1 −→Ωis the classifying map of the zero subobject, then (true, false): 2
−→Ωis an isomorphism.
Proof. (a) implies (b) because for any subobject A, A ∧¬A = 0. (b) and (c) are
clearly equivalent by Theorem 4 of Section 5.6.
To see that (b) implies (d), observe that true:1 −→Ωhas a complement A
−→Ω. But A −→Ωclassiﬁes subobjects just as well as true because there is
a one to one correspondence between subobjects and their complements so that
Proposition 4 of Section 2.3 shows that A = 1.
Finally, if (d) holds, any map f: E −→2 deﬁnes a complemented subobject
since E is the sum of the inverse images of the two copies of 1 (sums are stable
under pullback).
Warning: Even when 2 is the subobject classiﬁer there may be other global
sections 1 −→2. In fact, the global sections of 2 can form any Boolean algebra
whatever. However, see Proposition 2 and Theorem 4 below. A topos is said to
be 2-valued if the only subobjects of 1 are 0 and 1.
A topos is well-pointed if it is nondegenerate (that is 0 ̸= 1) and 1 is a
generator. By Exercise 4 of Section 6.8, this is equivalent to saying that for each
object A and proper subobject A0 ⊆A, there is global element of A that does
not factor through A0. In particular, every non-zero object has a global element.
Proposition 2.
Let E be a well-pointed topos. Then
(a) E is 2-valued.
(b) E is Boolean.
(c) Hom(1, −) preserves sums, epimorphisms, epimorphic families and pushouts
of monomorphisms.
(d) Every nonzero object is injective.
(e) Every object not isomorphic to 0 or 1 is a cogenerator.
Proof. (a) If U were a proper nonzero subobject of 1, the hypothesis would force
the existence of a map 1 −→U, making U = 1.
(b) There is a map (true, false): 1 + 1 −→Ω.
This induces a map from
Hom(1, 1 + 1) to Hom(1, Ω) which is an isomorphism by (a). Since 1 is a genera-
tor, it follows that (true, false) is an isomorphism. Booleanness now follows from
Proposition 1.

242
7 Representation Theorems
(c) A map from 1 to ΣAi induces by pulling back on the inclusions of Ai into
the sum a decomposition 1 = ΣUi. By (a), all but one of the Ui must be zero
and the remaining one be 1, which means that the original map factors through
exactly one Ai.
Given an epi A −→B and a global element of B, the pullback
1
B
-
C
A
-
?
?
?
?
and the map 1 −→C provides a map 1 −→A which shows that Hom(1, A)
−→Hom(1, B) is surjective, as required.
The preservation of epimorphic families follows from the preservation of sums
and epimorphisms.
Finally, given a pushout
C
D
-
-
A
B
-
-
?
?
the Booleanness implies that B = A + A′ for some subobject A′ of B, whence
D = C + A′, which we know is preserved by Hom(1, −).
(d) If A ⊆B = A+A′ and A ̸= 0 then the existence of A′ −→1 −→A provides
a splitting for the inclusion A −→B. (See Exercise 3 of Section 2.1.)
As for (e), let A be an object diﬀerent from 0 and 1. Since A ̸= 0, there is
a map 1 −→A and since A ̸= 1, that map is not an isomorphism so that there
is a second map 1 −→A that does not factor through the ﬁrst. Any map out
of 1 is a monomorphism. Since 1 has no non-zero subobjects, these determine
disjoint subobjects of A each of which is isomorphic to 1. Since they are disjoint,
their sum gives a mono of 2 into A. Hence it is suﬃcient to show that 2 is a
cogenerator. Given a parallel pair
B
f
−−→
−−→
g
C
with f ̸= g, let v: 1 −→B be a map with f ◦v ̸= g ◦v. Then we have the map
[f ◦v, g ◦v]: 1 + 1 −→C which is a mono by exactly the same reasoning and, since
2 is injective, splits. But this provides a map h: C −→2 for which h ◦f ◦v is the
one injection of 1 into 2 and h ◦g ◦v is the other, so that they are diﬀerent. Hence
h ◦f ̸= h ◦g which shows that 2 is a cogenerator.

7.1 Freyd’s Representation Theorems
243
Embedding theorems
Theorem 3.
Every small topos has an exact embedding into a Boolean topos.
This embedding preserves epimorphic families and all colimits.
Proof. Let E be the topos. For each pair f, g: A −→B of distinct arrows we will
construct a left exact, colimit preserving embedding of E into a Boolean topos
which keeps f and g distinct, and then take the product of all the Boolean toposes
so obtained. It is an easy exercise (Exercise 6) that the product (as categories)
of Boolean toposes is a Boolean topos.
The map from E to E /A which takes an object C to C × A −→A certainly
distinguishes f and g. In the category E /A, the diagonal arrow A −→A × A
followed by A × f (respectively A × g) gives a pair of distinct global elements
of B whose equalizer is a proper subobject U of 1. The topology j induced by
U as in Example (c) of Section 6.1 makes the equalizer 0 in Shj(E /A), which is
clearly a nondegenerate topos. The double negation sheaves in that category is
a Boolean topos with the required property (Exercise 3). The arrows that f and
g go to are still distinct because ¬¬0 = 0.
The limit preservation properties follow from the fact that the map E −→E /A
has both adjoints and the associated sheaf functor is left exact and has a right
adjoint.
Theorem 4.
Every small Boolean topos B has a logical embedding to a product
of small well-pointed toposes.
Proof. The argument goes by constructing, for each nonzero object A of B, a
logical morphism T: B −→C (where C depends on A) with C well-pointed and
TA ̸= 0. This will show that the the mapping of B into the product of all the
categories C for all objects A is an embedding (Exercise 4).
The proof requires the following lemma.
Lemma 5.
For every small Boolean topos B and nonzero object A of B there
is a small topos B′ and a logical morphism T: B −→B′ with TA ̸= 0 and such
that for all objects B of B either TB = 0 or TB has a global element.
Proof. Well order the objects of B taking A as the ﬁrst element. Let B0 = B
and suppose that for all ordinal numbers β < α, Bβ has been constructed, and
whenever γ < β, a family of logical morphisms uβγ: Bγ −→Bβ is given such that
(i) uββ = 1 and

244
7 Representation Theorems
(ii) for δ ≤γ ≤β, uβγ ◦uγδ = uβδ.
(Such a family is nothing but a functor on an initial segment of ordinals
regarded as an ordered category and is often referred to as a coherent family).
If α is a limit ordinal, let Bα be the direct limit of the Bβ for β < α. If α
is the successor of β then let B be the least object of B which has not become
0 nor acquired a global section in Bβ. Let c
B be its image in Bβ and let Bα be
Bβ/c
B. Stop when you run out of objects. Since toposes are deﬁned as models of
a left exact theory and logical functors are morphisms of that theory, it follows
from Theorem 4 of Section 4.4 that the direct limit is a topos. By Exercise 1,
the last topos constructed by this process is the required topos. It is easy to see
that the functors in the cone are logical.
To prove Theorem 4, form the direct limit C of B, B′, B′′ (forming B′′ using
the image of A in B′) and so on. The image of A in C will be nonzero, and every
nonzero object of C has a global element.
The product of all these categories C for all objects A of B is the required
topos.
Theorem 6.
Every small topos has an exact embedding into a product of well-
pointed toposes.
Theorem 7.
[Freyd’s Embedding Theorem] Every small topos has an embed-
ding into a power of Set that preserves ﬁnite limits, ﬁnite sums, epimorphisms,
and the pushout of a monomorphism.
Proof. Every well-pointed topos has a functor to Set, namely Hom(1, −), with
those properties.
Exercises 7.1
1. Prove that a Boolean topos is well-pointed if and only if every nonzero object
has a global section.
2. Prove that well-pointed toposes are not the models of an LE theory.
3. Show that the category of sheaves for the topology of double negation (Ex-
ercise 5 of Section 6.1) is a Boolean topos.
(Hint:
In any Heyting algebra
¬¬a = ¬¬¬¬a.)
4.
(a) Show that an exact functor from a Boolean topos is faithful if and only
if it takes no non-zero object to zero.
(b) Show that an exact functor from a 2-valued topos to any non-degenerate
topos is faithful.

7.2 The Axiom of Choice
245
5. Show that the embeddings of Theorems 6 and 7 reﬂect all limits and colimits
which they preserve. (Hint: First show that they reﬂect isomorphisms by consid-
ering the image and the kernel pair of any arrow which is not an isomorphism.)
6.
(a) Show that the product as categories of toposes is a topos.
(b) Show that the product of Boolean toposes is Boolean.
7. A category has stable sups if the supremum of any two subobjects exists
and is preserved by pullbacks. It has stable images if for any arrow f: A −→B,
Sub f: Sub B −→Sub A has left adjoint which is preserved by pullbacks. A left
exact category with stable sups and stable images is called a logical category.
Show that a category is a pretopos if and only if it is logical, has ﬁnite disjoint
sums and eﬀective equivalence relations. (This comes from [Makkai and Reyes,
1977, pp.121–122].)
7.2 The Axiom of Choice
The Axiom of Choice
If f: A −→B is an arrow in a category, we say that a map g: B −→A is a
section of f if it is a right inverse of f, i.e. f ◦g = 1. If f has a section, we
say that it is a split epi (it is necessarily epi), although the second word is often
omitted when the meaning is clear. It is easy to see that the Axiom of Choice
in ordinary set theory is equivalent to the statement that in the category of sets,
all epis are split. A section of the map (): A −→1 is a global element. A global
element of A is thus often called a global section of A.
We say a topos satisﬁes the Axiom of Choice (AC) if every epi splits. It is
often convenient to break this up into two axioms:
(SS) (Supports Split): Every epimorphism whose codomain is a subobject of
1 splits.
(IAC) (Internal Axiom of Choice): If f: A −→B is an epi, then for every
object C, f C: AC −→BC is an epi.
The name “Supports Split” comes from the concept of the support of an
object X, namely the image of the map X −→1 regarded as a subobject of 1.
An object has global support if its support is 1.
It is an easy exercise that AC implies SS and IAC. It will emerge from our
discussion that SS and IAC together imply AC.

246
7 Representation Theorems
We say f: A −→B is a powerful epi if it satisﬁes the conclusion of IAC. We
deﬁne § f by the pullback
1
BB
-
§f
AB
-
?
?
f B
where the lower map is the transpose of the identity. Intuitively, § f is the set of
sections of f.
It is clear that if f B is epi then § f has global support (the converse is also
true, see Exercise 1) and that § f has a global section if and only if f has a section.
In fact, global sections of § f are in one to one correspondence with sections of f.
Proposition 1.
For a morphism f: A −→B in a topos E , the following are
equivalent:
(a) f is a powerful epi;
(b) f B is epi;
(c) § f has global support.
(d) There is a faithful logical embedding L: E −→F into some topos F such
that Lf is split epi.
Proof. (a) implies (b) by deﬁnition.
(b) implies (c) because a pullback of an
epi is epi. To see that (c) implies (d) it is suﬃcient to let F be E / § f and L
be § f × −. By Theorem 6 of Section 5.3, L is faithful and logical. L therefore
preserves the constructions of diagram (1). In the corresponding diagram in F,
§ Lf has a global section (the diagonal) which corresponds to a right inverse for
Lf. For (d) implies (a), let C be an object and g a right inverse for Lf. Then
gLC is a right inverse for L(f C), which is isomorphic to (Lf)C. Thus L(f C) is
epi, which, because L is faithful, implies that f C is epi.
Proposition 2.
Given a topos E there is a topos F and a logical, faithful
functor L: E −→F for which, if f is a powerful epi in E , then Lf is a split epi
in F.
Proof. Well order the set of powerful epis. We construct a transﬁnite sequence
of toposes and logical morphisms as follows: If Eα is constructed, let Eα+1 be
Eα/ § fα where fα is the powerful epi indexed by α and the logical functor that
constructed by Proposition 1. At a limit ordinal α, let Eα be the direct limit of
all the preceding logical functors. The required topos F is the direct limit of this
family. As observed in the proof of Lemma 4 of Section 7.1, the direct limit of
toposes and logical morphisms is a topos and the cone functors are logical.

7.2 The Axiom of Choice
247
Corollary 3.
Given a topos E , there is a topos F in which every powerful epi
splits and a faithful, logical functor L from E to F.
Proof. Repeat the above process countably often.
Corollary 4.
A topos satisﬁes the IAC if and only if it has a faithful, logical
embedding into a topos that satisﬁes the Axiom of Choice.
Proof. The “if” part is very easy. For if a topos has such an embedding, it is
immediate that every epi is powerful. So suppose E is a topos that satisﬁes the
IAC. If we show that every slice and any colimit of such slices (called a limit
slice because it is a limit in the category of geometric morphisms) satisﬁes the
IAC, then the topos constructed above will have every epi powerful and every
powerful epi split. The limit part is trivial since every epi in the colimit is an
epi before the colimit is reached (since the functors are all faithful). Thus it is
suﬃcient to show that slicing preserves the IAC. If
B
C
-
A
g
@
@
@@
R
h
    	
is an epimorphism in E /A, then f: B −→C is epi in E . Since E satisﬁes the
IAC, the object § f has global support. Now consider the diagram of toposes and
logical functors:
E /A
E /(§f × A)
-
E
E /§f
-
?
?
If we apply § f × −to (*), we get
§f × B
§f × C
-
§f × f
§f × A
§f × g
@
@
@@
R
§f × h
    	
The map § f × f has a splitting in E / § f. It is immediate, using the fact that
it is a section, to see that it makes the triangle commute and is hence a section
in E / § f × A. But then E /A has a faithful (because § f × A −→A has global
support), logical functor into a topos in which f has a section and hence by
Proposition 1, f is a powerful epi.

248
7 Representation Theorems
AC and Booleanness
Our goal is to show that a topos satisfying AC, and ultimately a topos satis-
fying IAC, is Boolean. We require a lemma:
Lemma 5.
If
C
D
-
A
B
-
?
?
is a pullback and a pushout with all arrows monic, then its image under any near
exact functor Φ from E to a topos F is a pushout as well as a pullback.
Proof. Since (2) is a pushout,
A −→
−→B + C −→D
is a coequalizer. The kernel pair of the arrow from B + C to D is (B + C) ×D
(B + C), which is isomorphic to
B ×D B + B ×D C + C ×D B + C ×D C
B −→D monic implies that B ×D B = B and similarly C ×D C = C. The fact
that (2) is a pullback implies that the other two summands are each A. The result
is that the kernel pair is the reﬂexivized, symmetrized image of A in B + C. The
same considerations will apply to Φ applied to (2). Thus
ΦB + ΦA + ΦA + ΦC −→
−→ΦB + ΦC −→ΦD
is a kernel pair and since the right arrow is epi, is also a coequalizer. It follows
that
ΦAΦB + ΦC −→ΦD
is a coequalizer and hence that Φ of (2) is a pushout.
Theorem 6.
A topos E which satisﬁes the Axiom of Choice is Boolean.
Proof. We must show that every subobject A of an object B has a complement.
Since a slice of a topos satisfying AC is a topos satisfying AC and subobjects of
B in E are the same as subobjects of 1 in E /B, it is suﬃcient to consider the
case B = 1. So let A be a subobject of 1. Form the coequalizer
A −→
−→1 + 1 −→1 +A 1

7.3 Morphisms of Sites
249
and ﬁnd a right inverse f for the right arrow. Take the pullbacks C1 and C2 of f
along the two inclusions of 1 in 1 + 1; then we claim that the complement of A is
C = C1∩C2 as subobjects of 1. We know that A and C are subobjects of 1, so we
have a map A + C −→1, which we want to prove is an isomorphism. By Freyd’s
Theorem 7 and Exercise 5 of Section 7.1, there is a family of near-exact functors
Φ: E −→Set which collectively reﬂect isomorphisms. By Lemma 5, everything in
the construction of A + C is preserved by near-exact functors, so it is suﬃcient
to prove that A + C −→1 is an isomorphism in Set. In Set, either A = ∅in
which case C1 = C2 = C = 1 which is the complement of A, or A = 1 in which
case one of C1 or C2 is empty, so the intersection is empty and is therefore the
complement of A. In each case the map A + C −→1 is an isomorphism.
Corollary 7.
A topos satisfying IAC is Boolean.
Proof. Suppose A is a subobject of B in a topos satisfying IAC. According to
Proposition 4, the topos has a logical, faithful embedding into a topos satisfying
the Axiom of Choice. Since it is logical, it preserves the construction of ¬A. Thus
the equation A + ¬A = B is true in the original topos if and only if it is true
after the embedding. This follows from Theorem 6.
Exercises 7.2
1. Show that if f: A −→B is a map for which § f has global support, then f B is
epi. (Hint: Slice by § f.)
2. Show that if G is a nontrivial group, SetG satisﬁes IAC but not AC.
3. If A is a subobject of B, then A has a complement in B if and only if the
epimorphism B + B −→B +A B is split.
4. If A is a subobject of B and C is any object whose support includes the
support of B, then A is complemented in B if and only if A×C is complemented
in B × C. (Hint: Adapt the argument used in Corollary 7.)
7.3 Morphisms of Sites
In this section, we state a theorem about extensions of left exact cover-preserving
functors to the sheaf category which will play the same role for theories with
cocones (treated in Chapter 8) that Theorem 4 of Section 4.3 plays for theories
with only cones. This theorem is also used in the proof of Deligne’s Theorem in
the next section.
We need some preliminary results.

250
7 Representation Theorems
Proposition 1.
Let B and D be complete toposes, A a left exact generating
subcategory of B, and f: B −→D a colimit-preserving functor whose restriction
to A is left exact. Then f is left exact.
Proof. Since A is left exact, it contains the terminal object 1, so f(1) = 1. Thus
we need “only” show that f preserves pullbacks.
In the proof below we systematically use A and B with or without subscripts
to refer to objects in A or B respectively. The proof requires several steps.
(i).
Let B = P Ai. Then for any A, f preserves the pullback
A
B
-
A ×B Ai
Ai
-
?
?
where the right arrow is coordinate inclusion.
Proof. We have
X
A ×B Ai ∼= A
and
X
f(A ×B Ai) ∼= fA ∼=
X
f(A) ×fB f(Ai)
because f commutes with sums and so do pullbacks in a topos.
Both these
isomorphisms are induced by the coordinate inclusions A ×B Ai −→A. Thus the
sum of all the maps f(A ×B Ai) −→fA ×fB fAi is an isomorphism, so all the
individual ones are.
(ii).
If P A is the full subcategory of B consisting of sums of objects of A ,
then P A has ﬁnite limits and the restriction of f to P A is left exact.
Proof. Suppose we are given
P A′′
j
P Ai
-
P A′
k
?
For each j, deﬁne A′
ji so that
A′
j
P Ai
-
A′
ji
A′
i
-
?
?

7.3 Morphisms of Sites
251
is a pullback, and similarly deﬁne A′′
ki for each k. Because pullbacks distribute
over sums,
P A′
j
P Ai
-
P
i,j,k A′
ji ×Ai A′′
kl
P A′′
k
-
?
?
is a pullback. This proves that pullbacks and hence all limits exist in P A . Since
sums and all the pullbacks used in the preceding construction are preserved by
f, f preserves these pullbacks, and therefore all ﬁnite limits in P A .
We will henceforth assume that A is closed under sums.
(iii).
f preserves pullbacks of diagrams of this form:
B1
A
-
B1 ×A B2
B2
-
?
?
In particular, f preserves monos whose target is in A .
Proof. By Exercise 8, Section 6.8, B1 is the colimit of objects Ai, i running over
some index set, and B2 is the colimit of objects A′
j, j running over a diﬀerent
index set. For each i and j, form the pullback Ai ×A A′
j. Then B1 ×A B2 is the
colimit of these pullbacks for i and j ranging over their respective index sets.
Then we calculate
f(B1 ×A B2) ∼= f(colim(Ai ×A A′
j) ∼= colim f(Ai ×A A′
j)
∼= colim fAi ×fA f(A′
j) ∼= f(B1) ×fA f(B2)◦
(iv).
f preserves pullbacks
A1
B
-
A1 ×B A2
A2
-
?
?
in which the two maps to B are joint epi.
Proof. Let A = A1 + A2. Under the hypothesis, A −→B is an epi whose kernel
pair is the disjoint sum
E = A1 ×B A1 + A1 ×B A2 + A2 ×B A1 + A2 ×B A2

252
7 Representation Theorems
E is an equivalence relation whose transitivity is equivalent to the existence
of an arrow E ×A E −→E (the ﬁber product being the pullback of one projection
against the other) satisfying certain equations. This pullback is of the type shown
in (iii) to be preserved by f. It follows that fE is transitive on fA. The fact
that E is a subobject of A × A implies in a similar way that fE is a subobject
of f(A × A) ∼= f(A) × f(A). Symmetry and reﬂexivity are preserved by any
functor, so fE is an equivalence relation on fA. Hence it is the kernel pair of its
coequalizer. Since f preserves colimits, that coequalizer is fA −→fB. So letting
Aij = Ai ×B Aj and Cij = fAi ×fB fAj for i, j = 1, 2, both rows in
C1,1 + C1,2 + C2,1 + C2,2
f(A1,1) + f(A1,2) + f(A2,1) + f(A2,2)
?
-
-
-
- fA
fB
-
fA
fB
-
?
=
?
=
are kernel pairs, so the left vertical arrow is an isomorphism, from which it follows
that each component is an isomorphism. The second component is the one we
were interested in.
(v).
Given the pullback
A1
B
-
A1 ×B A2
A2
-
?
?
the induced map f(A1 ×B A2) −→f(A1) ×fB f(A2) is monic.
Proof. This follows from the diagram
fA1 ×fB fA2
fA1 × fA2
-
f(A1 ×B A2)
f(A1 × A2)
-
?
?
∼=
where the horizontal arrows are induced by the mono A1 ×B A2 −→A1 × A2 (and
so are mono by (iii)) and the fact that if the composite of two arrows is monic
then so is the ﬁrst one.

7.3 Morphisms of Sites
253
(vi).
Given the pullback
A1
B
-
A1 ×B A2
A2
-
?
?
the induced map f(A1 ×B A2) −→f(A1) ×fB f(A2) is epic.
Proof. Since A is closed under sums, every object B has a presentation A −→B
(epi). Form the following diagram
A′
1
A
-
A′
1 ×A A′
2
A′
2
-
?
?
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
I
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
I
A1
B
-
A1 ×B A2
A2
-
?
?
A1 ×B A2
@
@
@
R
@
@
@
R
A2 ×B A2
   	
   	
   	
   	
A1 ×B A
   
   
   
in which A −→B is a presentation, and then A′
i −→Ai ×B A are presentations
for i = 1, 2. Furthermore, A′
i ×B A is a pullback which by (iv) is preserved by f.
The composite arrow in the upper left corner can be seen to be epi using Freyd’s
Theorem 7 of 7.1 (the near-exact embedding into a power of Set) and a diagram
chase in Set.

254
7 Representation Theorems
In the target category D we have a similar diagram:
fA′
1
fA
-
fA′
1 ×fA fA′
2
fA′
2
-
?
?
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
I
@
@
@
@
@
@
I
fA1
fB
-
fA1 ×fB fA2
fA2
-
?
?
f(A1 ×B A2)
@
@@
R
@
@@
R
fA2 ×fB fA2
   	
   	
   	
   	
fA1 ×fB fA
   
   
   
The maps fA′
i −→fAi ×fB fA (i = 1, 2) are epi because they are f of the
corresponding arrows in the diagram preceding this one. By the same argument
using Freyd’s representation theorem as was used in the earlier diagram,
fA′
1 ×fA fA′
2 −→fA1 ×fA fA2
is epi, so the second factor
f(A1 ×B fA2) −→fA1 ×fB fA2
is also epi.
(vii).
f preserves arbitrary pullbacks.
Proof. It follows from (v) and (vi) that f(A1 ×B A2) −→fA1 ×fB fA2 is an
isomorphism. Thus we can apply the argument used in (iii) above to the diagram
B1
B
-
B1 ×B B2
B2
-
?
?

7.3 Morphisms of Sites
255
by replacing A by B throughout.
There are other proofs of Proposition 1 known, not quite as long, which depend
on analyzing the form of the Kan extension. See for example Makkai and Reyes
[1977, Theorem 1.3.10].
In the application below, the categories B and D are both functor categories,
and the use of Freyd’s theorem can be avoided in that case by a direct argument.
Theorem 2.
Suppose A and C are sites, and f: A −→C is a morphism of
sites. Then there is a functor f#: Sh(A ) −→Sh(C ) which is left exact and has a
right adjoint for which
Sh(A )
Sh(C )
-
f#
A
C
-
f
?
y
?
y
commutes.
Proof. Form the diagram
C
SetC op
-
Y
A
SetA op
-
Y
?
f
Sh(C )
Sh(A )
?
f!
6
f ∗
-
L

I
-
L

I
?
f#
6
f ∗
in which f ∗is the functor composing with f and f! is the left Kan extension. Y
is Yoneda, I is inclusion, and L is sheaﬁﬁcation. y = L ◦Y . The fact that f is
cover-preserving easily implies that f ∗takes sheaves to sheaves and so induces a
functor which we also call f ∗on the sheaf categories. Then by Theorem 2 of 4.3,
f# = L ◦f! ◦I is left adjoint to f ∗.
The commutativity follows from the following calculation:
Hom(f#yA, F)∼= Hom(yA, f ∗F) = Hom(LY A, f ∗F)
∼= Hom(Y A, If ∗F) ∼= If ∗F(A) = IF(fA)
∼= Hom(Y fA, IF) ∼= Hom(LY fA, F) = Hom(yfA, F)◦
Since f! is an instance of f#, it commutes with Y .
Since Y is left exact,
f!Y = Y f is left exact and Proposition 1 forces f! to be left exact. Thus f# = Lf!I
is the composite of three left exact functors.

256
7 Representation Theorems
Exercise 7.3
1. Let A denote the category whose objects are Grothendieck toposes and whose
morphisms are left exact functors with a right adjoint (that is the adjoints to geo-
metric morphisms). Let B denote the category whose objects are essentially
small sites, meaning those sites which possess a small subcategory with the prop-
erty that every object of the site can be covered by covering sieves with domains
in that subcategory. There is an underlying functor U: A −→B which associates
to each Grothendieck topos the site which is the same category equipped with the
category of epimorphic families (which, in a Grothendieck topos, is the same as
the topology of regular epimorphic families). Show that the category of sheaves
functor is left adjoint to U.
7.4 Deligne’s Theorem
A topos E is coherent if it has a small full left exact generating subcategory
C such that every epimorphic family Ei −→C (for any object C) contains a
ﬁnite epimorphic subfamily. Johnstone [1977] gives a proof of a theorem due to
Grothendieck that characterizes coherent Grothendieck toposes as those which
are categories of sheaves on a site which is a left exact category with a topology
in which all the covers are ﬁnite. In Chapter 8, we will see that coherent to-
poses classify theories constructed from left exact theories by adding some ﬁnite
cocones. (In general, geometric theories allow cocones of arbitrary size).
Theorem 1.
[Deligne] Let E be a coherent Grothendieck topos. Then E has a
left exact embedding into a product of copies of the category of sets which is the
left adjoint of a geometric morphism.
Proof. Let E0 be the smallest subtopos of E which contains C as well as every
E -subobject of every object of C . E0 is small because each object has only a set
of subobjects (they are classiﬁed by maps to Ω), and we need only repeatedly
close under P, products and equalizers at most a countable number of times, and
take the union.
According to Theorem 7 of Section 7.1, there is a faithful near-exact embed-
ding T from E0 to a power of Set. f = T|C is left exact and preserves ﬁnite
epimorphic families which, given the nature of C , implies that it preserves covers
(by cover we mean in the topology of epimorphic families). We interrupt the
proof for
Lemma 2.
f preserves noncovers; that is, if a sieve {Ci −→C } is not a cover,
then {fCi −→fC} is not a cover.

7.5 Natural Number Objects
257
Proof. E = S Im(Ci −→C) exists in E because E is complete. Since E0 is closed
under subobjects, that union belongs to E0; moreover, by hypothesis, it cannot
be all of C. Therefore since T is faithful, it follows that TE is a proper subobject
of TC, through which all the TCi factor. Consequently all the fCi factor through
this same proper subobject of fC.
Let S be the codomain of f. By theorem 2 of Section 7.3, f: C −→S extends
to a left exact functor f#: E = Sh(C ) −→S which has a right adjoint f ∗. We
claim that f# is faithful. It is enough to show that given a proper subobject E0
of an object E, then f#(E0) is a proper subobject of f#(E).
Since C generates, there is an object C of C and an arrow C −→E which
does not factor through E0. Form the diagram
E0
E
-
-
E1
C
-
-
?
?
P Ci
-
-
in which the square is a pullback and the Ci are a cover of E1 and belong to C .
Since C −→E does not factor throught E0, E1 is a proper subobject and so the
sieve {Ci −→C} is a noncover. By Lemma 2 and the fact that f# is a left adjoint,
we have
f#E0
f#E
-
-
f#E1
f#C
-
-
?
?
P f#Ci
-
-
where the square is still a pullback and the sieve is a noncover. It follows that
the top map cannot be an isomorphism.
7.5 Natural Number Objects
In a topos, (A, a, t) is a pointed endomorphism structure, or PE-structure,
if a: 1 −→A is a global element of A and t: A −→A is an endomorphism. PE-
structures are clearly models of an FP-theory, and f: (A, a, t) −→(A′, a′, t′) is a

258
7 Representation Theorems
morphism of PE-structures if
a′@@
R
1
a  
?
f
A′
A′
-
t′
A
A
-
t
?
?
f
(1)
commutes.
A PE-structure N = (N, 0, s) is a natural number object or NNO (or ob-
ject of natural numbers or natural numbers object) if for any PE-structure (A, a, t)
there is a unique morphism t(−)a: (N, 0, s) −→(A, a, t). If we write (suggestively)
tn(a) for t(−)a(n) when n ∈N, then the deﬁning properties of a morphism of
PE-structure means that
(i) t0(a) = a, and
(ii) tsn(a) = t ◦tn(a).
It follows immediately that if we identify the natural number n with the global
element s◦s◦s · · · s◦0 (s occurring in the expression n times) of N, then expressions
like tn(a) are not ambiguous. However, now tn(a) is deﬁned for all elements n of
N, not merely those global elements obtained by applying s one or more times to
0.
In this section, we will derive some basic properties of natural number objects
and prove a theorem (Theorem 6 below) due to Freyd that characterizes them
by exactness properties. The proof is essentially the one Freyd gave; it makes
extensive use of his embedding theorems (Section 7.1).
We begin with Proposition 1 below, which says in eﬀect that any PE-structure
contains a substructure consisting of all elements tn(a). Note that this is a state-
ment about closure under a “countable” union in any topos, so it will not be a
surprise that the proof is a bit involved. Mikkelsen [1976] has shown that inter-
nal unions in PA, suitably deﬁned, always exist. (Of course, ﬁnite unions always
exist). That result and a proof of Proposition 1 based on it may be found in
Johnstone [1977].
Proposition 1.
If (A, a, t) is a PE-structure, then there is a substructure A′ of
A for which the restricted map ⟨a, t⟩: 1 + A′ −→A′ is epi.
The notation ⟨a, t⟩is deﬁned in Section 1.8. A PE-structure (A′, a′, t′) for
which ⟨a′, t′⟩is epi will be called a Peano system.

7.5 Natural Number Objects
259
Proof. We begin by deﬁning a natural transformation r: Sub(−×A) −→Sub(−×
A) which takes U ⊆A × B to
U ∩(Im(idB × a) ∪(idB × t)(U))
where (idB × t)(U) means the image of
U )−→B × A
idB × t
−−−−−−→B × A
That r is natural in B follows easily from the fact that pullbacks commute
with coequalizers, hence with images. Note that if A′ ⊆A then rA′ = A′ if and
only if A′ ⊆Ima ∪tA′.
The function r induces an arrow also called r: PA −→PA. Let E be the
equalizer of r and idPA. Deﬁne C by the pullback
∈A
PA × A
-
-
C
E × A
-
-
?
?
(2)
Here ∈A is deﬁned in Exercise 2 of Section 2.1.
In rest of the proof of
Proposition 1, we will repeatedly refer to the composites C −→E and C −→A
of the inclusion with the projections.
In the following lemma, A′ ⊆A corresponds to cA′: 1 −→PA.
Lemma 2.
The following are equivalent for a subobject A′ )−→A.
(i) A′ ⊆Ima ∪tA′◦
(ii) rA′ = A′
(iii) cA′: 1 −→PA factors through E by a map u: 1 −→E.
(iv) A′ can be deﬁned as a pullback
1
E
-
A′
C
-
?
?
(3)
for which the inclusion A′ )−→A = A′ −→C −→E × A −→A, the last map being
projection.

260
7 Representation Theorems
Proof. That (i) is equivalent to (ii) follows from the fact that in a lattice, A∩B =
B if and only if B ⊆A. That (ii) is equivalent to (iii) follows from the deﬁnition
of E: take B = 1 in the deﬁnition of r.
Assuming (iii), construct v: A′ −→C by the following diagram, in which the
outer rectangle is a pullback, hence commutative, and the bottom trapezoid is
the pullback (2).
∈A
PA × A
-
-
A′
A = 1 × A
-
-
?
    	
C
v
@
@
@@
R
C
E × A
-
-
E × A
A
-
idA
@
@
@@
R
?
u × idA
?
?
(4)
The last part of (iv) follows immediately from the preceding diagram.
Now in the following diagram, II, III, IV and the left rectangle are pullbacks
and III is a mono square. Hence I and therefore the top rectangle are pullbacks
by Exercise 12, Section 2.2.
C
E × A
-
-
A′
1 × A
-
-
?
E
-
p1
1
-
p1
?
u
∈A
PA × A
-
-
?
?
PA
-
?
?
u × idA
I
II
III
IV
(5)
Thus (iii) implies (iv).
Given (iv), let u: 1 −→E be the bottom arrow in (3). Then in (5), III is a
pullback and so is the rectangle I+II, so I is a pullback because II is a mono
square. Hence the rectangle I+III is a pullback. Clearly rectangle II+IV is a
pullback, so the outer square is a pullback as required.
Let D be the image of C −→E × A −→A. We will show that D is the
subobject required by Proposition 1.

7.5 Natural Number Objects
261
Lemma 3.
The statement
(A)
D ⊆Ima ∪tD
is true if and only if
(B)
the map e: P1 −→C in the following pullback is epi.
1 + C
A
P1
C
-
e
?
?
1 + A
-
-
(6)
Proof. We use Freyd’s near-exact embedding Theorem 7 of Section 7.1.
By
Lemma 2, the statement (A) is the same as saying that two subobjects of A
are equal, a statement both preserved and reﬂected by a near-exact faithful func-
tor. (Note that the deﬁnition of r involves almost all the constructions preserved
by a near-exact functor). Since statements (A) and (B) are equivalent in the
category of sets (easy), they are equivalent in a power of the category of sets
since all limits and colimits are constructed pointwise there. It thus follows from
the near-exact embedding theorem that (A) is equivalent to (B).
Now we will do another transference.
Lemma 4.
Suppose that for every global element c: 1 −→C the map f: P2 −→1
in the pullback
1 + C
A
P2
1
-
f
?
1 + A
-
-
C
?
?
(7)
is epic. Then (B) is true.
Proof. We ﬁrst observe that by a simple diagram chase, if e: P −→C is not epi,
then neither is the left vertical arrow in the following pullback diagram.
C
C × C
-
(c, idC)
P ′
P × C
-
?
?
e × idC
(8)

262
7 Representation Theorems
Now if e in (6) is not epi, its image in the slice E /C is not epi either. The
observation just made would then provide a global element of C in a diagram of
the form (7) in which the map P −→1 is not epic. The lemma then follows from
the fact that all constructions we have made are preserved by the logical functor
E −→E /C.
Lemma 5.
(B) is true.
Proof. We prove this by verifying the hypothesis of Lemma 4. Let c be a global
element of C. Deﬁne C′ by requiring that
1
E
C′
C
-
?
?
C
-
c
-
(9)
be a pullback, and P3 by requiring that the top square in
P2
1 + C
-
P3
1 + C′
-
?
?
?
f
?
1 + A
?
1
C′
-
′
A
-
(10)
be a pullback. The bottom square is (7) with c replaced by the global element
of C′ induced by c and the deﬁnition of C′. This square is easily seen to be a
pullback, so the big rectangle is a pullback.
Because g ◦h epi implies g epi, it suﬃces to show that P3 −→1 is epic. We
can see that by factoring the big rectangle in (10) vertically:
1
C′
-
P3
P4
-
?
?
A
-
1 + C′
-
?
?
Here P4 is deﬁned so that the right square is a pullback. The middle arrow is
epi by Lemma 2 and Lemma 3, so the left arrow is epi as required.

7.5 Natural Number Objects
263
By Lemma 5, D satisﬁes property (i) of Lemma 2. By Lemma 2, any subobject
A′ which has that property factors through C, hence through its image D. Since
Ima∪tD also has property (i) of Lemma 2 (easy), it must be that D = Ima∪tD.
This proves Proposition 1.
Theorem 6.
[Freyd] A PE-structure (A, a, t) for which
(i) ⟨a, t⟩is an isomorphism and
(ii) the coequalizer of idA and t is 1
is a natural number object, and conversely.
The proof will make use of
Proposition 7.
[The Peano Property] A PE structure (A, a, t) which satisﬁes
requirements (i) and (ii) of Theorem 6 has no proper PE-substructures.
Proof. Let (A′, a′, t′) be a substructure. By going to a subobject if necessary we
may assume by Proposition 1 that the restricted ⟨a′, t′⟩: 1+A′ −→A′ is epi. Since
this proposition concerns only constructions preserved by exact functors, we may
assume by Corollary 6 of Section 7.1 that the topos is well-pointed, hence by
Proposition 2 of the same section that it is Boolean.
Let A′′ be the complement of A′ in A. If the topos were Set, it would follow
from the fact that ⟨a, t⟩is an isomorphism on 1 + A and an epimorphism to A′
on 1 + A′ that
(∗)
tA′′ ⊆A′′
Since sums, isomorphisms, epimorphisms and subobjects are preserved by
near-exact functors, using the near-exact embedding of Theorem 7 of Section 7.1,
(*) must be true here. Thus t = t′ + t′′ where t′ and t′′ are the restrictions of t to
A′ and A′′, respectively. Since colimits commute with colimits, the coequalizer of
idA and t is the sum of the coequalizers of idA′ and t′ and of idA′′ and t′′. Such
a sum cannot be 1 unless one of the terms is 0 (Proposition 2(a) of Section 7.1).
Since A′ is a substructure it contains the global element a and so cannot be 0;
hence it must be A, as required.
We now have all the ingredients to prove Theorem 6. Suppose we are given
a natural number object N = (N, 0, s). We ﬁrst show (i) of the theorem. A
straightforward diagram chase shows that if i1: 1 −→1 + N is the inclusion and
t = i2 ◦⟨0, s⟩: 1 + N −→1 + N, then (1 + N, i1, t) is a PE-structure and ⟨0, s⟩
is a morphism from this structure to N. Thus the composite ⟨0, s⟩◦t(−)(i1) (we
remind you just this once that the last morphism, by deﬁnition, is the unique
morphism from N to (1 + N, i1, t)) is an endomorphism of N as a PE-structure,
so by deﬁnition of NNO must be the identity.

264
7 Representation Theorems
If we can show that the opposite composite t(−)(i1) ◦⟨0, s⟩is the identity on
1 + N we will have shown that ⟨0, s⟩is an isomorphism. That follows from this
calculation, in which we use the notation of (ii) at the beginning of this section:
t(−)(i1) ◦⟨0, s⟩= ⟨t0(i1), ts(i1)⟩
= ⟨i1, ts◦idN(i1)⟩= ⟨i1, t ◦t(−)(i1)⟩◦
But this last term is ⟨i1, i2⟩= id1+N, where i2 is the inclusion N −→1 + N,
since t = i2 ◦⟨0, s⟩and we have already shown that ⟨0, s⟩◦t(−)(i1) is the identity.
To show that 1 is the coequalizer of s and idN, we need to show that given any
f: N −→X with f ◦s = f, there is an arrow x: 1 −→X with f = x(). (As before,
() denotes the unique map from something to 1—here the something must be N).
We deﬁne x = f(0). It is easy to see that both f and x() are PE-morphisms from
N to the PE-structure (X, x, idX), hence must be the same. Uniqueness follows
because N has a global element 0, so the map N −→1 is epic.
For the converse, let (N, 0, s) satisfy (i) and (ii), so ⟨0, s⟩is an isomorphism and
the coequalizer of idN and s is 1. If (A, a, t) is any PE structure and f, g: N −→A
two PE-morphisms, then the equalizer of f and g would be a PE-substructure
of (N, 0, s), so must be all of N by Proposition 7. Hence (N, 0, s) satisﬁes the
uniqueness part of the deﬁnition of NNO.
Now suppose (B, b, u) is a PE-structure. Then so is (N × B, 0 × b, s × u). By
Proposition 1, this structure must contain a substructure (A, a, t) with ⟨a, t⟩epic.
Moreover, the projection maps composed with inclusion give PE-morphisms A
−→N = A )−→N × B −→N and A −→B = A )−→N × B −→B. Thus if we
can show that the map A −→N is an isomorphism, we will be done.
This map A −→N is epic because its image must be a PE-substructure of
(N, 0, s), so must be all of it by the Peano property. To see that it is monic (in
a topos, monic + epic = iso), it is suﬃcient to prove:
Proposition 8.
If ⟨a, t⟩is epi, ⟨0, s⟩is an isomorphism, the coequalizer of idN
and s is 1, and f: A −→N is a PE-morphism, then f is monic.
Proof. The constructions involved in this statement are all preserved by exact
functors, so it is enough to prove it in a well-pointed topos. Let K )−→A × A
be the kernel pair of f, K′ the complement of the diagonal ∆in K, and N ′ the
image of the map K′ −→A −→N (take either projection for K′ −→A—the kernel
pair is symmetric). Let M be the complement of N ′. We must show M = N,
for then N ′ = 0, so K′ = 0 (the only maps to an initial object in a topos are
isomorphisms), so K = ∆and f is then monic.
We show that M = N by using the Peano property.

7.6 Countable Toposes and Separable Toposes
265
If a global element n of N is in N ′ it must lift to at least two distinct global
elements a1, a2 of A for which fa1 = fa2. (This is because Hom(1, −) preserves
epis by Proposition 2 of Section 7.1, so an element of N ′ must lift to an element
of K′.) If it is in M it must lift to a unique element of A which f takes to n.
Since any element of N must be in exactly one of N ′ or M, the converse is true
too: An element which lifts uniquely must be in M.
Suppose the global element 0: 1 −→N lifted to some a1 other than a. (Of
course it lifts to a.) Since ⟨a, t⟩is epi, a1 = t(a2). Thus 0 = ft(a2) = sf(a2) which
would contradict the fact that ⟨0, s⟩is an isomorphism. Thus by the argument
in the preceding paragraph, a ∈M. A very similar argument shows that if the
global element n of N has a unique lifting then so does sn. Hence sM ⊆M, so
by the Peano property, M = N as required.
Corollary 9.
An exact functor between toposes takes a NNO to a NNO.
Exercise 7.5
1.
(a) Show that Set × Set is a topos with natural number object N × N.
(b) Show more generally that if E1 and E2 are toposes with natural number
objects N1 and N2, respectively, then E1 × E2 is a topos with natural number
object N1 × N2.
7.6 Countable Toposes and Separable Toposes
A Grothendieck topos is called separable if it is the category of sheaves on a site
which is countable as a category and which, in addition, has the property that
there is a countable base for the topology. By the latter condition is meant that
there is a countable set of covering sieves such that a presheaf is a sheaf if and
only if it satisﬁes the sheaf condition with respect to that set of sieves. Makkai
and Reyes [1977] have generalized Deligne’s theorem to the case of separable
toposes. In the process of proving this, we also derive a theorem on embedding
of countable toposes due to Freyd [1972].
Standard toposes
A topos E is called standard if for any object A of E and any reﬂexive,
symmetric relation R ⊆A × A the union of the composition powers of R exists.
That is if R(n) is deﬁned inductively by letting R(1) = R and R(n+1) be the image

266
7 Representation Theorems
in A × A of the pullback R(n) ×A R, then we have
R ⊆R(1) ⊆R(2) ⊆· · · ⊆R(n) ⊆· · ·
and we are asking that this chain have a union. By Exercise 5 of Section 6.8, this
union, when it exists, is the least equivalence relation containing by R. Such a
least equivalence relation always exists, being the kernel pair of the coequalizer of
the two projections of R, so this condition is equivalent to requiring that {R(n)}
be an epimorphic family over that least equivalence relation. Of course if the
topos has countable sums the union may be formed as the image in A × A of the
sum of those composition powers. Hence we have,
Proposition 1.
A countably complete topos is standard.
Proposition 2.
Let E be a standard topos and u: E −→F be a near exact
functor that preserves countable epimorphic families. Then u is exact.
Proof. It is suﬃcient to show that u preserves coequalizers. In any regular cat-
egory the coequalizer of a parallel pair of maps is the same as the coequalizer of
the smallest equivalence relation it generates. The reﬂexive, symmetric closure
of a relation R ⊆B ×B is R∨∆∨Rop, a construction which is preserved by near
exact functors. Thus it is suﬃcient to show that such a functor u preserves the
coequalizer of a reﬂexive, symmetric relation.
“endcomment
So let R be a reﬂexive, symmetric relation and E be its transitive closure.
Then by hypothesis the composition powers, R(n) of R, are dense in E. Hence
the images uR(n) ∼= (uR)(n) are dense in uE.
The isomorphism comes from
the fact that all constructions used in the building the composition powers are
preserved by near exact functors. Moreover, uE is an equivalence relation for
similar reasons: the transitivity comes from a map E ×B E −→E and this arrow
is simply transported to F. The least equivalence relation on uB generated by
uR contains every composition power of uR, hence their union which is uE. Since
uE is an equivalence relation, this least equivalence relation is exactly uE.
To ﬁnish the argument, we observe that near exact functors preserve coequal-
izers of eﬀective equivalence relations. This is a consequence of the facts that
they preserve regular epis, that they preserve kernel pairs and that every regular
epi is the coequalizer of its kernel pair.
Proposition 3.
If u: E −→F is an exact embedding (not necessarily full)
between toposes and F is standard, so is E .
Proof. Let R be a reﬂexive, symmetric relation and E be the least equivalence
relation containing it. If the composition powers of R do not form an epimorphic

7.6 Countable Toposes and Separable Toposes
267
family over E, there is a proper subobject D ⊆E which contains every R(n).
Applying u and using the fact that it is faithful, we ﬁnd that uD is a proper
subobject of uE that contains every uR(n). But the construction of E as the
kernel pair of a coequalizer is preserved by exact functors, so the uR(n) must
cover uE in the standard topos F. Thus E must be standard as well.
Proposition 4.
A small topos is standard if and only if it has an exact embed-
ding into a complete topos that preserves epimorphic families. If the domain is
Boolean, resp. 2-valued, the codomain may be taken to be Boolean, resp. 2-valued.
Proof. The “only if” part is a consequence of Propositions 1 and 3. As for the
converse, it suﬃces to take the category of sheaves for the topology of epimorphic
families. The functor y of Section 6.8 is an embedding that preserves epimorphic
families, and Proposition 2 gives the conclusion.
If B is a Boolean topos, this embedding may be followed by the associated
sheaf functor into the category of double negation sheaves. An exact functor on
a Boolean topos is faithful if and only if it identiﬁes no non-zero object to zero
(Exercise 4 of Section 7.1). But an object B is identiﬁed to 0 if and only if 0
−→B is dense, which is impossible for B ̸= 0 as 0 certainly has a complement.
If B is 2-valued, every map to 1 with a non-0 domain is a cover. If F ̸= 0 is a
presheaf and B −→F is an arbitrary element of F, then B −→F −→1 is epi,
whence so is F −→1. Thus 1 has no proper subobjects except 0 and so the topos
is 2-valued.
A topos with an NNO is called N-standard if the ordinary natural numbers
(that is, 0, 1, 2, 3, · · ·) form an epimorphic family over N. It follows from Theo-
rem 6 of Section 7.5 that an exact functor preserves the NNO, if any. It is clear
that any countably complete topos is N-standard since N is then the sum of the
ordinary natural numbers. If E is a standard topos with an NNO, then from
Proposition 4 it follows that E has an exact embedding into a complete topos
that preserves epimorphic families. As in the proof of Proposition 3, a faithful
exact functor reﬂects epimorphic families. Thus we have,
Proposition 5.
A standard topos has an exact embedding into an N-standard
topos that preserves epimorphic families; moreover a standard topos with an NNO
is N-standard.
Proposition 6. An N-standard topos has an exact embedding into an N-standard
Boolean topos that preserves epimorphic families.
Proof. Apply Theorem 3 of Section 7.1. The embedding preserves N and pre-
serves epimorphic families.

268
7 Representation Theorems
Proposition 7.
A countable N-standard Boolean topos has a logical functor to
a 2-valued N-standard Boolean topos.
Proof. We begin by observing that if U is a subobject of 1 in a topos E , then
the induced maps from subobject lattices in E to those of E /U are surjective.
Moreover a slice functor has a right adjoint and so preserves epimorphic families.
Now let B be a Boolean topos with a standard NNO and let U1, U2, · · · enumerate
the subobjects of N. Having constructed the sequence
B −→B1 −→B2 −→· · · −→Bn
of toposes and logical functors gotten by slicing by subobjects of 1, we continue
as follows. Let m be the least integer for which the image of Um in Bn is non-0.
Since the natural numbers are an epimorphic family over N, there is at least one
natural number, say p: 1 −→N for which the pullback
Um
N
-
P
1
-
?
?
is non-0. The process can even be made constructive by choosing the least such.
Then let Bn+1 = Bn/P. In the limit topos, every non-0 subobject of N has a
global section which is a natural number. There are two conclusions from this.
First, the natural numbers cover and second, since 1 is subobject of N, every
non-0 subobject of 1 also has a global section which implies that the topos is
2-valued.
It is worth mentioning that the transﬁnite generalization of this argument
breaks down because at the limit ordinals you will lose the property of being
N-standard; the epimorphic families may cease being so at the limits (where the
transition functors are not faithful; see Lemma 9 below). The proof above uses
an explicit argument to get around that.
Corollary 8.
Let B be a countable N-standard Boolean topos. Then for every
non-0 object A of B, there is a logical functor from B into a countable 2-valued
N-standard topos in which A has a global section.
Proof. Just apply the above construction to B/A and replace, if necessary, the
resultant topos by a countable subtopos that contains A, N and the requisite
global sections.

7.6 Countable Toposes and Separable Toposes
269
Lemma 9. Let Eα be a directed diagram of toposes and faithful logical morphisms
which preserve epimorphic families.
Let E = colim Eα.
Then for any α the
canonical functor Eα −→E is faithful, logical and preserves epimorphic families.
Proof. We use the notation Tβ,α: Eα −→Eβ for α ≤β and Tα: Eα −→E for the
element of the cocone.
Let fi: Ei −→E be an epimorphic family in Eα.
Let
g, h: TαE −→E′ be distinct maps in E . Directedness implies the existence of
β ≥α, an object E′′ of Eβ and (necessarily distinct) maps
g′, h′: Tβ,αE −→E′′
such that Tβ(g′) = g and Tβ(h′) = h. Since {Tβ,αfi} is also an epimorphic family,
there is an index i for which
g′ ◦Tβ,αfi ̸= h′ ◦Tβ,αfi
Since for all γ ≥β, Tγ,β is faithful, it follows that
Tβg′ ◦Tαfi ̸= Tβh′ ◦Tαfi
which shows that the {Tαfi} are an epimorphic family. The fact that the Tα are
faithful and logical is implicit in what we have done.
Proposition 10.
Every countable N-standard Boolean topos has a logical em-
bedding into a product of N-standard well-pointed toposes.
Proof. For a non-zero object A of the topos there is, by Corollary 9, a logical
functor into a countable 2-valued N-standard topos B in which A is not sent to
zero (in fact has a global section). Enumerate the elements of B and deﬁne a
sequence of toposes B = B0 ⊆B1 ⊆B2 ⊆· · · in which Bi+1 is obtained from
Bi by applying that Corollary to the ith object in the enumeration. If Bω is
the direct limit of this process, then every object of B has a global section in
Bω. Moreover, it follows from Exercise 4 of Section 7.1 and Lemma 9 that the
resultant functor B −→Bω is logical, faithful and preserves epimorphic families
from which it follows that Bω is N-standard. Applying the same argument to
the sequence B ⊆Bω ⊆Bωω ⊆Bωωω ⊆· · ·, and repeating the above argument
gives the required result.
Proposition 11.
An N-standard topos is standard.
Proof. The conclusion is valid as soon as it is valid in every countable subtopos.
Propositions 6 and 7 reduce it to the case of a 2-valued N-standard Boolean
topos. Accordingly, let B be such a topos, B be an object of B and R ⊆B × B

270
7 Representation Theorems
be a reﬂexive, symmetric relation on B. Using the mapping properties of N, let
f: N −→2B×B be the unique map such that the diagram
‘∆’@
@@
R
1
   
?
f
2B×B
2B×B
-
R ◦−
N
N
-
?
?
f
commutes.
Here ‘∆’ corresponds to the diagonal of B × B and R ◦−is the
internalization of the operation on subobjects of B × B which is forming the
composition with R. It is constructed using the Yoneda lemma.
The transpose of f is a map g: N×B×B −→2 which classiﬁes Q = [(n, b1, b2) |
(b1, b2) ∈R(n)]. The image E of Q in B × B under the projection is intuitively
the set of all [(b1, b2)] which are in some R(n). The diagram
R(n)
Q
-
B × B
N × B × B
-
n × B × B
?
?
1
-
2
-
?
?
(∗)
shows that every R(n) is contained in E.
We claim that E is an equivalence
relation. First observe that in a 2-valued N-standard Boolean topos the only
global sections of N are the standard ones (that is are either 0 or one its successors;
this is, of course, where the present use of “standard” comes from). For when
1 has no proper non-0 subobjects, any two global sections are equal or disjoint.
Moreover, in an N-standard topos, no subobject of N, hence no global section
can be disjoint from every standard global section. Hence, every global section
is a standard one. Second observe that in a well-pointed topos, two subobjects
of an object are equal if and only if they admit the same global sections. Thus
to show that E ◦E ⊆E, it is suﬃcient to show it on global sections. A global
section of E lifts to one on Q and a global section on E ◦E lifts to a pair of
sections (n, b1, b2) and (m, b2, b3) such that (b1, b2) ∈R(n) and (b2, b3) ∈R(m). We
can easily show by induction that
R(n) ◦R(m) ⊆R(m+n) ⊆E
from which it follows that E is an equivalence relation.

7.6 Countable Toposes and Separable Toposes
271
To complete the argument, we observe that since the natural numbers cover
N and products have adjoints, the maps n × B × B cover N × B × B as n varies
over the standard natural numbers. Since (*) is a pullback, it follows that the
various R(n) cover Q and a fortiori cover E. Hence B is standard.
Proposition 12.
[Freyd] Every countable standard topos can be embedded ex-
actly into a power of Set.
Proof. By Proposition 5 a countable standard topos has an exact embedding into
an N-standard topos which by Proposition 6 can be exactly embedded into an
N-standard Boolean topos. By replacing the target by a countable subtopos, we
can apply Proposition 10 to embed it logically—hence exactly—into a product of
N-standard well-pointed toposes. In a well-pointed topos, the functor Hom(1, −)
is an exact Set-valued functor. Putting this all together, we have the desired
conclusion.
Recall that a separable topos is the category of sheaves on a site which is
both countable and for which there is a set of countable covers that generate the
topology.
Theorem 13.
[Makkai and Reyes] If E is a separable Grothendieck topos, then
there is a faithful family of Set-valued left exact functors on E which have right
adjoints.
Set-valued functors on a topos which are left exact and have a right adjoint
are called points. This theorem says that a separable Grothendieck topos has
enough points.
Proof. Let E be a separable topos. For each object C of E and proper subobject
E of C, we construct inside E a countable subcategory C with certain properties.
It should be a topos; it should contain the image of E )−→C, the NNO of E (so
C is standard), and a generating set for E . It should contain all the objects used
in the countably many sieves {Ai −→A} that generate the topology. It should
also include the sum S of the objects that appear in each such sieve, together
with the coproduct injections, the induced map S −→A and the unique arrow S
−→N for which
A
N
-
Ai
1
-
?
?
(∗)
is a pullback. Since we are closing a countable category under ﬁnitary and count-
able operations, the resulting category is countable, by exactly the same kind of

272
7 Representation Theorems
argument that you use to show that the free group generated by a countable set
is countable. Note that S is not in general the categorical sum in C .
Now apply Freyd’s Theorem 12 to get a faithful family of exact functors
C −→Set. Each such functor takes (*) to a similar diagram from which it is
clear that each such functor preserves the sum P An.
Since that sum maps
epimorphically onto A, each of the functors preserves the covers which generate
the topology and hence extends to a point of E .
7.7 Barr’s Theorem
By adapting the proof of Theorem 4 of Section 7.1, we can obtain the following
proposition, from which we can deduce an embedding theorem for any Grothen-
dieck topos.
Proposition 1.
For every small Boolean topos B there is a small Boolean
topos B in which subobjects of 1 generate, and a logical morphism B −→B
which preserves epimorphic families.
Proof. . Well-order the set of objects of B which have global support. Given
a Boolean topos B and an object A of global support, the map B −→B/A is
faithful by Exercise 1 of Section 5.2, and preserves epimorphic families because
it has a right adjoint.
Moreover, the image of A has a global section.
Thus
we can construct a well-ordered sequence of Boolean toposes Bα together with
faithful logical morphisms Tβ,α: Bα −→Bβ whenever α ≤β as follows. Begin by
letting B0 = B. Having constructed Bα together with the appropriate transition
functor, let A be the least object in the well-ordering which has global support
and lacks a global section. Take Bα+1 = Bα/A. At a limit ordinal take a direct
limit. In the latter case preservation of epimorphic families follows from Lemma 9
of Section 7.6. Taking the direct limit of this sequence, we get a Boolean topos
eB and a faithful logical morphism B −→eB which preserves epimorphic families,
again by Lemma 9. Moreover, every object of B with global support has a global
section in eB.
By iterating this construction a countable number of times, and taking the
directed limit of the resulting sequence, we get a topos B and a logical morphism
B −→B which is faithful and preserves epimorphic families. In B, every object
with global support has a global section. If A is an arbitrary object of B with
support S, let T be the complement of S in the subobject lattice of 1. Then the
object A + T has a global section which restricts to a section of A −→S. Hence
the subobjects of 1 generate.

7.7 Barr’s Theorem
273
Theorem 2.
[Barr] Every Grothendieck topos has a left exact cotripleable em-
bedding into the topos of sheaves on a complete Boolean algebra.
Proof. To show that an exact functor is cotripleable, it is suﬃcient to show that
it is faithful and has a right adjoint. Let E be a Grothendieck topos. Let C be
a small topos contained in E which contains a set of generators for E so that
E is the category of canonical sheaves on C as in Theorem 1 of 6.8. Combining
Theorem 3 of 7.1 with the above proposition we conclude that C can be embedded
into a Boolean topos B# which is generated by its subobjects of 1 so that the
embedding is left exact and preserves epimorphic families. If c
B is the completion
of the Boolean algebra B of subobjects of 1 in B#, we claim that B# is embedded
in the category Sh(c
B) of sheaves on c
B and this embedding is exact and preserves
epimorphic families. Assuming this true, the result follows from Theorem 2 of
7.3 plus Theorem 1 of 6.8.
To complete the argument, we must show that B# is embedded in Sh(c
B).
There is a functor B# −→Sh(c
B) given by representing an element b ∈c
B as
sup bi, with bi in B and deﬁning, for an object C of B# the presheaf on c
B given
by colim Hom(bi, C). These are not necessarily sheaves, so we must follow this by
the associated sheaf functor. To see that the resultant composite is faithful, let
C )−→D be a non-isomorphic mono in B# and let E be a complement of C in
D. Then E is not the initial object of B# so that it has a section over a non-zero
object of B and hence is not the initial presheaf. The associated sheaf contains
a quotient of E and cannot be the initial sheaf. But it remains a complement of
the sheaf associated to C so that the inclusion of C into D does not induce an
isomorphism and the functor is faithful.
Note that the existence of the right adjoint to this left exact embedding means
that the embedding is the left adjoint part of a geometric morphism. Part of the
signiﬁcance of this result arises from the following.
Theorem 3.
Let E be the category of sheaves on a complete Boolean algebra.
Then E satisﬁes the Axiom of Choice.
Proof. We begin by observing that if B is a complete Boolean algebra, a functor
F: Bop −→Set is a sheaf if and only if whenever b = S bi is a disjoint union, Fb ∼=
Q Fbi, the isomorphism being the canonical map. The condition is necessary for
then the bi cover b and the intersection of any two of them is empty. To see that
the condition is suﬃcient it is enough to note that every cover has a reﬁnement
which is disjoint. For if b = S bi is not disjoint, choose a simple ordering of the
index set and replace bi by bi −S bj, the union taken over the j⟨i.
Next we note that an epimorphism is onto. Let f: F −→→G be an epimorphism
of sheaves and G0 )−→G be the presheaf image of the map.
We claim that

274
7 Representation Theorems
G0 = G. For let b = S bi be a disjoint union. In the diagram
Q Fbi
Q G0bi
-
-
Fb
G0
-
-
?
?
Q Gbi
-
-
G
-
-
?
?
it is easy to see that when the outer vertical arrows are isomorphisms, so is the
middle one. Thus G0 is a sheaf, which shows that G0 = G. Now to split the epi f,
we choose a maximal element (J, h) among the partially ordered set of pairs (I, g)
in which I is an ideal of B and g is a splitting of f|I. If J is not the whole of B,
we consider separately the cases that J is or is not principal. In the former case,
let J = (b) and suppose b′ /∈J. Then we may replace b′ by b′−b and suppose that
b′ is disjoint from b. Given an element of x ∈Gb′, choose an arbitrary element of
y ∈Fb′ mapping to it and extend h by h(b′ ∪c) = y ∪hc. It is easy to see that
this gives a morphism of presheaves, hence of sheaves. If J is not principal, let
b = S J and extend h to b by h(b) = S h(J). We see, using the fact that F and
G are sheaves that this extends h. This completes the construction of a section
of f.
7.8 Notes to Chapter 7
The results of Section 7.1, Section 7.5, and the parts of Section 7.6 pertaining to
standard toposes appeared in a remarkable paper that Peter Freyd wrote during
a visit to Australia in 1971 [Freyd, 1972]. These results form the basis for the
modern representation theory of toposes. We have followed Freyd’s exposition
quite closely.
Although Barr’s theorem [Barr, 1974] appeared two years later than Freyd’s
paper, the work was done in ignorance of Freyd’s work with a proof quite diﬀerent
from that presented here. The latter is, of course, based on the ideas used by
Freyd. There is an entirely diﬀerent proof of this theorem due to Diaconescu
which is given in Johnstone [1977]. The result was in response to a question
of Lawvere’s as to whether the example of a Boolean-valued model of set theory
for which the Boolean algebra lacked points (complete 2-valued homomorphisms)
was essentially the most general example of a topos without points. The result,
that every topos has a faithful point in a suitable Boolean topos, showed that the
Lawvere’s surmise was correct.
Diaconescu [1975] was the ﬁrst to show that AC implied Boolean.

7.8 Notes to Chapter 7
275
Deligne’s theorem [SGA 4, 1972] was proved for the purposes of algebraic
geometry. The original proof was completely diﬀerent. So far as we know, this
is the ﬁrst place in which it has been derived as a simple consequence of Freyd’s
theorem.
Makkai and Reyes [1977] proved the theorem credited to them without refer-
ence to Freyd’s work. Again, this seems to be the ﬁrst place in which the proof
is done using Freyd’s results.
Johnstone [1977] has put down Freyd’s representation theorems as “. . . some-
thing of a blind alley”.
This chapter clearly demonstrates the utility of the
theorems. It is possible, of course, to want to avoid the use of Freyd’s theorems
out of dislike of the use of representation theory for proving things, or from a
more general preference for elementary or constructive methods. We do not share
those attitudes. We feel it is a matter of taste whether, for example, the proof we
have given of the fact that AC implies Boolean is better or worse than a harder,
but elementary proof. We generally prefer a proof which is more readily under-
stood. (That is not necessarily the same as easier—see our proof of Proposition 1
of Section 7.3).
There are other useful representation theorems. For example, Makkai and
Reyes [1977, Theorem 6.3.1] show that any Grothendieck topos can be embedded
into the topos of sheaves on a complete Heyting algebra by a functor which is
the left adjoint part of a geometric morphism and which preserves all infs as well
as ∀. They also show [Theorem 6.3.3] that when there are enough points the
Heyting algebra can be taken to be the open set lattice of a topological space.
In both Abelian categories and regular categories there is a full embedding
theorem, which states that there is a full, exact embedding into a standard cate-
gory. In the case of Abelian categories, the standard categories are the categories
of R-modules for rings R, while in the regular case it was Set-valued functor cat-
egories. (A Set-valued functor category can be viewed as the category of M-sets
where is M is a monoid with many objects, i.e. a category.) The corresponding
theorem for toposes would be a full, exact embedding into a functor category.
Makkai [unpublished] has given an example of a topos that has no such full em-
bedding. Fortunately, these full embeddings have had very limited usefulness.
The existence of an embedding that reﬂects isomorphisms has allowed all the
diagram-chasing arguments that one seems to need.
It should be observed that hypotheses that a topos be small or even countable
are not a signiﬁcant limitation on results used for diagram-chasing. Any diagram
involves only a ﬁnite number of objects and morphisms and can be taken as
being in some countable subtopos. We have already illustrated the technique in
Section 7.6.

276
7 Representation Theorems
One of the main thrusts of categorical logic is the exploitation of the insight
that each pretopos corresponds to a theory in the sense of model theory (a lan-
guage, a set of deduction rules and a set of axioms), and vice versa.
Under
this equivalence, embedding theorems correspond to completeness theorems—
theorems to the eﬀect that if a statement made in the language is true in every
model of a certain type, then it follows from the axioms. In particular, Deligne’s
theorem is an easy consequence of G¨odel’s completeness theorem for ﬁnitary ﬁrst
order logic. In fact it is equivalent to that theorem for the case of ﬁnitary geo-
metric theories. Barr’s theorem can be interpreted as saying that if something
follows by classical logic from the axioms, then it follows by intuitionistic logic.
See Makkai, Reyes [1977] and Lambek-Scott [1986] for more details.

8
Cocone Theories
In this chapter, we consider a general type of theory which is left exact and
which in addition has various types of cocones included in the structure.
In
the kinds of theories considered here, the family of cocones which is part of the
structure is always induced by the covers of a Grothendieck topology according
to a construction which we will now describe.
Let S = {Ai −→A} be a sieve indexed by I in a left exact category C . Form
a graph I whose objects are I + (I × I), with arrows of the form
i
l
←−−(i, j)
r
−−→j
We deﬁne a diagram D: I −→C which takes i to Ai and (i, j) to the ﬁber
product Ai ×A Aj. The cocone induced by S is the cocone from D to A whose
arrows are the arrows of the sieve S.
The reason for this restriction is not that this is the only conceivable kind of
cocone theory, but this the only kind of theory for which there is a generic topos
(classifying topos).
8.1 Regular Theories
A regular sketch R = (G , U, D, C, E) is a sketch (G , U, D, C) together with a
class E of arrows in G . A model of R is a model of the sketch which satisﬁes the
additional condition that every arrow in E is taken to a regular epimorphism.
A preregular theory is a left exact theory Th together with a class E of
arrows. A model of a preregular theory is a left exact functor which takes every
arrow in E to a regular epimorphism. It is clear that if R is a regular sketch, then
the left exact theory generated by R in the sense of Section 4.4 is a preregular
theory, which we will denote PR(R), with the “same” class E of arrows.
The sieves are, of course, the single arrow sieves and the corresponding cocones
consist of diagrams
A ×B A −→
−→A
e
−−→B
for e ∈E. If a functor M is left exact, then it is immediate that M takes (∗) into
a colimit if and only if M(e) is regular epi. Thus models are indeed characterized
277

278
8 Cocone Theories
by the properties of being left exact and taking the corresponding cocones to
colimits.
A regular theory Th is a regular category, i.e., a left exact category in which
regular epis are stable under pullbacks. A model of a regular theory is a regular
functor which we will always suppose to take values in a regular category. This
is the same as the model of the underlying regular sketch which has all regular
epis as its distinguished class of morphisms.
In this section, we show how to begin with a regular sketch R and construct
the regular theory induced by R. In regular categories, it will have the same
models as R.
An example of such a theory which arises in real life is the theory of regular
rings. (The coincidence of terminology is purely accidental). A regular ring is a
ring A in which for every element a there is an element b such that aba = a. This
condition can be rewritten as follows: Deﬁne B = {(a, b) | aba = a} ⊆A × A.
Then A is a regular ring if and only if the composite B −→A × A −→A (the last
map is the ﬁrst projection) is surjective.
The regular sketch to describe regular rings can be constructed as follows.
Begin with the sketch for rings in which A denotes the ring and add an object B
together with an arrow B −→A2 and a cone that forces the image of B in any
model to be [(a, b) | aba = a]. Then E consists of the single arrow B −→A that
corresponds to the ﬁrst projection.
Notice that B and the map from B to A can be deﬁned in an arbitrary left
exact category (B is an equalizer). We say that a ring object in an arbitrary
regular category is a regular ring object if the map B −→A is a regular epi. Of
course, other deﬁnitions of regular ring object in a category are conceivable; e.g.,
one could ask that the map be a split epi. However, an attempt to formalize
this would almost surely lead to the introduction of a splitting map deﬁned by
equations as part of the structure. This would lead to a non-full subcategory
of the category of rings. In the case of commutative rings and some classes of
non-commutative rings, this equational deﬁnition is actually equivalent to the
existential one.
Another example of a regular theory is the theory of groups in which every
element is an nth power for some ﬁxed n > 1 (see Exercise 1).
Regular theories from regular sketches
If R is a regular sketch, then as remarked above, it generates a preregular
theory PR(R) with the same models by following the process of Section 4.4 and
taking for the class of arrows the image of the given class in the regular sketch.

8.1 Regular Theories
279
This preregular theory PR(R) generates a site by closing the class E under
pullbacks and composition to obtain a topology. The covers in this topology each
consist of only one arrow. This site is also a preregular theory, with E consisting
of all arrows which are covers in the resulting topology.
Proposition 1.
A model in a regular category of PR(R) is the same as a model
for the site generated by R.
Proof. This follows from the fact that a model preserves pullbacks and compo-
sition, and a pullback of a regular epi in a regular category is a regular epi.
Now given a regular sketch R, we deﬁne Reg(R), the regular theory associated
to R, to be the full image of the composite
A
Y
−−→SetA op
L
−−→Sh(Th)
where A is the site generated by R, Y is the Yoneda embedding and L is sheaﬁ-
ﬁcation. Observe that Reg(A ) = Reg(R).
The induced map A −→Reg(A ) will be denoted y.
Note that y is left
exact. If A is already a regular category, then by Proposition 4 of Section 6.7,
A = Reg(A ).
Proposition 2.
In the notation of the preceding paragraph, the covers in A
become regular epis in Reg(A ).
Proof. Let f: B −→A be a cover. In a left exact category to say that yf is a
regular epi is to say that
y(B ×A B) ∼= yB ×yA yB −→
−→yB −→yA
is a coequalizer. This is equivalent to saying that for every sheaf F,
Hom(yA, F) −→Hom(yB, F) −→
−→Hom(y(B ×A B), F)
is an equalizer. Now yA = LY (A) where L is left adjoint to the inclusion of the
sheaf category, so
Hom(y(−), F) ∼= Hom(Y (−), F) ∼= F(−)
Hence
FA −→FB −→
−→F(B ×A B)
must be an equalizer, which is exactly the condition that F be a sheaf.

280
8 Cocone Theories
Proposition 3.
Let A and B be preregular theories and f: A −→B a left
exact functor which takes arrows in the distinguished class of A to arrows in the
distinguished class of B. Then there is a unique regular functor Reg(f): Reg(A )
−→Reg(B) for which
Reg(A )
Reg(B)
-
Reg(f)
A
B
-
f
?
y
?
y
commutes.
Proof. The condition on f is equivalent to the assertion that it is a morphism of
the associated sites. The map f# constructed in Theorem 2 of Section 7.3 clearly
takes yA into yB, and so takes Reg(A ) into Reg(B).
Corollary 4.
If B in the diagram above is a regular theory and A is the site
associated to some regular sketch R, then there is an equivalence of categories
between models of R in B and regular morphisms from Reg(R) = Reg(A ) to B.
In other words, every regular sketch R has a model in a universal regular
theory Reg(R) which induces an equivalence of model categories.
Exercise 8.1
1.
(a) Let n > 1 be an integer. Say that a group G is n-divisible if for any
a ∈G there is a b ∈G for which bn = a. Show that the category of n-divisible
groups (and all group homomorphisms between them) is the category of models
for a regular theory.
(b) Show that the group of all 2n roots of unity is 2-divisible. This group is
denoted Z2∞.
(c) Show that in the category of 2-divisible groups, the equalizer of the zero
map and the squaring maps on Z2∞is Z/2Z, which is not divisible. Conclude that
there is no left exact theory which has this category as its category of algebras
and for which the underlying set functor is represented by one of the types.
8.2 Finite Sum Theories
If we wanted to construct a theory of ﬁelds, we could clearly start with the sketch
for commutative rings, let us say with an object F representing the ring. Since

8.2 Finite Sum Theories
281
the inverse is deﬁned only for the subset of nonzero elements, we need to add an
object Y to be the nonzero elements and a map Y −→Y together with equations
forcing this map to be the inverse map. All this is clear, except how to force Y
to be the nonzero elements. We will see in Section 8.4 that this cannot be done
in an LE or even a regular theory.
The approach we take is based on the observation that a ﬁeld is the sum
(disjoint union) of Y and a set Z = {0}. Thus to the LE-sketch of commutative
rings we add objects Y and Z and arrows
Z −→F ←−Y
Besides this, we need an arrow from Y to Y which takes an element to its inverse,
and a diagram forcing any element of Z to be zero (remember zero is already given
by an arrow from the terminal object to F in the LE-theory of commutative rings).
This can be done by techniques of Chapter 4 so we will not give details here.
A ﬁeld is a model of this theory which takes (1) to a sum diagram. This
construction suggests that we vary the concept of regular theory deﬁned in Sec-
tion 8.1 to allow more general classes of covers. In this section, we develop the
idea of a ﬁnite-sum theory.
A ﬁnite-sum sketch or FS-sketch S = (G , U, D, C, E) is a sketch (G , U, D, C)
with a class E of ﬁnite sieves.
A model of S is a LE-model of the sketch
(G , U, D, C) which takes each sieve to a sum diagram. In this book, the models
will be in left exact categories with disjoint ﬁnite universal sums.
A pre-FS-theory is an LE-theory together with a distinguished class of
sieves.
Again, a model of the theory is an LE model which takes the sieves
to sums.
An FS-sketch clearly induces a pre-FS-theory by taking the theory
to be the LE completion of the sketch and taking as distinguished sieves those
corresponding to the distinguished sieves of the original sketch.
An FS-theory is a left exact category with ﬁnite disjoint universal sums. It
will be regarded as a pre-FS-theory by taking all ﬁnite sums as distinguished
sieves. A model of one FS-theory in another is a left exact functor that preserves
ﬁnite sums.
An FS-sketch S induces an FS-theory FS(S ) in the following way. Begin
with the LE-theory and take as covers the images of all the sieves in the original
sketch. To this add to the covers, for any sieve {Ai −→A} in S , the sieves {Ai
−→Ai ×A Ai} (using the diagonal map) and for any i ̸= j, the empty sieve with
vertex Ai ×A Aj. Then add all sieves obtained from the above by pullbacks and
composition. Finally, take as FS(S ) the smallest subcategory closed under ﬁnite
sums of the category of sheaves for that topology which contains the image of S .

282
8 Cocone Theories
Proposition 1. Let S be an FS-sketch. Any model of S in a left exact category
with ﬁnite disjoint universal sums extends to a model of the associated FS-theory.
Proof. It is an easy exercise to show that in a left exact category with disjoint
(ﬁnite) sums, a cocone {Ai −→A} is characterized as a sum by the following
assertions:
(i) P Ai −→→A
(ii) Ai −→→Ai ×A Ai
(iii) 0 −→→Ai ×A Aj for i ̸= j
Theorem 2. Any FS-sketch has a model in a universal FS-theory which induces
an equivalence of model categories.
Proof. Essentially the same as Corollary 4 of Section 8.1 (the covers correspond
to the regular epis there).
Exercise 8.2
1. Prove that total orderings and strictly increasing maps are models of a ﬁnite-
sum theory. (Hint: express the order as a strict order and consider trichotomy).
8.3 Geometric Theories
A local ring is charactized as a ring A in which for each a ∈A either a or 1 −a
has an inverse. Both may be invertible, however, so that {a | a is invertible }
and {a | 1 −a is invertible } are not necessarily disjoint. We will describe in this
section a more general kind of theory in which such predicates may be stated.
A geometric sketch S = (G , U, C, D, E) is a sketch (G , U, C, D) togeth-
er with a class E of sieves. A model of a geometric sketch is a model of the
sketch in a pretopos such that the sieves are sent to regular epimorphic families.
(Recall that a pretopos is a regular category with eﬀective equivalence relations
and disjoint universal ﬁnite sums.) Note that you can still force a particular sieve
to go to a sum by adding ﬁber products forced to be zero as in the preceding
section.
A pre-geometric theory is a left exact category together with a class of
sieves. As above, a model is a left exact functor which takes the given sieves to
regular epimorphic families. A geometric sketch induces, in an obvious way, the
structure of a sketch on its associated left exact theory.

8.3 Geometric Theories
283
A geometric theory is simply a Grothendieck topos. A model is a functor
which is the left adjoint part of a geometric morphism. Using the special ad-
joint functor theorem, it is not hard to show that a left exact functor between
Grothendieck toposes which takes covers to covers has a right adjoint, so that
provides an equivalent deﬁnition of geometric morphism. A model in Set is also
known as a point. We have:
Theorem 1. Every geometric sketch has a model in a universal geometric theory
which induces an equivalence of model categories.
Proof. It is clear that there is an equivalence of categories between the models
of the geometric sketch and models of the associated pregeometric theory. The
rest is similar to the proof of Corollary 4 of Section 8.1.
An important variation on the notion of geometric theory is that of a coherent
sketch. A coherent sketch is a sketch in which all the sieves are ﬁnite. A model
is required to be a model of the associated LE-theory which takes the sieves to
regular epimorphic families. However, the models are permitted to take values in
an arbitrary pretopos.
A coherent theory is the same thing as a pretopos. We leave to the reader
the task of modifying the constructions given above to ﬁnd the coherent theory
associated to a coherent sketch and of proving the analog of Theorem 1.
The model of the sketch in the universal geometric theory is called the generic
model. The generic topos is called the classifying topos for the theory. Of
course, as we have deﬁned things, the classifying topos for the geometric theory
is the theory. However, there are many kinds of theories besides geometric (FP,
LE, Regular, FS, coherent) and they all have classifying toposes.
The classifying topos of a pre-geometric theory is often constructed directly;
that is one adds directly all the necessary disjoint sums, quotients of equivalence
relations, etc. necessary to have a topos. This bears about the same relation to
our construction as does the construction of the free group using words does to
the argument using the adjoint functor theorem. In each case, both constructions
are useful. The one is useful for getting information about the detailed internal
structure of the object while the other is useful for the universal properties. Less
obvious is the fact that the syntactic construction provides a convenient locus
for the semantic one to take place in. Did you ever wonder what x was in the
polynomial ring k[x] (which is the free k-algebra on a singleton set)? Even if x
is deﬁned, what is a “formal sum of powers of x”?
For more about classifying toposes, see Johnstone [1977], Makkai and Reyes
[1977], Tierney [1976] and Mac Lane and Moerdijk [1992].

284
8 Cocone Theories
Exercises 8.3
1. Let S be a single sorted FP-sketch with generic object (generating sort) B.
S generates a geometric theory G by taking E to be empty. Let Th = LE(S ).
(a) Show that SetA is the geometric theory associated to S , where A = Thop
is the category of ﬁnitely presented algebras. (See Theorem 5 of Section 4.1.)
(b) Show that the generic model of S in G takes B to the underlying functor
in SetA .
2. Let S be an LE-sketch and G be the geometric theory generated by S , taking
E to be empty.
(a) Show that G is a full subcategory of SetLE(S ).
(b) Show that the generic model of S in G takes each object B of S to
the functor from LE(S ) to Set which evaluates at B, and each arrow of S to a
natural transformation between such functors.
(c) Show that if f is a model of S in a topos E , then the induced model
f ∗: G −→E is determined uniquely by what it does to the objects and arrows
of S . (This is the semantic explication of the generic nature of the geometric
theory of S , as opposed to the syntactical one of Theorem 1. Note that a similar
exercise can be done for FS- and geometric sketches, with the functors from
LE(S ) replaced by sheaves).
3.
Show that there is a coherent theory whose models correspond to inﬁnite
sets. (Hint: For any set S and any natural number n, let Sn denote, as usual, all
functions from n to S. If E is an equivalence relation on n, let SE ⊆Sn denote
all functions whose kernel pair is exactly E. Then Sn is the disjoint union of all
the SE over all the equivalence relations. Moreover, S is inﬁnite if and only for
all n and all equivalence relations E in n, SE is non-empty, meaning its terminal
map is epi.)
4.
Construct a geometric theory which classiﬁes the category of dense linear
orderings and strictly increasing maps. (See Exercise 1 of Section 8.2.) Show
that the topos is Boolean.
8.4 Properties of Model Categories
In this section we raise and partly answer questions of recognizing categories
as categories of models of diﬀerent sorts of theories. The answers we give are
in the form of properties that categories of models have, so that any category

8.4 Properties of Model Categories
285
lacking them is not such a category. For example, the category of categories is
not a regular category and hence cannot be the category of algebras of any triple
(Corollary 4 of Section 3.4 and Theorem 5 of Section 4.3) or even the category
of models of any FP-theory (see Theorem 1 below).
In the following theorem we refer to these properties of a category C of models
in Set of a sketch S . “Underlying functors” are functors which take a model to
the set corresponding to a given object B of the sketch.
(L:) C has all limits and the underlying functors preserve them.
(FC:) C has all ﬁltered colimits and the underlying functors preserve them.
(R:) C is regular.
(EE:) C has eﬀective equivalence relations and the underlying functors pre-
serve their coequalizers.
Other properties to which we refer require deﬁnitions.
For the purpose of the deﬁnitions that follow we must give a more general
deﬁnition of a regular epimorphic sieve in the case that the ambient category
lacks the relevant pullbacks. In Exercise 4 you are invited to show that the two
deﬁnitions agree in the presence of pullbacks.
A sieve {fi: Ai −→A} is said to be regular epimorphic if whenever B is any
object and for each i there is given a morphism gi: Ai −→B with the property
that for any object C of the category and pair of maps d0: C −→Ai, d1: C −→Aj,
fi ◦d0 = fj ◦d1 implies gi ◦d0 = gj ◦d1, then there is a unique h: A −→B such
that gi = h ◦fi for all i. The class C of objects may be replaced without loss of
generality by a generating set.
An object G of a category is a regular projective generator if
(i) It is regular projective: for any regular epi A −→B, the induced map
Hom(G, A) −→Hom(G, B)
is surjective, and
(ii) It is a regular generator: the singleton {G} is a regular generating family
(Section 6.8).
More generally, a set G of objects is a regular projective generating set
if it is a regular generating family in which each object is a regular projective.
A ﬁlter is a subset f of a lower semilattice (a poset with ﬁnite meets) for
which (i) if a ∈f and a ≤b then b ∈f, and (ii) if a ∈f and b ∈f then the meet
a ∧b ∈f. An ultraﬁlter on a set I is a ﬁlter f (under inclusion) of subsets of I
with the property that for each set J, either J or its complement belongs to f.
It follows that if J ∪K ∈f, then at least one of J or K must be (Exercise 1). In

286
8 Cocone Theories
a category C with all products, an ultraproduct is an object constructed this
way: Begin with a family {(Ci)}, i ∈I of objects and an ultraﬁlter f. For each
set J in the ultraﬁlter we deﬁne an object N(J) = Q
i∈J(Ci). If K ⊆J, then the
universal property of products induces an arrow N(J) −→N(K). This produces
a ﬁltered diagram and the colimit of that diagram is the ultraproduct induced
by Q(Ci) and f. However, the concept of ultraproduct does not itself have any
universal mapping property. Note that since an ultraproduct is a ﬁltered colimit
of products, L and FC together imply that a category has ultraproducts.
In the theorem below, we list a number of properties of categories of models.
We would emphasize that the categories may well and often do permit other limit
and colimit constructions. The ones mentioned in the theorem below are limited
to those which are preserved by the functors which evaluate the models (which
are, after all, functors) at the objects of the sketch. Equivalently, they are the
constructions which are carried out “pointwise”, meaning in the category of sets
where the models take values.
Theorem 1.
(a) If S is a single sorted FP-sketch, then C has L, FC, R, EE and a regular
projective generator.
(a) If S is an FP-sketch, then C has L, FC, R, EE and a regular projective
generating set.
(b) If S is an LE-sketch, then C has L and FC.
(c) If S is a regular sketch, then C has FC and all products.
(d) If S is a coherent theory, then C has FC and all ultraproducts.
(e) If S is a geometric theory, then C has FC.
Note that we give no properties distinguishing FS- and coherent theories.
Proof. The category of models in sets of an LE-sketch has all limits and ﬁltered
colimits by Theorem 4 of Section 4.4. It is trivial to see that the same is true of
models of FP-sketches.
To show that FP-theories have eﬀective equivalence relations and are regular,
we need a lemma.

8.4 Properties of Model Categories
287
Lemma 2.
Given the diagram
C10
C11
C00
C01
-
?
C12
-
C02
-
C20
C21
?
?
C22
-
?
6
?
??
??

-
-
-
-
-
which is serially commutative and in which all three rows and columns are co-
equalizers and the top row and left column are reﬂexive, the induced
C00 −→
−→C11 −→C22
is also a coequalizer.
Proof. Exercise 2.
Let M be a model, E a submodel of M which is an equivalence relation, and
C the quotient functor in SetFP(S ), which we will prove to be a model. This last
claim is equivalent to the assertion that C preserves products. Let A and B be
objects of FP(S ). We get the diagram
EA × MB
MA × MB
EA × EB
MA × EB
-
?
CA × MB
-
CA × EB
-
EA × CB
MA × CB
?
?
CA × CB
-
?
6
?
??
??
 -
-
-
-
-
The rows and columns are coequalizers because products in a topos have a right
adjoint. The lemma then implies that the diagonal is a coequalizer. But since E
and M preserve products, this implies that C does also.
This not only shows that the model category has coequalizers of equivalence
relations, but that the evaluation functors preserve them. In view of the Yoneda
Lemma, that is just the assertion that the objects of FP(S ) are regular projective.
To see that they generate, observe that the maps from representable functors form
an epimorphic family in the functor category. But that category is a Grothendieck
topos, so those maps form a regular epimorphic family. It is easy to see that they

288
8 Cocone Theories
continue to do so in any full subcategory. If the FP-theory is single sorted, that set
may be replaced by the generic object to get a single regular projective generator.
Any surjective natural transformation in a Set-valued functor category is a
coequalizer. Since C is closed under limits, this means that maps between models
are regular epis if and only if they are surjective. It follows from this and the fact
that the pullback of a surjective map in Set is surjective that C is regular. This
takes care of (a) and (b). (Note that in fact C has all colimits, but they are not
necessarily preserved by the evaluations.)
Let S be a regular sketch and R = Reg(S ) be the regular theory associated
to it. If {Mi} is a family of models then we claim that the pointwise product M
is a model. Models must preserve ﬁnite limits and take regular epis to regular
epis. But a product of ﬁnite limits is a ﬁnite limit and a product of regular epis
is a regular epi (since it is in Set and we carry out these constructions pointwise).
As for ﬁltered colimits, the argument is similar. Filtered colimits commute with
ﬁnite limits in Set and in any category with regular epis. This completes the
proof of (d).
Let R denote a coherent theory and C be the category of models. Let I be an
index set, {Mi} an I-indexed family of models and f an ultraﬁlter on I. A product
of models is not a model, but it is regular. Since this property is preserved by
ﬁltered colimits (Exercise 3), an ultraproduct of models also preserves it. Thus
it suﬃces to show that the ultraproduct preserves ﬁnite sums.
Let A and B be objects of the theory and suppose ﬁrst that for all i ∈I, MiA ̸=
∅and MiB ̸= ∅. Let M = Q Mi. Then if N is the ultraproduct, the canonical
morphism M −→N is surjective at A, B and A + B. Consider the diagram
NA + NB
N(A + B)
-
MA + MB
M(A + B)
-
?
?
?
?
The vertical arrows are quotients and the horizontal arrows the ones induced
by the properties of sums. We want to show that the bottom arrow is an iso-
morphism. Let x ∈N(A + B) and choose a y ∈M(A + B) lying over it. Since
M(A+B) is a colimit of the products over sets in f, there is a set J ∈f such that
y = (yi), i ∈J is an element of Q(MiA+MiB), the product taken over the i ∈J.
Let K = {i | yi ∈MiA} and L = {i | yi ∈MiB}. Since K ∪L = J ∈f either K
or L belongs to f. If K does, then (yi), i ∈K is an element of MA whose image
in NA goes to x ∈N(A + B).
To ﬁnish the argument, let IA = {i ∈I | MiA ̸= ∅} and IB = {i ∈I |
MiB ̸= ∅}. We observe that if IA ∩IB ∈f, the proof above may be repeated

8.4 Properties of Model Categories
289
with IA ∩IB replacing I.
If neither IA nor IB is in f, then it is clear that
NA = NB = N(A + B) = ∅. Finally, suppose that one of the two, say IA, is in
f and the other one isn’t. Then we have
{i | Mi(A + B) = MiA + MiB = MiA} ∈f
whence N(A + B) = NA = NA + NB.
This theorem demonstrates, for instance, that the category of ﬁelds is not the
models of any regular theory and similar such negative results. As for positive
results, there are few. Beck’s tripleableness theorem and its variants give a posi-
tive result in terms of a chosen underlying set functor, or equivalently, in terms
of chosen representing sketch. Exercise 6 shows that the category of models of
an LE sketch might be regular without being the category of models of an FP
sketch.
Exercises 8.4
1. Let f be an ultraﬁlter. Show that if J ∪K ∈f then either J ∈f or K ∈f.
2. Prove Lemma 2. (Compare Lemma 6 of Section 4.4 for a variation on this
assertion.)
3. Prove that ﬁltered colimits of regular functors are regular.
4. Show that the deﬁnition of regular epimorphic family given in this section is
the same as the one given in Section 6.7 in the presence of pullbacks. Show that
the class of C used in the deﬁnition in this section may be restricted to being in
a generating family.
5.
(a) Show that the category of posets and order-preserving maps is a subcat-
egory of the category of graphs which is closed under products and subobjects.
(b) Show that the map which takes the graph below to the graph obtained
by identifying A with A′ and B with B′
B
B′
A
A′
6
6
(but not identifying the edges) has a kernel pair which is (i) an equivalence relation
and (ii) is deﬁned on a poset.

290
8 Cocone Theories
(c) Use (a) and (b) to show that equivalence relations are not eﬀective in the
category of posets.
6. An orthodox semigroup is a semigroup in which the product of any two
idempotents is idempotent. Let O be the category of orthodox semigroups and
semigroup homomorphisms.
(a) Show that O is the category of models of an LE-sketch.
(b) Show that O is regular. (Hint: Show that O is closed in the category
of semigroups under subobjects and products and that such a subcategory of a
regular category is regular.)
(c) Show that O does not have eﬀective equivalence relations. (Hint: Any
free semigroup is orthodox.)
7. In this exercise and the next, the categories of groups considered are under-
stood to have all group homomorphisms as arrows. Show that the category of
torsion groups is the category of models of a geometric theory. Can it be the
category of models of a coherent theory? (Hint: For the ﬁrst part, consider the
theory of groups augmented with types
Gn = {x ∈G | xn = 1}
which is an equalizer and hence in the left exact theory. Require that {Gn −→G}
be a cover.)
8. (a) Show that the category of cyclic groups is not the category of models of
any coherent theory. (Hint: Consider a non-principal ultrapower of Z.)
(b) Show that the category of ﬁnite cyclic groups is not the category of models
of any geometric theory.

9
More on Triples
This chapter consists of four independent sections providing additional results
about triples. Everything may be read immediately after Chapter 3 except for
Lemma 5 of Section 9.3, which depends on a fairly easy result from Chapter 5.
9.1 Duskin’s Tripleability Theorem
In this section we state and prove a theorem of Duskin (Theorem 1) giving nec-
essary and suﬃcient conditions for a functor U: B −→C to be tripleable, under
certain assumptions on the two categories involved.
If B is an equationally deﬁned class of algebras (i.e. models of a single sorted
FP theory) and C is Set then Birkhoﬀ’s theorem on varieties says that B is
“closed under” products, subobjects and quotients by equivalence relations in B.
The ﬁrst two closure properties mean little more than that, in our language, U
creates limits. The third condition means that U creates coequalizers of parallel
pairs which become equivalence relations in C = Set.
Duskin’s Theorem is motivated by the idea that a functor U which satisfy
a categorical version of Birkhoﬀ’s theorem ought to be tripleable. We begin by
studying equivalence relations in a category. Throughout this section we study a
functor U: B −→C with left adjoint F.
Equivalence pairs and separators
An equivalence pair on an object C is a parallel pair f, g: B −→C for which
(a) f and g are jointly monic, which means that for any elements x and y of
B deﬁned on the same object, if f(x) = f(y) and g(x) = g(y) then x = y; and
(b) the induced pair of arrows from Hom(X, B) −→Hom(X, C) is an equivalence
relation in Set for any object X. When B has products, f and g are jointly monic
if and only if the arrow (f, g) is monic, and are an equivalence pair if and only if
(f, g): B −→C × C is an equivalence relation (see Exercise 18 of Section 1.7).
Maps f, g: B −→C form a U-contractible equivalence pair if Uf and Ug
are an equivalence pair which is part of a contractible coequalizer diagram in C .
291

292
9 More on Triples
A separator of a parallel pair f, g: B −→C is the limit
[(b, b′) | f(b) = f(b′) and g(b) = g(b′)]
Thus it is the intersection of the kernel pairs of f and g. In particular, a
category which has separators of all parallel pairs has kernel pairs of all maps.
Duskin’s theorem
Theorem 1. [Duskin] Suppose B has separators and C has kernel pairs of split
epimorphisms. Then the following two statements are equivalent for a functor
U: B −→C :
(i) U is tripleable.
(ii) U has an adjoint and reﬂects isomorphisms, and every U-contractible
equivalence pair has a coequalizer that is preserved by U.
Before we prove this theorem, notice what it says in the case of groups. An
equivalence pair d0, d1: H −→G in Grp forces H to be simultaneously a subgroup
of G × G and a U-contractible equivalence relation on G (every equivalence pair
in Set is part of a contractible coequalizer diagram). It is easy to see that the
corresponding quotient set is the set of cosets of a normal subgroup of G, namely
the set of elements of G equivalent to 1. The canonical group structure on the
quotient set makes the quotient the coequalizer of d0 and d1.
Note that you
can show that the quotient is the coequalizer by showing that d0 and d1 are the
kernel pair of the quotient map; since the quotient map is a regular epi (it is the
coequalizer of the trivial homomorphism and the injection of the kernel of the
quotient map into its domain), it follows from Exercise 6 of Section 1.8 that the
quotient map is the coequalizer of d0 and d1. That may not be the method of
proof that would have occurred to you, but it is the strategy of the proof that
follows.
The argument is even more direct in the case of compact Hausdorﬀspaces.
If R is an equivalence relation in that category on a space X then R is a closed
(because compact) subspace of X × X, so corresponds to a compact (because
image of compact) Hausdorﬀ(because R is closed) quotient space X/R.
Proof. Proof of Theorem 1. Because of Beck’s Theorem and Proposition 3 of
Section 3.3, the proof that (i) implies (ii) is immediate.
To prove that (ii) implies (i), we ﬁrst prove three lemmas, all of which assume
the hypotheses of Theorem 1 (ii).

9.1 Duskin’s Tripleability Theorem
293
Lemma 2.
If Uf: UA −→UB is a split epimorphism, then f: A −→B is a
regular epimorphism.
Proof. Let h, k: S −→A be the kernel pair of f. Then because U preserves limits,
(Uh, Uk) is the kernel pair of Uf; hence by Exercise 2 (h, k) is a U-contractible
equivalence pair and so by assumption has a coequalizer A −→C in B. Thus
there is an induced map from C to B which necessarily becomes an isomorphism
under U. Thus because U reﬂects isomorphisms, f must be the coequalizer of h
and k.
Lemma 3.
If Ud, Ue: UE −→UB is an equivalence pair, then so is d, e.
Proof. For any object B of B, UϵB ◦ηUB = idUB (Exercise 15 of Section 1.9),
so Lemma 2 implies that ϵB is a regular epi. Then by Corollary 7 of Section 3.3,
FUFUB
FUϵB
−−−−−−→
−−−−−−→
ϵFUB
FUB
ϵB
−−−→B
is a coequalizer.
For any object C of C , the induced maps
Hom(C, UE) −→
−→Hom(C, UB)
are an equivalence relation in Set, and by adjointness so is
Hom(FC, E) −→
−→Hom(FC, B)
Putting the facts in the preceding two paragraphs together, we have that the
rows in
Hom(B′, B)
Hom(FUB′, B)
-
Hom(B′, E)
Hom(FUB′, E)
-
Hom(FUFUB′, B)
Hom(FUFUB′, E)
??
??
-
-
-
-
??
are equalizers and the right hand and middle columns are both equivalence re-
lations. It follows from an easy diagram chase that the left hand column is an
equivalence relation, too.
Lemma 4.
In the notation of Lemma 3, if f: B −→Y is a map for which Ud
and Ue form the kernel pair of Uf, then d and e form the kernel pair of f.
Proof. The proof follows the same outline as that of Lemma 3. One has that for
any object C, the parallel pair in
Hom(FC, E) −→
−→Hom(FC, B) −→Hom(FC, B′′)

294
9 More on Triples
is the kernel pair of the right arrow, so that in the diagram below
Hom(B′, B)
Hom(FUB′, B)
-
Hom(B′, E)
Hom(FUB′, E)
-
Hom(B′, B′′)
Hom(FUB′, B′′)
-
?
?
Hom(FUFUB′, B)
Hom(FUFUB′, E)
Hom(FUFUB′, B′′)
?
??
??
-
-
-
-
-
-
??
the middle and right hand vertical parallel pairs are kernel pairs of the corre-
sponding arrows and the horizontal sides are all equalizers.
Then a diagram
chase shows that the left hand column is a kernel pair diagram too.
Now, to prove that (ii) of Theorem 1 implies (i). By Beck’s Theorem, we must
prove that if
A
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
B
is a reﬂexive U-split coequalizer pair, then it has a coequalizer which is preserved
by U.
In B, we construct the following diagram, in which (p0, p1) is the kernel pair
of d1 and S is the separator of d0 ◦p0 and d0 ◦p1. The object E and the arrows
into and out of it will be constructed later.
A
B
R
E
-
y
S
-
e0
-
e1
-
d0
-
d1
?
p0
?
p1
?
u0
?
u1
In C , we have diagram (5), in which c is the coequalizer of Ud1 and Ud2 with
contracting maps s and t and (q0, q1) is the kernel pair of of the split epi c.
UA
UB
UR
UE
-
w
US
-
Ue0
-
Ue1
R
Ud0

t

Ud1
?
Up0
?
Up1
?
q0
?
q1
C
-
c

s

9.1 Duskin’s Tripleability Theorem
295
This is how the proof will proceed: (a) We will construct w and (b) show txhat
it is a split epi with (c) kernel pair (Ue0, Ue1). It then follows from Lemma 3 that
(e0, e1) is a U-contractible equivalence relation which must by hypothesis have a
coequalizer v: R −→E from which we conclude that up to isomorphism, UE can
be taken to be C′. (d) We then construct u0, u1 for which u0 ◦v = d0 ◦p0 and
u1 ◦v = d0 ◦p1 and also U(u0) = q0 and U(u1) = q1. Now c is the coequalizer
of (q0, q1) (Exercise 6 of Section 1.8: if a regular epi has a kernel pair then it is
the coequalizer of its kernel pair), so (u0, u1) is a U-split equivalence pair, hence
has a coequalizer x. By changing c to an isomorphic arrow if necessary, we may
assume that U(x) = c. Finally, (e) we show that x is also the coequalizer of
(d0, d1). It follows easily from the fact that U reﬂects isomorphisms that U takes
this coequalizer to an arrow isomorphic to c, as required.
(a) It follows from the identities for a contractible coequalizer that c coequal-
izes Ud0 ◦Up0 and Ud0 ◦Up1. Let w be the unique map (by virtue of (q0, q1) being
the kernel pair of c) for which q0 ◦w = Ud0 ◦Up0 and q1 ◦w = Ud0 ◦Up1.
(b) To see that w is a split epi (surjective on elements), suppose that (b0, b1) ∈UB×UB
C′; then s ◦c ◦b0 = s ◦c ◦b1, so Ud1 ◦t ◦b0 = Ud1 ◦t ◦b1, which means that
(t ◦b0, t ◦b1) ∈UR (Up0 and Up1 are the kernel pair of Ud1). We claim that
w(t ◦b0, t ◦b1) = (b0, b1). The ﬁrst coordinate is
q0 ◦w(t ◦b0, t ◦b1) = Ud0 ◦Up0(t ◦b0, t ◦b1) = Ud0 ◦t ◦b0 = b0
and similarly the second coordinate is b1, as required. Hence w is a split epi.
(c) Since e0 and e1 form the separator of d0 ◦p0 and d0 ◦p1 and U preserves
limits, Ue0 and Ue1 are the separator of Ud0 ◦Up0 and Ud0 ◦Up1. It is straight-
forward to calculate, using the fact that q0 and q1 are jointly monic, that the
kernel pair of w is the intersection of the kernel pairs of Ud0 ◦Up0 and Ud0 ◦Up1.
Hence Ue0 and Ue1 are the kernel pair of w.
(d) Because e0 and e1 form the kernel pair of d0 ◦p0 and d0 ◦p1, they coequalize
e0 and e1, so for i = 0, 1 there are induced maps ui for which ui ◦v = d0 ◦pi. Then
qi ◦w = U(d0 ◦pi) = U(ui) ◦U(v) = U(ui) ◦w
so because w is epi, U(ui) = qi.
To complete the proof, we must show (e) that x, which by deﬁnition is the
coequalizer of u0 and u1 is also the coequalizer of d0 and d1. Now c = Ux is the
coequalizer of Ud0 and Ud1, so by Exercise 6 of Section 1.8, Ud0 and Ud1 is the
kernel pair of c. Hence by Lemma 4, d0 and d1 form the kernel pair of x. Since
x is a regular epi, it is the coequalizer of d0 and d1 as required.

296
9 More on Triples
Variation on Duskin’s theorem
The following version of Duskin’s theorem is the form in which it is most often
used.
Proposition 5.
If
(i) B has separators,
(ii) C has kernel pairs of split epis,
(iii) U: B −→C has an adjoint F,
(iv) U reﬂects isomorphisms and preserves regular epis, and
(v) U-contractible equivalence pairs in B are eﬀective and have coequalizers,
then U is tripleable.
Proof. All that is necessary is to show that under these hypotheses, U pre-
serves coequalizers of U-contractible equivalence pairs. If such an equivalence
pair (d0, d1) has coequalizer x and is the kernel pair of y, then by Exercise 6 of
Section 1.8, x has kernel pair (d0, d1). Since U preserves kernel pairs, Ux is a
regular epi which has (Ud0, Ud1) as kernel pair. Again using Exercise 6, Ux is
therefore the coequalizer of (d0, d1).
Tripleability over Set
If X is a set and G is an object in a cocomplete category, we write X · G
for the coproduct of X copies of G. In particular, if A is another object, there
is an obvious induced map Hom(G, A) · G −→A (the arrow from the copy of G
corresponding to f is f).
An object P of a category is a regular projective if whenever f: A −→B is
a regular epi then the induced map Hom(P, A) −→Hom(P, B) is surjective. (If
this is true for all epis then P is a projective.) An object G is a generator if
for each object A, the induced map Hom(G, A)·G −→A is an epi. If the induced
map is a regular epi, then G is a regular generator. P is a regular projective
generator if it is both a regular projective and a regular generator. If it is both
a generator and a projective then it is a projective generator. The dual of
“projective” is “injective”.
Theorem 6.
A category C is tripleable over Set if and only if it is regular, has
eﬀective equivalence relations and has a regular projective generator P for which
X · P exists for all sets X.

9.1 Duskin’s Tripleability Theorem
297
Proof. If U: C −→Set is tripleable, then F(1) is a regular projective generator
(Exercise 4). Then for any set X, F(X) = X · F(1) because X = X · 1 in Set and
F preserves colimits. (Compare Theorem 1(a), Section 8.4.)
For the converse, the functor which is tripleable is U = Hom(P, −), which has
a left adjoint taking X to X · P (Exercise 3).
U reﬂects isomorphisms: Suppose f: A −→B and Uf is an isomorphism. The
top arrow in this diagram
A
B
-
f
UA · P
UB · P
-
?
?
is an isomorphism and the vertical arrows are regular epis, so f is a regular epi.
On the other hand, in this diagram
E
e
−−→X
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
A −→B
let (d0, d1) be the kernel pair of f and e the equalizer of d0 and d1. Since Uf is
an isomorphism, Ud0 = Ud1, so that Ue is an isomorphism. Hence by the ﬁrst
part of this argument, e is epi, whence d0 = d1 and so f is an isomorphism.
Now suppose e0, e1: A −→B is a U-contractible equivalence relation. Since
equivalence relations are eﬀective, there is a coequalizer/kernel pair diagram
A
e0
−−−→
−−−→
e1
B
c
−−→C
Ue0 and Ue1 become the kernel pair of Uc because U preserves limits. Uc is epi
because P is a regular projective generator, so because we are in Set, Uc is the
coequalizer of Ue0 and Ue1, as required.
As an application of Theorem 5, observe that the Tietze Extension Theorem
says that the unit interval I is an injective cogenerator in CptHaus. Thus it is
a projective generator in the opposite category; in fact it is a regular projective
generator since every monomorphism in CptHaus is regular (take two copies of
the codomain and amalgamate the subspace).
Corollary 7.
Hom(−, I): CptHausop −→Set is tripleable.
Proof. The only complicated thing to prove is that CptHaus has eﬀective coequiv-
alence relations. We leave the rest of the veriﬁcations to the reader.

298
9 More on Triples
Suppose
X
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
Y
is a coequivalence relation. Then there is a map r: Y −→X for which r ◦d0 =
r ◦d1. (In fact, that is the only property of coequivalence relations we use. See
Exercise 5.) Let d: Z −→X be the equalizer of d0 and d1. We must show that d0
and d1 form the cokernel pair of d. We do this by showing that the map X +Z X
−→Y is bijective. It is clearly surjective because [d0, d1]: X + X −→Y is. For
j = 0, 1, dj is injective because it has a left inverse r. It follows that if (for j = 0 or
1) [d0, d1](ijx) = [d0, d1](ijx′), then x = x′. Clearly if [d0, d1](i0x) = [d0, d1](i1x′),
then x = x′, hence d0x = d1x so that the map from X +Z X to Y is injective as
well as surjective, and so is an isomorphism.
Exercises 9.1
1. Show that if f: A −→B is a map, then the kernel pair of f is the the separator
of f and f. Show that if f, g: A −→B, then the separator of f and g is kerp(f) ∩
kerp(g).
2. Show that if g is a split epi and (h, k) is its kernel pair, then h, k and g form
a contractible coequalizer diagram.
3.
Show that if C is a category with a regular projective generator P, then
Hom(P, −) has a left adjoint taking a set X to the sum X ·P (assuming that sum
exists).
4.
Show that if U: C −→Set is tripleable, then F(1) is a regular projective
generator in C .
5. A single-sorted equational theory is called a Mal’cev theory if there is in the
theory a ternary operation µ satisfying the equations µ(a, a, c) = c and µ(a, b, b) =
a. A theory which includes a group operation is automatically a Mal’cev theory
for one can deﬁne µ(a, b, c) = ab−1c. Thus the dual of the category of sets is the
category of algebras for a Mal’cev theory, since Setop is equivalent to the category
of complete atomic Boolean algebras which, like any rings, include the group
operation of addition. See Exercise 3 of Section 5.6 for an example that doesn’t
arise from a group (or any other binary) operation. Show that in the category of
algebras for a Mal’cev theory every reﬂexive relation is an equivalence relation.
The converse is also true. The construction of µ in such a category can be
sketched as follows. On the free algebra on two generators which we will denote

9.2 Distributive Laws
299
by 0 and 1 consider the relation generated by (0, 0), (1, 1) and (0, 1) which is the
image of a map from the free algebra on three generators (the map taking the
three generators to the three above mentioned elements). This image is a reﬂexive
relation which is hence an equivalence relation.
In particular it is symmetric
which means there is an element µ in the free algebra on three generators that
maps to (1, 0). Given the correspondence between n-ary operations and elements
of the free algebra on n elements developed in Section 4.3 (see Exercise 3), this
element corresponds to a ternary operation which (you will have no doubt already
guessed) is the required Mal’cev operation. Remarkably, one need only assume
that every reﬂexive relation is symmetric to derive the conclusion.
These operations were ﬁrst studied (you will have no doubt also guessed) by
Mal’cev [1954] who derived most of their interesting properties, not including
what was probably their most interesting property: every simplicial object in a
category of algebras for a Mal’cev theory satisﬁes Kan’s condition.
9.2 Distributive Laws
It is not ordinarily the case that when T1 = (T1, η1, µ1) and T2 = (T2, η2, µ2) are
triples on the same category, there is a natural triple structure on T2 ◦T1. But that
does happen; for example, the free ring triple is the composite of the free monoid
triple followed by the free Abelian group triple. The concept of distributive law
for triples was formulated by Jon Beck to formalize the fact that the distribution
of multiplication over addition explains this fact about the free ring triple.
Another way of seeing the distributive law in a ring is that it says that mul-
tiplication is a homomorphism of the Abelian group structure. This underlies
the concept of a lifting of a triple, which we will see is equivalent to having a
distributive law.
Distributive laws
Using the notation above, a distributive law of T1 over T2 is a natural
transformation λ: T1 ◦T2 −→T2 ◦T1 for which the following diagrams commute.
We omit the “◦” to simplify notation.
T1T2
T2T1
-
λ
T1
T1η2
    	
η2T1
@
@
@@
R
(D1)

300
9 More on Triples
T1T2
T2T1
-
λ
T2
η1T2
    	
T2η1
@
@
@@
R
(D2)
T1T2
T1T 2
2
T2T1T2
-
λT2
?
T1µ2
T2T1
T 2
2 T1
-
T2λ
?
µ2T1
-
λ
(D3)
T1T2
T 2
1 T2
T1T2T1
-
λT2
?
T1µ2
T2T1
T 2
2 T1
-
T2λ
?
µ2T1
-
λ
(D4)
For example, when T1 is the free monoid triple on Set and T2 is the free
Abelian group triple, we have a distributive law λ: T1 ◦T2 −→T2 ◦T1 which takes
an element of T1T2X of the form
(P α1(x) · x)(P α2(x) · x) · · · (P αm(x) · x)
(each sum only having the integer αi(x) nonzero for a ﬁnite number of terms) to
P α1(x1)α2(x2) · · · αm(xm) · (x1x2 · · · xm)
the sum over all strings of length m in elements of X.
Another example in Set has T1 the free semigroup triple and T2 deﬁned by
T2(X) = 1 + X (the disjoint union—see Example 3 of Section 3.1) Then T2 ◦T1
is the free monoid triple. The distributive law λ takes
1 + X + (1 + X)2 + (1 + X)3 + · · · = 1 + X + 1 + X + X + X2
+ 1 + X + X + X + X2 + X2 + X2 + X3 + 1 + · · ·
to 1 + X + X2 + X3 + · · · by the map which takes each summand on the left to
the same thing on the right.
Lifting
If T1 and T2 are triples on a category C , a lifting of T2 to C T1 is a triple
T∗
2 = (T ∗
2 , η∗
2, µ∗
2) on C T1 for which

9.2 Distributive Laws
301
(L1) U T1 ◦T ∗
2 = T2 ◦U T1,
(L2) U T1η∗
2 = η2U T1: U T1 −→U T1 ◦T ∗
2 and
(L3) U T1µ∗
2 = µ2U T1: U T1 ◦(T ∗
2 )2 −→U T1 ◦T ∗
2 ◦
In understanding L2 and L3, observe that by L1, U T1 ◦T ∗
2 = T2 ◦U T1 and
U T1 ◦(T ∗
2 )2 = T2 ◦U T1 ◦T ∗
2 = T 2
2 ◦U T1.
Note that given a functor T ∗
2 satisfying (L1), rules (L2) and (L3) determine
what η∗
2 and µ∗
2 must be, and the resulting T∗
2 = (T ∗
2 , η∗
2, µ∗
2) is trivially a triple.
A lifting of T2 is equivalent to having a natural way of viewing T2A as a T1
algebra whenever A is a T1 algebra, in such a way that η2 and µ2 are algebra
morphisms.
Given a distributive law λ: T1 ◦T2 −→T2 ◦T1, deﬁne T ∗
2 (A, a) = (T2A, T2a◦λA),
and deﬁne T ∗
2 to be the same as T2 on algebra morphisms.
Proposition 1.
T ∗
2 is the functor part of a lifting of T2 to C T1.
Proof. (L1) is clear, so (L2) and (L3) determine η∗
2 and µ∗
2.
These diagrams show that T ∗
2 (A, a) is a T1 algebra.
T2A
T2T1A

T2a
T2A
T1T2A
-
η1T2A
?
=
?
λA
T2η1A
HHHHHHH
H
j
T1T2A
T2T1A
-
λA
T 2
1 T2A
T1T2T1A
-
T1λA
?
µ1T2A
T2T 2
1 A
T2T1A
-
T2T1a
T1T2A
-
T1T2a
?
λT1A
?
λA
T2A
-
a
?
T2µ1A
?
T2a
Furthermore,
η2A ◦a = T ∗
2 a ◦λA ◦T1η2A
by (D1) and naturality, so η∗
2 is an algebra morphism, and
µ2A ◦T 2
2 a ◦T2λA ◦λT2A = T2a ◦λA ◦T1µ2A: TT 2
2 A −→T2A
by D3 and naturality, so µ∗
2 is an algebra morphism.

302
9 More on Triples
Compatibility
The following deﬁnition captures the idea that a triple with functor T2 ◦T1 is
in a natural way the composite of triples with functors T2 and T1.
The triple T = (T2 ◦T1, η, µ) is compatible with triples T1 = (T1, η1, µ1) and
T2 = (T2, η2, µ2) if
(C1) η = Tη2 ◦η1 = η1T ◦η2: id −→T1 ◦T2◦
(C2) µ ◦T2T1η2T1 = T2µ1: T2 ◦T 2
1 −→T2 ◦T1◦
(C3) µ ◦T2η1T2T1 = µ2T1: T 2
2 ◦T1 −→T2 ◦T1◦
(C4) µ2T1 ◦T2µ = µ ◦µ2T1T2T1: T 2
2 ◦T1 ◦T2 ◦T1 −→T2 ◦T1, and
(C5) T2µ1 ◦µT1 = µ ◦T2T1T2µ1: T2 ◦T1 ◦T2 ◦T 2
1 −→T2 ◦T1◦
Given triples T1 and T2 on a category C and a lifting T∗
2 on C T1, we get
(C T1)T∗
2
F ∗
2
−−−→
←−−−
U ∗
2
C T1
F1
−−−→
←−−−
U1
C
whence F ∗
2 ◦F1 is left adjoint to U1 ◦U ∗
2 , so
T2 ◦T1 = T2 ◦U1 ◦F1 = U1 ◦T ∗
2 ◦F1 = U1 ◦U ∗
2 ◦F ∗
2 ◦F1
produces a triple T = (T2 ◦T1, η, µ) on C .
Proposition 2.
With the notation of the preceding paragraph, the triple T is
compatible with T1 and T2.
Proof. We will check one of the hardest compatibility conditions, namely C5, and
leave the rest to you. In the diagram, we have carried out the replacement of
U2F2U1 by U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 and replaced µ by its deﬁnition so that the diagram that has
to be shown to commute is
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1U1F1
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1
-
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 U ∗
2 F ∗
2 ϵ1F1
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1U1F1
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1
-
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 ϵ1F1
?
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 ϵ1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1U1F1
?
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 ϵ1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 F1
-
U1U ∗
2 F ∗
2 U ∗
2 F ∗
2 ϵ1F1
?
U1U ∗
2 ϵ∗
2F ∗
2 F1U1F1
?
U1U ∗
2 ϵ∗
2F ∗
2 F1

9.2 Distributive Laws
303
Now suppose that the triple T is compatible with T1 and T2. Deﬁne λ: T1 ◦T2
−→T2 ◦T1 as the composite
T1T2
η2T1T2η1
−−−−−−−−→T2T1T2T1
µ
−−→T2T1
Proposition 3.
λ is a distributive law.
Proof. D1 and D2 follow from this diagram (note that Tη = T2T1η2η1).
T1T2
T2T1T2T1
-
η2T1T2η1
T1
T2T1
-
η2T1
?
T1η2
?
T2T1
-
µ
=
@
@
@
@@
R
Tη
To get D4, consider this diagram.
T 2
1 T2T1
T2T1T2T1T2T1
-
η2T1η2T1T2T1
T 2
1 T2
T1T2T1T2T1
-
T1η2T1T2η1
?
T 2
1 T2η1
?
η2T1T2T1T2T1
T1T2T1
T2T1T2T1
-
η2T1T2T1
?
µ1T2T1
?
µT2T1
T2T1T2T1
-
T2T1µ
T1T2T1
-
T1µ
?
η2T1T2T1
T2T1
-
µ
?
µ
where the top left square commutes by deﬁnition, the top right square by natu-
rality, and the bottom right square by a triple identity. The bottom left square
is the following square applied to T2 ◦T1:
T 2
1
T2T 2
1
-
η2T 2
1
T1
µ1
@
@
@@
R
T2T1T2T1
-
T2T1η2T1
T2T1
T2µ1
@
@
@@
R
µ
    	
-

304
9 More on Triples
Now the left and bottom route around square (1) is λ ◦µ1T2 by deﬁnition of
λ and the fact that
µ1T2T1 ◦T 2
1 T2η1 = T1T2η1 ◦µ1T2
by naturality, and the top and right route is T2µ1 ◦λT1 ◦T1λ because
T1T2T1
T2T1T2T 2
1
-
η1T1T2η1T1
η2T1T2T1
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@@
R
T2T1T2T1
?
T1T2T1µ1
T2T1
-
µ
T2T 2
1
-
µT1T1T2T1µ1
?
T2µ1
The left triangle is a triple identity and the square is C5.
We leave the rest to you.
Exercise 9.2
1. Prove that for the constructive processes described in the text, all composites
of length three in the following triangle are the identity.
distributive
laws
liftings
-
Proposition 1
compatible
Proposition 3
@
@
@
@
@
I
Proposition 2
     	
triple structures
9.3 Colimits of Triple Algebras
Theorem 1 of Section 3.4 gives what is perhaps the best possible result on the
completeness of categories of triple algebras. In this section, we investigate co-
completeness, with results which are informative but less satisfactory. First we
need a lemma.

9.3 Colimits of Triple Algebras
305
Lemma 1.
Let B be a category and I a small diagram. Then the diagonal
functor ∆: B −→BI has a left adjoint L, if and only if every functor F: I
−→B has a colimit in B, and in that case LF is that colimit.
Proof. The isomorphism HomB(LF, B) ∼= HomBI (F, KB), where KB is the con-
stant functor, applied to the identity on LF yields a cocone from F to LF which
is universal by deﬁnition.
The converse is true by pointwise construction of adjoints.
Dually, a right adjoint, if it exists, takes a functor to its limit.
Theorem 2.
[Linton] Let U = B −→C be of descent type and I a small
category. In order that every D: I −→B have a colimit, it suﬃces that every
UD: I −→C have colimits and that B have coequalizers.
Note that there is no claim that any colimits are created by U, only that they
exist.
Proof. We give a slick proof under the additional assumption that C is cocom-
plete. See Linton [1969c] for a proof without this hypothesis. Apply Theorem 3(b)
of Section 3.7 and Lemma 1 to the diagram
C
C I
B
BI
-
∆
?
?
-
∆

colim
where the colimit functor on the bottom exists by Exercise ?? of Section 1.7.
Corollary 3.
Let B −→C be of descent type and C have ﬁnite colimits. Then
B has ﬁnite colimits if and only if it has coequalizers.
A similar statement can be made for countable colimits, all colimits, etc.
Proposition 4.
[Linton] Let T be a triple on Set. Then SetT is cocomplete.
Proof. Given
(A, a)
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
(B, b)
we must construct its coequalizer. Since the underlying functor from SetT creates
limits, B × B underlies a unique T-algebra. Let E ⊆B × B be the intersection
of all subsets of B × B which
(a) are T-subalgebras,

306
9 More on Triples
(b) are equivalence relations, and
(c) contain the image of R = (d0, d1): A −→B.
E is clearly a subset satisfying all three conditions. Thus in Set,
E −→
−→C
is a contractible pair because any equivalence relation in Set is. Thus U, being
tripleable, must lift the coequalizer of this contractible pair to a coequalizer in
SetT which is also the coequalizer of d0 and d1. Hence SetT has all colimits by
Corollary 3.
When do triple algebras have coequalizers?
Given a triple T in a category C , to force C T to have coequalizers seems to
require some sort of preservation properties for T. For example, if T preserves
coequalizers and C has them, then C T will have them too (Exercise 1). However,
that happens only rarely.
Theorem 7 below is an example of what can be proved along these lines. We
need another result ﬁrst; it says that the quotient of an algebra map is an algebra
map, if by quotient we mean the image of a regular epimorphism.
Lemma 5.
If C is regular, then the classes E of regular epis and M of all
monos form a factorization system.
Proof. This has the same proof as Theorem 2 of Section 5.5. (The assumption
of regularity makes r in diagram (1) of Section 5.5 an epi).
Given an arrow F: C −→B in such a category, its image via the factorization
into a regular epi followed by a mono is called its regular image.
One deﬁnes equivalence classes of epis the same way as for monos—if C −→A
and C −→B are epi, they are equivalent if there are (necessarily unique) maps
for which
A
B
C
   	
@
@@
R
-

commutes both ways.
A category C is regularly co-well-powered if for each object C there is
a set R consisting of regular epimorphisms of C with the property that every
regular epimorphism of C is equivalent to one in R.

9.3 Colimits of Triple Algebras
307
Proposition 6.
Let C be a regular, regularly co-well-powered category with
coequalizers, and T a triple which preserves regular epis. Then the regular image
of an algebra morphism is a subalgebra of its codomain.
Notice that the condition that T preserve regular epis is automatically satisﬁed
in categories such as Set and categories of vector spaces over ﬁelds in which every
epi is split.
Proof. Let an algebra map (C, c) −→(B, b) factor as in the bottom line of the
following diagram. The vertical arrows make coequalizers as in diagram (13),
Section 3.3. The arrow a, and hence Ta, exists because of the diagonal ﬁll-in
property of the factorization system.
TC
TA
-
-
T 2C
T 2A
-
-
TB
-
T 2B
-
C
A
-
-
?
c
?
a
B
-
-
?
b
?
µC
?
Tc
?
µA
?
Ta
?
µB
?
Tb
The associative law for algebra follows because it works when preceded by the
epimorphism T 2C −→T 2A. A similar diagram with η’s on top gives the unitary
law.
Proposition 7. Let C and T satisfy the hypotheses of Proposition 6, and suppose
in addition that C is complete. Then C T has ﬁnite colimits.
Proof. We construct coequalizers in B = C T and use Corollary 3.
Given a parallel pair
(B, b)
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d
1
(C, c)
let C −→Ci run over all regular quotients of C which are algebras and which
coequalize d0 and d1. Then form the image d: C −→C0 which is a subalgebra of
Q Ci. Clearly d coequalizes d0 and d1. If f: (C, c) −→(C′, c′) coequalizes d0 and
d1, the image of f is among the Ci, say Cj. Then
C0 −→Q Ci
pj
−−−→Cj
inclusion
−−−−−−−−→c′
is the required arrow. It is unique because if there were two arrows, their equalizer
would be a smaller subobject of C0 through which C −→Q Ci factors.
The following theorem provides another approach to the problem.

308
9 More on Triples
Theorem 8.
Suppose C has ﬁnite colimits and equalizers of arbitrary sets of
maps (with the same source and target). Let T be a triple in C which preserves
colimits along countable chains. Then B = C T has coequalizers.
Proof. Again we use Corollary 3. Let (2) be given, and let e: C −→C0 be the
coequalizer in C of d0 and d1.
For i > 0, deﬁne each Ci in the diagram below to be the colimit of everything
that maps to it.
TC
TC0
-
Te
T 2C
T2C0
-
T 2e
C
C0
-
e
?
c
6
TC1
-
Te0
T 2C1
-
T 2e0
C1
-
e0
ηC0
6
ηC1
TC1
TC2 · · ·
-
Te1
T 2C1
· · ·
-
T 2e1
C2 · · ·
-
e1
6
ηC2
?
Tc
?
µC
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
T(ec)
TeµC
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
Tc0
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
Te0µC
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
Tc1
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
Te1µC
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
c0
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
c1
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
R
It follows that ci+1 ◦Tci = ci+1 ◦TeiµCi.
If f: (C, c) −→(B, b) coequalizes d0 and d1, then there is a unique g: C0 −→B
for which g ◦e = f. Then
g ◦e ◦c = f ◦c = b ◦Tf = b ◦Tg ◦Te
Also,
b ◦TgT(e ◦c) = b ◦Tf ◦Tc = f ◦c ◦Tc
= f ◦c ◦µC = b ◦Tf ◦µC = b ◦Tg ◦Te ◦µC,
and by a similar calculation,
b ◦Tg ◦ηC0 ◦e ◦c = b ◦Tg ◦Te
It follows that there is a unique g1: C1 −→B for which g1◦e0 = g and g1◦c0 = b◦Tg.
Now assume gi: Ci −→B has the property that gi ◦ei−1 = gi−1 and b ◦Tgi−1 =
gi ◦ci−1. Then,
b ◦Tgi ◦Tci−1 = b ◦T(b ◦Tgi−1) = b ◦Tb ◦T 2gi−1
= b ◦µB ◦T 2gi−1 = b ◦Tgi−1 ◦µCi−1
= b ◦T(gi ◦ei−1) ◦µCi−1 = b ◦Tgi ◦Tei−1 ◦µCi−1,

9.4 Free Triples
309
and similar but easier calculations show that
b ◦Tgi ◦Tei−1 = gi ◦ei−1
and
b ◦Tgi ◦ηCi ◦ci−1 = b ◦Tgi ◦Tei−1
This means that there is a unique gi+1: Ci+1 −→B for which gi+1 ◦ei = gi and
b ◦Tgi = gi+1 ◦ci.
Now we go to the colimit of the chain.
Let C′′ = colim Ci, so TC′′ =
colim TCi−1 and T 2C′′ = colim T 2Ci−2.
We get g′: C′′ −→B whose “restric-
tion” to Ci is gi. The maps ci induce a map c′′: TC′′ −→C′′. This is an algebra
structure map making g an algebra morphism:
(a) g′ ◦c′′ = b ◦Tg′ because gi ◦ci = b ◦Tgi−1.
(b) c′′ ◦Tc′′ = c′′ ◦µC′′ because ci ◦Tci−1 = ci ◦Tei−1 ◦µCi−1 and the ei commute
with the transition maps in the diagram.
However, we are not done. This map g′ need not be unique. To make it
unique, we pull a trick similar to the construction in the proof of the Adjoint
Functor Theorem. We have a map e′: (C, c) −→(C′′, c′′) induced by the ei which
is an algebra morphism. The equalizer of all the endomorphisms m of (C′′, c′′)
for which me′ = e′ is the coequalizer. This equalizer exists because it exists in
C and tripleable functors create limits. By copying the argument of the Adjoint
Functor Theorem, one gets a map e′′: C −→E which is the required coequalizer.
Exercises 9.3
1. Show that if T is a triple in C , C has coequalizers and T preserves them, then
C T has coequalizers.
2. Show that Theorem 8 may be generalized to show that if C has ﬁnite colimits
and equalizers of arbitrary sets of maps and if T is a triple in C which preserves
colimits along chains indexed by some cardinal α, then B = C T has coequalizers.
9.4 Free Triples
Given an endofunctor R: C −→C on a category C , the free triple generated
by R is a triple T = (T, η, µ) together with a natural transformation α: R −→T

310
9 More on Triples
with the property that if T′ = (T ′, η′, µ′) is a triple and β: R −→T ′ is a natural
transformation, then there is a triple morphism T −→T′ for which
R
T
-
α
β
@
@
@@
R
T ′?
commutes.
The concept of free triple on R is clearly analogous to the concept of free
monoid on a set, with composition of functors playing the role of Cartesian prod-
uct of sets. In one special situation, we can construct the free triple on R in
very much the same way as for the free monoid. If C has countable sums and R
preserves them, let T = id + R + R ◦R + R ◦R ◦R + · · ·. Then T ◦T ∼= T, and
with the identity map and the obvious map onto the ﬁrst summand serving as µ
and η respectively, one obtains a triple which is easily seen to be the free triple
generated by R. (See Exercise 1).
To get a more general construction, we form the category which will be C T.
Let (R: C ) denote the category whose objects are pairs (C, f) where C is an
object of C and f: RC −→C. A morphism f: (A, a) −→(A′, a′) in (R: C ) is an
arrow f: A −→A′ for which
A
A′
-
RA
RA′
-
Rf
?
?
Uf
commutes. This is a (non-full) subcategory of the comma category (R, C ). If R
should happen to be the functor part of a triple, then the category of algebras
for the triple is a full subcategory of (R: C ).
The canonical underlying functor U: (R: C ) −→C takes (A, a) to A and
f to f.
Proposition 1.
The underlying functor U:(R: C ) −→C satisﬁes the condition
of the PTT except possibly for the existence of a left adjoint. Thus if it has a left
adjoint, it is tripleable.
Proof. It is clear that U reﬂects isomorphisms. If
(A, a)
d0
−−−→
−−−→
d1
(B, b)

9.4 Free Triples
311
lies over a contractible coequalizer
A −→
−→
←−
s B
d
−−→
←−−
t
C
then c = d ◦b ◦Rt is a structure on C for which d is a morphism in (R: C ) which
is the required coequalizer.
Proposition 2.
Let R: C −→C be a functor and T = (T, η, µ) a triple on
C . Then there is a one to one correspondence between natural transformations
from R to T and functors Φ: C T −→(R: C ) which commute with the underlying
functors.
Proof. Given a natural transformation α: R −→T, deﬁne Φ to take an algebra
(A, a: TA −→A) to (A, a ◦αA), and a morphism to itself. It is easy to see that
this gives a functor.
Going the other way, let Φ be given. Since (TA, µA) is a T-algebra, Φ(TA, µA) =
(TA, φA) for some arrow φA: RTA −→TA. Now given f: A −→B, Tf: (TA, µA)
−→(TB, µB) is a morphism between (free) algebras, so ΦTf = Tf: (TA, φA)
−→(TB, φB) must be a morphism in (R: C ). It is immediate from the deﬁnition
that this is the same as saying that φ: RT −→T is a natural transformation,
whence so is α = φ ◦Rη: R −→T.
We must show that this construction is inverse to the one in the preceding
paragraph. For this we need
Lemma 3.
Any functor Φ: C T −→(R: C ) which commutes with the underlying
functors preserves the coequalizers of UT-contractible coequalizer pairs.
Proof. Such a functor clearly takes a UT-contractible coequalizer pair to a U-
contractible coequalizer pair, where U: (R: C ) −→C is the canonical underlying
functor. Then by Proposition 1 and the fact that UT is tripleable, Φ must preserve
the coequalizer.
Now suppose that Φ is given, α is constructed as above, and Φ′ is constructed
from α. We must show that Φ and Φ′ agree on T-algebras; to do this, we use the
standard technique of showing they agree on free algebras, so that by Lemma 3
they must agree on coequalizers of U-contractible diagrams of free algebras; but
those are all the algebras by Proposition 4 of Section 3.3.
A free algebra has the form (TA, µA), and µ: (T 2A, µTA) −→(TA, µA) is a
T-algebra morphism. Thus µ: (T 2A, φTA) −→(TA, φA) is a morphism in (R: C ),
whence φ ◦Rµ = µ ◦φT. Then
Φ′(TA, µA) = (TA, µA ◦αTA) = (TA, µA ◦φTA ◦RηTA)
= (TA, φA ◦RµA ◦RηTA) = (TA, φA) = Φ(TA, µA)

312
9 More on Triples
Thus Φ and Φ′ agree on free algebras, and so since both UT and U preserve
coequalizers, Φ and Φ′ must agree on all algebras. (Since both UT and U create
coequalizers of U-contractible coequalizer pairs, Φ and Φ′ do not merely take an
algebra to isomorphic objects of (R: C ), but are actually the same functor.)
Conversely, suppose we start with a natural transformation α, construct a
functor Φ, and then from Φ construct a natural transformation α′. As before, let
Φ(TA, µA) = (TA, φA). Since by deﬁnition Φ(TA, µA) = (TA, µA ◦αTA), we
have φ = µ ◦αT). Then
α′ = φ ◦Rη = µ ◦αT ◦Rη = µ ◦Tη ◦α = α
Theorem 4.
If U: (R: C ) −→C has a left adjoint F, then the resulting triple
is the free triple generated by R.
Proof. The comparison functor (R: C ) −→C T is an equivalence, so its inverse
corresponds via Proposition 2 to a morphism η: R −→T. If λ: R −→T ′ is a natural
transformation, the composite of the corresponding functor with the comparison
functor yields a functor from C T′ to C T which by Theorem 3 of Section 3.6
corresponds to natural transformation α: T −→T ′. Since α ◦η corresponds to the
same functor from C T to (R: C ) as λ, they must be equal.
The converse of Theorem 4 is true when C is complete:
Proposition 5.
Let C be a complete category and R an endofunctor on C
which generates a free triple T. Then U: (R: C ) −→C has a left adjoint and the
Eilenberg-Moore category C T is equivalent to (R: C ).
Proof. To construct the left adjoint we need a lemma.
Lemma 6.
If C is complete, then (R: C ) is complete.
Proof. The proof is the same as that of Theorem 1 of Section 3.4, which does not
require the existence of an adjoint.
Now let B be any set of objects of (R: C ). Let B# be the full subcategory
of (R: C ) consisting of all subobjects of products of objects in B.
Then the
composite B# −→(R: C ) −→C has an adjoint F by the Special Adjoint Functor
Theorem, the objects of B being the solution set.
Now form ¯B from B# by adding any object (B, b) for which there is a mor-
phism (B0, b0) −→(B, b) for which B0 −→B is a split epi. If a map C −→B in

9.4 Free Triples
313
C is given, it lifts via the splitting to a unique map C −→B0 for which
C
B
-
B0
@
@
@@
R
    	
commutes. This lifts to the unique map FC −→(B0, b0) given by the deﬁnition
of left adjoint. Composition with B0 −→B gives a map FC −→(B, b), and this se-
quence of constructions gives an injection from HomC(C, B) to Hom ¯B(FC, (B, b)).
The fact that B0 −→B is split makes it surjective, so that we have shown that
the underlying functor ¯U: ¯B −→C has a left adjoint.
If
(B′, b′) −→
−→(B, b)
is a U-contractible coequalizer diagram with both algebras in ¯B, then it has
a coequalizer (B′′, b′′) in (R: C ) which by deﬁnition belongs to ¯B. Thus since
U: (R: C ) −→C satisﬁes the requirements of PTT except for having a left adjoint,
and ¯U is a restriction of U to a subcategory which has the requisite coequalizers,
¯U must be tripleable. Let T′ = (T ′, η′, µ′) be the resulting triple.
The inclusion C T′ −→(R: C ) corresponds to a natural transformation R −→
T ′ which by the deﬁnition of free triple gives a morphism T −→T′ of triples which
makes
R
T
-
T ′
@
@
@@
R
    	
commute, the top transformation being the one given by the deﬁnition of free
triple. By the correspondence between morphisms of triples and morphisms of
triple algebras (Theorem 3 of Section 3.6), this yields the commutative diagram
C
B
T′
C T
-
W
(R: C )
-
V
U
         	
F T′
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
I
UT′
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@@
R
6
F T
?
UT
(∗)

314
9 More on Triples
in which the top row is the inclusion.
Thus every object and every map of ¯B is in the image of C T. Since we began
with any set of objects, it follows that V is surjective on objects and maps.
Now take an object B of (R: C ) and a ¯B contained in (R: C ) as constructed
above which contains B. We have, in the notation of diagram (∗),
Hom(V F TC, B) ∼= Hom(V F TC, V WB) ∼= Hom(F TC, WB)
∼= Hom(C, U T ′B) ∼= Hom(C, UB),
which proves that U has a left adjoint.
The last statement in the proposition then follows from Proposition 1 and
Theorem 4.
Proposition 7.
Let C be complete and have ﬁnite colimits and colimits of
countable chains. Let R be an endofunctor of C which commutes with colimits of
countable chains. Then R generates a free triple.
Proof. By Theorem 4, we need only construct a left adjoint to U: (R: C ) −→C .
Let C be an object of C . Form the sequence
C1
C2
-
e1
RC0
RC1
-
Te0
?
c1
?
C2
-
e3
RC2
-
Te1
c2
?
· · ·
-
· · ·
-
e3
C = C0
-
e0
in which each square is a pushout and C1 = C0 + RC0. Let C′ = colim Cn. Then
RC′ = colim RCn and there are induced maps e: C −→C′ and c′: RC′ −→C′.
Lemma 8.
For any diagram
A
C
-
f
B
?
g
there is an arrow f ′: C′ −→B for which
C′
B
-
RC′
RB
-
Rf ′
?
c′
?
b
f ′
C
e
@
@
@
I
f
   

9.4 Free Triples
315
commutes.
Proof. Begin with f0 = f. Let f1: C1 −→B be deﬁned using the deﬁning property
of a sum by f1 ◦e0 = f and f1 ◦c1 = b ◦Rf. We will deﬁne fn for n ≥1 inductively;
notice that after f1 we are using a pushout rather than a sum, so our induction
hypothesis will have to carry with it a commutativity condition.
So assume that f0, · · · , fn have been deﬁned in such a way that
(a) fi: Ci −→B;
(b) fi ◦ci = b ◦Rfi−1; and
(c) fi ◦ei−1 = fi−1.
Then b ◦Rfi ◦Rei−l = b ◦Rfi−1, so we can legitimately deﬁne fi+1 by requiring
that fi+1 ◦ci+1 = b ◦Rfi and fi+1 ◦ei = fi. The induced map f ′ then clearly
satisﬁes the required identities.
By Lemma 8, the objects (C′, c′: RC′ −→C′) form a solution set for the un-
derlying functor U: (R: C ) −→C , which therefore has a left adjoint as required.
Exercises 9.4
1. Prove that if C is a category with countable sums and R an endofunctor which
preserves countable sums, then R generates a free triple.
2. (Lambek)
(i) Let R be an endofunctor of a category C . Show that if a: RA −→A is an
initial object in (R: C ), then a is an isomorphism.
(ii) Prove that an endofunctor which has no ﬁxed points does not generate a
free triple.
(iii) Prove that the covariant power set functor which takes a map to its direct
image does not generate a free triple.
3. Formulate and prove a transﬁnite generalization of Theorem 7 analogous to
the way in which Exercise 2 of Section 9.3 generalizes Theorem 8 of that section.


References
J. Ad´amek and J. Rosiˇcky, Locally Presentable and Accessible Categories. Cam-
bridge University Press (1994).
H. Applegate, Categories with models. Dissertation, Columbia University (1965).
H. Applegate and M. Tierney, Categories with models. Springer Lecture Notes
in Mathematics 80, 156-243 (1969).
M. Barr, Exact categories, in Exact Categories and Categories of Sheaves,
Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics 236, 1-120. 1971.
M. Barr, Toposes without points. J. Pure and Applied Algebra 5, 265-280 (1974).
M. Barr, Coequalizers and free triples. Math. Z. 116 (1970), 307-322.
M. Barr, J. Beck, Homology and standard constructions, in Seminar on Triples
and Categorical Homology Theory. Springer Lecture Notes in Math. 80
(1969), 245-335.
M. Barr, R. Diaconescu, Atomic Toposes. J. Pure Applied Algebra, 17 (1980),
1-24.
M. Barr, R. Par´e, Molecular Toposes. J. Pure Applied Algebra, 17 (1980), 127-
152.
M. Barr and C. Wells, Category Theory for Computing Science, 3rd Edition. Les
Publications CRM (1999).
A. Bastiani and C. Ehresmann, Categories of sketched structures. Cahiers de
Topologie et G´eometrie Diﬀ´erentielle 13 (1973), 1-105.
J. M. Beck, Triples, Algebras, and Cohomology. Ph. D. Thesis, Columbia Uni-
versity (1967).
J. B´enabou, Structures alg´ebriques dans les cat´egories. Cahiers de Topologie et
G´eometrie Diﬀ´erentielle 10 (1968), 1-126.
J. B´enabou, Structures alg´ebriques dans les cat´egories. Cahiers de Topologie et
G´eometrie Diﬀ´erentielle 13 (1972), 103-214.
G. Birkhoﬀ, On the structure of abstract algebras. Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc.
31 (1935), 433-454.
317

318
References
A. Blass, The interaction between category theory and set theory. Preprint, Uni-
versity of Michigan (1983).
A. Boileau and A. Joyal, La logique des topos. J. Symbolic Logic 46 (1981), 6-16.
F. Borceux, Handbook of Categorical Algebra I, II and III. Cambridge University
Press (1994).
M. C. Bunge, Toposes in logic and logic in toposes. (To appear, Proc. of the
meeting of the Soc. for Exact Philosophy, April, 1983.)
H. Cartan and S. Eilenberg, Homological Algebra. Princeton University Press,
1952.
C. C. Chang and H. J. Keisler, Model Theory. North-Holland, 1973.
P. M. Cohn, Universal Algebra. D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1982.
A. Day, Filter monads, continuous lattices and closure systems. Canadian J.
Math. 27 (1975), 50-59.
B. Day, Note on the Stone representation theorem.
P. Deligne, La conjecture de Weil I. I. H. E. S. Publ. Math. 43 (1974), 273-307.
R. Diaconescu, Axiom of choice and complementation. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.
51 (1975), 176-178.
R. Diaconescu, Change of base for toposes with generators. J. Pure Applied Al-
gebra 6 (1975), 191-218.
E. Dubuc and G. M. Kelly, A presentation of topoi as algebraic relative to cate-
gories or graphs.
J. Duskin, Variations on Beck’s tripleability criterion. Springer Lecture Notes in
Mathematics 106, 74-129 (1969).
B. Eckmann and P. Hilton, Group-like structures in general categories. Math.
Ann. 145 (1962), 227.
C. Ehresmann, Introduction to the theory of structured categories. Charles
Ehresmann, œuvres compl`etes et comment´ees III, 2, 591-676. (Noted by V.
Topencharov.)
C. Ehresmann, Probl`emes universels relatifs aux cat´egories n-aires. C.R.A.S. 264
(273-276), 1967a.
C. Ehresmann, Sur les structures alg´ebriques. C.R.A.S. 264 (840-843), 1967b.
C. Ehresmann, Esquisses et types de structures alg´ebriques. Bul. Inst. Polit. Ia¸si
t. XIV(XVIII), Fasc. 1-2 (1968), 1-14. Reprinted in Œuvres compl`etes et
comment´ees IV, 1, 19-33.
S. Eilenberg and S. MacLane, General theory of natural equivalences. Trans. A.
M. S. 58, 1945, 231-244.

References
319
S. Eilenberg and J. C. Moore, Adjoint functors and triples, Illinois J. Math. 9,
381-398 (1965).
G. D. Findlay, Reﬂexive homomorphic relations. Can. Math. Bull. 3 (1960), 131-
132.
M. Fourman, The logic of topoi, in Handbook of Mathematical Logic, J. Barwise,
ed. North-Holland, 1977.
P. Freyd, Abelian Categories: An introduction to the theory of functors. Harper
and Row, 1964.
P. Freyd, Several new concepts: lucid and concordant functors, pre-limits, pre-
completeness, the continuous and concordant completions of categories. In
Category theory, homology theory and their applications III: Proceedings of
the Batelle Institute Conference, Seattle, 1968. Springer Lecture Notes in
Mathematics 99 (1969), 196-241.
P. Freyd, Aspects of topoi. Bull. Austral. Math. Soc. 7 (1972), 1-72 and 467-480.
Corrections (preprint), 1973.
P. Freyd and A. Scedrov, Categories, Allegories. North-Holland Mathematical
Library 39. North-Holland (1990).
P. Gabriel and F. Ulmer, Lokal pr¨asentierbare Kategorien, Springer Lecture Notes
in Mathematics 221. Springer-Verlag, 1971.
R. Godement, Th´eorie des faisceaux. Hermann (1958).
J. Goguen, J. Meseguer, An initiality primer. Preprint, (1983a), SRI Interna-
tional, Computer Science Laboratory, 333 Ravenswood Ave., Menlo Park,
CA, USA, 94025.
J. Goguen, J. Meseguer, Completeness of many-sorted equational logic. To ap-
pear in Houston J. Math. (1983b).
A. Grothendieck, Sur quelques points d’alg`ebre homologique, Tohˆoku Math. Jour-
nal 2, 1957, 119-221.
A. Grothendieck, Cohomologie ´etale des sch´emas. Seminaire de G´eometrie
Alg´ebrique de L’I. H. E. S. 1964.
A. Grothendieck, J. L. Verdier, Th´eorie des topos. in SGA 4 Expos´es I-VI (1963-
4), reprinted in Springer Lecture Notes in Math. 269-270 (1972).
J. W. Gray, Formal Category I: Adjointness for 2-Categories. Springer Lecture
Notes in Math. 391 (1974).
P. Huber, Homotopy theory in general categories. Math. Ann. 144, 361-385
(1961).
J. R. Isbell, General functorial semantics. (You must have this reference in your
ﬁles.)

320
References
P. T. Johnstone, Topos Theory. Academic Press, 1977.
P. T. Johnstone, G. Wraith, Algebraic theories in toposes, in Indexed Categories
and their Applications, Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics 661 (1978).
D. M. Kan, Adjoint functors. Trans. A. M. S. 87, 1958, 294-329.
G. M. Kelly, On the essentially-algebraic theory generated by a sketch. Bulletin
Australian Mathematical Society 26 (1982), 45-56.
G. M. Kelly, A uniﬁed treatment of transﬁnite constructions for free algebras,
free monoids, colimits, associated sheaves, and so on. Bulletin Australian
Mathematical Society 22 (1980), 1-83.
J. F. Kennison, On limit-preserving functors. Illinois Jour. Math. 12, 616-619
(1968).
J. F. Kennison and D. Gildenhuys, Equational completion, model induced triples
and pro-objects. J. Pure Applied Algebra 1 (1971), 317-346.
H. Kleisli, Comparaison de la r´esolution simpliciale `a la bar-r´esolution. in
Cat´egories Non-Ab´eliennes, L’Universit´e de Montr´eal (1964), 85-99.
H. Kleisli, Every standard construction is induced by a pair of adjoint functors.
Proc. A. M. S. 16, 544-546 (1965).
A. Kock and G. E. Reyes, Doctrines in categorical logic. In Handbook of Math-
ematical Logic, J. Barwise, editor. North-Holland, 1977.
Anders Kock, Synthetic Diﬀerential Geometry. London Mathematical Society
Lecture Note Series 51. Cambridge University Press, 1981.
A. Kock and G. Wraith, Elementary toposes. Aarhus Lecture Notes 30, 1971.
J. Lambek and P. Scott, Introduction to higher-order categorical logic. Cam-
bridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics 7. Cambridge University Press
(1986).
F. W. Lawvere, Functorial semantics of algebraic theories. Dissertation, Columbia
University (1963). Announcement in Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 50 (1963), 869-
873.
F. W. Lawvere, An elementary theory of the category of sets. Preprint (1965).
F. W. Lawvere, The category of categories as a foundation for mathematics. Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Categorical Algebra at La Jolla. Springer-
Verlag (1966).
F. W. Lawvere, Quantiﬁers and sheaves. Actes du Congr`es International des
Math´ematiciens, Nice (1970), 329-334.
F. W. Lawvere, Continuously variable sets: algebraic geometry = geometric logic.
Proc. A. S. L. Logic Colloquium, Bristol, 1973. North-Holland (1975),135-
156

References
321
F. W. Lawvere, Introduction. Toposes, Algebraic Geometry and Logic. Springer
Lecture Notes in Math. 445 (1975), 3-14.
F. W. Lawvere, Variable sets, ´etendu, and variable structures in topoi (Notes by
S. E. Landsburg), Lecture Notes, University of Chicago (1976).
F. W. Lawvere, Variable quantities and variable structures in topoi. in Algebra,
Topology and Category Theory: a collection of papers in honor of Samuel
Eilenberg. Academic Press (1976), 101-131.
F. E. J. Linton, Some aspects of equational categories. Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Categorical Algebra at La Jolla. Springer-Verlag (1966).
F. E. J. Linton, An outline of functorial semantics, Springer Lecture Notes in
Mathematics 80, 7-52 (1969a).
F. E. J. Linton, Applied functorial semantics, Springer Lecture Notes in Mathe-
matics 80, 53-74 (1969b).
F. E. J. Linton, Coequalizers in categories of algebras, Springer Lecture Notes in
Mathematics 80, 75-90 (1969c).
S. Mac Lane, Duality for groups. Bull. A. M. S. 56, 1950, 485-516.
S. Mac Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician 2nd Edition. Springer-
Verlag, 1998.
S. Mac Lane and I. Moerdijk, Sheaves in Geometry and Logic. Springer-Verlag
(1992).
A. I. Mal’cev, On the general theory of algebraic systems. Math. Sbornik, N. S.
35 (1954). 3-20.
M. Makkai and G. Reyes, First Order Categorical Logic. Lecture Notes in Math-
ematics 611. Sringer-Verlag, 1977.
C. McLarty, Elementary Categories, Elementary Toposes. Oxford Logic Guides
21. Clarendon Press (1992).
C. J. Mikkelsen, Lattice Theoretic and Logical Aspects of Elementary Topoi.
Aarhus University Various Publications Series 25, 1976.
B. Mitchell, The full embedding theorem. Amer. J. Math. 86, 1964, 619-637.
B. Mitchell, Theory of Categories. Academic Press, 1965.
P. Mulry, Generalized Banach-Mazur functionals in the topos of recursive sets.
J. Pure Applied Algebra, 26 (1982), 71-83.
G. Osius, Categorial set theory: a characterization of the category of sets. J.
Pure Applied Algebra, 4 (1974), 79–119.
G. Osius, Logical and set theoretical tools in elementary topoi. Model Theory
and Topoi, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 445 (1975), 297–346.

322
References
R. Par´e, Connected components and colimits, J. Pure Applied Algebra, 3 (1973),
21-42.
R. Par´e, D. Schumacher, Abstract families and the adjoint functor theorem, in
Indexed Categories and their Applications, Springer Lecture Notes in Math-
ematics 661 (1978).
J. Peake and G. R. Peters, Extensions of algebraic theories. Prof. A. M. S. 32
(1972), 356-362.
H. Rasiowa and R. Sikorski, The Mathematics of Metamathematics. Polish Sci-
entiﬁc Publishers, Warsaw (1963).
G. Reyes, From sheaves to logic. In Studies in Algebraic Logic, A. Daigneault,
ed. MAA Studies in Math., 9, Mathematical Association of America, l974.
R. Rosebrugh, On algebras deﬁned by operations and equations in a topos. J.
Pure and Applied Algebra 17 (1980), 203-221.
J. Shoenﬁeld, Mathematical Logic. Addison-Wesley, 1967.
R. Street, Notions of topos. Bull. Australian Math. Soc. 23 (1981), 199-208.
R. Street, The family approach to total cocompleteness and toposes, Reprint,
School of Mathematics and Physics, McQuarrie University, North Ryde,
NSW 2113, Australia (1983).
R. Street, R. Walters, The comprehensive factorization of a functor, Bull. Amer.
Math. Soc. 79 (1973), 936-941.
B. R. Tennison, Sheaf Theory. London Math. Soc. Lecutre Notes 20. Cambridge
University Press (1975).
A. S. Troelstra, Aspects of Constructive Mathematics. Handbook of Mathemat-
ical Logic, J. Barwise, ed., North-Holland,
R. F. C. Walters, Categories and computer science. Cambridge University Press,
1991.
C. Wells, A triple in Cat. Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc. 23 (1980), 261-268.
G. C. Wraith, Algebras over theories. Colloq. Math. 23 (1971), 180-190.
O. Wyler, Algebraic theories of continuous lattices. In Continuous lattices,
Springer Lecture Notes in Mathematics 871 (1981), 390-413.

Index
2-valued, 238
S-separated, 224
S-sheaf, 224
U-contractible equivalence pair, 288
G-coalgebra, 105
P, 170
j-closed, 196
j-dense, 196
j-separated, 201
Cat(E ), 218
T-algebra, 103
-divisible, 277
Ab, 3, 24, 47
absolute coequalizer, 110
absolutely closed, 202
AC, 242
adjoint, 54, 56, 59, 99, 152
adjoint functor theorem, 59
adjoint transpose, 54
adjoint triple, 138
adjoint tripleable, 138
algebraic theory, 154
application, 18
arrow, 1
arrow category, 9
arrow congruence, 10
arrows, 34, 35
associated sheaf functor, 202
atom, 15
atomic, 15
Axiom of Choice, 242
Barr’s Embedding Theorem, 269
Beck conditions, 91
Beck’s Theorem, 115
Beck, Jon, 62
Birkhoﬀ’s Theorem, 288
Boolean, 193, 237, 245
Boolean algebra, 15
Boolean topos, 240
Butler’s Theorem, 137
CABA, 15
canonical, 227
canonical underlying functor, 307
cartesian closed, 180, 181
categorical theory, vii
category, 1, 8, 162
category object, 217
category of Abelian groups, 3, 15, 62, 196
category of groups, 1, 3, 13, 16, 48, 49,
69, 104, 126
category of models, 281
category of sets, ix, 1, 15, 242, 302
category of topological spaces, 1
change of base space, 82
classifying topos, 280
coalgebras, 105
cocone induced by, 274
cocontinuous, 48
codomain, 1
coequalizer, 47
cogenerating set, 65
cograph, 8
coherent, 253
coherent family, 241
coherent sketch, 280
coherent theory, 280, 283
colimit, 47, 302
323

324
Index
comma category, 13
commutative cone, 36
commutative cone over D based on T, 29
commutative diagram, 3
commute, 3
commute serially, 84, 111
compatible, 299
complete, 15, 37
components, 16, 36
composite, 1, 235
Cone, 34
congruence, 51
connected, 10
connected diagrams, 44
connected graph, 44
conservative generator, 228
continuous, 39
contractible, 109
contractible coequalizer, 109
contractible coequalizer pair, 110
contravariant functor, 11
contravariant hom functors, 12
coproduct, 47
cotriple, 100
counit, 55
covariant, 12
covariant functor, 11
cover, 224
creates, 42
crible, 223
Crude Tripleability Theorem, 126
CTT, 126
deﬁned over, 19
Deligne’s Theorem, 253
dense, 150
descent type, 107
designated ﬁnite limits, 39
diagram, 35
diagram of type, 35
direct image, 82
discrete, 37
discrete category, 63
discrete opﬁbration, 223
distributive law, 296
domain, 1
domain of variation, 20
dual, 5
Duskin’s Theorem, 289
eﬀective descent type, 107
eﬀective epimorphic family, 225
eﬀective equivalence, 89
eﬀective equivalence relation, 51
Ehresmann-Kennison Theorem, 147
Eilenberg-Moore comparison functor, 105
element, 25, 29
element free, 3
element of, 19
empty path, 66
epi, 21
epi-mono factorization, 183
epic, 21
epimorphic family, 224
epimorphism, 21, 53, 242
equalizer, 39, 84
equational theory, 67, 158
equivalence, 13
equivalence pair, 288
equivalence relation, 40, 50, 89
equivalent, 23
essentially small, 253
evaluation map, 75
exact, 141
exact category, 51, 237
exact functor, 237
exponential, 180
factorization system, 187
factors through, 22
faithful, 11
ﬁber, 81, 222
ﬁber product, 30
ﬁbration, 218
ﬁlter, 282
ﬁltered, 158

Index
325
ﬁltered colimit, 67, 158
ﬁltered diagram, 67
ﬁnite diagram, 35
ﬁnite products, 38
ﬁnite-sum sketch, 278
ﬁnitely complete, 37
ﬂabby, 98
forgetful functor, 11
FP theory of groups, 143
FP-category, 143
FP-sketch, 145, 283
FP-theory generated by S , 151
free, 105
free group, 12, 28, 97
free triple, 306
Freyd’s Embedding Theorem, 241
FS-sketch, 278
FS-theory, 278
full, 3, 11
function, 7
functor, 11
functor category, 17, 74, 75
generator, 228, 293
generic, 280
generic element, 20
geometric morphism, 83, 208, 215, 233
geometric sketch, 279
geometric theory, 279, 283
germ, 81
Giraud sieve, 234
Giraud topology, 234
Giraud’s Theorem, 228
global element, 23
global section, 242
global support, 179, 242
Godement’s rules, 19
graph, 8, 34
Grothendieck topology, 224
Grothendieck topos, 229, 233, 253, 268,
269
group, 38, 39, 143
groupoid, 63
Grp, 1, 49
has ﬁnite limits, 38
has products, 38
Heyting algebra, 191
homomorphism, 35
homotopy types, 2
homset, 1
IAC, 242
idempotent, 195
idempotent triple, 217
identity, 1
identity property, 8
image, 183, 188
index graph, 35
inﬂationary, 195
initial object, 5, 186
injective, 77
internal axiom of choice, 242
internal functor, 218
intersection, 184
Intuitionistic logic, 190
inverse, 4
isomorphic, 13
isomorphism, 4
jointly monic, 45, 288
Kan extension, 60
Kan extensions, 222
kernel pair, 40, 89
Kleisli category, 103
LE-category, 156
LE-functor, 156
LE-sketch, 156, 283
LE-theory, 156
left C -object, 218
left adjoint, 54
left exact, 38, 42
left exact cotriple, 208
left exact triple, 212
left Kan extension, 60

326
Index
lex total, 233
lifting, 297
limit, 36
limit slice, 244
Linton’s Theorem, 302
locally small, 1
logical, 175
logical category, 242
map, 1
model, 145, 274
model category, 281
monic, 21
mono, 21
mono square, 85
monomorphism, 21
morphism, 1, 145
morphism of sites, 224
morphism of triples, 128
natural equivalence, 16
natural number object, 255
natural transformation, 16, 27, 35
near exact, 237
NNO, 255
nodes, 35
object, 1
objects, 34, 35
opﬁbration, 222
opposite category, 5
order-preserving, 195
orthodox semigroup, 287
over, 3
Par´e’s Theorem, 170
parallel pair, 108
path, 66
path category, 67
PE-structure, 254
Peano property, 260
Peano system, 255
point, 280
pointed, 126
pointed endomorphism structure, 254
points, 268
pointwise construction of adjoints, 56
poset, 2, 38
power object, 73, 165, 170, 172
powerful epi, 243
powerset, 12, 28
pre-FS-theory, 278
pre-geometric theory, 279
Precise Tripleability Theorem, 116
preorder, 10
preregular theory, 274
preserves, 11, 42, 75
presheaf, 77, 224
pretopos, 237
product, 37
product of categories, 3
product projection, 37
projections, 14, 37
projective, 293
projective generator, 293
projective sketch, 144
PTT, 117
pullback, 30, 84
pullback diagram, 30
pun, 141, 222
quotient category, 10
reﬁnes, 223
reﬂective, 64
reﬂector, 64
reﬂects, 11, 42
reﬂects isomorphisms, 108
reﬂexive, 112
reﬂexive coequalizer, 112
regular category, 48
regular epimorphic, 282
regular epimorphic family, 225
regular epimorphism, 48, 89
regular functor, 237
regular generator, 228, 293
regular image, 303

Index
327
regular monomorphism, 48
regular projective, 293
regular projective generating set, 282
regular projective generator, 282, 293
regular ring, 275
regular sketch, 274, 283
regular theory, 275
regularly co-well-powered, 303
representable functor, 27
restriction map, 77
retraction, 21
right exact, 48
saturated, 224, 234
section of, 242
sections, 78
separable, 262
separated object, 201
separator, 289
Set, 1
set of sorts, 155
sheaf, 77, 196, 202, 205
sheaf of sections, 78
sheaﬁﬁcation, 82, 202
sheaves, 98
Sierpinski space, 191
sieve, 223, 274
simplicial object, 222
single-sorted, 154
singleton, 88
Singleton set, 4
site, 224
skeleton, 10
sketch, 144
slice, 172
slice category, 3
small, 1
solution set condition, 58
source, 1, 35
split, 109
split discrete opﬁbration, 219
split epi, 242
split epimorphism, 21
split monomorphism, 21
split opﬁbration, 223
square brackets, 31
SS, 242
stable, 224, 225
stable images, 242
stable sups, 242
stable under pullback, 48
stalk, 81
standard, 227, 262
strict, 186
strict initial object, 228
structure map, 103
subcanonical, 227
subcategory, 2
subfunctor, 25
subobject, 23, 32
subobject classiﬁer, 87, 177
sum, 47
support, 242
supports split, 242
target, 1, 35
terminal object, 4
theory, vii, 274
Top, 1
topology, 195
topos, vii, 74, 79, 165, 208, 215, 221
torsion theories , 197
total, 233
total space, 81
transpose, 54
triple, vii, 96
tripleable, 107, 116, 155, 288, 289, 293
twisted arrow category of, 9
ultraﬁlter, 282
ultraproduct, 282
under, 5
underlying graph, 35
underlying graph functor, 35
underlying set functor, 11
underlying sketch, 145

328
Index
union, 184
unique lifting property, 219
unit, 55
universal, 224, 225
universal arrow, 58
universal element, 27
upper semilattice, 15
VTT, 126
Vulgar Tripleability Theorem, 126
weak universal arrow, 58
well powered, 65
well-pointed, 238
Yoneda, 27
Yoneda embedding, 25, 26, 233
Yoneda map, 25, 26

