
Tor and the Dark Net
The Lowdown on the Deep Web
Staying Anonymous Online, Evading NSA Spying, and Organizing Social Revolution
 
By: Gordon Summers

Legal notice
This book is copyright (c) 2017 by Gordon Summers. All rights reserved. This book
may not be copied or duplicated in whole or in part via any means including electronic
forms of duplication such as audio or video recording or transcription. The contents of
this book may not be stored in any retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise copied for
any use whether public or private, other than brief quotations contained in articles or
reviews which fall under the “fair use” exception, without express prior permission of
the publisher.
This book provides information only. The author does not offer any advice, medical or
otherwise, or suggest a particular course of action in any specific situation, nor is this
book meant as a substitute for any professional advice, medical or otherwise. The
reader accepts all responsibility for how he or she chooses to use the information
contained in this book and under no circumstances will the author or publisher be held
liable for any damages caused directly or indirectly by any information contained in this
book.

Table of Contents
Introduction to Tor
The Silk Road
Crypto and The Dark Net
The Crypto Social Revolution

Introduction to Tor
In this world where there is free and unlimited access to information, anyone who is
connected to the Internet appears to have all the knowledge in the world within his or
her grasp. However, although widespread information sharing has been significantly
expanded by the advent of the Internet, matters related to personal privacy have also
become more complex. People are anxious about the possibilities of their Internet
browsing activity or even their personal information being monitored without their
consent. In addition to government agencies who can exercise surveillance of people's
online activity, private companies have similar capabilities and are increasingly using
browsing data for targeted advertising. In fact, we are being observed all the time
without our knowledge.
As concerns about privacy and unregulated data mining increase, attention has been
brought to bear on a browser known as Tor. Still largely misunderstood and even
considered mysterious by many, Tor is often regarded as part of the technological
underworld. However, Tor is essentially software which is designed to maintain a user's
anonymity. Initially named The Onion Router, it was developed by a non-profit group
(the Tor Project) which champions people's right to online privacy. The group is largely
funded by the US government which envisages potential use of the software in
oppressive countries.
Understanding the insecurity of the Internet
Fundamentally, the Internet is a set of relationships among remote computers. The first
computers were entirely self-contained with no way of forming external connections
with other computers. However, technological advancement soon enabled technicians to
network computers together through physical connections. These were the first networks
which, however,  could only be created among computers in proximity to each other.
Later on, the advent of improved fiber optic technology increased the scope of inter-
computer connections across countries ; which heralded the birth of the Internet as we
know it today. These connections have since evolved into wireless signals.
The data which is stored on the Internet is kept on servers, which are sophisticated
computers.  This information can be accessed through the use of various devices such as
personal computers or smart phones. Any device which is used to access Internet data is
known as a client. When a client and a server relate to each other this is called a
connection. Clients and servers exchange information in packaged clusters of data.
Individuals use their connections to obtain information or data from servers but this is

not a one-way affair. At the same time that  the individual receives a package of
information from the server, a package of his or her own information is exchanged. This
includes data on browsing habits and location. As it is transferred, this data can be
visible to others (whether government or private enterprises) who can observe and keep
track of an individual's Internet behavior. So how does Tor work to prevent this?
How Tor can protect the user
The Tor software uses something called onion routing which means that it uses several
layers to route information between client and server. Tor's network is made up of a
number of computers which operate as intersections or nodes. These nodes perform the
task of passing that information from one to another.  If a Tor user is accessing a server,
instead of their package of information going directly to and from that server, it goes
through a randomly designated path of nodes along the Tor network before getting to the
server.
More importantly, the Tor software adds several protective layers to the data package.
This effectively obscures sensitive details about users like their addresses and the
destination of their queries which cannot be detected at any of the nodes.
For example, if a user sends a query or other bit of information to a server, this
information package is immediately shrouded in a number of layers. The outermost layer
will direct it to Router (node) A which will then remove that outer layer. The second
layer will tell Router (node) A to forward the package to Router (node) B which will
then remove that second layer. The third layer will tell Router (node) B to send the
information package on to Router (node) C and so on; until the message arrives at the
intended server. No one monitoring a message from one node to another can know the
entire path of the message. In the same way none of the routers (nodes) have any
information on the message's point of origin or final destination.
How to obtain Tor
Tor is entirely free, in accordance with the principles of the Tor project. However, you
should note that while the Tor browser is correctly configured, users whose networks
have certain firewalls or other types of security may encounter some issues. Note also
that it is still important to be extremely vigilant when using the Internet since careless
usage can undermine your anonymity. The Tor website lists a number of precautionary
measures that you can take, and it provides recommendations for fixing any problems
that may arise while using the Tor browser.
Tor's obscure services and the 'Deep Web'

The protection of privacy is only one of Tor's functions. It can also be used to access
what is often referred to as the 'Deep Web", which is that portion of the Internet that
search engines do not normally reach into. Often spoken about as dark and unfathomable,
the Deep Web is quite unremarkable. It is basically the rather large amount of data that is
difficult to access through a regular web search. The Internet is very vast, but in the
same way that much of the earth is under water and cannot be seen on an ordinary map,
much of the information on the Internet is below the surface that is accessible to most
search engines. Approximately 80 percent of Internet pages are hidden from the average
user who would not have the requisite passwords or procedures to gain access.
Just as it protects the anonymity of clients, Tor does the same for web pages by using a
specially configured server as a relay station for the web page to connect with the client.
There is no need for an IP address to be provided; instead Tor generates a 16 character
key which replaces the customary URL. Some of the Tor network's concealed  pages
make up one of the notorious 'Darknets', access to which requires special procedures
and conventions . The sinister connotations of the term Darknet are certainly accurate,
since many of these sites are known for buying and selling illegal merchandise. One of
the best known Darknet sites was the Silk Road which sold illegal drugs and was
eventually closed down in 2013 by the FBI.
The who and why of Tor users?
Tor relies entirely on anonymity, which makes it practically  impossible to get a
complete sense of who its users are. However, many of Tor's users do speak openly
about their use of the service and it is possible to make assumptions that certain groups
naturally gravitate towards this software. Tor is particularly attractive to journalists in
countries which have repressive laws against freedom of Internet use. Activists in these
countries are also quite likely to use Tor. In countries like North Korea or Iran which
exercise strict Internet censorship, Tor is a useful tool by which citizens can access the
Internet without restrictions. As was the case with Edward Snowden, informants, who
wish to leak information to the press are also natural users of Tor. However, Tor is not
solely the domain of activists or persons with political agendas. It has also been praised
by academics as well as ordinary persons as a means of maintaining privacy and free
speech.  Nonetheless, despite the much-touted benefits of Tor, it is not well thought of in
mainstream press circles. Tor's  bad reputation among certain groups is not surprising
since the fact that it provides cover for Internet activities has made it very attractive to
those with sleazy and unwholesome agendas. Its use by nefarious characters is indeed a
growing trend.  This is a rather unfortunate and disturbing consequence of Tor's laudable
goals of providing freedom and privacy of expression.

Constraints, dangers, and safe practices
Tor's usefulness is not without its complications. Although the Tor network securely
protects data traffic, the browser (which is a refashioned form of Firefox) is just as
vulnerable to attacks as any other. Therefore a user's computer can be infected with the
same malware which could affect Firefox, and clients can be accessed remotely in this
way. The fact that Tor enables anonymous Internet browsing has also triggered the
attention of government agencies, especially the FBI and the NSA, who have begun to
take considerable interest in Tor. Naturally, anyone using Tor, even legally, could be a
target of these agencies or others, which can piggyback on less careful Tor users to gain
access to several nodes. Once enough nodes have been identified, information packets
can be observed while layers are being shed and it is possible for someone retrace their
path.
It is impossible to attain complete security on the Internet and not even Tor can change
this. However, with the Tor browser, the risks are significantly lowered as long as you
take reasonable precautions. The most important safeguard is to disable independently
operating scripts and plugins e.g. Flash, which are often sources of data transmission
about users. The use of Torrents poses another danger, since they work by allowing
several people to share different bits of a file to create a complete file. This requires the
sharing group to send out their IP addresses to each other which nullifies the point of
Tor's protective layering. Finally, those who use Tor's hidden services must be very
careful about what they attempt to access. One should be aware that in addition to the
many legal and perfectly acceptable web pages, there are several which are potentially
dangerous, populated by illicit content or frequented by the criminally inclined.  Your
accidental entry to one of the latter may well result in an unanticipated and complicated
legal problem.

The Silk Road
Business and import and export exchange has been revolutionized through the Internet.
Consumers and vendors can be effortlessly linked around the globe, expediting making
purchases and making it much easier. About half of all buyers around the world do their
shopping primarily online, and this number is increasing yearly. The convenience of e-
commerce and all of its perks, from expedited shipping options, instant check out, and
one-click purchases has become an industry that is accumulating billions of dollars.
However, along with these advantages, there is also another more detrimental up-and-
coming area of e-commerce, which is that of the online buying and selling of illegal
substances.
In 2014, approximately 80,000 drug users from forty-three countries were surveyed
about where they acquire their illegal substances from. The results indicated that there is
a growing number of people that are using the Internet as their main source of drugs,
including 20% of drug users in the UK as recorded last year. There was one site in
particular that most of these people were using to obtain their drugs. As an experiment,
one person in particular, a non-user, decided to see for themselves how this system
worked. With surprising ease, there was in no time an innocent small package delivered
quite quickly to their home, inside of which was a small quantity of cannabis. They were
amazed at just how easy it was to purchase drugs online via the Silk Road, just as
150,000 people have been doing for the past three years.
Decades before major online shopping websites such as eBay or Amazon were around,
the first ever online drug-selling deal was carried out by students at Stanford University
in California and MIT in Massachusetts in 1972. Out of the computer labs in their
universities via their Arpanet account, a miniscule amount of marijuana was sold by
Stanford students to their peers. This development slowly gained momentum, and by the
1990s many dealers would randomly use the Internet to sell hard-to-come-by narcotics
via online drug-related forums. Not long after, this industry expanded to a larger
consumer market online in the early 2000s. One of these websites in particular, the
Farmer’s Market, specialized mostly in psychedelic drugs and conducted their business
strictly through email. This particular site managed to conduct over 5,000 transactions in
twenty-five countries between January 2007 and October 2009, accruing a million
dollars in sales, according to an FBI investigation. They weren’t stopped following the
arraignment, however, and became a Tor Hidden Service in 2010.
At the present time, approximately 40,000 Tor Hidden Service sites exist, around
15% of which are used for illegal substances. Even though there are many legal Hidden
Service sites, Tor is the idyllic platform for drug trafficking and other underground
niches, as it has advanced encryption abilities.

 
An online member of a magic mushroom-related forum (called “The Shroomery”) going
by the name of “altoid” posted a message on the website on November 27, 2010, giving
one of the earliest mentions of the Silk Road. He reached out to his fellow drugs users
on the site, asking if they knew of it or had experience with it since he/she was
considering using its anonymous selling services. Shortly after making this post, altoid
made another appearance on bitcointalk.org, which is a website about crypto-currency,
or the encrypted digital currency system operating independently of any banks. They
once again asked fellow site members if they had heard of the Silk Road, describing it
as a kind of amazon.com with anonymity. Providing links to a WordPress blog about the
website, he relayed that there was no heroin being sold on the Silk Road, but there were
other substances available, including marijuana, shrooms, and MDMA. There were
options on the website that allowed users to register as both buyers and sellers. Within a
few months’ time in the spring of 2011, the site began to slowly gain popularity, with
users mostly registering as vendors, and in turn drawing in customers. Although the
website was described as being able to anonymously buy and sell “anything,” the vast
majority of the 300 listings that were created by May 2011 were illegal drugs. Just a
month later, the online magazine Gawker posted an article advertising the up-and-
coming anonymous shopping website, and in no time it gained thousands of new users.
 
The main appeal of the Silk Road was that it was infinitely more secure than the
unstable and informal online deals users were used to partaking in, either
interpersonally via forums or through less secure sites such as the Farmer’s Market. The
Silk Road was very professionally and formally designed, with thorough user account
descriptions of all of the vendors, as well as an easily navigable layout, with organized
categories of products for sale with descriptions and photos of each. There were easily
accessible links to customer service, as well as a buyer’s online shopping cart and
account balance. The cyber security of the site was extremely thorough and methodical,
allowing users to only use crypto currency (Bitcoin) to carry out transactions. The
website was also exclusively accessible through a Tor browser, and users were
encouraged to use online aliases as their usernames. All digital communications
between users on the site were secured via PCP encryption, automatically erasing
messages once they were read. A more secure forum was introduced in June 2011 to
allow for easier contact between buyers and sellers on the website.
 
In addition to its easy-to-navigate layout and easily accessible customer service, the
Silk Road was also very professionally maintained. Altoid actually ended up becoming
a part of the Silk Road management team, writing on bitcointalk.com in October 2011
that he was recruiting for the technical maintenance of the site. At the time that he posted
this, the website’s administrative team consisted of two to five members, whose
responsibilities were to handle user complaints and queries, as well as keeping track of
the interface to make sure it was not being permeated by legal organizations. Each
member of the administrative team, through the website’s private email system as well
as Tor Chat, kept the main administrator (going by the username Dread Pirate Roberts,

or DPR) updated weekly about their work in regards to the website, as well as any
problems that needed addressing. The Silk Road took commission from all transactions
completed on the website, and it was so lucrative that members of the team were making
$1,000 to $2,000 per week.
 
Even though the site had been hacked a few times and there had been some customer
complaints about the amount of money the website deducted from sales following a rate
change in January 2012, the site continued to expand and thrive. The FBI stated that the
Silk Road had facilitated more than $1.2 billion in sales from around 4,000 sellers and
150,000 buyers worldwide by July 2013. With these enormous numbers, DPR was
making an estimated $20,000 per day just on commission.
 
Undoubtedly, this was the most successful platform for the online buying and selling
of drugs ever. On the first version of the Silk Road, members saw a message from DPR
explaining the origin and philosophy behind the founding of the website. He explained in
this message that the Silk Road was in real life a historical trade route between Africa,
Europe, and Asia, which during its time significantly contributed to the sharing of
culture and commerce between these lands, encouraging shared peace and opulence. His
username also held a deeper meaning behind it. In the 1973 book The Princess Bride,
the Pirate was actually a line of many men whose name was continually passed on to the
next one. DPR aimed for the Silk Road to be a coming together of people to take
advantage of their freedom and natural human rights. This endeavor was not only a way
of making money for him, but was an expression and wish for a freer way of life. In
April 2012, he wrote that he believed that people are not just meant to be held down
under a series of rules that infringed on the organic enjoyment of human freedom, and
that there shouldn’t be persecution for doing so.
 
Although it started off on hidden forums on the Tor network, it wasn’t long before
word of the Silk Road leaked onto the surface net, making appearances on popular
forums such as Reddit and 4chan. Its popularity was exponential, attracting the applause
and support of all different kinds of communities that reinforced the idea behind it. The
philosophy DPR had expressed was embraced by not only drug connoisseurs, users, and
sellers, but also Bitcoin enthusiasts and, most notably, libertarian-minded people who
advocated for an unrestricted substance market. Everyone agreed that it was not the right
or responsibility of the government to control what people consumed for themselves. It
became a type of fraternity where supporters could come together and share their
thoughts and ideas without the restrictions that real life forced upon them. Everyone
played a part in maintaining the security of the site, alerting about any possible threats to
the site or online community and keeping each other informed.
In late 2013, however, the community found itself in a state of Internet-wide panic
when the FBI had seized and shut down the Silk Road after undercover agents had been
using the website posing as buyers already for two years prior. The FBI agents during
this time had been able to closely monitor major vendors and site administrators,
including DPR himself, and on 1 October, 2013, took him under arrest. Ross Ulbricht

was a 29-year-old university graduate who had been living under the name Joshua
Terrey in a flat nearby the San Francisco library in which he was arrested. His
roommates believed that he was a currency trader who had been spending time in
Australia and had recently returned. Upon his arrest, the FBI seized approximately $150
million worth of Bitcoins from his computer, and charged him with drug trafficking,
soliciting murder, cyber hacking, and money laundering. This arrest was the first of
many soon to follow of Silk Road administrators and registered vendors around the
world, including the UK, Sweden, Ireland, the Netherlands, and Australia.
 
Silk Road enthusiasts were in shock and disbelief when they visited the website
shortly after Ulbricht’s arrest, seeing not the original message of freedom and peace
from DPR, but from the FBI stating that the website had been seized and shut down by
the government. It didn’t take long before all of the Silk Road surface net forums were
frantically posting about what the next step was, or if their times of safe buying, selling,
and experience-sharing were over.
 
Their fears were shortly relieved just a week later, when a Silk Road administrator
under the username Libertas announced that the new version of the Silk Road was
already under construction, and expected it to be reopened within a month. He posted a
message of hope on one forum, saying that they would not let the government and FBI
hold them down and restrict their freedoms. Named Silk Road 2.0, with an even tighter
security system, temporarily displayed an edited version of the same message the FBI
had posted on the original website when they took it down. Libertas was working with
other Silk Road administrators tirelessly to get it up and running and soon as possible,
using what they could from the old source code and trying to re-establish the accounts of
their long-standing sellers. Many users were of course displeased that the website,
which included all of their Bitcoins, had disappeared, but there were even more that
were eager to get rolling again. The administrators were constantly being flooded with
emails from past vendors who were frantic to get back to work, reaching out to their
patrons in forums and ensuring them that they were working hard to get things up and
running as soon as possible.
 
As planned, Silk Road 2.0 was launched a month after Libertas’ original
announcement, complete with a new Dread Pirate Roberts as the main administrator,
whose true identity was unknown. On 6 November, he wrote an inspirational message
on Twitter to the Silk Road patrons, stating that they had risen again and refused to be
defeated.
 
Although Silk Road had managed to get back on its feet, within the month of its
absence, other smaller dark net markets seized the opportunity to make a name for
themselves. This escalated into a six-month-long chaotic competition, with new
websites arising, being shut down by the government, and resurfacing, including many
scam websites that falsely advertised as a dark net service and just stole Bitcoins from
users. One website in particular, the Sheep Market, received a rush of Silk Road users

following its shut down, but shortly thereafter disappeared itself; whether it was also
hacked by the FBI or taken down by its founders, all of the users’ Bitcoins went with it.
The Utopia marketplace, which was expected to be the Silk Road’s successor, was shut
down by the Dutch police just over a week after its opening in February 2014. All of
this pandemonium was causing buyers and sellers a great deal of stress, not having a set
reliable platform for their needs since the Silk Road’s demise.
 
This universal apprehension across the web carried on for quite some time, and it
seemed as though the online drug market was being defeated by law enforcement.
However, in the early months of 2014, things started slowly to recover, with three new
dark net sites emerging and being incredibly successful. Silk Road 2.0 itself managed to
make over 100,000 sales within the first four months of 2014, and it seemed as though
things were back to normal.
 
There has been an explicably large amount of concern and outrage since the rise of
dark net markets in recent years. While it is not surprising that they were created in the
first place as a more secure way to carry out illegal transactions, with the amount of
animosity that is associated with them from their opponents (including the federal
government), it is impressive that they are actually so successful. On top of all of the
law enforcement trailing, all purchasers and vendors are completely anonymous, and
there is no insurance if you get cheated out of your money. Still, the online drugs market
is one of the most prosperous ones, and the question remains as to how they continue to
flourish.
 
On the Road
As previously discussed, all Tor Hidden Service websites are only accessible through a
Tor browser. Site patrons generally find the dark net sites through index pages such as
the Hidden Wiki, which provide links and tips on how to navigate this underground
online territory. Visiting these index pages can be quite daunting, with the extensive list
of dark net sites and even more excessive list of illegal products offered on each of
them, making choosing which websites to trust quite challenging.
A study entitled Webs of Influence was conducted by Nathalie Nahai, on web
developers’ usage of certain qualities to convince surfers to visit and utilize their
websites. In her study, she concluded that there are certain values called “trust cues” that
convince people of a website’s authenticity. In general, people are more impressed by a
website that is well put together and easy to navigate, as well as attractive to the eye.
The idea behind this is that the more time that appears to have been put into the making
and maintaining of the website, the more deserving the creators are of our patronage.
The most successful companies, including many dark net markets, spend millions of
dollars on the creating and upkeep of their websites, with distinctive logos and features.
Other important trust cues that are a general rule of thumb when selecting a website to

use include easily and immediately accessible links to basic functions, such as the home
page, user accounts, and product listings.
Just like in the real world, there is tight competition in online marketing, especially in
the dark net. Users look for the best deals for their money and ease of use when deciding
which website to use as their main platform, but in the online drugs and illegal items
market, security is also a huge factor. One website that was a competitor to Silk Road,
Atlantis, was on a recruiting spree in April 2013, advertising that they had higher
security, less expensive rates, higher quality user-friendliness, and smoother contact
with customer service. These are just a few values that website administrators can
enhance to draw in customers.
Dark net site users are especially cautious in selecting which sites to use because of
the huge risk of losing serious amounts of money in the event that the site gets suddenly
shut down, or conversely if it is a con website. To avoid this, people usually go to
surface net forums from fellow users in the community about which sites are and are not
trustworthy. There are countless forums and blogs in which people share their
experiences and knowledge, advocating for their favorite websites and warning about
those which should be avoided. According to many of these forums, Silk Road 2.0 was
one of the most popular choices, and definitely the largest, with 13,000 listings. One
primary area in which Silk Road 2.0 received acclaim is in the way they handled the
site being hacked in February 2014. With $2.7 million in Bitcoins having vanished, the
website’s new administrator at the time, Defcon, guaranteed that the site would not take
commission from sales until all of the sellers were reimbursed. He stayed true to this
promise, paying back half of the lost Bitcoins less than three months later.
Vendors and Products
On the Silk Road 2.0 alone, along with a simple signup process, there was a selection
of around 870 sellers, and detailed subcategories of endless types of drugs. In addition,
there were many other items for sale (both legal and not), including discounted gift
cards, DVDs, counterfeit art, fake legal documents, and countless more.
One Silk Road 2.0 user, with the help of some special software, managed to collect
the sales statistics from the website in 2014. The specific period from which the details
were gathered was that of 99 days between January and April 2014 and covering
120,000 transactions, and the statistics were posted online on a forum about the Silk
Road. The most popular items sold were of course drugs, 28% of the total being weed,
19% cocaine, 18% MDMA, 12% hash, and 8% cannabis. 14% of the total items sold
during this time also included digital goods such as e-gift cards and premium website
memberships. The detailed statistics of the 99-day period are listed below:
 
Top Selling Items on Silk Road 2.0, January–April 2014
Product
Price
($)
No. of sales (over 99
days)

Australia genuine Roche Valium 10 x 10mg
42
240
1000 2mg pfizer xanax bars
1050
193
The Original Lotus Coupon Collection [fake
gift vouchers]
84
190
Testosterone Enanthate 250 (250mg/ml) 10ml
US
40
187
Reality Kings Premium Account [pornography]
10
142
Australia Genuine Valium Single Tablets 10mg
5.25
117
 
In addition to the item statistics, seller information was also collected. With most of
the registered vendors on Silk Road being either American (33%), British (10%), or
Australian (10%), almost all of the sellers offered worldwide delivery. The seller
population was very diverse in regards to the number of sales. In the same 99-day
period between January and April 2014, out of 867 vendors at the time, the average
seller sold around 178 items. The heaviest vendor on the website during this time
conducted 3,592 transactions via the website, and 418 of the sellers sold less than 100
items altogether. When evaluating these numbers along with the value of the products
sold, it can be determined approximately how much money each of these vendors were
making. An estimated calculation is listed below, with the name of the top vendors on
the left-hand side:
Turnover: Top Vendors on Silk Road 2.0, January–April 2014
Name
Products
Overall turnover (99
days)
The Drug
Shop
Principally cocaine, heroin and
ketamine
$6,964,776
Heavenlost
Cocaine, MDMA
$713,564
Solomio
Heroin, weed, cocaine
$232,906
Hippie
Mainly cannabis, a little acid, a little
MDMA
$231,711
VikingKing
LSD, psychedelics
$204,803
PantherRed
Speed, cocaine, MDMA, cannabis
$147,450
Thebakerman
Cocaine, MDMA
$140,596
This list is of course of the top seven vendors on the entire website during this time
period, so these numbers aren’t indicative of the average seller’s earnings, although they
also make a pretty penny. In another sample during the same 99-day period of nine other
less large vendors, their average earnings were between $15,000 and $20,000, which
would amount to a salary of approximately $60,000 to $120,000 per year. Although this
amount isn’t nearly as much as what a typical big-time international drug dealer earns,

this is still a very satisfying income for an average seller or street dealer, which is what
most of the registered vendors on the Silk Road were. Some of these people are actually
just pushers who have been in the industry for a long time but have made a name for
themselves, and had moved on to the online market to expand clientele. The Silk Road
and the online drug market, however, have brought some new ordinary people to the
“dark side,” from average recreational cannabis users to professional pharmacologists.
One of these people, a Silk Road member under the username Ace, was a twenty-four-
year-old who claimed to be making up to 140 sales per week with his home-grown
cannabis. Another user, Angelina, was in charge of a decent-sized legal organization
before she found out about the Silk Road in 2011. It wasn’t long afterwards that she
began to use the website in collaboration with some other people she knew, and through
buying from wholesalers and selling online, by 2012 had made around 10,000 sales.
Digital Reputation
When a normal person buys drugs in person and locally, the selection of dealers is
rather limited as to who delivers to your area and how many contacts you have. With
online drug shopping, however, your options are virtually unlimited, with hundreds and
thousands of sellers and products all over the world, and numerous websites to choose
from. This is actually the case with any industry, legal or not, and one major factor that
plays a role in keeping or driving away customers is customer reviews. According to a
study, 88% of people in the UK who do their shopping online (for legal industries) base
their patronage on customer reviews. This is understandable, seeing as people hear
honest opinions and first-hand experiences, which are generally more reliable than
simply the word of the vendor.
Although the ability of encryption and crypto-currency are the backbone of dark net
markets such as Silk Road, user reviews are still absolutely necessary to keep them up
and running. Every single website that offers illegal substances has the customer review
option that is normally required of users, with a rating of up to five stars and a text box
for personal comments. Silk Road 2.0 was very clear and thorough in expressing to its
users that reviews were essential, suggesting certain factors that should be mentioned in
reviews, such as the reliability and communication of the vendor, delivery times, and
quality of the product.
 
If someone would want to buy even just a minimal amount of cannabis, the selection
of vendors and products is enormous; on Silk Road alone, for cannabis products only
there were 200 registered vendors with 3,000 different types of marijuana listed. In
addition the the promises made by the vendor themselves on their profile page, carefully
looking through user reviews is a very effective way of enormously thinning the
selection. Obviously if a seller has a majority of negative reviews, whether they be
about shipping delays, prices, fraud products, or seller communication, that is generally
one to stay away from. However, the more reviews a seller has, and of course the more
positive, the more likely people are to buy from them. Although it is nearly impossible
to get a 100% positive review record, even the negative comments don’t have to be

devastating; maybe a product had gotten lost in the mail but was replaced at no extra
cost, with great communication between the seller and buyer throughout the process.
This works both ways, however, since sellers also have to be wary of whether or not the
people they are conducting business with are going to come through. Buyers can just as
easily build up a reputation with reviews they’ve received in regards to communication
and payment issues.
The first idea of deep encryption and anonymous online review-based markets
originates with the cypherpunks. According to them, anonymity wasn’t enough, because
there was still no sure-fire way to know if someone was reliable with no additional
information. The cypherpunks founders aimed that this secret online world would enable
people to create entirely new personas for themselves that were completely
disconnected from their real lives. Even though people who do business together online
will never know the real people behind these online personas, the trust is established
through long-built-up online reputations. It took Dread Pirate Roberts around two years
of positive dealings before he had built up enough of a successful reputation to create
the Silk Road.
Unfortunately for all of the users of the original Silk Road website, when the FBI shut
it down, all of the data of their online profiles was permanently deleted, along with their
history and reviews. When frantic users reached out to the administrators of Silk Road
2.0 in regards to this, they responded with regret that there was no way possible to
retrieve their old data, and everyone had to start from scratch to rebuild their reputations
through good customer service.
 
Because reviews and online reputations play such a significant role in the success of
a vendor, sometimes they go so far as to embellish their accounts themselves, leaving
false positive reviews in an effort to appear popular and trustworthy, especially if they
are just starting out. Some methods people use for this involve either creating false
accounts to write positive reviews for themselves, writing false negative reviews for
other accounts, and bribing other users with money or free products to write positive
reviews for them regardless of whether or not they were customers. Some online
forums, such as The Rumor Mill, are made for the sole purpose of keeping fellow
patrons aware of known scammers. Red flags that alert people to report them are if they
receive a high number of sketchy reviews in a short period of time when they normally
do not generate reviews at all, all of these reviews being from very non-diverse account
descriptions, and very similar-sounding language in their review posts.
 
The following of online seller reputations is also a huge insurance of safety for the
buyers not only in regards to their money, but also to their health. Drugs obtained from
street dealers are notorious for not being of pure quality, and there is no way to find out
through previous buyers’ experiences, as well as no indemnification in the case that
things go awry. Cocaine obtained from street dealers can have a purity score as low as
2%, with only 25% being the average, due to the mixing in of other substances by the
middlemen in order to expand their product quantity and therefore make more of a profit.

In 2009, it was even found that half of all of the confiscated ecstasy pills didn’t even
contain any of the drug at all, but instead caffeine and 1-benzylpiperazine. When you
aren’t sure of what exactly the product is that you are ingesting, unfortunately it is very
common that this can prove devastating to one’s health, and even fatal. Between 2009
and 2010, forty-seven Scottish heroin users received a product that was actually anthrax,
which resulted in fourteen of their deaths.
 
The online drug markets ease the minds of consumers in this regard through their
online reputations. Through reviews, users can share their experiences with the drug and
vouch for its quality, or lack thereof. The prices can vary greatly as compared to that of
street dealers’ rates, with Silk Road cocaine being sold at almost half the cost that it
would be on the street, marijuana about the same, and heroin more than twice the street
price (as of October 2013). Although this can mean paying a slightly to much higher
price than acquiring drugs on the street, users are generally prepared to pay more for the
insurance of a safe and quality product.
 
Purchase
 
After the most difficult part of finding and selecting a seller is completed, the next step
is contacting them to place an order. Most trusted vendors have friendly, polite, timely,
and informative communication about their selling process and their products. Once a
buyer and seller have agreed to do business together and the product is chosen, all that
needs to be done is a simple click to add it to the shopping cart prior to checking out.
Proceed to Checkout
In the early days of the online drugs market, buyer protection wasn’t exactly a top
priority; after all, that’s not how things operated on the streets. You simply paid for your
product and waited for the package to arrive. There was no sure reliability as to who
you were dealing with and whether or not you would receive your product after sending
over the money. Big-time modern-day surface net retail sites such as Amazon and eBay,
in addition to being highly reputable, have legal buyer protection to safeguard against
scammers or lost products. Some of the earliest online drug websites such as Farmer’s
Market required immediate payment before shipping of the product, but because of the
instability of the market, it wasn’t always reliable. Silk Road, however, decided to
follow the example of the popular surface net sites and implement the escrow.
 
The escrow is a system that dates back hundreds of years, deriving from the Old
French word for a small piece of paper. The way the escrow works is that is utilizes the
website administrators as the middlemen to arrange financial transactions between the
buyers and sellers instead of the users doing it independently. All dark net sites use their
own specific Bitcoin virtual wallet, where users can transfer Bitcoins from their
personal wallet on their home computer. On Silk Road, once a transaction was

confirmed, the customer would send Bitcoins from their personal Silk Road wallet to
the wallet of the site administrators; this administrator wallet is called the escrow. The
website would then contact the seller that the money had gone through and that they
could send the order. Once the product was received by the customer, they would send a
message to the website administrator, who would then transfer the held Bitcoins to the
seller account, ensuring that everyone’s end of the bargain was held up before the money
was released. Silk Road was very adamant that its users made use of the escrow,
explaining that there were many scammers who would set up false accounts and tell
their customers to send their payment directly to them before receipt of the product.
 
Escrow is not a faultless system, however. Drugs websites are still very prone to
hacking as well as government shut down, not to mention the possibility of dishonest site
admins who can empty the Bitcoin wallets for themselves. All of these situations have
almost no insurance that the money stays safe and goes where it is intended to go. A
perfect example of this is when Silk Road 2.0 was hacked in February 2014 and robbed
of $2.5 million worth of users’ Bitcoins stored in Silk Road wallets. The admin at the
time, Defcon, wrote an apology to the site’s users, announcing a change to the escrow
system for a more secure way of handling the money and protecting buyers and sellers
alike. He applied a new method of the using the escrow system called “multi-signature.”
The way this works is that a new Bitcoin wallet is created for every purchase a vendor
takes. The seller must accept the order, the buyer must approve the order when it
arrives, and then the website either approves or disapproves the transaction, according
to if it went successfully or not. At least two of these parties must sign for approval of
the transaction before the money is finally transferred to the seller’s account, ensuring
that the site administrator cannot deduct it for themselves, and providing easy refunds in
the case of an unsatisfied customer. After the introduction of multi-signature escrow (or
“multi-sig” as referred to by the online community), it became the only method of
payment that dark net users trusted.
 
The more technology advances, the more security risks are associated with dark net
websites, so they are constantly having to come up with new creative ways to keep their
money and identities safe. In order to keep double charges of online purchases from
occurring, every purchase is logged and time stamped in the public blockchain. Because
Bitcoin wallets are generally anonymous, if a user transfers Bitcoins from their personal
wallet to a wallet on a website such as Silk Road, although it is recorded in the
blockchain, the identity of the wallet owner remains unknown. However, if the money is
being converted to and from Bitcoins from a personal bank account, which is the
common practice, all purchases and money received in Bitcoins can be traced back to a
person as easily as if directly charged from their bank account.
 
To overcome this security problem, “tumbling” was invented. How this works is that
a user sends Bitcoins for a transaction to a large universal wallet that holds numerous
people’s Bitcoins at the same time, and then they are mixed up and sent to their intended
receiver. The precise amount of Bitcoins is received, but they are not directly from the

purchaser’s account, and therefore cannot be linked back to them. This is equivalent to
micro-laundering of money, and most sites usually charge a fee for this service.
However, it revisits the downsides to the non-multi-sig escrow systems, seeing that
there is still one main person holding many people’s Bitcoins. However, some newer
tumbling websites, such as CoinJoin, uses a method more similar to multi-sig, replacing
the single wallet administrator by having everyone anonymously place their coins into a
wallet to be mixed up, and then not sent through until the transactions have been signed
off by everyone.
 
With all of these extravagant security measures and trust-building between buyers,
sellers, and website administrators, the goal of the community is actually quite ironic.
The dark net market websites are such a precarious place to conduct business, but it a
huge enough industry that its utilizers need to be absolutely sure that they are not at risk.
So even though it appears that the community is tirelessly working to establish an
environment of trust, the real goal is to create an environment where trust is not needed
at all. The advancement of technology with the introduction and expansion of the escrow
system and tumbling, in addition to all of the deep encryption, the members of the online
drugs market are striving to make a network that is government, scam, and hacker-proof,
where users can shop and sell without fear of losing their money or getting caught. Silk
Road 2.0 was a centralized site where the administrators were running everything from
one place, but the future of the dark net markets lies in a world where all components of
the websites are kept separate and under no one specific person’s control, including
finances, customer reviews, messaging, and account management.
 
The final steps of the payment process on a website such as Silk Road are pretty
straight forward: simply send your Bitcoins to the seller’s wallet and confirm the
payment, after which you will receive a notification that the order has gone through.
 
Stealth
Processing the order is one thing, but waiting to see if the delivery actually comes to
fruition is the most anxious stage. Apart from all of the encrypted payment methods, it is
of course extremely important that the illegal products are disguised as normal,
everyday packages if they are going to be posted through the regular mail. Most people
use their own regular mailing address where they get all of their post sent on a normal
basis, while others use an obscure or uninhabited residence that can still receive mail,
known as a “drop address.” In addition to price, communication, shipping times, and
product quality reviews by customers, another important area that needs to be
considered when selecting a vendor is how well they disguise their packages; in the
online drugs market community, this is known as “stealth”. It is common for some
vendors not to mention in detail how they package their products for fear of law
enforcement becoming aware of it, but customers can still leave reviews as to how well
it was done.

Market Pressure
The online drugs market has revolutionized the buyer-seller relationship. In the real
world, the sellers have always been the ones in control. However, with the
implementation of customer reviews and the infinite selection of vendors, the customers
are the ones who are calling the shots and having more control over the dealers’ incomes
than the dealers themselves. This ultimately ends up creating a sales and marketing
platform that is aimed at customer satisfaction. Many sites like Silk Road 2.0 offer
special deals, shipping discounts, courtesy gifts, and competitive prices to attract
clientele. Both Silk Road and Silk Road 2.0 were perfect examples of this trend, with
exceptional statistics of over 95% maximum customer satisfaction, and only 2%
dissatisfaction. The vendors are now the ones competing for loyalty instead of the other
way around, and are dependent on customer reviews. The buying and selling of illegal
substances online has transformed the market into that of any everyday product.
 
Since the original Silk Road got shut down by the government, there has been an
explosion of new dark net markets, and the competition continues to grow. There are
now also special search engines specifically for the online drugs market, and the
associated technology continues to advance with more available features. Every time a
site is shut down by law enforcement or hacked, they only come back stronger; security
is enhanced, encryption is deepened, and more aversion software is created. Every
failure is actually a learning experience, and they keep rising back up with more strength
than before. All of these new features and insurances also play a huge role in generating
and retaining visitors, further proving that the customer is in control.
 
With the online drugs and illegal substances market constantly and exponentially
growing, the war on drugs is being hugely defeated. Since 1971, when President Nixon
initiated the war on drugs, there has been no reduction in demand or availability; on the
contrary, it has become quite the opposite. The Internet and dark net markets have made
illegal substances infinitely available and easier to get a hold of, with increased security
and insurance, better prices, and definitely more convenience. The problem has in fact
thrived as a result. However, one positive effect that the online market has had on the
drugs market is that of cutting out the middlemen and therefore lessening the dangers
associated with purchasing illegal drugs. The less people involved in the distribution,
the less that substances are mixed or unpurified, and there is an outstandingly decreased
risk of violence. In addition, shortening the supply chain ensures more profit for the
supplier, as well as a higher quality product for the consumer. In addition, social costs
related to organized gangs involved with drug-related crimes are expected to also be
diminished in connection with the subtraction of the street dealers. It has been seen in
society throughout history that if people really want something, they will find the means
to achieve it. The online drugs market greatly facilitates drug vendors and consumers,
providing higher quality products in a safer environment.

 
What has always been condemned as a frowned-upon illegal act, the dark net markets
have transformed the buying and selling of illegal substances into a simple, normal
transaction, just as with any other product. In the end, it is clear that what has made the
industry so wildly successful is not only the sophisticated security, but rather the striving
for a positive supplier-consumer relationship.

Crypto and The Dark Net
 
Introduction
The 21st century has proven itself to be a critical time in the protection of information
for everyone around the globe. The intention of data encryption is to protect information
and keep it secure, or from falling into the wrong hands and breaching individual
privacy. However, this brings about the debate from two different perspectives,
showcasing two very imminent threats. On the one hand, ciphers protect individuals
when they shop online, browse the internet, and conduct financial transactions. On the
other hand, ciphers also protect criminals, terrorists, and spies as they conduct their own
malicious tasks on the internet. The debate on the policy of encryption has arisen:
Should governments limit or regulate the amount of cryptography that can be applied to
information? If they did so, how would they enact such regulations?
September 2013: The New York Times and the Guardian both reveal a $250 million-
per-year program called Bullrun which would make encrypted internet traffic
accessible to intelligence agencies of the United States and the United Kingdom. Weeks
after the unveiling of Bullrun, a story emerged that the US National Security Agency
(NSA) had successfully received information decoded and in plain text in its data
centers that should have been encrypted between Google and its users. As media took
hold of the story, a simple yellow Post-it note with a smiley face and the words “added
and removed here” became infamous. It was written by an NSA spy to denote the area
where encryption could be decoded between Google traffic and public access.
Reuters reported before Christmas 2013 that the NSA was working with RSA, a security
company that enables individuals and businesses to secure data through encryption, to
override a system that randomly generates numbers which is the driving program behind
data encryption. What little trust the world had in the US government was now
extinguished, as the work of cryptographers had been diminished in the face of
government intervention. As technology and information access has become easier to
use and more advanced since the early 1990s, so too has the struggle to keep information
secure.
Is More Better?
The old saying goes “less is more,” but in the debate about the necessary level of
encryption, some argue that more encryption is better – better for cyber security, human
rights, democracy, commerce, and privacy. By strengthening encryption, applying it to
more applications and in larger volumes, the benefits seem to outweigh the risks by far.
Most giant websites with heavy traffic fully encrypt their traffic data, evident to the user
with a green lock symbol found in the browser’s search bar. The leaking of NSA
information by former contractor Edward Snowden revealed that encryption, while still

secure, can be accessed because of poor system architecture. The infamous yellow Post-
it was a key player in the internet companies’ revisions to their internal encryption
architecture, pushing them to fix their flaws to keep encryption serving the purpose for
which it was intended.
On the other side of the encryption debate are institutions charged with keeping the
public safe – intelligence agencies, governments, and law enforcement. From their
perspective, the more encryption there is to break through, the more information goes
unnoticed about possible security threats. In certain situations, it is possible for
governments to read emails and listen in on telephone conversations and other
communications. Former UK Prime Minister David Cameron emphasized that a level of
security which barred the government from monitoring certain communications should
not be allowed. Sparked by the rise in activity of ISIS, FBI Director James Comey,
shortly after the terrorist attacks in Paris in November 2015, emphasized that allowing
terrorist groups the same level of encryption that keeps citizens’ data secure can only be
destructive to public safety. For these government bodies, more encryption is not better.
Although both sides have valid and concerning arguments, each position carries its own
flaws. This brings about the quandary about the level of encryption (and consequently,
the level of government power) that is necessary to benefit everyone. In the instance of a
liberal democracy, the public is generally aware of the activities of those in power that
they have chosen for those positions. An illiberal democracy, conversely, allows public
involvement in the selection of leadership positions but masks the activities of
leadership in governing policies. In the debate of encryption, is there a marked
difference between the two? Where is the border between “good encryption” and “bad
encryption” and what is the difference?
In liberal democracies, the concept of free speech has been a protected liberty of the
people of those societies. This is not to say that all forms of “speech” are protected and
legal, due to their vicious consequences – inciting violence, child pornography, drug and
weapons trading, money laundering, and terrorism, to name a few. With the internet and
advancements in the way communications are available, there is no need for a
reevaluation of the moral compasses of the people in a society – as illegal activities are
generally immoral ones as well – but rather a review of moral choices to better serve a
technologically advancing world. This begs the question: With more encryption, will it
foster the behavior of the people in a positive or negative way?
It seems obvious that more encryption would be more advantageous. However, not all
applications will benefit a liberal society. Cryptology systems are politically driven
choices – and sometimes the costs outweigh the benefits. Analysis and assessment of the
controversial Tor Project may help to differentiate between liberal and illiberal
encryption structures.
Encryption: The Five Principles
To understand encryption, it is necessary to understand where the concept originated.

Quite possibly as early as the 1960s, but publicly marked in 1976, public-key
encryption began the cryptology argument between privacy advocates and the US
government, reaching an apex in the 1990s. The idea of encrypting data is basically how
to share a secret. It is understood that one can code a message, and the receiver, so long
as they have a key or clue to the code, can decode the message. However, how does the
key securely get transmitted to the message recipient so that only they can decipher the
coded message? From this arose the problem of key distribution.
With the increased ability of conversations to include multiple participants, so too the
problem increased with regards to key distribution. In the 1960s with tactical military
radio usage at risk, there needed to be a way to transmit information securely. In
Cheltenham, James Ellis of the UK’s Government Communication Headquarters
(GCHQ) secretly proposed a solution to the problem in the late 1960s. After only a few
years, Martin Hellman and Whitfield Diffie of Stanford University saw the problem as
not one of only tactical radio usage, but on the larger scale of networked computers,
foreseeing (correctly) that telecommunicated mail would replace traditional post mail
and other forms of soon-to-be-outdated information transfer. This proposed the issue that
physically sharing specific keys between multiple parties was not feasible.
All three men effectively had the same solution – instead of only the sender generating
the encryption code, the receiver could also contribute to the encryption of a message.
By generating an algorithm from a one-way function, a key pair could be established –
one for deciphering, one for enciphering. The deciphering key was not revealed while
the enciphering key could be sent to the recipient. The GCHQ secretly discovered this
code, with the US scholars publicly revealing the discovery a few years later.
The one-way function was derived from the factorization problem – that multiplying two
large prime numbers together garners a product, but deconstructing the product into its
multipliers was much more difficult. From this came the connection between the public
and private key pair – the private key being the product of the two prime numbers, and
the public key from the multipliers. The invention of public-key encryption became a
fundamental necessity for the ever-changing global telecommunication marketplace,
forcing the reinvention of five basic principles of human communication.
The first matter of communication is privacy – in the traditional postal mail, this came in
the form of a sealed envelope. Of course, the envelope wasn’t the most secure barrier to
protect the message, but it was appropriate enough to use on an everyday basis.
Cryptography is not a new idea; it has been used for many thousands of years to send
messages. The basic difference between an envelope and cryptography, however, is that
envelopes are readily available for use by anyone and everyone, while cryptography in
the modern sense could not safely be distributed to multiple users over a network until
the discovery of public-key encryption.
This discovery then led to the next requirement of electronic encryption – authenticity.
In a traditional letter, a handwritten signature denoted the sender of a message with

reasonable certainty. This is a widely available and accepted way to authenticate a
document because literally anyone can do it. Public-key encryption now allowed this to
be done electronically, identifying the sender of information over a network. Three MIT
forerunners – Ronald Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman, who would go on to
found RSA, a leader in encryption system development – suggested factorization as a
way to secure data, recognizing that electronic mail would eventually overtake post mail
as a means of communication. With this in mind, they saw the need and importance of
maintaining privacy and authenticity in electronic mail delivery.
While some academics have dismissed the GCHQ development of encryption, citing
they did not actually conceive the algorithm, their motives were sided more on a
political front than a technical one. Columnist Martin Gardner, in 1977, revealed in an
article in Scientific American the use of prime numbers as a way to cipher data, and
essentially left the NSA with their jaws on the floor. For the US military at Fort Meade,
Maryland, they weren’t so much surprised as they felt that someone had stolen their
secret. The government took, sometimes desperate, action to quell the spread of
encryption by means of censorship, lawsuits, and threats, and treated technological
algorithms as weapons. In mainstream society, however, encryption was gaining a
following among computer-savvy crowds studying trap doors and mathematical
functions. With the line between activism and research blurring, it became evident that
there were two more aspects of cryptography that needed to be taken into account.
The third aspect was anonymity. In postal mail terms, this is the equivalent of not putting
a return address on the envelope, disguising the sender from everyone including the
recipient. For cryptographers, the term “traffic analysis” refers to searching out patterns
in communications that would reveal information about the sender. With the worldwide
realization that privacy was being jeopardized because of government intervention in the
arena of technology, a new group of activists emerged, dubbed “cypherpunks.” These
groups initially aimed to make traffic analysis more difficult by removing the sender’s
address from an email by means of “remailers.” Remailers were email servers that
intercepted a message, stripped it of sender information and replaced it with a dummy
address, then sent the new ‘anonymous’ message to the recipient – postal mail equal to
cutting off a sender’s address from an envelope.
At the University of California Berkeley in 1981, a 26-year-old mathematician
developed a method to override traffic analysis, preserving anonymity. David Chaum
formulated a cipher that essentially chopped the message up, put it into different
encrypted envelopes, and shuffled them up in computers he called “mixes.” This idea is
the basis for the idea of “onion routing” which is emulated in the methods of the Tor
Project.
This led Chaum to the realization of the next aspect to preserving privacy – cash. When
using cash to buy anything, there is complete anonymity between the buyer and seller.
Banknotes are untraceable in common transactions, so there is no way to track who is
buying what. With the evolution of credit cards in the global market, initially in stores

and then evolving to online transactions, the purchase of a specific product was virtually
traceable to anyone. Since computers could trace buyers’ purchases through traffic
analysis, it became clear that an ordinary transaction could now be used to gather
information about a person’s whereabouts, lifestyle choices, and habits. Chaum
developed a company based on digital currency with “blind signatures,” and in 1994 he
made the first cryptographic payment using Digicash, his own creation.
To this point in public-key cryptography evolution, it afforded the same security as non-
electronic interactions that the public valued – envelopes (privacy), signatures
(authenticity), anonymity, and currency (cash). The algorithm that produced such
methods of encryption not only recreated the ways people communicated, but also
improved them.
With anonymity and cash essentially concealing the identity of the buyer in the new
online purchasing marketplace just has it had with cash transactions in a physical shop,
the fifth element of encryption surfaced – hidden exchanges. Now, not only was the
buyer’s identity protected, but the seller could also keep their information secretive.
This created anonymity from the buyer as well as from any other third party observer,
including tax agencies, law enforcement, or internet service providers.
This is not to say that there aren’t brick and mortar transactions that explicitly define the
seller’s information every time. Instances such as flea markets, bazaars, street vendors,
or farmers’ markets (especially in developing countries) typically function on a cash-
only basis, and once the seller made the purchase, the transaction ended there. However,
in most developed countries, the need for anonymity in the buyer-seller relationship
usually centered around illicit activities – buying weapons, drugs, gambling, payment
for undocumented labor, or money laundering – which were sometimes typically
conducted in back alleys or hotel rooms.
Data encryption now allowed space for these types of transactions to take place via the
internet and global marketplace, protecting both the buyer and seller from any kind of
repercussions from law enforcement, or even physical dangers that conducting shady
business in public, yet secret, locations might entail.
The first use of this kind of cryptographically hidden message was brought forth by
BlackNet. The intention of the system, while serious about anonymity, was also created
in jest. The anonymous author of the first ever message sent from BlackNet, titled
“Introduction to BlackNet” was sent to cypherpunk’s remailers with the sender’s
address showing “nowhere@cyberspace.nil” which caused the FBI to get involved. The
author of the email made it clear that BlackNet used public-key cryptology to guarantee
security for its customers. The message also made it clear that the cyberspace
marketplace would have no way to identify the users unless they identified themselves –
and they were urged not to. By using a public-key system, an encrypted message could
be posted on a public forum and only the holder of the private key could decipher it.
BlackNet had found a way to monitor several sites online where these messages could

be sent, essentially creating a way for illicit messages or transactions to take place.
The author of the BlackNet email was adamant that they felt export and patent laws,
nation-states, and national security were concepts of a pre-cyberspace age. They felt
these ideas were just a way for the government of any nation to expand its power, further
holding control of its citizens and their business. The email went on to state BlackNet
was interested in building its inventory of information, requesting that anyone with
commercial secrets to share about the global marketplace send it to them for use in their
encryption strategies. At the time, the half-prank BlackNet predated the darknet by
almost ten years – but the inspiration for the darknet came from a very different place.
Below the Radar
Generally speaking, “darknet” encompasses a large network of cryptographically hidden
websites. The term was popularized in an article by Microsoft researchers in 2002
when they conducted a case study focusing on peer-to-peer networks and the increase in
digital piracy among networks that were less easy to censor. A host that cannot be found
ensures that piracy can be conducted in the dark and no one can be held responsible.
Three notable examples of such darknets are I2P, Tor, and Freenet – they use software
which allows users access to the distributed network. It is hard to estimate the size of
the networks because of their fluid structure, but it is thought that Tor is the largest, with
I2P coming in second; others are smaller in popularity and scope in terms of what they
offer.
The structure of Tor provides two properties valued by users – anonymity when
browsing the network and hosting anonymous exchanges of information – through the Tor
Browser, a single software application. Both functions essentially use the same structure
to hide traffic information, but apart from that, the browsing and hosting can be done
independently of one another. Browsing is distinctly more popular than hosting, as most
Tor users have never accessed a hidden website with a .onion address because it is
mostly used for accessing the internet as a whole anonymously or more securely.
Anonymous browsing is not part of the ‘darknet’ but rather a legitimate way for
customers to keep their information secure from tracing or infiltration. Tor provides this
service as well.
The concept of Tor was created in collaboration between the non-profit organization
Free Haven Project and the US Naval Research Lab. Its original purpose served to
create an encrypted network that was easily deployable, anonymous, and distributable to
users for free who were in locations where internet traffic was heavily censored or
threats of persecution for illegal information searches were a reality.
Inspired by Chaum, the concept of onion routing was born – where a user would be
routed though ‘circuits’ or a series of intermediate servers – to essentially scramble the
user’s information from being traceable. By sending the user’s information through
multiple servers, encrypting it each time, this created the onion effect – creating multiple
layers where the information was scattered around the circuit so that intercepting only

one layer would allow the sender’s information to stay secure.  Only the place where the
message left the circuits – the exit node – would reveal the original information about
the sender. This is not impossible to trace but makes it very difficult to intercept and
decode the information because it has been scattered through the circuits.
As the understanding of this architecture grew, it became possible for some government
agencies and researchers to decode some users by forcing internet traffic through
websites controlled by such agencies or implanting exit nodes that would record
information about users. This would allow the user’s true IP address to be seen. Even
with such implementations, users can still keep their information hidden by following a
few simple guidelines. For instance, keeping the web browser up to date will ensure
that Tor works as it is intended. The company is constantly identifying and repairing
security risks found on their platform, thereby increasing and improving their
architecture.
The anonymity featured by Tor has been praised and supported by numerous companies
like the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Human Rights Watch, and Google. In instances
where a government chooses to censor or restrict the use of the internet, such as the
Mubarak regime in Egypt in 2011, Tor became a way for people to share information
and communicate without government intervention. Also, in Syria, rebels used Tor
browsing to release evidence of the mayhem caused by the regime in the region against
what was probably widespread efforts to uncover their identities.
The security of Tor doesn’t end with protecting users in politically hostile environments;
it also harbors the ability to create hidden services, a highly controversial function of
the platform. This capability allows anyone to create an untraceable server on the
network by adding lines of code to the configuration file. These two lines of code allow
the users’ identities and locations to avoid being traced by Tor itself and the internet
service providers routing the traffic, as well as by law enforcement.
As the name suggests, hidden services are meant to be hidden and untraceable. To
access a website through Tor, the user must know the unique address of the site which is
then followed by the .onion extension. The .onion sites do not correlate to a specific,
locatable IP address. Once the connection is established between a user and the site they
are searching, encrypted circuits are created and “meet” at a rendezvous point in the Tor
network. This keeps the information of the user and the destination site hidden from one
another as well as the from the internet service provider unless of course, the user
chooses to reveal their identity.
Diving In
A specialized web crawler can be used to show how the hidden services that Tor
provides are actually used, versus the preconceived notions of how they might be
abused by some users. A web crawler is a software that scans the internet using links,
jumping from one website to the next. The process looks like this: Firstly, the initial set
of information that was gathered is sorted manually into categories, which is then fed

into a Support Vector Machine – an algorithm that classifies content – to train it on what
characteristics to search for in order to classify the rest of the websites the crawler
landed on. Then the automated system can sort through the remaining web pages to
classify them accordingly.
Typically, website registries on the internet allow users to find out who manages any
given website and their registered location. Tor’s darknet is designed to avoid a central
location that harbors such website information. HTTP-based “hidden” services are very
low in occurrences and most sites available this way are unstable. To find these in the
past, researchers have analyzed traffic to determine a site’s popularity, operated a
directory server, or performed web crawls with a very narrow scope. This web crawl
conducted on Tor was designed to be more in-depth and cover every hidden service on
the web that users could access through the darknet.
The results include a majority of the websites available that users could have
encountered on their searches through Tor; it is inevitable that some sites were missed,
simply because there is no way to index every hidden site that exists. However, the total
number of mapped sites matched closely with the estimated number of sites that Tor
allows access to at any given time. Although they are hidden services, because of the
architecture of the system to keep operator and source information hidden, visibility is
welcomed.
To find the initial list of websites for the web crawler to search and classify, sites were
compiled from onion.city and ahmia.fi, yielding a roster of 5615 .onion sites with
unique addresses. Between January and March of 2015, this initial list was crawled
using a standard link utilization – the way a human user would use links – customized to
follow only .onion sites so that only hidden sites would be searched. Previous research
conducted on mapping Tor was done by scanning thousands of pages from only a few
initial sites. This research was conducted to only go five levels deep in to a specific site
and limited to index a maximum of 100 pages from that site. This allowed for retrieval
of more data from more pages and maintained a greater diversity among searched sites.
The crawl was also set up to search text-only pages in an effort filter out illegal
materials with media or image files, such as terrorist organizations or child
pornography. If a page contained graphic files, it was discarded or filtered out of the
search results. The use of text-only pages shouldn’t have yielded different results than if
pages containing media were included.
In manually sorting through the first set of pages for categorization, the results yielded
twelve categories that the remaining pages the crawler found would be classified into.
The Support Vector Machine was pre-fed these twelve categories based on
characteristics or keywords found on the pages. The results of the auto-classification by
the system were randomly inspected to ensure the accuracy of the classifications.
Previous studies classified websites based only on the homepage, but this study
classified the hidden domain based on all of the pages found at that website’s address.

Below are the twelve categories and their definitions that were used to sort and
categorize them:
1. Social – online communities sharing illicit materials on forums, message boards,
or other social networks
2. Finance – trade in stolen bank accounts or credit cards, money laundering,
counterfeit bills
3. Hacking – hackers for hire or distribution/trade of malicious software
4. Drugs – manufacture or trade of illegal drugs, including prescription medications
obtained illegally
5. Arms – firearms and weapon trading
6. Extremism – content related to extremist ideologies including extremist
community forums, support of terrorist violence, ideological texts, and militant
how-to guides
7. Violence – instructions for conducting violent attacks or hitmen for hire
8. Nexus – websites that linked to other illicit websites in the darknet
9. Illegitimate pornography – materials of a pornographic nature obtained without
the consent of participants, or other pornography involving animals, children, or
violence
10. Other illicit – general illicit activities or material not otherwise classifiable in
another category, for example, trading or manufacture of fake passports or IDs
11. Other – content not classified as illicit such as political or ideology texts,
information sources, or legitimate services for sale
12. None – inaccessible websites, websites with no visible content, websites with
only text placeholders (“under construction”) where the builder had not yet added
indicative content
Discoveries
All in all, the scans revealed an overwhelming number of sites within Tor that centered
around illegal or illicit content. Out of a total of 300,000 accessed addresses, there
were 205,000 unique pages found. The scans revealed 5205 active websites, and 2723
were successfully categorized into one of the twelve classes. The results were randomly
and manually inspected again, to ensure the accuracy of the data and found that the
system produced results with a high degree of confidence in accuracy. The “none”
category indicates a blatant lack of content either illicit or legitimate, and “unknown”
denotes content of which the actual nature of the content could not be determined. The
breakdown of the total of 5205 sites were as follows:
1. Social – 64
2. Finance – 327
3. Hacking – 96
4. Drugs – 423
5. Arms – 42
6. Extremism – 140

7. Violence – 17
8. Nexus – 118
9. Illegitimate pornography – 122
10. Other illicit – 198
11. Other – 1021
12. None – 2482
13. Unknown – 155
The results revealed that Tor’s hidden services were most commonly used for criminal
activity – illicit finance, pornography, and drugs. An interesting note about the results
found that there were very few sites used for terrorism or Islamic extremists to conduct
business. This could be due to a couple of reasons. Jihadists tend to utilize the internet
to conduct two kinds of businesses – public-facing and non-public facing. Public-facing
activities are typically recruitment or dissemination of propaganda, leaving out specifics
of their activities; non-public facing is more in-depth, such as command and control or
internal communications. Newcomers to the darknet may be skeptical about its
anonymity capabilities, deterring them from using it for propaganda when they know a
simple Google search about general terrorist information can still be protected by Tor’s
encryption (as many Islamic militants still use the Tor browser on the internet).
Secondly, hidden services may not be as easily accessible or stable for communication
among these groups, as there are other, more user-friendly, platforms that serve this
purpose.
The illicit financial category broke down further into three distinct subcategories: the
trade of stolen bank account or credit card information, Bitcoin methods for money
laundering, and trade of counterfeit currency. The quality of the offered services was
difficult to determine primarily because of the lack of information about the vendors’
identities, but sellers did try to sound professional about their “products.” As found on a
website concerning the sale of counterfeit money, the vendor boasted about the features
of their products, stating the notes were made with high-quality cotton fiber and
displayed all of the necessary security features –  microprinting, security threads, color-
changing and magnetic inks, and watermarks.
There are already successful sites that host the anonymous exchange of credit card or
banking information stolen with the use of malware. The financial subcategories ranged
from the distribution of malware for capturing financial information to the wholesaling
of stolen credit card details. The darknet is now also a cozy home for such transactions
because the sellers can evade any monitoring or detection. Criminal communities under
the surveillance of law enforcement can find open arms in Tor’s darknet to further mask
the identities of its users and their activities.
The use of Bitcoin for money laundering is the most widely used currency among Tor’s
hidden services. In addition, third party escrow services provide assurance that users
will get paid since all transactions are unverifiable and anonymous. Since Bitcoin is
easily monitored and traceable, the rise of services to scramble these transactions has

benefited as well – for a small fee. These are called Bitcoin mixers, and they essentially
pull Bitcoins from various sources and wallets, making it almost impossible to track the
activity.
The findings of the pornography sites were perhaps the most disturbing. While sites with
actual videos or photographs were filtered out, the sites that were categorized included
an abundance of links to videos of bestiality, pedophilia, and rape. Among the disturbing
finds were a link to access videos of the vendors own family members, promising their
stepsisters would be “pleased to show you their little secrets” and another that promised
a video of a twelve-year-old girl being raped by four boys at school.
Another discovery within the pornographic realm of the darknet was the open
discussions, and even groups showing support for one another when it came to
nonconventional sexual fetishes. The communities in this category seemed to have very
active users, discussing anything from desires, preferences, experiences, and even
trading content. Many users appear to seek justification for their desires and acts from
other users, uniting them on the basis of feeling discriminated against when it came to
their sexual practices. Because the darknet protects the users’ identities, there seems to
be no fear of prosecution or retribution, freely allowing users the comfort to share their
own experiences without the greater populace being aware.
The most notable discernable category that had the highest number of active websites
were drug related. This included illegal drugs as well as pharmaceuticals, thus creating
anything from single page vendors that sold small quantities of drugs made by
themselves, to large marketplaces, such as the widely known Agora. The drugs offered
on these sites ranged from methamphetamines to cocaine, and marijuana to acid. More
‘distinguished’ sites specialized in pharmaceuticals and generics, for example, Viagra
and anabolic steroids. For the most part, vendors appeared to be fraudulent, with
‘customers’ frequently complaining of being ripped off by any given seller.
Other illegal services commonly offered under cover of Tor’s darknet included the sale
of malicious software for collecting personal information from legitimate websites;
obtaining fake identifications; and the selling of stolen firearms or other weapons and
equipment. Some pages even offered contract killings – for a substantial fee – while
ironically setting out “rules” for killing conduct, such as no notable politicians or
anyone under the age of sixteen. Somewhat relieving about the contract killing sites,
however, was that none of the information found seemed to be an indication that anyone
had successfully hired killers, leaving their credibility unconfirmed.
Many of the websites that fell into the “other” category were about the use of the darknet
itself. Tutorials on Tor, personal blogs, and drop sites for journalists among them, they
seemed to be a beginner’s guide to using the realm of hidden services. The “other”
category also included sites that denied access past the homepage where no classifiable
content could be found and which required users to log in. If there was enough relevant
information on the homepage, the system was able to place it into a category matching its

content. These inaccessible sites that required user logins were given the benefit of the
doubt as being non-illicit if the information gathered from the page seemed ambiguous.
The classification of “none” was used most frequently, indicating the lack of reliability
of the hidden services platform as a whole. Many of these sites returned with failed
addresses, server errors, placeholders, or having no content at all. Although the sites
were technically active, they did not display any relevant content for the system to use to
classify the pages.
The identifying mark between non-illicit and illicit hidden services websites within Tor
was that non-illicit sites, for the most part, chose to identify the operator – while illicit
sites did not. Self-identifying websites included search engines, blogs, newspapers and
even Facebook. The illicit sites utilized onion sites, or other security measures offered
by the platform, to hide identifying characteristics of their operators.
Technology and Politics
The discovery of mathematics itself is a pure science, but how one chooses to use
mathematics can have political and moral implications which can undermine or advance
liberty. As it stands to reason, inventors inherit the responsibility for their inventions –
but interestingly, in the world of hidden services, this concept went in reverse. An
anarchist from Santa Cruz, California, during the 1990s Crypto Wars, Timothy May,
foresaw the implications of illicit exchanges through encrypted technology, but when the
US Naval Research Lab developed hidden services in Tor nearly a decade later, they
chose to neglect the risks.
One of Tor’s developers was asked in 1997 about the possible abuse of hidden services;
he replied that it was a political issue, not a technological one, and focusing on the
politics of Tor would inevitably lead to its demise. Even in 2007 with Tor and its hidden
services platform running, developers were still uninterested in the political
implications of their creation. They simply stated that there were ways to prevent
anonymous abuse while still protecting anonymity in communications.
Timothy May, on the other hand, who had the vision for and later claimed credit for
BlackNet, was unafraid of facing the political arguments against his creation. He
reiterated that although some people are going to abuse their right to free speech, that
free speech itself should not be banned, furthering the argument to encompass encryption
– some may abuse it, but that is no reason to ban encryption entirely. May stood in
defense of hidden services in 1994, long before such platforms were popular. He
recognized the unsavory practices of which encrypted sites would allow users to
conduct such business, and he was right. All the practices he foresaw, the government
also cited including child pornography, piracy, the selling of stolen information and
trade secrets, along with terrorism. May’s answer was already intact – if some people
choose to use video cameras to film naked children, it doesn’t mean there should be a
universal ban on camcorders, cameras, or VCRs.

Although he had the mindset to foresee such political arguments, his view was perhaps
naïve and primitive. In the 20 years since then, there have been developments in
architectures of encryption that serve different purposes. The five properties that
encryption reinvented – anonymity, security, authenticity, hidden exchanges, and
currency (blockchain technology as it is referred to) – can all be used or abused.
Encryption and Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) have been recognized as critical in
protecting commerce, free speech, and privacy and are now a foundation on which the
internet and global trade thrives. The GCHQ even advocates encryption in the protection
of business and security, and the government of the United Kingdom encrypts all their
websites, with the United States on track to do the same in the near future.
Liberal democracies are recognizing the benefits, and necessity, of encryption
development despite ethical, economic, and security concerns. While cryptocurrencies
are still somewhat controversial, it is becoming recognized as a widespread means of
conducting business. However, hidden services were far more technically advanced in
the face of political implications than perhaps anyone had accounted for. The original
design of onion routing was to prevent physical attacks and protection against denial of
service attacks, but this is not what it has been used for in practice, and none of the
original inventors mentioned it being used for illicit ventures, possibly because of their
tunnel vision to create a system that protected everyone all the time.
In October 1996 at a conference in Prague, Ross Anderson, a security engineer at
Cambridge University, suggested a method for encryption to not only protect
confidentiality and integrity of information but also as a means against physical and
electronic attacks. He cited in his paper, “The Eternity Service,” that much of the recent
research on computer science security had focused solely on integrity and
confidentiality. This was part of the inspiration for hidden services for Paul Syverson, a
key developer of onion routing. Another source of encouragement for Syverson was, of
course, David Chaum, who spoke about using mixers for onion routing in 1981.
Instead of bringing light to encryption security, Tor’s priority now is to hide illegal
exchanges in the dark, rather than defending the availability of a secured network. As
recent research has shown, the overwhelming majority of sites on Tor’s hidden services
platform with service providers that do not identify themselves are used for illegal or
illicit means – not only in jurisdictions with heavy censoring or restrictions but also in
liberal jurisdictions. The BlackNet of Timothy May seems to be a closer resemblance to
the future of Tor, versus Ross Anderson’s vision of an “Eternity Service.”
Self-destructive Cryptography?
While it seems easy to criticize Tor’s hidden services for fostering illicit activities, it
should also be noted that not all the responsibility falls on the platform itself. Tor
combines two features – the first that hides the physical locations of users
communicating with one another, which is a technical side-effect of the nature of onion
routing (called a trunk sale effect); and the second which hides the identity of the host

and is a choice of the service provider. Syverson argues that identities can be revealed
without compromising the security features inherent in the platform – essentially creating
a trunk sale scenario with visible plates on the cars.
Going back to the original intentions of public-key encryption – privacy and
authentication – many other platforms offer .onion sites. For instance, journalists can
access SecureDrop sites for their articles; internet users can search DuckDuckGo or
ProPublica (the darknet’s first notable news website) while remaining hidden; and even
Facebook offers a guaranteed authentic site while allowing the user’s information to
remain hidden. Privacy is guaranteed in the Tor network for any platform because there
is no exit node – both parties are within the network itself. The integrity of
authentication is maintained because the site uses its own name in the web address even
within the dark web. Facebook’s Tor network developer elaborated that authentication
on the darknet is better than the open internet because it protects the user while allowing
access to the entire, legitimate site – as evident in their secure address
(https://facebookcorewwwi.onion). Another example is the SecureDrop site offered by
the New Yorker, titled “Project Strongbox” offering a specific address that ensures to the
user the site is affiliated with the New Yorker (http://strngbxwyuu37a3.onion). 
Advocates of hidden services propose that they are intended to be the future of security
rather than a threat to security, and the continuing development of the technology may
well allow for this in the future. The first four properties of encryption – security,
anonymity, commerce, and authentication –  can stand on their own without the use of
hidden exchanges being a necessary offshoot. Crypto purists, however, including Tor’s
developers, sometimes seem to fail to recognize this aspect of encryption. The issues
are conceptually, technically, and politically distinct, garnering distinct consequences
among these properties. Tor still allows anonymity, authenticity, and privacy without
having to force users into hidden exchanges for legal or illegal activities.
The double-edged sword that is hidden services provides technical benefits while at the
same time presenting a political risk to the use of cryptography. Roger Dingledine is one
of the original designers of Tor, and even he has expressed doubts about hidden
services, stating in December 2014 that the Tor Project occasionally considers ridding
the site of hidden exchanges altogether. Paul Syverson also recognized the risks of
hidden exchanges, noting that .onion sites used for authentication are independent of the
requirement of hiding the server’s location.
Despite Timothy May’s warnings about the risks of BlackNet, a decade before Tor, the
widespread usage of highly sophisticated encryption isn’t always beneficial. Tor’s
designers appeared to have ignored his warning, perhaps blinded by the idealistic
perspective of encryption in all shapes and forms being advantageous to society. The
Tor Project still recognizes, however, that hidden services are hugely underdeveloped
and its proper functions have yet to be discovered.
If May’s 1996 reference to the US protection of the second amendment’s right to bear

arms “Crypto=Guns” stands true, it produces the consequence of shoot first and ask
questions later when it comes to hidden services. Many proponents of cryptography put
it on a pedestal and choose to see only the benefits offered, ignoring the pitfalls that
come with such security. Edward Snowden embodied this philosophy in a rephrasing of
a quote by Thomas Jefferson regarding the Constitution. Jefferson’s quote implied that
the Constitution was in place to keep people from misbehaving in positions of power,
disregarding man’s ability to censor himself. Snowden placed this same responsibility
on cryptography, citing that man is flawed – math is not. This idealism has grave
political consequences, and the visually widespread abuse of hidden services leaves the
gateway open to criticism, especially in regards to heightened awareness of terrorism in
today’s social and political arenas. Such criticisms may point out that as of November
2015, the Islamic State (ISIS) launched a hidden service site to promote propaganda for
their agenda.
The debate is disappointing in the two liberal countries who have been discussing and
developing cryptosystems for the last forty years – the US and the UK – and it can only
become worse in the future as authoritarian countries continue to develop their own
infrastructures. In China, the government has already blocked the use of and access to
the Tor platform. In Russia, the Safe Internet League heavily censors all internet-
conducted business, and they have reiterated that Tor creates an invisible internet where
criminals can flourish and keep their activities safe from intervention by authorities and,
thus, prosecution. The policies of Russia and China are founded on the ugly truth of the
matter – which gives encryption a bad name. This is a stifling realization, considering
that the populations of Russia and China are nearly double that of Europe and the United
States combined. These countries are also setting de facto standards for other fast
developing and non-democratic countries, leaving the future of encryption controversial
and wide open.
Where to Go from Here
Since liberal democracies are still working on developing and enhancing encryption
capabilities, it’s important to fully assess every corner of every issue it brings with it,
good and bad. Rather than relying on artificial ideologies, maintenance of technical
purity, and cults of cypherpunks, research needs to be done based on principles, user
behavior, and empirical facts, taking into consideration technical and political
consequences. When it comes to the political front, decision-making has always been
conducted logically and rationally; now, policies regarding technology deserve the same
time, attention, and respect.
There are several questions that arise during the discussion of encrypted services and
how to safely and effectively make such services available to the wider audience.
Among others, a few distinct issues are as follows:
Is it feasible to create a structure that ensures the first four properties of
encryption without facilitating the fifth?

Is there a way to improve authenticity, anonymity, and availability without
fostering illegal behavior?
Is it possible to modify Tor hidden services to encourage more use by self-
identified service providers (i.e. Facebook) and lessen the number of criminals
utilizing the platform?
Which systems should be accessible to democratic intelligence agencies?
There are several traits of encryption that most liberal democracies should be able to
agree on as the foundation of the debate about the benefits versus risks of hidden
services. In principle, encryption is considered a technology of freedom and a necessary
ingredient for a free society in the 21st century. The application of cryptography should
be utilized and improved upon based on the advantages of the previous paper-and-
pencil system it seeks to overtake – privacy, authenticity, anonymity, availability, and
integrity – combined with blockchain technology for commerce and cash to flourish in a
global marketplace. Even still, two predicaments are evident.
For one, end-to-end encryption allows users to communicate with no way for a third
party or service provider to read the messages; in fact, any of the properties of
encryption can be protected this way. There are some service providers that offer
commercially developed systems that maintain the systems themselves, for instance,
Facebook, Google, and Apple. There are other open source systems that are not
maintained by any one provider and publicly distributed, such as Signal, PGP, and, of
course, the Tor platform. It is possible for a service provider to be served with a
warrant if the situation arises, in which they are forced to remove the end-to-end
encryption for an account. Some large communication providers argue that their
encryption architecture won’t allow them to remove the encryption from specific
accounts. This is not feasible with open source systems, so the availability of such
encryption structures will always remain for the determined user. It should be noted that
there are exceptions to both systems.
With the availability of the open communication market and ways to continue to protect
ones’ identity on the open internet, the demand for protecting end-to-end encryption is
not very prevalent on a large scale, by nature restricting its application and acceptance.
This may change in the future if an attempt is made to undermine the desire for end-to-
end encryption. For instance, if a government were to pursue legislation that would
require service providers to maintain an option to remove encryption for its users, this
would strengthen the desire for society to find ways around the legislation – opening the
door for extremists and criminals to avoid the radar of government intervention. This
may be a path better left unexplored in the political arena.
In the United States, the White House has already recognized the consequences of
undermining end-to-end encryption. It would damage security for legitimate users,
provide minimal overall security benefits, put American companies at a disadvantage in
the global marketplace, and just be a terrible political move. The government of the

United Kingdom has yet to determine a reasonable stance, but after the events
surrounding Edward Snowden’s divulgence of information, the Government
Communication Headquarters (GCHQ) clearly sees the risks and rewards of encryption.
They do, however, also see that widespread interception may not be the way to go, but
that utilizing computer network hacking techniques to gain desired information from
communication end points would better serve to reach their goal.
The second quandary in the democratic debate over encryption rests within darknets.
Tor and the entirety of hidden services already has a damaged reputation and trust in the
internet itself has been lost. To repair such damages, it may be necessary to abolish
hidden services – if not forever, at least in the form in which they currently exist.
However, if the Tor Project were to dismantle their hidden services platform, even
voluntarily, to save face of their browser or overall reputation, users may simply run to
other darknet providers. The desirable nature of such a large user base, such as Tor, is
that it is harder for a single user to be identified – the larger the network, the more
hidden a person can stay. Smaller darknets are easier to infiltrate and de-anonymize by
their very nature. Tor developers are aware of the fact that a better reputation allows for
better security, and the popularity of the Tor browser brings with it the security in using
their hidden services, including the illicit behavior of its users.
In free countries, darknets are not illegal nor should they be. Because they are platforms
open to abuse in contrast to their PKI counterparts, they should, however, also be open
territory for investigation by intelligence agencies and law enforcement, and treated as a
resource for aggressive academic research. It is easy to see how having darknets could
benefit governments as well, because bad security is often predetermined by a bad
reputation, and keeping some political information hidden is just as important as keeping
individual information safe from malicious, prying eyes. Regardless of which side of the
debate one favors, the example of Tor and its double-edged sword approach to
encryption should serve to remind everyone of the benefits and pitfalls of technology.
Refusing to analyze technological choices from a political standpoint is reckless and
could set society up for freedom or anarchy. 

The Crypto Social Revolution
There are better places to start an uprising than a derelict restaurant in North London.
However, seventy spirited individuals are anxiously waiting to hear what Amir Taaki, a
renowned computer coder should say. Apparently, he believes that Bitcoin is going to
revolutionize the world. As we look around, we see that we aren’t alone – twelve
baffled squatters were wondering what we are doing in their home. The beer flows
freely, and a plume of cigarette smoke sits above us, giving the whole gathering a
sinister feel.
The rabble grows quiet as a man who is in desperate need of a shave and a haircut
wanders to the front of the room. Even though Amir is only in his twenties, he is thought
to be a computer programming prodigy. He was named in Forbes ‘Top Thirty Under
Thirty’ in 2014, and most blue-chip companies are chasing him to join their teams.
Instead, Amir chooses a quiet life, living in a self-proclaimed techno-industrial colony
in Spain. Calafou to be exact.
Amir is a subject matter expert, no, more than that – he is the Bitcoin software guru,
having been working on it around the clock for many years. The purpose of today’s
gathering is for Amir to explain his newest venture — Dark Wallet.
Bitcoin is exciting for Amir and his colleagues because this form of internet currency
has sweeping consequences. What is a Bitcoin? You ask, well a Bitcoin is simply a
computer code – nothing more than a string of distinctive numbers. It holds no value and
is no way related to any form of currency – it is solely based on individuals believing in
the system and using it as they require. It is easily accessible, with anyone being able to
download their very own Bitcoin wallet and use a currency exchange to trade their real
money for this unique internet currency. Once they have Bitcoins in their wallet, they are
used to buy products and services. The system is user-friendly, fast, free, anonymous,
and secure. The main advantage of the Bitcoin economy is that there is no one selling for
profit and driving up the cost of these goods and services; there isn’t anyone sitting at
the top of the pyramid controlling Bitcoin – it’s run by everyone.
Commencing in 2009, Bitcoin was first presented in a public post available only to
cryptographers. Its popularity grew, and it didn’t take long for there to be a massive
database of users, including those who use Bitcoins for nefarious purposes like the
online drug market Silk Road. As more people swapped Bitcoins for general currency,
the exchange rate was raised from $0.001 in October 2009, to a whopping $100 in April
2013. It was suggested in 2013 that Bitcoin was on its way to being a viable currency,
which saw the worth of the Bitcoin jump even higher to over $1000 for a single Bitcoin.
The Bitcoin world has grown so much that millions of dollars are traded every day, and
in some parts of the globe, it is possible to live almost entirely on Bitcoin currency.

As Bitcoin rose to fame, there was a following of investment, currency exchange
companies, and even the odd automatic teller machine. There have been intense
discussions with Governments and regulators regarding how to marry the digital
currency with the current paper money. Although, not an official organization, the
Bitcoin Foundation was created in 2012 to represent Bitcoin’s interests. Still, there is
not one man in charge of Bitcoin, the foundation held an annual conference — The
Future of Payment in 2013. The conference title held true the belief of many Bitcoin
users – although, it became apparent that not everyone felt this way.
As Amir began his presentation regarding the Dark Wallet, he went into detail about the
technical difficulties he has overcome. But his mundane performance quickly became
impassioned as he shouted catchphrases like; Bitcoin isn’t a payment innovation, it’s a
fucking political project. The audience shifted, and one member suggested that they
could work with the Government, in the long term making Bitcoin more accessible.
Amir was emphatic in his negative response; he went on further to suggest that the
Government is a bunch of crooks – you can’t work with felons. He grew increasingly
outspoken as he continued his impassioned speech; we have the momentum, and we
aren’t going to hand it over, he shouted to the restless crowd.
Amir and his consorts consider Bitcoins to be only a part of a much larger melee –
the right to be anonymous and the right to have absolute freedom while online. It is
Amir’s belief that you should be able to be, say, and do whatever you desire while
online without restriction or big brother watching. Amir also suggests that these
freedoms will result in several political revolutions.
The Mailing List
There was a gathering of like-minded people in Oakland, California sometime in 1992,
attendees included businessman Tim May, math genius Eric Hughes and John Gilmore, a
computer scientist who invented alt.* and several select computer programmers.
Tim May had an illustrious career. He graduated from the University of California with
a physics degree and in 1974, he began working with Intel. May was instrumental in the
redesign of memory chips and was so successful, he retired at the ripe old age of 34.
May now spends his days reading, dabbling in computers, maths, cryptography, physics
and finally politics.

His companion John Gilmore had similar success in his career and retired early from
Sun Microsystems and pursued his political interests.
Eric Hughes was a mathematical prodigy, after his graduation from the University of
California, he spent time in the Netherlands with renowned cryptographer David Chaum.
A natural trio who shared the same political affiliations and love for computer
technology, especially what impacts the technology would have on the world as it
improved. However, while most of the Western liberals were celebrating a new and
exciting electronic age, our trio of May, Hughes, and Gilmore were more concerned
about the most nefarious consequences of this technology, such as eavesdropping and
domination. The trio was convinced that the primary political concern should be if the
global Governments would use this new technology to censor and deny personal
liberties and confidentiality or would it be possible for unknown people or groups to
use this technology to destroy the state?
The first meeting of like-minded individuals saw May laying out his ideas. The group of
excitable and impressionable people all agreed with May’s thoughts that if the
Government isn’t able to see what you are doing, then it has no power over you. May
went on to say that given the changes in computer technology, it was now possible to
guarantee personal freedoms because the laws that govern maths and physics aren’t
malleable, unlike man-made rules. May firmly believed that a computer system could
deliver the lasting freedoms that politics and politicians will never be able to.
Eventually, May got to the reason behind this gathering. He requested his rabble to
determine what software was required for the average person to side-step any possible
Government surveillance.
The momentum of the group grew, and before long they were meeting once a month at the
Cygnus Solutions premises. Cygnus Solutions was a side business created by Gilmore.
One of the early meetings in 1992 saw Jude Milhon nickname this small group the
Cypherpunks, explaining that this was a derision of the popular fiction genre cyberpunk.
The nickname took hold and May once described it as a marketing ploy, along the same
line as the group Anonymous and their Guy Fawkes masks.  
As time went on, Eric Hughes created an email mailing list to reach the increasing
numbers of cypherpunks and anyone else who was interested in what they had to say.
Hughes used the same email server that hosted toad.com — Gilmore’s personal website.
The very first item that was posted was a copy of Chuck Hammill’s 1987 Crossbows to
Cryptology speech. This post demonstrated the content that was to come, Hammill
claimed that for a small portion of the investment in dollars, energy and time he would
spend trying to eradicate censorship and eavesdropping, he could show everyone how to
do it themselves using cryptography. After this post, the mailing list flourished and soon
members were posting daily. Their posts included the swapping of ideas, heated
discussions and development and testing. The individuals on this list foresaw and
ultimately cultivated every technique that is used today to evade Government
observation.
Among his many promises, May suggested crypto-currencies that would allow all

people to use the internet anonymously. May called the crypto-currencies the Black Net.
May continued with his explanation to say that anything could be purchased or sold
anonymously – without a trace, he also counterbalanced this with an anonymous method
for reporting nefarious dealings. 
It was no secret that this band of cypherpunks were agitators, provocative, extremists.
However, they also had a use. They were handy and made things. Some members were
able to produce new software and send it out to others, while other members would test
the software and suggest ways to improve it. As Hughes found ways to improve the
system and created a way for the members to email without being traced, another
member — Hal Finney, saw potential problems with this remailer program and sought
out to improve it. Andy Greenberg, a renowned Forbes journalist, penned an article
suggesting that creativity was an activity with the highest regard, Hughes went on further
to devise the statement that ultimately defined them; cypherpunks write code!
The holy grail the cypherpunks were chasing was encryption – the ability to keep things
private from everyone. History shows that from the days of the Roman Empire right until
the 70s, the foundation of this holy grail of encryption was a single key model, requiring
the same key to both lock and unlock the hidden communication. The invention of
modern computer technology made the whole process weightier, but the principles were
still the same – if you wanted someone to be able to read your encrypted message, they
needed the key. In 1976, this problem was solved by two MIT mathematicians.
Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman created what is known as public key encryption.
The system involves each individual being given two keys which are completely
different, yet still interconnected mathematically. While the intricacies are incredibly
complex, the premise behind the concept is not — you can share your keys with
whoever you want, they use this key to encrypt a message that only you can decode. 
This concept of public key encryption changed the game forever. All of a sudden, people
could exchange encrypted messages without the exchange of codes – this means that you
could now send encrypted messages to someone who you had never seen face to face.
From its creation in 1976, right through to the 1990s this was the only Government
safeguard. It was so fiercely protected that the United States deemed the export of public
key encryption illegal unless you held a specific license. 
As the numbers of people who were circling the information highway began to grow, so
did the interest of the United States Government. The Government wanted to know what
people were up to while in cyberspace and this led to FBI operation Sundevil in 1990.
The purpose behind this witch hunt was to crackdown on computer hackers, and was
followed by The Key Clause - Senate legislation pushed through by Senator Joe Biden,
that forced service providers to make available all user’s personal information.
If this wasn’t bad enough, it got worse in 1993 when the United States Government
declared that there would be an industry standard for encryption, known as Clipper Chip
and the National Security Agency would hold all the keys.

The people who used the internet in those early days were unhappy with this apparent
endeavor of the United States Government to place control over cyberspace. Up until
this point, it was mostly beyond state control. Many people were vocal regarding these
changes, especially anti-nuclear protestor and computer programmer Phil Zimmermann.
Zimmermann’s primary concern was that digital technology would ultimate eat into an
individual’s privacy and not free them. Zimmermann had envisaged creating a public key
based encryption system that would be available to everyone, thus, permitting political
objectors to communicate in private. Unfortunately, life took over for Zimmermann, and
he was not able to accomplish his goal until that is, the Chipper Clip clause came into
effect in 1993. Once Zimmermann became aware of Biden’s push, he made it his life’s
work to create the encryption system. He finished the system in 1991, calling it Pretty
Good Privacy, or PGP and made it available for free on a Usenet group. Within weeks
of PGP becoming available, thousands pf people from across the globe were using this
encryption technology. Zimmerman later claimed that before the invention of PGP, it was
impossible for any two people to connect over long distances without the possibility of
their communications being intercepted. PGP remains to this day, the most popular form
of email encryption.
Unhappy with this new encryption software, the United States Government believed that
it if high numbers of people used PGP, it would be immensely difficult for security
agencies to do their jobs. The British Government was falling into line with the US and
were watching the progression with bated breath. A former British Intelligence Agency
employee, Sir David Omand remembers this period of uncertainty vividly. Omand
claimed that the British Government was extremely worried about the widespread use of
PGP and considered adopting legislation comparable to France that would offer some
control over encryption. Ultimately, Britain decided against such measures as they
realized that once Zimmerman posted his encryption software online, it would be almost
impossible to remove it. Fortunately, they had the foresight to see benefits of encryption
software to online trade and commerce as well as the overall condition of the internet.
They believed that a more secure internet would be used and trusted by more people.
The United States Government did not agree and went on their own path. They
considered Zimmerman’s release of the encryption software to the public domain akin to
the release of munitions and a full criminal investigation was initiated, with the goal of
prosecuting Zimmermann under the Arms Export Controls Act.
This period of time was known as the Crypto-Wars. It was contested between one side
who thought that it was an individual’s right to possess and use strong cryptography and
the United States Government who did not agree with this dogma. May, Gilmore, and
Hughes considered that available encryption software was a stepping stone to which
they and the rest of the cypherpunks believed would be a political, social and economic
revolution. The members of their secret email lists bubbled with excitement, and in
1994, May published his manifesto aptly titled Cyphernomicon — a detailed overview

of the cypherpunks and those on the mailing list. May explained in detail his and the
groups overall anti-democratic viewpoints and their desire to use encryption software to
overthrow Governments around the globe. Generally speaking, the cypherpunks were
resilient libertarians whose core belief was that the democratically elected
Governments around the world made too many choices that impacted the freedoms of the
individual. 
The cypherpunks were given a list of recommended reading material, including 1984,
The Shockwave Rider, and True Names. These titles were on top of Security without
Identification, written by David Chaum and Atlas Shrugged was considered essential
reading. Ayn Rand proclaimed that the most industrious people of the dystopian
American society repudiate the paying of taxes and ultimately dissolve into Galt’s
Gulch. Rand explained Galt’s Gulch as being an isolated population where everyone
was free to work towards greatness. It was May’s ambition to see a virtual Galt’s Gulch
where individuals were free to make their own decisions, economic or otherwise
without the state hanging over their heads.
The secret list turned into a popular hang out for elite computer programmers and
hackers from all around the globe. Most of these cypherpunks used the list to educate
themselves about encryption so they could fight their own fight against Government
censorship and supervision. Of particular note, was a programmer who called himself
Proff. When he became a cypherpunk in the early to mid-1990s, he instantly fell in with
the extremists of the group and relished in the bullying behavior that was tantamount to
the team – insulting those new to the list, pointing out those with inferior technical
knowledge and planning the demise of all government.
The leader of the civil liberties organisation, that was co-founded by Gilmore,
Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), Esther Dyson disagreed with Proff. Claiming that
minor regulations could be acceptable under very strict privacy conditions, but Proff
was adamant that Dyson’s beliefs, as well as those of her organisation,  are easily
swayed, had a vested interest in politics and lacked a general moral compass. Proff
even went as far as to say that Dyson worked with the CIA, and reiterated that he was
not, nor had he every been working with the CIA, but he was aware his credibility was
low and people may not believe him.
As it turned out, the aptly named Proff was none other than Julian Assange, an Australian
programmer. Although he held libertarian views, Assange did not share May’s elitist
attitude. May went as far to rant in his Cyphernomicon about unproductive people,
inner-city breeders and most infamously, the clueless 95%. In a likely confutation to
May’s outburst, Assange claimed that this clueless 95% that may spoke of were never in
his line of sight, and should not have been in May’s. Assange explained that it is the
extreme 2.5% on either end of the scale that was his focus. Later on, when asked if he

believes that Assange was a dedicated cypherpunk? May responded emphatically that he
did, Assange was there building and developing all things related to cypherpunk and the
list.
Over time, it became apparent that May’s disdain towards the Government was an
intellectual discovery – the result of years of gluttonous reading. Assange’s dislike on
the other hand, was based on emotion. He was arrested in 1991 after hacking into
Nortel, an Australian telco company. Assange managed to avoid prison on this occasion.
However, the cloud of possible prosecution hung over his head for a long two years. In
1994, Assange entered a guilty plea to 25 hacking charges. Assange later proclaimed
that this occurrence led him to be able to see through the veil that those who are
educated pledge their disbelief, but in their hearts, they truly believed was there.
Assange was able to see that cryptography could be used for both defense as well as
offense. He was under the belief that anonymous cryptography software would not only
encourage people to blow the whistle but would give them the platform to potentially
expose state secrets. Assange believed that cryptography could rip Governments open
so they would become increasingly transparent and ultimately more accountable. He
thought that if a few Governments went under in the process, then more for the better.
Assange was inspired by fellow mailing list member, John Young – the founder of
cryptome.org. A website used to publish any leaked documents, particularly Government
records and reports that are generally confidential in nature. In 2006, Assange contacted
Young, explained who he was and how they were both a member of the cypherpunk
mailing list. Assange went into detail about his plan to form a new institution which is
now infamously known as WikiLeaks. Assange was adamant that his WikiLeaks would
alter the course of the world. He explained that new developments in technology and
advances in cryptography inspired the leaking of documents, and the promotion of them
to a wide market. Assange intended to shine a new light on the political arena.
The cypherpunk mailing list was the epitome of the cryptography circle for the best part
of a decade. There were hundreds of members who used it to learn code, how to avoid
being discovered, and there were intense debates about extremist politics. In 2001, the
mailing list floundered when Gilmore, who was by this stage apparently disheartened
with the group, removed it from toad.com. The mailing list had an impressive record of
accomplishment, members came from all over the globe to access the anonymous
browser. Being able to search the internet while untraceable was revolutionary. The
intelligence agencies were becoming increasingly frustrated with Cryptome, and even
better for the cypherpunk group was that all investigations into Zimmermann and his
PGP software were eventually dropped.   
The cypherpunks were never quite successful in their endeavor to create an entirely
anonymous payment system. When Gilmore disbanded the original mailing list, several
more popped up in his place. A majority of these new groups were specifically targeted
at refining cryptography.
Perry Metzger’s list was the most popular of the new groups, and a good portion of the
original mailing list members moved over to his domain. Metzger’s list welcomed the

next generation of aspiring revolutionists who were every bit as eager to evade
Government scrutiny and develop and expand the opportunities for personal privacy
while online. In 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto’s message to Metzger’s group would
ultimately change everything.
 

To Calafou
Six weeks after Amir’s initial impassioned speech, upon entering a complex of
abandoned textile factories, the phrases Calafou: colonia ecoindustrial postcapitalista
stand out, their green and black lettering is a stark contrast to the side of the building. 
There is a long-haired man lurking around the entrance, when asked if he had seen Amir,
the bearded man’s reply was simple – he will be in the hackers’ space or asleep.
It is immediately obvious to any observer that Calafou is a trial towards collective
living. The thirty-odd permanent citizens run and manage the facility in conjunction with
the Catalan Integral Cooperative (CIC). The ultimate goal of this experiment is to find a
way to live ethically, sustainably and completely removed from the consumerist society.
Calafou is enormous. It has to be at least 200 acres; it is difficult to determine as there
are so many dwellings. Approximately 30, four-roomed flats span across the 10,000
square meters of prime industrial space. There is even a church and a communal dining
area. The space is in a constant status that can only be defined as organized chaos.
Strewn across the space are engines and bicycles – each in various states of disrepair,
plasterboard, beer bottles, bricks and plenty of other clutter. Towards the rear of the
complex is the heart of the hackers’ space. The area is accessible via concrete stairs,
and the size is about that of a tennis court. The sight of the hacker’s space is awe-
inspiring, it is littered with old computers, modems, wires, telephones, and cables.
Every computer that is in the complex is either repurposed or second-hand. This den of
inequity has sofas adorning one wall and a table that looks like it is ready to collapse
under the weight of technology, food, and telephones.
If you ever had any misconceptions about these individuals and their allegiances – there
are paintings of the telephone hacker Captain Crunch and British cryptographer Alan
Turing spray painted on the walls.
Some of the occupants are coding. Bypassing the two young men in the corner, only to
discover an older man, trying to hang onto his youth by wearing a hoodie and smoking.
He is staring intently at the three monitors in front of him, completely absorbed by his
activities. Judging by his appearance, it is certain that this is Pablo, he is Amir’s top
collaborator and is the main in charge of what you see when you look into the Dark Net
– or the front end. No one notices the new arrival, after introductions with Pablo and
quick conversations, and he states that he is having programming issues and he can’t talk
at that moment. Memories of previous discussions regarding advanced coding with Amir
surface, and his comment regarding creativity, Amir explained that advanced coding is
very much an artistic and inspired venture. While you are having a good run, you must
stick with it. It was apparent that Pablo was having a good run.
Some time passes before Pablo stops what he is doing, rolls himself another smoke and

journeys over to the sofa. Polite discussion about the factory and Calafou ensues, Pablo
explains that he lives here permanently. He is excited about the prospects with CIC and
the residents at Calafou are in contractual discussions about being able to purchase the
complex in its entirety. Pablo explains the economics, currently while renting the
complex from CIC each resident pays 100 euros a month for a room and working space.
Once it is purchased, each resident will pay 25,000 euros for a flat. When you include
the communal cooking and maintenance arrangements – the residents can survive on a
very small income and are free to peruse their other interests.  Pablo explains that one of
the most notable projects to emerge from Calafou is the Dark Wallet, but there are
organic projects as well – one current example is the attempt to grow, and ameba that is
capable of storing energy, with the long-term objective is an organic computer. There
are compost facilities, the creation of solar panels, clay ovens (which are available for
purchase) and open-source telecommunications. They are at 100% occupancy, and many
of the random couches are often full – especially during one of the many events Calafou
regularly host.
Pablo continued his explanation of Calafou – claiming that it is so much more than just
somewhere to live. Funded in part and inspired by Enric Duran, who in 2008,
distributed more than 200,000 copies of his publication Crisis. Duran had gone into
detail about how he had spent two years hoodwinking 39 different banks into lending
him 500,000 euros. Duran was labeled a modern-day Robin Hood as he gave most of
what he borrowed away – mostly to social objectors, the rest of what he had swindled,
paid for future editions of Crisis. He would pay back small loans early on, then he
would borrow more and eventually just stopped making repayments. Duran’s second
newspaper – we can live without capitalism, promoted the CIC as a real-life example of
his ideology. In 2009, Duran was arrested and was incarcerated for two months, after
six banks pressed charges against him, he ultimately went into hiding in 2011 after the
prosecutor was seeking an eight-year imprisonment.
An entertaining and enlightening discussion with Pablo had lasted for about an hour
when Amir finally made an appearance. He had with him two friends from the Occupy
London organization and didn't pay anyone any mind. Amir announced to Pablo that he
had obtained the first Bitcoin transaction from an unknown source while he was
assessing Pablo’s monitors. Seeming rather indifferent to what he was reading onscreen,
he simply stated it was nifty and moved on. 
Raised in Kent by immigrant parents, Amir learned the art of computer programming
during his school years, it wasn’t long before he was in hot water for turning off the
school’s CCTV system. Naturally gifted in the subject of mathematics, it was a natural
progression for Amir to progress to university level in the field, three times he attempted
this scholarly adventure with little success. He was homeless, eventually becoming an
unlawful tenant, which lead to a collaboration with Pablo on an open-source computer
game. Unfortunately, the project stalled before it was released – Amir claiming that
politics and other individuals shelved the release. Amir was downhearted as he had no
money, no education, and the last five years were for naught. Regardless of his personal

relationship with Pablo, Amir realized that working in large industrious teams was not
for him, he was once quoted as saying that the worst thing in life is having to listen to
others.  
Amir managed to eke out a living by playing online poker. For two years, he lived this
way, playing poker every day. He didn’t become wealthy during this endeavor – in fact,
he barely made enough to live on. It was through these two years and multiple online
poker games, he learned all about politics. In April 2011, the FBI removed the websites
of the three most popular online poker games and prosecuted the founders, a day is
known as Black Friday. There were thousands of people who lost their money on Black
Friday, and Amir and his friends were not immune. As their money was now floating
around in cyberspace somewhere, Amir began to play with the concept of his own peer-
to-peer poker game but failed when he was unable to establish a secure payment
gateway. When Amir fell across Bitcoin in 2011, he began working on projects and
developments related to Bitcoin, even going as far as inventing Britcoin – the United
Kingdom’s very own version where exchanges were made straight to British currency
rather than the American dollar.
Upon further examination of Bitcoin, Amir was disturbed to find that the system was not
as nameless as first indicated. Amir praised the developers on their innovation and
explained with a few modifications it could be more revolutionary. This is how Amir’s
Dark Wallet came about, Amir relocated to Calafou and collaborated with Pablo and the
American crypto-anarchist who was responsible for the world’s first 3D printed firearm
by the name of Cody Wilson. They worked together and cultivated $50,000 in one month
alone through Indiegogo, a crowd funding website.
Regardless of any admiration for Amir and his knowledge and skill, his morals and
provocations have left him on the outside of the Bitcoin society. Dark Wallet is in firm
competition with any associations that would like to profit from and dominate Bitcoin
and the Bitcoin market. It is not uncommon to see Bitcoin developers working with the
law and policy makers to train and gain endorsement from the Governments, according
to one Dark Wallet blog post, the rant continued to say that it is not in the best interest of
Bitcoin or the Bitcoin users, but is aimed at increasing the wealth of the Bitcoin
Foundation.
Refuting these remarks, one Bitcoin Foundation specialist Gavin Andresen claimed that
Bitcoin is a much better, simpler, efficient currency that is not subject to Government
inspection. Andresen continued emphatically that Bitcoin is NOT a black-market
implement that can be used by individual trouble makers to upheave the current system.
Many of the individuals in the Bitcoin society are concerned that Amir’s extreme
viewpoints will impede Bitcoin from ever being taken seriously. One member, on a
Bitcoin roundtable, claimed that Amir takes the proverbial cake. A lead Bitcoin
programmer, Mike Hearn suggested that it was up to the Bitcoin community as a whole

to remove these extremists from the organization. Hearn agreed with the basic
philosophy that overall Government control should be reduced, he thought that Bitcoin
was not the platform for such politics, he continued to say that Amir and his followers
were going to be devastated when they realized that their ideology of bank-less money is
never going to cause a revolution.
Amir vehemently denies this line of conversation; he considers Bitcoin to be the
mechanism that will overthrow the establishment and claims that the Bitcoin Foundation
are trying to censor their creation. Amir and Cody anticipate that Dark Wallet will be
used as a medium to purchase illicit substances securely and that any negotiations with
the establishment will undermine Bitcoin’s vision. Amir is concerned that these
negotiations are reducing any potential Bitcoin showed. Amir believes that it is not
necessary to improve Bitcoin for the consumers, and any attempts to do so will be self-
fulfilling and politically motivated.
Satoshi
The cypherpunks didn’t actually invent digital crypto-currencies, but they got a glimpse
of their potential when cryptographer David Chaum developed the modern anonymous
payment system.
Crypto-currencies are units of currency, each of which containing a string of distinct
numbers that can be digitally transferred. However, the problem with this concept is that
the assigned numbers can be duplicated, making the currency worthless. To resolve this
problem, Chaum designed a single centralised ledger that documented all crypto-
currency payments. In 1990, Chaum launched DigiCash with the purpose of centralising
crypto-currency transfers, but the company was unsuccessful as many had doubts about
the trustworthiness of a single, independent validation system.    
Satoshi addressed Chaum’s flawed system with his distributed structure of verification,
Bitcoin.    This new crypto-currency was initially met with doubts. Hal Finney, a veteran
cypherpunk who had witnessed firsthand various attempts of crypto-currencies has noted
the sceptical nature of the initial response. However, Finney picked up on an element in
Satoshi’s Bitcoin that he had never seen in previous models, the blockchain.   
 
When a Bitcoin is transferred, a blockchain collects and stores the transaction. A certain
amount of each Bitcoin is kept at an address made up of letters and numbers. Every
payment is accumulated in blocks, each of which contains approximately 10 minutes of
transmissions. The blocks are then chronologically organized and contain a digital
signature, a “hash,” of the preceding block which acts as the supervising block, allowing
a new block into the chain as long as the new block begins from the end of the prior
block. A log is kept of all payments made by Bitcoin software users, and the blockchains
are continually checked by other Bitcoin users in order to safeguard smooth operation. 
 
The first Bitcoin transfer was carried out by Satoshi and Finney, and after fixing a few
quirks, Satoshi opened his concept to cypherpunks and others with knowledge in the

field in order to use their expertise to perfect the currency. The mailing list grew and
payment transactions increased with trepidation, but the system never failed. The reason
for the system’s success is that at all times it knows the number of Bitcoins of any user.
Therefore, the currency can never be “forged” or used more than once. This was a
breakthrough in crypto-currency; the introduction of a digital tender that could be sent
without danger of replication exclusive of an independently regulated auditor.    
Libertarians hail the Bitcoin because the government has no control of currency supply.
Like the Libertarians, Satoshi didn’t believe in nor trust the global banking system. He
envisioned his system as a means to expose the widespread corrupt commerce cartel
and eventually replace it as the dominant form of currency. He despised the blatant
manipulation of those in the financial sphere and collaborating governments which work
hand-in-hand to keep the money flowing into their own pockets. Satoshi went as far as
adding a superfluous message in the first blockchain, the “genesis block”, which stated:
“The Times 03/Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks.”
In order to ensure that the state controlled banks had absolutely no involvement with
Bitcoin, Satoshi limited production of Bitcoins to 21 million. Bitcoins are not minted, so
to speak, but can be purchased with legal tender through what’s known as mining:
Bitcoin investors gain a marginal quantity of new Bitcoins by competing to authenticate
blockchain transactions. Each new Bitcoin requires more computing power to mine. In
addition, Satoshi designed the encrypted system as to be quasi-anonymous. Because the
blockchain doesn’t document who made the transaction, tracking and assigning
transactions to an individual is extremely challenging and severely limits taxation and
censorship. 
From inception, Satoshi’s system was centered around these safeguards. His plan is
evidenced in his posts to the cryptography mailing list. In a post to Finney during the
early stages, Satoshi said the Bitcoin was “Very attractive to the libertarian viewpoint if
we can explain it properly.” And in response to this comment posted by a user, “You
will not find a solution to political problems in cryptography,” Satoshi wrote, “Yes, “but
we can win a major battle in the arms race and gain a new territory of freedom for
several years.” Satoshi’s final post to date was in late 2010, after which he abruptly
dropped off the list, as in true cypherpunk fashion. 
Amir was correct when he asserted that Bitcoin was designed as a political statement,
but it’s a functional open-source project, and for proponents like the Bitcoin Foundation,
it’s still viewed as a viable means of exchange. Amir, however, believes this viewpoint
mitigates the authentic cypherpunk vision and is the primary reason he’s building the
Dark Wallet.
Dark Wallet
Amir’s most recent project, dubbed the Dark Wallet, is dedicated to incorporating more
anonymity and dependability into the Bitcoin. New elements to be included are: “multi-

signature,” which allows release of a Bitcoin payment only with the signature of two out
of three parties; “trustless mixing,” which makes it more difficult to track Bitcoin
transfers and derives from CoinJoin, a project that scrambles simultaneous transactions
and deflects them to the final destination so that the correct quantity is sent without
anyone knowing who sent what to who; and the last improvement is known as the
“stealth address,” a generated phony Bitcoin recipient address which makes it more
problematic to connect the sender to the Bitcoin. Dark Wallet is a substantial break-
through, even without achieving total anonymity, and Amir predicts that people will be
lining up with anticipation at this opportunity to add one more level of security to their
online activities.
Amir is a brilliant computer programmer, precise and exacting, but when it comes to
politics, his positions are disconnected and his attitude hostile. He’s against the
surveillance state, unethical governments, greedy corporations, tyranny, and
environmental exploitation. His political agenda could be defined as system-opposition,
i.e., citizen versus governments and corporations. He understands the problems and
finds solutions, and similar to May, his solution is mathematics, not human constructed
edicts. He believes that Bitcoin creates a truly pure peer-to-peer market. To Amir, Dark
Wallet is an attack on incompetent, wasteful, and useless governments.
Having complete confidence that math and physics are the answer to all of society’s
problems can be labelled as a utopian belief. Amir doesn’t give much consideration to
government run social welfare programs such as healthcare and education and how these
programs will survive in a mathematically driven world. Computer games, however, are
part of his daily routine. He likes games like the Mirror’s Edge, a futuristic society run
by a dictatorial state which keeps peace through a deadly combination of surveillance
and sterile hyperconsumerism. The passive population accepts the status quo with the
exception of a group of rebels who use “runners” to deliver messages to an underground
resistance. Runners dart across rooftops, creep down back alleys, and vanish into the
shadows in order to elude the police. Amir says that computer games are how children
learn about politics and views them as a training tool for the imminent revolution.
Cypherpunk Goes Mainstream
For cypherpunks like Amir, unrestricted monetary transactions such as Bitcoin are the
first step in a complete devolution of all communication and individual activities. Amir
believes that currencies are just the beginning and that the real innovation of blockchain
is that it will facilitate an online world free of censorship; a world that extends well
beyond Bitcoin.
 
Amir’s transformation would take Internet control away from server hosts like
Facebook, who have access and the power to manipulate users’ data at any time, and
make the information available to the users themselves. The Internet is not really “free”
because the hosts own the information. If that data is put on a blockchain, like Bitcoins,
users who post on social media platforms would have a copy of those posts because

they would be part of the blockchain. All posts would be anonymous, censorship would
be virtually non-existent, and because there’s no ownership, platforms could never be
shut down.
Several efforts at this decentralized net are in the works. Twister is one such project,
triggered by British Prime Minister David Cameron’s public announcement that the
British government had considered shutting Twitter down during London’s 2011 riots.
Chief developer Miguel Freitas revealed that he had tried searching for peer-to-peer
alternatives for microblogging but came up empty handed.
Twister is merely one of many user-friendly, cheap, and efficient future systems
designed to assure unrestricted communication and privacy for the mass public rather
than the specialist. Jitsi, a student driven project at the University of Strasbourg, is a
free, secure, open-source voice, video conferencing and instant messaging application;
Jabber is another instant messaging service, administered by volunteers and hosted in a
secure data centre and encrypted with industry standard Secure Sockets Layer; and Phil
Zimmermann is presently working on an automatic end-to-end encrypted email service
called Darkmail.
 
There are currently hundreds of inspired people like Amir and Freitas toiling away on
processes for maintaining online secrets and stopping censorship, often crowdfunded by
sympathizing users.  One of these intellectuals is Smári McCarthy. Smári is a self-
proclaimed geek, computer genius, and founding member of the radical Icelandic Pirate
Party who worked with Julian Assange in the beginning of WikiLeaks. Smári isn’t a true
cypherpunk—he doesn’t follow Ayn Rand’s philosophy—but he is a proponent that
online privacy is a fundamental right and views crypto as a central tenant of an ongoing
political movement.
Smári advocates for encryption of all email with PGP, particularly those sent between
friends and family members so to provide “cover traffic” for those individuals who
require secrecy. If everyone uses it, then no one does and the protestors will withdraw
to the shadows. Smári has dissected existing National Security Agency (NSA) programs
and U.S. security budget and determined that the cost to infiltrate every person using the
Internet is 13 cents per day. Alternate encryption services like his would increase the
cost to almost $10,000 per day, which would considerably reduce state spying to only
those who pose a threat to state security, which Smári estimates would be about 30,000
people.
People don’t use encryption because it’s complicated and time-consuming, whereas
Gmail is quick, simple, and easy to set up. In order to streamline encryption for
everyday use, Smári, along with two colleagues, raised $160,000 in 2013 from
supporters on Indiegogo for development of a new email system called Mailpile. 
The documents Snowden unveiled in 2013 charged the NSA, partnered with Britain’s

GCHQ and others, with tapping seabed “backbone” Internet cables, installing back-door
access to private company servers, and working to crack (and weaken) encryption
standards without going through the proper legal channels. Once this information was
leaked and open to public discourse, the public began securing their online presence
through software designed by people like Smári.
The cypherpunk objective hasn’t been overlooked. An increasing number of individuals
are beginning to employ encryption technology, and the request for services like
Mailpile, PGP, and Jitsi is also rising, with daily adoption rates of PGP keys tripling
shortly after Snowden’s leaks. During the mid-1990s, cypherpunks routinely cautioned
against the impending “surveillance state,” and they were right. Now, cypherpunk has
turned mainstream, all because of a tweet.
Crypto-party!
Despite strong resistance from civil liberties groups the Australian parliament recently
passed the Cybercrime Legislation Amendment Bill, which allocated them additional
online spying capability. Shortly after the law’s passage, the following tweet appeared
on Australian privacy activist Asher Wolf’s timeline: “Ain’t no party like a crypto apps
install party.” Wolf wanted to organize a “crypto-party” where everyone would bring
their devices, beer & music. This tweet incited a world-wide, grass-roots movement
and Wolf later said that within only a day the movement was starting to go viral with
events being organized across the planet.
A crypto-party is a training session that teaches people how to anonymously browse the
Internet through Tor, how Bitcoin works, and how to send encrypted emails with PGP.
The clinic is usually conducted at a private home, university, or bar and hosted by expert
volunteers at no cost to the attendees. Those who attend the workshop and others can
reference the crypto-party handbook, which emerged within one day of the tweet and
was crowdsourced by activists located across the globe. The book remains in
circulation and is regularly updated.
Following Snowden’s revelations, an alliance of privacy activists organised a crypto-
party of around 200 people on the campus of Goldsmiths, University of London. The
attendees were made up of all ages and varying occupations. During one hour sessions,
the basics were taught. Friends sent message to each other, and a group of older women
got a kick out of using PGP and seeing this:
Jklr90ifjkdfndsxmcnvjcxkjvoisdfuewlkffdsshSklr9jkfmdsgk,nm3inj
219fnnokmf9n0ifjkdfndsxmcnvjcxkjvoisdfuewlkfJflgmfklr90ifjkdfn
dsxmcnvjcxkjvoisdfuewlkf,nm3inj219fnnokmf972nfksjhf83kdbgfh
ydid89qhdkfksdfhs8g93kkkafndhfgusdug892kmgsndu19jgwdnng
skgds8t48senglsdpss9sy31bajsakf7qianfkalhs19jaslfauwq8qoafall
2kjhagfasjf993hamfalsfuqiejfkallnjksd732j1ls0dskj

magically turn into:
Hello!
No one there, however, had heard of Tim May and the cypherpunks. These people were
simply concerned about keeping their online personal information private. Surveys have
consistently revealed that the public places a high value on their privacy. Nine out of ten
Britons state that they want more control over what happens to their personal online
data. Modern societies have been searching for a balance between individual freedoms
and state power for hundred of years, and the majority of citizens agree that even in
democracies some activity must be spied on, but that espionage needs to be restricted to
cases that threaten safety and security. The state enacts laws with this very goal, yet
modern technology has progressed at such a rapid pace, particularly powerful
computing, and today because individuals publicly share almost all aspects of their
lives, a great majority of non-cypherpunks believe their right to privacy is being
violated.
The Downside
Smári and others develop crypto with the purpose of protecting civil liberties from state
intrusion, especially in repressive regimes, and one can make the case that crypto does
safeguard privacy. However, crypto is also used by terrorists, organised crime
syndicates, and other malefactors. These Nefarian’s are often the first to utilize new
technology and remain underground while secretly carrying out their agenda. For
example, the main producers and distributors of child pornography are specialists when
it comes to crypto, and if Bitcoin was still merely an idea, the online drug market Silk
Road may never have formed.
Visiting professor at King’s College, London and former GCHQ Director David Omand
is still close to UK intelligence agencies, believing that it is important for intelligence
agencies to retain the technical capability to observe who and what they want to in order
to enhance public safety. The Internet gives a much wider range of options for avoiding
surveillance, and in a sense there is an arms race between the criminals and law
enforcement.
Although never proven, it’s been asserted that the 9/11 terrorists used PGP encryption in
their communications. Omand says he has no knowledge of the allegation, but does
believe the terrorists would have been ecstatic about the Edward Snowden leaks. He
believes terrorists as well as foreign governments like the Russians and the Chinese
would have followed these leaks closely.
Regarding the rise in crypto-parties and increased adoption of Tor, Mailpile, and Dark
Wallets threatening public safety, Omand says that he is concerned, but that the
intelligence machine cannot be stopped. He believes intelligence officers will be forced

to counter it, which could lead to more intrusive methods than those uncovered by
Edward Snowden, which he says are “typically more morally hazardous.” He also
claims that during the Cold War, Soviet cyphers were too complex for GCHQ to crack,
so British intelligence had to resort to recruiting more Soviet agents.
Cypherpunks look at criminal use as a regrettable consequence, but one that’s necessary
to reach the ultimate outcome of privacy and uninhibited liberty. Zimmermann’s answer
to his feelings about the 9/11 terrorists possibly employing his software in the U.S.
attacks is that the fact that “PGP is a tool for human rights around the world far
outweighs (the attacks). Strong crypto does more good for a democratic society than
harm.”
With the exception of Omand, cypherpunks aren’t responsible for keeping the public safe
and don’t have access to security briefings. Omand doesn’t attribute any fault to
Zimmermann, believing that regulating new technology in a way that will keep the public
safe is a job for the government.
The Cyberstead
Crypto began as a libertarian ideology. The cypherpunks were Ayn Rand type
autonomists eager to see their dream of a revolution come to fruition. Cypherpunks were
fixated on protecting their individual liberty long before the current outcry against online
privacy invasion by the mass public of all political affiliations. In a sense, cypherpunks’
manifesto has infiltrated all political parties across the globe.
Most cypherpunks simply want to stay off the state’s radar; they aren’t free-market
warriors or convinced Randians like Tim May. For example, Smári is an anarchist who
backs May’s call for the eradication of the modern state, but unlike May, has faith that
humans, when unrestrained by governmental or corporate interests, have the capacity to
work together in order to build thriving civilizations rather than seclude themselves
from the rest of humanity. Smári is also concerned about social issues such as welfare,
minority rights, and other progressive causes.
All cypherpunks share one belief—their distrust of government—particularly security
institutions and division. Their answer to solving the corruption is crypto. They believe
this mathematical formula will re-shift the power into the hands of the citizenry.
Affirmed anti-capitalist Enric Duran looks at Bitcoin as a way of progressing towards
individual cooperatives and eliminating dependence on government’s fiat currencies.
They come from all over the globe, but every cypherpunk genuinely adheres to the
policy that anonymity and privacy are crucial to a healthy, functioning, free society.
Regardless of which political ideology cypherpunks associate with, preserving
anonymity is their driving force, and crypto not only preserves but broadens individual
freedom which will eventually inspire creativity, increased production, and
resourcefulness, allowing room for progressive living.

Amir views crypto as a means of enhancing individual freedom and autonomy and
creating a space for individuals to engage in valuable activities. He believes it is better
to build trust networks based on establishing a relationship rather than rely on judges,
bureaucracy, or law enforcement. In the coming year, Amir has designs to erect
industrial machines that can generate sustainable agriculture and waste management
systems. He also plans to invest in building homes for 1,000 euros and selling them for
five times the cost. With his profits, Amir will reinvest in another Calafou.
What libertarians and cypherpunks like Amir seem to overlook, however, is that if
Bitcoin takes off and becomes the primary currency, the government’s power to tax and
spend will be limited, affecting social welfare programs such as healthcare, education,
and social security. Without these life-sustaining programs, democracies will most
likely fall apart. Mathematical code can’t take societal needs into account and once
broke, communities can’t simply be repaired with a code.  In addition, without some
form of regulation and oversight, anonymous communication will be used by criminals.
Most factions and individuals pushing for digital anonymity have only good intentions;
however, these groups are also unintentionally supporting and encouraging the agenda of
an extreme, fanatic Californian libertarian.
 
Tim May isn’t concerned about what or who’s pushing the agenda because he believes
in the end it’s going to happen regardless. He says the final leg of the trifecta is situated:
Anonymous currency has joined PGP and anonymous browsing, something he thinks
must scare governments around the world. He prophesises that in the next 10 or 20 years
current forms of government will be superseded by a digital “gulch,” what he calls a
“cyberstead.” The Gulch is a state and government free space where individuals create
online communities of interest and engage in direct interactions.
May, like Amir, has no delusions about the short-term future. He knows that for the poor
and minority groups it will be unstable at best, even if the long-term prospects are good.
In 1994, May wrote, “Crypto-anarchy means prosperity for those who can grab it, those
competent enough to have something of value to offer for sale.” Recently he stated his
belief that crypto is about making the world better and safer for the one percent while
the rest of humanity will essentially be doomed. May believes the only way to reach
complete human potential is to eradicate protections such as laws and social welfare.
He knows that it will be chaotic in the beginning, but is willing to take that risk for the
long-term rewards.
Amir, unlike May, thinks Calafou and similar places provide a superior lifestyle for all,
not just for those in the top five or one percent. However, as May does, Amir believes
crypto is the answer to this alternative way of life and doesn’t stop to think about the
corresponding and possible detrimental effects of a mathematical blueprint that will
design an entire world of Calafous. A world made up of self-sustaining and self-
governing collectives that are owned and controlled by the people.

Table of Contents
Introduction to Tor
5
The Silk Road
9
Crypto and The Dark Net
23
The Crypto Social Revolution
40

