Hookup of the Tow Dolly to Truck  
 
1. The coupler locking device must be in the full open position. If equipped with a lower locking 
plate, the plate must be in the down position. Place the coupler of the tow dolly over the 2" 
hitch ball on the truck. Be sure the coupler is fully seated down over the ball.  
Lever-Type Coupler 
(with locking plate)  
Handwheel-Type Coupler 
 
2. Completely lock the coupler. If equipped with a level-type coupler,the lever must be in the 
down position and the locking pin inserted. If equipped with a handwheel-type coupler, 
completely tighten the handwheel.Pull up on the tow dolly tongue to be sure it is properly 
secured. 
 
 
3. Connect the color-coded wires from the tow dolly to the 
corresponding color-coded posts on the truck's electrical box. Check for 
proper operation. 
 
4. Crisscross the safety chains from the tongue of the tow dolly. Pass through eyelets on truck 
and attach hook to safety chain. Allow slack in the chains for movement during turns made by 
the truck and tow dolly. 
 
Hookup of the Towed Vehicle to Tow Dolly 
It is the customer's responsibility to hook up the towed vehicle to the tow dolly. Consult your 
insurance carrier before towing as Penske is not responsible for any damage to a towed vehicle. 
1. Be sure that the truck and tow dolly are straight and on level ground.  
 
2. Make sure that the tow dolly platform is straight.  
 
3. Remove safety pin on ratchet assembly and unroll tire 
straps. 

4. Lay tire straps along fender side of tow dolly, off of tire platform.  
5. Allow tow dolly platform to tilt back by releasing the locking pin. 
 
 
6. Slowly drive the front end of the towed vehicle onto the tow dolly until tires on the towed 
vehicle are resting against the tow dolly wheel stops. The platform will go into upright 
position.Make certain that the towed vehicle is centered on the tow dolly platform since the 
platform swivels during turns. Adequate space is required between the tow dolly fenders and 
towed vehicle.Never back up a towed vehicle onto a tow dolly.  
7. Locking pin on platform must go into the locked position.  
8. For safety reasons, engage the parking brake on the towed vehicle (see item #13) and place 
transmission in low gear (standard) or park (automatic).  
9. Center the tie-down ratchets in front of the towed vehicle's tires and pull the tire straps 
forward over the tires.  
10. Tighten each tire strap securely by pulling up and down as many times as necessary on the 
tow dolly ratchet assembly handle. Be sure the strap on the inside of the tire does not come in 
contact with any brake or suspension parts. Insert safety pins and attach safety clip with 
handle in down position.  
 
11. Hook up safety chains from tow 
dolly platform to the frame of towed 
vehicle directly above the area where 
chains are mounted on the tow dolly. 
Allow slight slack in the chains to 
provide for suspension movement on 
the towed vehicle. 
 
12. Disconnect the drive shaft on the 
towed vehicle if rear-wheel or four-wheel 
drive. Consult your dealer if you are 
uncertain of the above. Towing above 
vehicle without disconnecting drive shaft 
will damage towed vehicle's transmission 
even if transmission is placed in neutral. 
 
 
13. Release parking brake on towed vehicle and be sure the steering is locked in the straight 
position.  
14. Remove keys from ignition and lock vehicle.  
15. Check the towing system after hookup, tow about 100 feet, then stop and perform a safety 
check. Check the bolts, chains, coupler, ramps, tire straps, and other items to make sure they 
are in the right position and secure. 

16. Repeat the safety check after the first five miles and then every 50 miles thereafter.  
Towed vehicle is now safely connected and ready to be towed.  
CHECK THE TOW DOLLY BOLTS, COUPLER, SAFETY CHAINS, ELECTRICAL HOOKUP, 
AND TIRE STRAPS AFTER THE FIRST FIVE MILES OF TRAVEL AND THEN EVERY 50 
MILES THEREAFTER.  
 
Unload Towed Vehicle from Tow Dolly  
1. Park truck and tow dolly straight and on level ground. Fully apply the towed vehicle and 
truck parking brakes. Install drive shaft on rear-wheel or four-wheel drive towed vehicle.  
 
2. Remove tire straps and safety chains from towed 
vehicle, placing the ratchet handle in the down position. 
 
3. Release tow dolly platform locking pin.  
4. Release parking brake on towed vehicle.  
5. Slowly back towed vehicle off of tow dolly to prevent bottom of vehicle from contacting 
ramps. Check transmission fluid level on towed vehicle if drive shaft was removed as fluid may 
have leaked out during towing.  
6. Return tow dolly platform to the up position and engage locking pin.  
7. Take up excess slack of tire straps in ratchet assembly and place safety chains in storage 
position.  
 

