

Andy Oram
Trends Shaping the London
Tech Scene
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-96917-5
[LSI]
Trends Shaping the London Tech Scene
by Andy Oram
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Acquisitions Editor: Susan Conant
Editor: Dawn Schanafelt
Production Editor: Dan Fauxsmith
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
August 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-08-31: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Trends Shaping
the London Tech Scene, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
Trends Shaping the London Tech Scene. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Highly Skilled Staff—Where Do They Come From?                           2
Pitching In                                                                                                  4
Setting Up Shop                                                                                         5
Government: We’re Here to Help You                                                 11
Life in London                                                                                         13
v


Trends Shaping the London
Tech Scene
Figure 1-1. London does have unicorns
Finance, journalism, trade, the arts, government—London has been
known as a world leader in these areas for centuries. Computer
technology doesn’t arouse such an immediate association with Lon‐
don, but since the mid-2000s it has steadily taken hold in all those
1

areas of London activity and has created a vibrant, independent
business environment of its own. While not as “hot” as Silicon Val‐
ley (no Facebooks or Apples have been launched in London, and few
unicorns), London’s tech scene obeys its own “slow and steady”
growth model.
This report aims to be a comprehensive view of the computer tech‐
nology scene in London: where it stands, some of its origins, who’s
participating in it, and what feeds its strengths.
I happen to be examining the phenomenon of computer technology
in London at an odd moment, because many people attribute its
robustness to Britain’s presence in the European Union. The British
have notoriously just come away from a historic vote that, over the
next few years, will undo that relationship, while trying to maintain
as close a business and cultural connection to the Continent as pos‐
sible. Although this report does not examine politics or take on the
dicey task of predicting the impact of the Brexit, we will examine
London’s ties to the continent and the impact of these ties on the
tech scene.
Highly Skilled Staff—Where Do They
Come From?
London’s highly international workforce benefits from fine universities
in Britain and across the continent. But they also take learning into
their own hands, creating numerous free and paid forums for com‐
puter training.
London is a whirlpool that sweeps in programmers and data scien‐
tists not only from all over Great Britain but also from Europe, the
British Commonwealth, and the rest of the world. Given the short‐
age of qualified technical staff worldwide, it’s salient to consider how
people get these skills. In particular, British universities are an excel‐
lent source of data scientists. It’s hardly necessary to remind readers
that British mathematicians stood at the very dawn of the computer
field. These include not just Alan Turing, but also such people as the
creators of EDSAC, claimed to be “the first practical general purpose
stored program electronic computer”, at Cambridge University in
1949.
2 
| 
Trends Shaping the London Tech Scene

An Education Cornucopia
Yodit Stanton, the head of OpenSensors.io, suggests that more
recently, British universities picked up the need for more data scien‐
tists from England’s strong financial sector, one of the earliest fields
to recognise the critical importance of such skills. Now, she says,
London is one of the best places to get quant skills, making it easier
to build a data-focused business.
London also benefits from the fine universities across Europe, many
of them free to attend. It’s generally easy for educated people from
any country to move to London, because they learn English as part
of their training. Although there is some diversity in the tech field, it
does not reflect the diversity of London itself. Technology staff tend
to come from other parts of Europe, rather than Asia or Africa.
Most of the technologists I talked to thought the Brexit would have
minimal impact on London’s appeal for foreign computer experts,
but some foreigners are seriously reconsidering their choice to live
there. What I am hearing extends beyond dry calculations concern‐
ing the Brexit’s financial impacts on the computer field, and enters
into a kind of grief over the newly revealed, less welcoming atmos‐
phere shown by the vote, particularly as that atmosphere might
affect them and their family members.
Close to Home
Once in London, technologists need to learn new skills. According
to Simon Wardley, a researcher for the Leading Edge Forum in areas
of competition and strategy, many people used to satisfy their need
for ongoing education through the Open University. However,
increases in that institution’s fees have led some job hunters to con‐
sider it prohibitively expensive.
Luckily, educational opportunities of all types have risen to address
the pressing need for computer science education. The Guardian, a
leading newspaper, printed an article listing just a few of these
opportunities, which include many that will be familiar to program‐
mers outside the UK and others that are UK-specific. Some are for
adults, some for children. Some are held online and others face-to-
face.
According to Martijn Verburg—CEO of jClarity, as well as co-leader
of the London Java  Community (LJC) and the London CTO com‐
Highly Skilled Staff—Where Do They Come From? 
| 
3

munity—coding bootcamps train people over periods of up to three
months, showing the depth of learning. More than one of my corre‐
spondents highlighted Skills Matter, which offers meet-ups, formal
lectures, and online videos of earlier lectures. Henry Garner men‐
tioned Makers Academy, a bootcamp-like environment for learning
to become a full stack developer with a focus on Ruby on Rails and
JavaScript. He said that around 30% of its graduates are female, an
important achievement in a coding culture that is still male-
dominated. He also praised Codebar.io, a non-profit that brings in
volunteers to provide accessible learning opportunities via evening
sessions that draw 20 to 50 attendees. And techmums offers work‐
shops in digital technologies to mothers.
Meetups are also well-attended in London, a phenomenon we’ll look
at in the next section.
Pitching In
London tech players eagerly pursue networking opportunities. Each
community holds numerous meetups each month, and there’s also
cross-pollination between communities.
The previous section mentioned the generosity shown by expert
programmers who volunteer for Codebar.io. Other volunteer groups
marshal programmers and data scientists to aid social causes. For
instance, DataKind signs up data scientists to do pro bono work for
charities.
Like many cities, London has a rich meetup culture. Its size allows a
proliferation of events on the same topic. Some of my correspond‐
ents reported that many people attend meetups just for networking
purposes (particularly contractors who change jobs frequently), but
it appears that many meetups involve authentic learning and com‐
munity building. Popular sessions can draw 80 people. Verburg
points out that meetups cross-promote speakers and events, such as
when the co-lead of the Java meetup keynoted at the London PHP
conference a few years ago.
One of the earliest meetups, according to Verburg, was the London
Java Community, which now boasts 5,500 members and claims a
significant impact on the global Java community. In addition to
hosting its own event almost every week, the London Java Commu‐
nity has spun off several related groups, including Groovy, Clojure,
Scala, JBoss, Docklands, CTOs, Graduate Developers, and Front
4 
| 
Trends Shaping the London Tech Scene

End developers. Verburg also links the London Java Community to
the Software Craftsmanship meetup.
Python programmer Nic Tollervey says that a typical month in the
Python community includes a general meetup with traditional talks,
a Coding Dojo (social programming for all levels of experience, now
in its eighth year), a PyLadies chapter, a PyDataLondon gathering
(which regularly attracts 200+ people to meetings), a Django User
Group London (DJUGL) meeting, a Python Project Night (designed
for people to collaborate on “side projects”), and some special inter‐
est groups such as Python in fin-tech meeting in the financial dis‐
trict. Teachers and developers often meet to share experience and
knowledge, demonstrating the dedication that busy people in the
tech community show in volunteering their time.
Lorna Mitchell, a tech lead who is currently a developer advocate at
IBM, reports similarly rich offerings for PHP developers. In addi‐
tion to PHP meetups, there are meetings devoted to Drupal, Word‐
Press, and frameworks built on PHP—something every night of the
week.
Popular meetups can schedule the same presentation in different
parts of town on different evenings, making travel easier for people
in those districts. Several meetups focus on women, such as Django
Girls and the aforementioned PyLadies. Stanton runs a “Women in
Data” meetup with more than 1,000 members.
Setting Up Shop
The startup scene is very fertile in London, and to some extent in
many parts of the UK. But entrepreneurs have to get creative with
funding, because risk-taking is still less common than in the US, and
money doesn’t flow at the same volumes in the UK. Employee reten‐
tion can also be difficult, as well-trained staff constantly seek better
jobs.
People outside Britain tend to be unaware of British successes in the
computer business. For example, people don’t necessarily associate
the well-known chip manufacturer ARM, whose products can be
found throughout the embedded industry, with the UK, despite its
being headquartered in Cambridge (though it was recently bought
by a Japanese company).
Setting Up Shop 
| 
5

Embedded Technology
Much of the glow of London’s technology scene remains hidden
because it serves the many other sectors of the economy, such as the
financial district, rather than spawning standalone computer com‐
panies like Twitter. Simon Wardley points out that local tech compa‐
nies provide online services in real estate, small business lending,
overseas money transfer, and music (Shazam in particular). Food
delivery services, which have websites that accept orders, are also
much more popular here than in the US. Tollervey points out that
Bank of America employs thousands of Python developers in Lon‐
don. And large multinational computer firms have opened London
centres, such as Google (nicely settled in a building painted in outra‐
geous orange and green) and Facebook. (We will examine the strat‐
egy of attracting such large firms in the section on government later
in this report.) UK-based firms tend to get acquired before they get
large on their own; a well-known example being Google’s 2014 pur‐
chase of the artificial intelligence firm DeepMind.
Punctuated Evolution
Several of my correspondents traced the history of tech opportuni‐
ties, mentioning a crisis in employment for programmers during the
dot-com bust of the early 2000s. Technologist Simon Wistow notes
that lots of people who lost their start-ups at that time took refuge in
the media. The BBC in particular used this opportunity to launch
innovative, integrated online sites. (The BBC is insulated from busi‐
ness trends because it is funded by a tax on the owners of television
sets.) James Duncan, who has moved between private and govern‐
ment tech work, says that the BBC innovations, historic though they
may be, stayed locked within the BBC—much of what its tech
employees learned did not enter general practice until they took
other jobs. The Guardian has also, more recently, championed inno‐
vation in media.
According to James Governor, a co-founder of RedMonk who now
runs the co-working space Shoreditch Works, the infrastructure for
a vibrant culture of innovation in computers wasn’t yet present in
the early 2000s. It has come together over time through the growth
of funding, incubators, and other elements of a healthy tech econ‐
omy.
6 
| 
Trends Shaping the London Tech Scene

Duncan sees a key difference between US’s Silicon Valley and Lon‐
don: Silicon Valley produces core technology, such as database
engines, whereas London consumes these technologies and produces
end products, such as the online companies mentioned earlier.
On the start-up end of the business range, London has many prom‐
ising companies breaking new ground in technologies on the early
side of the hype cycle. Tollervey cited blockchains and cryptocurren‐
cies (which the traditional financial sector has funded generously),
green energy marketplaces, 3D printing, and the Internet of Things.
Wardley sees interest and advances across the UK in robotics, virtual
reality, augmented reality, genetic engineering, biomanufacturing,
and artificial intelligence.
Made of Money
The business models and growth strategies for London-based tech
companies are tied to funding opportunities, which most technolo‐
gists find to be less available than in the US. Each stage of funding
has its own challenges and opportunities. There is a widespread
sense that London (for all its financial heft) has fewer venture capi‐
talists than San Francisco or New York. But consulting firm owner
Francesco Cesarini, citing a recent VC forum, calls these impres‐
sions into doubt and claims that VC funds in the UK are only a bit
smaller than what’s available in Silicon Valley. In the UK, however,
sale prices for companies tend to be smaller at exits (sales by found‐
ers) and there are fewer unicorns.
Some correspondents have noticed that old English families are
putting their money into computer companies, so that as Governor
puts it, “investment is getting increasingly posh”. This is nothing
new in British history. Even in the 1600s, landed aristocracy grew
interested in the burgeoning trade, and later they funded the mines
and factories of the Industrial Revolution. There was less of a con‐
tentious gap between the landowning class and the bourgeoisie in
Great Britain than in other parts of Europe.
Many people therefore tap friends and family to start a business;
crowdfunding has also been used. Nuno Job, who moved to London
after a career in San Francisco and runs a consultancy firm, suggests
that the lower intensity of business activity in London makes it eas‐
ier to succeed than in the Silicon Valley.
Setting Up Shop 
| 
7

Some of my correspondents said that technological advances, nota‐
bly the availability of cloud computing, has made starting a
computer-based business much cheaper and easier. Money that used
to go to networking equipment, servers, and expensive software
such as commercial databases can now go toward staff salaries. Gov‐
ernor pointed out that the London tech scene really kicked off about
the time Amazon Web Services become a significant option.
Incubators also play a role. They, too, can take more risks in hosting
start-ups because technology costs have eased. Many incubators
focus on particular areas such as fin-tech (Canary Wharf is an
example) or the Internet of Things. There are also tech fairs around
London for people seeking jobs.
Rising Tides
Yodit Stanton pointed out that many businesses are started by “peo‐
ple who don’t look like Anglos and don’t have Anglo names”, but
who grew up in Britain, attended the same schools, and share British
culture with long-standing English families. As a woman with an
African heritage, she decided to ensure her business was self-
funding from the start, because she “didn’t see many people who
look like me” getting VC funding. Her company has, however, won
some grants, including one from the EU. That channel, of course,
may be closed off when Britain exits the EU.
Tollervey says that some large organisations assemble teams and pay
them to act as start-ups. He says they may launch a new product
without branding it as their own, see how it fares, and then add their
brand if it’s successful.
Stage A funding, where entrepreneurs try to raise a million pounds
or so, can be harder to get in the UK than initial funding, and Stage
B is harder still. At each stage, a bigger investment is called for, and
funders are consequently less eager to take on the risk. This phe‐
nomenon leads London companies to experience a very different
life cycle from that of firms in Silicon Valley. In California, one tends
to get big quickly, sell out quickly, or go bust. In London, and per‐
haps (as suggested by Fran Bennett, chief of Mastodon C) in Europe
generally, companies stay small for a longer period of time. They
choose what Stanton calls “organic growth” over “steroid growth”. I
sense that British investors would not consider a company to be fail‐
ing if it reported 20% growth in revenue over the previous year.
8 
| 
Trends Shaping the London Tech Scene

Slow growth has also been blamed on risk-averse funders. Failing
fast is not viewed positively. Martijn Verburg traces funding con‐
straints to laws and regulations for company directors that are
stricter in the UK than in the US, and that emphasise fiduciary
duties that make failure a significant liability. Duncan says that busi‐
nesses leave core research up to universities and invest in projects
with immediate, recognisable benefits. He says there is no “garage
culture” in the UK, and researchers wouldn’t drop out of university
to found a company as they do in the US. Furthermore, some corre‐
spondents struck a dubious attitude toward university computer sci‐
ence training, saying that graduates emerge unable to produce code
in real-world environments.
On the other hand, several of my correspondents have seen more
willingness to take on risk since the late 2000s. This period also saw
the advent of viable cloud computing, and heightened UK govern‐
ment interest in technology, as mentioned elsewhere in this report.
Borough Markets
As in other cities, certain parts of London get associated with partic‐
ular types of computer technology: the City (a name that still sticks
to the oldest part of London) for fin-tech, Shoreditch for start-ups,
Richmond for larger companies. Bennett locates technology for
media, advertising, and fashion in West London (because those
industries were historically located there).
One central traffic circle is known as the Silicon Roundabout
because of the many start-ups clustering around it. The term began
as a joke that was picked up by newspapers. At one point the gov‐
ernment considered actually building a campus in that roundabout,
but that plan fizzled out. (I consider that just as well, because stand‐
alone campuses tend to shut out innovation rather than spread it.
The government might as well invite entrepreneurs to set up office
in the Tower.)
Also as in other cities, the computer field has to flee from its own
success, which takes the form of rapidly rising rents. Shoreditch, east
of the centre of London, used to be attractive for scrappy new com‐
panies, but has recently gotten too popular. Governor says that
Shoreditch rents have tripled over the past three to four years, and
Verburg’s company actually closed its Shoreditch office. Many of the
experimenters are being driven even farther east. The periphery of
Setting Up Shop 
| 
9

London, especially the part close to Gatwick Airport, also picks up
companies seeking lower rents. The head of a small office in South‐
wark, a popular area on the south bank of the Thames, told me her
office would have to move because their rent just doubled. And as I
walked the streets of downtown London, I saw building cranes
everywhere.
Many co-working spaces are available. Programmer Konrad Malaw‐
ski says that Google has a co-working space that offers learning pro‐
grams. However, Lorna Mitchell believes that most London
technologists commute to their organisations’ offices. She says, “No
one would live in London if they could telecommute, because the
cost of living is so high.”
Finding a Good Fit
My correspondents disagreed on how much churn businesses suffer
from. Nuno Job finds that people move from one start-up to another
every 9 to 12 months, making it hard for companies to get the stabil‐
ity they need. Others believe that turnover is less frenzied than in
San Francisco. Marco Iannone, a data scientist who started the firm
Retechnica in 2012 with a specialisation in text analytics, calls hiring
and retention the hardest part of running a tech business.
Skills are tight in every technical area: all kinds of programming as
well as design. Four to five years of experience are enough to launch
a career as a consultant, which many employees do because it gives
them more control over their locations and hours of work. Thus,
Iannone says, a business has to offer employees and contractors
compelling reasons to work for it. London is still the place to be, he
says, because most firms have large offices there even if they’re not
headquartered there, and meeting face-to-face with Chiefs of Inno‐
vation or other client managers is invaluable.
Data scientists, according to Iannone, get to write their own ticket
because all hiring organisations have to compete for people in that
field with well-funded businesses in finance, advertising, and media.
Some data scientists, however, choose to work in smaller, more
innovative firms in order to gain more control over their projects.
Most firms hiring data scientists don’t have managers who under‐
stand the field themselves, so they assign a high importance to get‐
ting a PhD and attending a famous university. Iannone takes a
different approach, looking for a curiosity about the type of business
10 
| 
Trends Shaping the London Tech Scene

where the data scientist is working. The scientist must learn the
domain she’s working in and how to interact with the business peo‐
ple in the organisation. He has seen that if this doesn’t happen, the
data science and business sides of the organisation stop working
together. Each side ends up feeling that the other doesn’t appreciate
it, and after a couple years the data scientist heads off looking for a
new position.
Simon Wardley notes that the UK lags behind other developed areas
of the world in Internet bandwidth. In some assessments, the his‐
toric British Telecom company still has an effective monopoly over
broadband. Many parts of the UK have upgraded to fiber-to-the-
cabinet, which is less aggressive than fiber-to-the-home and leaves a
lot of slow copper wire along the “last mile”. In other parts of the
UK, community-driven efforts in the North and South provide
high-speed fiber-to-the-home.
Government: We’re Here to Help You
Over the past five or six years, the national government has taken a
strong role in promoting technology. In addition to offering tax breaks
and incentives for companies to open UK offices, they have embarked
on a digital transformation of government itself.
British governments have cultivated the UK’s tech sector with alac‐
rity. In government itself, the Government Digital Service (GDS)
has taken on a number of projects, eschewing the worldwide lazi‐
ness that leads governments to hand projects over to contractors
and provide insufficient technical oversight. Initiatives comparable
to the GDS in other countries include 18F in the US and Red Gealc
(Network of Electronic Government of Latin America and the Car‐
ibbean).
A Slow Unfolding
Around 2010, a number of papers were published that called for
reforming software practices in government. According to Simon
Wistow, the GDS was based on one such paper. They recruited high-
quality candidates from the start-up community and (unlike the
civil service in general) paid them salaries comparable to what they
could get in the private sector. By putting the staff in a high pay
grade, the GDS endowed them with the prestige to get civil servants
throughout the government to do what they asked.
Government: We’re Here to Help You 
| 
11

Some of GDS’s achievements include revamping the Gov.uk website,
setting up a site called G-Cloud that provides cheap computing to
public sector organisations (and subsequently shutting down some
data centres, thus saving money), making it easier for small compa‐
nies to compete for government contracts and providing better sites
for citizens to register cars, pay taxes, apply for passports, register to
vote, and even vote remotely. Along the way, GDS showed the value
of iterating quickly to produce products.
Many GDS staff are restricted to two-year contracts, both to bring in
fresh ideas regularly and to produce alumni of the GDS who can
promote it throughout the computer community. Wistow spoke of a
“revolving door between the tech start-up community and the GDS.”
He also says that technologists in the UK are more drawn to political
activity and civic participation than their Silicon Valley counter‐
parts. The libertarian ethos so widespread in the Silicon Valley is
absent here.
Duncan, who works in the Home Office, is helping them make a
similar transition to doing more work in-house. He says, “We had to
change everything in government to make that work.” Formerly, the
people responsible for technology in government were accountants
and procurement people. So the first change Duncan’s group made
was to put in place senior leadership who understood technology
and what it could do. They also compelled departments to adopt
open standards such as the Open Document Format. Duncan says
that the UK government can claim credit for Microsoft’s decision to
support ODF in its Office suite.
Software reuse, which would be an obvious benefit of government
development efforts, was also hard to promote. Duncan says that,
traditionally, government agencies didn’t even know what software
they had. They don’t reuse software even if two departments have
contracts with the same vendor. Still, there is progress in doing soft‐
ware in-house. Duncan says that despite low pay in most govern‐
ment offices, “many of the smartest and hardest-working people I
know are in the civil service.”
London is also exploring smart city technologies. Bennett’s com‐
pany, Mastodon C, is prototyping tools that let them predict the rip‐
ple effects of a large housing project or of decreased funding in
some area. A special issue of Centre for London essays on technol‐
ogy includes an article on open data and visualisations for the city.
12 
| 
Trends Shaping the London Tech Scene

In addition to serving as a role model, the UK government pro‐
motes technology through tax breaks. The UK makes it lucrative to
sell a company. The capital gains tax was recently reduced. Qualify‐
ing types of R&D also get tax breaks, and the Seed Enterprise Invest‐
ment Scheme (SEIS) allows investors who invest up to £100,000 to
claim 50% tax relief.
Direct investment by government is less common, but Tech City UK
includes a range of stimuli. According to Governor, these efforts
succeeded in London—particularly in attracting large companies
such as Google—but didn’t work in the North, despite efforts by a
Tory administration to expand Tech City there (probably hoping to
win the hearts of the working-class Labour voters from smokestack
industries). Wardley believes that a technology push by the
Conservative-Liberal coalition elected in 2010 helped London a
great deal.
Life in London
Like many of the world’s leading cities, London suffers from a high
cost of living and difficulties with housing. Yet to many, it is the best—
or even the only—place to build a computer career and a business.
Technology plays a role in the London arts scene just as it does in
other fields. Anthony Mann, a programmer who worked in both
music software and digital art, says that projects in computer-
generated art are widespread. Hack spaces feature groups around
sound and audio-visual presentations. Interactive installations use
sensors to reflect viewers’ moods and behavior. Galleries display
these projects, and sometimes the press reviews them. Yet they
maintain a certain distance from the technologically driven art: for
instance, such displays are advertised as “digital art” instead of just
“art”, in the same way that music by female composers used to be
programmed in special concerts of “women’s music”. It’s also hard to
make money doing digital art.
Mainstreaming
Exhibits in the Victoria & Albert Museum show some of the high-
tech art going on in London. A canopy called Elytra is being created
incrementally in the museum’s garden by a robot, based on the daily
movements of visitors to the museum, as recorded by sensors. 3D-
printed furniture is also part of the permanent exhibit.
Life in London 
| 
13

Figure 1-2. In the shadow of a canopy designed and built by a robot at
the Victoria & Albert Museum
Figure 1-3. Make beautiful 3D-printed furniture and it may end up in
the Victoria & Albert Museum’s permanent collection
Who Will Pay the Rent?
Everyone I talked to complained about the stresses of London, nota‐
bly high costs and long commutes. The quality of life is high, and
everyone appreciates such British benefits as the National Health
Service and parental leave. But European and British salaries are
14 
| 
Trends Shaping the London Tech Scene

lower than in the US, and the city is oriented around the stock trad‐
ers, not the middle class. The London tube cars are replete with ads
one finds in places with superheated economies: ads for services that
come to your home and do everything from clean to give you a mas‐
sage. These should be accompanied by a warning: “Mind the income
gap.”
One study found that London is much cheaper to live in than New
York, while another rated them about the same. Either way, London
has to be one of the world’s most costly places to live. Duncan goes
so far as to say that it’s “almost impossible” to survive as a tech per‐
son in London.
Typical train commutes are 50 minutes one way, and one-way com‐
mutes of two hours or more have been reported. But Fran Bennett
says that some companies are experimenting with flexible hours to
make family life easier.
Owning a home in London is beyond most people’s means. Berlin
has been cited as a city of comparable appeal with a much easier real
estate market.
Yet people still flock to London. Duncan cites “a sense that the rest
of the UK is irrelevant”. Start-up scenes do exist in other cities—
including Birmingham, Brighton, Manchester, and towns along the
M4 highway—but they’re nowhere near as robust as London’s.
London’s diversity, of which residents are proud, isn’t likely to
diminish. On a recent visit, as I listened to people on streets and
buses, I heard foreign languages as often as English.
Foggy Predictions
No one can predict what the Brexit will do to London’s tech scene.
Many speculate that fewer technologists will move there and that a
financial downturn will make success harder. Lorries (funded by
some German entity) are going around with loudspeakers encourag‐
ing people to move to Berlin. Governor says, “The UK used to be the
bridge to the continent, but now it needs a bridge to the continent.”
In contrast to that prevailing pessimism, Wardley stresses that the
UK remains especially friendly to technology. Its government has
often tangled with the European Commission to insist on royalty-
free licensing in open standards (a major plank of the free and open
source software movement), to oppose unwarranted regulations that
Life in London 
| 
15

hamper Internet services, and to slow down attempts at premature
standardisation in emerging markets. The nation still benefits from
a history of global trade, democracy, immigration, and multicultur‐
alism that existed long before the political institution that is the
European Union.
Certainly, while the EU remains a huge market, its own economies
aren’t exactly dynamos at the moment (although the irony is not lost
on me that the Brexit vote played some role in the most recent
downturn).
At a far-ranging panel on technology held right after the Brexit vote,
entrepreneurs and venture capitalists showed their stiff upper lips
and tried to take a “can do” attitude. (It’s unfortunate that, in the
recording of that panel discussion, many of the speakers cannot be
heard because of problems with the sound recording.) They agreed
that leaving the EU was bad for business, but urged technologists to
look for opportunities just as in any downturn.
London is unlikely to split from the UK (unless climate change
brings the Channel right up to the banks of the Thames), but the
city will continue to hold a central place in the hearts of British and
foreign computer professionals, as it does the world as a whole.
16 
| 
Trends Shaping the London Tech Scene

About the Author
Andy Oram is an editor at O’Reilly Media. An employee of the
company since 1992, Andy currently specializes in programming
topics. His work for O’Reilly includes the first books ever published
commercially in the United States on Linux, and the 2001 title Peer-
to-Peer.

