DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.

NONRESIDENT
TRAINING
COURSE

February 1989
Mathematics,
Trigonometry
NAVEDTRA 14140


DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
Although the words “he,” “him,” and
“his” are used sparingly in this course to
enhance
communication,
they
are
not
intended to be gender driven or to affront or
discriminate against anyone.

i
PREFACE
By enrolling in this self-study course, you have demonstrated a desire to improve yourself and the Navy.
Remember, however, this self-study course is only one part of the total Navy training program. Practical
experience, schools, selected reading, and your desire to succeed are also necessary to successfully round
out a fully meaningful training program.
COURSE OVERVIEW: The objective of this course is to enable the student to:
a.
Apply logarithms to the solution of problems encountered in mathematics and the sciences.
b.
Apply trigonometric techniques as tools in the analysis of mathematical, physical, and scientific
problems.
THE COURSE: This self-study course is organized into subject matter areas, each containing learning
objectives to help you determine what you should learn along with text and illustrations to help you
understand the information.
The subject matter reflects day-to-day requirements and experiences of
personnel in the rating or skill area. It also reflects guidance provided by Enlisted Community Managers
(ECMs) and other senior personnel, technical references, instructions, etc., and either the occupational or
naval standards, which are listed in the Manual of Navy Enlisted Manpower Personnel Classifications
and Occupational Standards, NAVPERS 18068.
THE QUESTIONS: The questions that appear in this course are designed to help you understand the
material in the text.
VALUE:
In completing this course, you will improve your military and professional knowledge.
Importantly, it can also help you study for the Navy-wide advancement in rate examination. If you are
studying and discover a reference in the text to another publication for further information, look it up.
1989 Edition
Published by
NAVAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
AND TECHNOLOGY CENTER
NAVSUP Logistics Tracking Number
0504-LP-026-7950

ii
Sailor’s Creed
“I am a United States Sailor.
I will support and defend the
Constitution of the United States of
America and I will obey the orders
of those appointed over me.
I represent the fighting spirit of the
Navy and those who have gone
before me to defend freedom and
democracy around the world.
I proudly serve my country’s Navy
combat team with honor, courage
and commitment.
I am committed to excellence and
the fair treatment of all.”

iii

 
iv
INSTRUCTIONS FOR TAKING THE COURSE 
ASSIGNMENTS
The text pages that you are to study are listed at 
the beginning of each assignment. Study these 
pages carefully before attempting to answer the 
questions. Pay close attention to tables and 
illustrations and read the learning objectives. 
The learning objectives state what you should be 
able to do after studying the material. Answering 
the questions correctly helps you accomplish the 
objectives. 
SELECTING YOUR ANSWERS 
Read each question carefully, then select the 
BEST answer. You may refer freely to the text. 
The answers must be the result of your own 
work and decisions. You are prohibited from 
referring to or copying the answers of others and 
from giving answers to anyone else taking the 
course.
SUBMITTING YOUR ASSIGNMENTS 
To have your assignments graded, you must be 
enrolled in the course with the Nonresident 
Training Course Administration Branch at the 
Naval Education and Training Professional 
Development 
and 
Technology 
Center 
(NETPDTC). Following enrollment, there are 
two ways of having your assignments graded:  
(1) use the Internet to submit your assignments 
as you complete them, or (2) send all the 
assignments at one time by mail to NETPDTC. 
Grading on the Internet:  Advantages to 
Internet grading are:  
•  you may submit your answers as soon as 
you complete an assignment, and 
•  you get your results faster; usually by the 
next working day (approximately 24 hours).  
In addition to receiving grade results for each 
assignment, you will receive course completion 
confirmation once you have completed all the 
assignments. 
To 
submit 
your 
assignment 
answers via the Internet, go to: 
http://courses.cnet.navy.mil
Grading by Mail: When you submit answer 
sheets by mail, send all of your assignments at 
one time. Do NOT submit individual answer 
sheets for grading. Mail all of your assignments 
in an envelope, which you either provide 
yourself or obtain from your nearest Educational 
Services Officer (ESO). Submit answer sheets 
to:
COMMANDING OFFICER 
NETPDTC N331 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
PENSACOLA FL 32559-5000 
Answer Sheets: All courses include one 
“scannable” answer sheet for each assignment. 
These answer sheets are preprinted with your 
SSN, name, assignment number, and course 
number. Explanations for completing the answer 
sheets are on the answer sheet. 
Do not use answer sheet reproductions:  Use 
only the original answer sheets that we 
provide—reproductions will not work with our 
scanning equipment and cannot be processed.  
Follow the instructions for marking your 
answers on the answer sheet. Be sure that blocks 
1, 2, and 3 are filled in correctly. This 
information is necessary for your course to be 
properly processed and for you to receive credit 
for your work. 
COMPLETION TIME
Courses must be completed within 12 months 
from the date of enrollment. This includes time 
required to resubmit failed assignments. 

v
PASS/FAIL ASSIGNMENT PROCEDURES
If your overall course score is 3.2 or higher, you 
will pass the course and will not be required to 
resubmit assignments. Once your assignments 
have been graded you will receive course 
completion confirmation. 
If you receive less than a 3.2 on any assignment 
and your overall course score is below 3.2, you 
will be given the opportunity to resubmit failed 
assignments. 
You 
may 
resubmit 
failed 
assignments only once.  Internet students will 
receive notification when they have failed an 
assignment--they may then resubmit failed 
assignments on the web site. Internet students 
may 
view 
and 
print 
results 
for 
failed 
assignments from the web site. Students who 
submit by mail will receive a failing result letter 
and a new answer sheet for resubmission of each 
failed assignment. 
COMPLETION CONFIRMATION
After successfully completing this course, you 
will receive a letter of completion. 
ERRATA
Errata are used to correct minor errors or delete 
obsolete information in a course.  Errata may 
also be used to provide instructions to the 
student.  If a course has an errata, it will be 
included as the first page(s) after the front cover. 
Errata for all courses can be accessed and 
viewed/downloaded at: 
http://www.advancement.cnet.navy.mil
STUDENT FEEDBACK QUESTIONS 
We value your suggestions, questions, and 
criticisms on our courses. If you would like to 
communicate with us regarding this course, we 
encourage you, if possible, to use e-mail. If you 
write or fax, please use a copy of the Student 
Comment form that follows this page. 
For subject matter questions:  
E-mail: 
n3222.products@cnet.navy.mil 
Phone: 
Comm:  (850) 452-1001, Ext. 1520 
 
 
or 1518 
 
DSN:  922-1001, Ext. 1520 or 1518 
 
FAX:  (850) 452-1694 
 
(Do not fax answer sheets.) 
Address: COMMANDING OFFICER 
 
NETPDTC N3222 
 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
 
PENSACOLA FL 32509-5237 
For 
enrollment, 
shipping, 
grading, 
or 
completion letter questions
E-mail: 
fleetservices@cnet.navy.mil 
Phone: 
Toll Free:  877-264-8583 
 
 
Comm:  (850) 452-1511/1181/1859 
 
DSN:  922-1511/1181/1859 
 
FAX:  (850) 452-1370 
 
(Do not fax answer sheets.) 
Address: COMMANDING OFFICER 
 
NETPDTC N331 
 
6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD 
 
PENSACOLA FL 32559-5000 
NAVAL RESERVE RETIREMENT CREDIT 
If you are a member of the Naval Reserve, you 
may earn retirement points for successfully 
completing this course, if authorized under 
current directives governing retirement of Naval
Reserve personnel. For Naval Reserve retire-
ment, this course is evaluated at 11 points. 
(Refer to Administrative Procedures for Naval
Reservists on Inactive Duty, BUPERSINST
1001.39, for more information about retirement
points.)


 
vii
Student Comments
Course Title: 
Mathematics, Trigonometry
 
 
 
 
NAVEDTRA:  
14140
Date:   
We need some information about you:
Rate/Rank and Name: 
 
SSN: 
 
Command/Unit 
 
 
 
 
Street Address: 
 
City: 
 
State/FPO: 
 
Zip 
 
Your comments, suggestions, etc.:
Privacy Act Statement:  Under authority of Title 5, USC 301, information regarding your military status is 
requested in processing your comments and in preparing a reply.  This information will not be divulged without 
written authorization to anyone other than those within DOD for official use in determining performance. 
NETPDTC 1550/41 (Rev 4-00 























































































































































































































AII-2




AII-6


AII-8



















Assignment Questions
Information: The text pages that you are to study are
provided at the beginning of the assignment questions.
























