Understanding 
the Mind
Subtopic
Mind-Body 
Philosophy
Course Guidebook
Philosophy 
& Intellectual History
Topic
Professor Patrick Grim
Stony Brook University

PUBLISHED BY:
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westfields Boulevard, Suite 500
Chantilly, Virginia 20151-2299
Phone: 1-800-832-2412
Fax: 703-378-3819
www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2017
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of
The Teaching Company.

PATRICK GRIM
I
Patrick 
Grim
B.Phil., Ph.D.
Distinguished Teaching Professor of Philosophy Emeritus
Stony Brook University
P
atrick Grim is the Distinguished Teaching Professor of Philosophy Emeritus 
at Stony Brook University. Having graduated with highest honors in both 
Anthropology and Philosophy from the University of California, Santa Cruz, 
Professor Grim was named a Fulbright Fellow to the University of St. Andrews, 
Scotland, from which he received his B.Phil. He received his Ph.D. from Boston 
University with a dissertation on ethical relativism and spent a year as an Andrew 
W. Mellon Faculty Fellow at Washington University. 
Professor Grim has received the president’s and chancellor’s awards for 
excellence in teaching at Stony Brook University. He was named Marshall M. 
Weinberg Distinguished Visiting Professor at the University of Michigan in 2006 
and visiting fellow at the Center for Philosophy of Science at the University of 
Pittsburgh in 2007. He has also been a frequent visiting scholar and professor at 
the Center for the Study of Complex Systems at the University of Michigan. 

II
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Professor Grim has published extensively in computational modeling and on such 
topics as theoretical biology, linguistics, decision theory, and artificial intelligence. 
His work spans ethics; philosophical logic; game theory; contemporary metaphysics; 
and philosophy of science, law, mind, language, and religion.
Professor Grim is the author of The Incomplete Universe: Totality, Knowledge, 
and Truth and the coauthor of The Philosophical Computer: Exploratory Essays in 
Philosophical Computer Modeling (with Gary Mar and Paul St. Denis); Beyond Sets: 
A Venture in Collection-Theoretic Revisionism (with Nicholas Rescher); and Reflexivity: 
From Paradox to Consciousness (also with Nicholas Rescher). He is the editor of 
Mind and Consciousness: 5 Questions and Philosophy of Science and the Occult as well 
as a founding coeditor of more than 30 volumes of The Philosopher’s Annual, an 
anthology of the best articles published in philosophy each year.
Professor Grim has taught three other Great Courses: The Philosopher’s Toolkit: How 
to Be the Most Rational Person in Any Room; Philosophy of Mind: Brains, Consciousness, 
and Thinking Machines; and Questions of Value. ■

III
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of 
Contents
Introduction
Professor Biography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  i
Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .vi
Course Scope. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Lecture Guides
Lecture 1
Mind, Body, and Questions of Consciousness . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Lecture 2 
Mind and Body in Greek Philosophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Lecture 3
Eastern Perspectives on Mind and Body . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Lecture 4
Using the Body to Shape the Mind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
IV
Lecture 5 
History of the Soul . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Lecture 6
How Descartes Divided Mental from Physical. . . . . . . . . . . 57
Lecture 7
Mistakes about Our Own Consciousnesses. . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Lecture 8
Strange Cases of Consciousness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Lecture 9
Altered States of Consciousness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Lecture 10
Memory, Mind, and Brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Lecture 11
Self-Consciousness and the Self . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Lecture 12 
Rival Psychologies of the Mind . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   119
Lecture 13
The Enigma of Free Will . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Lecture 14
Emotions: Where Mind and Body Meet . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  139
Lecture 15
Could a Machine Be Conscious? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
Lecture 16
Computational Approaches to the Mind. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  159

V
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Lecture 17 
A Guided Tour of the Brain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  171
Lecture 18
Thinking Body and Extended Mind. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  181
Lecture 19
Francis Crick and Binding in the Brain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  191
Lecture 20
Clues on Consciousness from Anesthesiology . . . . . . . . . . 201
Lecture 21
Of Mind, Materialism, and Zombies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
Lecture 22
Thought Experiments against Materialism . . . . . . . . . . . . 221
Lecture 23
Consciousness and the Explanatory Gap. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231
Lecture 24
A Philosophical Science of Consciousness? . . . . . . . . . . . .  241
References
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
Image Credits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271

vi
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY 
Acknowledgments
Professor Grim is grateful to his undergraduates studying philosophy of mind for 
research input, and to his graduate students in his seminar on the brain and mind 
for extended discussion.
He is extremely grateful to L. Theresa Watkins, his collaborator in all things, 
for good ideas, for extensive editing of both form and content, and for loving 
encouragement throughout. 

1
COURSE SCOPE
Mind-Body 
Philosophy
H
ow can three and a half pounds of gray matter in our skulls produce the 
world of subjective experience? What is the relation between minds and 
bodies—between the mental and the physical? How does the brain produce 
the phenomena of consciousness in memory, emotion, perception, altered states, 
and our sense of ourselves? Questions of bodies and minds have been topics of 
intense concentration through the history of philosophy. We can now approach 
those questions with new techniques and new findings in the brain sciences. In this 
course, we’ll draw on both the resources of philosophical history and contemporary 
psychology and neuroscience in order to explore the multifaceted relationships 
between minds and bodies—between consciousness and the brain.
We’ll trace philosophical approaches to bodies and minds from the ancient 
Greeks through the Middle Ages, the Enlightenment, and Renaissance to the 
birth of psychology and 20th-century debates. Materialism, idealism, dualism, 
and a range of other positions are examined in contemporary forms as well as 
historical contexts. Lectures include contributions from the Presocratics, Plato, 
Aristotle, Augustine, Aquinas, Descartes, Leibniz, Spinoza, Hobbes, Locke, 
Hume, Kant, Sigmund Freud, William James, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and Alan  
M. Turing, always with an eye to their importance from the perspective of the  
21st century. Hinduism, Buddhism, meditation, and yoga are included as 
alternative approaches from the East, together with a history of the soul from the 
Orphic mysteries through the Judeo-Christian tradition. 

2
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
How exactly does the brain produce the phenomena of consciousness? Drawing on 
today’s neurosciences, we will explore the many ways that memory works; 
the nature of emotion, self-consciousness, and our sense of self; the routes of 
perception, dreams, hallucinations; and questions of free will. The course includes a 
tour of the brain through strange forms of consciousness: blindsight, face blindness, 
motion blindness, Tourette’s, left-side neglect, split brains, locked-in syndrome, 
loss of ability to remember, and inability to forget. 
Experiments on using the body to shape the mind, perception, consciousness, 
imagination, and memory are included for the student to perform during lectures. 
Scientific work on neural correlates of consciousness forms a major theme, drawing 
on new technologies for brain imaging, the binding theories of Francis Crick, 
computational theories of mind, and breakthroughs in anesthesiology. 
Are the core questions scientific questions or philosophical ones? 
Thought experiments have been called the melodies of philosophy, and are 
used throughout the lectures to emphasize perennial challenges to reductive 
materialism and functionalism. We’ll also take a full tour of the lively 
philosophical debates now going on between monism, dualism, materialism, and 
its alternatives in the work of David Chalmers, Daniel Dennett, John Searle, 
Frank Jackson, and many others.
The course draws in depth on contemporary science and contemporary 
philosophy of mind. The final lecture outlines an approach to understanding 
body and mind through a combination of philosophy and science: a philosophical 
science of consciousness.

3

4
Mind-Body Philosophy

Lecture 1
Mind, Body, and 
Questions of 
Consciousness

6
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
A 
major question regarding bodies and minds is this: How do our physical 
brains produce our subjective experience? Inside a human skull is about 
three pounds of gray matter. It has distinct layers and an unfathomably 
complex tangle of specialized cells. But in the end, it’s just three pounds of matter. 
Yet, we daily encounter the phenomena of our subjective experience: the way 
the sun looks, the sound of the birds, and the smell of the coffee. How can three 
pounds of matter produce not merely the objective phenomena of electro-chemical 
impulses across synapses but also the subjective phenomena of sights, sounds, touch, 
and smells? The standard name for that central question is the mind-body problem, 
and we’ll be exploring it throughout this course. 
Science and Philosophy
 
●
Today’s brain scientists are relative newcomers to the mind-body problem. 
Only over the last few decades have we started to have tools adequate to track 
experimentally the organizational structure of the brain. What we’ve learned 
from empirical research over even that short period is breathtaking. But we 
still have far to go. 
 
●
Philosophers, on the other hand, have been dealing with the central issues 
for centuries. Their tools have been different: the abstract tools of logic and 
philosophical argument. 

7
LECTURE 1MIND, BODY, AND QUESTIONS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
 
●
Brain scientists focus on the empirical details as subjective experience emerges 
from a physical substrate. Philosophers focus on how such a thing is even 
logically possible. 
The Field
 
●
When starting a journey, it often helps to have a rough map of the territory. 
A strategy from work by the philosopher John Haugeland is useful here: 
envisioning the territory as a baseball field. 
 
●
In the ballpark of mind-body ideas, materialists are in right field. For them, 
the only world we have is a physical world. Everything real must therefore be a 
part of that world. To the extent that subjective phenomena are real, they must 
ultimately be physical. 
 
●
The idealists are in left field. They say the only experience of the world we 
have is subjective experience. To the extent that anything objective is real, 
it must somehow be a construct from the subjective. Idealists are few and far 
between these days. 
 
●
The dualists play center field. For them, the world is not purely physical, 
as the materialists would have it. The world is not essentially subjective, as the 
idealists would have it. The world is composed of two different realms, neither 
of which can be denied: mind and body, objective and subjective. The dualists 
try to cover both fields.
 
●
Today, nearly everyone in the research domain—philosophers and scientists 
alike—play toward the right. Nearly all researchers are materialists of 
one form or another. We have just one universe, a physical universe. 
The problem is to figure out how things that aren’t objective—subjective 
touch sensations, tastes, and smells—can be part of that materialistic picture.
 
●
Outfielders can play deep or shallow, and that is part of the baseball field  
image too. Deep in right field are the reductive materialists. As they see it, 
because the universe is ultimately the universe of physics, everything—both  
people and their subjective lives—must reduce to elements of physics. 

8
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Not all materialists play deep. Some suggest that reality must be understood 
on different levels. Maybe there are explanations appropriate at the level of 
psychology that don’t deny the ultimately physical character of the universe, 
but that don’t reduce to physics, either. 
 
●
Regarding the idealists in left field: Some play deep and some play shallow. 
Deep in left field are those who think that there is no physical universe. 
An objectively real world is an illusion. Somehow the whole thing is made 
of subjectivity. 
 
●
As we move closer in, we change the question slightly: Instead of asking, 
“Is the universe merely a subjective construct?” we ask, “To what extent is the 
world as we know it a subjective construct rather than an objective reality?” 
 
●
The perennial problem for right-field materialism is how subjective experience 
can fit in a purely material world. The perennial problem for deep-left-field 
idealism is how you can start with a subjectivity that is entirely us and arrive at 
an objective something independent of us. In center field, dualism attempts to 
catch the best of both worlds. 
 
●
Playing shallow or deep in center field means taking one or another approach 
to the problem of interaction. Toward the infield are those who ultimately 
think the two realms are really one, seen perhaps from two sides. Farther back 
you find those who think there are two essentially different realms but that 
there is some point at which they make contact.
 
●
Deep in center field are those who think, if there is any contact at all, it is a 
contact that will be conceptually impossible for us to see. These contemporary 
philosophers, called mysterians, think that the connection between the 
subjective and the objective will forever remain a mystery. 
 
●
If that baseball field map covers the conceptual possibilities, the truth must lie 
in there somewhere. Somewhere in left, right, or center field, deep or shallow, 
is the sweet spot that is the truth about brains and minds. But how do we 
find it?

9
LECTURE 1MIND, BODY, AND QUESTIONS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Losing Limbs
 
●
Today’s brain scientists are relative newcomers to the mind-body problem. 
But they’ve become major players. It’s safe to say that we have learned more 
about the brain in the last 30 years than in the previous 3,000. It may be time 
to reshape our view of mind and body in light of new information.
 
●
One example: When an arm or leg is lost, a person may continue to “feel” the 
missing arm or leg. The British war hero Lord Horatio Nelson, whose right 
arm was amputated after he took a musket ball in 1781, was a classic case. 
He reported feeling his missing right hand as clenching uncontrollably, 
the fingernails digging painfully into the palm. 
 
●
The term “phantom limb” was coined in the context of massive numbers of 
amputations in the carnage of the American Civil War, when the phenomenon 
became all too familiar. 
 
●
It’s interesting to note that Nelson himself took his experience with a phantom 
limb as evidence for the existence of a sentient soul existing beyond death. 
If the sensations of an arm can exist when it is no longer there, why not the 
sensations of an entire body?
 
●
Of course, that’s not the scientific explanation for the phantom 
limb phenomenon. For decades, the primary theory was that what the 
person was feeling was stimulation in the severed nerve ends, known as 
peripheral neuromas. 
 
●
There is a newer and very different theory of phantom limbs, which turns 
crucially on brain anatomy. A canyon in the brain, the central sulcus, 
separates the frontal lobe in front of it from the parietal lobe behind it. 
Along the front side of it is the primary motor cortex, from which signals 
output to the muscles of the body. Along the rear of the central sulcus is 
the somatosensory cortex, in which sensations from the body are processed. 

10
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Sensations from particular areas of your body are processed in very specific 
areas of the somatosensory cortex. The somatosensory body map can 
reorganize when there are parts of the body from which stimulation is no 
longer received. 
 
●
The neuroscientist V. S. Ramachandran wondered whether the impulses 
interpreted as coming from a phantom hand were really coming from its 
severed nerves. Maybe they arose from other parts of the body that had taken 
over the areas of the somatosensory cortex previously associated with the hand. 
 
●
Ramachandran tested his theory with a young man who had lost an arm in 
an automobile accident. The subject said he could still feel the missing hand. 
Ramachandran stimulated other parts of the young man’s body to see what 
produced a sensation in the phantom hand. 
 
●
He was able to map the phantom hand on two other body areas: the young 
man’s face and his shoulder. Stimulation of those areas was read as sensation 
from the missing hand. 
 
●
If that Ramachandran’s idea was right, some sensory input that will keep the 
motor impulse under control would be required. Ramachandran developed 
a technique to supply visual input using a simple mirror box. The amputee’s 
remaining arm goes in a box, which creates a mirror image where the 
phantom arm should be. Unclenching the good arm looks like relaxing 
the phantom arm. 
 
●
The result of the therapy is that the phantom arm can feel that it has relaxed. 
Thirty-five years after an accident that left her with a phantom hand, 
a 57-year old woman’s phantom hand pain had become unendurable. 
But 30-minute sessions with a mirror box over two weeks were sufficient to 
relieve that pain.
 
●
It seems that the mind can create the body. The lesson of phantom limbs is that 
it can create a part of the body that isn’t there at all. 

11
LECTURE 1MIND, BODY, AND QUESTIONS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Gaining Limbs
●
The first part of the story of phantom limbs is the story of limbs lost.
The second part is about limbs gained.
●
Wouldn’t it be wonderful if we could replace lost limbs with mechanical
replacements that functioned like real limbs? DARPA—the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency—continues to spend billions on research with
that goal.
●
Robotic arms have been developed with 10 to 17 miniature motors, enabling
near-natural replication of arm and hand movements. A further goal is to
take the artificiality out of artificial replacements: to develop a replacement
arm that can be used without thinking in the same way you use your arm
without thinking.
In the first 10 years of  the 21st century, there were nearly 6,000 amputations in 
the U.S. Armed Forces. Developing replacement limbs is a huge need.

12
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Brain-computer interfaces represent a major step toward that goal. A crucial 
early achievement was muscle reinnervation, which routes severed nerves at 
the site of an amputation to some living muscle that is still intact. 
 
●
Motor impulses along the original nerves then produce muscle contractions 
somewhere else. In arm replacements, the nerves are often routed to the 
pectoral muscles. We can build a device that reads those muscle contractions 
and produces computer-controlled movements in a robotic arm. 
 
●
This process requires extensive training. But the amazing takeaway is that the 
brain can learn to control a prosthetic limb as its own. The mind can build a 
new body.
 
●
Brain-computer interface has been used in still more extreme cases. 
Quadriplegia involves paralysis of all the limbs and torso. It is often caused by 
spinal injury in an accident, but can also be the result of multiple sclerosis or 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease). 
 
●
In both quadriplegia and ALS, the brain is still fully functional. People can 
still imagine moving their hands or legs. The goal is therefore to 
use microelectrode arrays planted directly into the skull to record 
electrical activity. That electrical activity is translated through complex 
algorithms in the computer interface to guide an artificial limb. 
●
Developmental obstacles are daunting, but all evidence is that the mind 
can learn to use an artificial body even in cases as extreme as these. 
DARPA reports that an individual can learn to produce a few movements 
of a robotic limb within two weeks and many more within five. 
 
●
Very recently, the technique has been extended even further. Brain-controlled 
electrical impulses have been sent to a quadriplegic’s own arm and hand, 
activating their own muscles with electrical impulses. Bypassing the damaged 
neural pathway with a very indirect route, the mind has found its own 
body again. 

13
LECTURE 1MIND, BODY, AND QUESTIONS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Suggested Reading
Gutenplan, ed., A Companion to the Philosophy of Mind.
Ramachandran and Blakeslee, Phantoms in the Brain. 
Questions to Consider
1 
If the baseball diamond is a map of all conceptual possibilities, a fly ball hit just 
right would land on the truth. If you had to make a guess right now, where do 
you think it would land? What position would you play?
2 
This lecture emphasized ways in which a mind can create a body. 
Can interaction go in the other direction as well? Are there cases in your 
experience in which the body shaped the mind?

14
Mind-Body Philosophy
The Greek 
philosopher 
Aristotle

Lecture 2 
Mind and Body in 
Greek Philosophy

16
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
T
his lecture discusses some of the earliest philosophical influences on thinking 
about mind and body. These early influences continue to resonate with 
contemporary work—both philosophical and scientific. The previous lecture 
laid out major philosophical positions on mind and body using the metaphor of a 
baseball field. Early forms of many of those positions can be found in ancient Greek 
philosophy, which this lecture focuses on. Our philosophical legacy from the 
Greeks includes materialism, dualism, and another force called functionalism.
The Beginning
 
●
The origins of what we think of as Greek philosophy lie not in Greece but in 
what was known as Ionia, on the west coast of present-day Turkey. In order to 
find the city of origin for Western philosophy, you have to travel 200 miles east 
of Athens, across the Aegean sea, to the city of Miletus. Ionia was the cradle of 
Greek philosophy, and Miletus was the cradle of Ionian thought. 
 
●
The watershed figure in ancient philosophy is Socrates. Just as our traditional 
dating system runs B.C. and A.D., Greek philosophy is divided into the period 
before Socrates and after. Starting with the Ionians, the earliest philosophers 
we’re talking about are those before Socrates, the Presocratics.
The famous Greek philosopher Plato

17
LECTURE 2MIND AND BODY IN GREEK PHILOSOPHY
 
●
The Presocratics were materialists. For them, the universe was fundamentally 
a material universe. With a few qualifications, Greek philosophy begins by 
exploring various forms of materialism. 
 
●
The central question for the Presocratics was the ultimate nature of the 
cosmos. The Ionians were cosmologists, asking: What is the world made of? 
They wanted a unified answer: a single substance of which everything else 
is composed. 
 
●
Histories of Western philosophy typically start with Thales of Miletus, writing 
around 600 B.C. He believed the cosmos was made of water. The Presocratics 
that followed Thales picked a different substance but offered a similarly 
materialistic cosmology. 
 
●
Around 550 B.C., Anaximenes proposed that air was the fundamental 
substance. In Heraclitus, about 500 B.C., it was fire. Whichever matter is 
chosen as ultimate, we still have a firmly materialistic universe. 
 
●
Around 400 B.C., the atomists—Leucippus and Democritus—came closer 
to the world that is reflected in contemporary science. Leucippus and 
Democritus envisaged the cosmos as composed of extremely small particles 
moving randomly in a void, much as we think of atoms. 
 
●
Another angle came from the Pythagoreans, who flourished from the time 
of Pythagoras himself in the 500s B.C. through intellectual descendants into 
the 300s. The Pythagoreans rejected a cosmos made of water, air, fire, or any 
other material thing. For them, the cosmos is made of numbers. 
 
●
Also apparent in Presocratic philosophy are elements of panpsychism— 
a view that reappears in contemporary philosophy. Panpsychists insist that 
the world is made of one basic kind of stuff, but speculate that basic stuff 
isn’t purely physical. 
 
●
In sum, the major message of the Presocratics is materialism. But you can also 
find mentions of the transmigration of souls and hints of panpsychism

18
Mind-Body Philosophy
The Greek 
philosopher 
Socrates

19
LECTURE 2MIND AND BODY IN GREEK PHILOSOPHY
Socrates and Plato
 
●
All Greek philosophy is dated before or after the watershed figure of Socrates, 
who lived from about 470 to 400 B.C. Socrates was a citizen of Athens, to the 
extent that it’s right to think of Greek philosophy in terms of Athens. 
 
●
Given his importance, it may come as a surprise that we have no writings 
of Socrates. The simple reason is that Socrates himself wrote nothing;  
he believed the written word erodes memory. What we know comes from the 
character of Socrates in the plays written by his student Plato between 400 
and 350 B.C. These were the dialogues. 
 
●
If the Presocratics give us materialism, Plato gives us dualism. The universe 
is composed of not one realm but two: both the physical realm and a 
second realm. That second realm is the realm of both ideas and of the soul. 
 
●
Plato’s clearest outline of dualism is in the Phaedo. In that work, Socrates has 
been found guilty of impiety and corrupting the youth. He is sentenced to 
death by drinking hemlock. Socrates speaks of the soul as trapped in the body, 
liberated to fuller wisdom after death. 
 
●
For Plato, the real world is the world of ideas. In that regard, he is something 
of an idealist. Over the door to Plato’s Academy was a sign that read “Let no-
one ignorant of geometry enter here.” 
 
●
A triangle drawn on a blackboard has with imperfect angles and bending lines.
Geometry is about the ideal triangle represented by that imperfect sketch. 
The ideal triangle is defined in terms of three perfect angles and three 
perfect lines. 
 
●
That ideal triangle is the real one for Plato. The perfect triangle is too good 
for this world. It exists only in the realm of forms, of ideas. For Plato, 
what goes for triangles goes for all concepts: Any act of goodness only 
imperfectly represents goodness itself. Plato’s world is a world divided 
between the realm of the ideal and its imperfect physical imitation. Plato says 
that when we really know something, it is the ideal that we grasp. 

20
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Immortality
 
●
In the Phaedo, Plato portrays Socrates as offering four arguments for the 
immortality of the soul. The central argument turns on this: For Socrates, 
knowing demands contact with the ideal world of forms. He maintains that 
“learning” is actually remembering from our previous existence among the 
forms. He concludes that there must therefore be a life beyond the present one: 
a life among the forms.
 
●
He also argues from opposites: If death comes from life, then life must come 
from death. Like Pythagoras before him, he too invokes the transmigration 
of souls.
Modularity
 
●
Modularity is a theme from Plato that is echoed in contemporary scientific 
work on mind and body. Our contemporary understanding of both mind 
and brain is in terms of modules: Parts of your brain do different things, 
corresponding to different aspects of your mental life. Some parts handle 
visual data, others handle audio data, and so on. 
Greek mathematician and philosopher Pythagoras

21
LECTURE 2MIND AND BODY IN GREEK PHILOSOPHY
 
●
The idea that both mind and brain function in terms of distinct modules has 
been a guiding principle throughout the history of the brain sciences. But the 
core idea of distinct mental modules is a legacy of Greek philosophy, appearing 
with particular strength in Plato. 
 
●
Plato envisaged a tripartite soul: three distinct modules of mental life. 
One module is the module of desire: drives of hunger, thirst, and sex. A second 
module is the module of thumos—a force of courage shown in battle. 
The faculty of reason is the third and should rule over the other two. 
The Mind
 
●
There is another image of mind and body anticipated in Plato that appears 
in contemporary research as well. This theme is captured in the title of a 
book by Marvin Minsky: The Society of Mind, in which he tries to explain how 
minds work. 
 
●
Minsky says the mind is what the brain does. But how? Minsky tries to show 
how the mind can emerge from the collaborative organization of smaller 
and essentially mindless bits—what he calls agents. A mind is an emergent 
phenomenon from the interaction of bits and pieces, just as society is an 
emergent phenomenon from the interaction of people. 
●
The analogy between minds and societies the core of another of Plato’s 
dialogues, the Republic. In Plato, the analogy functions in the other direction: 
It is societies that are compared to minds, rather than minds that are compared 
to societies. In particular, Plato is interested in leveraging an understanding of 
how a mind works well in order to understand how a society will work well.
 
●
Plato’s soul modules come into play: The producers in his ideal society form 
the economic base of the state, which he identifies with the mental module 
of desire. Those who protect the state—the warrior class—correspond to the 
module of thumos. But the state must be under the charge of a rational ruling 
class: Plato’s rational guardians. 

22
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Functionalism
●
Functionalism is a view that attempts to go beyond materialism and dualism.
It too is anticipated in Greek philosophy, in the work of Aristotle.
●
Envisaging mind-body ideas on the image of a baseball field, idealism would
be in left field and materialism in right. Dualism would be in center field
trying to capture the best of both. But that image doesn’t capture everything.
Laid out that way, our positions all seem to be answering a certain kind
of question: What is the basic stuff of the universe?
●
The functionalist says that is the wrong question. Functionalists believe that
we won’t understand mental phenomena by looking for some specific stuff
they’re made of. It’s a pattern and dynamics of organization that we should be
looking for, not some “stuff” that the mind is made of.
●
Functionalism is the view that the appropriate level of analysis is at the
organization level. For example, in order to understand the mental life of an
organism, we have to remember that it is an organism, with both a complex
internal organization and a complex interaction with its environment. In order
to understand elements of mental life—desires, beliefs, thoughts, even pains—
we have to understand the part they play in the life of the whole organism.
●
Aristotle can easily be seen as the first functionalist. Plato’s forms existed
in an ideal world apart: the abstract realm of “Plato’s heaven.” Aristotle was
a devoted student of Plato for 20 years. But after Plato’s death, Aristotle
began to bring Plato’s forms down to earth. The forms of things,
Aristotle says, don’t exist separately in some idealistic realm. They are the
forms of real material things.
●
In his De Anima—On the Soul—Aristotle says that the soul is the form of a
natural, organized human body. If you want to find the soul, you have to look
at the living organism as a whole. The soul is the form—the organization—of
that living, acting, perceiving, and reasoning animal.
●
Plato looked at the body and saw a cage that traps the soul. Aristotle looked at
the body and saw the soul in how it thrives and how it functions.

23
LECTURE 2MIND AND BODY IN GREEK PHILOSOPHY
 
●
One implication of the shift from Plato to Aristotle is that Plato’s arguments 
for life after death disappear. Aristotle compares the relation between matter 
and form, between body and soul, to the relation between a candle and 
its shape. When the candle is gone, its shape is gone too. When the body dies, 
its Aristotelian form—its Aristotelian soul—will go with it. For Aristotle, 
there is no life after death. 
Suggested Reading
Kirk and Raven, The Presocratic Philosophers.
Plato, Phaedo. 
——— , Republic.
Questions to Consider
1 
Plato says that we really understand geometry only when we grasp the ideal 
form of a triangle. Do you think that is right? Do you think it generalizes to 
knowledge in general?
2 
Imagine that you were a philosopher in ancient Greece. You find yourself 
pressed between the materialism of the Presocratics, the dualism of Plato, or 
the functionalism of Aristotle. Which would you choose? 

24
Mind-Body Philosophy

Lecture 3
Eastern 
Perspectives on 
Mind and Body

26
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
A
t the core of Western philosophy is the mind-body problem: If the world is 
composed of two radically different kinds of things—the mental and the 
physical—how can they possibly interact? The problem doesn’t appear in 
the same way in Eastern philosophy at all. It’s not merely that Eastern philosophy 
offers a different answer. In important ways, Eastern philosophy doesn’t even ask 
the same question. Hinduism, the focus of the first half of this lecture, comes 
the closest. The lecture also discusses Buddhism, which is farther away from the 
Western tradition.
Hinduism
 
●
The sacred texts of Hinduism are the ancient Indian Vedas, dating from 
1500 to 500 B.C. There are many schools in the philosophical development 
of Hinduism. This lecture will concentrate on the Samkhya and Yoga schools 
of thought. 
 
●
Both are explicitly dualist. The world is seen as dividing into two 
major components. As in Western philosophy, that division is crucial to the 
role of mind. 
 
●
Yogic and Samkhya Hinduism cut their dualism at a different place than the 
Western tradition does. Although the Hindu universe is composed of two basic 

27
LECTURE 3EASTERN PERSPECTIVES ON MIND AND BODY
realms, they aren’t what we think of as the realms of mind and body, or the 
physical and the mental.
 
●
On one side of the Hindu divide is prakriti. Prakriti is the realm of the natural 
world. Prakriti includes observable inner psychological processes—like 
hunger and touch—as well. 
 
●
Atman is on the other side of the divide. If prakriti is the known, atman is the 
knower. Prakriti includes the subjective experience, precisely because we can 
experience it. Atman is not the experience, but the experiencer.
 
●
The fundamental mystery for the Western dualist is the existence of conscious 
experience in a physical world. The fundamental mystery for a Hindu dualist 
is the existence of Atman in the natural world of prakriti: the existence of an 
observer in a world that shows only the observed. 
The Meaning of Philosophy
 
●
There is a major difference in emphasis in what philosophy means in the Eastern 
and Western traditions. As a result, how one should approach a philosophical 
problem is different. What would count as a solution is also different. 
 
●
Western philosophy is first and foremost a theoretical discipline. It’s an attempt 
at a representation and explanation of the way things are. 
 
●
By contrast, Eastern philosophy is not first and foremost a theoretical discipline. 
It is quite fundamentally a practical discipline. If Western philosophy is first 
and foremost an attempt to find out how things are, Eastern philosophy 
is first and foremost an attempt to figure out how to live. 
 
●
Western philosophers typically try to figure out how things stand, going 
from there to an inference as to how we ought to live. For example, one can 
figure out whether the ethical thing to do is to create the greatest good for the 
greatest number, and then put that theoretical principle into practice in one’s 
own life. 

28
Mind-Body Philosophy

29
LECTURE 3EASTERN PERSPECTIVES ON MIND AND BODY
 
●
By contrast, Eastern philosophers tend to speak of truth as something that 
one should approach through practice rather than theory. Understanding is 
something one finds through practice: A bicycle rider doesn’t study the physics 
of balance first; they understand balance by getting on and riding. 
Suffering
 
●
The practical problem of suffering is the focus of Eastern philosophy. 
Here, it helps to contrast Western thoughts on suffering with Eastern ones. 
An example from Western philosophy: In David Hume’s Dialogues Concerning 
Natural Religion, the character Philo lists life’s horrors as part of a theoretical 
argument—an argument that there can be no omnipotent, omniscient, and 
morally perfect God.
 
●
The Western philosopher wants to know how evil can fit into a universe with an 
omnipotent, omniscient, and morally perfect creator. By contrast, the Eastern 
philosopher’s concern with suffering is not first and foremost theoretical. 
The Eastern philosopher’s concern with suffering is practical: How can we live 
with it? How can we perhaps alleviate it? 
 
●
In Hinduism, suffering is inherently observable, so it is inherently part 
of prakriti. Atman is not part of the world of prakriti, so it is not part of the 
world of suffering. If one is ruled by one’s atman—if one is enlightened— 
one can free oneself from the pushes and pulls of prakriti. By realizing and 
being ruled by one’s atman, one can free oneself from unnecessary suffering. 
Buddhism
 
●
The major Eastern philosophy is Buddhism. Buddhism and Hinduism share an 
emphasis on a practical rather than theoretical problem. The problem is the 
same: the problem of suffering. But Buddhism offers a very different path, 
a path that is not dualistic. In that sense, Buddhism offers a path even farther 
from the Western tradition. 

30
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Buddhism traces back to the teachings of Siddhartha Gautama, who was born 
in what is now Nepal. Though the exact dates of his life are controversial, 
it appears that he died a few decades before or after 400 B.C. As a point of 
reference, Socrates died by drinking hemlock at almost precisely the same 
time: 399 B.C.
 
●
Our earliest biographies of Siddhartha come from a much later period, in the 
2nd century A.D. They are probably most important not as historical accounts 
but as representations of central values. With variations, the story is the same 
in many of those texts. Siddhartha is born as a prince, the son of a wealthy 
warrior nobleman. 
 
●
At his birth, it is foretold that he will be a great man, but that he will develop in 
one of two directions. Either he will become a great king or he will renounce 
the material world to become a holy man. The latter will occur only if he 
learns about old age, sickness, death, and the example of asceticism.
 
●
Desiring that his son become a great king, his father hides him from life’s 
harsh realities within the palace walls. No old or sick are allowed within.  
Siddhartha is shielded both from the fact of death and from exposure  
to religion. Into his 20s, through marriage and the birth of a son, Siddhartha 
leads a sanitized life of artificial perfection, cloistered within the palace walls. 
 
●
In his late 20s, Siddhartha journeys outside the palace walls for the first time. 
He is exposed to the realities of human suffering for the first time. When he 
first sees a very old man, his charioteer explains that all people grow old. 
 
●
Then he sees a diseased man and a decaying corpse and learns of sickness  
and death. He also sees an ascetic. His charioteer explains that the ascetic has 
renounced the world in order to escape the fear of sickness, age, and death. 
 
●
Siddhartha now knows suffering to be the human condition. Following what 
was foretold, he leaves his palace and his wife and son, and he devotes himself 
to finding a solution to suffering. Only when he finds that path does he become 
the Buddha, which means “the enlightened one.”

31
LECTURE 3EASTERN PERSPECTIVES ON MIND AND BODY
●
Just as in Hinduism, the problem Buddhism attempts to resolve is the problem 
of suffering. But the attempt to solve that problem is very different, as is the 
worldview that results.
Buddhism on Suffering
 
●
A major theme in modern Buddhism is the denial of any central self. 
Indeed, the concept of such a self is held to be a major source of suffering. 
For that reason, much of modern Buddhism is anatman—without atman. 

32
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Although experience is vivid and various, there is no observer distinct from 
that experience. There is no self. Underneath is merely soullessness and 
emptiness, or sunyata. Buddha did believe in reincarnation, but where 
Hinduism has many gods, Buddhism has none. 
 
●
At the core of Buddhism are the Four Noble Truths, reputed to come from the 
Buddha’s first teaching: 
1 
Suffering is everywhere, permeating not only human existence but 
existence in general. 
2 
All forms of suffering stem from craving: thirst, greed, and desire. 
3 
The cessation of suffering comes by letting that craving go. 
4 
The Eightfold Path is the way to achieve the cessation of suffering. 
It includes right understanding, right thoughts, right speech, right action, 
right effort, right mindfulness, and meditation. 
 
●
The epistemology of Buddhism is arch-empiricism: What we know is what 
we experience. Buddhist metaphysics goes along with that: What is real is 
what is experienced. 
 
●
It is because of this empiricism that the Buddhist sees the self as an illusion. 
In Hinduism, atman must be something different—something dualistically 
apart—because it is by definition found nowhere in experience. 
In Buddhism, what is real is what is experienced, so there is no atman. With the 
disappearance of self, we gain the disappearance of self-centered craving. 
With the disappearance of craving comes the release from suffering.
 
●
In one Buddhist parable, a house is on fire; this is the Buddha’s metaphor for 
the suffering that surrounds us. The important thing is not to analyze the 
ongoing damage. The important thing is to get out of the house. Release from 
suffering—the practical issue—is more important than metaphysics. 

33
Lecture 3—Eastern Perspectives on Mind and Body

34
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
What does the world look like if we follow the Buddhist path? The result is 
not a dualist world. A dualism of mind and body, the mental and the physical, 
lies deep within Western philosophy. A different dualism—of prakriti and 
atman—is essential to Hinduism. But the forms of Buddhism described 
in this lecture deny the existence of atman. With one stroke they leave 
Dualism behind.
East and West
 
●
This lecture has outlined the alternative that Eastern approaches present to 
a Western philosophical and scientific worldview. Regarding the historical 
interface between the two, it wasn’t merely the East that influenced the West. 
The West also influenced the East. 
 
●
The empire established by Alexander the Great extended far beyond the 
Mediterranean, far to the east. It brought Greek influences to India and 
Bactria, east of the Caspian Sea, and to Buddhism in the 300s B.C. 
 
●
There are clear similarities to Greek Skepticism in Buddhism’s distrust of 
the world of experience as fleeting, passing, unreliable, and impermanent. 
The dignity of asceticism appears in both Buddhism and Greek Cynicism. 
Most strongly, the search for equanimity by the control of one’s own 
craving—focusing on one’s own reaction to experience rather than the 
experience itself—is precisely the core of Greek Stoicism. 
 
●
Bidirectional influence wasn’t just through Alexander’s empire. The Silk Road 
began in the 200s B.C. as a 4,000-mile trade route from China through India 
to the Mediterranean. Greek philosophy, Hinduism, and Buddhism would 
have met and mingled along the Silk Road as well, each influencing the other.

35
LECTURE 3EASTERN PERSPECTIVES ON MIND AND BODY
Suggested Reading
Levine, The Positive Psychology of Buddhism and Yoga. 
Nauriyal, Drummond, and Lal, Buddhist Thought and Applied Psychological Research. 
Walpola, What the Buddha Taught. 
Questions to Consider
1 
Western philosophers typically try to figure out the theoretical truth, going 
from there to practical applications. Eastern philosophers tend to speak 
of truth as something you approach through practice rather than theory. 
Are there moments in your life in which you’ve taken the Western approach? 
The Eastern approach?
2 
The core of anatman Buddhism is a denial that there is a self. But even 
proponents admit that is a hard mental state to sustain. How close can 
you come? Can you conceive of your experience without a you? 

36
Mind-Body Philosophy

Lecture 4
Using the Body to 
Shape the Mind

38
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
W
hen we think about mind and body, we inevitably think of the mind 
as being in charge. In this lecture, we will begin to explore what 
happens if we stand that image on its head. In what ways is the body  
in control? How might we use the body to shape the mind? This lecture explores 
some traditions from Eastern philosophy, which has much to teach us about using 
the body to shape the mind. It also covers some modern scientific findings.
Yoga
 
●
Because of its myriad blended elements, creating a tidy intellectual history of 
Eastern philosophy is difficult. The blended history is nowhere more evident 
than in trying to track Eastern traditions of yoga and meditation. 
 
●
The origins of yoga are lost in time. The term is found in the oldest text 
in any Indo-European language, the Rigveda, composed in India in perhaps 
1200 B.C. It is also prominent in the Upanishads, from perhaps 500 B.C. We 
tend to think of yoga as a physical practice, but in the historical texts, the 
term often represents spiritual claims as well. 
 
●
The yoga with which most of us are familiar is Hatha yoga. It is a yoga of 
postures and relaxation. Another form is Raja Yoga, which stresses meditation. 
But there is no sharp distinction between yoga as a physical practice and yoga 
as meditation.

39
LECTURE 4USING THE BODY TO SHAPE THE MIND
 
●
In a classic image, the mind is compared to a lake. When the surface of the lake 
is agitated, it becomes opaque. One cannot see within. Yogic postures, with 
simple movements from one posture to another, are intended to help calm the 
surface of the lake. The postures are called asanas. Muscle relaxation and the 
coordination of breath and movement are important.
 
●
A good yoga instructor will repeatedly tell their charges to stretch the body 
taut in a pose but not beyond. The goal is not ego-driven achievement of some 
demonstrated pose. The goal is a state in which one is calmly immersed, mind 
and body, in breath and movement. 
Meditation
 
●
Some aspects of Buddhist meditation are only a shade away from yoga. 
Anapanasati is a meditation technique common to a wide range of Buddhist 
traditions. It’s sometimes called mindfulness of breathing. 
 
●
Meditation has many forms, but it gained a major foothold in the West through 
Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and the Transcendental Meditation movement, also 
known as TM.
 
●
The core of TM is mental repetition of a mantra. Mental repetition of the 
mantra offers a focus. One frees the mind by letting all other thoughts go. 
 
●
That’s the core of meditative practice in all its forms: The idea is to let go 
of the thoughts, emotions, and anxieties that agitate the surface of the mind. 
Calm the lake by letting go of distracting and disturbing influences. Notice that 
the idea isn’t to push or force those influences away. The idea is to let them go.
 
●
The attempt to deliberately push thoughts away seems to be counterproductive. 
For instance, the psychologist Daniel Wegner is known for his work on the 
“white bear phenomenon.” Try not to think of a white bear: Once the idea is 
introduced, it’s almost impossible to get it out of the mind. In the same way, 
unpleasant memories and images and emotions tied to unwanted behaviors can 
themselves become the focus of the desire to avoid them. 

40
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Positive Effects? 
 
●
The psychologist Martin Levine has reported his own experience with yoga. 
His doctor had told him that his heart palpitations and aches and pains were 
inevitable aspects of aging. But after a month of yoga, he writes, “all my 
ailments—the aches and sudden pains, the heart palpitations—disappeared. 
I felt as if the movements had oiled my joints, so that I now moved smoothly 
and easily.” The doctor had been wrong. As Levine puts it, “I hadn’t been 
aging; I had been rusting.” 
 
●
We have good scientific evidence that yoga does increase flexibility and balance 
in both young people and seniors. The physical effect for which we have the 
best positive evidence is relief of chronic low back pain, in both the short and 
long term. 
 
●
What of mental effects? Can yoga and meditation be used to shape the mind? 
Yoga and meditation certainly seem to produce an altered mental state. But it’s 
not clear precisely what that altered mental state is. 
 
●
Using functional MRI, investigators have reported patterns of brain 
activity indicative of mind wandering are less pronounced in meditators. 
These differences have been found in meditators even when they’re 
not meditating. 
●
As early as the 1950s, researchers hauled cumbersome EEG equipment to 
remote Indian monasteries in order to make measurements on Indian yogis 
during meditation. Those measurements indicated brain waves in the 8–12 
hertz alpha range, which is characteristic of relaxed waking. The meditative 
state among Indian yogis also seemed to be characterized by sensory withdrawal: 
a state of calm that was not interrupted by noises or distractions from outside. 
 
●
Later studies with Japanese Zen practitioners showed brain waves slowing 
to 6 or 7 hertz, but with different results regarding external sensation. 
Normally the brain pays reduced attention as a sound is repeated many times. 
Zen practitioners responded to every repetition of the same sound as if it 
were new. 

41
LECTURE 4USING THE BODY TO SHAPE THE MIND
 
●
The claims made for positive effects of meditation and yoga range from 
the very plausible to the more extreme. It is widely accepted that yoga and 
meditation reduce stress. Other aspects of mind can quite plausibly come with 
stress reduction: lower levels of anxiety and improved mood, for example. 
 
●
Claims that yoga and meditation lower blood pressure and reduce the 
risk of heart disease and stroke are more extreme, but those might occur 
as a byproduct of stress reduction as well. Still more extreme are claims 
regarding control of chronic pain, strengthening of the immune system, and 
decreasing inflammation and symptoms of arthritis and fibromyalgia. It has 
even been claimed the meditation can cure diabetes and cancer. 
 
●
The effects claimed at the stress-reduction end seem very plausible. Those at 
the cancer-curing end seem dubious. In truth, all such claims turn out to be 
amazingly difficult to test. 
 
●
Can yoga and meditation be recommended as ways to reduce stress? Absolutely. 
But we can’t say that we have solid scientific evidence that they reduce stress 
more effectively than alternatives like simple relaxation, listening to music, or 
spending quality time with a pet. 

42
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Here is an example that makes clear both the tantalizing possibility of positive 
results from meditation and the need for solid research: Tonya Jacobs, at the 
UC Davis Center for Mind and Brain, led a team that studied the impact of 
meditation on telomerase, which is something like an anti-aging enzyme that 
protects telomeres—sequences at the end of each strand of DNA. 
 
●
Thirty people were chosen to participate in a three-month meditation retreat. 
Thirty other people were chosen as a control group, with a similar distribution 
of age, sex, and body mass index. At the end of three months, the blood of each 
group was tested. The result was that levels of telomerase were higher in the 
meditation group.
 
●
That’s a wonderfully promising result. Unfortunately, the experiment isn’t 
designed to give us the full comparison that we need. It compared results in 
30 people who got to go on a meditation retreat for three months with results 
for 30 people who were simply told they were on a wait list. That doesn’t tell 
us whether it was meditation or merely three months off that produced the 
telomerase result. 
Western Thought
 
●
Using the body to shape the mind also appears frequently in Western thought, 
primarily in recommendations for physical exercise. 
○
Plato claimed that movement and methodical physical exercise save and 
preserve the good condition of every human being. 
 
○
Thoreau emphasized the mental effects of exercise: “How vain it is to sit 
down to write when you have not stood up to live!”
 
○
Although remembered as a poet, Walt Whitman supported himself 
as a journalist. He wrote a 13-part series for a New York newspaper 
entitled “Manly Health and Training, with Off-Hand Hints Toward 
Their Conditions.” Whitman advocates getting up early, taking a walk, 
and breathing the fresh air. 

43
LECTURE 4USING THE BODY TO SHAPE THE MIND
 
●
Using mice as test subjects, researchers at the Salk Institute at the University of 
California in San Diego found compelling results regarding the growth of new 
neurons in the brain as a result of exercise. Mice raised in an environment that 
includes exercise wheels, toys, and opportunities for play grow about twice as 
many new brain cells as do mice in an impoverished environment. 
 
●
Charles Hillman, at the University of Illinois, has devoted much of his research 
career to the effects of exercise in children. He and his colleagues asked a 
group of children to visit their lab on two occasions. 
 
○
On one visit the kids did 20 minutes of treadmill walking before the visit. 
On another visit, they rested for 20 minutes before entering the lab. 
 
○
The exercise visit produced higher performance on cognitive tests 
emphasizing attention. Neural activity from frontal and parietal areas that 
are correlated with attention also measurably increased with exercise. 
 
●
In adults, short bouts of physical exercise have been found to enhance attention 
and short-term memory. Working with Ben Sibley, a colleague in physical 
education, the psychologist Sian Beilock found that those with poorer working 
memory benefited most from those short workouts. 
 
●
Exercise also seems of value later in life. One of the effects of age is a shrinking 
of the hippocampus. That is the module deep in the brain, important for 
converting short-term to long-term memory, which showed the greatest 
growth in exercising mice. 
 
●
In older adults, the hippocampus typically shrinks by 5 percent or more 
each passing decade. Kirk Erickson and his colleagues at the University of 
Pittsburgh found that a regular stretching routine didn’t affect the rate of 
hippocampus shrinkage. But they found that older adults who walked 40 
minutes around a track three times a week increased the hippocampus as 
much 2 percent a year.

44
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
QWERTY
 
●
An example of a more subtle form of body-mind influence comes from the 
standard QWERTY keyboard, so named because the first six letters on the 
upper left are QWERTY. 
 
●
An experiment shows people two columns of letter pairs. On the left is a 
column with the letter pairs FV, VR, TF, JY, MJ, and UH. On the right is a list 
with the letter pairs CJ, GK, KT, CM, EJ, and JD. 
 
●
When asked which they like better, a majority of people pick the column on 
the right, starting with CJ, GK, and KT. They have no idea why. 
 
●
The interesting fact about that column is that those letter pairs are easier to 
type on the familiar QWERTY keyboard. People use a different hand for each 
letter of the pair. The other column of letter pairs is harder, requiring a person 
to type two letters with the same hand. This is an example of the body shaping 
the mind.

45
LECTURE 4USING THE BODY TO SHAPE THE MIND
Suggested Reading
Beilock, How the Body Shapes the Mind.
Desikachar, The Heart of Yoga. 
Questions to Consider
1 
In a classic image used in both yoga and meditation, the mind is compared to 
a lake. When it is agitated, it becomes opaque: You cannot see within. Try the 
simple breathing exercise outlined in the video or audio lecture. Does that help 
to calm the surface of the lake? 
2 
In exploring whether yoga and meditation reduce stress, the lecture 
emphasizes the research question: Compared to what? For what kinds of 
questions will comparison be important? For what kinds of concerns might it 
not be important? 

46
Mind-Body Philosophy

Lecture 5 
History 
of the Soul

48
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
D
espite its immense importance over the millennia, there is one concept not 
found in contemporary science or philosophy of mind: the concept of the 
soul. That’s interesting because the concept of the soul is of great importance 
in the history of Western philosophy, from its earliest origins to the medieval 
period. Why would it vanish? What happened to it? Why are problems of mind 
and body still with us, both philosophically and scientifically, while contemporary 
scientists and philosophers have nothing to say about souls? This lecture considers 
the history of that vanished concept. 
Early Origins of the Soul
 
●
Our notion of the soul arises not from one ancient source but from several. 
To trace its history is something like tracing the tangled fibers of a 
braided rope. 
 
●
The word soul traces to related terms in Saxon and Old High German, Norse, 
and Lithuanian. It appears in Old English in the epic Anglo-Saxon poem 
Beowulf, written sometime between 700 and 1000. 
 
●
The Greek term we translate as “soul” is psyche. Intriguingly, even the 
Greek concept of psyche radically changed meaning over time. Psyche in a 

49
LECTURE 5HISTORY OF THE SOUL
Platonic dialogue of 350 B.C. means something quite different than it does 
350 years earlier in Homer’s epic poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey. In Homer, 
psyche means “breath.” It’s something that leaves a person when they die, 
but isn’t that person. 
 
●
In the Phaedo, Plato’s Socrates speaks of the immortality of the soul. He speaks 
of the soul as trapped in the body. Both of those sound far more familiar to a 
modern Western mind than did Homer’s concept. 
 
●
Regarding another source, the Bible: Surprisingly, our concept of the soul 
doesn’t appear in the Old Testament any more clearly than it does in Homer. 
The term in the Old Testament that gets translated as “soul” is nephesh. But 
according to scholars, the word nephesh is never used to mean a spiritual part of 
a person. Nephesh identifies a whole living being, not a part of the living being 
that is somehow distinct from the body. 
Braiding Histories Together
 
●
According to tradition, in 300 B.C. in Alexandria, the Egyptian ruler 
Ptolemy II assembled six scholars from each of the 12 tribes of Israel. He had 
them translate the first five books of the Bible from Hebrew into Greek. 
The historical translations are known as the Septuagint, after the legendary 70 
or so scholars who did the work. 
 
●
In translating the first five books of the Old Testament into Greek, the Jewish 
scholars had to translate the Hebrew term nephesh into Greek. They used the 
closest Greek term they could find. That’s where the conceptual histories join: 
nephesh was translated as psyche. It is in the New Testament psyche rather than 
the Old Testament nephesh that we start to see familiar elements of the modern 
Western concept of soul. 
 
●
Importantly, the promise of eternal life is a central idea in the New Testament. 
Surprisingly, though, even with the New Testament promise of eternal life, 
it’s difficult to find explicit mention of a soul that leaves the body and continues 
at death. 

50
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Eastern Influences
 
●
The point in history where we first found a concept of the soul that was close 
to ours was in Plato’s dialogues of 350–400 B.C. Plato’s conception owes a 
debt to the Presocratics, particularly the Pythagoreans. 
 
●
The Pythagoreans had a conception of the transmigration of souls—an 
element that also appears in Plato’s Phaedo. Transmigration demands a concept 
of something that is the same soul, existing before and after its instantiation in 
its current body. 
 
●
If the history of our concept of soul stretches from Plato back to the 
Pythagoreans, where did they get their concept of soul, reincarnated from one 
body to another? The possibility of an Eastern influence by way of Egypt is 
extremely tempting. Perhaps our concept of soul traces back to Plato, from 
Plato back to the Pythagoreans, and from the Pythagoreans back to influences 
from the East. 
Greek philosopher Plato

51
LECTURE 5HISTORY OF THE SOUL
 
●
What were those influences? Among the prime candidates are the 
Orphic mysteries. There is much that we don’t know about the cult of 
Orpheus, but it seems to have come into Greece around 600 B.C. At the 
core of the Orphic mysteries is the myth of the god Dionysus, who like the 
Egyptian god Osiris was dismembered and then reborn. 
 
●
Within that mythic structure, people are envisaged as composed of a soul 
of divine origin trapped within a baser body. The soul is judged after death. 
It passes either to punishment by continuing a cycle of transmigration or to the 
reward of release. 
After Plato
 
●
How does the conceptual history of the soul develop after Plato? The soul in its 
contemporary sense really came into its own as Greek philosophy was joined 
with the Judeo-Christian tradition. 
 
●
In the spring of 1947, so the story goes, a Bedouin boy searching for a lost goat 
discovered a cave in the cliffs above the Dead Sea. Those caves contained jars 
filled with manuscripts now known as the Dead Sea Scrolls. 
 
●
They are attributed to a separatist Jewish sect known as the Essenes, who 
would have been contemporaries of Jesus. A Greek influence is already evident 
in the writings of the Essenes, including elements reminiscent of both the 
Orphic mysteries and Pythagoreanism. 
 
●
Philo of Alexandria was a Jewish thinker who lived from 25 BC to 40 A.D. 
He too was a contemporary of Jesus. Philo claims that the Greek philosophers 
must have read the Jewish scriptures. Strongly influenced by Plato, Philo 
maintains that soul and body are two distinct elements in man, with the soul 
linked to the rational elements and the body to the sensual. Liberation comes 
with the freeing of the soul from the body.
 
●
After Philo, we can trace a string of religious thinkers crucial to the 
development of Christianity as we know it. They were all deeply influenced by 
the Greek philosophy that came before them, particularly Plato’s work. 

52
Mind-Body Philosophy
Saint Augustine

53
LECTURE 5HISTORY OF THE SOUL
 
●
There is evidence of familiarity with Greek philosophy in the New Testament 
letters of Paul, who was both a Jew and an educated Roman citizen. 
The Christian apologist Justin Martyr, writing around 150 A.D., agrees with 
Philo in claiming that the wisdom of Plato was borrowed from Moses and the 
Old Testament prophets. 
 
●
The Greek Christian philosopher Athenagoras defended Christianity before 
the emperor Marcus Aurelius in 170 A.D. by citing Plato, Aristotle, and 
the Stoics. About the same time, Clement of Alexandria speaks of Plato as 
Moses writing in Greek. 
Medieval Philosophy
 
●
The further development of the concept of the soul offers a clear insight 
into the two major figures in medieval philosophy: Augustine of Hippo 
and Thomas Aquinas. Their views correspond with those of Plato and 
Aristotle, respectively.
 
●
Writing in 400 A.D., Augustine professes, “The question of the soul troubles 
many people, and I confess that I am among them.” The soul, he says is “a special 
substance, endowed with reason, adapted to rule the body.” Augustine explicitly 
says, “I myself am my soul.”
●
Writing eight centuries later in 1250 A.D., Aquinas says equally explicitly, 
“I am not my soul.” His view is Aristotelian, rather than Platonic. The soul is 
not something trapped inside a body. The soul is the form of a living being, 
just as the body is the matter of a living being. 
 
●
Eventually, it was Augustine’s approach that won out. It’s not the Aristotelian 
but the Platonic view that gets braided with the Judeo-Christian tradition to 
give us the contemporary Western concept of the soul. 

54
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
The Soul Today
 
●
That history gives us a clearer sense of where our idea of the soul comes from. 
But why isn’t it discussed in the contemporary field of psychology? There are 
two major figures responsible for the disappearance of the soul, one writing 
in the philosophy of the 17th century and one in the birth of a science of 
psychology as the 19th century gave way to the 20th.
 
●
The crucial figure in 17th-century philosophy is Descartes. Descartes makes it 
clear that he considers the mind and soul interchangeable. In his work, the soul 
has been subsumed into the concept of mind. 
 
●
The crucial figure in exiling the soul from the science of psychology is William 
James. In his major work, 1890’s The Principles of Psychology, James makes it 
clear that this is to be a science of the mind. James says that the science of 
psychology doesn’t need the soul. His main objection is that it is superfluous. 
What the science of psychology seeks to understand is the actual subjective 
phenomena of consciousness—an empirical realm open and obvious before us. 
 
●
For James, the soul is a metaphysically and scientifically unnecessary add-on: 
an idle wheel that turns nothing. According to him, “As psychologists, we need 
not be metaphysical at all. The phenomena are enough, the passing thought 
itself is the only verifiable thinker, and its empirical connection with the brain-
process is the ultimate known law.” 
 
●
But James was also a pragmatist, who thought that we ultimately have to 
understand truth in terms of belief. He adds that anyone “who finds any 
comfort in the idea of the Soul is, however, perfectly free to continue to believe 
in it; for our reasonings have not established the non-existence of the Soul; 
they have only proved its superfluity for scientific purposes.” 
 
●
In 1901, however, there was an attempt to prove the existence of the 
soul scientifically. Dr. Duncan MacDougall weighed six patients dying of 
tuberculosis, reporting a weight loss of 21 grams at the moment of death—
perhaps the soul leaving the body. MacDougall also weighed 15 dogs at the 
moment of death, recording no weight loss. He concluded that dogs have  
no souls. 

55
LECTURE 5HISTORY OF THE SOUL
 
●
Unfortunately for those seeking scientific confirmation of a soul, the 
experiment and its reporting were badly flawed. As his fellow physician 
Augustus Clarke pointed out, at death the lungs no longer cool the blood and 
so there is a sudden rise in body temperature. 
 
●
The resulting water loss due to a rise in sweating could easily explain the 21-
gram weight loss in humans. Why doesn’t that happen with dogs? Dogs have no 
sweat glands. 
Suggested Reading
Goeetz and Taliaferro, A Brief History of the Soul. 
Plato, Phaedo.
Wise, Abegg, and Cook, eds., The Dead Sea Scrolls. 
Questions to Consider
1 
What would you give as a definition of the term soul? On that definition, do 
people have souls?
2
James doesn’t say there aren’t souls. He says the hypothesis isn’t necessary for 
scientific purposes. Are there different contexts in which the concept might 
be important? 

56
Mind-Body Philosophy
René Descartes

Lecture 6
How Descartes 
Divided Mental 
from Physical

58
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
C
oncepts of mind and soul evolved from the Greeks through the Middle 
Ages, with many classical thinkers reflecting on the nature and relation of 
body and mind. What isn’t obvious in those reflections is the contemporary 
form of the mind-body problem. This lecture will focus on the development of 
thought from the Middle Ages through the Renaissance to the Enlightenment.  
A clear case can be made that it is during this period in the 1600 and 1700s that the 
mind-body problem as we know it first appears with full force. 
Descartes and the Central Question
 
●
Let’s begin by analyzing the central question: If the mental and the physical 
are two such different realms, how could one arise from the other? There are 
two presuppositions involved in that question. Presupposition one is the idea 
that there are two radically different realms. Presupposition two is that one 
does arise from the other. Half of the question implies an unbridgeable gap;  
the other half asks how it is bridged. 
 
●
A crucial figure here is the 17th-century French mathematician and philosopher, 
René Descartes. Descartes is responsible for the sharp dichotomy that forms 
the first presupposition in our question. In Descartes, the mental and the 
physical are two radically different realms.
French philosopher René Descartes

59
LECTURE 6HOW DESCARTES DIVIDED MENTAL FROM PHYSICAL
 
●
A second big split arises as a reaction to Descartes: If the mental and the 
physical are two such different realms, how could one arise from the other? 
There are two radically different ways to try to answer that part of the question. 
Those very different reactions to Descartes echo through the Enlightenment 
and continue today. 
Descartes’s Goal
 
●
Descartes is famous for the phrase “I think, therefore I am.” Here’s the context: 
Descartes was looking for absolute certainty. What can we really know?
 
●
Descartes’s Meditations on First Philosophy is the narrative of an intellectual 
journey, designed to carry the reader along the same path. Descartes’s goal is 
certainty: What can we be absolutely certain of? Clearly nothing that we have 
been told, as everyone has been told contradictory things or incorrect things.
 
●
Our senses and sensations within the body can deceive us as well. Take, for 
instance, phantom limbs, which we discussed in Lecture 1.
 
●
Descartes’s acid test for certainty is the hypothesis of an evil demon: 
Perhaps an evil demon has planted false beliefs in one’s mind. For instance, 
maybe the demon deceives people into believing they have bodies when 
they actually don’t. Only something that would survive the hypothesis of an 
immensely powerful deceiver can be accepted as absolutely certain. 
 
●
Can anything survive such a test? Descartes thinks the answer is yes. He thinks 
he has found a rock of sheer certainty: Cogito ergo sum, or, “I think, therefore 
I am.”
 
●
Interestingly, the central argument offered by Descartes echoes an argument in 
Augustine written nearly 1,000 years before. Here is part of the central passage 
in Descartes, with a segue from doubt to the kernel of certainty: “But there is 
a deceiver of supreme power and cunning who is deliberately and constantly 
deceiving me. In that case, I too undoubtedly exist, if he is deceiving me.”

60
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Here is part of the passage in Augustine: “if I am deceived, by this same token 
I am. … I am not deceived in this knowledge that I am.” The argument is the 
same: I cannot doubt that I exist; if I doubt, I must exist. 
The Division
 
●
In his Discourse on the Method, Descartes argues, “I think, therefore I am” 
and concludes, “the soul by which I am what I am, is entirely distinct from 
body.” Descartes is quite explicit about identifying the mind with the  
thinking soul.
 
●
Descartes was a major contributor to the science of his time. The metaphor 
of human physiology throughout the period in which Descartes lived, and the 
metaphor explicit in his work in anatomy, is the metaphor of the machine. 
 
●
For Descartes and his contemporaries, the idea wasn’t merely that machines 
could imitate animals. The idea was that animals were a kind of machine.  
It wasn’t merely that machines could imitate bodily processes, but that bodies 
were essentially mechanical. 
 
●
What Descartes draws from the cogito (“I think”) concept is not just a kernel of 
certainty but a big split: a portrait of a universe split between the physical on 
one side and the mental on the other. 
The Bridge
 
●
Despite their differences, it seems clear common sense that the mental and 
the physical realm do interact. Take, for example, someone mentally deciding 
they want a cup of coffee and then physically drinking it. Or someone 
physically drinking Scotch and feeling a mental effect from the alcohol.
 
●
Descartes didn’t write in an intellectual vacuum. His readers and critics were 
quick to see the interaction problem. They asked: If what you say is true, how 
could these two essentially distinct realms possibly interact?

61
LECTURE 6HOW DESCARTES DIVIDED MENTAL FROM PHYSICAL
 
●
Descartes’s dualism seems to tell us that the interaction is impossible. 
The interaction problem isn’t just a gap in the theory. It’s a built-in refutation 
of the theory. Fortunately, Descartes gives a response to the interaction 
problem in a later work. 
 ●
His answer is based on his work in anatomy, which included dissection of 
the brain. It’s a fascinating piece of 17th-century science. Unfortunately, it’s wrong. 
 
●
Near the center of the brain at the top of the spinal cord, tucked in a groove 
between the two hemispheres, is a tiny gland, known today as the pineal gland.  
Descartes proposed that mind and body interact precisely there, in the  
pineal gland. 
 
●
Descartes also thought, mistakenly, that the pineal gland was unique  
to humans. Since he thought only humans had a mind—that animals were  
mere machines—he had a second mark in favor of the pineal gland as the 
interaction point of mind and body. 
 
●
As a piece of science, Descartes’s hypothesis turned out to be a  
complete failure. The pineal gland produces the hormone melatonin. It can 
be surgically removed without in any way affecting mental function, or 
one’s sense of oneself.

62
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Moreover, as a piece of philosophy, the hypothesis was doomed to failure 
from the start. After all, the question isn’t where mind and body interact. 
The question is how they possibly can. Given dualism, the problem isn’t 
what or where the point of contact is between the mental and the physical. 
The problem is rather that any point of contact looks like a simple impossibility. 
Malebranche and Leibniz
 
●
In the decades following Descartes, other philosophers attempted to come to 
terms with his arguments and their implications. There arose two radically 
different ways to do so. 
 
●
On one side were those who accepted Descartes’s arguments, but confronted 
the interaction problem more directly. Two attempts on that side of the 
split are the occasionalism of Nicolas Malebranche and the pre-established 
harmony of Gottfried Leibniz. Both philosophers are full-blown dualists. 
There are physical and mental realms, which do not interact.
 
●
In 1674, about 25 years after Descartes’s death, Malebranche proposed that 
physical events are never the true or direct causes of mental effects, nor 
are mental events the true or direct causes of physical effects. In each case 
of apparent interaction, there is instead an intervention by God. God is who 
makes a person want a cup of coffee. 
 
●
Forty years later, Leibniz offered an even more creative theory. The mental 
and the physical are indeed two essentially different realms. There is no real 
causal interaction between them. 
 
○
But at the beginning of the creation, God wound up a physical clock that 
would carry forward the entire physical history of the universe. Beside it 
he wound up a clock of mental events to carry forward the mental history 
of the universe. 
 
○
In his wisdom, God designed the clocks so that they would run perfectly 
in parallel, side by side, despite the lack of any real link between them. 
It is known as Leibniz’s doctrine of pre-established harmony.

63
LECTURE 6HOW DESCARTES DIVIDED MENTAL FROM PHYSICAL
 
●
Both of these are attempts to live with the implications implicit in 
Cartesian dualism. If Malebranche and Leibniz’s theories seem like desperate 
measures, they’re an indication of the desperate measures that a full-blown 
dualism seems to require.
Spinoza and Hobbes
 
●
The alternative reaction to Descartes—the other side of the big split—is 
to see the interaction between mind and body as so obvious that it cannot 
be denied. Dualism, in turn, must be wrong. That view, in its various forms, 
is called monism. The thinking on this side of the reactive split is exemplified 
by the work of two other philosophers: Baruch Spinoza and Thomas Hobbes. 
 
●
Proceeding from axiomatic definitions in the manner of Euclidean geometry, 
Spinoza attempted to prove that the universe is composed of only one thing. 
What is that thing? Spinoza is explicit: “God, or Nature.” For him, the two are 
the same. Individual things, whether they are mice or mountains, are merely 
aspects of that.
 
●
The fact that spirit pervades the whole universe marks Spinoza as a pantheist. 
He also thinks that all aspects of the reality are logically necessary. That’s why 
he thinks he can deduce all of reality from basic axioms by logic alone. 

64
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Spinoza’s monism is probably the high point of rationalism: the view that 
the key to knowledge is not experience based, on the model of scientific 
experiment, but pure reason based, on the model of mathematics. 
 
●
Hobbes offers a different monism in response to Descartes. His response to 
Descartes is clearest in his masterwork Leviathan, which presents a materialistic 
monism. He says that all sensation is motion in the brain. 
 
●
Like dualism, monism faces a basic problem: If there is just one universe, why 
does it seem to have such different sides? How can the objective somehow be 
the subjective? How can the physical somehow be mental? 
Descartes in the 21st Century
 
●
Cartesian dualism has an enormous legacy. Our everyday common sense seems 
to be written in dualistic terms: We think that people have bodies, that they 
have minds, and that the two are not the same. 
 
●
What of Descartes’s “I think, therefore I am?” Bertrand Russell argues that 
the most Descartes can conclude is not that “I exist” but that “thinking exists.” 
What one experiences is the thinking, not something else.
 
●
A similar point arises in Hume’s work and in Buddhism. The experiencer isn’t 
itself evident to experience, and isn’t evident to Descartes. 
 
●
The reactive split between dualism and monism continues. The dominant view 
in the development of the brain sciences through the 20th and 21st centuries 
has clearly been materialistic monism: Everything mental must be grounded 
in a thoroughly physical brain. Everything that is mentally real must be 
physically real. Much of 20th- and 21st-century philosophy of mind follows 
that same approach.
 
●
But powerful challenges to materialistic monism remain. If the universe is 
entirely physical and is to be understood in objective scientific terms, why 
does an obvious part of that universe seem so different—the part immediately 
evident in conscious experience? 

65
LECTURE 6HOW DESCARTES DIVIDED MENTAL FROM PHYSICAL
 
●
Alternative forms of monism have found recent philosophical defenders. 
One line of thought goes like this: Perhaps the world itself isn’t ultimately 
physical, or isn’t ultimately physical alone. Perhaps we have to recognize the 
realm of subjectivity not as something that is produced by the physical, but 
something built into it.
 
●
Perhaps we have to supplement our physics to recognize consciousness as a 
basic force in the universe as a whole. The position is called panpsychism; the 
idea is the mind is in everything. In it, you can hear echoes of Spinoza. 
 
●
There are also increasingly strong voices arguing for dualism. Perhaps our 
science inevitably leaves out the subjective half of the universe. Perhaps consci-
ousness cannot be understood in those terms. Perhaps an understanding 
of consciousness demands a different kind of science—or something other 
than science.
Suggested Reading
Copleston, History of Philosophy, Vol. IV.
Descartes, Discourse on the Method.
——— , Meditations on First Philosophy. 
Questions to Consider
1 
Both Descartes and Augustine think there is one thing that no one and nothing 
could deceive you about: That you are thinking, and therefore that you exist. 
But where does that get us? Is there any way we can build to a more complete 
knowledge from that? 
2 
The second big split in this lecture is in reaction to Descartes: the split 
between monists and dualists. Are you a monist—do you think the universe is 
composed of just one kind of fundamental stuff? Or are you a dualist—do you 
think the universe is divided between two basic realms?

66
Mind-Body Philosophy

Lecture 7
Mistakes about 
Our Own 
Consciousnesses

68
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
N
othing is more intimate and immediate to us than our own consciousness. 
Surely we can’t be wrong about what we see, hear, taste, and feel  
in consciousness. It is immediately before us. We can be wrong about 
the external things that we think we hear: the music was live, rather than a 
broadcast recording. But in none of those cases are we wrong about the contents 
of consciousness per se. In none of those cases are we wrong about how things 
seem to us. Surely the core of that idea is right. Or is it? The focus of this 
lecture will be the ways we can be wrong, surprisingly wrong, even about our 
own consciousness.
An Incomplete Picture
 
●
Consciousness is somewhat like watching a movie in a theater. There is a visual 
image, like the image on the screen. There is auditory input, like input from 
the speakers. All of our sensations come together at a point of consciousness 
there in the inner theater.
 
●
The inner-theater representation may come in handy, but it won’t do as a 
complete description of consciousness. For one thing, it leaves out some of 
the senses: tastes, smells, and tactile sensations are also important elements 
of consciousness. 

69
LECTURE 7MISTAKES ABOUT OUR OWN CONSCIOUSNESSES
 
●
There’s also a deeper conceptual problem with the metaphor of the inner 
theater: It only makes sense if there is a spectator. If we do have a spectator, 
we’re doing something like hypothesizing a person in our heads, viewing the 
ongoing show. 
 
●
There again, we haven’t explained anything: How does that inner person see 
the screen—with another inner screen in their own head? However easy and 
tempting the inner-theater metaphor for consciousness, it can’t be right on 
its own. 
Pictures and Memory
 
●
A persistent way we characterize our own consciousness is the picture 
metaphor: What’s it like to remember something? Like pulling an old 
picture from a drawer. What’s it like to imagine something? Like painting a 
mental picture.
 
●
But the picture comparison doesn’t fit consciousness all that well. For instance, 
try to remember what a penny looks like. The general image is easy, but it’s 
difficult to remember details like which way Lincoln’s head is facing and what 
is written above his head. A true picture would make those details easy to 
pull up.
●
People do remember in general what pennies look like. But they don’t 
remember precise images, so remembering isn’t much like a picture. 
Imagination and Narratives
 
●
Imagination and narratives are incomplete in interesting ways. For instance, 
picture Sherlock Holmes putting down his newspaper, rising from his chair, 
throwing a cape across his shoulders, grabbing his hat, and saying, “Quick, 
Watson, the game is afoot!”

70
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
What color was the chair? Did he put the newspaper to the left or right? 
What color was the cape he threw across his shoulders? Did it have a red 
silk lining? There’s no firm answer to those questions. 
 
●
When we really consider our own consciousness, at the very least the idea of a 
picture may not always be a very good fit for the experiential facts.
Color Blindness
 
●
Color blindness can teach us something regarding our own consciousness and 
the mistakes we make regarding our own consciousnesses. The physiological 
basis of the most common type of color vision is well understood. Receptor cells 
in the retina include rods and three types of cones. 
 
●
Rods are active in low light, sensitive to brightness; they are associated with vision 
in black and white. There are three varieties of cones, with peak sensitivities at 
short, medium, and long wavelengths. These correspond to something like the 
blue, green and yellow-green regions of the spectrum. 
 
●
Normal color vision is keyed not merely to the individual activation of these 
but the balance between them. For example, there are no true red cones: 
Red light is perceived because of strong stimulation of the long wavelength 
cones relative to the other two.
 
●
Most color blindness is genetic. The three different types of cones operate with 
three different photopigments, which are encoded on the X chromosome; if 
something goes wrong there, color blindness can result. 
 
●
There are 6.5 to 7 million cones in each eye, concentrated toward the center 
of the retina. But there are 120 to 130 million rods in each eye. Cones thin 
out toward the edges, leaving practically nothing but rods at the edges of the 
retinal field. That’s where everyone is color-blind: In peripheral vision, people 
can see dark and light, but are terrible on color. 

71
LECTURE 7MISTAKES ABOUT OUR OWN CONSCIOUSNESSES
 
●
Here’s the lesson regarding consciousness: If a person were asked to paint a 
picture of what their visual field looked like, knowing only what we’ve just 
learned, they might be tempted to paint a picture that was rich in color in the 
center, but bleached out to black and white at the edges. 
 
●
Yet in consciousness, the visual field doesn’t seem to be colored in the center 
and black and white at the edges. How are we to explain the discrepancy 
between how things seem to us and how our visual field actually works?
 
●
“Filling in” is one explanation: Our consciousness fills in colors where they 
don’t exist, giving the impression that what we see is a full-color image all the 
way to the edges. Our visual field doesn’t look like it’s black and white at the 
edges because we fill in color there.
 
●
Here’s an alternative explanation: That part of the visual field just doesn’t 
operate in terms of color. The brain doesn’t expect to see colors out there. 
The philosopher Daniel Dennett has been particularly prominent in arguing 
for this approach. We don’t have a brain that’s busy painting in missing colors 
in the big picture. We have a brain that pays attention to color in central vision 
and ignores the lack of it at the edges. 

72
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
The Blind Spot
 
●
Blind spots are another case in which we use a picture metaphor 
for consciousness. Here’s how to “see” the blind spot: Draw an X and a 
solid black dot about two inches apart on a three-by-five-inch index card.
 
○
Turn the card so that the X is on the right and the solid black dot on 
the left. Now put your hand over your right eye and hold the card at arm’s 
length with the X straight in front of your left eye.
 
○
Keep focusing on that X, without moving your eye, as you bring the card 
slowly toward your nose. When the card is about one foot away, the dot 
disappears. Bring the card still closer and the dot reappears. 
 
○
Now flip the card so that the X is on the left and the solid dot is on  
the right. Cover your left eye and do the same experiment again. When you 
get the card about a foot away, the dot will disappear again. 
 
●
The basic physiological explanation for the blind spot is as simple as the 
physiological explanation for color blindness. We don’t have to go deeper than 
the retina. In order for an eye to work, impulses from the retinal cells have to 
transfer to the brain. The feat is accomplished by binding over a million nerve 
fibers into a single optic nerve. 
 
●
The bundle leaves the eye right where a blind spot is detected. The blind spot 
is there because the exiting optic nerve makes things too crowded for light-
detecting photoreceptors. There are no rods or cones; people are totally 
blind in that part of the visual field. In a literal picture of what the retina 
actually receives, the image would have a gap in it where the blind spot is. 
 
●
Now let’s take the disappearing-spot trick one step further. Take the three-by-
five card and draw some cross-hatching across the side with the dot on it. 
 
●
Now repeat the experiment: Bring that card progressively closer to your eye. 
Here’s what you’ll find: The dot disappears, just as before. But it doesn’t look 
like the cross-hatching does. The same trick works with wavy lines. The dot 
disappears, but the rest of the pattern remains.

73
LECTURE 7MISTAKES ABOUT OUR OWN CONSCIOUSNESSES
 
●
The brain has to compensate for the fact that it has no information from a 
certain area in the visual field. It fills it in with what it thinks is there: cross-
hatching, or wavy lines, or whatever the brain has—so the explanation goes. 
In another respect, the brain is terrible at filling in blind spots: After all, 
there is a dot there. 
 
●
Daniel Dennett tries to offer an alternative to the filling-in picture for 
blind spots. Dennett says that the brain merely registers that there is more of 
the same in the area of the blind spot. It doesn’t need to fill in. It merely tells 
you not to expect anything different there, so you don’t.
Suggested Reading
Dennett, “Quining Qualia.” 
Hoffman, Visual Intelligence. 
Questions to Consider
Imagine a duck dressed as a pirate. Which of these questions can you answer, 
without adding to what you’ve imagined? Is it wearing a sword? Does it have scars? 
What color are its feet?
1 
Is its tail straight or curly?
2 
One explanation for what you see in your peripheral vision is that your brain 
fills in color at the edges. Another explanation is that your brain simply ignores 
the fact that you don’t see color at the edges. Which theory do you think 
is right?
3 
One explanation for what you see in your blind spot is that your brain fills in 
a visual background there. Another explanation is that your brain simply tells 
you that there is more of the same there. Which theory do you think is right? 

74
Mind-Body Philosophy

Lecture 8
Strange Cases of 
Consciousness

76
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
W
e can learn quite a lot about the mind and the brain by exploring our 
own normal consciousness. But we can also learn a great deal by looking 
further afield at some very strange cases of consciousness. Some strange 
cases of subjective experience offer important lessons as to how the brain functions. 
The first set of lessons from consciousness tells us about modularity in the brain.  
The second set of lessons tells us about multiple routes in the brain. The third set 
carries lessons about differentiation and separation between parts of the brain, 
particularly between different sides of the brain. And the fourth set of lessons 
concerns strange effects of blending, intersection, and union between different 
parts of the brain. 
Modularity
 
●
Different areas of the visual cortex have been found to process different aspects 
of the stream of information from the retinas, with quite different effects. 
The first area of information arrival is known as V1, short for visual processing 
area 1. The representation that appears on V1 is laid out like the image in a 
fish-eye mirror. 
 
●
In the adjoining area, V2, stereo vision is processed: putting together 
the information from two eyes to generate your impression of a three-
dimensional scene. V3 is a distinct area that processes depth and distance. 
V4 is devoted to color, V5 to motion, and V6 is at work processing the position 
of objects. 

77
LECTURE 8STRANGE CASES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
 
●
The celebrated neurologist Oliver Sacks tells the story of a successful artist, 
known for abstract color canvases, who suffered damage to the V4 area in an 
automobile accident. He lost color entirely. He spoke of the world as going not 
only into shades of gray, but going indescribably “wrong.” What had appeared 
“flesh-colored” now appeared “rat-colored.” 
 
●
That is a lesson regarding modularity: Those with changes to V4 have no 
trouble reading a newspaper, no trouble navigating the world in terms of place 
or motion, and no difficulty in recognizing family and friends. It is just color 
that is impacted. 
Multiple Routes
 
●
The brain routes information through multiple paths. There is an area of the 
brain toward the bottom of the temporal lobes known as the fusiform gyrus. 
With damage to the fusiform gyrus, a person is unable to recognize faces. 
It’s called prosopagnosia, or face-blindness. 
 
●
The more severe the condition, the more compensation is required. 
Those with prosopagnosia may focus on particular features as indicators of 
particular people. They may, in fact, prefer friends who have recognizably 
large noses, bushy mustaches, or the like. There are cases so extreme that 
people fail to recognize their own face in a mirror. 
 
●
Normal recognition of people actually involves two routes. From the fusiform 
gyrus—where faces are recognized—visual recognition information 
normally is routed to the amygdala, a very old and central part of the brain 
that is tied to emotion. 
 
●
But it is possible for the first route to be operative while the second is not. It is 
possible to have facial recognition with no accompanying emotional overtone. 
That strange form of consciousness is called Capgras syndrome. It results in 
the belief that one is surrounded by imposters; someone might think their wife 
is actually an imitator.

78
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
The thalamus

79
LECTURE 8STRANGE CASES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
 
●
The current theory is that it is that second route—the emotional one—has 
been interrupted. The facial recognition of the fusiform gyrus remains intact 
but the emotional response isn’t there.
 
●
There is an even stranger form of double routing or redundancy in the brain 
known as blindsight. In the anatomy of visual consciousness, information from 
the optic nerve comes into V1. Before that, it has been divided into left and 
right visual fields. 
 
●
If the V1 on one side of the brain is knocked out, one loses half the visual field. 
Knock out V1 on the right side and a person loses the left side of their 
visual field. Knock out the V2 on the left side and a person loses the right side 
of their visual field. 
 
●
A person whose V1 has been impacted on the right side will be unable to tell 
where a spot of light is on a screen to their left. They can’t see over there. 
Their eyes may still be functional, but they are cognitively blind to the left. 
Strangely, however, if asked to point to where the point of light is, they may 
point to the spot with astounding accuracy.
 
●
Blindsight was first documented in the work of Lawrence Weiskrantz 
at Oxford. Working with his original blindsight patient, Weiskrantz found that 
although the patient repeatedly insisted that he couldn’t see to his left—a clear 
result of damage to the V1 area on the right—he would “guess” the position 
of a spot of light with 99 percent accuracy. Subjects with blindsight have 
been documented navigating through rooms, avoiding furniture they cannot 
consciously see.
 
●
The explanation is a secondary route in the brain. When information routes 
from the retina, there is a “transfer station” in the thalamus: the lateral 
geniculate nucleus. At that point, the information stream divides. The stream 
goes to the normal visual processing area at the back of the head—to V1, 
unless of course it has been knocked out. But the stream is also routed to 
an evolutionary older pathway down to the brainstem in an area called the 
superior colliculus. 

80
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
It is that route—a route that is not revealed to consciousness—that allows 
accurate guesses as to the location of a spot of light. It is that route that allows 
blindsight navigation of a room one cannot consciously see. The brain is 
modular, but is also redundant. 
Differentiation
 
●
The third set of lessons about how the brain functions concerns differentiation 
in consciousness and the brain. The brain has two hemispheres. The right 
hemisphere receives sensory input from the left side of the body and controls 
movement on that side. The left hemisphere receives sensory input from the 
right side of your body and controls that side. 
 
●
The exception is the eyes. The right hemisphere receives input not from the 
left eye but from the left side of the visual field, taken from both eyes. The left 
hemisphere receives input from the right side of the visual field—again, from 
both eyes. 
 
●
What happens when one specific side of the brain is impacted? An example 
case is the neuroscientist Barbara Lipska. One day, as she stretched out her 
arm to turn on a computer, she realized that her right hand had disappeared. 
A brain tumor had knocked out her right visual field.
●
There is another strange form of consciousness, parietal neglect, caused by
a stroke. With this condition, people stop caring about one side of their vision. 
They simply neglect the left side of their world. The condition is caused by 
damage to the parietal region of the right brain. Interestingly, it happens only 
with the right brain. Lisa Genova has written a fascinating novel based on the 
condition, entitled Left Neglected. 
 
●
A person with parietal neglect will only eat food placed on the right side of 
the plate, ignoring even a particular treat to the left. The person may be able 
to see that food, and indeed may eat it once someone calls attention to it. 
But unprompted, they won’t pay any attention to it. 

81
LECTURE 8STRANGE CASES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
 
●
Neglect applies not only to what is seen but what is imagined. When patients 
in Milan were asked to imagine that they were walking through a familiar 
cathedral square in a particular direction, they described only what they would 
have seen on the right side. 
 
●
In a previous lecture, we discussed V. S. Ramachandran’s astounding treatment 
for phantom pain using a simple mirror box. Could the same technique be 
used to treat parietal neglect? What if we used a mirror to show a person with 
parietal neglect the left side of the world? 
 
●
Ramachandran found that with the mirror in place, a person with parietal 
neglect clearly sees the person and the pen reflected in the mirror. But when 
asked to reach out and take the pen, she doesn’t identify the person as to 
her left. Despite the fact that she has dealt with mirror images her entire life, 
she cannot reach out to the left, to the real person reflected, in order to grasp 
the pen reflected from the left. She says that the mirror is in front of the pen.
 
●
In parietal neglect it is indeed like the left side of the world ceases to exist. 
When reflected in a mirror to the right, it has come into existence on the right 
side, but trapped behind the mirror.
The highlighted section shows the parietal lobe in the brain.

82
Mind-Body Philosophy

83
LECTURE 8STRANGE CASES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
The Split
 
●
The strongest lesson regarding differentiation between different hemispheres 
of the brain appears in split-brain patients. Running between the hemispheres 
is a broad tissue of nerves called the corpus callosum. In extreme cases of 
epilepsy, as a last-ditch effort, there are cases in which the corpus callosum has 
been surgically cut. With the exception of an overlap of functioning in the face 
and neck, cutting the corpus callosum effectively isolates the two hemispheres 
of the brain.
 
●
There is nothing particularly remarkable in the behavior of split-brain patients. 
In the 1940s, a number of patients were treated for epilepsy by cutting 
the corpus callosum. Despite that drastic surgery the patients showed no 
significant ill effects. It wasn’t until the 1950s, when Ronald Myers and Roger 
Sperry developed techniques for addressing the two hemispheres separately, 
that the strangeness of split-brains began to appear. 
 
●
The Myers and Sperry work began with cats and monkeys. With the corpus 
callosum of their animal subjects cut, they were able to train each of the 
hemispheres independently. What they found was that what was learned on 
one side of the brain did not transfer to the other side. The corpus callosum 
was necessary for information transfer between the hemispheres.
 
●
Linguistic processing is almost always in the left brain. Input to the right half 
of the visual field—processed in the left brain—can therefore be reported 
verbally: If someone sees a pipe, they can say, “I see a pipe.” Because linguistic 
processing is standardly restricted to the left brain, input to the left half of the 
visual field—processed in the right brain—cannot be reported verbally. 
 
●
One of the most dramatic cases involved a young man who had undergone 
split-brain surgery but who did retain a limited linguistic capability in his 
right hemisphere. Under control of his right hemisphere, this patient was able 
to use movable letters to spell out words with his left hand. 

84
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
He was asked what he wanted to do with his life. He responded verbally 
with his verbal left hemisphere that he wanted to be a draftsman. But his left 
hand, expressing his right brain, spelled out “automobile race.” His right brain 
wanted to be a racecar driver. 
 
●
From his investigations, Sperry concluded that each hemisphere does seem 
to have its own separate and private sensations, with the right hemisphere 
constituting a second conscious entity running along in parallel with a 
dominant stream of consciousness in the left. 
Synesthesia
 
●
Synesthesia is a blending of different sensory modalities. In one form of 
synesthesia, music comes in colors. One note might be red, another blue. It has 
been estimated that synesthesia of one form or another is evident in as many as 
2 people in 100. 
 
●
Synesthesia, first documented by Francis Galton in the 19th century, appears 
to be largely genetic. It is quite demonstrably real. The color perception of 
numerals can be revealed by a test in which numeral 2s and numeral 5s—
computer generated in a square format so that they are mirror images of each 
other—are scattered in patches across a field. 
●
The two symbols are so similar that most people just see a field of black and 
white S- and Z-shapes. But for those with synesthesia who see numerals in 
color, patches of 2s and 5s stand out because of their different colors. 
 
●
Ramachandran’s hypothesis regarding synesthesia is that it is overlap between 
neighboring brain areas that produces numbers with color. One of the strange 
facts about synesthesia is that it is seven times more common among artists, 
poets, and novelists. Ramachandran’s further hypothesis is that overlap, 
blending, and hyperconductivity across various parts of the brain may be an 
important part of artistic creativity. 

85
LECTURE 8STRANGE CASES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Suggested Reading
Genova, Left Neglected. 
Nagel, “Brain Bisection and the Unity of Consciousness.” 
Sacks, “The Case of the Colorblind Painter.” 
Questions to Consider
1 
People with achromatopsia live in a world without color. They can neither see 
nor even imagine color. Can you imagine living a month in a world without 
color? Can you imagine not being able to imagine color?
2 
Here’s an experiment to do with a friend. Give them a series of numbers, 
asking them to write down a color that seems right for each one:
9  1  4  7  6  2  3  5  8 
In a week or so, ask them to do it again, giving them the same numbers in a 
different order:
7  5  2  6  3  9  1  8  4
Compare the two lists. For most people, the colors assigned the two times 
won’t match up. If your friend has number synesthesia, they will assign the 
same color to the same number each time.

86
Mind-Body Philosophy

Lecture 9
Altered States of 
Consciousness

88
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
T
his lecture will look at altered states of consciousness from two directions: 
What can the brain sciences tell us about altered states? And what can altered 
states tell us about the brain? The lecture begins with the altered state  
of dreams. Then the lecture moves on the hallucinations before entering a 
discussion on altered states caused by drugs. Finally, the lecture looks at near-
death and out-of-body experiences. As we will see, altered states offer a wealth of 
information about the brain.
Sleep
 
●
There are two kinds of sleep, REM (rapid eye movement) and NREM (non-
rapid eye movement). There is a standard sleep cycle that can be tracked in 
terms of brain waves. Waking life is characterized by beta waves, at 12 to 40 
cycles per second. As we doze off into stage 1 NREM sleep, there is a shift to 
slower alpha and theta waves, 8–12 and 4–8 cycles per second. 
 
●
In stage 2 of NREM, rapid and rhythmic brain activity, known as sleep 
spindles, appear against that background. Stage 3 NREM is marked by the 
addition of still slower delta waves to the mix. In stage 4, deep NREM sleep, 
the brain settles into delta waves almost exclusively. 

89
LECTURE 9ALTERED STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
 
●
Then the surprise: a rapid ascent through stages 4, 3, and 2 NREM into REM. 
The EEG for REM sleep actually looks a lot like waking, dominated by 
beta waves. But during REM sleep all input is internal, stimulated from the 
brain stem, rather than reaching us from outside. REM sleep lasts 20 to 
30 minutes. It is followed by another descent into NREM. The entire cycle 
takes about 90 minutes. Eight hours of sleep represents about five cycles. 
 
●
It was long thought that dreaming was the sole province of REM sleep 
and that NREM sleep was empty of mental content. It now appears that 
there are two kinds of dreaming, one characteristic of REM and the other of 
NREM sleep. If you wake someone during REM sleep, they typically relate 
the vivid, sensation-rich, complex and bizarre dreams we are all familiar with. 
 
●
Waking someone during NREM sleep produces a different kind of report. 
Here dreams seem to be thought-like rather than experience-like. Sleepers will 
say, “I was just thinking” about something. NREM dreaming takes the form of 
looped fretting, almost always, of course, about things that aren’t really worth 
fretting about. 
The Purpose of Dreams
 
●
There is no consensus on the purpose of dreams. One view is that what we 
do in dreams is rehearse patterns of action from the day—action repertoires, 
either alone or in bizarre combinations. The psychologist Nicholas Humphrey 
proposes that rehearsal in dreams is one of nature’s most audacious and 
ingenious techniques for self-education. 
 
●
At the opposite extreme, Francis Crick and Graeme Mitchison proposed 
that dreams flood circuits at random in order to wash away unneeded 
connections acquired during the day. Dreaming is for forgetting rather 
than remembering. 
 
●
The philosopher Owen Flanagan thinks they have no real purpose all. 
He claims that dreams came along as a side effect as we evolved mechanisms for 
things that really do matter: sleep and waking consciousness. 

90
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Do dreams reveal something deep about our psyches? Freud thought dreams 
were wish fulfillments. His colleague Carl Jung made a list of dream archetypes 
with standard meanings. Both theories have been roundly debunked. 
 
●
Nevertheless, dreams might mean something after all. A tempting theory of 
dreams is that during REM sleep the neural patterns that constitute images of 
people or events, memories, and behavioral routines are stimulated at random 
by impulses from the brain stem. The faculties of the higher brain then 
attempt to construct a narrative that makes sense of this stream of random 
mental contents. 
 
●
Have you ever had a dream in which you knew you were dreaming, and 
found you could manipulate the story in your sleep? That’s a lucid dream. 
Fifty percent of people questioned say they’ve had a lucid dream at least once in 
their lives. Twenty percent say they have a lucid dream at least once a month. 
 
●
Sleep researchers have confirmed that lucid dreams do occur. In fact, the 
psychologist Stephen LaBerge runs the Lucidity Institute, and one of its aims 
is to teach people how to produce and control their lucid dreams. 
Hallucinations
 
●
A hallucination is defined as a sensation of something that isn’t there. 
Although we normally think of hallucinations as visual, auditory hallu-
cinations are the most common. There are also smell hallucinations, taste 
hallucinations, and touch hallucinations. Auditory hallucinations can be as 
simple as a hissing sound or a constant tone, and they can be teasingly soft or 
disruptively loud. 
 
●
The most common time for hallucinations to occur is just as one is falling 
asleep (hypnagogic) or waking up (hypnopompic). These hallucinations 
are considered normal. Hallucinations can also come with migraines, 
Parkinson’s disease, temporal lobe seizures, lesions in the brain stem, and, of 
course, hallucinogenic drugs.

91
LECTURE 9ALTERED STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
 
●
What causes hallucinations? Two basic mechanisms have been proposed, 
though they might in fact function together. 
 
○
The first theory emphasizes higher brain function. A person’s sense 
of reality has slipped: The sounds and images are entirely internal, 
misinterpreted as coming from the outside. 
 
○
The second theory says we are asking the wrong question. Instead of 
asking why we sense something that isn’t there, we should be asking why 
we don’t hear those internal sounds and see those internal images all 
the time. This theory says that we actually do; it’s just that those internal 
impressions are usually swamped by input from the outside. 
 
●
If this second theory is true, hallucination should occur when input from 
the outside is cut. Indeed, one of the most reliable ways to produce 
hallucinations is by sensory deprivation. You don’t need to block all the 
senses: Put someone in darkness for extended periods of time, and they 
will have visual hallucinations. Block their hearing and they will have 
auditory hallucinations. 
 
●
Some hallucinations, as the previously mentioned hypnagogic and hypno-
pompic hallucinations, are considered normal. On the other hand, hearing 
voices may occur as a symptom of mental illness. Schizophrenia involves a 
chronic and severe loss of contact with reality, with hallucinated voices—from 
God, the devil, or one’s dog, for example—as a major sign. 

92
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Drug-Induced States
 
●
Nicotine and caffeine are stimulants. So are cocaine and amphetamines. 
Both cocaine and amphetamines require larger and larger doses to 
produce their effects. Long-term use of amphetamines can lead to para-
noid hallucinations. Long-term use of cocaine can produce a very specific 
hallucination: bugs crawling under one’s skin.
 
●
Alcohol, barbiturates, and tranquilizers are depressants. Heavy and extended 
use alcohol can produce hallucinations, both during use and in withdrawal.
 
●
The altered states produced by the highly addictive narcotics heroin, 
morphine, codeine, and methadone are primarily of altered mood rather 
than perception. Altered perceptual states are first and foremost the territory 
of hallucinogenic: psilocybin from “magic mushrooms,” mescaline from 
peyote, and LSD.
 
●
Hofmann mentioned circles and spirals as part of that first acid trip. 
Complex hallucinations may include cartoon characters, scenes from 
childhood, or beautiful landscapes. But simple and specific geometric 
patterns show up repeatedly in visual hallucinations, whether natural 
or drug-induced. 
 
●
These simple patterns include wavy lines, circles, spirals, and con- 
centric patterns.Similar patterns can be found in ancient art from around 
the world, some of which may be tied to rituals incorporating hallucination. 
 
●
Why the ubiquity of concentric circles and spirals? A group of mathe-
maticians led by Jack Cowan in Ohio and Paul Bressloff in Oxford have offered 
a theory built on the anatomical structure of visual processing the brain: 
The standard patterns of base-level hallucinations could be explained by 
drug-induced instability within the specific brain structure of visual 
processing area V1. 

93
LECTURE 9ALTERED STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Out of Body
 
●
Out-of-body experiences are a state in which someone seems to see the 
world from a location outside their body. These may occur as an effect of 
hallucinogenic drugs, in association with epilepsy and migraines, or under 
conditions of stress. Some 15 to 20 percent of people claim to have had at least 
one out-of-body experience. 
 
●
The first question, of course, is whether what is perceived is real: Has some 
part of a person—their consciousness, perhaps—really exited their body? 
That would certainly have important consequences for the mind-body problem. 
 
●
Leaving one’s body, projected to another place, is a common element in 
folklore in many cultures. “Spectral evidence” played a major role in the Salem 
witch trials. Witnesses testified that they had a dream or vision in which 
they were attacked by the accused witch. But many accounts of out-of-body 
experiences strain credulity. 
 
●
If out-of-body experiences literally involved leaving one’s body, one should be 
able to perceive things that aren’t visible from where one is laying. In a 1968 
paper, the parapsychologist Charles Tart reported a sleep experiment in which 
a woman asleep in his lab was able to correctly report a five digit number 
hidden on a shelf above the bed. 
●
Was she able to see that number in an out-of-body experience? Tart’s experi-
mental controls were bad, and it seems equally plausible that she got up 
and peeked. Later experiments with 100 subjects who thought they could read 
remote messages in out-of-body experiences showed a success rate of zero. 
The alternative explanation is that out-of-body experiences are “as-if” 
experiences: the experience is merely as if you were viewing your body from 
the outside. 
 
●
Transcranial magnetic stimulation produces an electric current in the area 
of the brain under a magnetic coil. The Canadian neuroscientist Michael 
Persinger reports producing out-of-body experiences by transcranial magnetic 
stimulation in the temporal lobe. 

94
Mind-Body Philosophy

95
LECTURE 9ALTERED STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Near Death
 
●
A composite picture of commonly reported near-death experiences would 
include an out-of-body experience, travel through a tunnel toward bright light, 
the presence of a central figure or lost loved ones, and immersion in positive 
and loving emotions. 
 
●
Over the course of a year, a hospital in Southampton, England interviewed 
all survivors of cardiac arrest. Four percent reported near-death experiences. 
In the Netherlands, of 344 patients resuscitated after cardiac arrest, 18 percent 
reported a near-death experience. 
 
●
Interestingly, and not implausibly, many of those who have had near-death 
experiences regard them as life changing, and report stronger belief in an 
after-life and a reduced fear of death. 
 
●
Not so often reported is the rate of hellish near-death experiences: a cold 
field of dead gray, or cackling demons with naked people writhing in pain. 
The rate of these has been estimated as high as 15 percent, though people are 
understandably anxious to deny or forget them. 
 
●
Just as out-of-body experiences are offered as evidence of a separate soul, near-
death experiences are offered as evidence of a life after death. Are they?
●
The strongest form of evidence would be the occurrence of such experiences—
or any experiences—within a period of flat EEG, standardly associated with 
bodily death. That isn’t the kind of evidence we have. What we have in all 
cases of near-death experiences are reports after the event. It is not clear that 
what is reported is an experience during a period before the EEG goes flat, 
during a flat EEG, or even within a period of recovery. 
 
●
Reports of near-death experiences are also consistent with the dying brain 
hypothesis: Loss of oxygen to the brain can produce what researchers at the 
University of Michigan’s Center for Consciousness Science call a “brainstorm” 
of increased electrical activity and a massive release of neurotransmitters. 
Visions of tunnels and lights appear with disinhibition of the visual cortex. 

96
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Out-of-body experiences may be linked to activity in the temporal lobe. 
Positive and loving emotions may correlate with endorphins and enkephalins, 
released under stress. 
 
●
It is interesting to note that if there is a realm after death, it seems to be an 
all-inclusive and ecumenical realm. Christians report seeing Jesus and angels 
in the course of near-death experiences. Hindus report meeting the king of 
the dead and his messengers. If near-death experiences are a purely physical 
brain phenomenon, that’s exactly what you’d expect: a core phenomenon 
interpretable in different ways within a wide range of cultures.

97
LECTURE 9ALTERED STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Suggested Reading
Flanagan, Dreaming Souls.
James, “On Some Hegelisms.” 
Sacks, Musicophilia.
Questions to Consider
1 
The lecture mentioned three theories of dreams:
 
○
They serve as rehearsals of action repertoires formed during the day.
 
○
They flood circuits in order to wash away unneeded connections made 
during the day.
 
○
They are an evolutionary by-product that serves no function at all. 
Which theory do you think is right?
2 
Have you ever had a hallucination? An out-of-body experience? What do you 
think we can learn from those experiences? 

98
Mind-Body Philosophy
98

Lecture 10
Memory, Mind, 
and Brain

100
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
T
his lecture will begin to trace the link between memory and self, starting 
with a look at different types of memory and the functions they serve.  
In thinking about memory and the self there is one central figure in the 
history of philosophy: John Locke, one of the founders of British empiricism.  
It is in his 1690 An Essay Concerning Human Understanding that the term consciousness 
appears with its contemporary meaning for the first time. At the core of that work 
is a connection he draws between memory and personal identity: a link between 
memory and being the person who you are. This lecture takes a look at just what 
memories are and then circles back to Locke’s and others’ views on memory.
Types of Memory
 
●
There are many types of memory. One is short-term memory, also called 
working memory, which we use all the time. For example, people can 
remember a telephone number long enough to dial it. But at any given time, 
short-term memory is limited to only 15 to 30 seconds in length. Additionally, 
according to work by George A. Miller, we can only hold about seven pieces of 
short-term information, give or take a couple.
John Locke, who helped found British empiricism

101
LECTURE 10MEMORY, MIND, AND BRAIN
 
●
Short-term memory occurs behind the forehead, at the front of the 
frontal lobe. 
 
●
In order to operate for more than 15 to 30 seconds, or with more than seven 
items, we need long-term memory. Examples are remembering an appointment 
next Tuesday or that Bill owes John 10 dollars from a lost bet last week.
 
●
Other examples are how to shuffle a deck of cards or how to ride a bike. 
Remembering how to do something is called procedural memory. 
Procedural memory happens in a very different part of the brain, indeed, in 
different parts of the brain. 
 
●
When someone is first practicing a new motor skill, the frontal cortex lights 
up with activity. Five or six hours later, the motor skill operates more easily, 
much more smoothly. At that point, it’s the motor cortex (looped in an arc 
over the center of the brain) and the cerebellum (at the back just over the spinal 
cord) that light up as the person goes through the routine. 
 
●
Remembering specific events—for example, when a relative stepped off 
the train with various details of the scene—is called episodic memory. 
Remembering that FDR died before the end of World War II or that you 
have an important appointment is called semantic memory. Both episodic and 
semantic memory are thought of as explicit or conscious memory.
●
The hippocampus, a structure deep in the center of the brain, is crucial 
for laying down long-term memories of these types. Precisely how long-
term memories are laid down remains an unknown. One thing we do know 
is that “recycling” plays a role: If the same pattern recirculates through the 
hippocampus, the memory is laid down with greater strength. 
 
●
We also know that sleep can play a role. The hippocampus is active during 
sleep. Damage to or removal of the hippocampus impacts memory in a specific 
way. You can still use short-term memory and may retain some long-term 
memories, but you become unable to lay down new long-term memories. 

102
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
In addition to facilitating the conversion of short- to long-term memories, 
the hippocampus codes basic spatial memory. Brain scans on humans show 
spatial navigation as a function of the hippocampus. 
 
●
Near the hippocampus is another important structure: the amygdala, thought 
of as a center for emotion. It has been suggested that the hippocampus and the 
amygdala function together: that emotion enhances the coding of memories. 
 
●
In evolutionary terms, the hippocampus is an ancient part of the brain. 
Right next to it is another ancient structure: the processing area for smell. 
That may partially explain why smell can be so evocative of memory. 
What and Where Are Memories?
 
●
What are memories, and where are they located? Eric Kandel won a Nobel 
Prize in 2000 for work addressing that question. It is not an individual neuron 
that encodes an individual memory. It is a pattern of neurons that encodes 
a memory. 
 
●
Every experience fires a particular pattern of neurons. During repeated, 
partially repeated, or overlapping patterns, the synapses between the neurons 
in that particular pattern are strengthened. Kandel’s work allows us to track 
down the idea of neural cell assemblies in biological detail. 
 
●
Where are the neural cell assemblies stored? All evidence indicates that 
the patterns are stored precisely where they first appeared: Visual data is 
processed in the visual center, audio data in the auditory center, and so on. 
Perceiving those things together involved a pattern of neurons coordinated 
in different parts of the brain. That pattern of precisely those neurons is 
codified as the memory of the event in the same place or linked places as in the 
original perception. 
 
●
In short-term memory, things are recorded sequentially: Asked to recall the 
fifth number in a seven-digit sequence you just heard, you’ll probably count 
from the start until you hit the fifth number. In contrast, memories are 
retrieved from long-term memory by association.

103
LECTURE 10MEMORY, MIND, AND BRAIN
 
●
Cell assemblies serve more than one purpose. An individual neuron may fire 
when a person sees a picture of the Eiffel Tower. The same neuron fires—
and by supposition the entire cell assembly is activated—when a patient 
remembers the Eiffel Tower. That’s our evidence that the neural pattern of 
initial perception and of later memory are the same. 
 
●
But the neuron may also fire when the person is asked merely to imagine the 
Eiffel Tower. The same cell assembly, in other words, may do the work of 
perception, memory, and imagination as well. 
Memories versus Imagination
 
●
If they memories and imagination recruit the same cell assemblies, what 
is the difference between memories and imagination? How can we tell  
them apart?
 
●
David Hume, an empiricist in the tradition of Locke, thought that 
memories have an internal characteristic that allows us to tell that they  
are memories. Perceptions are vivid and intense. Memories are fainter,  
pale shadows in comparison.

104
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
That doesn’t help distinguish memories from imaginings, and not many 
people have been convinced. One can have a vivid memory and a tenuous 
piece of imagination. But one can also imagine something vividly while 
remembering it only vaguely. 
 
●
The truth is that Locke’s problem is a problem that we all face: There may 
not be any internal difference between the products of memory and the 
products of imagination that allows us to tell them apart just by looking at 
them from the inside.
 
●
Each time you bring up a memory you bring it up in a different context, and 
when you put it back it may not be precisely the same cell assembly. Every time 
you remember something your memory is liable to change. This leads to
the problem of false memories: things we think we are recalling as accurate 
memories—accurate records of a past event or a past experience—
but which are not. 
 
●
Elizabeth Loftus is an expert in the field who has done some wonderful 
experiments in false memory. In one, she asked parents of an advanced age 
to recount some events that had happened during the childhood of their 
adult children. 
 
○
She then interviewed the adult children, asking them whether they 
remembered the events their parents had told her. In doing so, she used 
three episodes their parents had related. 
 
○
But she also slipped in a fourth event that hadn’t been mentioned by the 
parents and hadn’t ever happened. About 25 percent of the adult children 
also insisted that the fourth fictional event had occurred to them. In some 
cases, they would even elaborate on remembered details of the event that 
never happened. They were merely imagining it.
 
●
It turns out that our memories are extremely malleable, extremely vulnerable 
to suggestion. A suggested detail that is merely imagined may be incorporated 
as if it were part of a memory. We may later be unable to tell the genuinely 
remembered parts from those that were merely suggested or imagined. 

105
LECTURE 10MEMORY, MIND, AND BRAIN
 
●
One of the gut-wrenching places this shows up is in what are termed 
recovered memories under therapy, including memories of being the victim of 
child abuse. In the 1980s, under therapy and hypnosis, cases began arising 
of adults who remembered being sexually abused as children. 
 
●
There have been a number of legal cases in which a perpetrator—often a 
father—has been publicly accused on the basis of memories thought to have 
been suppressed but later recovered.
 
●
The debate regarding recovered memories continues. On the one side, child 
abuse is a horrible crime, and we do indeed want perpetrators to face justice. 
On the other side, there are cases in which the recovered memories have 
turned out to be false memories. 
 
●
False memories are also a frightening possibility in eyewitness testimony. 
Next to DNA, the testimony of an eyewitness is the gold standard in 
criminal cases. Yet decades of research—much of it inspired by Elizabeth 
Loftus—has shown that the memories recounted in eyewitness testimony 
are as malleable and subject to distortion as any others. 
Aging
 
●
Age does affect memory, but not as much as you might think. Perhaps 
because of news coverage, a large proportion of the aging population swears 
that they are starting to suffer from Alzheimer’s or dementia. The truth 
is that only about 10 percent of people between 65 and 100 suffer from 
anything so clinical. 
 
●
The typical and normal kind of memory loss that comes with aging is the “tip-
of-the-tongue” memory problem; for instance, trying to recall a name but 
having it remain just out of grasp. Misplacing the occasional name happens 
to everyone, even if it does become more frequent with age. In Alzheimer’s, 
one loses concepts of common objects and familiarity with common places. 

106
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
True short-term memory is not much affected by normal aging. What appears 
to suffer most with age is the conversion of short-term memories into long-
term memories. That is a function of the hippocampus, which shrinks 
with age. That may be why, with age, people may find it easier to remember 
what happened 10 years ago than what happened two months ago. 
 
●
One of the very last aspects of memory to fail—even in extreme cases of 
Alzheimer’s and dementia—is procedural memory, remembering how. 
 
●
The good news is that memory, like other mental functions, can be preserved 
and extended through life-long use. Studies of people beyond the age of 70 
show that those with more education have more efficient memories, with less 
change in memory ability. The theory is that they have learned, practiced, 
and can apply more flexible strategies for establishing and managing memory. 
Remembering Everything
 
●
The Argentinian author Jorge Luis Borges has a story called “Funes 
the Memorius,” in which the title character remembers everything. 
Everything Funes has ever seen—every nuance of every shadow of every leaf 
of ivy on a wall—is etched indelibly in his memory. 

107
LECTURE 10MEMORY, MIND, AND BRAIN
 
●
Funes is what we all would be if Locke had been right about memory: If every 
experience we had made an impression that was filed away in a storehouse 
of memory. Locke forgot forgetting. Forgetting is probably just as important 
for effective thinking and living as memory. 
 
●
An important point of the story is that Funes regards his prodigious memory 
not as a blessing but as a curse. He hides himself away in a dark room. He says, 
“My memory, sir, is like a garbage heap.” 
 
●
The real though rare condition that Funes has is called hyperthymesia. 
Jill Price is credited as the first established case, with about 25 confirmed 
cases since. 
 
●
Price can remember every day of her life from when she was 14.  
Interestingly, her recall is almost entirely autobiographical: She actually 
performs poorly on standardized memory tests. Like Funes, she describes  
it as a burden: “non-stop, uncontrollable, and totally exhausting.”
Suggested Reading
Borges, “Funes the Memorious.” 
Foer, Moonwalking with Einstein.
Miller, “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two.” 
Questions to Consider
1 
Give three examples from your own experience of each kind of memory: 
An episodic memory (of a scene), a semantic memory (of a fact), and a 
procedural memory (of how to do something). 
2 
What is the first thing you remember in your life? How confident are you that 
that is a genuine memory?


Lecture 11
Self-Consciousness 
and the Self

110
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
H
ow is memory tied to our concept of the self? That’s the topic this 
lecture explores, using John Locke as our point of reference in the  
history of philosophy. For Locke, it is the continuity of conscious memory 
that defines someone’s identity as a person. But there are two distinct questions 
that Locke runs together as if they were the same question. Distinguishing between 
those two questions offers a clearer understanding. The first question: What 
precisely is the sense of self—is it an element added to experience, or is it built into 
the structure of our experience? The second question: What counts as the “same 
person” over time? 
The Sense of Self
 
●
Our experience seems to come with a sense of the self that is having 
that experience. Descartes puts the “I” at the core of his certainty: “I think, 
therefore I am.” 
 
●
Locke says that “when we see, hear, smell, taste, feel, meditate, or will 
anything we know that we do so.” Emphasizing a sense of continuous self, he 
says that it is beyond doubt that “I that write this am the same myself now 
whilst I write that I was Yesterday.”

111
LECTURE 11SELFCONSCIOUSNESS AND THE SELF
 
●
Immanuel Kant, writing a little less than 100 years later, says that the “I 
think” accompanies all experiences, which would be impossible without it. 
William James says that within the stream of consciousness there is a sense 
of self, “felt by all men as a sort of innermost citadel within the circle, of 
sanctuary within the.” 
 
●
The neuroscientist Antonio Damasio echoes all of these: “Besides the images 
of what we perceive externally,” there is also “this other presence that signifies 
you, as observer of the things imaged, potential actor on the things imagined. 
If there were no such presence, how would your thoughts belong to you?” 
 
●
All of this seems obvious: When it comes to the experiential question, we do 
have a sense of self. 
The Same Person
 
●
What is it that makes someone the same person over time? That’s the question 
of personal identity.
●
Let’s distinguish qualitative from numerical identity. Two things are numerically 
identical if they’re literally the same entity. If two people have Subaru Outbacks, 
they have qualitatively similar vehicles, but not numerically identical.
●
When we talk of changes in someone’s personality, we use the qualitative 
sense: “He’s not himself today” or “She’s not the woman I married.” 
We’re bemoaning a qualitative change in personality while relying on the 
fact that we’re talking about the same person in a numerical sense. 
 
●
Locke believes it is continuity of memory that makes us the same person 
over time—not identity of bodies. Locke’s argument relies on this thought 
experiment: Suppose that we implant the consciousness of a prince in the body 
of a cobbler. We are to imagine that the prince’s consciousness, including his 
consciousness of his past life, is implanted in the body of the cobbler. Who will 
that person be? Locke’s answer is unequivocal: the prince. It is the continuity 
of conscious memory that makes a person the same person over time. 

112
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Dissociative Fugue and Multiple Personalities
 
●
On January 17, 1887, Reverend Ansel Bourne withdrew $551 from his bank in 
Providence, Rhode Island, and disappeared, only to reappear in Norristown, 
Pennsylvania, believing he was a man named A. J. Brown. Later, he eventually 
awoke one morning as a very confused Ansel Bourne.
 
●
The pioneering psychologist William James suggested they could explore the 
case by putting Bourne under hypnosis. Indeed, under hypnosis, A. J. Brown 
reappeared and was able to describe his travels to Norristown. But even the 
Brown that appeared under hypnosis claimed to know nothing about Reverend 
Ansel Bourne. 
 
●
Today the case would be classified dissociative fugue: a case of reversible 
amnesia for memory, personality, and personal identity.
 
●
We’ve previously discussed cases in which the hemispheres of the brain are 
separated by surgically cutting the corpus callosum: A man might say he 
wants to be a draftsman but spell out that he wants to be a racecar driver 
with his hand. That certainly sounds like William James’ conclusion:  
“Mr. Bourne’s skull … covers two distinct personal selves.” 
 
●
That was Michael Gazzaniga’s initial thinking when he started working on 
split-brain cases. He changed his mind later because of the role of what he 
called the interpreter. 
 
○
The left brain of a subject was shown a chicken claw. The right brain was 
shown a snow scene. The subject was asked to choose a related picture 
with each hand. 
 
○
He chose a picture of a chicken with one hand and a picture of a shovel 
with the other. This is where the interpreter comes in. When asked, “Why 
did you pick two different things,” the left hemisphere interpreter would 
make up something that covered the two responses. In this example, the 
subject said “Oh, that’s easy. You’re going to need a shovel to clean out the 
chicken coop.” 

113
LECTURE 11SELFCONSCIOUSNESS AND THE SELF
 
●
Because of the overarching role of the interpreter, Gazzinga ultimately decided 
that even in split-brain cases, there is only one dominant hemisphere, only one 
high-level consciousness, and in that sense only one self.
Dealing with Odd Cases
 
●
A number of thinkers have tried to deal with both normal self-consciousness 
and the aforementioned unusual cases by distinguishing between different 
senses of self. James, for example, speaks of two selves: a “me” and an “I.” 
The me includes all those things one tend to call mine: “my social life,” “my 
virtues and vices,” and “my memories.” James clearly thought of Bourne and 
Brown as different selves in that sense. 
 
●
But beneath that self, James insists, there is also an “I.” That is the self we feel 
as the focus of all our experience—the lasting core self.
 
●
Distinctions between senses of self are also prominent in the work of 
neuroscientist Antonio Damasio. Damasio characterizes the core self, which 
is reminiscent of short-term memory, as “a transient entity, ceaselessly re-
created for each and every object with which the brain interacts.” 
 
●
The other self is what he terms the “autobiographical self.” That self includes 
lasting characteristics like your name, your history, whether you tend to avoid 
conflict, and how you approach a problem. The autobiographical self has the 
properties of long-term memory. 
Animals
 
●
Are animals self-conscious? Do they have a sense of self? The standard test 
for sense of self in animals is the mirror test, developed by the psychologist 
Gordon Gallup in the 1970s. The test is this: We show the animal a mirror for 
the first time. 

114
Mind-Body Philosophy

115
LECTURE 11SELFCONSCIOUSNESS AND THE SELF
 
●
Then, in some way the animal isn’t aware of—under anesthesia, for example—
we put a colored mark on its ear, or its forehead. We then watch how it then 
behaves in front of the mirror. Does it look at the image and then investigate 
the mark by reaching to that spot on its own body? If so, it must realize that 
the image it sees in the mirror is an image of itself. It must, therefore, have a 
sense of self.
 
●
Chimpanzees pass the mirror test, as do orangutans and bonobos. Gorillas do 
not, except for one: Koko, a gorilla raised in close human contact and taught 
elements of American sign language. Human infants don’t pass the test until 
somewhere between 18 months and two years old. There have been positive 
reports of versions of the mirror test for dolphins, orcas, and magpies. 
 
●
The test isn’t without flaws: Many species view staring as a threat, which 
makes using a mirror problematic. That may complicate results. If the test 
does reveal a sense of self, it’s unclear what specific self it reveals. 
 
●
Damasio thinks that only simple levels of autobiographical memory are 
present in other animals. Gordon Gallup, on the other hand, the man 
who designed the mirror test, thinks that chimpanzees not only recognize 
themselves in the mirror but have an awareness of self in terms of a personal 
past and future.
The Teletranslator
 
●
Derek Parfit is a contemporary philosopher who has explored questions 
of memory and personal identity in great depth, using some strange and 
wonderful thought experiments. 
 
●
Parfit borrows the idea of a teletransporter from science fiction. Take this 
thought experiment: Let’s say a teletransporter can take a complete map 
of your brain and body. Then it can disassemble your atoms and send them 
to a teletransporter receiver on. There, identical atoms and molecules are 
assembled to recreate you. 

116
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
When you step into the teletransporter, are you suddenly whisked across 
the universe, or do you die? An atom-by-atom replica of you appears on 
Alpha Centauri. But maybe it’s just a Xerox copy. It’s not you. You ceased 
to exist when your atoms were disassembled here in the teletransporter 
on Earth.
 
●
Raising further doubts: What if the teletransporter sends the same set of 
signals to two different places in the universe, making two Xerox copies? 
Split-brain cases are hard enough. Parfit hands us a split-person case. 
What happened to the one numerical self-identical you in the process? 
 
●
Parfit thinks the thought experiments show that being the same person 
isn’t always a matter of yes or no. Our concept gets gray and fuzzy at the 
hypothetical edges. Parfit calls someone who thinks that selves come in 
discrete yes-or-no packages an ego theorist. Parfit rejects ego theory. 
There just aren’t individual selves in the way we intuitively think there are. 

117
LECTURE 11SELFCONSCIOUSNESS AND THE SELF
Suggested Reading
Dennett, “Where Am I?” 
Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.
Parfit, “The Unimportance of Identity.” 
Questions to Consider
1 
Were Reverend Ansel Browne and A. J. Bourne the same person or not? 
2 
What is it that makes you numerically the same person as your past self as 
a child? 
3 
Would you step into Parfit’s teletransporter? Why or why not?


Lecture 12 
Rival Psychologies 
of the Mind

120
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
I
n this course, we’ve been tracing the history of thought on bodies and minds, 
always with an eye to contemporary scientific results. Psychology, as the science 
of the mind, is clearly a major part of that history. There are three claimants 
to the title of father of psychology: William James, Sigmund Freud, and Wilhelm 
Wundt. All three developed their theories in the infancy of psychology as a discipline 
in the latter part of the 19th and early part of the 20th century. All three have 
influenced the trajectory of psychological theory and research to the present day. 
This lecture contrasts the work of James against that of Freud, and then compares 
both to Wundt’s work.
William James
 
●
William James’s foundational work, The Principles of Psychology, was 
published in 1890. It had taken 12 years to write and was about 1,200 
pages long. The publisher encouraged him to publish a shorter version, which 
was released in 1892 as Psychology: the Briefer Course. 
 
●
For James, the primary concern of psychology is the issue of consciousness. 
This central focus dictates both his methodology and the core of his theoretical 
contribution. James does not take Freud as his intellectual sparring partner in 
his major work. It is rather the British empiricists he is arguing against: Locke, 
Berkeley, and Hume. 

121
LECTURE 12RIVAL PSYCHOLOGIES OF THE MIND
 
●
According to the empiricists, the mind acquires individual ideas, sensations, 
or impressions from sensory experience and then combines them into higher 
units in consciousness. For example, if we combine the idea of a horn with the 
idea of a horse, we come up with a unicorn.
 
●
James sees that synthetic approach as fundamentally unscientific. He claims 
that a genuine science must be built on the phenomena of experience, and 
experiences don’t come in atomic bits and pieces. The phenomena of experi-
ence always come as a whole. According to James, we have to start with what 
we directly know, with “total concrete states of mind.”
 
●
The psychology that James envisages is a scientific psychology based on data 
of a particular kind: introspective data. The target is an understanding of 
consciousness, and consciousness can only be revealed to us from our own 
subjective experience in introspection. 
 
●
Four immediate characteristics of consciousness guide James’s examination. 
1 
Every state of consciousness is a personal consciousness; every state of 
consciousness is owned by someone. With the ownership of every state 
of consciousness comes privacy: Every mind keeps its thoughts to itself. 
2 
Within each personal consciousness, states are always changing. 
3 
Consciousness is sensibly continuous. You go to sleep and wake up, but 
your consciousness is sensed as a continuation of what went before. 
4 
Attention focuses and shifts within consciousness. 
Sigmund Freud
 
●
In an early work, Freud says that any psychological theory must meet the 
demands of natural science. But he also says it must explain the puzzling things 
that we know in consciousness. 

122
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
This is a break: James tracks consciousness as the fundamental fact, relying 
on introspection as the primary tool. Freud attempts to explain the puzzling 
things about consciousness. According to Freud, the mental is divided into 
three realms: the conscious, the preconscious—that which can be retrieved 
from memory—and the unconscious. 
 
●
Given that map of mental territory, Freud develops a theory of basic 
forces, outlined like a cast of mythological characters. The id is the locus of 
inborn biological instincts or drives. The ego, developed from the id in 
infancy, is the id’s interface with reality. The ego attempts to bring the 
demands of the id into accord with the demands of the external world. 
The superego develops in early childhood as we incorporate internally the 
social constraints of parental influence. 
 
●
Freud used his theory in the treatment of patients. His writing is framed in 
terms of cases or generalizations from cases in which he attempts to treat 
hysteria, paranoia, and neuroses. The treatment protocol develops into 
psychoanalysis, a combination of talk therapy, free association, and dream 
analysis. The conceptual framework proliferates to include Oedipal complexes, 
Electra complexes, and so on.
 
●
Despite Freud’s insistence throughout his career that his goal was a science 
of psychology, his approach is closer to the therapeutic model of medicine. 
Freud himself resisted the use of controlled experiment. He seemed happy to 
see perceived success in individual cases as a vindication of broad theories. 
James versus Freud
 
●
James and Freud arrived at very different foundations for very different 
sciences. What did they have to say about each other?
 
●
Despite the fact that they were contemporaries, it is very difficult to 
find passages in which James mentions Freud by name or the reverse. 
Instead, they mention an approach or position which clearly is to be taken 
as that of the opponent. On both sides, the mention is always is sharp 
and critical.

123
LECTURE 12RIVAL PSYCHOLOGIES OF THE MIND
 
●
James totally rejects the concept of an unconscious mental state. The existence 
of an unconscious flies in the face of any attempt to build a science of 
mentality grounded first and foremost in conscious introspective experience. 
 
●
James says the attempt to introduce unconscious mental states “is the 
sovereign means for believing what one likes in psychology, and of turning 
what might become a science into a tumbling-ground for whimsies.” That is a 
strong rejection of Freudian theory.
 
●
For his part, Freud minces no words in condemning the other side: “Whereas 
the psychology of consciousness never went beyond this broken sequence 
of events … the view that held that what is mental is itself unconscious 
enabled psychology to take its place as a natural science like any other.”
Attacks
 
●
Freudian psychology, in particular, came under increasing attack 
as pseudoscientific. A prime mover in that attack was Karl Popper. 
Popper wasn’t primarily concerned with when a theory is true because he 
knew that even the best scientific theories might turn out to be wrong. 
He wanted to know what made a theory scientific to begin with, whether true 
or not. 
●
Popper’s demarcation criterion was falsifiability: A theory is scientific 
only if it is falsifiable. Popper’s cases of pseudoscience included Marxism 
and psychoanalysis. Those theories seem to be able to explain the results 
of social movements or individual psychology in every case, no matter 
what happens. That is the whole problem. 
 
●
A Marxist can find what he takes to be confirming evidence on every page of 
the newspaper. And whether a man tries to save a drowning child or drowns 
a child himself, the Freudian can explain it in terms of repression or some 
other notion. For a Freudian, every conceivable case can be explained in 
Freudian terms. 

124
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Popper’s falsifiability criterion has left a lasting impression. In a critique of 
Freud, author Richard Webster suggests that psychoanalysis may be the most 
complex and successful pseudoscience in history. 
 
●
However, if Freudian psychoanalysis is seen not as a single unified theory but 
as a collection of different theories, that critique may go too far. A number of 
philosophers and psychologists have come to the conclusion that at least some 
Freudian concepts are falsifiable, even if others may not be. 
 
●
After extensive examination, both the psychologist Hans Eysenck and 
the philosopher Adolf Grunbaum came to the conclusion that Popper’s 
blanket statement was wrong. At least some aspects of Freudian theory are 
empirically testable. Even so, Eysenck claims that Freud managed to set back 
the study of psychology and psychiatry by 50 years or more. 
 
●
James’s reputation has not done much better. The psychologist Gregory 
Kimble took a critical look at James’ major work, The Principles of Psychology, 
on the 100th anniversary of its publication. He concluded that he couldn’t 
find a single principle in it. 
Wilhelm Wundt
 
●
Although Freud and James have both been named as fathers of psychology, 
their theories have not fared particularly well. It is the third figure—Wilhelm 
Wundt, also spoken of as a father of psychology—who is a far clearer precursor 
of academic psychology as it developed through the 20th century. 
 
●
The object of Wundt’s investigations were “the elements of consciousness.” 
His background theory was in the tradition of the British empiricists. 
Wundt was looking for elements of sensation as they compounded into 
higher ideas. 
 
●
Unlike James’s personal introspection and unlike Freud’s clinical practice, 
Wundt’s approach was experimental. Like James, Wundt took introspection 
to be the route into consciousness. But he was acutely aware that the attempt 
to focus on one’s own mental state may change the mental state. 

125
LECTURE 12RIVAL PSYCHOLOGIES OF THE MIND
 
●
Because of that, Wundt didn’t rely on verbal introspective reports but on a 
subject’s simple signals regarding subjective experience—the pressing of 
a key when a sound was heard, or when a light reached a particular point 
on the screen. He tested reaction times and discrimination thresholds. 
His experimental contexts called for stimuli that could be strictly controlled 
and strictly repeated with a number of subjects. 
 
●
In Wundt’s work, unlike that of James and Freud, one has real psychological 
experiments, many of which are indistinguishable in format from psychological 
experiments performed today.
 
●
In the course of the 20th century, at least in academic psychology, the influence 
of both James and Freud was swamped by experimental psychology in the 
tradition of Wundt. During his career, Wundt trained 116 graduate students, 
including many Americans. It was at precisely this time that psychology 
became popular, with new academic positions in rapidly expanding American 
universities. 
Behaviorism
 
●
In Wundt’s wake developed the most powerful movement in 20th-century 
psychology: behaviorism. With behaviorism, the shift is clearly away from 
both Freud and James and toward the experimental psychology of Wundt. 
 
●
Behaviorism carries Wundt’s insistence on a science fundamentally tied to 
experiment and objective observation. Wundt tried to track consciousness and 
envisaged the behavior of his subjects as a report of introspective experience. 
Behaviorism went much further, restricting study to only what is observable 
under controlled conditions. 
 
●
If science demands that we stick to what is strictly observable in the lab, and 
only behavior is strictly observable, the scientific psychology we seek will 
be a science of behavior. With the rise of behaviorism, consciousness loses 
its central place. With the rise of behaviorism, consciousness seems to lose  
any place. 

126
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Experimental psychology guided by behaviorism ruled most of the 20th
century, with John B. Watson and B. F. Skinner as major figures. 
 
●
Of course, no movement occurs without a counter-movement. In the 1960s, 
a cognitive revolution began as a revolt against the reign of behaviorism. 
Critical to that revolution was Noam Chomsky, who argued that analysis of 
verbal behavior in terms of the behaviorists’ stimulus and response wasn’t 
going to be enough to explain the complex and structured ways that humans 
use language. 
 
●
We will have to go “inside” in order to understand the cognitive factors 
running behind the observed behavior. In the merging of a number of fields, 
cognitive psychology came into its own and morphed into what is now known 
as cognitive science. 
 
●
As the 20th century began to shift to the 21st, still another revolution occurred: 
the neuroscience revolution. With the explosion of new techniques for brain 
imaging and brain intervention, cognitive science has joined forces with 
biology, medicine, and genetics. 

127
LECTURE 12RIVAL PSYCHOLOGIES OF THE MIND
Suggested Reading
Freud, “Project for a Scientific Psychoanalysis.” 
James, “The Stream of Consciousness.” 
Popper, “Science: Conjectures and Refutations.” 
Questions to Consider
1 
Freud says that a memory, a thought, a realization, or a fear can slip from 
consciousness to unconsciousness, but still continue to guide your behavior. 
Give an example from your own experience. 
2 
James emphasizes the continuity of consciousness—the stream of consciousness.
Contemporary critics claim that consciousness is actually quite fragmented, 
with gaps in time, attention, and content. Which account do you think is 
right? Could they both be right? 

128
Mind-Body Philosophy

Lecture 13
The Enigma of 
Free Will

130
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
A 
sense of being able to choose different courses of action is a clear 
characteristic of our subjective experience. But is it a sense of a freedom 
that is itself real? Or is our sense of free will merely an illusion? This lecture 
will focus on both the classic philosophical problem of free will and the way in 
which questions of free will arise in contemporary scientific research. There is 
much that the philosophical and scientific approaches have in common. But there 
are also important ways in which they differ. 
The Problem
 
●
The universe is governed by cause and effect. What happens at noon Monday 
is determined by everything that happened before noon Monday. If what 
happens at any step is entirely a result of what happens at the step before, 
everything at every step is determined by what happened before. All history 
is determined. That’s the determinism side of the so-called problem of free 
will and determinism. 
 
●
The other side of the problem is the free will part. Our lives—all lives—
involve a series of choices. If you trace back the course of your life, you can 
map it out like a branching tree diagram of choices faced and decisions made, 
followed by further choices faced and decisions made. 
 
●
The problem is that the two pictures we’ve painted don’t fit together. We think 
of our lives using the second picture: free will. But the way we think of the 
universe seems to have the first picture built in: determinism. 

131
LECTURE 13THE ENIGMA OF FREE WILL 
 
●
One option when faced with this dilemma is to buy the deterministic picture 
and to kiss free will goodbye. The universe operates by physical laws written 
in terms of natural forces and fundamental particles. Free human choice isn’t 
part of the picture. It is at best an illusion. 
 
●
Another option is to clutch onto free will, denying the deterministic picture 
in order to maintain the picture we’ve painted of free decisions, free choices, 
genuine responsibility, and sometimes grounded regret.
Scientific Confirmation?
 
●
One of the best-confirmed scientific theories of all time is quantum 
mechanics, the physics of the very small. We have mathematical formulations 
of the theory that give us, solidly and reliably, the right quantitative results—
often strange and unexpected.
 
●
Things become very confusing when we ask not merely how the formulas 
operate and what they predict but what they are telling us about how the 
universe works at a fundamental level. For instance, quantum mechanics 
doesn’t merely tell us that we don’t know why a particular atom decays at a 
particular time. It tells us there is nothing to know. There is no reason why 
a particular atom decays at a particular time. 
●
The implication of this scientific picture is that the universe isn’t deterministic. 
Not every event is determined by earlier events: The decay of a particular 
uranium nucleus isn’t so determined. While the 19th-century physics of 
Newton outlined a deterministic universe, 20th-century quantum mechanics 
tells us that picture is wrong.
 
●
So perhaps that settles it: Our best science tells us that the universe isn’t 
deterministic after all. There is space for free choice, responsible decisions, 
and free will after all. 
 
●
Some thinkers have made precisely that argument, claiming that quantum 
randomness allows for free will. But that is a step too far and too fast: If some 
events happen for no reason, how precisely does that give you free will?

132
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Ancient Debates
 
●
Much of the debate over free will, determinism, and randomness played out 
long before quantum mechanics arose. Stoicism and Epicureanism were two 
schools of Greek philosophy that continued into the Hellenistic or Roman 
period. Although Stoics and Epicureans were both materialists, the two 
schools had a very different take on free will.
 
●
The Epicureans took something like the quantum line. The Latin poet 
and philosopher Lucretius gives one of the most complete outlines of 
Epicureanism we have. Everything is material, including the mind, but the 
atoms of which things are made occasionally “swerve.” Lucretius tempers his 
determinism with randomness in order to carve space for free will.
 
●
The Stoics, on the other hand, were strict determinists. In full acceptance of 
an unbreakable chain of cause and effect, everyone’s fate is sealed. The best 
one could do, the Stoics said, was to bear it stoically. That has problems too: 
If everything is determined, it will be determined whether you suffer your 
fate or freely accept it. Even there you wouldn’t be free.
Roman philosopher Seneca

133
LECTURE 13THE ENIGMA OF FREE WILL 
Compatibilism
 
●
An alternative approach is to reject the dilemma itself: Maybe, once we 
really understand the philosophical issues involved, we will see that free 
will and determinism are compatible. Not surprisingly, this is known as a 
compatibilist approach. 
 
●
The basic idea is well captured in a quote from the American philosopher John 
Dewey: “What men have esteemed and fought for in the name of liberty is 
varied and complex—but certainly it has never been a metaphysical freedom 
of will.”
 
●
Dewey is emphasizing that metaphysical freedom—freedom from chains 
of causality—is not the freedom that we care about. What we care about 
is freedom from tyranny, from oppression, from chains of iron. It may 
also be freedom from addiction and compulsion. To want those kinds of 
freedom isn’t to want to be metaphysically independent of cause and effect. 
Freedom in the sense worth caring about is freedom from coercion, not 
freedom from causality. 
Grey Walter’s Experiments
 
●
Now let’s shift to questions of free will in a scientific context. We will 
examine two very suggestive sets of experiments. 
 
●
The first set of experiments, conducted by the neurologist Grey Walter, 
date to the 1960s. Walter implanted electrodes in the motor cortex of brain 
surgery patients. Those enabled him to record a pattern of activity called 
readiness potential: a burst of electrical activity in the motor cortex that 
precedes actions like moving your arm, or hand, or finger. 
 
●
Grey Walter’s hypothesis was that those bursts of activity in the brain didn’t 
merely precede voluntary action. They were the initiation of the causal chain of 
voluntary action, from brain to hand. In order to test the hypothesis, electrodes 
were implanted in the area of the brain associated with finger movement. 

134
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
He then asked his patients to control the movement of an old-fashioned 
carousel slide projector: When a patient wanted to see the next slide, they’d 
press the button. 
 
●
Grey Walter rigged the slide projector so that what actually triggered 
the slide change wasn’t the press of the patient’s finger, but the readiness 
potential in the motor cortex. There was a direct brain-to-slide projector 
connection instead of the normal finger-to-slide projector connection. 
 
●
The decision to change the slide was still up to the patient. The patient would 
then reach to press the button in order to change the slide. 
 
●
Curiously, that wasn’t how Grey Walter’s patients experienced it at all. 
Instead, they reported that the slide projector clicked to the next slide just 
before they decided to move it. 
 
●
The results seem to mean that we had the timing of events wrong. This order 
is incorrect: First, we have that moment of conscious decision; that activates 
the readiness potential; and that produces the movement. Instead, the order 
seems to be: First, the readiness potential starts the chain of events; then we 
have that moment of conscious decision; and then the finger moves. 
Benjamin Libet’s Experiments
 
●
A later set of experiments by Benjamin Libet seem to show much the 
same effect. Libet, like Grey Walter, wanted to know how spontaneous 
voluntary action worked and to know about the timing of events in the brain 
and the moment of conscious decision.
 
●
Libet’s method was to ask subjects about when they decided to move not at the 
time of the decision, but later. He asked his subjects to move their right hand 
any time they felt like it, but to watch a spot of light revolving in a circle as they 
did so, something like a rotating hand on a clock. Subjects were to remember 
where the spot of light was when they decided to move their hands. The light 
served as a timekeeping measure: Each person could report where the light was 
when they decided.

135
LECTURE 13THE ENIGMA OF FREE WILL 
 
●
The experiment also recorded the timing of the readiness potential in their 
brains and the moment at which their hands actually move. The findings: The 
subjective intention or decision to move comes about 200 milliseconds—a 
fifth of a second—before the movement itself. 
 
●
But the readiness potential comes about 535 milliseconds before the 
movement itself. That’s over half a second before. That means the readiness 
potential that makes your finger move comes before you are aware of a 
decision or intention to move. 
 
●
The simplest interpretation—the one Libet offers—is that your experi-
enced decision or intention can’t be what actually makes your finger move. 
Your brain is well on its way to making your finger move almost 350 
milliseconds before you think you are deciding to make it move. 
Your subjective experience of deciding to move your finger comes more than 
a third of a second after the process is already in play.
Interpreting
 
●
Do those experiments show that we don’t have free will? When we ask that, 
we’re not asking merely what happened in the experiments. We’re asking 
how to interpret what they really mean. 
●
Libet himself seems uncomfortable with the conclusion that free will is 
an illusion. Although the readiness potential starts the chain to movement, 
Libet claims that some of his data show that it is possible for that chain to be 
consciously interrupted before the movement actually happens. Libet speaks of 
this as a veto function. 
 
●
There are other examples in which consciousness seems a late arriver. 
Sports excellence often relies on split-second timing. At times, those split 
seconds are too fast for consciousness to play the kind of role we might expect.
 
●
For a time, the reigning champion in the 100-meter was Linford Christie. 
In the 1996 Olympics, Christie was disqualified for twice jumping the gun. 
Video replay clearly shows that the starter pistol was fired before Christie 

136
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
started to move. Nevertheless, the officials stood by their decision. A similar 
outcome befell John Drummond in the 100-meter quarterfinal of the 2003 
World Championships.
 
●
How is that fair? Both Christie and Drummond moved only after the gun 
had fired. The answer is that since the 1970s, false starts have been 
determined with great precision, both electronically and with careful 
attention to reaction times. Typical reaction time for top-level competitors 
is something like 125 to 250 milliseconds. If a runner reacts significantly 
faster than that, they can’t have heard or seen the signal and then started. 
Drummond, for example, moved in less than 100 milliseconds after 
the signal. He jumped the gun, said the officials. 
The Takeaway
 
●
The Walter and Libet experiments do seem to show that a particular picture 
that we have of free will is often wrong. It’s not true that a moment of 
decision precedes voluntary action in all cases. 
 
●
That doesn’t mean, however, that the picture is always wrong: A person can 
decide to marry a spouse long before they pop the question. It is in terms of 
milliseconds and instantaneous spontaneous action that the picture fails, not 
in the minutes, hours, days and years of our deliberate action. 

137
LECTURE 13THE ENIGMA OF FREE WILL 
 
●
Maybe the standard picture—deliberation first, decision initiating action—
is right for the kind of free will we really care about: freedom in major 
choices, important decisions, even decisions about whether to do the 
shopping now or later. 
 
●
If our picture of free will is one in which every movement in every context 
has to be initiated by a moment of conscious decision in order to be free, 
we’ll have to conclude that in that sense many of the simple movements we 
make are not free. But that may not be the kind of freedom we really care 
about, either.
Suggested Reading
Dennett and Kinsbourne, “Time and the Observer.” 
James, “The Dilemma of Determinism.” 
Libet,  “Unconscious Cerebral Initiative and the Role of Conscious Will in 
Voluntary Action.” 
Questions to Consider
1
Do you think you have free will? In your answer, specify precisely what you 
mean by free will.
2 
If you said yes in answer to question 1, what would convince you that you 
didn’t in fact have free will?

138
Mind-Body Philosophy

Lecture 14
Emotions: 
Where Mind and 
Body Meet

140
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
A
re emotions aspects of mind that produce a bodily reaction? Or are they 
bodily phenomena that produce a mental reaction? The answer turns out to 
be more complicated than either of those options. As a phenomenon where 
mind and body meet, emotions allow us to trace some of the complex details of 
mind-body interaction. That’s what we’ll examine in this lecture.
Defining Emotion
 
●
What precisely do we mean by emotion? Or, what precisely do we mean 
by emotions? Those two ways of phrasing the central question reflect a very 
basic division of opinion in the field. 
 
●
Many researchers think that we have multiple emotions: distinct modular 
systems of emotional processing, perhaps reflecting distinct patterns of 
processing in the brain. 
 
○
They propose a small set of six primary emotions: happiness, sadness, 
fear, anger, surprise, and disgust. These primary emotions are thought 
to be universal across human experience: A frown is taken as a universal 
sign of sadness. Raised eyebrows indicate surprise. 
 
○
An alternative proposal is that there are not six but eight primary 
emotions. This approach adds acceptance and expectancy to the other 
six. Whatever the number, more complex emotions, such as pride or 
disappointment, are seen as a mixture of the primaries. 

141
LECTURE 14EMOTIONS: WHERE MIND AND BODY MEET
 
●
On the other side of the fence are researchers who think of emotion in terms 
of a single multi-dimensional psychological space. Emotions are points of a 
single psychological space. It is the space as a whole that constitutes emotion.
 
●
Wilhelm Wundt proposed that all emotion could be mapped in 
three dimensions. One dimension was how pleasurable or unpleasurable the 
emotion was. One was how arousing or subduing. The third dimension 
was strain or relaxation. In the 1980s, Havlena and Holbrook proposed a 
three-dimensional field model for emotion in terms of pleasure, arousal, 
and dominance. 
 
●
Whether framed in terms of multiple primary emotions or in terms of 
dimensions in an emotional field, most theorists recognize that our emotions 
are often a complex mixture of simpler elements. We feel guilty pleasure, 
with elements of both pleasure and guilt. We feel affection streaked with 
minor irritation, or annoyance tempered by pity. 
 
●
Just how universal are the primary emotions that we have outlined? Some critics 
have claimed that even the basic emotions require a cultural context. 
 
●
Once we go from primary to complex emotions, it proves still harder to 
argue for universality. The German language recognizes an emotion for which 
English doesn’t have a word: schadenfreude. We need a whole phrase to express 
schadenfreude in English: It’s “delight at someone else’s misfortune.” 
The James-Lange Theory
 
●
As in so many areas, it is William James’s observations and speculations that set 
the stage for later work on emotion. James thought emotions are not an aspect 
of mind that then produces a bodily response. Rather, it’s precisely the other 
way around: We don’t run because we’re afraid; we’re afraid because we run.
 
●
Here’s the way James puts it in 1890: “Common sense says that we lose our 
fortune, are sorry and weep; we meet a bear, are frightened and run; we are 

142
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
insulted by a rival, are angry and strike. … [My theory is that the] sequence 
is incorrect … we feel sorry because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid 
because we tremble.” 
 
●
This is called the James-Lange theory of emotion. James and the Danish 
physiologist Carl Lange didn’t work together, but they both developed a body-
based theory of emotion at about the same time. In all his writings, James is 
scrupulous to give Lange equal billing. 
 
●
According to James, we can’t produce emotion as a purely mental phenomenon. 
If you try to produce emotions without the initiating physiological cause, you’ll 
get something hollow. 
 
●
Here is how James puts it: “Can one fancy the state of rage and picture … no 
flushing of the face, no dilation of the nostrils, no clenching of the teeth, no 
impulse to vigorous action, but in their stead limp muscles, calm breathing, 
and a placid face?” According to James, the answer is no.
British scientist Charles Darwin

143
LECTURE 14EMOTIONS: WHERE MIND AND BODY MEET
 
●
This argument is convincing, but doesn’t absolutely set in stone the idea 
physical reactions have to come before emotions. In order to be fear, the 
trembling may have to be there. But that doesn’t really mean it has to be the 
instigating cause. 
 
●
At the same time, there is some evidence of a link. Moebius syndrome is a rare 
genetic disorder in which people are born with facial paralysis and unable to 
move their eyes. They can’t frown, smile, or raise their eyebrows in surprise. 
Not only do those with Moebius syndrome have trouble conveying emotion to 
others, it appears they have trouble feeling emotion as well. 
 
●
The idea that facial expression influences mental state has led to proposals 
for the treatment of depression. There are clear facial signs of chronic 
depression in the form of permanent frown lines and a furrowed brow. If we 
could change those, might we be able to affect the depression itself? 
 
●
The answer seems to be yes, with a mounting chain of evidence. Plastic surgeons 
have reported that individuals who had Botox treatment for frown lines seemed 
to lighten their moods. 
 
●
And a 2012 study conducted in Europe found lower signs of depression in 
those who received Botox injections over a placebo. Botox works by blocking 
the neurotransmitters sent to the facial muscles. There can be no frown 
and so no feedback message of frowning from face to the emotional brain. 
As James said, “Refuse to express a passion, and it dies.”
Criticism
 
●
The James-Lange theory set the stage for later work on emotion. It has also 
served as a lightning rod for criticism. A major challenge came with the work 
of the Harvard physiologist Walter Cannon and graduate student Philip Bard 
in the 1920s. 
 
●
Cannon and Bard’s first argument against the James-Lange theory was that 
the same physiological changes are present in very different emotional states. 

144
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Increased adrenalin, heart rate, levels of blood sugar, sweating, and pupil 
dilation occur across many forms of excitement, for example, in both fear 
and rage. 
 
●
Here’s their second argument: Artificially producing the physiological states 
characteristic of specific emotions does not necessarily produce those emotions. 
Running on a treadmill causes raised heart rate, sweating, and the like. If the 
James-Lange theory were correct, shouldn’t running on a treadmill make 
us afraid?
 
●
Cannon and Bard surgically cut the connection from the sympathetic nervous 
system to the brain in cats. In all parts of their bodies that could still express 
it, these cats continued to show signs of rage when exposed to a barking dog. 
They concluded that emotion is not simply a response to bodily input. 
It remains even without that input. 
 
●
As an alternative to the James-Lange theory, Cannon and Bard proposed a 
branching theory of emotion. They proposed that sensory input goes to 
the thalamus, located essentially at the center of the brain. From there it is 
sent in two directions. One route goes directly to the body, stimulating the 
immediate physiological reactions that James noted. The other route goes to 
the cortex, resulting in the feeling of emotion. In the branching theory, those 
two routes are independent. Although the feeling of emotion and the body 
response come from the same place, neither directly produces the other.
 
●
Cannon and Bard didn’t succeed in refuting the James-Lange theory on 
all counts. Cannon and Bard argued that if emotion were physiologically based 
we should have difficulty distinguishing the two. In fact, it turns out that we 
do: Sometimes the same physiological input is interpretable in different ways. 
Dutton and Aron
 
●
In a classic experiment by Donald Dutton and Arthur Aron, male participants 
were asked to walk across either a stable bridge or a frightening suspension 
bridge. At the end of each bridge stood an attractive female experimenter, who 

145
LECTURE 14EMOTIONS: WHERE MIND AND BODY MEET
handed the participants an ambiguous picture about which they were asked 
to write a story. She also gave them her phone number in case they had any 
further questions about the experiment. 
 
●
The men crossing the scary bridge made up stories that had a higher sexual 
content than those by the men crossing the stable bridge, and the scary-bridge 
crossers made more follow-up phone calls to the attractive experimenter.
 
●
Emotion doesn’t appear to be a merely physiological stimulus. It doesn’t 
appear to be merely a branching pattern to independent physiology and feeling 
as suggested by Cannon and Bard. Emotion appears to have a contextual and 
interpretational element, involving both physiology and cognition.
 
●
That result supports Stanley Schachter and Jerome Singer’s two-factor theory 
of the 1960s. Schachter and Singer claimed that our emotional response often 
incorporates two elements. One part is physiological arousal. Another part is 
the cognitive label that we assign to that arousal on the basis of context. 
The Full Picture
 
●
What has now become the standard picture of emotional processing 
incorporates bits and pieces from the entire history we’ve traced. The neuro-
scientist Joseph LeDoux has been a major figure in the development of that 
standard theory.
 
●
At the core is the branching hypothesis of the Cannon-Bard model. 
The stimulus of the charging bear is directed to the sensory thalamus. 
From there it goes in two different directions: to the amygdala, identified as 
the emotional instigator, and to the prefrontal cortex, where emotion is felt for 
the first time.
 
●
The prefrontal cortex is identified with deliberate judgment and decision, 
and this is where aspects of the Schachter-Singer model come in. It is 
the prefrontal cortex that interprets the emotion, shaping and perhaps 
inhibiting response. 

146
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
From the prefrontal cortex, signals are sent back to the amygdala. Those may 
be reinforcing: “Run faster.” They may be corrective: “Wait, I can’t outrun 
a bear. Should I freeze?”
 
●
Regarding the James-Lange theory, the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio 
takes pains to defend that model against the Cannon-Bard arguments. 
James’s theory, he says, was unfairly attacked and dismissed. 
 
●
Although it’s not true that the body is the only source for feelings, James 
was right that feelings can be a reflection of body-state changes. As an 
example, patients with damage to the spinal cord often do report a damping 
down of emotion. The higher the damage to the spinal cord, the more seems 
to be lost. 
Emotion and Reason
 
●
From the Greeks, we inherit the view that emotion is a threat to rationality. 
Plato characterized reason as a charioteer, needed in order to keep the wild 
horses of emotion under control. 
 
●
Aristotle defines man as a rational animal, with the rational principle in 
charge of any lower impulses. The Stoics tell us that the best life is one in 
which we rationally remove ourselves from the turmoil of the passions. 
 
●
In the contemporary picture, it is in the cortex rather than in the amygdala 
that the feeling of emotion occurs. Damasio reports on a patient called Elliot 
in whom that route to the cortex was lost. 
 
●
The history of philosophy would suggest Elliot’s case to be the philosophical 
ideal: a life of reason freed from disruptive emotion. That’s not the case: 
Without a route from the inner brain to the cortex—without felt emotion—
Elliot was lost. He performed normally on all intellectual tests, on tests of 
background knowledge, and on tests of reasoning, even ethical reasoning. 
But Elliot could no longer make appropriate decisions. 

147
LECTURE 14EMOTIONS: WHERE MIND AND BODY MEET
 
●
Without being able to register emotions, Elliot wasn’t able to evaluate 
alternative courses of action; he couldn’t make up his mind regarding personal 
and social matters. He lost his job, one marriage, and then a second marriage, 
along with his sense of responsibility.
●
There is now a wide consensus that rationality requires an emotional component. 
In 1983, Howard Gardner introduced a theory of multiple intelligences, 
attempting to expand a concept of rationality beyond the confines of IQ. EQ, 
or emotional quotient, has been proposed as a necessary supplement. 
Suggested Reading
Damasio, Descartes’ Error. 
James, “What Is an Emotion?” 
Thagard, Hot Thought. 
Questions to Consider
1 
Make a list of at least 25 emotions. Are some of these compounds of others? 
Do some, like awe or pride, demand a particular kind of object or context? 
2 
Darwin says that bodily expression of an emotion amplifies and intensifies it, 
whereas dampening the bodily expression can soften the felt emotion as well. 
Give an example from your experience where that does fit, and perhaps an 
example where it does not.

148

Lecture 15
Could a Machine 
Be Conscious?

150
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
I
n 1939, at the University of Cambridge, there were two courses offered on the 
foundations of mathematics. One was a course on the foundations of mathematics 
by the influential and charismatic philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein. The other 
was a course on the foundations of mathematics by the mathematician Alan M. 
Turing, who in the previous 10 years had laid down some of the theoretical work 
that led quite directly to computers. This lecture tracks some of the major ideas of 
those two figures, Wittgenstein and Turing. Their ideas were central to the fields 
of 20th-century philosophy of mind, computer science, and artificial intelligence. 
Wittgenstein and Turing
 
●
Most philosophers develop only one major viewpoint, in one extended period 
of exploration. Wittgenstein developed two contrasting viewpoints in two 
distinct periods. The first viewpoint is that of his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
of 1921, which offers a vision of the logical structure of the world mirrored in 
the logical structure of language. 
 
●
By 1939, Wittgenstein was well into his second period of intellectual 
exploration. He renounced the vision of the Tractatus. In his second period, 
Wittgenstein offers a very different picture of language and the world, a 
picture in which it is the linguistic practice of a social community that is the 
key to understanding. The slogan for this second period is “meaning is use.”

151
LECTURE 15COULD A MACHINE BE CONSCIOUS?
 
●
Turing was 23 years younger than Wittgenstein, born in London in 1912 
as the second son of a British civil servant with a commission in India. 
His parents traveled often between England and India, leaving the boys with an 
older couple or in their private schools. 
 
●
In school, Turing’s genius for mathematics was discovered and cultivated 
early on. By 1939, Turing had completed his major theoretical work in what is 
now regarded as the foundations of computer science. 
 
●
In his lifetime, Wittgenstein published only the brief 75 pages that constitute 
the Tractatus, one article, one book review, and a dictionary for children. 
Despite that thin record of publication, his impact was enormous, based 
largely on the force of a charismatic personality and a dramatic air of ascetic 
philosophical intensity. By contrast, Turing was a stutterer, careless in dress 
and cleanliness, and entirely undiplomatic in expressing his opinions. 
 
●
Their ideas on the foundations of mathematics were as diametrically opposed 
as their personalities. Turing thought of mathematics as something that was 
essentially discovered, something like a science of the abstract. Wittgenstein 
insisted that mathematics was essentially something invented, following out a 
set of rules we have chosen—more like an art than a science.
The Language Argument
 
●
About the time of the Cambridge lectures, Wittgenstein developed a central 
component in his later thinking: the private language argument. One way to 
read it is as an argument that there can be no private language. Our language is 
a public language, with a public use: learned, applied, and corrected in a social 
context of communication. 
 
●
Wittgenstein uses the parable of the beetles in the boxes to illustrate his claim. 
Imagine two people, each with a beetle in a box. Using their respective private 
languages, one person might describe their beetle as “kufu kufu” and the other 
might describe their beetle as “niki niki.” If they can’t see each other’s beetles, 
those words will never acquire meaning. 

152
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
The learning process is entirely public, and the correction required in learning 
demands that it be public. For instance, a child who identifies a cat as a truck 
has to be corrected. If our mental terms referred to something inherently 
private and locked way, we couldn’t ever learn those terms. 
 
●
Wittgenstein’s private language argument is best conceived as a negative argument. 
It’s an argument against private Cartesianism. However, many of his students 
at the 1939 lectures interpreted it as a positive argument for a particularly 
extreme form of behaviorism. 
 
●
Behaviorism dictates that data is first and foremost behavioral data: Any science 
of the mind must at base be a science of behavior. Wittgenstein’s students 
in those 1939 sessions took the private language argument not merely as a 
negative argument against Cartesian privacy but as a positive argument for 
analytic behaviorism. Their view was that talk of the mind must ultimately 
simply be talk of behavior. 
 
●
Wittgenstein emphasized that our mental terminology is part of our way of 
dealing with each other. It has the meaning it does as part of language use 
in a community. Because of that tie to a community of creatures like us, 
Wittgenstein seemed to think that it’s a category mistake to speak of machines 
as thinking, let alone to think of machines as conscious. 
Turing on Machines
 
●
In 1939, Wittgenstein was emphasizing the role of language—including the 
role of mental terms—as part of an essentially human way of life. By 1939, 
Turing had developed something very different: a fascinating and fully 
developed theoretical picture of machines and their prospects for computation.
 
●
Turing was a mathematician. He wanted to know what aspects of mathe- 
matics were computable and what weren’t: Are there limits to what is 
algorithmically computable? 
 
●
He wanted an answer to that question about mathematics that was as 
tight as mathematics itself. In order to get that, he needed to have a formal 

153
LECTURE 15COULD A MACHINE BE CONSCIOUS?
definition of these intuitive things: calculations, computations, algorithms, 
and effective procedures. Turing realized that by formalizing the notion of a 
symbol-manipulating machine he could get a rigorous handle on questions of 
computability and its limits.
 
●
The abstract model he developed is what we know as a Turing machine, for 
which he was already well known in those lecture sessions in 1939. It is still 
regarded as the standard model for computability in general.
 
●
A Turing machine is not a physical thing. It is an abstract model of an 
information-processing machine. It has some number of possible internal states. 
It can be in state 1, or state 1,207, but it has some certain number of possible 
states it can be in at any given time. 
 
●
Its information input is a set of symbols written one by one in squares on 
a tape. We won’t give it memory limitations—the tape extends as far as we 
need in both directions.
 
●
Here’s how the machine works: At any point in time it sits on just one square of 
the tape and operates in terms of just two things: the symbol beneath it on the 
tape and the internal state it happens to be in. 
 
●
What it does when it sees a particular symbol and is in a particular state is 
dictated by its rules; for example, if it sees the symbol a and is in state 2,007, it 
will do a certain thing, and if it sees the symbol c and is in state 45, it will do a 
different certain thing.
 
●
Today it’s hard to believe how revolutionary Turing’s model was. After all, 
it sounds like “just” a computer. The point is there were no computers when 
Turing developed his abstract model. The real machines came later, based on 
Turing’s abstract vision of information processing.
 
●
Turing envisaged information processing as symbol manipulation. His model was 
conceived purely theoretically but ended up with very practical consequences. 
All of our contemporary computers trace back to Turing’s vision. 
 
●
In World War II, Turing put his theory to practical use, developing computing 

154
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
machinery that managed to crack the Nazi Enigma code. After World War 
II, Turing was instrumental in the construction of larger and all-purpose 
computing machines. But his vision went even farther. In his notes, Turing 
anticipated the next generation of computing: neural networks, inspired by 
the way that neurons function in the brain. Neural networks show an amazing 
ability to learn. 
 
●
The end of Turing’s story is not a happy one. Security in the development 
of computers was tight after World War II. The Americans were wary of 
two groups they thought of as security risks: communists and homosexuals. 
Turing was homosexual. He was forthright and honest about his inclinations as 
he was about everything else. In England at the time, homosexual conduct was 
a crime. In 1952 he was arrested, tried, and convicted.
 
●
It was clear that his security clearance was in danger—that he would be 
shut out of working in the field that he had essentially invented. In 1954, he 
committed suicide by eating an apple dipped in cyanide. 
Turing on the Mind
 
●
The field of artificial intelligence is another part of Turing’s legacy. It is here 
that we come back to his views on the mind. In 1950, Turing published his 
definitive philosophical piece on the question of minds, machines, and 
information: “Can a Machine Think?” 
 
●
Turing rejects the question of if a machine can think as meaningless but 
proposes replacing that question with one that isn’t meaningless. It’s called the 
Turing test: Could you build a machine that under specified conditions was 
indistinguishable from a person? 
 
●
Note that the Turing test is an entirely behavioral test. It is the behavior of a 
properly programmed machine that Turing predicts will be indistinguishable 
from that of a human. 

155
LECTURE 15COULD A MACHINE BE CONSCIOUS?
 
●
Turing’s article and the Turing test were a major instigation for the field of 
artificial intelligence, a term that wasn’t invented until after Turing’s death in 
1954. 
 
●
In 1956 a group of collaborators put together the Dartmouth Summer Research 
Project on Artificial Intelligence. The theme was clearly along Turing’s lines 
of inquiry. The conference was explicitly based on the conjecture “that every 
aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can in principle be so 
precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it.” 
 
●
There were actually two branches of artificial intelligence that came out of 
the conference. One involved straight programming, on the model of the 
Turing machine. The other involved the first explorations in neural nets, 
another line of thought that Turing had anticipated. 
The Legacies
 
●
In 1950, Turing predicted that by the year 2000 we would have machines that 
passed the Turing test: machines good enough at simulating human intelligence 
that an average interrogator wouldn’t have better than a 70 percent chance of 
distinguishing mind from machine after a five-minute exchange. Turing was 
wrong about that. We’re long past the year 2000 and still don’t have computers 
that can pass the Turing test. 
 
●
But there was another thing Turing was certainly right about. He said that he 
expected language to change: “I believe that by the end of the century the use 
of words and general educated opinion will have altered so much that one will 
be able to speak of machines thinking without expecting to be contradicted.” 
 
●
He was absolutely right about that. Today we have no problem using a full 
range of anthropomorphic concepts in order to characterize what our 
computers do. We say “It can’t see items in that subdirectory,” and “It 
thinks I put that document somewhere else.” Turing was right: We speak of 
our machines as knowing things, thinking things, even forgetting things or 
ignoring us.

156
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Wittgenstein didn’t see that far ahead. Today it looks like Wittgenstein’s 
refusal to speak of machines thinking, at least in today’s informal and 
colloquial sense, represented an outlook appropriate to Cambridge in 1939. 
 
●
Then again, maybe Wittgenstein was right in saying that terms like thinking 
are appropriate only for particular kinds of agents in a particular way of life. 
What he wasn’t able to see was that our way of life would change in ways that 
would give machines a much more important and integrated role. 

157
LECTURE 15COULD A MACHINE BE CONSCIOUS?
Suggested Reading
Casti, The Cambridge Quintet. 
Diamond, ed., Wittgenstein’s Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics Cambridge 1939. 
Turing, “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” 
Wittgenstein, The Blue and Brown Books. 
Questions to Consider
1 
Which of these do you think is possible for a machine? In each case, specify 
why or why not:
□ calculate
□ compute
□ respond
□ perceive 
□ remember
□ think
□ reflect
□ understand
□ be conscious 
2 
Do you think it will be possible to build machines that pass the Turing test? If 
so, by what date would you guess? 


Lecture 16
Computational 
Approaches 
to the Mind

160
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
T
his lecture explores two computational approaches to the mind. One is a 
computational approach to the mind through artificial intelligence.  
The other is a computational approach through the concept of information. 
The first approach asks: Can we understand intelligence better by attempting 
to build intelligent machines? The second approach asks: Can computational 
approaches take us as far as really understanding intelligence? 
The Beginning
 
●
A key figure in the history of both approaches is Alan M. Turing, who died in 
1954 by eating an apple dipped in cyanide. Two years later, the Dartmouth 
conference was held. It was the first devoted to what they decided to call 
artificial intelligence.
 
●
There were actually two groups of people involved in early artificial intelligence.  
One group wanted to pursue artificial intelligence in order to understand 
intelligence. Intelligent machines were a means to an end. 
 
●
The other group simply wanted to build smart machines. If understanding 
human intelligence would help in that task, fine. But understanding human 
intelligence was simply a means to that end. 

161
LECTURE 16COMPUTATIONAL APPROACHES TO THE MIND
 
●
As well as two different goals, there were two different methodologies. 
Some of the participants at the Dartmouth conference intended to produce 
intelligence using straightforward linear computer programming. The other 
methodology was to copy the mechanisms of the brain. 
 
●
For many years, it looked like the route to modeling intelligence was 
straightforward computer programming—known today colloquially as “good 
old-fashioned artificial intelligence,” or GOFAI. 
GOFAI
 
●
Allen Newell and Herbert A. Simon of Carnegie Mellon each had a background 
that combined psychology with computer science. At the Dartmouth 
conference, they showed off their brand new Logic Theorist program. 
 
●
Simon and Newell’s program would eventually prove 38 of the first 52 theorems 
of Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica, a 
landmark in 20th-century logic. 
 
●
The next year Newell and Simon unveiled the General Problem Solver, 
designed for a wider class of problems. Herbert Simon claimed that they had 
“solved the venerable mind-body problem, explaining how a system composed 
of matter can have the properties of mind.”
 
●
With that first flush of success came bold predictions for the future.  
In 1958, Newell and Simon predicted that “within ten years a digital 
computer will discover and prove an important new mathematical theorem.”  
And “within ten years a digital computer will be the world’s chess champion.”  
Neither happened. In 1965, Simon predicted that “machines will be capable, 
within 20 years, of doing any work a man can do.” That didn’t happen either.
 
●
By 1974, the over-hype caught up with the field. The programming 
approach hit a wall. It’s known as Moravec’s paradox, after the researcher 
Hans Moravec. The initial tasks which artificial intelligence attempted—

162
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
proving theorems and solving geometry problems—turned out to be the easy 
problems for machine programming. By contrast, a range of tasks that are 
easy for us—pattern recognition, facial recognition, maneuvering across a 
crowded room—turned out to be forbiddingly hard to program into machines. 
The Second Approach
 
●
What of the second methodological approach to artificial intelligence—using 
artificial neural nets in order to build intelligent machines on the model of 
the brain?
 
●
In the late 1950s, the psychologist Frank Rosenblatt developed a computer 
network that functioned roughly like a network of neurons. A node in the 
network receives input from various other nodes; when it reaches a certain 
threshold, it fires; then that firing sends input to other nodes down the line, 
just like a neuron does. 
 
●
The real breakthrough was the fact that Rosenblatt’s neural networks could learn. 
By repeating what answer was wanted from a set of sample inputs, a neural 
network could make its own adjustments to produce the desired result. 
Rosenblatt called his neural networks perceptrons.
A contestant asked to choose between two prizes is facing an “exclusive  
or” choice.

163
LECTURE 16COMPUTATIONAL APPROACHES TO THE MIND
 
●
Perceptrons consisted of just two layers of nodes: a set of input nodes 
connected to a set of output nodes. The training scheme that Rosenblatt used 
demanded that simplicity. It only worked for two-layer networks. 
 
●
Precisely because of that simplicity, it turned out there was also something 
that perceptrons couldn’t learn. It was impossible for a perceptron to learn 
what is called an “exclusive or”: This is true, or that is true, but not both. 
 
●
The fact that perceptrons had that limitation was the key point in a devastating 
critique of neural networks leveled by Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert in 
their book Perceptrons. Minsky was a proponent of the GOFAI approach.
 
●
Minsky and Papert’s critique resulted in research funding and efforts being 
directed almost exclusively to the GOFAI approach. It set back by decades 
the attempt to build smart machines on the model of the human brain. 
 
●
Frank Rosenblatt died shortly after the book was published, on his 43rd
birthday, in what was reported as a boating accident on the Chesapeake Bay. 
 
●
In the long run, neural networks came back strong. In the 1980s, the physicist 
John Hopfield introduced a form of neural nets that could learn in an entirely 
new way. The psychologists David Rumelhart and James McClelland also 
developed a new form of neural net learning that could be applied to more 
than two layers. Neither “exclusive or” nor any other function of inputs were a 
problem any longer. 
Advances
 
●
What have we learned in the process? Have machines taught us what 
intelligence is? Can we build truly intelligent machines? 
 
●
In 1997, IBM’s Deep Blue became the first computer to beat a reigning world 
chess champion, Garry Kasparov. That was a good 30 years after Newell and 
Simon’s prediction. In order to beat Kasparov, Deep Blue reportedly scanned 
200 million possible moves every second. We know that human chess masters 
don’t think that way. 

164
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
In 2011, IBM’s computer Watson beat the two greatest Jeopardy! champions 
at their own game. How? Watson had access to 200 million pages of content, 
including the full text of Wikipedia. It searched word frequencies that would 
fit a basic syntax of questions and answers.
 
●
Despite being able to generate correct questions quickly, Watson had no 
idea what it was saying. Here is one clue Watson responded to: “It was the 
anatomical oddity of U.S. Gymnast George Eyser, who won a gold medal 
on the parallel bars in 1904.” Watson said, “What is a leg?” Watson wasn’t 
awarded credit. The answer is, “What is a missing leg?” 
 
●
David Ferrucci, head of the Watson project, said that Watson didn’t 
understand the idea of “anatomical oddity” in the original clue.
Intelligent Machines
 
●
What of the future of intelligent machines? Consider Moore’s law, named for 
Gordon Moore, the cofounder of Intel. Moore noted that the computing power 
of available hardware doubles about every two years. 
 
●
That exponential growth in computing power is the basis for predictions by 
Hans Moravec and computer scientist and futurist Ray Kurzweil that we are 
fast approaching a point at which our machines become more intelligent than 
we are. 
 
●
Kurzweil extrapolates Moore’s Law to predict a future singularity. That is a 
point at which technological development will be driven by the machines 
themselves, with progress so rapid that mere humans will no longer be able to 
comprehend it. Kurzweil says the singularity will be here by 2045.
 
●
Moravec extrapolates Moore’s law in a similar way to predict a “mind fire” 
of computational intelligence. Our real descendants, he predicts, will not be 
biological. They will be intelligent machines.

165
LECTURE 16COMPUTATIONAL APPROACHES TO THE MIND
 
●
Both predictions leave unanswered what intelligence is, in either people 
or machines. Both predictions also rely on a simple extrapolation from a 
few decades of progress in computer hardware. Moore himself said in 2015, “I 
see Moore’s law dying in the next decade or so.”
Information
 
●
Consider the brain as an information-processing machine. Can we get a better 
take on how brains and minds work by understanding information?
 
●
First, what exactly is information? Here again, Alan M. Turing may have played 
a role. For several months in 1943, Turing was sent to Washington to share the 
breakthroughs that the British had made in cracking the Nazi Enigma code. 
He made contact with a young researcher named Claude Shannon at Bell Labs. 
Turing and Shannon had long conversations over lunch. Information theory 
may have begun in those conversations. 
 
●
The founding document of information theory came a few years later, in Claude 
Shannon’s “Mathematical Theory of Communication.” He was still working 
for Bell Labs. The application he had in mind was how much information you 
could condense into a signal across a telephone wire. 

166
Mind-Body Philosophy

167
LECTURE 16COMPUTATIONAL APPROACHES TO THE MIND
 
●
At the core of Shannon’s information theory is the concept of surprise. 
The more a message surprises you, the more information it contains. Shannon’s 
measure depends on the number of options that a message eliminates. 
The more options are eliminated, the greater the information content. 
 
●
Consider a coin toss. A coin can only come up one of two ways: heads or tails. 
If someone can reliably tell you which way it will land, they have eliminated 
one option out of two.
 
●
Now consider the roll of a die. If a person can reliably predict that, they have 
eliminated five options out of six. They have given you more information. 
 
●
But Shannon’s theory encounters a paradox: Under Shannon’s rules, a com-
pletely random string of 0s and 1s contains the most information as compared 
to a string of all 1s or 0s, or a patterned string of 1s and 0s.
 
●
Shannon himself recognized the limits of his information theory. At the 
beginning of his classic paper, he notes that message information often has 
to be understood a different way: in terms of message meaning. But for his 
purposes, he just puts that sense of information aside: “These semantic aspects 
of communication are irrelevant to the engineering problem.”
The Global Workspace
 
●
How does information come together in the brain? Bernard Baars is a 
theoretical neurobiologist at the Neurosciences Institute in La Jolla, California. 
He has proposed what he calls global workspace theory. It’s a theory of how the 
brain handles information and a theory of consciousness. 
 
●
Much of the brain’s functioning is unconscious, distributed in different areas. 
Baars says that consciousness is a “blackboard” or a “global workspace” of 
working memory that has access to those different areas. 

168
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Consciousness, he says, “resembles a bright spot on the stage of immediate 
memory, directed by a spotlight of attention under executive guidance. 
Only the bright spot is conscious.”
Integrated Information
 
●
There is a recent information-theoretic model of consciousness that builds 
on both Baars’s global workspace and Shannon’s information theory. 
Here the foundational document is a piece by Giulio Tononi at the University of 
Wisconsin: “Consciousness as Integrated Information: A Provisional Manifesto.” 
 
●
For Tononi, consciousness is integrated information. Tononi combines Shannon 
and Baars and offers a mathematical measure for integrated information. 
He calls that measure phi. 
 
●
Consider the sensory chip of a digital camera. It incorporates a million or 
more photodiodes. That’s a lot of information in Shannon’s sense. But the 
information isn’t integrated in Baars’s sense. It gets a low score using Tononi’s 
phi computation. Furthermore, the sensory chip isn’t conscious. 
 
●
In contrast, your visual system deals in integrated information. Information 
comes to you from the millions of photosensitive cells in your retina, but 
it comes in as an integrated picture of a rushing roadside or a smiling face. 
It’s so integrated that you can’t tell what any particular retinal cell is doing. 
Unlike the camera, your information is integrated information and would 
score high on phi. And of course, you’re conscious. 

169
LECTURE 16COMPUTATIONAL APPROACHES TO THE MIND
 
●
However, computer scientist Scott Aaronson points out that there are many 
simple systems that come out high on Tononi’s phi-scale but that no sane 
person would consider conscious. One of his examples is the operation of 
error-correcting codes in compact discs. 
 
●
These codes work using a two-dimensional grid of very simple logic gates. 
Despite that simplicity, the system is very highly integrated, so it scores high 
on a measure of phi. If consciousness were merely integrated information, CDs 
would be conscious. 
Suggested Reading
Kurzweil, The Singularity Is Near.  
Minsky and Papert, Perceptrons, Expanded Edition.
Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication.” 
Tononi, “Consciousness as Integrated Information.”
Questions to Consider
1
Moravec’s paradox is that aspects of what we think of as intellectually 
challenging—construction of mathematical theorems, for example—turn out 
to be relatively easy for computers. It is the easy things for us—recognizing 
faces, for example—that turn out to be hard for computers. Why do you think 
that is?
2 
We talk about information all the time. We are in an information age, after all. 
But what is information? If asked for a definition, what would you say?


Lecture 17
A Guided Tour of 
the Brain

172
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
T
hroughout this course so far, we’ve considered the brain in some detail, but 
almost always in bits and pieces. To understand brain modularity, we’ve 
explored areas in the visual system, examined the fusiform gyrus and its role 
in prosopagnosia, discussed the role of the hippocampus in memory formation, and 
talked about the two hemispheres in split brains. This lecture will take on a more 
holistic and more ambitious project: a tour of the whole brain. 
The Brain
 
●
The human brain has been described as the size of a coconut, the shape of a 
walnut, the color of uncooked liver, and the consistency of chilled butter. It has 
also been described as the most complex three and a half pounds of matter in 
the universe.
 
●
Under the microscope, a cross-section of the brain reveals two kinds of cells. 
The most common are glial cells. Glial means “glue.” The function of the 
relatively simple glial cells has long been thought to be primarily structural. 

173
LECTURE 17A GUIDED TOUR OF THE BRAIN
However, like other long-held assumptions regarding the brain, we should be 
prepared to be wrong. It has also been suggested that glial cells may play a 
role in amplifying or synchronizing electrical activity within the brain.
 
●
The other cell seen under the microscope is the neuron. The neuron 
is designed to transfer electrical potential through complicated paths of 
other neurons. There are about 100 billion neurons in the brain, as many 
as there are stars in our galaxy. Each neuron has something like 10,000 
connections to other neurons. 
 
●
The textbook picture of a neuron is of a cell body that receives input from 
other neurons at a number of dendrites and sends a signal down an axon to 
the dendrites of other neurons. Neurons don’t actually touch: Their contact 
is across the tiny gap called the synapse. The process of information transfer 
across a series of neurons goes from electrical to chemical to electrical. 
 
●
Just as it combines chemical and electrical processes, the neuron combines 
analog and digital information. The input gathered by dendrites builds 
smoothly, essentially in analog form. But when that input crosses a certain 
threshold, the cell fires, sending what is essentially a digital signal down 
the axon. 
 
●
The picture we’ve painted so far is really one of excitatory neurons, which 
stimulate the firing of further neurons at the ends of their axons. But there are 
also inhibitory neurons, whose work is to impede the firing of those they come 
in contact with. The ratio is about 80 excitatory to 20 inhibitory. 
 
●
Aside from 100 billion neurons, the brain also has synapses in the trillions. 
Some 50 neurotransmitters are also part of the mix; examples include 
serotonin, which affects mood and anxiety, and acetylcholine, which is 
associated with learning, attention, and memory. 
 
●
Have we found consciousness yet? No. However necessary neurons are 
for consciousness, no-one thinks that consciousness exists at the level of a 
single neuron.

174
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
The Brain’s Organization and Evolution
 
●
The brain is built on the end of the spinal cord and brain stem, a tube that 
originally developed in fish in order to more centrally process nerve impulses 
from various parts of the body. What was originally just a bulge on the top of 
the spine developed more specialized modules, for instance, modules for smell, 
sight, and the control of bodily movement—the cerebellum. Taken together, 
the smell area, primitive visual processing, and the cerebellum constitute the 
inner core of our brains, known as the reptilian brain. 
 
●
Do we find consciousness in the reptilian brain? The cerebellum might be 
the best candidate for consciousness in that part of your brain. Your body 
positions itself and moves as smoothly as it does, with balance and with coordi-
nated movements, only because of the cerebellum. But bodily movement isn’t 
initiated in the cerebellum. In your brain, movement is initiated higher in 
the brain. It is merely coordinated and fine-tuned in the cerebellum. 
 
●
The cerebellum’s best claim to that kind of consciousness is motor learning. 
The body memory of how to swing a baseball bat or ride a bike may involve 
the cerebellum. But once learned, those too are things that we think of 
as operating automatically or unconsciously. To that extent, at least, your 
reptilian brain seems an unlikely place to find consciousness as we know it. 
 
●
The mammalian brain developed from the reptilian, adding a number of 
further components. Modules developed as the amygdala (the emotion center), 
the hippocampus (critical to laying down new memories), the thalamus (where 
central processing occurs), and the basal ganglia. Together these are known as 
the limbic system. 
 
●
Is it in the mammalian brain that we find consciousness? We are certainly conscious 
of memories, which the hippocampus lays down. We are certainly conscious of 
emotions, for which the amygdala is crucial. Signals through the thalamus 
appear to be part of our attention system and are crucial to various aspects 
of sensation and motor control of which we are certainly conscious. 

175
LECTURE 17A GUIDED TOUR OF THE BRAIN
 
●
The mammalian brain is thus clearly important to consciousness as we 
know it. Like the reptilian brain, however, the mammalian brain is generally 
thought as operating largely unconsciously. Although we sense our emotions in 
consciousness, it’s rare that we’re able to consciously direct them.
The Neocortex
 
●
The mammalian level of our brains is wrapped in a still larger structure: the 
neocortex. It was originally a skin of cells over the mammalian brain and 
developed into a massively larger enveloping structure. Roughly three-quarters 
of your brain is neocortex. 
 
●
It is the neocortex that forms the walnut-like exterior of the brain. 
The wrinkles are described in terms of their canyons—sulci—and ridges—gyri. 
The neocortex in rats and small mammals, on the other hand, is smooth. 
 
●
The neocortex has six layers. It is presumed that the layer structure reflects 
some form of information processing, but no one knows quite how or why. 
The neocortex also seems to be organized in terms of columns: particular 
vertical patches six layers thick. Again, there is a notable lack of consistency 
in the literature regarding the definition or function of those distinct columns.

176
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
What do the parts of the neocortex do? The occipital lobe, at the back of the 
head, is largely devoted to the progressive stages of visual processing. 
 
●
Sound is the province of the temporal lobe. Although sounds go to both 
hemispheres, those detected by your right ear are primarily processed in 
your left brain, while those detected by your left ear are processed in your 
right brain. 
 
●
The processing of speech sounds is concentrated in the left hemisphere. 
For that reason, a person who goes deaf in the right ear may develop prob-
lems hearing language. A person who goes deaf in the left ear may have no 
problems with language but may lose an appreciation for music. 
 
●
Language production and processing is accomplished in two interestingly 
different areas, both in the left hemisphere but in different lobes of the brain. 
Wernicke’s area lies in the temporal lobe and is where speech is understood. 
Broca’s area is where speech is produced. It lies in front of Wernicke’s, across a 
major canyon called the lateral sulcus. 
 
●
Between the two areas, running down and below the bottom of the canyon, is 
a large bundle of fibers: the language loop between production and processing, 
Broca’s and Wernicke’s.
 
●
In the 1860s, a French surgeon named Paul Broca met a man called Tan. 
Tan was called that because “Tan” was all he seemed able to say. When Tan 
died, Broca dissected his brain and found a sizeable lesion in what we now 
call Broca’s area. When the Broca’s area is impacted, people can understand 
what is said to them, and know what they want to say, but are unable to say it. 
The result is often telegraphic speech, individual words that lack the form of 
grammatical sentences. 
 
●
If Wernicke’s area is impacted, the Broca’s area may still allow a person to 
produce what sound like full and perfectly grammatical sentences. But because 
the person cannot understand speech, they can’t understand their own. 

177
LECTURE 17A GUIDED TOUR OF THE BRAIN
 ●
Sound processing is a major function of the temporal lobes, but not the only function. 
The middle temporal gyrus area of the temporal lobes is crucial to 
judging motion. Face recognition is a function of the fusiform gyrus at 
the bottom of the temporal lobe. Aspects of memory live here as well. 
Development and Damage
 
●
Neural development of the frontal lobes starts at the age of about six months. 
At that age, the neocortex begins to exert control over the mammalian brain. 
Before six months, a baby presented with two toys will try to grab both. By the 
age of one, she will make a choice. 
 
●
The ability to understand speech matures before the ability to produce speech. 
There is therefore a period in which toddlers can understand much more 
language than they can express. It has been speculated that that is part of the 
problem with the “terrible twos.”
 
●
The frontal lobes are associated with planning, logical reasoning, and problem 
solving, particularly problem solving that demands creative flexibility rather 
than standard solutions. Aspects of personality and memory are also credited 
to the frontal lobes. 
●
But a core function is management and control of other aspects of the brain—
particularly emotion. Here the classic case is Phineas Gage, a railroad foreman 
in the mid-1800s whose frontal lobes were massively impacted by a mistimed 
explosion that sent a steel rod through his head. 
 
●
Astoundingly, Phineas survived. But he was a changed man. He lost the 
judgment and executive control that is the function of the frontal lobe. He was 
converted from a reliable and industrious worker to an aimless drifter. 

178
Mind-Body Philosophy

179
LECTURE 17A GUIDED TOUR OF THE BRAIN
Suggested Reading
Bear, Connors, and Paradiso, Neuroscience. 
Carter, Mapping the Mind. 
Questions to Consider
1 
Have you ever wondered whether your brain might function differently than 
other people’s? With the background covered in this lecture, what specific 
parts of your brain do you think might be different?
2 
In the search for how the brain produces consciousness, what do you think we 
should look for in the evolutionary record? What should we look for in infant 
and child development? 


Lecture 18
Thinking Body and 
Extended Mind

182
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
O
ne could characterize a great deal of the history of philosophy in terms 
of just two questions. Both are questions of how we can cross a divide.  
The first question is how we cross the divide between the mind and 
the world: How can we possibly know what the world is really like, beyond  
our experience? The second problem is the one we’ve been tracking throughout 
this course: How can we understand the relation between our mental self and our 
physical self? This lecture considers a range of phenomena and a handful of theories 
suggesting that those two problems are ultimately artificial. They are problems of 
our own making.
Neglected Areas
 
●
In the previous lecture, we took a tour of the brain. The brain functions only as 
part of the larger nervous system. In our search for consciousness we neglected 
a number of structures crucial to the autonomic nervous system, generally 
thought of as unconscious. 
 
●
These include reflex structures within the spinal cord itself and the medulla, 
pons, and hypothalamus in the brain stem. These structures register and 
regulate blood sugar, oxygen, and carbon dioxide. They control blood 
pressure, heart rate, and body temperature: all the elements of homeostasis. 

183
LECTURE 18THINKING BODY AND EXTENDED MIND
 
●
It is the wider nervous system that leads people to seek food, water, sex, 
shelter, and warmth. It is also that wider nervous system that regulates sleep, 
dreaming, wakefulness, and attention.
 
●
There are actually two subsystems of the autonomic nervous system: the 
sympathetic nervous system, functioning from the middle stretch of your 
spinal cord, and the parasympathetic, functioning from the upper spinal cord 
and brain stem. 
 
●
The sympathetic nervous system has been roughly characterized as an initiating 
system and the parasympathetic as an inhibitory system. The sympathetic 
accelerates the heartbeat. The parasympathetic slows it. 
 
●
There is also a third nervous system embedded in the gut, sometimes described 
as a “second brain.” It’s the enteric system, a mesh of neurons that regulate 
your gastrointestinal system. Although it normally communicates with the 
sympathetic and parasympathetic systems, the enteric system is autonomous: 
It will continue to function on its own even when those connections are cut. 
The Mind
 
●
The brain isn’t separated from the larger nervous system. So why think the 
mind is separated from the body? After all, what would it be like if your mind 
was separated from your body?
 
●
You couldn’t feel pain, for one thing. That might sound wonderful, but it’s not. 
A man named Steven Pete has a congenital inability to feel pain. His parents 
realized the problem when their toddler chewed half of his tongue to ribbons. 
Those with the disability are prone to bone fractures they don’t realize, 
problems from eye irritations they don’t feel, cavity-caused toothaches that 
don’t ache, and infections for which they can’t feel the symptoms. 
 
●
Congenital inability to feel pain is a condition researchers were surprised 
to find was linked to mutations in a single gene: SCN9A, which provides 
instructions for an element crucial to the proper functioning of the nerves that 
transmit pain signals. 

184
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
If your mind were separated from your body, you also wouldn’t be able to feel 
the position or movement of your body. People have an internal sense of their 
own body called proprioception; you can test yours by closing your eyes and 
touching your knee. It should be no problem. 
 
●
But there are six people in the world known to have lost all proprioception. 
Ian Waterman is the only one who has successfully compensated for it. 
He makes up for the loss of proprioception by using vision. He has to monitor 
his body visually, constantly, in order to move with anything like a semblance 
of normality. 
Thinking
 
●
We tend to think of thinking—of cognitive processing—as something that 
happens in the head. But maybe we use our bodies for at least some of our 
cognitive processing. For instance, is a child counting on her fingers doing all 
her thinking inside her head? 

185
LECTURE 18THINKING BODY AND EXTENDED MIND
 
●
There are films of Walt Disney’s animators drawing sketches of characters 
with strong emotions: anger, fear, surprise. The animators contort their faces 
into those expressions in order to draw them. 
 
●
When thinking internally—with “inner speech”—people’s mouth and throat 
muscles make minute movements. This is called subvocalization and shows that 
even silent soliloquies aren’t totally private.
Psychological Theory
 
●
There is a tradition of psychological theory, widely applied in a number of 
fields, that emphasizes both the mind in the body and the mind in the world. 
 
●
J. J. Gibson was an American psychologist. Working from the 1950s through 
the 1970s, he offered a new theory of perception. The standard view at the 
time was information-processing theory in terms of representations. The idea 
was that, in perception, the mind builds representations of objects in the world 
around it. 
 
●
For Gibson, that was a picture of a mind separated from its world. The core 
of Gibson’s theory of perception is that we don’t perceive objects and don’t 
operate cognitively in terms of object representations. What we perceive—
what any animal perceives—are what Gibson terms affordances. 
 
●
Squirrels don’t see trees, represent them internally, and calculate how to 
climb them. What they see is something more immediate and more action-
oriented than that. They see a way up. For Gibson, a mind in the world 
operates in terms of those affordances: more immediate and more action-
oriented than mere representation of objects. 
 
●
The theory has had a wide impact. A range of thinkers in both philosophy and 
psychology carry on the Gibson tradition, emphasizing an embodied mind 
interactive with its environment. Called situated cognition, the theory is often 
cited as background for “knowing by doing.” It forms the basis of participatory 
learning strategies in educational psychology. 

186
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Critiques of this approach warn against is overstating the conclusions. It may 
be true that we learn by doing without it being true that it is the only way 
we learn.
Evolutionary Pressures
 
●
If we look at the issue from an evolutionary perspective, it shouldn’t be 
surprising that we find important areas of integration between mind and body, 
and between mind and world. 
 
●
Evolutionary pressures operate on organisms in environments, not on minds 
separate from bodies or minds independent of the world. Successful organisms 
are those that reproductively succeed. A successful organism will have mental 
responsiveness reflected in environmentally sensitive bodily behavior. 
 
●
We are the product of that kind of evolution. Despite a philosophical history 
of conceptual separation, we shouldn’t be surprised that when we look closely 
at our own experience, we find a mind integrated with its body and situated in 
its world.
Robotics
●
That evolutionary perspective on mind and body is reflected in robotics. 
Rodney Brooks is a robotics professor at MIT. He is known for solving 
problems by taking unusual approaches. 
 
●
Brooks proposes building robotic brains in layers, just like evolution seemed 
to build our brain: Start with a basic navigational unit, then add different 
perceptual units, then add something like a goal-directing unit, and so on.
 
●
His robots don’t add a body to an established artificial intelligence program. 
They operate with a robotic body and an interactive environment from 
the start. His robots are made to scramble over terrain. They end up 
looking and moving like insects because that is what proves effective in 
that environment. 

187
LECTURE 18THINKING BODY AND EXTENDED MIND
Mental Concepts
 
●
Everyday experience, situated cognition and affordance theories, and even 
robotics argue for paying attention to connections between mind and body. 
Even our concepts of purely mental things have lots of the world built in.
 
●
The philosopher Hilary Putnam argues that even meanings aren’t purely 
contents of the head. The meanings of your words don’t depend merely on how 
your linguistic community uses them. The meanings of your words can depend 
on the world itself. 
 
●
This is known as Putnam’s Twin Earth thought experiment: What does 
the word water mean? Water is H20, two hydrogen atoms bonded with one  
oxygen atom. Now, suppose we send a group of astronauts to another planet, 
one very much like ours. The planet is Twin Earth and in most respects is very 
similar to our world. 
 
●
But the stuff that fills the streams and rivers on Twin Earth, the stuff they 
pour into glasses and drink, has a very different chemical composition. It has a 
complicated formula abbreviated as XYZ. 
 
●
Suppose you have a doppelganger on Twin Earth, and suppose that you sit 
down at a restaurant and ask for a glass of water. To you, water means H2O. But 
on Twin Earth, your doppelganger asking for a glass of water would be asking 
for XYZ.
 
●
Your psychological states—what is in your heads—are precisely the same.  
But the meaning of the word water as you use it and the meaning of the word 
water as your doppelganger uses it are different. Here, for you, it means H2O. 
There, for your doppelganger, it means XYZ. Putnam concludes that the 
meanings differ, even though everything in the heads is the same. 
 
●
Putnam’s position is called externalism: When we talk about psycho-
logical states like meaning, we aren’t just talking about something internal.  
Whether someone can be said to mean something may depend on how the 
world is.

188
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
The question is how far to push the theory. A common response to externalism 
is to concede that some psychological terms, in some uses, may indeed fit 
Putnam’s story. Some uses of belief and meaning may have wide content, 
meaning that they depend on the world around us. But that may not be true of 
all our psychological or mental terms. Other psychological concepts may have 
narrow content, limited more narrowly to just what’s in a person’s head. 
Further Externalism
 
●
The philosophers Andy Clark and David Chalmers argue for an extended-mind 
thesis that they call active externalism. In cases in which we use the world 
as part of our cognition, we should think of our minds as extending into the 
world. Whatever you use to think is part of your mind. 
 
●
They use this comparison: Igna and Otto both want to go to a new exhibit at 
the Museum of Modern Art. Igna recalls the museum’s location—it’s on 53rd 
Street—from memory and starts walking there. Otto, who has Alzheimer’s, 
consults the notebook he carries and brings up the museum’s location that way. 
He also heads to the museum.

189
LECTURE 18THINKING BODY AND EXTENDED MIND
 
●
Clark and Chalmers say that both Inga and Otto believe that the museum is 
on 53rd street because both have that as accessible information. Where it is 
accessible, whether in skull or notebook, shouldn’t make a difference.
 
●
Clark and Chalmers concede that we don’t use mental terms that way. We say 
Inga remembers where the museum is but Otto doesn’t. He has Alzheimer’s. 
It’s because he can’t remember things that he has to consult his notebook. 
Inga has a background belief that the museum is on 53rd street. Otto just has a 
jotting in his notebook.
 
●
But even if we don’t use mental terms that way, Clark and Chalmers claim  
we should. In all important respects, the cases of Otto and Inga are relevantly  
the same. If our mental concepts don’t yet recognize a mind extended into the 
world around it, they should. 
 
●
Taken that way, they aren’t just giving us an analysis of our current concepts 
of mind. They’re telling us to change them. Is that going too far?
Suggested Reading
Clark and Chalmers, “The Extended Mind.” 
Gibson, “The Theory of Affordances.” 
Questions to Consider
1 
Give three examples from your own experience in which you use your body as 
part of your thought process. 
2 
Give three examples in which you use something from the world as part of 
your thought process. 


Lecture 19
Francis Crick and 
Binding in the 
Brain

192
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
T
he central figure in this lecture is Francis Crick, co-discoverer with James 
D. Watson of the structure of DNA. But his work on DNA is not the main 
topic this lecture will discuss. Instead, the lecture concentrates on his later 
work on the brain, specifically on two of Crick’s hypotheses regarding brain 
function and consciousness. The first hypothesis is that the theory is that patterns 
of neurons firing synchronously in the range of 40 hertz form part of the same 
conscious experience. In the second, Crick proposes that there is a particular part 
of the brain that is responsible for the coordination across various areas of the 
brain required for consciousness. 
Francis Crick
 
●
After their work together on DNA, Crick and Watson went on to important 
later careers. Watson’s was the straighter line: He went to the biology faculty at 
Harvard and from there to direct the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long 
Island. By the 1990s, he was a major player in the Human Genome Project. 
 
●
By contrast, Crick left DNA behind and changed course again. He felt there 
were two mysteries: the physical basis of life and the physical basis of mind. 
His progress on the question of life had been astounding. So Crick turned to 
the second question: What is the physical basis of mind? What is the underlying 
structure of consciousness? 

193
LECTURE 19FRANCIS CRICK AND BINDING IN THE BRAIN
 
●
Crick was a materialist, or physicalist, with regard to mind as he was with 
regard to life. He was sure the underlying structure of consciousness was going 
to be a physical understructure. 
 
●
In 1990, Crick published a groundbreaking piece with Christof 
Koch, a neuroscientist. It’s called “Toward a Neurobiological Theory 
of Consciousness.” At the beginning of that piece, they were able to say, “It is 
remarkable that most of the work in both cognitive science and the neurosciences 
makes no reference to consciousness.” This was a piece that changed all that. 
 
●
Crick and Koch laid out the problem of consciousness as a genuinely scientific 
project. They lay out a number of assumptions they’re going to make, as well 
as a number of questions they’re going to put aside, at least at the beginning. 
 
●
Their first assumption is that it’s not just people who have consciousness. 
Other animals, and clearly the higher mammals, do as well. They assume therefore 
that language of the sort found in humans is not necessary for consciousness.
 
●
One of the problems they put aside is how far down an evolutionary ladder 
consciousness goes. They claim it’s unprofitable at an early stage to speculate as 
to whether octopi, fruit flies, or nematodes are conscious. They also put aside, 
for the moment, questions of what consciousness is for. 
 
●
There are two aspects that they put aside that may be particularly worrisome. 
One is what they call the problem of qualia, focusing on the character of 
subjective experience. The other issue they put to the side is actually defining 
the phenomenon they are after. 
 
●
Those are some pretty significant factors to set aside, but it’s all in the name 
of trying to convert the problem of consciousness into a genuinely scientific 
research project. They recognize their first step as precisely that: a first step. 
In that regard—jumpstarting a scientific study of consciousness—the Crick 
and Koch paper was a dramatic success.
 
●
That central aspect of consciousness is what they term the binding problem. 
Although they don’t allude to it, the binding problem has a significant 
philosophical history.

194
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
The Binding Problem
 
●
The binding problem is this: At the moment there are certain things you see. 
There are certain things you hear. You may feel certain pressure on your 
fingertips or a certain tension in your forehead. There are certain thoughts 
going through your mind, and you might smell coffee. 
 
●
Those are all different sensations and conceptualizations. But they are 
all happening at once, and they are all happening together. Yours is a 
single consciousness in which many things are happening simultaneously. 
How precisely is that possible, that all those things are bound in a single 
consciousness?
 
●
The binding problem can be phrased as either a problem of phenomenal 
binding—what brings all those phenomena together?—or of binding in 
the brain. 
 
●
Crick and Koch approach it as a problem of the brain. We know that different 
parts of the brain process vision, hearing, touch, smell, and thoughts. What binds 
activity in those different parts of the brain together into a single consciousness?
 
●
Crick and Koch weren’t the first theorists to ponder the binding problem. It is 
raised in both Plato and Aristotle. And the Scottish philosopher David Hume, 
writing in 1738, raised the binding problem in a particularly forceful way. 
Hume was an empiricist. The basic idea of empiricism is that all knowledge 
comes from experience. 
 
●
The mind operates using ideas from impressions as its basic material, but there 
are important limitations as to what it can do with them. In Hume, association 
of ideas operates solely in terms of similarity, whether things are next to each 
other in time or space, and an association of cause and effect that arises purely 
from habit.
 
●
How are these impressions bound together? In the main section of Hume’s 
Treatise of Human Nature in which he addresses the issue, he simply denies 
that experience gives us any sense of self. If ideas come from impressions, 
there is no genuine idea of self. What are people? All of mankind, 

195
LECTURE 19FRANCIS CRICK AND BINDING IN THE BRAIN
Hume says, “are nothing but a bundle or collection of different perceptions, which 
succeed each other with an inconceivable rapidity, and are in a perpetual flux 
and movement.”
 
●
It’s called the bundle theory precisely because of that passage. The bundle 
theory doesn’t so much solve the binding problem as refuse to recognize it. 
Nothing brings experiences and sensations together. They remain separate. 
They’re as loose as a bundle of twigs. But in a later appendix to the Treatise 
of Human Nature, however, Hume confesses that he’s not satisfied with his 
earlier analysis. 
 
●
Writing 40 years later, near the end of the 18th century, Immanuel Kant credits 
Hume with awakening him from his dogmatic slumbers. One of the problems 
in Hume that Kant tackled was the binding problem. 
 
●
For Kant, the mind has templates in advance that shape all the experience that 
comes in. One of the templates for Kant is space. Another is time. Space and 
time aren’t so much in the world as in how we come prepared to interpret  
the world.
 
●
The same goes for a concept of self and a binding of experience into a  
single unity. Kant has a fancy name for it: the transcendental unity of  
a perception.“Unity” signals it’s binding; “apperception” signals it’s a kind of per- 
ception or representation; and “transcendental” signals it doesn’t come from 
experience but is necessary for experience. 
Back to Crick and Koch
 
●
Crick and Koch see attention and short-term memory as crucial for 
consciousness, but those don’t solve the binding problem. As Crick and Koch 
admit, there is no evidence of any spatial location in the brain in which “it all 
comes together.” What they propose instead is a temporal binding: a binding in 
time rather than space. 
 
●
How do different areas of the brain bind in consciousness? Their hypothesis is 
that binding occurs through the synchronization in the oscillation patterns of 

196
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
neuron firing commonly called brain waves. EEG recordings show particular 
firing patterns in particular areas of the brain. Sometimes these are slow—
alpha waves at 8–12 cycles per second, or 8–12 hertz. Sometimes these are 
fast—gamma waves, at 40–70 hertz. 
 
●
Crick and Koch cite experimental research on cat brains showing that when 
a cat is shown a moving bar, neurons some distance apart in its brain respond 
with synchronized oscillations. They propose that is what all binding is, and 
ultimately what consciousness is: “We suggest that one of the functions of 
consciousness is to present the result of various underlying computations and 
that this involves an attentional mechanism that temporarily binds the relevant 
neurons together by synchronizing their spikes in 40Hz oscillation.” 
 
●
That is Crick’s first hypothesis. It had an immense influence precisely because 
it was a serious scientific hypothesis about consciousness. It opened the door to 
a field of research that has flourished ever since.
 
●
Summed up, the theory is that patterns of neurons firing synchronously in the 
range of 40 hertz form part of the same conscious experience. Those firing 
asynchronously, or out of that range, may well be functioning unconsciously, 
but don’t break the surface of conscious awareness.
 
●
How has Crick’s first hypothesis fared? A number of studies, in both animals 
and humans, do indicate some forms of synchrony as important for binding 
different perceptions. However, it does not appear that the importance of 
synchrony is limited to the 40-hertz range, nor that it needs to have the form 
of regular oscillation that Crick and Koch emphasize. On the other hand, there 
are cases of 40-hertz synchrony that do not trigger conscious awareness. 
The Second Hypothesis
 
●
By 2003, research had led Crick and Koch to abandon the first hypothesis, 
at least in its original form. They wrote, “We no longer think that 
synchronized firing, such as the so-called 40 Hz oscillations, is a sufficient 
condition for” consciousness. Nor did they appear to think that it is necessary 
for consciousness. 

197
LECTURE 19FRANCIS CRICK AND BINDING IN THE BRAIN
 
●
But Crick didn’t give up. He was working on a paper that lays out a second 
hypothesis regarding consciousness up to the day he died in 2004. In his second 
hypothesis, Crick targets a particular anatomical area. Crick proposes that 
there is a particular part of the brain that is responsible for the coordination 
across various areas of the brain required for consciousness. 
 
●
The title of the piece Crick was working on when he died is “What Is the 
Function of the Claustrum?” The hypothesis is that it is the claustrum that is 
crucial to consciousness by binding the different areas of the brain.
 
●
Claustrum literally means “hidden away,” and the term is apt. On each side 
of the brain is a lateral sulcus, a deep canyon that separates the temporal 
lobe from the parietal and frontal lobes. Deep in that canyon is a folded part 
of the cortex called the insula. One step even deeper toward the center of 
your brain is an extremely thin and irregular sheet of neurons, hidden away. 
That’s the claustrum. 
 
●
Crick’s work suggests that the claustrum coordinates different areas of the 
brain, binding them into consciousness. The brain may not have a spatial 
theater where everything comes together. But Crick suggests that it does have 
an anatomical feature, spatially located, that coordinates the temporal binding 
of firing in different parts of the brain. 

198
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Crick proposed a test of his hypothesis: Knock out the claustrum and see what 
happens. He also noted the extreme difficulty of performing any such test. 
The claustrum is so thin that shutting it down, and only it, either 
pharmaceutically or surgically seemed beyond the reach of current techniques.
 
●
Much more recently, however, Mohamad Koubeissi of George Washington 
University and his collaborators in Marseille and Geneva have reported a 
suggestive study. They planted individual electrodes in different parts of the 
brain of a 54-year-old woman with intractable epilepsy. Koubeissi’s attempt 
was to treat the woman’s seizures by electrical stimulation at specific points in 
the brain, tracking the effects on synchronization at they did so.
 
●
Stimulation of a single electrode implanted in many parts of the brain 
seemed to have no discernible effect on synchronization. An electrode in the 
hippocampus, amygdala, and many parts of the neocortex could be activated 
without significant effect. 
 
●
Results were dramatically different for an electrode stimulating one particular 
point in the brain. Described as a “consciousness switch,” electrical stimulation 
at that point seemed to disrupt firing across the brain in a way that rendered 
the patient entirely unconscious. Where was it? Right next to the claustrum. 
 
●
There is also some evidence against the claustrum hypothesis. The structure 
of the claustrum seems too simple for any complex information processing. 
Brain imaging doesn’t indicate that it is particularly active during consciousness. 
 
●
Whether it ends up being right or not, Crick’s second hypothesis is another 
characteristically bold speculation as to how the brain works. Like his first 
hypothesis, the second is a clear conjecture framed in light of available evidence 
and fully open for further testing. In that alone, it continues to guide research 
and advance the field.

199
LECTURE 19FRANCIS CRICK AND BINDING IN THE BRAIN
Suggested Reading
Crick, The Astonishing Hypothesis. 
Crick and Koch, “What Is the Function of the Claustrum?” 
Watson, The Double Helix. 
Questions to Consider
1 
Has the course of your life been a straight line between points A and B, or 
something with more turns and twists than that? Which parts have been the 
most interesting?
2 
This lecture focuses on the binding problem, in two forms:
 
○
The problem of brain function: What binds the functioning of different 
parts of the brain?
 
○
The phenomenal problem: How do all your different sensations come 
together in a single consciousness at a single time? 
3
In what respects do you think those are the same question? In what ways are 
they different questions?


Lecture 20
Clues on 
Consciousness 
from 
Anesthesiology

202
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
I
n the city of Boston stands a 40-foot-tall monument dedicated to the use of 
ether as an anesthetic. At the top is a vaguely Moorish figure in robe and 
turban holding the drooping body of a man over his knee and a cloth in one 
hand—a cloth presumably soaked with ether. The innovation of anesthetic ether 
was a major achievement in medicine. The American dentist William T. G. 
Morton and the Harvard professor Dr. Charles Jackson squabbled over credit for 
the invention. Whoever deserves the credit, the use of ether spread quickly, as 
did other anesthetics, like chloroform and nitrous oxide. Their use has much to 
teach us about consciousness.
On Anesthetics
●
The initial hypothesis on different anesthetics was that they must have some 
common mechanism. There must be some one thing that all these different 
chemicals are doing in the brain. 
 
●
In 1901, a couple of independent studies reported that there was a correlation 
between the effectiveness of a chemical as an anesthetic and whether it was 
soluble in olive oil. Lipids are fats, so what emerged was the lipid hypothesis 
of general anesthesia. All of these chemicals must work by affecting lipid 
membranes in the nerves.
 
●
By the 1980s, the lipid hypothesis had been debunked. An even larger range 
of anesthetics was available by that time. But how those different anesthetics 
worked was still a mystery. 

203
LECTURE 20CLUES ON CONSCIOUSNESS FROM ANESTHESIOLOGY
 
●
By then, attention had turned away from lipids to proteins and ion 
channels instead. Theories also shifted away from a unitary hypothesis to a 
diversity hypothesis: Maybe all anesthetics don’t work the same way. 
 
●
It is also possible that the effects aren’t even all that similar. Anesthesia is 
a single term meaning “insensitivity to pain.” But there are more terms  
beyond that.
 
○
Paralytics is the term used for chemicals employed as muscle relaxants, 
which block patient movement. 
 
○
Amnesiacs is the term for chemicals that block recall. What happened 
to you for a period of time after you took an amnesiac won’t be 
remembered afterward.
 
○
Analgesics, like aspirin and acetaminophen, dampen or deaden pain 
without loss of awareness. 
 
●
The aim of general anesthesia is to wipe the awareness slate clean—to entirely 
eliminate conscious awareness, eliminating pain in the process. A warning: If 
you have a surgical procedure scheduled in the near future, you may want to 
postpone this lecture until later.
The Effects
 
●
It is common in anesthesiology to use a cocktail of chemicals that have a 
spectrum of effects. The combination typically includes a paralytic for muscle 
relaxation and smooth surgery. It also typically works as an amnesiac to block 
memory of the event. Of course, the main intent is to block pain and awareness 
under the knife. 
 
●
A philosophical problem arises immediately. Suppose, for example, that you 
have a combination that is very effective as a paralytic (the patient doesn’t 
thrash about) and is also very effective as an amnesiac (the patient doesn’t 
complain after). Isn’t it still possible that the patient felt pain—perhaps a great 
deal of pain—during the operation? 

204
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Indeed, the awful truth is that this apparently happens. In 1984, four national 
newspapers in Great Britain carried the following short advertisement asking 
if people had been conscious during surgery. They got all too many responses 
recounting terrifying experiences from helpless patients.
 
●
The horror is called intraoperative awareness or anesthesia awareness. 
Reports of anesthesia awareness occur in only one or two cases in a thousand, 
but you sure don’t want to be one of those unlucky ones. 
 
●
Moreover, the figure of one or two cases in a thousand represents only those 
cases in which patients remember being awake and aware; an effective amnesiac 
may simply erase the memory of the horror. 
 
●
What we need is a consciousness monitor. With that, we could tell that the 
patient is really unconscious when under anesthetic, not merely paralyzed with 
muscle relaxant and unable to recall the physical experience later. 
The Four Questions
 
●
Four questions need to be answered before a consciousness monitor is possible. 
By now the first question should be familiar: What is consciousness? 
The primary answer seems to be subjective experience. We want to eliminate 
the subjective awareness reported in the horror stories. The experience that 
we want the patient to have during the surgery is none at all. 
 
●
The second question should also be familiar: How does consciousness work? 
If we could answer that, we would know the physical process we were trying 
to turn off in trying to turn off consciousness.
 
●
A third question concerns anesthetics in particular: How do anesthetics work? 
 
●
A fourth question is a question of measurement: Can we measure that 
anesthetics are in fact doing that work? It’s at that stage, with answers to all 
four questions, that we will really have a consciousness monitor. 

205
LECTURE 20CLUES ON CONSCIOUSNESS FROM ANESTHESIOLOGY
Research
 
●
The last few years have seen a number of promising breakthroughs by a number 
of different research teams. George Mashour, an anesthesiologist at the 
University of Michigan, is one of the main players. He speaks of an explosion 
of studies on how anesthetics interrupt consciousness and what they can teach 
us about it. 
 
●
Before the 1980s, the idea was that different anesthetics must work in basically 
the same way—the unitary hypothesis. In the 1980s, thinking shifted to a 
realization that different anesthetics or different aspects of anesthetics may 
work in different ways. 
 
●
In the past few decades, research has swung back toward a unitary hypothesis 
of consciousness once again. With that shift has come new hope for answering 
some of the questions we’ve highlighted.
 
●
What made a unitary theory seem impossible was that different anesthetic 
agents seemed to do very different things to very different parts of the brain. 
Rather than a general theory of how anesthesia works, it appeared that the best 
we could get was a bunch of theories of how a bunch of different anesthetic 
agents work.
 
●
This overlooks a simple distinction between what is done and the different 
ways in which that thing is done. It is possible that the same thing can be 
accomplished in a number of different ways.
 
●
Maybe anesthetics have the same general function, producing the same 
overall effect, although the details of how they accomplish that general 
function are different. Our unitary theory of anesthesia will be a theory of 
the general mechanism that produces the general effect. 
 
●
Many theories involve approaches that take binding to be crucial 
to consciousness. The idea is that subjective experience occurs not in some 
single part of the brain but in the operation of multiple parts of the brain 
functioning together. 

206
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
If we accept a binding hypothesis, we have provisional answers to the first two 
of the four questions. And with those, we can propose a possible answer to the 
third.
1 
What is consciousness? The sense of consciousness that seems to be 
important for studies of anesthesia is subjective awareness. 
2 
How does consciousness work? Consciousness operates any of various 
forms of the binding hypotheses. It is binding across a brain that is 
necessary for consciousness. 
3 
How do anesthetics work? Perhaps by blocking or interfering with the 
binding necessary for consciousness. 
Studies
 
●
A number of studies across the world seem to support the combination of a 
binding hypothesis regarding consciousness and this unitary hypothesis of how 
anesthetics work.
 
●
A Belgian group has studied anesthesia with PET and functional MRI scans. 
They found that when patients are unconscious, external stimulation causes 
initial islands of activation to occur, but it doesn’t spread to other areas of the 
brain like normal.

207
LECTURE 20CLUES ON CONSCIOUSNESS FROM ANESTHESIOLOGY
 
●
A German team has studied the process in slow motion by altering how 
anesthetics are administered; they administer the drug Propofol so that 
patients fall asleep in minutes instead of the normal 10 seconds. During the 
administering, they observe what happens in EEG readings with a mild shock 
to the volunteer’s wrist. When awake, the result is activation of the sensory 
cortex, with further activation of frontal lobes associated with judgment and 
temporal lobes associated with memory. When fully sedated, the activation 
seems to stop at the sensory cortex. 
 
●
This study resonates with the unitary hypothesis. They support the idea that 
what anesthetics do is block the process of binding across the brain. 
Blocking
 
●
How precisely is binding blocked? There are some intriguing research findings 
here as well. When conscious, the brain shows active communication between 
importantly different patterns of activity in different parts of the brain. 
 
●
As the patient slips into unconsciousness, that active exchange between areas 
of differential activity is replaced with a strong, monotonously synchronized, 
slow oscillation that washes across them all. 
 
●
A number of researchers have proposed that this is the process of “unbinding” 
in the brain. Andreas Engel’s results indicate that communication between 
areas in the brain is shut down not with a sudden silence between them but 
rather by the imposition of that abnormally strong synchronization. 
 
●
Like all good science, these results are open to further testing, vulnerable to 
falsification, subject to replication, and open to refinement. There are more, 
both older and newer, that seem to track the same trajectory. They offer strong 
evidence that anesthesia works by interfering with communication across 
different areas of the brain. 
 
●
We know a great deal more about how anesthesia works than we did only a few 
decades ago. That in turn gives us clues to at least some aspects of the neural 
dynamics responsible for consciousness.

208
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Regarding the fourth question: Do these results give us what we need for a 
consciousness monitor? If binding is a necessary condition for consciousness 
in the sense we’re after, and if we know anesthesia operates by blocking that 
binding in measurable ways, it looks like we might actually be able to build 
such a device.
Philosophical Questions
 
●
On the assumption of a binding theory of consciousness, we’ve sketched some 
promising answers to the four practical and scientific questions. But major 
philosophical questions remain. 
 
●
Even the most successful binding theory of consciousness would leave a crucial 
question unanswered: Why is it that subjective experience emerges only with 
binding across a brain? 
 
●
There are also some major philosophical assumptions we have made in 
tracking the promise of scientific breakthroughs in anesthesiology. We can 
still distinguish between two things, at least conceptually. On the one hand: 
a genuine anesthetic, genuinely eliminating awareness and pain during 
an operation. On the other: a highly effective combination of a paralytic toge-
ther with an amnesiac. 
●
In the second case, pain and awareness are there during the operation, though 
the patient is disabled from crying out and the memory of the event is entirely 
wiped afterward.
 
●
Neither an outsider’s observation nor any response from the patient at any time 
would tell us if the patient felt sensation during the operation: We hear no 
complaint when he is paralyzed during the operation, and hear no complaint 
afterward because he has forgotten all about it. 
 
●
That philosophical possibility would remain even if we did have the kind of 
consciousness monitor that we’ve outlined. We would know that when the 

209
LECTURE 20CLUES ON CONSCIOUSNESS FROM ANESTHESIOLOGY
fMRI indicates that functioning is confined to specific areas of the brain, 
or EEG readings signal the synchronous wave across the brain, the horror 
stories stop. We would no longer hear patient reports of anesthetic awareness. 
 
●
But it would remain a philosophical possibility that we no longer hear reports 
merely because we’ve finally found brain states from which we can’t hear the 
screams: brain states from which all reporting is blocked. 
 
●
Perhaps it’s merely a philosophical possibility. Perhaps it will join the wild 
speculative possibility that Bertrand Russell envisages: the possibility that the 
universe was created five seconds ago, complete with false memories. Or the 
logical possibility that other people are merely clever robots. Those too are 
philosophical nightmares. Luckily, blissfully, they prove unsustainable in the 
normal course of everyday life. Maybe that’s where this possibility belongs 
as well. 
Suggested Reading
Mashour, “Integrating the Science of Consciousness and Anesthesia.” 
Mashour and Alkire, “Evolution of Consciousness.” 
Questions to Consider
1 
A worry is raised in this lecture that there may be cases in which a patient 
is fully conscious but paralyzed during an operation, but the horrors are not 
reported later because the cocktail of drugs administered also includes an 
amnesiac that wipes memory of the event. If the patient doesn’t remember the 
event later, is it nonetheless something we should worry about? Why?
2 
It has been suggested that anesthesia, vegetative coma, and certain stages of 
sleep all show a pattern of unbinding in the brain. From your own experience 
of sleep, what do you think the pattern of unbinding is? Is it gradual, or sudden?


Lecture 21
Of Mind, 
Materialism, 
and Zombies

212
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
T
his lecture discusses zombies—not the blood-dripping creatures of popular 
portrayals on large and small screens, but denizens of philosophical 
thought experiments. These zombies don’t eat brains. They’re meant to 
stimulate brains: to test philosophical intuitions and theories about minds, brains, 
and consciousness. A zombie is a creature just like a person: acting like a person 
and saying the things a person does. The only difference is that a zombie does it 
all without any consciousness. A zombie’s responses are identical but aren’t routed 
through subjective experience the way a person’s are. 
Materialism
 
●
Materialism is the view that everything is ultimately physical. Typically, we 
picture the physical universe as a hierarchy: one type of physical thing is 
composed of another type of physical thing. 
 
●
For instance, you are composed of complex organs, which are composed of 
tissues, which are composed of cells, which are built from proteins, and so on, 
down to atoms and subatomic particles. Hierarchies can also be traced from 
the bottom up.
 
●
That hierarchy of things corresponds to a hierarchy of sciences. At the top, 
we have sociology and anthropology—sciences of societies and cultures— 

213
LECTURE 21OF MIND, MATERIALISM, AND ZOMBIES
and economics—a science of a particular dynamics within societies. Societies are 
composed of people, the realm of social and individual psychology. 
 
●
People, in turn, are biological organisms, with various branches of biology on 
the next level of the scientific hierarchy. Biology operates in terms of organic 
chemistry, the next rung down on the ladder. Below chemistry is physics, 
leading us to a foundation in particle and subatomic physics. 
 
●
Reductionism is a theory in philosophy of science tied to that ladder image of 
scientific disciplines. The theory is that each step in the ladder reduces to the 
step below. The reductionist view is that the foundational science is physics. 
If and when we get the whole picture, we’ll see that all other sciences are 
merely branches or sub-disciplines of physics. All science ultimately reduces 
to physics. 
A Hard Look at Reductionism
 
●
Although the hierarchical picture is appealing, what do we actually mean 
when we say that one theory reduces to another? Here is the classical 
answer: The “higher” theory (chemistry, for instance) reduces to the 
“lower” theory (physics) if all the laws of the higher theory can be deduced 
from the lower theory. 
●
Some might object, citing that chemistry and physics don’t even use the same 
terms. Classical reductionism has an answer to this: Reduction consists of 
deduction plus definition. We simply need to add bridge principles which 
define the concepts of the higher theory in terms of the concepts of the lower. 
 
●
That grand reductionist scheme fired the imagination of philosophers of science 
well into the middle of the 20th century. But over time, the difficulties facing 
the reductionist vision became clear. For instance, if we want psychology to 
give us an understanding a thing of mental illness, classical reductionism would 
make that difficult: How precisely would one define the concept of psychosis in 
terms of subatomic particles? And how much understanding of mental illness 
would that actually provide? 

214
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
The crucial point is that the abstract models we build to understand different 
levels of phenomena are inevitably going to be different. The concepts we take 
as basic, the relationships we choose to model, and the dynamics we put at the 
center will be different. 
 
●
In this course, we are most interested in the question of reduction between 
two particular areas: between the mental and the physical, from mind to brain, 
or perhaps from psychology to neurophysiology. 
 
●
There is a strong argument that reduction at this point will prove impossible. 
It’s called the multiple instantiation argument. It goes like this: Suppose we 
found very different creatures on a distant planet—creatures based on silicon 
rather than carbon, with brains that were distributed across their bodies in 
ways we didn’t recognize.
 
●
These creatures could conceivably feel pain But that means that the concept of 
pain is multiply instantiable. There might be various kinds of creatures, with 
various kinds of nervous systems—even nervous systems totally unlike any we 
could imagine—who still feel pain. 
 
●
If so, we’re never going to be able to define pain as a particular type of carbon-
based brain function. It’s a concept of a very different kind—a concept at a very 
different level of abstraction. If our mental concepts are multiply instantiable, 
that kind of reduction of mind to brain will inevitably fail.
Elements of Value
 
●
The full classical picture of reduction is now generally recognized as a failure. 
However, if we let go of the full classical picture, there may be elements of 
reductionism that are still of value. 
 
●
The classical picture called for what is sometimes called type-to-type reduction. 
The idea was that types of mental states, like pain, would correspond to types 
of brain state. The multiple instantiation idea dashes that hope.

215
LECTURE 21OF MIND, MATERIALISM, AND ZOMBIES
 
●
But it might still be true that each particular instance of pain, in a 
particular creature at a particular time, corresponds to a particular brain state
in that creature at that time. We can call that particular instance 
of pain in that creature at that time a specific token instance rather than a 
general type. Perhaps token-to-token reduction is possible even if we’ve 
abandoned type-to-type.
 
●
Another valuable thing that we might take from the reductionist program is 
a simple research strategy. If you want to understand something, it’s often a 
good idea to take it apart to see how it works. 
Non-Reductive Materialism
 
●
Reductionism is an epistemological theory: a theory about knowledge. 
Materialism, on the other hand, is an ontological theory. It’s a theory of being: 
Everything that exists is ultimately physical. Reductive materialism insisted on 
putting those two things together. Another option is to pull them apart. 
 
●
People have tried to flesh out the possibility of a non-reductive materialism by 
borrowing an idea from the field of ethics. Suppose that there are two actions 
that happen in identical circumstances, by identical agents, with identical 
backgrounds, motivations, and consequences. Imagine something like identical 
murders happening in Chicago and Detroit. 
 
●
If all the circumstances are the same, could one of those actions be ethically 
right and the other be ethically wrong? No. 
 
●
In philosophy of mind, the corresponding proposal is that mental states depend 
on brain states in much the same way. Just as you couldn’t have differences in 
right and wrong without some difference in circumstances, you couldn’t have 
differences in mental states without some difference in underlying brain states. 
 
●
We’ll call it dependence materialism. Mental states depend on brain states. 
Everything is still ultimately physical. 

216
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Zombies
 
●
Zombies offer a thought experiment to test, on reflection, whether dependence 
materialism is plausible. 
 
●
Suppose that somewhere, in some faraway galaxy, you have a zombie twin. 
There is only one difference between the two of you: You have a rich inner life 
and are conscious. 
 
●
Being physically identical, your zombie twin does everything you do. But it’s 
all merely a physical operation. Zombies have no subjective awareness and 
lack consciousness.
 
●
Is that kind of zombie possible? People who say yes are anti-materialist. 
Even dependence materialism won’t do. Materialism says that if the two 
of you are physically identical, the two of you must be mentally identical. 
People who say yes fall more in the camp of dualism.
 
●
People who say no, such a zombie is impossible, fall firmly in the materialist 
camp. A physically identical but mentally different zombie would be impossible 
if the mental must depend on the physical.
More Zombies
 
●
To begin with, there are different ways in which we might think of you 
and your zombie twin being “identical.” So far we thought of you and 
your zombie twin being fully physically identical: identical atom for atom, 
molecule for molecule. 
 
●
Alternatively, we might think of a weaker kind of identity. Suppose we 
specify that you and your zombie twin are not physically identical, just 
behaviorally identical. Everything you do or say, the zombie does or says.
 
●
Behaviorism appears in a number of different forms. One view is that mental 
states are dependent on behavioral states. If two things are behaviorally 
identical, they have to be mentally identical too. 

217
LECTURE 21OF MIND, MATERIALISM, AND ZOMBIES
 
●
We can use a different kind of thought experiment zombie to test whether 
you’re this kind of behaviorist: Could you and your zombie twin be behaviorally 
identical, but you be conscious and your zombie twin not be? 
 
●
If you think that kind of zombie is impossible, you’re not merely a materialist, 
you’re a behaviorist as well. If you think that kind of zombie is possible, you’re 
an anti-behaviorist. 
Types of Possibility
 
●
Possibility comes in different strengths. Something is logically possibly 
if imagining it doesn’t involve some kind of contradiction. For instance, 
imagining a horse with three horns would be weird, but doesn’t involve a 
contradiction. A married bachelor, though, is a contradiction.
 
●
On the other end of the possibility spectrum is a laws-of-nature possibility. 
To ask whether something is possible in this sense is to ask whether it’s possible 
without violating the laws of nature in the actual universe. For instance, 
traveling faster than the speed of light is not something that could happen 
without violating the laws of nature that actually hold in our universe. 

218
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
We can add one more type of zombie. The multiple instantiation argument 
argued that any of various creatures, with all kinds of different anatomies, 
silicon-based or carbon-based, might all feel pain. Pain isn’t something that can 
be reduced to a particular physical state, because it seems that very different 
creatures on other planets might all feel pain.
 
●
Hilary Putnam is the philosopher who proposed that argument. He believed 
it shows that pain isn’t a physical state; it’s a functional state. Putnam’s 
functionalism is a descendant of behaviorism, emphasizing a functional 
organization that includes internal states as well as behavior. 
 
●
Consider your functionalist zombie twin. There is no guarantee that the 
zombie is physically or behaviorally identical to you. The zombie has internal 
states that correlate with each of your mental states. Is it logically possible for 
you to have a functionally identical zombie twin like that, but for you to be 
conscious and your twin not to be? 
 
●
Are functional zombies laws-of-nature possible? They would be robots, just 
like the behavioral zombies were robots, but with a particular organization 
of states that match the functional organization of whatever person they are 
copying. Would the laws of nature dictate that they then had to be conscious?
 
●
To track your answers to questions like these, fill out a zombie scorecard. See 
this lecture’s Questions to Consider below for a model.
Suggested Reading
Dennett, “The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies.” 
Flanagan and Polger, “Zombies and the Function of Consciousness.” 
Polger, “Zombies Explained.” 

219
LECTURE 21OF MIND, MATERIALISM, AND ZOMBIES
Questions to Consider 
1 
The multiple instantiation argument has us imagine very different creatures 
that nonetheless have the same mental states—pain, for example. Are there 
limits to that thought experiment for different mental states? What would a 
creature have to be like in order for it to have beliefs? To have a sense of pride? 
2 
Fill in your own zombie scorecard:
Behaviorally 
Identical Zombie
Functionally 
Identical Zombie
Physically 
Identical Zombie
Logically 
Possible
□  Possible
□  Not possible
□  Possible
□  Not possible
□  Possible
□  Not possible
Laws-of-Nature 
Possible
□  Possible
□  Not possible
□  Possible
□  Not possible
□  Possible
□  Not possible


Lecture 22
Thought 
Experiments 
against 
Materialism

222
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
O
ne of the main tools employed in contemporary philosophy of mind is the 
thought experiment. Virtually all of the contemporary arguments against 
materialism and functionalism rely on appeals to thought experiments. 
Many thought experiments, in philosophy as well as physics, are designed to show 
that a particular theory will generate a clearly unacceptable conclusion under 
clearly imaginable circumstances. In this lecture, we’ll look at thought experiments 
in some detail. 
Requirements of Thought Experiments
●
The two requirements of thought experiments—a clearly unacceptable 
conclusion and clearly imaginable circumstances—are also potential 
weak points. A thought experiment from physics illustrates this point. 
 
●
Einstein wasn’t a fan of quantum mechanics. He didn’t like the essential and 
irreducible randomness at the core of the theory. It must be leaving out some 
hidden variables behind that apparent randomness. 
 
●
Working with colleagues Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, Einstein 
came up with an argument against quantum mechanics. They designed a 
thought experiment to show that quantum mechanics couldn’t be complete. 
Their strategy was to show that the target theory would lead to unacceptable 
conclusions under clearly imaginable circumstances.

223
LECTURE 22THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS AGAINST MATERIALISM
 
●
It’s now known as the EPR paradox—EPR for Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen. 
Here’s the core: If the relevant interpretation of quantum mechanics were 
right, separating two particles that had once been entangled in interaction 
would allow information about a random event performed at one point in the 
universe to reach us at a different point in the universe instantaneously. 
 
●
If the target theory were right, it would then be possible for information to 
travel faster than the speed of light. But nothing can travel faster than the 
speed of light. If the relevant interpretation of quantum mechanics were 
right, we’d have “spooky action at a distance,” Einstein said. This was an 
unacceptable conclusion.
 
●
But the EPR thought experiment didn’t turn out to be the knockout punch 
it was intended to be. There is ongoing work in physics attempting to 
convert that thought experiment into a real experiment. The underlying 
idea is maybe those unacceptable conclusions aren’t really so unacceptable: 
Perhaps the universe doesn’t have a speed limit when information is 
at stake. Perhaps information really could be transferred faster than the speed 
of light.
 
●
Thought experiments often have that structure: In clearly imaginable 
circumstances, if the theory were right, you’d get an unacceptable conclusion, 
so the theory must be wrong. That can be a powerful argumentative structure. 
But it does rely on those two important points: The clearly imaginable 
circumstances really do have to be clearly imaginable, and the unacceptable 
conclusion really does have to be unacceptable. In the case of the EPR 
experiment, it’s an open question whether that conclusion is really so 
unacceptable after all. 
Frank Jackson
 
●
The Australian philosopher Frank Jackson offers what has become one of the 
most famous thought experiments against materialism. The target theory is: If 
the universe is entirely physical, all the facts of the universe are physical facts. 

224
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
The clearly imaginable situation posits a brilliant neuroscientist named Mary. 
Mary grows up in a black-and-white room. She’s educated through black-
and-white books with black-and-white illustrations and views lectures in 
black and white. 
 
●
But since she’s brilliant, she learns everything there is to know about the 
physical nature of the world, and in particular about the physical nature of 
color vision. She’s trapped in a black-and-white world but becomes the world’s 
expert on all the physical facts of color. 
 
●
One day, Mary is released from her black-and-white world, opens the door, 
and sees color for the first time: azure rivers, green fields, and so on. “Oh,” she 
says, “So that’s what color looks like.”
 
●
That’s the clearly imaginable situation of the thought experiment. Here’s the 
punchline: Hasn’t Mary learned something new when she opens the door? 
We assumed that Mary knew all the physical facts of color before she opened 
that door. If she knows something more about color now, there must be 
something to know about color that isn’t a part of mere physical knowledge. 
 
●
Materialism would entail that Mary already knew all the facts, and so couldn’t 
have learned anything new. That is an unacceptable conclusion, so materialism 
must be wrong.
Leibniz and Dualism
 
●
Another thought experiment comes from the early 1700s, with the German 
philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz arguing for a very dualist conclusion. 
In the passage where this appears, Leibniz is arguing that perception and 
sensations are “inexplicable by mechanical causes.” No machine, nothing that 
worked purely by mechanical means, could have perceptions or sensations.
 
●
Suppose there were a machine whose structure produced thought, and 
sensation, and perception. Leibniz argues that’s impossible. Imagine a 
mechanical head blown up big enough that we could walk inside. All the 
levers, gears, and pulleys are the same as before, only big enough that we can 

225
LECTURE 22THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS AGAINST MATERIALISM
walk among them. If the machine is really producing thoughts, sensations, or 
perceptions, it shouldn’t matter how big we make the machine: All the causal 
interactions will be the same.
 
●
Leibniz says inside the head, you’d see levers and gears and pulleys in motion. 
But you wouldn’t see perceptions, or sensations, or thoughts. Leibniz argues 
that thought, sensation, perception, and subjective experience must therefore 
be something beyond the mechanism. 
Criticizing the Experiments
 
●
How good is the Leibniz thought experiment against mechanism or the Mary 
thought experiment against materialism? 
 
●
Leibniz’s historical target was mechanism. Today it would be materialism, 
which argues subjective experience is to be explained in terms of a 
physical substrate. For those inclined to either position, Leibniz’s thought 
experiment is far from convincing. 
German philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz

226
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
Suppose that a machine in Leibniz’s sense—he was thinking of metal 
clockwork—could produce sensations and perceptions. Why think that 
those would be additional things visible when we walked into it? 
 
●
Why not think that those things would be in the dynamics of the gears, 
pulleys, and wheels? They may be understandable once we consider the 
complexity of the system even if they’re not something additional that we’d 
see on the tour. For instance, think of all the wonderful things a computer 
can do—spell checking, mathematical calculations—that we wouldn’t be 
able to directly observe if we looked inside.
 
●
Note that a materialist using the computer analogy to criticize Leibniz’s 
argument hasn’t thereby given an argument for materialism. But if a 
mechanist or materialist can appeal to that counter-Leibniz possibility, they 
can neutralize the threat of Leibniz’s thought experiment. 
 
●
Regarding black-and-white Mary: Materialists have attacked Jackson’s 
thought experiment at a couple of different points. The clearest counter-
argument goes like this: We are supposed to buy the claim that Mary learns 
all the physical facts about color vision in a black and white room. 
 
●
But why think that? Why think that how red looks isn’t a physical fact—a phy-
sical fact that, unfortunately, Mary couldn’t learn in a black and white room? 
Why think that all facts can be expressed in black and white?
 
●
That attacks the clearly imaginable part of the thought experiment. Maybe 
it isn’t clearly imaginable that Mary learned all the facts about color vision 
in a black-and-white room. If that picture doesn’t hold up, the thought 
experiment fails at step one.
Two More Thought Experiments
 
●
Neither physical experiments nor thought experiments are unassailable 
arguments, invincible and beyond reproach. Let’s consider two more 
thought experiments. 

227
LECTURE 22THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS AGAINST MATERIALISM
 
●
The first is John Searle’s Chinese room. Searle was a student of students 
of Wittgenstein. He offers a thought experiment against forms of artificial 
intelligence, part of Turing’s legacy. 
 
●
Searle is arguing against strong artificial intelligence, a position close 
to both materialism and functionalism. The target theory is the claim 
that a computer running a program could understand a natural language. 
Could a computer running a program do what a human does when a human 
understands a language?
 
●
Here is Searle’s easily imaginable situation: He sits alone in a room with a 
slot in the door. Chinese speakers on the other side of the door write out 
questions in Chinese and slip them through the slot. Inside the room, Searle 
takes the input and follows a set of procedures outlined in a book written 
in English. 
 
●
The book was so good that the Chinese questioners become convinced 
there is a fluent (though slow) Chinese speaker on the other side of 
the door. The Chinese speakers may be convinced, but that’s where Searle’s 
argument starts. 
 
●
Searle’s argument is essentially that he is taking input (the questions) and 
giving output (the answers) without understanding Chinese. The activity 
in the Chinese room parallels the operation of a computer running a 
program: input, rule following, output. If there’s no reason to think that the 
Chinese room Searle understands Chinese, there’s no reason to think that a 
computer running a program understands Chinese.
 
●
Searle’s experiment has had its own critics. Some of the critiques accept the 
thought experiment, but attack the conclusions that Searle thinks we should 
draw from it. 
 
●
Searle is not a dualist. He thinks that consciousness is a phenomenon in the 
physical brain. But the Chinese room seems to show that instantiating a 
program isn’t enough. So what more do you need? 

228
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
The philosopher Ned Block has pressed the question with a thought 
experiment that’s even more far out: the China brain. Suppose we duplicated 
the function of neurons in a brain, with people in a sufficiently large nation, 
waving flags in specific ways. 
 
●
If a stimulus causes a specific neuron in the brain to fire, the person 
corresponding to that neuron waves a flag with the analogous stimulus. 
People communicating with flags replace neurons communicating with 
neurotransmitters, operating precisely on the pattern of all the neurons in 
your brain.
 
●
Would that nationwide complex of people with flags have thoughts? Would it 
be conscious? None of those seem plausible. This thought experiment seems 
to show that something more must be going on. 
The Final Experiment
 
●
This lecture’s final thought experiment fights thought experiments on one 
side with a thought experiment on the other. It is Paul and Patricia Smith 
Churchland’s response against Searle’s Chinese room. 
 
●
Since the work of James Church Maxwell in 1865, we know that light 
and electromagnetic waves are the same thing. Now for the thought 
experiment: Imagine a Victorian gentleman in his parlor first reading that 
fact in a scientific journal. Maxwell’s experiments show that light and 
electromagnetic waves aren’t two different things. They’re the same thing. 
 
●
Our gentleman isn’t buying any of it. He states, “If light were a form of 
electromagnetism, then if a magnet were to oscillate quickly enough, the 
result would be visible light.” He’s right: That is an implication of the theory 
we are talking about. In a darkened Victorian parlor, he waves a magnet up 
and down as rapidly as he can. No light appears. 
 
●
What the Victorian gentleman is able to produce in that darkened Victorian 
parlor is nothing near the conditions under which magnetic oscillation 

229
LECTURE 22THOUGHT EXPERIMENTS AGAINST MATERIALISM
would produce visible light. The physical experiment we are imagining him 
performing simply isn’t up to the task. 
 
●
Paul and Patricia Smith Churchland suggest that the same is true of Searle’s 
Chinese room. We are no more able to imagine—really imagine—the 
complexity that would be required in order for a program to mimic a Chinese 
speaker than the Victorian gentleman is able to wave a magnet fast enough 
to produce light. The Churchlands’ claim is that the clearly unacceptable 
conclusion in this case might not be so clearly unacceptable. 
 
●
Thought experiments or the intuitions that guide them should not be dismissed 
out of hand. They are a great tool for careful thinking. But they should not be a 
substitute for thinking. 
Suggested Reading
Churchland and Churchland, “Could a Machine Think?” 
Searle, “Minds, Brains, and Programs.” 
Questions to Consider
1
Does Mary learn something new when she leaves her black-and-white world? 
Does that show that there are more facts than the physical facts?
2 
John Searle offers the Chinese room as an argument against “strong AI”: 
No program, however sophisticated, could allow a computer to understand 
English. Paul and Patricia Smith Churchland think Searle is like the 
Victorian gentleman waving a magnet in a darkened room as a refutation of 
Maxwell’s theory of electromagnetism. Where do your intuitions lie in that 
battle between thought experiments? 


Lecture 23
Consciousness and 
the Explanatory 
Gap

232
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
T
his lecture faces a problem that has arisen a number of times in this course. 
We keep running up against the hard problem of consciousness, which 
has also been called the explanatory gap. The problem boils down to this: 
Suppose in the year 2050 we have discovered that whenever the brain displays 
a certain pattern and configuration, it produces consciousness. We’d still want 
to know why that configuration produces consciousness. What is it about that 
pattern that gives us subjective experience? Even when we know what produces 
consciousness, we’ll still want to know how a physical brain function could 
possibly produce it. 
The Hard Problem
 
●
The hard problem of consciousness has long been with us. Credit for pressing 
it as a contemporary problem goes to the philosopher David Chalmers. 
Chalmers offers a list of things that he thinks are well within reach of our 
contemporary brain sciences, such as how the brain reacts to environmental 
stimuli and the difference between being awake and asleep. 
 
●
In each of these cases, there’s a great deal we don’t know. But Chalmers says 
all are questions of how a brain functions. We know that the brain does it. 
We just have to figure out how. These are the so-called easy problems—easy 
in the relative sense, of course.

233
LECTURE 23CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE EXPLANATORY GAP
 
●
The really hard problem is not a question of function but of experience. 
Why does the brain in any particular state functioning in any particular way 
result in conscious experience? 
Unconscious Experience
 
●
Another way of pressing the question is to emphasize all the ways that our 
brains operate unconsciously, below the level of subjective experience. 
Take the example of a person driving to the office and suddenly realizing they 
have no memory of the trip: Despite avoiding pedestrians and stopping at red 
lights, they did this trip on “automatic pilot.” 
 
●
Even the deepest and most complex thinking can occur unconsciously. 
The great mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss spoke of a theorem he had 
tried for years to solve, without success. But then, he reported, “Like a 
sudden flash of lightning, the riddle was solved.” He himself couldn’t see 
what the thread was from his previous thinking to the solution that suddenly 
appeared before him. 
 
●
Responsiveness to the environment, intricate performance, learning, and 
even deep and creative formal thinking can all occur without consciousness. 
If the brain can do all this without consciousness, we might eventually 
understand how the brain performs all these functions—yet still not know 
how or why consciousness happens. That’s the explanatory gap. 
Difficulty
 
●
Just how hard is the hard problem of consciousness? Some thinkers claim 
no real issue has been defined. Patricia Smith Churchland calls it the 
“hornswoggle problem.” She points out that Chalmers’ “easy” problems aren’t 
all that easy. Even there, we often don’t know what a solution is going to 
look like. Why think that consciousness is any different? The clear road ahead 
is to keep working on the neurobiology of mental phenomena in general. 

234
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
She and her husband Paul Churchland argue that our view of the issue at this 
point may also be limited by our current ignorance and conceptual confusion. 
The Churchlands predict that as scientific work proceeds we’ll find that there 
is no explanatory gap after all. 
 
●
Daniel Dennett is another philosopher who thinks there is no real problem. 
While there is plenty of work to do, both philosophically and in the brain 
sciences, there is no sudden leap required to cross an explanatory gap. 
He makes a two-pronged argument.
 
○
Dennett argues that when we really pay attention to this thing called 
subjective experience, we’ll find there’s much less to explain than 
we thought.
 
○
Dennett also argues that a complex of different cognitive functions 
can explain much more than we tend to think. When we put together 
mechanisms for attention, for decision, for monitoring and for reporting 
internal states,we’ll see that they give us all we need.
 
●
Dennett outlines his two-pronged critical approach in his book 
Consciousness Explained. Criticism of Dennett accuses him of ignoring the 
depth of the real problem. 
Activities like playing the piano appear to require great coordination and 
concentration, yet many people can read music essentially unconsciously. 

235
LECTURE 23CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE EXPLANATORY GAP
 
●
Another approach claims the hard problem isn’t ultimately all that hard. 
It relies on the concept of emergence. How does subjective experience arise 
from a purely physical brain? Consciousness is an emergent property of a 
complex brain. 
 
●
The concept of emergence relies on the idea of levels. The idea is that 
something emerges on a higher level as a result of the interaction of elements 
on the lower level.
 
●
The classical example of emergence comes from John Stuart Mill, using water. 
A hydrogen atom is not wet. Neither is an oxygen atom. Nor does a single 
molecule composed of two hydrogen atoms have that property. But put 
lots of those molecules together, interacting at room temperature, and 
you have something new: liquidity. Only now do you have something wet. 
That’s emergence.
 
●
The difficulty with the concept is that it relies on two requirements. 
One requirement is that the thing on the higher level has to be something 
genuinely new and different. The second requirement is that it has to be the 
product of what happens lower down. It has to be entirely determined by 
the interactions of its components. 
 
●
But if a phenomenon is determined by the action of components at a lower 
level, we should be able to explain it in terms of those components. We can 
for liquidity, in terms of atoms that slide past each other rather than locking 
into a lattice. 
 
●
What do we get if we propose that consciousness is an emergent phenomenon? 
First, we are proposing that it’s genuinely new: something at one level that 
doesn’t appear at a lower level. And second, if it is emergent, it has to be 
produced entirely by the operation of things at a lower level. 
 
●
How can consciousness be produced entirely by that lower level? That brings 
up the hard problem all over again. 

236
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Another Take
 
●
A number of people have suggested that it’s hard enough to demand radical 
changes in our most fundamental approaches to the world. One of those 
people is the distinguished physicist and mathematician Roger Penrose. 
There are two parts to Penrose’s ideas about consciousness. 
 
●
The first part relies on important 20th-century results in logic  
and mathematics. Penrose interprets results from the work of Alan 
M. Turing and Kurt Gödel as showing that mathematical insight 
goes beyond algorithmic systems. Our minds must thus be able to  
do something that algorithms and computers cannot: Consciousness must 
function non-algorithmically. 
 
●
The second part is a proposal for precisely how that could operate in the brain. 
Penrose proposes that quantum mechanics might account for non-algorithmic 
processing in the brain. And that it is non-algorithmic processing that is the 
mark of consciousness. 
 
●
There are lots of questions here. One question is whether this interpretation 
of Turing and Gödel’s results is right. The jury’s out on that one.  
Another question is whether there is any quantum action in the microtubules 
that has any effect on the brain. Many seem dubious.
Solving the Problem
 
●
David Chalmers says it will take a radical change in our physics to solve the 
hard problem. He says there are fundamental aspects of our world that demand 
more than anything our current physics can handle. Subjective experience is 
the prime example. 
 
●
Consciousness should be recognized as a fundamental aspect of the universe, 
on par with concepts like mass and space-time. Interestingly, he adds that if we 
do that, our theory of consciousness will look more like a new physics than an 
expanded biology.

237
LECTURE 23CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE EXPLANATORY GAP
 
●
Here again there is a range of questions. One question is what any new 
physics of that sort would look like or how it would operate. A second 
question is whether we really need a new physics: Our old physics has been 
astoundingly effective in both understanding and manipulating the physical 
world around us. A third question is whether even this would give us what 
we want. Suppose we rebuilt our physics by adding a new particle, the 
conscioutron, or a new force, the C-force, and surmised that those make 
us conscious. Wouldn’t we still have the same problem? Why should 
conscioutrons or the C-force make us conscious? 
 
●
Chalmers is not alone, however. Galen Strawson is another philosopher 
who thinks the hard problem is hard enough to demand a radical change in  
our worldview. Strawson characterizes himself as a physicalist: Everything that 
exists is physical. But he also thinks that the existence of consciousness—our 
subjective experience—is more certain than the existence of anything else. 
 
●
Strawson argues that given those two premises, we have to recognize that 
consciousness is an aspect of the physical world. He doesn’t take it to be merely 
an aspect of some small and complex corner of the physical world, contained in 
our skulls. For Strawson, experiential consciousness must be part of every part 
of the physical world. 
 
●
Revolutionary views such as those of Chalmers and Strawson, as they 
themselves point out, are usually met not with counterarguments but 
with bewildered stares: “Do you mean that rocks, ocean waves, and atoms 
are conscious?” To which the answer has to be “Yes,” or at least, “In some sense, 
yes,” met again with bewildered stares.
 
●
Where else might we look for a solution to the hard problem? Dualism is always 
there, lurking in the background, but dualism seems to be the route that no 
one wants to take. The reasons are the same as those noted in earlier lectures. 
Divide the universe conceptually into two distinct realms, as Descartes did, 
and it looks like it will be conceptually impossible to put it back together. 

238
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
A Hopeless Problem?
 
●
The philosopher Colin McGinn is a mysterian. He asks whether we can solve 
the mind-body problem, and firmly answers no. This is a problem we cannot 
solve, ever and in principle. 
 
●
It’s not that there isn’t an answer. The universe knows the answer. But how 
the physical brain creates conscious experience is forever and inevitably 
closed to us. McGinn’s analogy is the blind spot. There are things that are 
there to be seen, but you cannot see them because they are in your blind spot. 
Somehow the physical does meet the mental in the operation of the universe, 
but that meeting point lies where we could never see it: It lies in our 
intellectual or conceptual blind spot. 
 
●
Is it possible that the answer we seek is one that we can’t in principle find? 
The answer may be yes. There are scientific principles that are beyond the 
conceptual reach of raccoons. There are aspects of mathematics that are 
beyond the reach of chimpanzees. There seems no reason to think that there 
aren’t also things that are beyond our reach.
 
●
On the other hand, there are things that might be true but that it would be 
intellectually wrong to accept. Why? Because that acceptance would block the 
possibility of intellectual progress by shutting down further inquiry. 
 
●
If we decide there is no answer, we will no longer look for one. If we don’t look 
for one, we won’t find one. That could be an intellectual loss beyond measure. 
Suppose there really is an answer, lingering just beyond reach.

239
LECTURE 23CONSCIOUSNESS AND THE EXPLANATORY GAP
Suggested Reading
Chalmers, “Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness.” 
Nagel, “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” 
Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind.
Questions to Consider
1 
This lecture lists a number of things that we seem to be able to do without 
consciousness. Is there something that we cannot do without consciousness? 
2 
How hard do you think the hard problem of consciousness is?


Lecture 24
A Philosophical 
Science of 
Consciousness?

242
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
F
rom the start of this course, we’ve been grappling with the mind- 
body problem. Much of the material we’ve covered suggests the need for 
both better philosophy of consciousness and a better science of mind.  
This lecture suggests that we also need an integration of the two: a  
philosophical science of consciousness. How might we get there? What might 
a philosophical science of consciousness look like? Those are the questions  
this lecture tackles. 
The Scientific Approach
 
●
In additional to the philosophical approach and the scientific approach, we’ve 
also considered the information-theoretic approach. Here the idea is that we 
can learn about the mind by trying to build information-processing devices 
that mimic mental functioning.
 
●
In which of these—science, philosophy, or information—lies the answer to 
understanding mind, body, and consciousness? Taken alone, none of these 
can give us the answers we’re after. The hard problem of consciousness 
illustrates that. 
 
●
Those working in the brain sciences are generally careful to specify what 
they’re doing as a search for “neural correlates of consciousness.” They hope for 

243
LECTURE 24A PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCE OF CONSCIOUSNESS?
a map of brain dynamics that correlates with states of consciousness. The ideal 
outcome would be an identifiable brain process—let’s call it brain process C—
that is precisely what a conscious brain is doing.
 
○
We would be able to say, “When C occurs in a brain, you have a conscious 
brain. When C does not occur, you don’t.” 
 
○
We are very far from that ideal. We don’t know the neural correlates of 
consciousness. We can’t identify any such brain process C. 
 
○
Should we keep looking? Absolutely. The search for C is a search 
for an important part of what we want to know about consciousness 
and the mind. We need to know what is happening in the brain. 
Nevertheless, even full achievement of that scientific goal wouldn’t tell us 
everything that we want to know. 
 
●
Sometimes the problem is phrased in very strong terms. The realm of 
science is the realm of objectivity. But the realm of consciousness is precisely 
the opposite. It is the realm of the subjective, the essentially private. 
The idea of a science of consciousness is therefore a contradiction in terms, 
or so the reasoning goes. 
 
●
There is a way of taking that line of reasoning that seems correct, but also 
a way that might lead us astray. It might lead us astray if we think that we 
could never do scientific experiments on neural correlates of consciousness. 
A correlate would link something objective about the brain with an 
aspect of consciousness or subjective experience. If we refuse an objective 
approach to the subjective, we’d never be able to include that subjective side 
in our scientific investigations. 
 
●
Experiments regarding consciousness have played a major role throughout 
this course: Recall V. S. Ramachandran’s experiments on the sensations 
felt in phantom limbs. We’ve reviewed Ronald Myers, Roger Sperry, 
and Michael Gazzaniga’s experiments on experience and sense of self in 
split-brain patients. We’ve looked at Grey Walter and Benjamin Libet’s 
experiments on whether the body is already in action before a conscious 
decision is made, and so on.

244
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
It’s true that in any scientific experiment regarding consciousness, we have 
to rely on first-person reports of consciousness. We know that those can 
go wrong. We have seen that we can be wrong about characteristics of 
our own consciousness. But there is no reason to doubt there is a genuine 
phenomenon being reported. 
 
●
The real conclusion is simply that objective access to the subjective realm 
is necessarily indirect. That’s not so different from much of the rest 
of our science, which similarly relies on indirect objective indicators. 
For instance, our knowledge of the distance and velocity of other galaxies is 
based on inferences regarding the shift in the color of light that we receive 
from those galaxies. 
The Information-Theoretic Approach
 
●
Science is taking us farther each day in the search for neural correlates 
of consciousness. But the understanding we’re after asks for more 
than correlates. We’ll need more than science alone—or at least more than 
that kind of science. 
 
●
Let’s consider an information-theoretic approach. From all appearances, 
the brain is a massive parallel information-processing device. If we can 
understand how that information processing occurs, perhaps we can 
understand more about intelligence, cognition, and perception. Maybe we 
can even understand more about consciousness.
 
●
But the history of artificial intelligence is a history that aimed for 
computational intelligence, not computational consciousness. The computer 
Deep Blue plays world-class chess. IBM’s Watson beat human players on 
Jeopardy! But no one thinks Deep Blue or Watson is conscious.
 
●
The history of artificial intelligence is a checkered one. It begins with the 
Turing Test, a test that is entirely behavioral. Turing thought that by 2000 we’d 
have a machine that with a probability of 70 percent would be indistinguishable 
from a human after five minutes of questioning. We haven’t passed that 
benchmark yet. 

245
LECTURE 24A PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCE OF CONSCIOUSNESS?
●
But when it comes to artificial intelligence, we continue to see areas 
of progress and glimmers of hope. A major sign of progress is the shift 
from linear programming to structures that imitate human neurons. 
Machine learning constitutes a prolific and growing field, in large part because 
it can be used to discern patterns in the torrents of data now available to us. 
 
●
Marvin Minsky, a major figure in the history of artificial intelligence, 
said that “mind is what the brain does.” There certainly is something the 
brain does. In principle, we should be able to specify what that something is. 
 
●
But in practice, the whole path of investigation turns out to be a lot harder. 
There are many more blind alleys than we ever thought, and we’ve learned 
that our minds don’t function like computers. 

246
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Philosophy
 
●
Neither the brain sciences alone nor informational sciences alone seem 
capable of giving us a real understanding of consciousness. Should the 
question then be left to philosophers?
 
●
This isn’t a good idea. Part of the argument is inductive. We’ve traced the 
history of philosophy of mind over more than 2,500 years. Philosophical work 
alone has taken us no further than we are now. Philosophers are great at 
posing questions, but not so great at agreeing on answers. 
 
●
The philosopher’s strengths are logical, conceptual, and analytic. Those are 
precisely what we need in order to figure out what the central questions are. 
They are precisely what we need in order to get a handle on how one might be 
able to answer those questions. But to go to a philosopher for a final answer 
on a question is to make a mistake about philosophy’s role. 
 
●
Philosophers are going to be of most use when their logical methods and 
conceptual talents are applied to concepts in use—concepts of interest and 
importance for a science of mind and consciousness, for example. 
Loops
●
Taken alone, none of the disciplines we’ve looked at—philosophy, artificial 
intelligence, or brain sciences—seem capable of giving us the understanding 
of mind, body, and consciousness that we’re after. Could they do better 
working together? It’s tough to definitely answer yes, but integration of the 
three offers progress in a way that none of the three does alone. 
 
●
Many thinkers agree that loops are an important key to consciousness. 
There is something about consciousness that is essentially self-referring or 
reflexive. Consciousness is somehow a mental state that loops on itself—that 
includes itself in its field of attention. 
 
●
We are creatures that interact with the environment using “fast and 
frugal” environmental detectors. We have a brain built to interact with our 

247
LECTURE 24A PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCE OF CONSCIOUSNESS?
environment in terms of fast and frugal detectors for color, sound, motion, 
temperature and touch. 
 
●
In order to respond in complex ways to a complex environment, our brains 
prioritize and categorize that fast and frugal input. But it may be important 
when reacting to something new, or preparing for the unexpected, to attend 
to the processing categories themselves: categories of color, of sound, 
of movement. The value of consciousness may lie in the availability of that 
kind of loop: an ability to monitor and revise categories of interaction with 
the environment in the process of interaction and on the fly. 
 
●
Regarding the brain: Processing doesn’t proceed linearly from one area to 
another in sequence. There is always backflow to the earlier areas. A theory 
of cognitive loops might tell us why. 
A Plan
 
●
How might we work toward a philosophical science of mind, body, 
and consciousness? The first step is to figure out what consciousness is by 
figuring out what consciousness is for: What does it do that other cognitive 
processing could not? 
 
●
The second step is to analyze the process in abstract terms. From input to 
output, what function is needed to produce the process we’ve identified as 
what consciousness is for? 
 
●
Once we have an abstract characterization of the process, we need to move to 
the concrete specifics of the brain: How does the brain perform that function? 
 
●
None of those steps will be easy, and they present some paradoxical 
possibilities. For instance, regarding the first step, identifying what 
consciousness is for: We are evolved creatures, shaped by natural selection, 
but not everything about us was specifically selected for. Our blood is red, 
but nature didn’t care about the color of our blood. Likewise, it is possible 
consciousness just came along for the ride—a cosmic accident.

248
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
 
●
That aside, suppose there is something that consciousness does, and that we 
can put our finger on what that is. The next step would be to specify that 
functional something operationally. It must be a process that moves from 
some range of inputs to some range of outputs. 
 
●
Can we give a formal description of that process? Those working in artificial 
intelligence, computer science, and aspects of mathematics are important at 
this point in the project.
 
●
There is a second paradox buried in this step. Suppose we succeed in giving 
a formal outline of the process of consciousness. There shouldn’t then be any 
obstacle to building that formal process into a computer. The paradoxical 
possibility is that if we succeed at this stage, we will have all we need in 
order to build conscious machines.
 
●
The reasoning that leads to that second paradox is not as tight as the first. 
It only holds if the process outlined for consciousness is a machine-like 
process: an algorithm in the sense of Turing and Penrose. 
 
●
There is also another possibility. It might turn out that the process we 
specify abstractly can’t be built concretely into the kinds of machines we 
have on hand. It might require a very different kind of machine. It might 
require biological wetware. 
●
It is at the third stage that we need the brain sciences. If we can establish what 
consciousness does, and if we can specify in the abstract the process required 
to do that, we will want to know the concrete form that process takes in 
the brain. What parts of the brain do the work of which parts of the formal 
process? And precisely how do they do it? 
The Link
 
●
Were we able to complete each step in such a research program, we would 
be far closer to the kinds of answers we’ve been looking for. What is the link 
between the material brain and the world of subjective experience? 

249
LECTURE 24A PHILOSOPHICAL SCIENCE OF CONSCIOUSNESS?
 
●
The answer would go something like this: In the first step, we would be 
able to see that consciousness has been evolutionarily selected for because 
it does whatever it does. In the second step, the formal sciences would 
give us a functional description of the process involved. In the third step, 
work in the brain sciences would show us how the brain makes that abstract 
function concrete. Might that not give us an answer to the hard problem? 
 
●
It is possible that the hypothesis that we’ll never know how conscious- 
ness happens is correct. But if accepted, it would guarantee that we’ll  
never know. We have an intellectual obligation to try to figure things out—
including consciousness.
 
●
If progress is possible, it will demand some integration of disciplines. 
We will certainly need the hard data of the brain sciences. We may well need 
the tools of the formal sciences. But neither of those will be enough. We will 
need conceptual philosophical work in order to outline what consciousness 
really is. 
Suggested Reading
Baumgartner and Payr, Speaking Minds.
Blackmore, Conversations on Consciousness. 
Grim, ed., Mind and Consciousness: 5 Questions. 
Questions to Consider
1 
This concluding lecture looks back on the resources we’ve drawn on from 
the brain sciences, from information theory, and from philosophy. When you 
think back on the lectures, which are the contributions you remember most?
2 
This lecture argues that a philosophical science of consciousness will require 
an integration of work from all three fields. In which area do you think we 
should put the most work toward that integration? 

250
Mind-Body Philosophy

251
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
Afriat, Alexander and Franco Selleri. The Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen Paradox in 
Atomic, Nuclear, and Particle Physics. New York: Plenum Press, 1999. A nicely 
complete guide to the EPR thought experiment and its conceptual fallout. 
Aquinas, Thomas. Tr. James H. Robb. Questions on the Soul. Milwaukee, WI: 
Marquette University Press, 1984. Circa 1265. Aquinas’s attempt to merge 
Aristotle with Christianity on the soul. 
Aristotle. De Anima. Clarendon Aristotle Series. Tr. Christopher Shields. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2016. Circa 350 B.C. Aristotle’s functionalism, 
highlighted in Lecture 2.
Augustine. The Greatness of the Soul, The Teacher. Tr. Joseph M. Colleran. Eds. 
Johannes Quasten and Joseph Plumpe. Circa 387 AD. New York: the Newman 
Press, 1950. Augustine’s Platonic view of the soul.
——— . City of God. Tr. Marcus Dods. New York: Modern Library, 1993. Available in 
many editions. Circa 415 A.D. Augustine’s masterpiece, including an anticipation 
of Descartes’s argument. 
Baars, Bernard. In the Theater of Consciousness: The Workspace of the Mind. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1997. Baars’s most complete outline of his global 
workspace theory of consciousness.

252
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Baars, Bernard, William P. Banks, and James B. Newman, eds. Essential Sources 
in the Scientific Study of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003. A solid 
collection of reprinted pieces, arranged by aspects and functions of consciousness. 
Baumgartner, Peter and Sabine Payr. Speaking Minds: Interviews with Twenty Eminent 
Cognitive Scientists. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995. One of several 
collections of anthologies with contemporary thinkers, always revealing of the full 
human personalities behind the theories. 
Beakley, Brian and Peter Ludlow, eds. The Philosophy of Mind: Classical Problems/
Contemporary Issues. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006. A compilation of pieces 
attempting to link pieces in the history of philosophy with contemporary debates.
Bear, Mark F., Barry W. Connors, and Michael A. Paradiso, eds. Neuroscience: Exploring 
the Brain. 2nd edition. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001. A very 
thorough textbook.
Beilock, Sian. How the Body Knows Its Mind: The Surprising Power of the Physical 
Environment to Influence How You Think and Feel. New York: Atria Books, 2015. 
Occasionally breathless with an air of self-help, Beilock’s book is nonetheless one of 
the best available overviews of research on the impact of body on mind. 
Beowulf. Tr. Burton Raffel. New York: Signet, 2008. The oldest surviving epic in 
Old English. Available in many versions. 
Blackmore, Susan. Consciousness: An Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. 
Written and illustrated like an undergraduate textbook, but drawing on a wealth of 
background research and with an enjoyable Blackmore spin. 
——— . Consciousness: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2005. Short but wonderfully compact. Points touched on just briefly here are 
expanded in Blackmore’s Consciousness: An Introduction. 
——— . Conversations on Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006. One 
of several collections of anthologies with contemporary thinkers, always revealing 
of the full human personalities behind the theories. 

253
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Block, Ned. “Troubles with Functionalism.” Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of 
Science 9 (1978): 261–325. Block’s Chinese brain thought experiment, with other 
critiques of functionalism.
Block, Ned, Owen Flanagan, and Güven Güzeldere, eds. The Nature of Consciousness: 
Philosophical Debates. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997. A solid collection of 
reprinted pieces, arranged by philosophical issues. 
Bloom, Deborah. Ghost Hunters: William James and the Search for Scientific Proof of Life 
After Death. New York: Penguin, 2007. Briefly mentioned in the lectures, James’s 
involvement in psychical research proved both fascinating and frustrating. Bloom 
writes the history like a novel.
Borges, Jorge Luis. “Funes the Memorious.” In Anthony Kerrigan, ed., Ficciones, 
107–116. New York: Grove Press, 1962. A wonderful tale of what Locke forgot in 
his theory of memory: forgetting. 
Bresloff, P. C., J. D. Cowan, M. Golubitskyh, P. J. Thomas, and M. C. Wiener. 
“What Geometric Visual Hallucinations Tell Us About the Visual Cortex.” 
Neural Computation 14, no. 2 (2002): 473–491. Cowan and Bresloff’s mathematical 
modeling of standard hallucination geometrics as an effect of the structural 
organization of the visual cortex. Dense but fascinating. 
Brooks, Rodney. “Intelligence without representation.” Artificial Intelligence 47, nos. 
1–3 (1991): 139–159. Inventive ideas, conversationally expressed, from a primary 
theoretician in artificial intelligence and practical master of robotics. 
Cannon, W. B. “The James-Lange Theory of Emotions: A Critical Examination and 
an Alternative Theory. The American Journal of Psychology 39 (1927): 106–124 and 
The American Journal of Psychology 100, Special Centennial Issue, nos. 3–4 (1987): 
567–586. The original source for the Cannon-Bard theory of emotion.
Carter, Rita. Mapping the Mind. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999. 
Despite a text that sometimes seems scattered, a wonderful introduction to the 
brain sciences, prolifically illustrated.

254
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Casti, John. The Cambridge Quintet. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1998. A series 
of fictional dinner conversations on minds and machines between Alan M. Turing, 
Ludwig Wittgenstein, Erwin Schrödinger, and J. B. S. Haldane, and C. P. Snow. 
Chalmers, David. “Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness,” Journal of 
Consciousness Studies 2, no. 3 (1995): 200–219. Chalmers’s influential formulation of 
the hard problem of consciousness. 
——— . The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1996. Chalmer’s most complete development of panpsychism as 
an answer to the hard problem of consciousness.
Churchland, Patricia Smith. Brain-Wise: Studies in Neurophilosophy. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2002. Reports and reflections from a philosopher immersed in 
the details of neuroscience. 
——— . Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unified Science of the Mind/Brain. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1986. Rich in neurophysiological detail, the book also lays out
P. S. Churchland’s most fully developed defense of reductionism.
——— . “The Hornswoggle Problem.” Journal of Consciousness Studies 3, nos. 
5–6 (1996): 402–408. Churchland’s argument that we have no right to assume 
that the hard problem of consciousness is any harder than any of the many other 
questions of the mind for which we don’t currently have answers.
——— . The Engine of Reason, the Seat of the Soul. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1995. Particularly valuable for an approach to questions of the mind with the 
artificial intelligence model of recurrent neural networks.
Churchland, Paul and Patricia Smith Churchland. “Could a Machine Think?” 
Scientific American 262, no. 1 (January 1990): 32–37. The Churchlands’ response 
to Searle’s Chinese room thought experiment. 
Clark, Andy and David Chalmers. “The Extended Mind.” Analysis 58, no. 1 
(1988): 7–19. Reprinted in Patrick Grim, Kenneth Baynes, Peter Ludow and Gary 

255
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Mar, eds., The Philosopher’s Annual, vol. 21, 59–74. Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview 
2000. Clark and Chalmers’s presentation of Otto and Inge, arguing for a mind 
that extends into the world beyond skull and skin. 
Cohen, Jonathan D. and Jonathan W. Schooler, eds. Scientific Approaches to 
Consciousness. Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1997. A collection of often fairly 
technical pieces on specific topics. 
Copleston, Frederick. A History of Philosophy. Nine volumes. New York: Image 
Books, 1994. Despite the series’s history, originally published in 1960 as a history 
of philosophy for Catholic seminary students, Copleston’s remains an important 
secondary source across the history of philosophy as a whole.
Coterill, Rodney. Enchanted Looms: Conscious Networks in Brains and Computers. 
Cambridge: Cambridge, University Press, 1998. Sometimes wandering, always 
fascinating. Includes a thorough discussion of Benjamin Libet and Roger Carpenter 
on consciousness and timing.
Crick, Francis. The Astonishing Hypothesis. New York: Touchstone, 1994. A wide-
ranging guide to the brain, including but by no means limited to Crick’s 40-hertz 
hypothesis for consciousness. Crick’s passion for finding out the real answers to 
mental functioning is obvious throughout.
Crick, Francis and Christof Koch. “What Is the Function of the Claustrum?” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 360, issue 1458 (June 2005): 1271–
1279. Crick’s second hypothesis regarding consciousness, a piece he was working 
on when he died. 
Damasio, Antonio. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York: 
Penguin, 1994. Damasio says that Descartes’s error was to leave out emotion.  
A developed theory of a body-based somatic marker hypothesis. 
Damasio, Antonio. The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of 
Consciousness. Orlando, FL: Harcourt 1999. Damasio sees his theory of emotion 
as a descendant of the James-Lange theory and takes pains to defend it against  
later critiques.

256
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Darwin, Charles. The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. Anniversary edition. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009. First published 1872. An admirable 
followup to The Origin of Species and The Descent of Man, taking implications for the 
evolution of human psychology head on. 
Dehaene, Stanislas. Consciousness and the Brain. New York: Penguin, 2014. A full-volume 
review of research on consciousness, with a clear exposition of the author’s own 
fascinating contributions.
Dennett, Daniel. Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1985. A collection of essays presented at conferences and 
departmental colloquia, collected as one of Dennett’s earliest and best volumes. 
——— . Consciousness Explained. New York: Penguin, 1991. Sometimes mocked 
as “Consciousness Explained Away,” Dennett’s full critical take on qualia and the 
Cartesian theater with his multiple drafts model offered as a positive alternative.
——— . “Quining Qualia.” In A. J. Marcel and E. Bisiach, eds., Consciousness 
in Contemporary Science, 43–77. Reprinted in Ned Block, Owen Flanagan and 
Güven Güzeldere, eds., The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates, 619–642. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997. Dennett’s thought experiments against the “raw 
feels” of subjective qualia. 
——— . “The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies.” Journal of Consciousness 
Studies 2, No. 4 (1995): 322–326. Dennett’s attack on Flanagan and Polger’s zombie 
thought experiments. 
——— . “Where Am I?” In Dennett, Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind 
and Psychology, 310–323. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985. Also in Douglas 
Hofstadter and Daniel Dennett, eds. The Mind’s I, 217–229. New York: Basic 
Books, 2000. A wonderful piece of fictional autobiography exploring the question 
of personal identity. 
Dennett, Daniel and Marcel Kinsbourne. “Time and the Observer: The Where 
and When of Consciousness in the Brain,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 15, no. 2 
(1992): 183–244. Reprinted in Patrick Grim, Gary Mar, and Peter Williams eds., 

257
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Philosopher’s Annual, vol. 21 (1992), Ridgeview Press, 23–68. A consideration of 
Libet’s and other research, arguing for a multiple drafts view on which there is no 
“finish line” for consciousness in the brain. 
Descartes, René. Discourse on Method and Meditations on First Philosophy. Tr. 
Donald A. Cress. Hackett Publishing, 1999. First published in 1637 and 1641.  
The core Descartes. Also available in many other versions and collections. 
Desikachar, T. K. V. The Heart of Yoga. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions, 1995.  
A valuable and accessible introduction to the conceptual core of yoga. 
Diogenes Laertes. Lives of Eminent Philosophers, vols. 1 and 2. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, Loeb Classical Library, 1972. Circa 250 B.C. The classic 
source on ancient Greek philosophers, in Greek and English format.
Edelman, Gerald M. Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind. New York: 
Basic Books, 1992. A major source for Edelman’s neural Darwinism, but valuable in 
other regards as a set of reflections worth rereading. 
Flanagan, Owen. Dreaming Souls: Sleep, Dreams, and the Evolution of the Conscious 
Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. Flanagan writes some of the 
most scientifically informed philosophy of mind available today, and is known in 
particular for his work on sleep and dreams. As outlined in the lectures, Flanagan 
argues that dreams are spandrels: unselected side effects of the evolutionary process. 
——— . The Science of Mind. 2nd edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984.  
An ambitious attempt at a contemporary philosophical overview of major move-
ments in psychology. 
Flanagan, Owen and Thomas Polger, “Zombies and the Function of Consciousness.” 
Journal of Consciousness Studies 2, no. 4 (1995): 313–321. A defense of imaginable 
philosophical zombies as a negative indicator for functionalism. Includes the  
zombie scorecard.
Foer, Joshua. Moonwalking with Einstein: The Art and Science of Remembering Everything. 
New York: Penguin, 2012. An entertaining personal foray into the world of 
competitive mnemonics. 

258
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Freud, Sigmund. “Project for a Scientific Psychoanalysis.” 1895. Available at 
http://users.clas.ufl.edu/burt/freud%20fleiss%20letters/200711781-013.pdf. 
Freud’s earliest outline for a science of psychology. 
Galileo. The Essential Galileo. Ed. and trans. Maurice A. Finocchiaro. Indianapolis, 
IN: Hackett, 2008. Circa 1610 to 1632. A good collection, including Galileo  
on Aristotle. 
Gazzaniga, Michael. “The Split Brain in Man.” Scientific American 217, no. 2 
(1967): 24–29. Gazzaniga’s later experiments and reflections on strange cases of 
consciousness in the split brain. 
Genova, Lisa. Left Neglected. New York: Gallery Books, 2011. A compelling novel of 
parietal neglect, in which the left side the world disappears. 
Gibson, James J. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum 1986. Rich in detailed analysis of perception, the core of Gibson’s work 
remains his theory of affordances.
——— . “The Theory of Affordances.” In R. Shaw and J. Bransford, eds., Perceiving, 
Acting, and Knowing: Toward an Ecological Psychology. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 
1977, pp. 67–82. The core of Gibson’s affordance theory, accessibly presented and 
without excessive detail. 
Goetz, Stewart and Charles Taliaferro. A Brief History of the Soul. Chichester, West 
Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011. Combines a review of the soul in the history 
of philosophy with a less successful attempt at a contemporary outline and defense. 
Grim, Patrick, ed. Mind and Consciousness: 5 Questions. Automatic Press/VIP, 2009. 
One of several collections of anthologies with contemporary thinkers, always 
revealing of the full human personalities behind the theories. 
Grim, Patrick and Nicholas Rescher. Reflexivity: From Paradox to Consciousness. 
Ontos-Verlag 2012. An attempt to carry the theme of loops from semantic paradox 
through issues of indexicals to questions of the structure of consciousness. 

259
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gutenplan, Samuel, ed. A Companion to the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Blackwell, 
1995. An encyclopedia format with entries on both topics and authors. Valuable for 
Gutenplan’s extensive introduction alone. 
Hebb, Donald. “On Watching Myself Get Old.” Psychology Today 12, no. 6 (1978): 
15–23. Autobiographical observations on personal aging by a thinker of wide 
influence in both psychology and computational modeling.
Hobbes, Thomas. Leviathan. Norton Critical Edition. Eds. Richard E. Flathman 
and David Johnston. New York: W. W. Norton, 1997. First published in 1651. 
Hobbes’s major work, targeted to social and political philosophy but grounded in a 
thorough-going materialism. Also available in many other versions.
Hoffmann, Albert. LSD, My Problem Child: Reflections on Sacred Drugs, Mysticism and 
Science. Sarasota, FL: Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, 2009. 
Reflections on drug effects and their context from the discoverer of LSD.
Hoffman, Donald D. Visual Intelligence: How We Create What We See. New York: W. W. 
Norton, 1998. A wonderfully inventive book exploring and proposing psychological 
theory for visual illusion. 
Hofstadter, Douglas and Daniel Dennett, eds. The Mind’s I. New York: Basic Books, 
2000. A collection of pieces in philosophy of mind with an emphasis on fiction, 
offering a light-hearted collection that raises hard-headed issues.
Homer. Iliad. Tr. Robert Fagles. New York: Penguin, 1998. Circa 760 BC. Valuable 
for innumerable reasons, including the early Greek view of the soul. Available in 
many editions.
——— . Odyssey. Tr. Robert Eagles. New York: Penguin, 1998. Circa 760 BC. 
Valuable for innumerable reasons, including the early Greek view of the soul. 
Available in many editions. 
Hume, David. A Treatise of Human Nature. Ed. David Fate Norton. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2001. Originally published 1738. Available in many editions, and 
free online. The earlier and in some ways fresher of Hume’s two major works on 
mind, a landmark in the history of philosophy. 

260
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Hume, David. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. with an introduction 
by Peter Millican. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008. Originally published 1748. 
Available in many editions, and free online. The other and later of Hume’s two 
major works on mind. 
——— . Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion. Ed. Richard H. Popkin. 
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1980. First published 1779. Available in many editions. 
Includes Hume’s canonic treatment of the problem of evil. 
Jackson, Frank. “What Mary Didn’t Know.” Journal of Philosophy 83, no. 5 (1986): 
291–295. Not the first appearance of Jackson’s black-and-white Mary, but the clearest. 
Mary appeared earlier in “Epiphenomenal Qualia,” Philosophical Quarterly 32 
(1982), 127–136. 
James, William. “The Dilemma of Determinism.” In The Will to Believe, 105–130. 
Cranston, RI: Angelnook, 2012. Also available in other editions and collections. 
James’s analysis of the classical problem of free will and determinism. 
——— . “On Some Hegelisms.” Mind 7, no. 26 (1882): 186–188. Excerpted as 
“Subjective Effects of Nitrous Oxide” in Patrick Grim, Philosophy of Science and the 
Occult, 2nd edition, 355–360. Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1990. James’s jocular but 
characteristically reflective report on his own experiences under nitrous oxide. 
——— . The Principles of Psychology. Two volumes. New York: Dover Publications, 
1950. Originally published in 1890 by Henry Holt and Company. This is always 
instructive and often inspiring to dip into. 
——— . Psychology: The Briefer Course. New York: Dover Publications, 1950. 
Originally published in 1892 by Henry Holt and Company. This is James’s 
abridgment of the longer work, with chapters covering stream of consciousness, the 
self, attention, memory, imagination, reasoning, and emotion. 
——— . “What Is An Emotion?” Mind 9, no. 34 (1884): 188–205. Available at 
http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/James/emotion.htm. James’s classic piece on emotion. 

261
BIBLIOGRAPHY
James, William. William James on Psychical Research. Eds. Garner Murphey and 
Robert O. Ballou. New York: Viking Press, 1960. Briefly mentioned in the lectures, 
James’s involvement in psychical research proved both fascinating and frustrating. 
This volume collects his writings on the topic. 
Kandel, Eric. In Search of Memory: The Emergence of a New Science of Mind. New York: 
W. W. Norton, 2006. A Nobel Prize winner’s charmingly autobiographical tour 
through recent discoveries in memories and memory formation.
Keenan, Julian, Gordon Gallup, and Dean Falk. The Face in the Mirror: How We Know 
Who We Are. New York: HarperCollins 2003. An accessible and entertaining review 
of the Gallup mirror test and related work on self-consciousness. 
Kirk, G. S. and J. E. Raven. The Presocratic Philosophers: A Critical History with a 
Selection of Texts. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984. The canonical 
collection of Presocratic fragments.
Kurzweil, Ray. The Singularity is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. New York: 
Penguin, 2006. Kurzweil’s futuristic predictions. 
LeDoux, Joseph. The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life. 
New York: Simon & Schuster 2015. A major source for the contemporary view 
outlined in the lecture on emotions. 
———. The Synaptic Self: How Our Brains Become Who We Are. New York: 
Penguin, 2002. With reflections on the concept of the self, the core of the book is 
LeDoux’s important work on emotions. 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. Discourse on Metaphysics and Other Essays. Tr. Robert 
Arlew and Daniel Garber. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1991. Leibniz’s arguments 
against mechanism and in defense of dualism in the Monadology (1714) and other 
sources. Pieces available in many editions. 
Levine, Marvin. The Positive Psychology of Buddhism and Yoga. Hove, East Sussex: 
Routledge, 2009. A very personal and practical take on traditions from the East by 
an eminent psychologist. Deep insights wrapped in a common touch.

262
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Libet, Benjamin. “Unconscious Cerebral Initiative and the Role of Conscious Will 
in Voluntary Action.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 8, no. 4 (1985): 529–566. Libet’s 
research indicating that conscious decision comes too late to be an act of initiating 
free will.
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. Roger Woolhouse. 
New York: Penguin Classics, 1998. First published in 1690. A canonical text of 
British empiricism, with Locke’s theory of memory-bound personal identity. 
Available in many editions.
Loftus, Elizabeth, and Katherine Ketcham. The Myth of Repressed Memory: False 
Memories and Allegations of Sexual Abuse. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 1994. 
A psychologically deep examination of a wrenching issue by a world expert on 
memory and eyewitness testimony. 
Lucretius. The Nature of Things. Tr. Alicia Stallings. New York: Penguin, 2007.  
Circa 50 B.C. The Epicurean take on determinism and free will, including atoms 
that occasionally “swerve.” 
Malebranche, Nicolas. Philosophical Selections. Ed. Steven Nadler. Indianapolis, IN: 
Hackett, 1991. Circa 1675. Malebranche’s occasionalist defense of dualism.
Mashour, George. “Integrating the Science of Consciousness and Anesthesia.” 
Anesthesia and Analgesia 103, no. 4 (2006): 975–82. An accessible but elegant 
argument that studies in anesthesia offer clues to understanding consciousness. 
Mashour, George and Michael Alkire. “Evolution of Consciousness: Phylogeny, 
ontogeny, and emergence from general anesthesia.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA 110, Supplement 2 (June 18, 2013): 10,357–10,364.  
Wider reflections on the significance of studies in anesthesia for an understanding 
of consciousness. 
McGinn, Colin. “Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?” Mind 98, no. 391 (1989): 
349–366. McGinn is a mysterian, arguing that the answer is no.

263
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Miller, George. “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on 
Our Capacity for Processing Information.” Psychological Review 63, no. 2 (1956): 
81–97. One of the most cited papers in psychology, a touchstone for the limitations 
of short-term or working memory. 
Minsky, Marvin. The Society of Mind. New York: Touchstone, 1985. The overall 
aim of the book is a theory of intelligent minds built from nonintelligent agents. 
Minsky’s one-page sections harbor a wealth of inventive ideas. 
Minsky, Marvin and Seymour Papert. Perceptrons, Expanded Edition. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1987. Minsky and Papert’s devastating critique of Frank Rosenblatt’s 
groundbreaking neural networks. A quotation from the introduction is used in 
Lecture 16. 
Miranda, Robbin A., William D. Casebeer, Amy M. Hein, et al. “Darpa-funded 
efforts in the development of novel brain-computer interface technologies.” Journal 
of Neuroscience Methods 244 (April 2015): 52–67. An overview of a number of the 
computer-brain interface technologies mentioned in Lecture 1. 
Moravec, Hans. Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1990. Moravec predicts that our real descendants 
will be robotic rather than biological. 
Nagel, Thomas. “Brain Bisection and the Unity of Consciousness.” Synthese 22, 
nos. 3–4 (1971): 396–413. Nagel’s attempt to make philosophical sense of split-
brain cases. 
——— . Mind & Cosmos. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012. Nagel’s extended 
and developed attack on “neo-Darwinian” materialism. 
——— . The View From Nowhere. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986. 
Classic Nagel, examining aspects of, in his words, “a single problem: how to 
combine the perspective of a particular person inside the world with an objective 
view of that same world, the person and his viewpoint included.” 

264
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
——— . “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review 83, no. 4 (1974): 
435–350. Reprinted in Brian Beakley and Peter Ludlow, The Philosophy of 
Mind, 255–266. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 2006. And in Douglas Hofstadter 
and Daniel Dennett, The Mind’s I, 391–402. New York: Basic Books, 2000.  
Nagel’s groundbreaking piece, historically important for refocusing philosophical 
attention on the problem of subjective experience. 
Nauriyal, D. K., M. S. Drummond, & Y. B. Lal. Buddhist Thought and Applied 
Psychological Research. New York: Routledge, 2006. A nice attempt to interface 
points in Buddhism with contemporary work in psychology.
Neurath, Otto and Rudolf Carnap, eds. International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, 
vol. 1, nos. 1–5. University of Chicago Press, 1955. The high-water mark of 
materialistic reductionism.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Philosophy During the Tragic Age of the Greeks. Tr. Marianne 
Cowan. Washington DC: Regnery, 1962. An incomplete work circa 1873. 
Nietzsche’s reflections on the beginning of Greek philosophy in Thales’s 
“preposterous fancy” are used in Lecture 2.
O’Connor, D. J., ed. A Critical History of Western Philosophy. New York: Free Press, 
1964. A chronologically arranged set of essays on major figures in the history of 
philosophy, both expository and critical.
Parfit, Derek. Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984. An enormously 
impressive piece of sustained conceptual work with a primary emphasis on ethics, 
but not ethics alone. 
——— . “The Unimportance of Identity.” In H. Harris, ed., Identity, 3–88. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1995. Parfit’s transporter example, with his reflections 
on what it shows us about what we should care about.
Penrose, Roger. The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws 
of Physics. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989. Penrose’s argument that 
mathematical insight goes beyond the limits of algorithms. 

265
BIBLIOGRAPHY
——— . Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1996. Penrose’s proposal for quantum mechanical effects 
in microtubules as a physical basis for consciousness.
Pinker, Steven. How the Mind Works. New York: W. W. Norton, 1997. Although the 
book may not fully live up to its title, it does offer a voluminous and wide-ranging 
set of speculations on evolution, language, and human nature. 
Plato. Phaedo. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009. Circa 380 B.C. Crucial 
for understanding both Plato and his later influence on Medieval philosophy. 
Available in many editions. Downloadable at http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/
phaedo.html.
——— . Republic. New York: Dover, 2000. Circa 380 B.C. The core Platonic 
dialogue on social and political philosophy, building from an analogy with mind. 
Available in many editions. Downloadable at http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/
republic.html.
Polger, Thomas W. “Zombies Explained.” In Don Ross, Andrew Brook, and 
David Thompson, eds., Dennett’s Philosophy, 259–286. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2000. A further response to Dennett in defense of the point and force of 
zombie thought experiments. 
Popper, Karl. “Science: Conjectures and Refutations.” In Karl Popper, Conjectures 
and Refutations. New York: Harper and Row, 1968, 43–78. Reprinted in 
Patrick Grim, Philosophy of Science and the Occult, 104–111. Albany, NY: SUNY  
Press, 1990. Popper outlines his falsifiability criterion of demarcation, with Freud as a  
major target. 
Purves, Dale and R. Beau Lotto. Why We See What We Do. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer 
Associates, 2003. A fascinating series of studies in psychology of perception.
Putnam, Hilary. “Meaning and Reference.” Journal of Philosophy 70, no. 19 (1973): 
699–711. Putnam’s clearest presentation of his Twin Earth thought experiment. 

266
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
——— . “Psychological Predicates.” In W. H. Capitan and D. D. Merill, Eds. 
Art, Mind, and Religion, 37–48. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1967. 
One version of Putnam’s multiple instantiation argument.
Rahula, Walpola. What the Buddha Taught. New York: Grove Press, 1974. An easy 
introduction to the essentials of Buddhism. 
Ramachandran, V. S. A Brief Tour of Human Consciousness. New York: Pi Press, 2004. 
A first chapter on Ramachandran’s work on phantom limbs is followed by accessible 
chapters that include Ramachandran’s theory of synesthesia.
Ramachandran, V. S. and Sandra Blakeslee. Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries 
of the Human Mind. New York: Quill, 1988. Includes Ramachandran’s work on 
phantom limbs, but also a number of other chapters on mind and brain, both clinical 
and speculative. 
Ratey, John J. A User’s Guide to the Brain. New York: Vintage, 2001. Research rich 
and wide-ranging but written with journalistic flair.
The Rig Veda. Ed. and tr. Wendy Doniger. New York: Penguin, 2005. The earliest of 
the four Hindu Vedas, circa 1200–900 BC.
Russell, Bertrand. A History of Western Philosophy. New York: Touchstone, 2008. First 
published in 1945. This is a widely condemned for its personal philosophical biases, 
and valuable for precisely that reason. Includes Russell’s vibrant and compelling 
take on Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz and more. 
Sacks, Oliver. An Anthropologist on Mars: 7 Paradoxical Tales. New York: Vintage, 
1996. The source for the colorblind painter, mentioned briefly in the lectures. 
Sacks should be on every bookshelf; his points are always as illuminating as his 
writing is entertaining.
——— . Musicophilia: Tales of Music and the Brain. New York: Vintage, 2007.  
As fascinating and accessible as all of Sacks’s volumes, particularly good on audi-
tory hallucination, synesthesia, and musical therapy.

267
BIBLIOGRAPHY
——— . The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat. New York: Touchstone, 1970.
These lectures try to go beyond Sacks because of his familiarity, but his cases and 
reflections are well worth re-reading. 
Searle, John. “Minds, Brains, and Programs,” The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3, 
no. 3 (1980): 417–457. Widely anthologized. Searle’s classic presentation of the 
Chinese room thought experiment. 
Shannon, Claude. “A Mathematical Theory of Communication.” The Bell System 
Technical Journal, 27, nos. 3 and 4 (July, October 1948): 379–423, 623–656. 
Also available as The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Chicago: University of 
Illinois Press, 1971. The seminal text for all information theory. 
Skinner, B. F. Science and Human Behavior. New York: The Free Press, 1965.  
The most complete source for Skinner on behaviorism.
Sperry, Roger W. “Cerebral Organization and Behavior: The split brain behaves 
in many respects like two separate brains, providing new research possibilities.” 
Science 133, issue 3466 (1961): 1749–1757. The classic source of split-brain studies. 
Spinoza, Baruch. Ethics. Ed. Edwin Curley. New York: Penguin, 2005.  
First published 1677. Bertrand Russell called Spinoza “the noblest and most 
lovable of the great philosophers,” which also says a lot about Russell. Available in  
many editions.
Strawson, Galen, et al. Consciousness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail 
Panpsychism? Exeter, UK: Imprint Academic 2006. A collection in which Strawson 
outlines and defends his panpsychism against a number of critics. 
Stich, Steven and Ted A. Warfield, eds. The Blackwell Guide to Philosophy of 
Mind. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2003. A compendium of contributed pieces by 
contemporary philosophers on topics in philosophy of mind. 
Thagard, Paul. Hot Thought: Mechanisms and Applications of Emotional Cognition. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006. A well-developed proposal for incorporating 
emotional reflection as a crucial part of practical and critical thinking. 

268
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
Tononi, Guilio. “Consciousness as Integrated Information: A Provisional Manifesto.” 
Biological Bulletin 215, no. 3 (2008): 216–242. Tononi’s outline of consciousness as 
integrated information. 
Tononi, Guilio. Phi: A Voyage from the Brain to the Soul. New York: Pantheon, 2012. 
A charmingly visual and literary tour through Tononi’s ideas on consciousness, 
neurophysiology and information. 
Turing, Alan M. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Mind, new series 59, 
no. 236 (1950): 433–460. An edited version reprinted in Douglas Hofstadter and 
Daniel Dennett, The Mind’s I, New York: Basic Books, 2000, 53–66. Turing’s classic 
piece outlining the Turing test, excerpted without some of the technical details in 
the Hofstadter and Dennett version. 
Upanishads. Tr. Patrick Olivelle. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008. Sacred Hindu 
texts circa 800–200 B.C.
Velman, Max and Susan Schneider, eds. The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. 
Malden, MA: Blacwell, 2007. A valuable collection of contributed pieces, often 
very technical.
Watson, James D. The Double Helix. New York: New American Library, 1968. 
A wonderfully personal account of the race for the structure of DNA, with telling 
reflections on the very human nature of scientific exploration. 
Watson, John B. Behaviorism. New York: W. W. Norton 1970. First published 1924. 
In his own words. 
Wegner, Daniel. White Bears and Other Unwanted Thoughts: Suppression, Obsession, 
and the Psychology of Mental Control. New York: Guilford Press, 1989. An accessible 
psychological guide to the difficulty of thought suppression.
Whitman, Walt. “Manly Health and Training.” Walt Whitman Quarterly Review, 33, 
nos. 3–4 (2016): 184–310. Walt Whitman’s newly discovered 1858 writings on 
exercise, in a special two-number issue of the journal. 

269
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Wise, Michael O, Martin G. Abegg, & Edward M. Cook, eds. The Dead Sea Scrolls: 
A New Translation. San Francisco: Harper, 2005. The definitive English translation of 
the complete scrolls, with helpful glossary and introductions. 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. The Blue and Brown Books. New York: Harper & Row, 1965. 
Dictated to his students between 1933 and 1935, circulated among his followers in 
blue and brown wrappers. 
——— . Philosophical Investigations. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009. 
Assembled and ordered by his students from Wittgenstein’s notes shortly after his 
death in 1951. The definitive corpus for the later Wittgenstein.
——— . Wittgenstein’s Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics Cambridge 1939. Ed. 
Cora Diamond. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989. Compiled from notes 
by his students, effective transcripts of the Wittgenstein lectures and Wittgenstein-
Turing exchanges of 1939.
Wundt, Wilhelm. An Introduction to Psychology. Tr. Rudolf Pinter. Blank Spots 
Publishing, 2014. Wundt’s own introduction to his experimental approach  
to consciousness. 

270
MIND-BODY PHILOSOPHY

271
IMAGE CREDITS
Image Credits
Page No.
Title Page ............................... © iyazz/iStock/Thinkstock
4 .........................................© patrice6000/Shutterstock
6 .................................... © life_in_a_pixel/Shutterstock
11 ............................................. © belushi/Shutterstock
13 ..............................© Tomwang112/iStock/Thinkstock
14 .....................................© MidoSemsem/Shutterstock
16 ...................................... © romkaziStock/Thinkstock
18 ...................................... © Anastasios71/Shutterstock
20 ...................................© chatsimo/iStock/Thinkstock
24 ..........................................© Igor Chus/Shutterstock
26 ................................ © designbydx/iStock/Thinkstock
28 ....................................... © Alvaro Puig/Shutterstock
31 ................................... © Pushish Images/Shutterstock
33 ........................© Ingram Publishing/iStock/Thinkstock
36 ....................................© Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock
38 .........................................© maxpetrov/Shutterstock
41 ............................© A and N photography/Shutterstock
44 ............................................... © Elnur/Shutterstock
46 ........................................... © lzf/iStock/Thinkstock
48 ..................................© Andrew Burgess/Shutterstock
50 ...................................... © Anastasios71/Shutterstock
51 ...............................................© eldeiv/Shutterstock

272
MINDBODY PHILOSOPHY
56 ................................. © Brendan Howard/Shutterstock
58 ................................ © Georgios Kollidas/Shutterstock
61 .............................................. © Blamb/Shutterstock
63 ............................. © MarcoMarchi/iStock/Thinkstock
66 ........................................© Lightspring/Shutterstock
68 ............................© Ablestock.com/iStock/Thinkstock
74 ......................................© VLADGRIN/Shutterstock
76 ................ © Monkey Business Images/iStock/Thinkstock
78 .............................. © Sebastian Kaulitzki/Shutterstock
81 ......................................© janulla/iStock/Thinkstock
82 .............................. © BananaStock/iStock/Thinkstock
86 ..................................... © lixuyao/iStock/Thinkstock
88 .............................. © BananaStock/iStock/Thinkstock
91 ................................................© ysuel/Shutterstock
94 .................................© Janie Airey/iStock/Thinkstock
96 ...........................© Viktor_Gladkov/iStock/Thinkstock
98 ............................ © SIphotography/iStock/Thinkstock
100 .............................. © Georgios Kollidas/Shutterstock
103 .............................................© okili77/Shutterstock
106 ................................© Zoonar RF/iStock/Thinkstock
108 ........................................© tixti/iStock/Thinkstock
110 ..............................© Ryan McVay/iStock/Thinkstock
114 ................................ © Argument/iStock/Thinkstock
116 .................................. © OSTILL/iStock/Thinkstock
118..................© KatarzynaBialasiewicz/iStock/Thinkstock
120 ...................................© Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock
126 ...............................© moodboard/iStock/Thinkstock
128 ............................ © RyanKing999/iStock/Thinkstock
130 ................................©selensergen/iStock/Thinkstock
132 ............................................... ©Telia/Shutterstock
136 ................................ © ESB Professional/Shutterstock
138 ....................................... © Lightspring/Shutterstock
140 ...........................................© PopTika/Shutterstock
142 ..................................... © 1000 Words/Shutterstock
148 ............................................© Ociacia/Shutterstock
150 ............................. © Willyam Bradberry/Shutterstock
156 ............ © PHOTOCREO Michal Bednarek/Shutterstock

273
IMAGE CREDITS
158 ...............................© Christian Lagerek/Shutterstock
160 .....................................© sarah5/iStock/Thinkstock
162 ...........................© andrewsafonov/iStock/Thinkstock
166 ...................© Wavebreakmedia Ltd/iStock/Thinkstock
170 ............................. © cosmin4000/iStock/Thinkstock
172 ......................................© iLexx/iStock/Thinkstock
178 .............................© DigtialStorm/iStock/Thinkstock
180 ............................... © Catalin205/iStock/Thinkstock
182 ............................© Digital Vision/iStock/Thinkstock
188 ................................. © goa_novi/iStock/Thinkstock
190 ................................... © Eraxion/iStock/Thinkstock
192 ......................© everythingpossible/iStock/Thinkstock
200 .............................© Jochen Sand/iStock/Thinkstock
202 ...............................© BlindTurtle/iStock/Thinkstock
206 ...............................© shironosov/iStock/Thinkstock
210 ..............................© Ryan McVay/iStock/Thinkstock
212 ...................© Wavebreakmedia Ltd/iStock/Thinkstock
217 ........................... © eugenesergeev/iStock/Thinkstock
220 ...................© Wavebreakmedia Ltd/iStock/Thinkstock
222 ................................© Antonio Guillem/Shutterstock
225 ..................................© Claudio Divizia/Shutterstock
230............................... © Ingram Publishing/Thinkstock
232 ....................................© monsitj/iStock/Thinkstock
234 ................© monkeybusinessimages/iStock/Thinkstock
240.................................© STILLFX/iStock/Thinkstock
242 ..............................© DimaBerkut/iStock/Thinkstock
245 ............................... © muratsenel/iStock/Thinkstock

