FREE 
Starter Guide! 
Details inside
◗ Benefit your health
◗ Conserve resources
◗ Protect the environment
◗ Reduce animal suffering

“It is the position of the American Dietetic Association 
and Dietitians of Canada that appropriately 
planned vegetarian diets are healthful, 
nutritionally adequate, and provide 
health benefits in the prevention and 
treatment of certain diseases.…
Protein, vitamin B12, vitamin D, 
omega-3 fats, calcium, and iodine are important 
for ensuring optimal health. For healthy bones, a serving 
of calcium- and vitamin D-fortified soymilk is an excellent 
choice. To learn more about healthful vegetarian nutrition, 
contact us for our free starter guide or visit 
TryVegetarian.org/guide
Try Vegetarian!  Benefit Your Health
“Well-planned vegan [pure 
vegetarian] and other types 
of vegetarian diets are 
appropriate for all stages 
of the life cycle, including 
during pregnancy, lacta-
tion, infancy, childhood, and 
adolescence. Vegetarian diets 
offer a number of nutritional bene­
fits, including lower levels of saturated 
fat, cholesterol, and animal protein as well as higher levels of carbo­
hydrates, fiber, magnesium, potassium, folate, and antioxidants such as 
vitamins C and E and phytochemicals. Vegetarians have been reported 
to have lower body mass indices than nonvegetarians, as well as lower 
rates of death from ischemic heart disease; vegetarians also show lower 
blood cholesterol levels; lower blood pressure; and lower rates of hyper-
tension, type 2 diabetes, and prostate and colon cancer.”
American Dietetic Association and Dietitians of Canada
“Position of the American Dietetic Association and Dietitians of Canada: Vegetarian Diets” 
Journal of the American Dietetic Association 103, no. 6 (June 2003): 748–65

“During 1993–1997, a total of 2,751 outbreaks of 
foodborne disease were reported.… Salmonella 
serotype Enteritidis accounted for the largest 
number of outbreaks, cases, and deaths; most 
of these outbreaks were attributed to eating eggs.”
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CDC Surveillance Summaries: MMWR 49, no. SS-1 (March 17, 2000)
“Dioxins have been characterized by EPA as likely to be 
human carcinogens and are anticipated to increase the 
risk of cancer at background levels of exposure.…
“Most of us receive almost all of our dioxin exposure from 
the food we eat: specifically from the animal fats associated 
with eating beef, pork, poultry, fish, milk, dairy products.”
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
“Persistent Bioaccumulative and Toxic Chemical Program: Dioxins and Furans” 
EPA.gov/pbt/pubs/dioxins.htm; last updated 6/5/06; cited 8/15/06
“Most of the antibiotics sold in America end up in animal feed—a practice that, 
it is now generally acknowledged, leads directly to the evolution of new 
anti­biotic-resistant ‘superbugs.’…
“Escherichia coli 0157 is a relatively new strain of a common intestinal bacteria 
…that is common in feedlot cattle, more than half of whom carry it in their guts. 
Ingesting as few as 10 of these microbes can cause a fatal infection.
“Most of the microbes that reside in the gut of a cow and find their way into our 
food get killed off by the acids in our stomachs, since they originally adapted 
to live in a neutral-pH environment. But the digestive tract of the modern feed-
lot cow is closer in acidity to our own, and in this new, manmade 
environment acid-resistant strains of E. coli have developed that 
can survive our stomach acids—and go on to kill us.”
The New York Times Magazine  “Power Steer” by Michael Pollan, 3/31/02

“The typical North American diet, with its large share of animal products, 
requires twice as much water to produce as the less meat-intensive 
diets common in many Asian and some European countries. Eating 
lower on the food chain could allow the same volume of water to feed 
two Americans instead of one, with no loss in overall nutrition.”
Scientific American  “Growing More Food with Less Water” by Sandra Postel, February 2001
Try Vegetarian!  Conserve Resources
The Hunger Report 1995 from the Alan Shawn Feinstein World 
Hunger Program at Brown University illustrates that a vegetarian 
diet can feed significantly more people than a meat-centered diet:
World hunger is a complicated problem, which we will not necessarily 
alleviate in the short term by becoming vegetarian. However, eating 
vegetarian is a positive step toward saving resources that can be used 
to feed people in the future.
Almost purely vegetarian diet
6.26 billion people
15% of calories from animal products
4.12 billion people
25% of calories from animal products
3.16 billion people
Populations Potentially Supported by 1993 Global Food Supply with Different Diets
Source: FAO, 1994

“The industrial system is a poor converter of fossil energy. Fossil energy is a major input 
of intensive livestock production systems, mainly indirectly for the production of feed.”
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Livestock & the Environment: Finding a Balance, a 1996 report coordinated in part by the FAO
“[I]f you follow the corn…back to the fields where it grows, you will find 
an 80-million-acre monoculture that consumes more chemical herbicide 
and fertilizer than any other crop. Keep going and 
you can trace the nitrogen run­off from that crop 
all the way down the Mississippi into 
the Gulf of Mexico, where it has 
created (if that is the right word) 
a 12,000-square-mile ‘dead zone.’
“But you can go farther still, and 
follow the fertilizer needed to grow 
that corn all the way to the oil fields of 
the Persian Gulf.… Assuming [a steer] 
continues to eat 25 pounds of corn a day 
and reaches a weight of 1,250 pounds, 
he will have consumed in his lifetime 
roughly 284 gallons of oil. We have 
succeeded in industrializing the 
beef calf, transforming what was 
once a solar-powered ruminant 
into the very last thing we need: 
another fossil-fuel machine.”
The New York Times Magazine
“Power Steer” by Michael Pollan, 3/31/02

Some of the “environmental challenges” posed by industrial livestock systems, 
particularly through feed production and manure, are acknowledged in the 
FAO’s Livestock & the Environment report:
◗ Greenhouse gas production (nitrous oxide, methane, carbon dioxide)
◗ Decreased biodiversity through habitat loss and ecosystem damage
◗ Aquifer depletion; reduction in the availability of irrigation water
◗ Nitrogen, phosphorus, and pesticide contamination of water
◗ Heavy metal contamination of soil; soil erosion
◗ Acid rain from ammonia emissions
“[T]hose who claim to care about the well-being of human beings 
and the preservation of our environment should become vegetarians 
for that reason alone. They would thereby increase the amount of 
grain available to feed people elsewhere, reduce pollution, save 
water and energy, and cease contributing to the clearing of 
forests.… [W]hen nonvegetarians say that ‘human problems 
come first’ I cannot help wondering what exactly it is that 
they are doing for human beings that compels 
them to continue to support the wasteful, 
ruthless exploitation of farm animals.”
Peter Singer  Animal Liberation, 1990
Try Vegetarian!  Protect the Planet
Waste lagoon at a North Carolina pig farm

Manure runoff from a Maryland dairy farm
In August 2002, after two and a half years investigating thousands of records from state 
and federal regulatory agencies, the Sierra Club published a report and database titled 
The RapSheet on Animal Factories, documenting “crimes, violations or other operational 
malfeasance at more than 630 industrial meat factories in 44 states.” Among other find-
ings, the RapSheet documents:
“[A]pproximately 50 corporations, 
or their managers, racked up a 
total of more than 60 misdemeanor 
or felony indictments, charges, 
convictions or pleas. Criminal fines 
total nearly $50 million. The crimi-
nal counts included animal cruelty, 
bribery, destroying records, fraud, 
distributing contaminated meat 
and pollution.
“Forty-three meat recalls by 31 com-
panies that totaled approximately 
67,000 tons (that’s almost 134 mil-
lion pounds) of suspect products 
that were delivered to schools, 
military installations, restaurants 
and grocers. Meat was found 
contaminated by deadly bacteria, 
rodent feces, rodent hair, rot, rust, 
mold, wire, metal shavings—and 
the list continues.
“Millions of gallons of liquefied 
feces and urine seeped into the 
environment from collapsed, leak-
ing or overflowing storage lagoons, 
and flowed into rivers, streams, 
lakes, wetlands and groundwater. 
Hundreds of manure spills have 
killed millions of fish.”
“A single dairy cow produces about 
120 pounds of wet manure per day, which 
is equivalent to the waste produced by 
20–40 people. That means California’s 
1.4 million dairy cows produce as much 
waste as 28–56 million people.”
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Notes from Underground 
EPA 909-N-01-004 
Fall 2001

“To visit a modern CAFO (Confined Animal Feeding Operation) is to enter 
a world that, for all its technological sophistication, is still designed 
according to Cartesian principles: animals are machines incapable of 
feeling pain. Since no thinking person can possibly believe this any more, 
industrial animal agriculture depends on a suspension of disbelief on 
the part of the people who operate it and a willingness to avert your 
eyes on the part of everyone else.
“From everything I’ve read, egg 
and hog operations are the worst. 
Beef cattle in America at least 
still live outdoors, albeit standing 
ankle deep in their own waste eat-
ing a diet that makes them sick. 
And broiler chickens…at least don’t 
spend their eight-week lives in 
cages too small to ever stretch a 
wing. That fate is reserved for the 
American laying hen, who passes 
her brief span piled together with 
a half-dozen other hens in a wire 
cage whose floor a single page of 
this [New York Times] magazine 
could carpet. Every natural instinct 
of this animal is thwarted, lead-
ing to a range of behavioral ‘vices’ 
that can include cannibalizing her 
cagemates and rubbing her body 
against the wire mesh until it is 
featherless and bleeding.… [T]he 
10 percent or so of hens that can’t 
bear it and simply die is built into 
the cost of production.…
Chickens inside 
a broiler house
Try Vegetarian!  Oppose the Cruelty
Iowa feedlot
Hens in battery cages
Should I Buy from Free-Range Farms Instead?

“Piglets in confinement operations 
are weaned from their mothers [2–3 weeks] 
after birth (compared with 13 weeks in 
nature) because they gain weight faster 
on their hormone- and antibiotic-fortified 
feed. This premature weaning leaves the pigs with a lifelong 
craving to suck and chew, a desire they gratify in confinement 
by biting the tail of the animal in front of them. A normal pig 
would fight off his molester, but a demoralized pig has stopped 
caring. ‘Learned helplessness’ is the psychological term, and it’s not un­common in 
confinement operations, where tens of thou-
sands of hogs spend their entire lives ignorant 
of sunshine or earth or straw, crowded together 
beneath a metal roof upon metal slats sus-
pended over a manure pit. So it’s not surprising 
that an animal as sensitive and intelligent as a 
pig would get depressed, and a depressed pig 
will allow his tail to be chewed on to the point 
of infection. Sick pigs, being underperforming 
‘production units,’ are clubbed to death on the 
spot. The USDA’s recommended solution to the 
problem is called ‘tail docking.’ Using a pair 
of pliers (and no anesthetic), most but not all 
of the tail is snipped off. Why the little stump? 
Because the whole point of the exercise 
is not to remove the object of tail-biting so much as to render it more sensitive. 
Now, a bite on the tail is so painful that even the most demoralized pig will 
mount a struggle to avoid it.…
“More than any other institution, the American industrial animal farm offers a 
nightmarish glimpse of what capitalism can look like in the absence of moral 
or regulatory constraint. Here in these places life itself is redefined—as protein 
production—and with it suffering.… Our own worst nightmare such 
a place may well be; it is also real life for the billions 
of animals unlucky enough to have been born 
beneath these grim steel roofs, into the 
brief, pitiless life of a ‘production unit.’…”
The New York Times Magazine
“An Animal’s Place” by Michael Pollan 
11/10/02
Free-range does not mean cruelty-free. While some free-range farms may be an improvement over standard factory farms, 
the only way to be sure is to witness the conditions firsthand. Please visit TryVegetarian.org for more information.
Chick being 
debeaked

Try Vegetarian!  Spare the Animals
“It takes 25 minutes to turn a live 
steer into steak at the modern 
slaughterhouse where Ramon Moreno 
works. For 20 years, his post was 
‘second-legger,’ a job that entails 
cutting hocks off carcasses as they 
whirl past at a rate of 309 an hour.
“The cattle were supposed to be 
dead before they got to Moreno. 
But too often they weren’t.
“‘They blink. They make noises,’ he 
said softly. ‘The head moves, the 
eyes are wide and looking around.’
“Still Moreno would cut. On bad 
days, he says, dozens of animals 
reached his station clearly alive 
and conscious. Some would survive 
as far as the tail cutter, the belly 
ripper, the hide puller. ‘They die,’ 
said Moreno, ‘piece by piece.’
“Under a 23-year-old federal law 
[which exempts the slaughter of 
birds], slaughtered cattle and hogs 
first must be ‘stunned’—rendered 
insensible to pain—with a blow 
to the head or an electric shock. 
But at overtaxed plants, the law is 
sometimes broken, with cruel con­
sequences for animals as well as 
workers. Enforcement records, inter-
views, videos and worker affidavits 
describe repeated violations of the 
Humane Slaughter Act at dozens 
of slaughterhouses, ranging from 
the smallest, custom butcheries to 
modern, automated establishments 
such as the sprawling IBP Inc. plant 
here where Moreno works.
“‘In plants all over the United States, 
this happens on a daily basis,’ said 
Lester Friedlander, a veterinarian 
and formerly chief government 
inspector at a Pennsylvania ham-
burger plant. ‘I’ve seen it happen. 
And I’ve talked to other veterinarians. 
They feel it’s out of control.’”
The Washington Post
“Modern Meat: A Brutal Harvest” 
by Joby Warrick, 4/10/01
Crated veal calf
Breeding sow in 
gestation crate

“In my opinion, if most urban meat eaters were to visit an 
industrial broiler house, to see how the birds are raised, 
and could see the birds being ‘harvested’ and then being 
‘processed’ in a poultry processing plant, they would 
not be impressed and some, perhaps many of them 
would swear off eating chicken and perhaps all meat.
“For modern animal agriculture, the less the consumer knows 
about what’s happening before the meat hits the plate, the better. 
If true, is this an ethical situation? Should we be reluctant to let 
people know what really goes on, because we’re not really proud 
of it and concerned that it might turn them to vegetarianism?”
Peter Cheeke, PhD  Oregon State University Professor of Animal Agriculture
Contemporary Issues in Animal Agriculture, 2004 textbook
“Historically, man has expanded the reach of his 
ethical calculations, as ignorance and want have 
receded, first beyond family and tribe, later 
beyond religion, race, and nation. To bring other 
species more fully into the range of these decisions 
may seem unthinkable to moderate opinion now. 
One day, decades or centuries hence, it may seem 
no more than ‘civilized’ behavior requires.…
“It is all very well to say that individuals must 
wrestle with their consciences—but only 
if their consciences are awake and 
informed. Industrial society, alas, hides 
animals’ suffering. Few people would 
themselves keep a hen in a shoebox 
for her egg-laying life; but practically 
everyone will eat smartly packaged, 
‘farm fresh’ eggs from battery hens…milk drinkers do not 
see the calves torn from their mothers.”
The Economist  “What Humans Owe to Animals,” 8/19/95
Chicken processing plant
Egg-laying hens

Trying vegetarian doesn’t mean you have to opt for a tossed salad or a piece 
of fruit! Today, more than ever, vegetarians have a vast assortment of foods 
to choose from. In fact, by exploring new foods and recipes, you may just 
find yourself eating a more diverse diet after becoming vegetarian!
Tasty vegetarian meals can be prepared 
with the foods sold at any supermarket. 
No time to cook? No problem! There 
are a growing number of meat- and 
dairy-free convenience foods available.
Plus, dining out has never 
been easier for vegetarians: 
new choices are cropping 
up on the menus of all sorts 
of eateries—even major 
fast-food chains! Chinese, 
Indian, Italian, Mexican, 
Middle Eastern, Thai, and 
other ethnic restaurants offer a broad variety of delicious vegetarian entrées.
If you do want to try your hand at cooking, you’ll find countless vegetarian 
recipes on the Internet, as well as a huge selection of vegetarian cookbooks. 
Natural food stores are also great places to explore your vegetarian options. 
There’s a whole host of meat and dairy alternatives on the market—some 
quite different from their nonvegetarian counterparts, some surprisingly similar. 
It’s best to experiment with as many products as you can, in order to find those 
you like the most. With the right substitute 
ingredients and a little experience, you’ll 
discover that you can still enjoy your 
favorite meals!
Try Vegetarian!  Explore New Foods

There are lots of vegetarian milks and 
cheeses, along with dairy-free butter, 
sour cream, mayo—you name it!
And for dessert, there’s nondairy ice 
cream, whipped cream, yogurt, and 
pudding, as well as vegetarian cakes, 
cookies, and pies! When baking, you 
can substitute eggs with Ener-G Egg 
Replacer, cornstarch (two tablespoons 
per egg), or bananas (one per egg).
Mock meats come in poultry, pork, 
and beef styles and a wide range of 
shapes and textures: burgers, franks, 
bacon, sausage, pepperoni, breaded 
cutlets, “unchicken” salad, and more!
At your request, we’ll mail you our free 
starter guide, full of helpful information:
◗ Easy-to-follow recipes—including 
nondairy cheeses and mock meat
◗ A vegetarian foods glossary
◗ Simple meal-planning tips
◗ A list of resources, such as cookbooks 
and online/mail-order catalogs that 
specialize in vegetarian products
◗ Nutrition advice to help you optimize 
your health on a vegetarian diet
Contact us to receive a free copy, or visit 
TryVegetarian.org/guide
Get a FREE Starter Guide!

As the many far-reaching effects of our 
food choices come to light, interest in 
eating a vegetarian diet continues to 
grow. Based on the results of a 2003 
national survey by Harris Interactive, 
the Vegetarian Journal estimates that 
there are 5.7 million adult vegetarians 
in the United States.
There’s much that we can do to benefit 
our health, conserve resources, protect 
the environment, and reduce suffering. 
Eating vegetarian is an enjoyable way 
to have a profoundly positive impact 
on the world every single day.
So try vegetarian for your next meal! 
And please contact us for a free copy 
of our Guide to Cruelty-Free Eating, 
which contains tasty recipes, shopping 
tips, questions and answers, and a 
detailed article on nutrition.
We can also provide you with copies 
of Try Vegetarian! to share with your 
friends and family or to distribute in 
your community.
Photos courtesy of CDC, Compassionate Action for Animals, Farm 
Sanctuary, Mercy For Animals, Virenda Nyberg, PETA, and USDA
Try Vegetarian!  Choose Compassion
Write or call us today for a
FREE starter guide!
Vegan Outreach 
Post Office Box 38492 
Pittsburgh, PA 15238-8492
info@TryVegetarian.org
412.968.0268
For more information, please see
TryVegetarian.org

“Do we, as humans, having an ability 
to reason and to communicate abstract 
ideas verbally and in writing, and to form 
ethical and moral judgments using the accu-
mulated knowledge of the ages, have the right 
to take the lives of other sentient organisms, 
particularly when we are not forced to do so 
by hunger or dietary need, but rather do so 
for the somewhat frivolous reason that we 
like the taste of meat?
“In essence, should we know better?”
Peter Cheeke, PhD
Oregon State University Professor of Animal Agriculture 
Contemporary Issues in Animal Agriculture, 2004 textbook
“True human goodness, in all its purity and freedom, can 
come to the fore only when its recipient has no power.
“Humanity’s true moral test, its fundamental test 
(which lies deeply buried from view), consists of its 
attitude towards those who are at its mercy: animals.
“And in this respect humankind has suffered a funda-
mental debacle, a debacle so fundamental that all 
others stem from it.”
Milan Kundera  The Unbearable Lightness of Being, 1984

“There’s a schizoid quality to our relationship 
with animals, in which sentiment and brutality 
exist side by side. Half the dogs in America 
will receive Christmas presents this year, 
yet few of us pause to consider the mis-
erable life of the pig—an animal easily 
as intelligent as a dog—that becomes 
the Christmas ham.”
The New York Times Magazine
“An Animal’s Place” by Michael Pollan 
11/10/02
“It is easy for us to criticize the prejudices of our grand­
fathers, from which our fathers freed themselves. It is 
more difficult to distance ourselves from our own 
views, so that we can dispassionately 
search for preju-
dices among 
the beliefs 
and values 
we hold.”
Peter Singer
Practical Ethics, 1993
Distributed courtesy of…
Post Office Box 38492, Pittsburgh, PA 15238-8492
phone 412.968.0268 6 email info@TryVegetarian.org
TryVegetarian.org/guide
Vegan Outreach is a nonprofit organization working to end cruelty to animals. You can help by trying vegetarian for your next meal!
© Vegan Outreach, 2006          Try Vegetarian!  Rev. 9/06          Printed on recycled paper with soy inks

