U.S. SOCIAL SECURITY
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Abortion in the United States, Dorothy E. McBride
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Capital Punishment, Michael Kronenwetter
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Euthanasia, Martha L. Gorman and Jennifer Fecio McDougall
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and 
James Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Rich and Poor in America, Geoffrey Gilbert
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

U.S. SOCIAL SECURITY
A Reference Handbook
Steven G. Livingston
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Copyright © 2008 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Livingston, Steven Greene.
U.S. social security : a reference handbook / Steven G. Livingston.
p.  cm. — (Contemporary world issues series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-119-0 (hard copy : alk. paper) — 
ISBN 978-1-59884-120-6 (ebook)
1.  Social security—United States.  2. Social security—United
States—History.  3. Social security—Cross-cultural studies.  I. Title.
II. Title: United States social security : a reference handbook. 
HD7125.L58  2008
368.4'300973—dc22
2008004413
13  12  11  10  09  08    1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. 
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper I
Manufactured in the United States of America
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Contents
Preface, xi
1  Background and History, 1
The Origins and Development of Social Security, 1
Social Security Act of 1935, 8
The Expansion of Social Security: From 1935 to 
the Present, 12
The U.S. Social Security Program Today, 25
References, 28
2  Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 31
The Social Security Trust Fund, 32
Why Will the Trust Fund Shrink? 34
Saving Social Security: The Options, 38
Prefunding Social Security, 39
Restoring Social Security to Pay-as-You-Go Principles,
43
Privatizing Social Security, 54
Leaving It Alone, 70
Conclusion, 71
References, 72
3  Worldwide Perspectives, 75
Canada: Moderate Reforms with Big Results? 76
Germany: Clamping Down on Benefits? 82
Australia: Putting Means Testing to Work? 87
Sweden: Fully Funding without Privatizing? 92
The United Kingdom: Voluntary Carve-Outs? 99
vii
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Chile: Privatization? 105
Too Many Alternatives? 111
References, 112
4  Chronology, 115
U.S. Chronology, 115
World Chronology, 121
5  Biographical Sketches, 133
Arthur Altmeyer, 133
Robert Ball, 134
William Beveridge, 135
Carl Bildt, 135
George W. Bush, 136
Benjamin Cardozo, 137
William J. Clinton, 138
Wilbur Cohen, 138
Nelson Cruikshank, 139
Marion Folsom, 140
Milton Friedman, 141
Alan Greenspan, 141
Paul Keating, 142
Huey Long, 143
Paul Martin, Jr., 144
Wilbur Mills, 145
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, 146
Robert J. Myers, 146
Frances Perkins, 147
James Jerrell Pickle, 148
José Piñera, 149
Augusto Pinochet, 149
Walter Riester, 150
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, 151
Isaac Rubinow, 152
David Stockman, 152
Margaret Thatcher, 153
Francis Townsend, 154
Harry S Truman, 155
Adrian Turner, 156
Arthur Vandenberg, 157
Robert Wagner, 157
John Winant, 158
viii
Contents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Edwin Witte, 159
6  Data and Documents, 161
The Social Security Act, 161
The Preamble to the Social Security Act of 1935, 162
The Supreme Court Opinion: Helvering v. Davis, 162
Principal Presidential Speeches and Messages, 167
Franklin Roosevelt: Message to Congress Reviewing 
the Broad Objectives and Accomplishments of the
Administration, June 8, 1934, 167
Franklin Roosevelt: Message to Congress on 
Social Security, January 17, 1935, 169
Franklin Roosevelt: State of the Union Address, 
January 11, 1944, 170
Harry S Truman: State of the Union Address, 
January 14, 1946, 171
Dwight Eisenhower: State of the Union Address, 
February 2, 1953, 172
William Jefferson Clinton: State of the Union Address,
January 19, 1999, 173
George Walker Bush: State of the Union Address, 
February 2, 2005, 175
Reform Commission and Advisory Council 
Reports, 178
Report of the National Commission on Social 
Security Reform (The Greenspan Commission). 
January 1983, 178
Report of the 1994–1996 Advisory Council on 
Social Security, 183
The 2001 President’s Commission to Strengthen 
Social Security (The Moynihan Commission). 
December 21, 2001, 186
Social Security Annual Trustees Report, 191
A Summary of the 2007 Annual Trustees Report, 192
Status of the Social Security and Medicare Programs. 
(Social Security Section), 194
7  Directory of Organizations, 197
Institutions and Organizations of the U.S. Government,
197
Interest Groups and Lobbying Organizations, 201
Think Tanks, 212
Contents
ix
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

8  Resources, 219
Public Agencies, 220
U.S. Government: Federal Agencies, 220
U.S. Government: Congress, 221
International Organizations, 223
Media and Press Sites, 224
Internet Research Sites, 225
Books and Articles, 225
Current Issues, 232
Response to Detailed Reform Plans, 242
Foreign Social Security Systems, 244 
Glossary, 261
Index, 267
About the Author, 275
x
Contents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Preface
S
ocial Security is one of the great successes, and one of the great
problems, of U.S. public policy. On the one hand, a program
created more than 70 years ago continues to provide for the re-
tirement needs of more than 40 million Americans with barely a
hitch in its operations. Public opinion polls confirm that Social
Security is among the most popular of the services provided by
the U.S. government; it is an entitlement that most citizens expect
and rely upon. On the other hand, there is a growing recognition
that, within the foreseeable future, today’s Social Security pro-
gram will not be able to honor the promises it is making to to-
morrow’s retirees. Unless changes are made, it is very likely that,
by the middle of the 21st century, Social Security will fall many
billions of dollars short of the money it will need to pay the
monthly benefits that American retirees have been promised. 
This book addresses both Social Security’s great success and
its great problem. It is an effort to provide an overview of the U.S.
Social Security system and, more specifically, how that system
was developed, why it is likely to encounter difficulty, and what
has been proposed to fix it. The experience of other countries is
also examined to see what lessons, if any, they may offer the
United States in this regard. The book offers a chronology of pen-
sions and social security programs at home and abroad and
sketches of the leading officials and personalities who have been
instrumental in its development. Further, it provides an annotated
guide to the many individuals and organizations, in and out of
government, that are active in the U.S. Social Security debate. The
objective is to provide readers with all of the information needed
to understand, follow, and assess the current controversies that
swirl about the U.S. Social Security program. 
xi
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Social Security is currently the U.S. government’s most ex-
pensive program. The total annual cost of Social Security benefits
is well over $500 billion a year. Social Security may also be the
most expansive government program. More Americans have a fi-
nancial stake in the Social Security program than in any other
program. And Social Security may be the most extensive govern-
ment program. It is a promise that spans the generations: that
today’s workers will pay for yesterday’s workers and will be, in
turn, supported by tomorrow’s. It is in this context of the pro-
gram’s enormity that any account of Social Security, or of the re-
form proposals in debate, must be placed. 
How was such a massive program ever created in a coun-
try so suspicious of its government? From the passage of the So-
cial Security Act of 1935 to the efforts to “save Social Security” in
the 1980s and 1990s, this volume traces the program’s major
changes, twists, and turns, with an eye to how this history has
framed the choices the United States confronts today. Certainly
even the most casual observer of the current controversies over
reform must be struck by the deep symbolic power that this pro-
gram has attained within the U.S. political system. Social Secu-
rity may not be the original “third rail” of American politics—a
program too politically dangerous for politicians to want to
touch—but it is hard to think of another policy that holds, year
after year, such a political charge. The aim here is to provide
some insight into why Social Security has become so deeply en-
grained in U.S. public policy.
Social Security is a mechanism to provide livable pensions
to American retirees and their survivors. The details of how this
program accomplishes this task are also provided here. How the
program is financed, who gets benefits, and how the benefits are
determined—all of these questions are carefully explained. It is
from these details that one can really get a sense not only of how
the program operates but of what might be its special strengths
or weaknesses in coming years. 
These details, moreover, go to the heart of the current de-
bate. Why do experts believe that in 30 to 40 years Social Security
will very likely not be able to fulfill its obligations, and what have
they recommended the United States do about it? This issue is ex-
plained in some depth. Also explained are the many competing
reforms that have been proposed to solve this problem. These re-
forms run the gamut from raising taxes to privatizing the Social
Security system. Proponents and critics often shed more heat
xii
Preface
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

than light in their efforts to promote or oppose one of these re-
forms. In this book, a substantial, unbiased account of each major
reform proposal is presented. Both proponents and critics are
given their say, so that readers can independently decide which
(if any) of these reforms is worthy of support.
As the United States engages in this important discussion,
very often the experiences of other countries are ignored or for-
gotten. Yet most of the world is facing exactly the same set of dif-
ficulties as that facing the United States, and a number of nations
have already begun the painful task of reform. Have they suc-
ceeded? Are there lessons to be learned for how the United States
should proceed? Probably so. U.S. Social Security: A Reference
Handbook investigates, in some detail, the experiences of Canada,
Germany, Australia, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and Chile,
each a trailblazer in its own way. The reader can decide what
their experiences should teach the United States.
This book offers no recommendation of the ideal reform,
nor does it promise that every person, sufficiently informed,
would reach the same conclusion. The huge number of Ameri-
cans—one in eight—drawing a Social Security check, each with a
different set of financial needs and expectations, makes the choice
of reform difficult. The need to address policy to individuals at
every stage of life, work, and retirement, too, makes the choice of
reform challenging. Hence, while it is quite easy to recognize this
coming problem, it is not so easy to decide what to do about it.
The essential problem is that no reform is painless. Each involves
some shift in who bears the cost of Social Security, and who bears
the risk. For better or worse, this is not just a question of econom-
ics; it is a question of values. This book cannot answer this ques-
tion of values, nor even of the politics that follows. But from the
resources it provides, the hope is that readers will obtain the
knowledge and confidence necessary to enter, from their own
perspectives and values, the great debate that is now occurring
over the future of a program that is so important to so many
Americans.
Preface
xiii
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1
Background and History
S
ocial Security is America’s largest, and many would say most
important and most successful, domestic policy program. This
chapter explores how and why this program was created. In
spite of Social Security’s near-universal popularity today, it was
not easy to develop and enact a national old-age pension pro-
gram in the United States. There were tremendous constitutional,
political, and cultural obstacles. Because of these obstacles, the
U.S. Social Security program that emerged was hardly the most
rational, efficient, or transparent. It was not enacted by tech-
nocrats. Rather, its creation was intensely political, and today’s
program contains the compromises, horse trading, and deals that
were necessary to get it passed. Even after its enactment in 1935,
Social Security was not a “done deal.” Continued controversy
and political pressures led to changes in the program for a half
century after it first became law. This chapter discusses how the
initial obstacles were overcome and Social Security was first cre-
ated, how the program has changed and evolved in the decades
thereafter, and how the American Social Security program oper-
ates today.
The Origins and Development 
of Social Security
Nothing seems as obvious as a society’s obligation to provide for
the needs of those too aged or infirm to work. Yet true old-age
pension programs are not much more than a century old. The
world’s first social security program was not established until
1
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1889, and even then by a most unlikely individual, Otto von
Bismarck, the “Iron Chancellor” of Germany. His motives were
political, not humanitarian. He saw a pension program as a
way to halt German socialism and increase the power of the
German state against the churches, the traditional providers of
aid to the indigent and elderly. Why did it take so long for any
country to offer such a program? And why was the United
States, a far richer country than 19th-century Germany, not the
first to offer it?
Social security was late in coming because the difficulties in
creating a sound and effective government old-age pension pro-
gram are many. These programs are immensely expensive, and
they transfer huge amounts of money from one generation to an-
other. They require very sizable taxes on businesses or citizens,
and strong and efficient governmental and legal systems to col-
lect and administer these taxes. Since they are based on promises
that are made today but paid in the future, social security pro-
grams also require political systems that are able to keep those
promises. If tax revenues fail to appear, or if the program is
poorly designed or administered, the government may find itself
with one of two terrible choices: renege on the promises or go vir-
tually bankrupt trying to meet them. Either choice would be dis-
astrous. Thus it is not surprising that old-age pension systems
did not arise until the emergence of strong governments and sub-
stantial, taxable societal wealth. This situation did not arise until
the late 19th century. Social security is a hallmark of modernity.
Perhaps fortunately, the widespread need for these systems
also was not widely felt until relatively recently. So long as most
individuals worked in the fields, the need for a pension system
did not appear stark. To a farmer or a peasant, there was no such
thing as retirement. One worked alongside one’s family almost to
the day that one died. And that day frequently came well before
old age. If infirmity did come, the family, and perhaps one’s reli-
gious community, was expected to care for its loved one. In such
a world, there was little expectation that a government would
step in to help.
This world ended with the Industrial Revolution. As men
and women moved to towns and began to work in factories, the
old support systems came under stress. Advances in health and
medicine increased life spans at the same time as the new modes
of work became difficult or impossible as one aged. Either by
choice or by necessity, one eventually had to leave the workforce.
2
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Retirement became a stage of life. But these new retirees, and
their families, were usually without private pensions or substan-
tial personal savings and often faced a future of impoverishment
and humiliation in their “golden years.” Not surprisingly, many
began to call for government action to end this plight. Whether
for reasons of social justice or simply politics, most of the world’s
wealthy nations followed the German example by developing
governmental old-age pension plans for their citizens in the first
years of the 20th century.
The United States was not one of those nations. In spite of
its relative wealth, it undertook no significant efforts to develop
a national social security system until the Great Depression,
nearly 50 years after Germany’s program was established. The
reasons for this delay are many. Legally, the U.S. federal govern-
ment is restricted to those powers and purposes granted it by the
U.S. Constitution. The Constitution is silent on the issue of social
security, and for many years this was taken to mean that such a
program was forbidden. Moreover, the American system of gov-
ernment is one of federalism. States are reserved the powers and
responsibilities not explicitly granted to the federal government
in the Constitution. So even if a social security program were to
be contemplated, there were good constitutional reasons for
thinking that such a program ought to be the responsibility of
the states. However, there are tremendous difficulties with each
state having its own social security system. Americans are a mo-
bile people who do not recognize state boundaries as they move
between jobs or decide where to retire. Any individual state
would have an almost impossible job in taxing and apportioning
benefits fairly to citizens who came and left the state at various
times in their lives. There might also be a race to the bottom as
states realized that the lower their social security taxes, the easier
it would be to attract and keep businesses and workers. The re-
sult could be that no one state would be able to tax at a rate high
enough to provide a meaningful pension. Thus a system of state-
led social security programs sufficiently large to be effective
would be very difficult to bring about.
These political barriers to a U.S. old-age retirement system
were joined by strong American cultural beliefs. Americans have
generally desired (or at least claimed to desire) a small state: “The
government that governs least, governs best,” in Thomas Jeffer-
son’s words. A social security system vastly increases the rev-
enues, capacities, and, frankly, the potential intrusiveness of the
The Origins and Development of Social Security
3
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

government. To the extent that the program has, or appears to
have, the characteristics of a welfare program or an income redis-
tribution program, it runs against the deeply held beliefs of many
Americans. Most European systems granted pensions automati-
cally at the time an individual reached a specified age. To Ameri-
cans, this reeked of giving someone money for nothing, the
opposite of the American work ethic. There was little support for
such an idea. In the face of these legal and cultural barriers,
American reformers made little progress toward developing a so-
cial security system in the first decades of the 20th century.
This did not mean, however, that Americans had no experi-
ence with old-age pension systems. In fact, the country had a sys-
tem so large that at least one expert claims that it was as generous
as Bismarck’s far more heralded system (Skocpol 1992). This was
the system of Civil War pensions. The U.S. government paid out
more than $5 billion in pensions between 1866 and the arrival of
the federal Social Security program. In the last years of the 19th
century, the Civil War pension program consumed more than a
quarter of the entire U.S. federal budget. The program eventually
reached every Union Civil War veteran over the age of 62, almost
a million men and women, with rather generous payments for
the time. Yet the operations, and the limitations, of the program
revealed how difficult it would be to develop a more universal
system of old-age pensions in the United States. For the Civil War
system was clearly linked to special recognition for services ren-
dered to the United States. This connection accounted for the po-
litical success of the program. It was not money for nothing. It
was not a method of ameliorating the difficulties of old age gen-
erally. The Civil War pension system was embedded in a different
moral sensibility, one still anchored in the principle that a govern-
ment pension was a privilege to be earned, not a right to be had.
From this principle, there was no way to expand the program to
other categories of citizens. Thus the Civil War pension system
expired with the veterans it supported and could not provide the
foundations for a modern U.S. pension program.
As the Civil War pension system came to an end, a healthy
American economy had pushed the issue of old age and poverty
to the back burner. It took the shock of the Great Depression to
bring it dramatically into view. The Great Depression was unlike
any  situation anyone had ever experienced. As banks failed and
the economy contracted, both jobs and life savings were wiped
out. By 1932, 38 percent of the nonfarm workforce was jobless.
4
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Cases of starvation were reported in the press. And unlike earlier
economic crashes, the United States did not quickly recover. Pres-
ident Herbert Hoover took the position that the Depression must
be addressed without significant government help. He resisted
calls for expanding or creating new federal programs, including
any pension plans to help impoverished senior citizens. But his
strategy to end the Depression was not successful, and he was
defeated for reelection in 1932 by Franklin Roosevelt (commonly
referred to as FDR).
President Franklin Roosevelt is the single most important
figure in the history of the U.S. Social Security program. Roosevelt
brought a dramatically different view of government to the Oval
Office. He believed in strong federal action to end the Depression
and was even prepared to experiment, if he must, to find pro-
grams that would work. He also had a deeper aim: to use this cri-
sis to transform the U.S. government and its capacities to provide
social services for its citizenry. This aim included the provision of
pensions for the aged. But even with his immense popularity and
a large Democratic majority in Congress, it still took all of his for-
midable political skills to accomplish this goal.
FDR’s first years in office were spent enacting the many
programs that became known as the “New Deal.” Most were
emergency responses to the unemployment and poverty that ac-
companied the Great Depression. A particularly severe problem
was caring for the aged poor. Work programs, such as the Works
Progress Administration and Civilian Conservation Corps, could
not help these individuals, nor could unemployment programs.
As private and public charity organizations collapsed around the
country, calls grew for action to help the elderly poor. State and
local governments, too, demanded that the federal government
take over the provision of assistance for the poor as their own
revenues disappeared. But Roosevelt responded cautiously, even
rejecting a 1934 congressional bill to provide matching grants to
the states to help them provide public assistance for the aged
poor. Behind this caution, he was awaiting the public momentum
that would allow him to enact a far broader program than simple
poverty relief for aged citizens.
While he waited, others promoted their own solutions.
Most argued for granting pensions to senior citizens as a mecha-
nism to get out of the Depression. The most famous proposal
among these was Louisiana governor and U.S. senator Huey
Long’s plan to “Share the Wealth.” Claiming it would make
The Origins and Development of Social Security
5
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

“every man a king,” Long proposed that all Americans should re-
ceive $5,000 a year to keep them out of poverty, and everyone
over the age of 60 should receive a government pension. To pay
for this benefit, Long suggested taxing and confiscating much of
the fortunes of America’s millionaires. Another, more politically
potent, idea came from a retired California doctor, Francis
Townsend. In 1933, Townsend published a plan to give all retired
persons over the age of 60 a pension of $200 a month, with the
proviso that they spend the money within 30 days. Such an “old-
age revolving pension” would be financed by a 2 percent national
sales tax. Townsend’s plan offered a neat combination of goals:
the money would support needy senior citizens and would also
revive the economy as it was spent. Twenty-five million Ameri-
cans signed petitions supporting the plan, and Townsend Clubs
spread across the country.
FDR put off these and other programs by claiming that
more study was needed. However, he was aware of the rumor
that Senator Long might run for president in 1936, and, in 1934,
he watched as the socialist Sinclair Lewis swept the California
Democratic gubernatorial primary and nearly won the general
election on a radical social platform.
Under this pressure, in June 1934, Roosevelt finally an-
nounced to Congress that he would undertake the study neces-
sary to introduce a national social insurance program the
following winter. To that end, he created the Committee on Eco-
nomic Security to advise him. The committee was composed of
five key administration officials: Henry Wallace, secretary of Agri-
culture; Henry Morgenthau Jr., secretary of the Treasury; Homer
Cummings, the attorney general; Harry Hopkins, the emergency
relief administrator; and, as chair, Frances Perkins, the secretary of
Labor. This committee was advised by a council of 23 business
and labor leaders and by a technical board of experts. In his direc-
tion to the committee, Roosevelt asked that he not receive a series
of different policies or bills; he wanted one piece of legislation that
would protect every American from every kind of severe economic
distress. In other words, social security would be wrapped within
a series of new labor, welfare, and social programs.
Roosevelt demanded a program that would be comprehen-
sive, financially sound, and capable of passing Congress. He op-
posed programs such as those of Dr. Townsend and Senator
Long, because he thought them fiscally irresponsible. They
would saddle the U.S. government with potentially huge finan-
6
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

cial liabilities far into the future. FDR preferred a program
funded by worker contributions rather than by the government’s
general revenues. A system based on worker contributions would
also solve the potential political problems of the program. On the
one hand, if pensions were not connected to worker contribu-
tions, they might be seen as welfare, pure and simple. If Ameri-
cans could not distinguish the program from welfare, they would
oppose it. On the other hand, if the pensions came out of the gen-
eral revenues (i.e., out of the income tax) rather than contribu-
tions, they would be subject to the enduring political pressure to
reduce taxes.
This understanding led Roosevelt to demand a program
built around insurance principles rather than charitable princi-
ples. As he put it, “we must not allow this type of insurance to be-
come a dole through mingling of insurance and relief. It is not
charity. It must be financed by contributions, not taxes” (Rosen-
man 1938, 452). This rationale is the reason why the U.S. Social
Security program became linked to one’s job. One must work to
receive Social Security, and the size of one’s Social Security check
is related to how long one has worked and at what salary. The
program appears to operate very much like a life insurance annu-
ity policy. One “contributes” a premium every month in the ex-
pectation of receiving an annuity when one retires. (The term
“contribution” is pure politics, as the contribution is in fact a tax.)
Roosevelt also expected that if individuals associated
their Social Security check with the contributions that they had
made, the program would be politically impregnable. No one
could ever end or reduce it without being accused of stealing
the contributions that workers had already made. In his blunt
words, “[w]e put those payroll contributions there so as to give
the contributors a legal, moral, and political right to collect
their pensions and unemployment benefits. With those taxes in
there, no damn politician can ever scrap my social security pro-
gram” (Schlesinger 1988, 308–9).
On January 15, 1935, the Committee on Economic Security
issued its report. Though the committee had engaged in much
wrangling, it unanimously proposed a legislative act composed
of five major programs. The act would include a program for in-
digent senior citizens and dependent children; a joint federal-
state program for unemployment insurance; grants for states to
expand public health and child welfare services; a health insur-
ance program; and a federal old-age insurance program. The
The Origins and Development of Social Security
7
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

health insurance idea was soon dropped in the face of vociferous
opposition from the medical community that made its survival in
Congress unlikely. Two days later, Roosevelt forwarded the re-
maining four recommendations to Capitol Hill.
At the time, there was great worry that any or all of these
programs would be found unconstitutional. The Supreme Court
had dealt harshly with many of Roosevelt’s New Deal programs.
The Court had already stricken eight New Deal programs on
grounds that they were not constitutional. Senator Robert Wag-
ner’s pension program for railroad workers, a forerunner to So-
cial Security, also was voided by the Court. The essential
constitutional problem, as noted above, is that the Tenth Amend-
ment appears to grant to the states all powers not given the fed-
eral government, and nowhere in the Constitution is the power to
implement a social insurance program enumerated. For some of
the Committee on Economic Security’s proposed programs, such
as aid for the aged poor, the solution was to make the programs
joint federal-state undertakings. But this was not practical for So-
cial Security. The committee optimistically identified the federal
government’s power to tax and the Constitution’s preamble to
“provide for the General Welfare” as arguments for constitution-
ality, but all political observers knew that the fate of these pro-
grams would rest with the Supreme Court.
It is this uncertain constitutionality that accounts for some
of the complexity of the Social Security system that eventually
emerged. For example, the words “pension,” “annuity,” and “in-
surance” are not to be found in the original Social Security Act
(Weaver 1996). Even though the program rested on these con-
cepts, it was feared that mentioning any of them could cause
problems before the Court. In addition, the tax (or contribution)
portion of Social Security was placed in a different section of the
bill from the program itself so that the former could be argued as
the federal government’s constitutional right to raise revenue.
The Social Security tax (later to become, through the Federal In-
surance Contributions Act, the FICA tax) and the Social Security
benefit are thus legally separate.
Social Security Act of 1935
Franklin Roosevelt was a brilliant politician. He had neatly
placed himself in the middle of his opponents, dividing those
who thought he had not gone far enough (the Huey Long sup-
8
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

porters and the Townsend club members) from those who
thought he had gone too far (Herbert Hoover and the Republi-
cans). Roosevelt knew that the former would have to rally behind
him as it became clear that his proposals were the best they could
obtain.
Republicans were overwhelmingly in opposition to the bill.
But the GOP was no threat. The Republicans had reached the
nadir of their popularity by the mid-1930s. In 1936, with only 25
senators and 103 representatives in Congress, they could neither
block nor even slow the legislation on their own. The question
was whether conservative Democrats, especially those from the
South, would join the Republicans in voting against the program.
Business, broadly opposed to the bill, could be expected to pres-
sure these members of Congress to kill, or at least gut, the bill. In-
terestingly, labor unions could not be expected fully to counter
that pressure. The American Federation of Labor (AFL) had op-
posed federal old-age insurance. Samuel Gompers, the hero and
longtime head of the AFL, argued that federal pensions would
supplant union benefits and make it more difficult to organize.
After his death, the AFL slowly shifted its position, but it never
became a united force on this issue.
The old-age insurance system turned out to be the most
controversial of all the programs offered in the bill. There were
three points of contention. First was the issue of the contributions
or tax that would be paid. To some, Roosevelt was much too con-
servative on this point. Many New Dealers, along with others on
the left, wanted an old-age pension system built upon European
lines. Such a system would be universal in coverage, generous,
and well financed via, preferably, the use of the progressive in-
come tax. Linking social security to workplace contributions, as
Roosevelt wanted, would in their eyes act as a regressive tax that
would limit the size of the pensions of the poorest workers. But to
others, there was great unease over the size of the taxes that
would be necessary to implement any form of social security. In
the United States of the 1930s, only 5 percent of the population
paid an income tax, and any program that would significantly in-
crease the percentage—whether one called it a contribution or
not—was politically contentious.
Second, business was opposed to the program because of the
tax implications. Business wanted neither to pay a contribution it-
self nor collect the workers’ contribution on behalf of the govern-
ment. Small businesses, in particular, vociferously opposed this
The Origins and Development of Social Security
9
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

new taxation. Third, Representatives from the segregated South
were opposed because of fears that their businesses and farms
could not afford to pay for a pension plan and because social secu-
rity appeared to promise a level of financial support to African
Americans that they regarded as unacceptable.
Roosevelt sought compromises that would prevent these
opponents from joining together. To appease those who worried
about the tax implications, the initial tax for the program was re-
vised downward to begin at a low 2 percent (1 percent each for
employer and employee) on the first $3,000 of earnings, and then
gradually rise to no higher than 6 percent. The first payments
would not begin until 1942, five years after enactment. This mod-
est tax also meant modest benefits. The maximum monthly pay-
ment would be $85. (Compare this amount with the $120 a month
offered to retired railway workers under the Wagner bill of the
previous year.) To those made unhappy by such a small pension
system, Roosevelt pointed out that the options were this pro-
gram, or no program. But the implicit bargain was that Social Se-
curity would be a minimal program. It would not provide a
comfortable retirement or end the need for private savings; it
would merely keep senior citizens out of poverty.
To further stress its financial soundness, FDR shaped the
program to appear as similar as possible to that of a private pen-
sion program that a business might offer. Hence, Roosevelt un-
waveringly supported the use of a reserve account, into which
employers and employees would contribute equally. Social Secu-
rity benefits then would be paid from the account to the employ-
ees once they had attained retirement age. This approach is very
close to the manner in which a private, defined-contribution pen-
sion program operates.
To dampen opposition from small business, a very large
number of Americans were excluded from the program. Farm
workers, domestic labor, and “casual labor” were all exempted.
Government workers and the nonprofit sector (which had vigor-
ously opposed the system) were also left out. Thus a considerable
portion of the United States was not covered under the new pro-
gram. Excluding farm workers and domestic labor was also a
backdoor method to meet the demands of segregationists. In
hearings, representatives such as Howard W. Smith of Virginia
made clear they wanted a program that allowed states to “differ-
entiate between persons” (U.S. Congress House Committee on
Ways and Means 1935, 949). They opposed a national program
10
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

that mandated a minimum standard of payments to Americans
in every state. Bluntly, they did not want African Americans to
have access to a retirement program. Their power was such that
Roosevelt did retreat by agreeing that the federal government’s
efforts to assist the indigent elderly should be limited to offering
matching monies to state-run programs. As far as the old-age
pension program itself, the workers excluded from the Social Se-
curity system constituted most of the entire rural South, which
meant virtually all African Americans in that region. This shift
served to diminish the strength of Southern opposition to the
program.
Even with these many compromises, it was by no means
clear that the program would pass. In the House of Representa-
tives, friendly members of the Ways and Means Committee pri-
vately told Roosevelt that he should drop the old-age pension
plan if he wished to see the rest of the bill become law. But the
president held firm. It was in this committee that, at some point,
the term “social security” was developed to replace Roosevelt’s
preferred “economic security,” giving the name to the program
that we know today. The committee also reorganized the old-age
pension plan under a new agency, the Social Security Administra-
tion, in an effort to gain more support. (Roosevelt had proposed
that the program be distributed among existing federal agencies.)
By using House of Representatives procedures that forced an up
or down vote on the entire Roosevelt package of programs, FDR’s
allies were able to obtain passage with an overwhelming vote of
372–33 for the bill.
The Senate was a potentially bigger obstacle because of the
possibility of a filibuster. In fact, Huey Long twice initiated fili-
busters. Senator Thomas Gore (D -Okla.) raised yet another en-
during criticism when he asked Secretary of Labor Frances
Perkins, “Now, Miss Perkins, wouldn’t you agree that there is a
teeny-weeny bit of socialism in your program?”(Altmeyer 1966,
38). But again, the final vote showed that when Congress was
presented with the choice of no program or the one FDR offered,
it was no contest. The Senate passed the Social Security Act by a
vote of 77–6. On August 14, 1935, Franklin Roosevelt signed the
Social Security Act of 1935 into law.
As expected, the law was almost immediately challenged in
court. In 1937, in two cases, Steward Machine Co. v. Davis and
Helvering v. Davis, the Supreme Court, departing from earlier New
Deal rulings, upheld the constitutionality of the act. Speaking for
The Origins and Development of Social Security
11
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

the Court, Justice Benjamin Cardozo argued that the problem of
the aged may certainly be included under the Constitution’s man-
date to promote the general welfare and is “plainly national in
area and dimensions” and thus need not be left to the states. The
most expensive public program in the history of the United States
was here to stay.
Clearly, the U.S. Social Security program was a political com-
promise. Elements such as the link of the pension to workplace
taxes, the separation of the system from the U.S. government’s
general revenues, the use of the Reserve Account, and the scope of
the occupations that would or would not be eligible for Social Se-
curity are the products of politics, not of economic necessity or fi-
nancial soundness. As a product of politics, Social Security
remains subject not only to economic possibilities and constraints
but also to the pull and push of political pressure and the national
mood. The result has been the continued reshaping of the pro-
gram over the decades that have followed its initial passage. Be-
cause of its political aspects, the Social Security program of today
is actually quite different from the one Roosevelt worked to enact
during the years of the Great Depression. In the years after Roo-
sevelt’s presidency, the program has been expanded to encompass
almost all working Americans, it has become far more generous,
and it has changed from operating on insurance or annuity princi-
ples into today’s “pay as you go” system.
The Expansion of Social Security: 
From 1935 to the Present
The Reforms of 1939
The first major bout of reform came a mere four years after the So-
cial Security Act’s passage. In the 1935 act, the old-age insurance
program was a reserve or annuity-style plan, one in which an indi-
vidual received back, upon retirement, his or her own contribu-
tions plus interest. (The Reserve Account was to be invested in U.S.
bonds, which would generate the interest payments.) In 1939,
amendments were added that began shifting the program to a pay-
as-you-go plan, in which a retired individual’s benefits were paid
not from his or her own contributions but from the annual contri-
butions of those currently in the workforce. The 1939 amendments
also added a survivors benefit to Social Security. In the 1935 pro-
gram, a worker’s benefits ended with her or his death. The 1939
12
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

amendments allowed the continuation of benefits, at a reduced
level, to the worker’s spouse or dependent children.
The real initiative for the 1939 amendments came from
Michigan Republican senator Arthur Vandenberg. Recall that the
1935 act had created a reserve account to hold the contributions
paid into Social Security until they were returned as benefits.
Like many Republicans, Vandenberg was deeply skeptical of
how this account would be used. At best, it would be a huge
temptation for those wishing to expand the federal government;
at worst, it was part of a Roosevelt scheme to get the financing for
more New Deal programs. Since Social Security taxes began in
1937 and benefits were not scheduled to be paid until 1942, the
Reserve Account was already sizable. Vandenberg and others es-
timated it would grow to $47 billion by 1980. In the late 1930s this
was an almost unbelievable amount of money, enough to buy
every farm in the United States with $14 billion to spare. How
could anyone reasonably believe that politicians could keep their
hands off it? This was the gist of an article Senator Vandenberg
published in an April 1937 edition of the Saturday Evening Post
(Vandenberg 1937, 5–7). Vandenberg proposed making the pro-
gram’s benefits more liberal, starting the payment of benefits in
1940 rather than 1942, and postponing the tax increase scheduled
for 1940, all in an effort to prevent the creation of this political
menace. Of course the lack of a reserve account would mean that
beneficiaries would have to be paid mostly out of that year’s
taxes on workers, because their own contributions had not been
“stored” anywhere and could not be returned to them. Vanden-
berg believed, however, that this would be just as safe as a re-
serve account and would be less expensive to operate.
Later that year, Senator Vandenberg approached Arthur Alt-
meyer, the first chair of the Social Security Board, and asked if he
would agree to establish a commission to examine this and other
questions. Altmeyer thought it politically impossible to refuse.
Although Altmeyer was not enthusiastic about making changes,
he believed that some reforms would be necessary to head off the
more extreme proposals of Vandenberg and others. Altmeyer
suggested a fallback position to Roosevelt: get rid of the Reserve
Account and increase benefits, but hold firm on the scheduled tax
increases. Roosevelt agreed.
Vandenberg was not alone in criticizing the new program.
Liberals who had lost the 1935 debate on financing again de-
manded the end of the contribution system, to be replaced by
The Origins and Development of Social Security
13
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

benefits paid from the general revenues. The contribution system
limited the generosity of the pensions, and at the time many
thought it a scandal that many senior citizens could draw higher
pensions from the old-age assistance plan (i.e., welfare) than they
could from the old-age pension plan. Robert LaFollette, the well-
known progressive senator from Wisconsin, fought to replace the
Social Security program with a flat-rate pension to all senior citi-
zens, to be paid from the general revenues. Business representa-
tives, too, objected to the whole idea of the Reserve Account. It
was, they believed, almost a Ponzi scheme. The government was
using the Social Security tax to buy U.S. bonds to place in the Re-
serve Account on behalf of contributing workers. But someday
the bonds would come due and the U.S. government would have
to raise the revenue to pay them off. Where would that money
come from? The economists on the reform commission had a dif-
ferent problem with the account. They believed that the taxes sit-
ting in the account constituted workers’ income that could not be
spent. It was idle money, and it would be better if it were put to
use. The Reserve Account amounted to a reduction in American
spending, served as a drag on the U.S. economy, and was a bar-
rier to getting out of the Depression.
What all of these different groups shared was an agreement
on eliminating the Reserve Account. But if this was done, how
could the financial soundness of the program be guaranteed?
One method, heartily endorsed by the board and liberal support-
ers, was to expand the number of workers paying into the pro-
gram. Thus the committee recommended including agricultural
workers, those working in education and the nonprofit sector,
and others in Social Security. Moreover, workers over age 65
should be allowed to continue to work if they wished.
To quiet opponents’ fears about the government’s use of So-
cial Security contributions, the committee suggested the creation
of a trust fund, to be managed by designated, independent
trustees, into which all Social Security taxes would automatically
be credited and from which all benefits would be paid. In other
words, contributions would not, even for an instant, pass
through the operating budget of the United States.
Though “trust fund” and “reserve account” may appear to
be very similar ideas, there is a vast difference. The latter pro-
vided a direct connection between an individual’s contributions
and her or his benefits. The benefits that one received ultimately
came from one’s own contributions. A trust fund provides no
14
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

such connection. The money that is paid out of the Social Security
Trust Fund is simply an amount that a retiree receives by statute.
It has no necessary link to the amount that that individual had
contributed during his or her working life. The shift from a re-
serve account to a trust fund amounted to disconnecting the
money that came in from the money that went out. This marked
the shift to a pay-as-you-go pension system. Pensions are paid
out from the money that it is currently coming in from those in
the workforce, not from money that is deposited somewhere
from a retiree’s earlier contributions.
Once this shift was accepted, the possibilities were opened
for greatly increasing old-age insurance benefits. The govern-
ment could now provide benefits far in excess of what a retired
person had contributed during his or her working years. Thus
the committee called for Social Security benefits to begin in 1940
rather than in 1942, and they were disbursed under a new for-
mula that would give the first retirees more generous payments
than contemplated under the 1935 act. It also argued for basing
benefits not on lifetime earnings, as in the 1935 act, but on aver-
age monthly earnings. This proposal had the effect of boosting
the payments to most retirees, who had, after all, spent the major-
ity of their working lives before the advent of the program and
had thus made no contributions to it.
The committee also proposed a second dramatic expansion
of benefits, the provision of survivors’ benefits. Under the 1935
law, Social Security benefits were linked to the individual who had
paid the taxes. When she or he died, the benefits expired. The advi-
sory committee suggested including the worker’s family in the
benefits. The surviving spouse of a married couple in which only
one had worked would receive the benefit earned by the working
spouse plus a supplemental allowance of 50 percent of that benefit.
(The 1939 amendments actually applied only to nonworking
wives. Husbands were not added until 1950.) A nonworking
widow would still receive three-quarters of the benefit. Dependent
children would receive one-half of their deceased parent’s benefit
until they reached the age of 16 (or 18 if still in school). In cases
where there were no other dependents, the deceased’s aged par-
ents might be eligible for benefits as well. As a result of the imple-
mentation of survivors benefits, the Social Security program was
retitled the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Program (OASI).
Securing Franklin Roosevelt’s assent to these proposals, the
committee finished its business and reported its recommendations
The Origins and Development of Social Security
15
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

to Congress in December 1938. Congressional hearings essentially
replayed the debate of 1935. A version of the Townsend plan was
revived and offered on the House floor as an alternative to Social
Security. It was defeated easily (by a vote of 302–97) but had the
serendipitous effect of making the 1939 proposals look very minor
and thus easing their passage (Solomon 1986, 16). Conservatives
and Southerners were, however, able to prevent expansion of the
program to cover agricultural workers. Maritime workers were the
only new group allowed into the program. (An amendment to re-
strict Social Security benefits solely to American citizens was easily
defeated.)
The 1939 amendments fundamentally recast Social Security.
The favorable Supreme Court decision enabled the rewriting of
the bill to develop explicitly the social insurance aspects that the
1935 drafters had feared might not pass constitutional muster.
The addition of survivors’ benefits, the supplemental pension for
spouses, the ability to use nonpayroll taxes to finance the pro-
gram, and the computation of benefits based on average monthly
earnings all served to change Social Security from what had been
essentially an annuity program to one in which benefits were not
restricted to one’s individual contributions. The 1939 amend-
ments thus made possible the huge expansion in Social Security
that was to come.
The Reforms of 1950
The reforms of 1939 did not end the debates over Social Security.
In the more conservative post–World War II political environ-
ment, resistance to expanding the program remained strong.
Congress repeatedly refused even to implement the Social Secu-
rity tax increases that had been scheduled in the 1939 amend-
ments. As a result, the program was starved of revenue, and the
monthly benefits to retirees were not increased. The odd outcome
was that, for most senior citizens, the old-age assistance poverty
program remained more important than the old-age insurance
program. By 1949, only one in five retired workers received a So-
cial Security pension. The average old-age assistance payment
was $42 a month, while the average Social Security check was but
$25 a month. One could credibly wonder whether Social Security
would survive.
But instead of collapsing, Social Security was revived,
thanks to another set of expansive amendments to the Social Se-
curity Act. These amendments, passed in 1950, made four criti-
16
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

cal reforms. First, the eligibility for Social Security was greatly
expanded. Most occupations previously excluded from cover-
age were brought into the program. Second, the 1950 amend-
ments raised the average monthly benefit by 77.5 percent, the
largest single increase in the history of the program. In effect,
this redefined social security as a “livable” pension rather than
as a bare minimum with which to avoid destitution. Third, the
survivors’ benefit was extended to new classes of Americans,
including dependent husbands, dependent widowers, and chil-
dren of insured women. Finally, the amendments added a mod-
est program of public assistance for disabled Americans to the
Social Security Act.
After World War II ended, President Harry S Truman at-
tempted, unsuccessfully, to expand the Social Security program.
Congress, in fact, was heading in the opposite direction. In 1948,
it actually narrowed the definition of an employee under the So-
cial Security Act, overriding a Truman veto, and cut 500,000
workers from the Social Security program. That same year, Tru-
man was reelected president in a famous upset victory. Truman
had campaigned on a platform of expanding Social Security. He
thus prepared to renew his efforts. He hoped that the election
would give him a more favorable political environment. The
unexpected economic prosperity of the postwar years promised
a better economic environment as well. Employment was high
and retirement contributions to Social Security were larger than
anticipated. The Social Security Trust Fund was healthy, with
$13 billion in 1950. This environment gave the president room
to maneuver.
On February 21, 1949, Truman transmitted to Congress the
drafts of three bills to reform the Social Security Act. One bill
called for the creation of national health care. This proposal pro-
duced such a storm of controversy that the other bills sailed
through Congress almost without notice. And it was one of these
latter bills that entailed the substantial reforms to the Social Secu-
rity program that Truman wanted.
The president’s requests for changes in the OASI program
were ambitious. Drawing on advisory commission report rec-
ommendations and his own advisers, Truman called for ending
almost all of the exclusions to eligibility written into the 1935
act. Specifically, Social Security should be extended to cover the
self-employed, farm workers, domestic workers, employees in
the nonprofit sector, and government workers. Qualifying for
The Origins and Development of Social Security
17
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

coverage would be made somewhat easier for everyone. Next,
Social Security retirees should receive an immediate, large in-
crease in benefits. Then, every year thereafter, the benefit
amount should rise by 1 percent for every year of an individ-
ual’s coverage in the program.
It took more than a year for Congress to act on Truman’s re-
quests. Republicans, frequently joined by Southern Democrats,
fought them fiercely. They argued that the OASI program should
be conceived as a basic floor of protection, not as a full pension
plan. The leader of the Republicans in the Senate, Robert Taft of
Ohio, argued for rolling OASI and old-age poverty assistance
into one program, with no eligibility requirements and equal
pensions for all retirees. This would be financed through a flat
percentage of the income tax. The GOP argued this was fairer,
simpler to administer, and a more honest accounting of public
funds. Ironically, the proposal was similar to that offered by those
on the ideological left in the debates of 1935 and 1939. The differ-
ence, of course, is that Taft and other conservatives wished to
place Social Security under the income tax so as to limit, not in-
crease, the benefits (and cost). This failed attempt marks the last
time that Congress seriously considered ending Social Security as
we understand it today.
The “conservative coalition” of Republicans and Southern
Democrats did remove the automatic benefit increases that Tru-
man wanted. They nearly removed farm workers once again, los-
ing only in the final conference committee bill. Government and
nonprofit workers also remained outside the program (at their
own wish). But President Truman gained the rest of his desired
reforms. The 1950 amendments extended Social Security cover-
age to 10 million working Americans, greatly increased the
monthly benefit, and liberalized the eligibility and computation
formulas for future benefits. To pay for this increase, Congress
raised the FICA tax in increments until it reached 7.5 percent in
1969. The self-employed would have to contribute three-quarters
of this amount.
The election to president of Dwight Eisenhower in 1952
was perhaps the last critical moment to the political survival of
Social Security. Many Republicans had opposed the program in
1935 and in the years thereafter. With a Republican finally in the
White House, would the GOP move to dismantle the program?
Surprisingly, Eisenhower not only made no such move but he
also used his first State of the Union address to demand that 10
18
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

million workers still excluded from the program be added to So-
cial Security. Eisenhower’s stance ended debate. Social Security
was here to stay. The addition of these workers also completed
the transformation of Social Security into a near-universal U.S.
old-age pension program. In 1956, Congress, over the opposition
of Eisenhower, also added disability benefits to Social Security.
The disability plan offered monthly benefits to all totally and
permanently disabled workers, to be computed in the same
manner as OASI benefits. Disabled children under the age of 18
would also receive monthly benefits if their parent or guardian
covered under OASI died or retired. The plan was financed by
an additional one-quarter of 1 percent tax on workers and their
employers (or three-eighths of 1 percent for the self-employed).
To answer the worries of opponents, a special disability trust
fund was created, into which this new tax would go. This fund
would ensure that the OASI Trust Fund would never be
“raided” for monies with which to pay disability benefits. In-
deed, Social Security’s disability program has grown dramati-
cally over the years. By 2000, more than 6 million Americans
received more than $100 billion a year through its auspices. It
has today become the primary form of financial protection for
most American workers. Perhaps ironically, the Disability Insur-
ance Trust Fund remains financially sound even as worries over
the OASI Trust Fund grow.
With the addition of the disability plan, the OASI was reor-
ganized as the Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Pro-
gram (OASDI), the current official title of the U.S. Social Security
system. With one exception, the Social Security program at last
looked essentially as it does today: in 1965, Medicare and Medic-
aid were added to the Social Security Act of 1935. While not di-
rectly affecting the operations of the OASDI program, these two
health care programs have dramatically improved the lives of se-
nior citizens and form a key part of America’s compact with its
senior citizens.
Completing the Package: Adding COLAs to Social Security 
In 1972, Congress made a final, fundamental change to the U.S.
Social Security system. At the time, this change was not much
more than an afterthought. Its significance was not recognized by
any but a handful of legislators, nor was it understood by many
in the media or among the American public. If ever the ram-
shackle process of constructing Social Security was exposed, it
The Origins and Development of Social Security
19
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

was through the enactment of that year’s Social Security legisla-
tion, when an automatic cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) was
added to the program.
In the first decades of Social Security, the monthly payments
that beneficiaries received were set by legislation. At any time
that Congress wished, it could increase Social Security payments
simply by passing a law with a new benefits schedule. During the
1940s and 1950s, years when the program still aroused contro-
versy and the Trust Fund was very small or even in deficit, this
did not happen often. But in the 1960s, mirroring the economic
boom of the postwar United States, the Trust Fund grew rapidly.
Existing Social Security benefits looked ever more miserly as
Americans’ incomes grew. And, of course, as senior citizens grew
in number, politicians were not unaware of the votes that might
be gained by offering them more generous pensions. The result is
that Congress became increasingly active in voting in substantial
Social Security benefits increases. By the early 1970s, double-digit
increases were being enacted almost annually.
Federal officials and Social Security experts became con-
cerned about these increases. Because Social Security is not
means tested, every beneficiary gains from an increase in bene-
fits, no matter how wealthy he or she may be. For that reason,
one could argue that across-the-board increases of such magni-
tude were dubious as a matter of policy. In any event, they were
extremely expensive. Peering into the future, some realized that
the large increases that were occurring then could sink the pro-
gram decades later. The problem, though, was a practical one:
how to prevent Congress from voting large increases when these
votes are so popular politically.
Many Social Security experts advanced the idea of taking
the benefits decision out of the hands of Congress. As an alterna-
tive, they suggested linking the growth of Social Security benefits
to the growth in the cost of living. A cost-of-living adjustment
could be made annually to the Social Security benefit using the
Consumer Price Index (CPI), which measures inflation. A yearly
adjustment based on the CPI would be predictable and would
preserve the real purchasing power of the OASI benefit. Presi-
dent Richard Nixon had asked the Department of Health, Educa-
tion, and Welfare to study this plan early in his administration,
and COLA proposals were added, unsuccessfully, as amend-
ments to several Social Security bills. But the addition of a COLA
was not uncontroversial.
20
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The key actor in this debate was Representative Wilbur
Mills (D-Ark.). Mills, the chair of the House Ways and Means
Committee, was arguably the most powerful legislator of the
20th century. He jealously protected the prerogatives of his com-
mittee, but he was also beginning a rather quixotic quest for the
presidency. To boost his chances, the once fiscally conservative
Mills shepherded large Social Security increases through Con-
gress in 1969 and 1971. He did not like COLAs; they would re-
duce his discretionary power in Congress. His ally in the Senate,
Democrat Russell Long of Louisiana (the son of Huey Long)
helped sneak the 1971 increase into law by placing it in a bill that
raised the national debt ceiling. When the government is in
deficit, it must shut down unless it can borrow the money it
needs to operate. To enable this borrowing, the debt ceiling often
must be raised. Because of this necessity, the bill is virtually vote
proof and veto proof; it must pass. Long’s wily strategy only
demonstrated the difficulty of ever controlling the increase of So-
cial Security benefits so long as it was set by Congress.
In 1972, as part of his presidential campaign, Mills intro-
duced legislation for a 20 percent across-the-board increase in So-
cial Security benefits. Beneath the increase, Mills had, with little
notice, added the COLA provision. Strong lobbying by the Amer-
ican Association of Retired Persons (AARP) and other senior citi-
zen groups had convinced candidate Mills to reverse his
opposition to COLAs and to support the ending of the discre-
tionary benefit increases that had been a major power of his own
committee. President Nixon announced that he would veto such
a large increase. But, having learned the trick from Senator Long,
Frank Church (D-Idaho) added the increase to yet another debt
ceiling bill. Nixon could not veto that bill. Church then added a
second amendment to include the COLA provision. Both easily
passed. Despite its profound change to the Social Security sys-
tem, placing future Social Security benefits on “automatic pilot”
rather than through congressional discretion, there was virtually
no debate. Nixon, also needing a Social Security success on which
to campaign for reelection, decided not to complain and signed
the bill into law on July 1, 1972.
In 1972, Wilbur Mills was not a very keen analyst of his own
presidential possibilities. But he was much better at assessing the
“far reaching provisions” of his Social Security bill. Thanks to the
benefits increase and the COLA provisions, poverty has declined
dramatically among America’s senior citizens. The United States
The Origins and Development of Social Security
21
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

now has virtually no need for a poverty program for the aged,
once considered among the country’s most pressing problems.
With the addition of the COLA to Social Security, the program fi-
nally gained the appearance of the program that we have today.
The First Social Security Crisis
With the passage of the 1972 amendments, the construction of the
U.S. old-age pension system was complete. Social Security ap-
peared nothing less than a full success. However, this view was
premature. Just 10 years after their passage, the entire system ap-
peared on the brink of collapse. Social Security suddenly needed
to be “saved.”
Yet participants then, as now, debated exactly what they
were saving the program from. The crisis, and the reforms of 1983
that followed, actually stemmed from two very different financial
problems, a predicted shortfall in the OASI Trust Fund and the
effects of the economic policies of the Ronald Reagan administra-
tion. The first of these problems was undoubtedly the result of
the 1972 amendments that had added a cost-of-living adjustment
to Social Security benefits. Benefits began to rise with the infla-
tion rate, as measured by the CPI. At the time, this was thought to
improve the process for determining Social Security benefit in-
creases. But key assumptions turned out to be wrong. The most
important was that, in the years ahead, inflation rates would re-
main within the historical norm. Instead, inflation raced out of
control as the 1970s progressed, and by 1980, the U.S. inflation
rate was four times that of the early 1970s. As the CPI exploded,
so did Social Security expenditures. Even worse, the inflation rate
exceeded the rate of wage increases for those still in the work-
force. This unexpected situation meant that the increase in the
flow of benefits paid out of the OASI Trust Fund was larger than
the increase in the flow of revenues coming in. (Remember that
Social Security is funded through a payroll tax on wages.) The sit-
uation was serious enough that both presidents Gerald Ford and
Jimmy Carter proposed technical adjustments to remedy this
problem. These measures were not enough to control the shrink-
age of the OASI Trust Fund.
Soon, the Social Security Administration’s Office of the Ac-
tuary, charged with making long-range forecasts of the solvency
of the Trust Funds, released a prediction that all of the Trust
Funds might be exhausted by the mid-1980s. By 1981, the OASI
Trust Fund was expected to be in a short-run deficit. This news
22
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

was all the more alarming considering the Office of the Actuary’s
predictions had a history of being overly optimistic. For 1980, for
example, it had predicted a rise in the CPI of 4.7 percent, when in
fact the rate was 13.5 percent, and it had predicted a rise in wage
rates of 2.4 percent, when in fact that rate turned out to be minus
4.9 percent (Schieber and Shoven 1999, 184). Its projected Trust
Fund shortfall of up to $200 billion thus stunned Washington.
This short-term crisis rested atop a deeper long-term crisis.
As more Americans retired and lived longer, the ratio of workers
paying into the OASI Trust Fund to retirees drawing out of the
Trust Fund was falling. This demographic shift would inevitably
drain the Trust Fund, absent reform, unless economic growth was
far faster than most experts were expecting. Moreover, the
growth of Social Security (and Medicare) was itself becoming a
budget problem. From 1969 to 1980, the portion of the federal
budget devoted to income maintenance and health care rose from
20 to 40 percent. Many questioned how long this could continue.
More sober members of Congress were already attempting
to address this long-term problem. They were led by J. J. (Jake)
Pickle (D-Texas), who tried to enact legislation to raise the retire-
ment age and end the benefit penalty on those who continued to
work after reaching the age of 68. Both of these changes would
increase the ratio of those working to those retired. His initial ef-
forts had little success, for one very simple reason: absent an im-
mediate crisis, what member of Congress wanted to vote for
legislation that made Social Security less generous? The Office of
the Actuary’s report provided that crisis.
In the spring of 1981, as members of Congress faced the ne-
cessity of Social Security reform, the Reagan administration un-
expectedly dropped a bombshell: a proposed cut in Social
Security benefits. This second contributor to the crisis arose out of
an economic problem wholly unrelated to the Trust Fund crisis.
The Reagan administration attempted to jar the U.S. economy out
of its dismal performance of the 1970s through large-scale tax
cuts. President Reagan’s director of the Office of Management
and Budget, David Stockman, recognized that the administra-
tion’s program was going to produce massive federal budget
deficits far into the future. He desperately needed to find pro-
grams he could cut, and cut fast. Among domestic programs,
only Social Security was sizable enough to make a real difference.
He thus targeted it. In addition, he recognized that the increased
deficits would mean greater reliance on borrowing from the Trust
The Origins and Development of Social Security
23
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Funds in order to subsidize the current federal budget. So it was
essential that the funds be as large as possible. Stockman there-
fore proposed a series of Social Security benefit cuts. He sug-
gested delaying the cost-of-living increase, reducing benefits to
those who choose early retirement (retirement at age 62), and
tightening the rules on obtaining disability insurance, along with
a variety of smaller cuts. Altogether, Stockman’s reforms would
have cut some $30 billion in benefits, and they affected nearly 60
million people. This plan was presented to Congress in May 1981.
The public outcry was deafening. Democrats, not believing
their good luck, offered congressional resolutions condemning
the proposals and, with Save Our Social Security, an umbrella
lobbying organization of some 125 special interest groups in tow,
ran with its attacks on Reagan’s “despicable plan.” Republican
legislators signaled to the president that it was imperative to get
the entire issue off the political agenda lest they lose the elections
of 1982. The quick fix was a bill that allowed the OASI to borrow
a sufficient amount from the healthier Disability and Hospital In-
surance Trust Funds to keep it afloat until June 1983. But what
should be done then? James Baker, Reagan’s chief of staff, had the
answer: create a national commission to study the issue.
In December 1981, the 15 members of the National Commis-
sion on Social Security Reform were appointed. Five were chosen
by congressional Republicans, five by congressional Democrats,
and five by the administration. Alan Greenspan, the future head
of the Federal Reserve Bank, was made the chair. Throughout
1982, members of the commission attempted to negotiate a bipar-
tisan package of Social Security reforms to save the system. Paral-
lel negotiations took place between President Reagan, Speaker of
the House Thomas P. “Tip” O’Neill, a Democrat, and their emis-
saries. Both sets of discussions nearly ended in failure. Basically,
Republicans favored cutting benefits, and Democrats favored
raising the FICA tax. Only after a series of intense meetings did
both sides agree that Social Security must be saved by a compro-
mise of equally cutting benefits and raising taxes. In a second im-
portant compromise, it was agreed that the Social Security
benefits of high-income recipients would be taxed as personal in-
come. Previously, all Social Security benefits had been exempt
from the income tax. Following several smaller compromises, the
commission voted to include these changes in its final report.
(The vote was not unanimous; three conservative Republican
members refused to endorse the report.)
24
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The commission’s report aroused great controversy. An al-
liance of interest groups, most importantly the 14-million-mem-
ber AARP and the National Federation of Independent Business
(NFIB), vowed to defeat the enactment of its proposals in Con-
gress. (The AARP opposed the benefits cuts, and the NFIB op-
posed the tax increase.) It took a tortuous journey through
Congress to enact the commission’s reforms in 1983. During that
journey, Representative Pickle was able to add a gradual rise in
the retirement age to 67 to the reform package. For many Ameri-
cans, this is probably the most important consequence of the 1983
reforms. However, those with incomes above $25,000 ($32,000 for
married couples) now had to pay the income tax on one-half of
their Social Security pension, while the self-employed saw an im-
mediate rise in their FICA taxes, and all workers faced an acceler-
ated timetable in previously planned FICA tax increases.
Defenders of Social Security breathed a sigh of relief when,
following the reforms, the Social Security Administration’s Office
of the Actuary predicted that the Trust Funds would now last
until 2063. Not only was the OASI Trust Fund saved but most ob-
servers thought that they had closed from one-half to two-thirds
of the long-term Social Security deficit. However, this, too, has
turned out to be an optimistic guess. The Office of the Actuary
has moved forward by about 20 years the predicted date of the
Trust Fund’s demise. The solution to the first Social Security cri-
sis, it turns out, actually only bought time. It did not solve the
program’s underlying problems.
The U.S. Social Security Program Today
Social Security has become the U.S. government’s largest domes-
tic program. More than 9 out of 10 Americans over the age of 65
receive a Social Security payment each month. Their benefits total
nearly $500 billion a year, an amount that would have astounded
previous generations. Though its details can at times seem
fiendishly complex, the operation of today’s Social Security pro-
gram is fairly straightforward.
Virtually every working American can qualify for Social Se-
curity. There are a very few exceptions, mostly involving individ-
uals who work for state and local governments or individuals
who work for a number of nonprofit institutions. By statute, these
employers are not obligated to join the Social Security system, 
The U.S. Social Security Program Today
25
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

although they can if they wish. Federal government workers were
not brought into the system until 1984. To gain eligibility for a
pension, a worker must accumulate 40 credits, or “quarters of cov-
erage.” A credit is gained each time the worker earns wages equal
to a stipulated dollar amount. This amount changes each year, as
it rises with an index of average American wages. In 2008, for ex-
ample, the amount of earnings needed to gain one credit was
$1,050. A worker is limited to accumulating four credits a year.
This means, in effect, that one must work at least 10 years to gain a
Social Security pension.
While individuals work, they must pay a tax, or contribu-
tion, on the covered wages that they earn until they reach what is
called the “maximum earnings” limit. This tax is called the Fed-
eral Insurance Contributions Act tax. One-half of this tax is paid
by the worker, the other half by the employer. If workers are self-
employed, they are responsible for paying the full tax. The origi-
nal Social Security law set the tax rate as 1 percent of earned
income for the worker and 1 percent for the employer, but that
rate has risen to 6.2 percent for each. Should workers reach the
maximum earnings amount, the FICA tax ends, and those work-
ers are not taxed on any additional income that they may earn.
This amount is also set to an index of average American wages,
and so it, too, rises every year. In 2008, the maximum earnings
amount was $102,000. About 85 percent of the FICA tax goes into
the Social Security Trust Fund, and the remaining 15 percent goes
into the Disability Insurance Trust Fund. (The total FICA tax today
is actually 7.65 percent each for workers and their employers, be-
cause it also includes contributions to the Medicare program, for
which all Americans over the age of 65 are eligible.) Money de-
posited into the Trust Fund is used to pay current retirees, with
any remainder invested in special U.S. Treasury bonds.
A Social Security pension begins at the date of retirement.
Somewhat confusingly, the Social Security Administration de-
fines retirement as the date at which an individual starts receiv-
ing her or his Social Security benefits, not as the date at which
that person leaves the workforce. It is possible to stop working
but then wait for several years or more before applying for a pen-
sion. Most workers choose to retire at their date of full retirement.
This age was originally set at 65, but, as explained above, the re-
forms of 1983 have replaced that date with a sliding scale that in-
crementally increases the retirement age for younger workers.
For workers born after 1960, their full retirement age will be 67. If
26
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

one retires at this age, she or he will receive full Social Security
benefits. One may also choose to retire early or to retire late. Early
retirement may begin at age 62; workers who retire at that age
will see their benefits reduced by 20 to 30 percent, depending
upon their year of birth. On the other hand, one may wait until
age 70 to retire. The monthly Social Security benefit for late re-
tirees is increased 5.5 to 8 percent, again depending upon the year
of birth, for each year that the retirement is delayed beyond age
65. The explanation for this scale is that the reduced benefit for
early retirees and the increased benefit for late retirees are simply
means to ensure that the total lifetime payments will be the same
for each of these groups of retirees, but this schedule of benefits
also operates as an incentive to encourage workers to postpone
their retirement.
If a worker does choose to keep working past the age of 65,
that individual continues to earn Social Security credits, although
she or he must also continue to pay the FICA tax. If the option to
retire early is taken, however, and the worker continues to be em-
ployed, she or he will be subject to an “earnings test.” A portion
(usually one-half) of the individual’s Social Security benefit will
be withheld because of the additional income that is being earned.
The monthly benefit that a worker receives depends upon
the age of retirement and the Social Security benefits calculation.
The calculation made to determine a worker’s initial benefit is
probably the most difficult part of Social Security to grasp. Basi-
cally, the calculation proceeds as follows. First, the worker’s earn-
ings for each year that she or he was employed are adjusted, or
indexed, to reflect the increase in average American wages that
has occurred since that time. Then, the 35 years with the highest
adjusted incomes are added together. This gives the worker’s
lifetime earnings. By dividing this figure by the number of
months in 35 years, the worker’s average indexed monthly earn-
ings (AIME) is computed. A formula then converts the AIME into
a level of benefits. The formula gives more weight to lower in-
comes, so it has a slightly progressive effect on Social Security
pensions. Individuals with low incomes do somewhat better, and
individuals with high incomes do somewhat worse, than if bene-
fits were paid strictly based on the total AIME. The benefit calcu-
lated from the AIME is called the Primary Insurance Amount
(PIA). This will be the amount in the retiree’s first Social Security
check. By law, however, an individual’s PIA cannot exceed a stip-
ulated maximum amount. In 2008, that maximum was set at
The U.S. Social Security Program Today
27
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

$2,185.00 per month. The average monthly benefit is currently
around $1080 per month. All PIAs are then adjusted each suc-
ceeding year by the rate of inflation, as measured by the Con-
sumer Price Index. In 2008, for example, all benefits were raised
by 2.3 percent. After the reforms of 1983, wealthier retirees are
taxed on their Social Security benefits, reducing the amount that
they actually receive.
Social Security benefits are given not only to the individual
who earned them but potentially to the spouse as well. A non-
working husband or wife of a beneficiary receives an additional
benefit equal to one-half of the primary wage earner’s Social Se-
curity pension. If the spouse also works, the spousal benefit is
guaranteed to equal one-half of the primary wage earner’s bene-
fit, no matter what the level of the spouse’s earnings may have
been. However, if the spouse’s benefits would be more than one-
half the primary benefit, the family is allowed to keep the full
amount of both benefits, again up to a stipulated maximum.
Finally, Social Security provides survivors’ benefits for fam-
ily members of a deceased Social Security beneficiary. A surviv-
ing spouse can begin to collect a reduced Social Security pension
at age 60 or a full pension at age 65. There are additional benefits
for children under age 16 and for widows or widowers who are
caring for them. In all cases, benefit conditions are somewhat lib-
eralized if the surviving spouse or children are disabled.
The U.S. Social Security program is comprehensive and rel-
atively generous. It must be counted as one of the country’s
great political successes of the 20th century. However, as dis-
cussed later in the book, absent changes or reduced expectations,
the program will not continue to be so successful in the future.
The United States once again must decide what to do about So-
cial Security.
References
Altmeyer, Arthur J. 1966. The Formative Years of Social Security. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.
Rosenman, Samuel Irving, ed. 1938. Public Papers and Addresses of
Franklin D. Roosevelt, vol. III. New York: Random House.
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. 1988. The Age of Roosevelt: The Coming of the
New Deal. New York: Houghton Mifflin.
28
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Schieber, Sylvester, and John B. Shoven. 1999. The Real Deal: The History
and Future of Social Security. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Skocpol, Theda. 1992. Protecting Soldiers and Mothers. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Solomon, Carmen. 1986. Major Decisions in the House and Senate Cham-
bers on Social Security. CRS Report for Congress, December 29. Congres-
sional Research Service. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Congress House Committee on Ways and Means. 1935. Economic
Security Act. Hearings on HR 4120 before the House Ways and Means
Committee, 74th Congress, 1st Session. http://www.ssa.gov/history
/35house.html.
Vandenberg, Arthur H. 1937. “The $47,000,000,000 Blight.” Saturday
Evening Post, April 27: 5-7.
Weaver, Carolyne L. 1996. Birth of an Entitlement: Learning from the
Origins of Social Security. AEI Online (May), http://www.aei.org
/publications/pubID.6500/pub_detail.asp (Accessed 12/26/2007).
References
29
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
M
ore than 40 million people are receiving Social Security old-
age insurance pensions. This number represents more than
one out of every eight Americans. Thanks to Social Security,
relatively few Americans now retire into poverty. The ending of
that poverty, and the fear it created, must be credited as one of
the great achievements of U.S. public policy. Whatever its contro-
versies at the time of its founding, few would now question the
value of a government old-age pension program. However, as
hinted in chapter 1, unless the program is changed—or U.S. de-
mographics change—this success is not guaranteed to continue.
Within little more than a generation, Social Security is expected to
encounter a severe problem. The trustees of the Social Security
program currently predict that at some point during the years
2040 to 2045, there will not be sufficient funds to pay retirees all
of the benefits they have been promised. At this point, it can truly
be said that Social Security is in crisis.
This chapter explains the nature of the funding problem
and explores the solutions that have been offered to fix it. It
sketches out each major type of solution and examines what both
supporters and critics have to say about it. No proposed solution
is popular in all quarters or is without its opponents. Each in-
volves trade-offs, and often the trade-offs involve personal values
as well as issues of finance and economics. Some of these solu-
tions have been tried in other countries; chapter 3 details their ex-
perience. But first the book focuses on the American debate and
assesses the options that currently exist to prevent a coming So-
cial Security crisis.
31
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Social Security Trust Fund
Recall that the U.S. Social Security system is what is known as a
pay-as-you-go program. This means that, each month, the bene-
fits being sent to retirees are paid out of the stream of the contri-
butions of current workers that are coming into the program. It is
not the case that each American worker has funds set aside under
her or his name somewhere in the Social Security system. Rather,
each worker’s Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) tax
simply goes into a common pool, and the benefits are then paid
out of this same pool. (The income tax that wealthier Social Secu-
rity recipients have paid on some of their Social Security benefits
since 1983 also goes into this pool.) When more contributions are
coming in than benefits going out (as is the case today), the extra
money is used to buy a special kind of U.S. Treasury bond. These
bonds are held in the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI)
Trust Fund. For a number of years contributions have exceeded
benefits, and so, by 2008, the Trust Fund has grown to hold more
than $2.2 trillion in these bonds.
However, the Trust Fund is a little more complicated and
confusing than it looks. First, it does not operate like a bank ac-
count or an investment fund. There are no names or account
holders in the Trust Fund. A working American earns an entitle-
ment to Social Security benefits, but not an entitlement to any
specific dollars that reside in the Trust Fund. So it is certainly
possible that the amount of Social Security benefits that the gov-
ernment has promised to pay workers in the future can be far
different from the amount that is, or will be, in the Trust Fund.
Second, the Trust Fund is not a stockpile or stash of bonds that
sits somewhere, like a Fort Knox of Social Security. It is merely
an accounting device. Anyone who would go to Washington,
D.C, and demand to see the Trust Fund would be disappointed.
The Trust Fund is a piece of paper, backed by the full faith and
credit of the United States to be sure, but a piece of paper
nonetheless. In a typical bank account or an investment fund,
one has stocks, bonds, or monies that can be sold, withdrawn, or
cashed in. They are real assets that make a financial claim on a
third party. The Trust Fund, however, is not composed of assets
like these. The special bonds that it holds cannot be cashed.
These bonds are simply a claim on future American tax rev-
enues. They are bonds issued by the government, to the govern-
ment (in the form of the Social Security Administration). In other
32
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

words, the government is buying bonds from itself and so mak-
ing a financial claim on itself, not a third party. Experts can thus
argue over the “reality” of the assets that are in the Trust Fund.
The bottom line is that the Trust Fund, despite its name, is pri-
marily an accounting device, albeit one that earns interest. It tells
us how much money the Social Security system has to pay all of
its promised benefits to retirees.
Because the Trust Fund is an accounting device, it can be
balanced, it can have a surplus, or it can have a deficit. If it is bal-
anced, this means that the FICA taxes that come in exactly equal
the benefits that go out. If it is running in surplus, it means, as
noted earlier, that the taxes exceed the benefits and the amount of
the Treasury securities in the Trust Fund is growing. But if it is
running in deficit, it means that the benefits to be paid exceed the
taxes that are coming in. In the case of a deficit, the Treasury secu-
rities must be liquidated to generate the extra money needed to
pay the benefits that month. The Trust Fund would thus shrink.
Obviously, if all of the securities were to be sold, the Trust Fund
would be empty. At that point, beneficiaries could only be paid
from the current stream of FICA contributions. There would be
no other money available to pay them. If the benefits that were
promised were greater than the contributions that were available,
the government could not honor its promises within the Social
Security system. It would have to renege on its obligations or find
additional revenues somewhere else with which to fulfill them. It
is precisely this situation in which almost all experts believe the
United States will find itself within several decades.
At some point around the year 2017, Social Security benefit
payments will begin to exceed the contributions and taxes com-
ing into the system. Between 15 and 35 years later, according to
the best estimates, the Trust Fund will be exhausted. Figure 2.1,
produced from figures published by the Social Security Adminis-
tration, illustrates the situation. As seen in the figure, the Trust
Fund grew steadily after the reforms of 1983, but its size will
peak before 2020. It will then steadily decline, and near the year
2042, it will be completely empty.
The magnitude of the coming Social Security deficit is stun-
ning. According to the U.S. Treasury Department, the difference
between the benefits that must be paid out and the amount of
money anticipated to come in (including what is in the Trust
Fund currently) is expected to amount to $4.6 trillion over the
next 75 years, and $13.4 trillion over the future life of the Social
The Social Security Trust Fund
33
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Security program. As a point of reference, the entire budget of the
United States was about $2.5 trillion in 2006, and the combined
personal and corporate income taxes of all Americans equaled
about $1.3 trillion in that year. If the United States were to close
down the government and set aside every single tax dollar it re-
ceived for the next three years just to prepare for the first 75 years
of the Social Security deficit, that action would not be enough to
close the gap.
Why Will the Trust Fund Shrink?
The Social Security Trust Fund will not be exhausted because of a
simple design flaw that can be easily rectified. It will occur be-
cause of deep changes in the demographics of the United States
in the 21st century. Americans are living longer, and they are hav-
ing fewer children. As a result, the ratio of working to retired
Americans is falling. As the number of people receiving Social Se-
curity benefits goes up and the relative number paying FICA con-
tributions and taxes goes down, the inevitable result is the
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
FIGURE 2.1
The Disappearing Trust Fund (in billions of dollars)
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
-1,000
-2,000
-3,000
1983 
 
  2017 
          2041  
         2079 
Source: Social Security Administration (2007).
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

draining of the Trust Fund. This trend is exacerbated by the fact
that benefits have been growing faster than the FICA tax receipts,
placing additional pressure on Social Security’s financing.
In 1935, the life expectancy of the average American was not
much more than 65 years. Today, it is approaching 80 years. The
dramatic increase in longevity has implications for Social Secu-
rity because the longer one is retired, the longer he or she will be
drawing benefits from the program. In 1940, the average male re-
tiree drew Social Security benefits for a period of 12.7 years,
while the average female retiree drew benefits for 14.7 years. In
2005, those periods had extended to 17.0 and 19.6 years, respec-
tively. By 2080, the average retiree is expected receive benefits for
more than 20 years, nearly half as long as the individual was in
the workforce. It is also the case that a far larger percentage of
people who work now live long enough to enjoy a retirement. In
1940, again, less than 60 percent of working Americans lived to
the age of 65. In other words, they would have paid FICA taxes
but not lived long enough to collect benefits. Today, close to 80
percent of working Americans will be alive to collect Social Secu-
rity. This is a triumph for medicine, but such success means that
ever more people are drawing Social Security pensions. Amer-
ica’s retired population has grown from about 9 million in 1940 to
more than 37 million today. By 2080, there will be nearly 100 mil-
lion retired Americans, almost all of them receiving a Social Secu-
rity benefit. The immense growth of the number who must be
paid is the first reason behind the Trust Fund’s future problem.
If the working population were growing as fast as the re-
tired population, this would not be too large a difficulty, for the
additional contributions of the working population would fund
the additional benefits to be paid. But this is not the trend. The in-
crease in new workers will not be close to the increase in the com-
ing number of retirees. The primary reason is that the American
birth rate has fallen. After peaking in 1960, the biggest year of the
baby boom, the U.S. fertility rate has fallen substantially. The av-
erage American woman today has about two children. This is not
expected to change anytime soon. Two children essentially “re-
place” their parents in the workforce when the latter retire; they
do not represent additional workers.
In fact, as the birth rate has fallen, the largest source of new
workers has been through immigration. But, though immigration
has increased substantially in recent decades, the increase is not
of a magnitude to make up for the smaller families of native-born
The Social Security Trust Fund
35
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Americans. The result is that the number of added workers who
will be joining the workforce, and paying FICA taxes, is expected
to fall sharply in coming years. In recent decades, the number of
working Americans has increased by 20 million or more, but in
the decade of 2020, for example, the workforce is expected to in-
crease by only 9 million and, for 2030, only 5 million. The result is
stark: there will be millions of new retirees, but not the same mil-
lions of new workers. In a system where current retirees are paid
from the taxes of current workers, this trend is troubling.
A neat way to summarize the problem is by looking at the
dependency ratio: the number of people 65 and older divided by
the number of people in the workforce (assumed to be those be-
tween the ages of 20 and 64). This ratio has grown from .135 in
1950 to .208 today. It is expected to soar to .421 by 2080 (U.S. Con-
gressional Budget Office 1998; Social Security Administration
2007). Another way of stating this ratio is that in 1950, more than
seven workers contributed to the system for every one retiree
drawing from it. The number of contributing workers to retirees
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
FIGURE 2.2
The American Fertility Rate, 1940–2010
Year
1940
1950        1960         1970         1980        1990          2000        2010
2.23
3.61
2.03
Note: Fertility rate given as average number of children born to U.S. women.
Source: National Center for Health Statistics.
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

has fallen to 4.7 and is gradually falling toward 2 by the end of
the 21st century. At that point, the pension of each Social Security
retiree will have to be paid out of the taxes coming from only two
other people. Those taxes would have to be incredibly high for
the system to continue to operate.
Demographics are not the only reason for the coming ex-
haustion of the Trust Fund. Almost half of the expected increase
in future Social Security payments is simply the result of the way
in which Social Security benefits are calculated.
Because of the construction of the benefits formula, the real
level of Social Security benefits is constantly rising. In 70 years, the
real value of a retiree’s Social Security check will be double the size
of today’s check. As discussed in chapter 1, an individual’s initial
Social Security pension is set at that person’s lifetime average in-
dexed monthly earnings (AIME). Each year of earnings before the
age of 60 is adjusted upward by indexing it to the growth in Amer-
ican wages that has occurred since that time. (If Social Security did
not make this adjustment, retirees would receive very paltry pen-
sions indeed. In 1977, for example, the average American’s income
The Social Security Trust Fund
37
FIGURE 2.3
The Dependency Ratio
7
6
5
1950
1970        1990        2010
2030
2050
2070
Historical           Expected
 Year
Workers per Retiree
4
3
Source: Social Security Administration (2007); U.S. Congressional Budget Office (1998)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

was about $10,000. If a person received a Social Security check
today based on his or her earnings in 1977, it would be quite
small.) This calculation appears to be necessary to achieve a fair So-
cial Security system. The difficulty is that historically, wages have
risen faster than prices. Thus, over the longer term, the real value
of the Social Security check increases, and the amount of money
that must be paid from the Trust Fund increases accordingly. This
places a second unfavorable trend alongside the demographic
problem. Together, they explain why the Trust Fund will shrink
and likely disappear in a generation.
Before turning to the solutions to this problem, it is impor-
tant to note one last complexity. Because all of the factors that
have been discussed are projections into the future, whether fer-
tility rates, life expectancies, dependency ratios, or wage rates,
they are only estimates. They are predictions. The experts gener-
ally agree about them. The Social Security Administration and
the Congressional Budget Office, for example, independently
reach roughly similar conclusions about when the Trust Fund
will be exhausted. But the future may not turn out as expected.
The Social Security Administration also tries to estimate the
worst-case and the best-case scenarios for the Trust Fund. In the
worst case, the Trust Fund will be empty much sooner than
thought. In the best case, it will shrink, but not hit zero, even as
late as 2080. Any attempt to reform Social Security has to take
into account the uncertainties of the future and the chance that
the best predictions of experts might not come true. It could be
worse, or better, than expected.
Saving Social Security: The Options
Solving the Social Security problem is one of America’s biggest
challenges. As might be expected, innumerable proposals have
been made. Broadly, they can be divided into proposals that in-
volve (a) prefunding Social Security, (b) restoring its pay-as-you-
go principle, or (c) replacing Social Security with a partially or
fully privatized alternative. There is always, too (d) the option of
doing nothing. Each of these alternatives is considered below, de-
scribing how they would operate and the arguments for and
against them. They should provide a good understanding of the
menu of choices that awaits the United States in tackling this very
serious issue.
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Prefunding Social Security
One solution to the Social Security problem is to build up the as-
sets of the Trust Fund before it becomes exhausted. Building up
the Trust Fund adequately would enable Social Security to con-
tinue to pay out more benefits than it collects in any given year’s
contributions and taxes. Any potential crisis in the system would
be continually pushed back into a more distant future.
Using the General Revenues
As long as the Trust Fund does not empty, Social Security can
proceed without problems. An obvious solution, then, is to some-
how extend the life of the fund. The easiest way to increase the
size of the Trust Fund would be to increase the FICA tax or the in-
come tax on Social Security benefits. We will consider this
method later, however, because such an increase is usually placed
in the context of other reforms to the operation of the program.
This discussion looks at how to grow the Trust Fund by means
other than raising taxes.
One recent major initiative to bolster the Trust Fund was
undertaken by President Bill Clinton during his second term.
This initiative serves as an example of how one might proceed.
In his 1999 State of the Union address, President Clinton called
for a program of “saving Social Security first.” To President Clin-
ton, part of saving Social Security was to build up the Trust Fund
in anticipation of the retirement of the baby-boom generation.
Thus he asked that “we commit 60 percent of the budget surplus
for the next 15 years to Social Security, investing a small portion
in the private sector just as any private or state government pen-
sion would do. This will earn a higher return and keep Social Se-
curity sound for 55 years” (Clinton 1999). Congress did not act
on this request. But what would it entail? There are two mecha-
nisms by which the Trust Fund could be increased without rais-
ing taxes. The first is to steer other government monies into the
fund. The second is to receive a higher rate of return on the
money that is already in the fund. The Clinton plan aimed to use
both mechanisms.
Recall from chapter 1 that in the first years of Social Secu-
rity, some lawmakers on the left, such as Wisconsin Senator
Robert LaFollette, as well as skeptics on the right, like Ohio Sena-
tor Robert Taft, argued for a program that would be funded
through the general revenues and not by a special “contribution.”
Saving Social Security: The Options
39
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Ironically, while both left and right had then envisaged such
funding as a mechanism for changing the size of Social Security,
today it has become an argument for keeping the size of the pro-
gram. There is no constitutional reason why Congress cannot
simply authorize the use of general tax revenues to augment the
FICA tax. The idea is to begin to do this well before the Trust
Fund runs out. The general revenues would be used to build up
the Trust Fund to the point that it would last longer, or even in-
definitely, depending upon the level of revenues that were di-
verted into the program. This is often called “prefunding”
because the funds are put into the program before they need to be
used. President Clinton specifically targeted the federal budget
surpluses of the late 1990s, then expected (falsely) to last some
years into the future, as the source for the prefunding. Ultimately,
Clinton requested that 62 percent of the budget surplus be placed
in the Trust Fund. In more general terms, Congress could stipu-
late that any particular amount of the general revenues go into
the Social Security program.
Investing in the Stock Market
President Clinton joined this proposal with a second effort to build
up the Trust Fund: he called for diversifying the investment of the
money in the Trust Fund. The Trust Fund, by law, can only invest
in U.S. Treasury securities. These are very safe but pay a relatively
low rate of return. Historically, common stocks and corporate
bonds have been substantially better investments. Many experts,
and the U.S. financial services industry, have long argued that al-
lowing the trustees of the OASDI Trust Funds to invest in the stock
market would increase the rate of return and thus increase the
Trust Funds for the future. Moreover, poorer Americans, who may
not have the money to invest in the stock market on their own,
would be able to share in the benefits of stock ownership through
their participation in Social Security. Arthur Altmeyer, the first
chair of the Social Security Board, had made such a proposal back
in the 1930s. President Clinton’s plan was to place a portion of the
existing Trust Fund into common stocks and then invest 15 percent
of all future FICA contributions in the stock market (while continu-
ing to place the other 85 percent in Treasury bonds).
To manage these investments, the government would create
an independent investment board that would in turn hire private
fund managers to operate the investments in the U.S. stock mar-
kets. The actual investment decisions would be made by these
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

private managers. Supporters of this proposal maintained that
the higher returns that resulted would extend the life of the Trust
Fund and stave off the crisis in Social Security.
As noted, President Clinton did not succeed in getting his
plan enacted. Though there was much support for both using the
general revenues and investing in the stock market, there was
much criticism, too. The chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan
Greenspan, was a leading critic of using the general revenues. (Re-
call that Greenspan was the head of the  National Commission on
Social Security Reform, which had examined the Social Security
program in 1983 and had developed the policies that greatly in-
creased the Trust Fund.) He voiced a common complaint, that
using general revenues to fund Social Security would blur its con-
nection to worker contributions and make it look like any other
government program. This could have two negative effects. One
echoes Roosevelt’s fear in 1935; in Greenspan’s words, many fear
that “breaking the link between payroll taxes and benefits by mov-
ing to greater reliance on general revenue financing would trans-
form social security into a welfare program” (Greenspan 2000).
The other is that resorting to the general revenues would become
an excuse not to engage in needed reforms. It would be another
case of throwing money at a problem rather than solving it. Presi-
dent Clinton advanced his proposal in an era of surpluses. But in
an environment of government deficits, another criticism is raised:
where would the revenues to be steered into Social Security come
from? Either other programs would have to be cut or the United
Saving Social Security: The Options
41
                                   TABLE 2.1 
          Return and Risk of Financial Assets: 1955-2004 
 
  
Average Return    
(% per year) 
Variability of return (% per 
year) 
Treasury Bills 
5.28 
2.89 
Corporate Bonds 
6.8 
10.18 
Common Stocks 
10.94 
17.66 
Small-Cap Stocks 
14.56 
25.64 
International Stocks 
20.7 
56.21 
 
 
 
 
*Note:  Variability is measured by the standard deviation of the return. 
 
Source: Dwyer 2005. 
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

States would have to borrow significantly larger amounts of
money. Neither option seems desirable.
Investing in the stock market is also controversial. (Note
that this discussion does not refer to individual investments, to
be discussed below, but to a government-owned investment.)
There is both a political and an economic argument against this
idea. The political argument is that allowing the government to
invest in the stock market gives it too much power over U.S. com-
panies and the U.S. economy. The size of Social Security is such
that even if the government invested but a part of it, it would
wind up as the legal owner of a significant percentage of the U.S.
economy. (Because of this factor, Social Security could actually
only invest in large companies; it would almost immediately take
ownership of small companies if it started buying their stock.)
For this reason, President Clinton promised that the U.S. govern-
ment would not buy more than 5 percent of the total value of the
U.S. stock markets. But even so, Greenspan and others claim that
this would give the United States too much power over private
enterprise. The government could decide to reward or punish
particular companies by buying or selling their stock. This debate
ultimately depends upon whether one thinks that the govern-
ment could truly invest neutrally or if one thinks that that it
would inevitably make investment decisions based on politics.
The economic argument is more complicated. If the Social
Security program were to be invested in the stock market, two
consequences would follow. First, stocks have historically had
higher rates of return because they are more risky investments.
The variability in their return is higher. This means that the size
of the Trust Fund would fluctuate depending upon how the stock
market was performing. If the stock market hit a period of an un-
usual or a sustained decline, the Trust Fund might actually fall
and the program would be faced with raising taxes or cutting
benefits to make up the difference. Though it is true that, over
time, stocks have generated significantly higher returns than
government bonds, there also have been periods of up to 25 years
during which this trend did not take place. Different analysts
reach very different conclusions over the danger of this possibil-
ity, but there is little doubt that moving from bonds to stocks
would increase the risks as well as the rewards that accrue to in-
vesting in the stock market. 
Second, investing in the stock market would have economic
repercussions outside of the Social Security system. If Social Secu-
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

rity reduced its purchases of government bonds, the interest rate on
U.S. bonds should rise. Interest rates are set by supply and demand.
The more people who wish to buy bonds, the lower is the interest
rate. If one of the biggest buyers, the Social Security program, re-
duces its purchases while the supply remains the same, the interest
rate will go up. Higher interest rates are good for investors but bad
for those who wish to borrow. In orthodox economic theory, higher
interest rates lead to reduced economic growth because some peo-
ple can no longer borrow to build businesses or make productive
investments. Moreover, because the interest rate is higher, the gov-
ernment will have to pay more interest on all of its debt. Where will
the money to pay this extra interest come from? It would have to be
from the general revenues. For this reason, some complain that
moving Social Security into the stock market is but an extremely
fancy way to use the general revenues without anyone noticing.
Meanwhile, if Social Security starts buying stocks, this, too, may
harm the economy. The huge amount of “automatic” money put
into stocks every year would substantially reduce the risk of invest-
ing in those stocks. But as the risk goes down, so should the reward.
As the government buys and buys, it will drive up the price of a
stock. That means that other investors must pay more for the same
stock, and so their return on that stock goes down. The result could
be a simple transfer of wealth from individual investors to the So-
cial Security system. Since most Americans are both investors and
Social Security beneficiaries, there would be no net benefit. They
would lose on one end as they were gaining on the other. Critics
and supporters argue over the likelihood that these scenarios will
occur. The controversy was enough to kill the Clinton plan.
However, it has not killed the support for the ideas that mo-
tivated it. Think tanks and academics continue to offer programs
of reform that include both using the general revenues and diver-
sifying the Trust Fund portfolio.
Restoring Social Security to 
Pay-as-You-Go Principles
Not too many years after its enactment, Social Security became a
pay-as-you-go program. Building a sizable trust fund was really a
later innovation. It happened only in the years after it became
clear to policy makers that the retirement of the baby-boom gener-
ation was going to play havoc with the Social Security budget. A
Saving Social Security: The Options
43
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

big trust fund is a preparatory measure to deal with this situation.
A number of Social Security experts do not believe that a big trust
fund is either the best or the most viable way of avoiding future
difficulties. Instead, they argue for one or some combination of a
variety of reforms that would return Social Security to a sound
pay-as-you-go principle. So long as the program is devised to en-
sure that each year the amount going out roughly equals the
amount coming in, Social Security can continue to hum along in-
definitely.
Changing the Benefits Formulas
As discussed in chapter 1, the Social Security benefit is calculated
by two formulas. The first uses an index of wage growth to up-
wardly adjust a worker’s lifetime average monthly earnings in
computing the size of that worker’s first monthly Social Security
check. The second uses an index of inflation, the Consumer Price
Index (CPI), to upwardly adjust the size of the checks that follow.
This second adjustment, called the cost-of-living adjustment
(COLA) is made once each year. Also discussed is the notion that
the wage indexing of Social Security accounts for more than 40
percent of the anticipated decline in the Trust Fund. Not surpris-
ingly, some policy analysts call for adjusting one, or both, of these
formulas to decrease the size of future Social Security payments.
Inflation is a terrible enemy of a fixed income. Even rela-
tively modest rates of inflation can rapidly erode the real value of
a pension. The COLA, added to the Social Security system in the
1970s, is an effort to ensure that Social Security benefits are not
ravaged by rising prices. Every year, Social Security payments are
increased at the same rate as the Consumer Price Index, the most
frequently used measure of inflation in the United States. In the
1990s, however, several studies estimated that the CPI in fact
overstates the rate of inflation. Moreover, some questioned the re-
liability of the CPI as a measure of the prices actually faced by re-
tirees. This index includes the cost of items that are seldom, if
ever, purchased by senior citizens (such as a new house). Why,
critics charged, should Social Security checks be increased each
year to reflect these sorts of costs? This issue has led to calls to re-
duce the Social Security COLA. Former senators Daniel Patrick
Moynihan (D-NY) and Bob Kerrey (D-Neb.) suggested reducing
the COLA increase by 1 percent each year. Others have called for
smaller reductions, albeit based upon the same logic. The Boskin
Commission (the Advisory Commission to Study the Consumer
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Price Index), established by Congress to investigate this issue, es-
timated in 1995 that a 0.5 reduction in the COLA would take care
of one-third of the coming Social Security shortfall. To those pol-
icy makers such as long-time Social Security advocate (and com-
missioner) Robert Ball, bringing the COLA into line with the true
rate of inflation faced by seniors is a very modest reform that
would go a long way toward restoring the soundness of the sys-
tem. It would not cut benefits; rather, it would merely reduce
their growth in coming years.
Others, however, have fiercely criticized this idea. One
problem they cite is the automaticity of such a reduction. The U.S.
Department of Labor (which is responsible for the CPI) has been
working hard to improve its accuracy in measuring inflation. The
higher the level of accuracy it achieves, the more accurate is the
CPI. But if Social Security benefits are calculated by automatically
reducing the CPI before it is applied, this improved accuracy will
lead to understating the rate of inflation when making the COLA.
For example, if the true inflation rate were 3.0 percent and the
CPI were improved to reflect that accurately, and if the COLA
were then to be calculated by reducing the CPI by 1 percent be-
fore applying it, as in the Moynihan-Kerrey plan, senior citizens
would end up seeing a 1 percent real reduction in their benefits.
Senator Bernie Sanders (D-Ver.) is one who notes that these seem-
ingly small changes to the COLA could have big effects over
time. A one-half percentage point reduction in the COLA over 30
years would produce a 15 percent difference in the size of a bene-
fits check. And the reduction would be felt most dramatically by
the oldest retirees—presumably those least able to find alterna-
tive sources of income—because the longer one draws a Social
Security check, the longer one relies upon COLA increases. A
final argument against reducing the COLA increase is that it is
not really known whether the CPI is overstating the impact of in-
flation on retirees. Increasing health care costs, for example, may
actually mean that inflation is more, not less, of a problem for se-
nior citizens on a fixed income.
A counterpart to adjusting the COLA formula is to change
the calculation of the Primary Insurance Amount (PIA), the Social
Security benefit that will be available to a worker upon her or his
retirement. The PIA is determined by computing the worker’s av-
erage indexed monthly earnings, which involves indexing an-
nual earnings to reflect the growth in wages that have occurred
since that time. However, here, too, there is debate over whether
Saving Social Security: The Options
45
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

this method of indexing is too generous to retirees. Some experts
call for changing the indexing formula to more accurately reflect
the needs of future senior citizens, especially given that this for-
mula produces such a large part of the future Social Security
deficit. The Concord Coalition, a fiscal watchdog group, has ar-
gued that changing the indexing formula is one of the best ways
to keep Social Security sound. It notes that future senior citizens
will be substantially wealthier than those of today. Why should
they not be expected to rely less upon Social Security and more
upon their own savings? Again, retirees would not see a cut in fu-
ture benefits but a reduction in the increase of their future bene-
fits. Given the importance of preserving the entire system, this is
not an onerous demand.
President George W. Bush included a revision to the wage
index as part of his plan to reform Social Security (discussed
below). Indeed, it is from this portion of his plan that he ex-
pected to generate the savings that would save Social Security.
In the Bush plan, the impact of wage indexing would be re-
duced by multiplying the AIME calculation formula by a ratio
of the growth in the CPI divided by the growth in wages for that
year. This reduction would be calculated each year, gradually
reducing the growth in the PIA over time. Confusingly, this is
sometimes called “price indexing.” Essentially, earnings are ad-
justed more by the past increases in prices than by the past in-
creases in wages. Consider the following example. There are
currently three income levels or “bend points” in the AIME for-
mula. A worker’s initial Social Security benefits are set to be 90
percent of the income in the first level (in 2008, the first $711
earned), 32 percent of the second level ($711 to $4,288), and 15
percent of the third level (more than $4,288). Now, imagine that
in the first year after the enactment of a price indexing reform,
the rate of inflation (the CPI) was 2 percent and wages grew by
4 percent. Price indexing in the Bush plan is accomplished by
dividing the CPI growth by the wages growth (1.02/1.04) and
then multiplying each of these three percentages by that
amount. If a worker had earned an average of $5,000 a month
(as adjusted by the wage index), she or he would receive (0.98 ×
0.90 × $711) + (0.98 × 0.32 × $3,577) + (0.98 × 0.15 × $712), or
$1,853.51. Without price indexing, this same worker would have
received $1,890.34 per month. For the following year, the new
AIME percentages would be 88 percent (i.e., 0.98 × 0.90), 31 per-
cent, and 14.7 percent, respectively. They would be again multi-
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

plied by that year’s ratio of the CPI growth/wage index
growth, and so on. The Bush plan is but one example of price in-
dexing. One could use another ratio or another method of de-
flating the wage indexation. The Social Security Administration
estimates that the Bush plan would eliminate the Social Security
deficit over the next 75 years, and this is the order of magnitude
of most reforms to the wage indexing formula.
Just as with changing the COLA formula, not everyone
agrees that price indexing is a good idea. The dispute is as much
philosophical as it is economic. What is the purpose of Social Se-
curity? Is it simply to provide an income floor for retirees suffi-
cient to keep them from poverty? Should it be set to the level to
their working years, so that they can continue to live as they did
when they were working? Or is it to provide a level of income for
retirees that grows along with the rest of the society? Should it be
set to a level where they can always continue to live in a lifestyle
similar to others around them? How one answers this question
will likely determine how one feels about price indexing. Critics,
such as the powerful seniors group AARP, note that price index-
ing means providing seniors with a benefit that grows at a lower
rate than the earnings of the rest of society. In other words, unless
they had saved a good deal of money, the standard of living of se-
nior citizens would slowly fall behind that of the working popu-
lation. It would remain linked to the income levels of their
working years, not to the income levels of contemporary U.S.
workers. One study calculates that, under the Bush plan, by 2085
the typical annual Social Security benefit would remain at
$12,558, whereas it would be $30,689 under the current calcula-
tion (Munnell and Soto 2005, 2; the figures are in 2005 dollars).
A second criticism is that altering the wage index would
disproportionately affect the poorest Social Security beneficia-
ries. The existing calculation formula is progressive; it is
weighted to provide a larger pension to those at the bottom of
the income scale. The benefit is set at 90 percent of the first (i.e.,
lowest) income level, but only 15 percent of the third. Those with
lower incomes thus get a higher benefit compared with their life-
time earnings than do those with very high incomes. A reform
such as the Bush plan that would ratchet down the benefit per-
centage for this first level, or indeed any reform that lowered the
indexed rise of this lowest bend point, would hit those with low
incomes the hardest. For this reason, supporters of price index-
ing, such as Senator Bob Bennett (R-Utah), have suggested using
Saving Social Security: The Options
47
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

a “progressive price index” that would exempt this first income
level from a change in the calculation formula and only apply it
to the higher levels.
Changing the formulas used to calculate Social Security
benefits is clearly one avenue of reform. However, it remains a
controversial one. In large measure, the argument turns on
whether one defines these reforms as benefit cuts or as reductions
in benefit increases. Should the Social Security benefit reflect the
current standard of living of those still in the workforce, or
should it be considered as just the first part of the retirement
“lifestyle” that ought to be increasingly supplemented by per-
sonal savings as society grows wealthier?
Incremental Reforms of the Social Security Program 
Another approach to reforming Social Security takes Social Secu-
rity’s basics as given and simply aims to tweak them to extend
the life of the program. This approach would include some com-
bination of increasing the FICA contribution, reducing benefits
directly, taxing more of either Social Security earnings or benefits,
and/or increasing the retirement age. More rarely, “means test-
ing” of Social Security benefits is called for. Because these
changes are well understood and because similar changes have
been made in the past, most recently via the 1983 amendments to
Social Security, one frequently finds these sorts of incremental
changes recommended in the many governmental and private
commissions and reports on Social Security that have been re-
leased over the past decade. However, like every other proposal
to save Social Security, these changes also have their critics.
Increasing the retirement age would be quite simple; in fact,
the program is currently undergoing such an increase. The retire-
ment age is being incrementally raised from 65 to 67. Supporters
of this idea wish to continue this rise. Some would extend the age
of retirement to a specified age—70 is the target age typically
cited—while others would index retirement to the increase in
American life expectancy, meaning the retirement age would rise
in tandem with increasing life expectancy. In early 2006, Senator
Bennett  sponsored a bill that would have tied Social Security
benefits to increases in life expectancy. Increasing this age could
reduce the expected Social Security deficit by as much as a third.
Later retirement would reduce the length of time a retiree draws
Social Security benefits. It could also increase the dependency
ratio because the number of people still in the workforce would
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

rise as the number retired fell. Both of these changes would save
substantial amounts of money. 
The argument for this reform is straightforward. The Ameri-
can life expectancy has grown dramatically since 1935. Today’s
workers can expect to draw Social Security for a 50 percent longer
period of time than workers in the first years of the program.
Many also argue that today’s work is not as arduous as in days
gone by, and, in any event, the health of older Americans is much
better than it was. So it is only fair that individuals who can antic-
ipate living much longer than their parents should have to work a
little longer than their parents before they can retire. Some would
go so far as to say that age 65 no longer even qualifies as “old,” so
why should it still be treated as a magic number of retirement?
Reducing benefits is similarly easy to execute, if not the
most politically popular of ideas. The COLA and price indexing
reforms discussed above are backdoor methods of reducing ben-
efits. An easier method would be to simply lower the basic PIA
that a retiree can expect to receive at full retirement. If this ap-
proach was adopted immediately, a benefits cut of around 13
percent would suffice to eliminate the entire predicted shortfall
in Social Security funding. If the United States waits until the
early 2040s, when the Trust Fund nears exhaustion, a 27 percent
cut would be needed to eliminate the shortfall. After that, as
time continued to pass, the necessary cut would continue to
grow. Newsweek and Washington Post columnist Robert J. Samuel-
son is among those who argue that, if implemented today, the re-
duction would be sizable but not devastating for retirees
(Samuelson 2005). This is particularly so given that the program
is financially unsound without it. Why not cut some now and
save Social Security rather than wait until much larger changes
are necessary? There is little doubt that Americans are wealthier
now than they were in the Great Depression. They have many
more retirement and savings options. This further justifies a nec-
essary cut in benefits. Finally, proponents of this reform note, the
brutal fact is that almost any change in the program is little more
than a disguised cut in benefits. So why not at least admit up
front what is happening?
The flip side to cutting benefits is increasing the taxes that
support the program. This measure might be effected through
raising the FICA contribution. Raising the FICA tax from 12.4 to
14.3 percent would eliminate the expected Social Security deficit.
(Recall that one-half this amount would come from the employee,
Saving Social Security: The Options
49
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

one-half from the employer.) If this reform is delayed until the
early 2040s, the estimated FICA tax would have to be around 17.5
percent. The argument for this proposal is that Americans, again,
are far wealthier than they once were. Moreover, they can antici-
pate a longer retirement and more years of Social Security bene-
fits. It is only reasonable, given the problems with the program,
that they pay more to keep it afloat.
Alternatively, the ceiling on covered wages could be ended.
Currently, there is a maximum level of earnings above which no
FICA tax is paid, nor are wages above that level used to calculate
the level of benefits to be received. In 2008, that level is $102,000.
Removing this ceiling would be enough to end the future Social
Security deficit. If an immediate removal is thought too drastic,
the ceiling could be slowly increased over a period of years. Sup-
porters of this reform, which included John Kerry in his 2004 run
for the presidency, note that, thanks to income trends in the
United States today, the percentage of total American earnings
that is subject to the FICA tax has been falling over the years. Fif-
teen percent of aggregate American income is today not subject to
the FICA tax. This number was once 10 percent (Diamond and
Orszag 2005, 15). It is not fair, it is said, that richer Americans are
getting ever more of their income exempted from the FICA tax.
This sentiment should justify modifying or ending the ceiling on
covered earnings.
Each of these incremental changes has its critics. Opponents
argue that any or all of these changes would be ineffective or un-
fair. Take life expectancy, for example. Critics charge that making
workers delay their retirement is a benefit cut, pure and simple.
Every worker forced to retire at an older age would, over the
course of his or her life, receive fewer Social Security checks. ”De-
layed retirement” is another name for a benefit cut. In addition,
there is dispute over the health of 60- to 70-year-old Americans.
Are people are really healthier, or are they just living longer? In
fact, for a person who is not healthy, a rise in the retirement age is
disastrous. An unhealthy individual is very likely to be forced to
take early retirement. If the retirement age is extended, either the
age of early retirement must be raised or the benefits paid to
someone who has retired early must be substantially decreased.
Either way, this worker will be hit hard. The issue quickly be-
comes an argument over fairness. If higher-income workers hold
the least arduous jobs (at least physically), and if these wealthier
people are usually also more healthy, extending the retirement
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

age will have its greatest impact on the poor. They have physical
difficulties sooner, and will live shorter lives. They will thus suf-
fer the most from the disguised benefits cut. Some analysts also
wonder if raising the retirement age will really keep people in the
workforce. If, in fact, they retire anyway and live on savings or
other pensions until Social Security begins, much of the promised
benefit of this reform is lost. Some have estimated that extending
the retirement age might only add another four months to the av-
erage worker’s career (Burtless 1998, 6–7).
A last criticism of increasing the retirement age is quite
complicated, but important. Currently almost all U.S. pension
and tax-deferred savings plans are established with a retirement
age of 65. Unlike Social Security, they cannot be easily changed.
For these other plans are specific legal promises. It would be
theft, for example, for a company to offer a pension plan, based
on contributions, that begins at age 65 and then suddenly to an-
nounce that it would not pay benefits until its employees reached
70. Most pension and savings plans accrue contributions into a
personal account from which benefits are then taken after retire-
ment. There is a legal connection between individuals, the money
they paid into an account, and the age at which they can begin to
draw it out. That connection cannot be broken by a simple policy
change, as it can be for Social Security. The result would be a re-
tirement system operating at cross-purposes. Parts of the system
would encourage the worker to retire at age 65, while other parts
would encourage that worker to retire later. Who knows what
this worker would ultimately decide to do?
Cutting benefits is perhaps the most politically unpalatable
change to Social Security. Interest groups such as AARP, often
rated as the most powerful lobbying group in Washington, have
made clear their opposition to benefit cuts. The reason is obvious:
it is clear who would lose from this reform, and no effort would
be made to hide it. Those who oppose a benefits cut usually focus
on what such a reduction is: the violation of a promise. It is un-
fair, if not immoral, to tell the American people that they will re-
ceive a level of income at their retirement and then renege upon
that promise. However, fairness is not the only complaint. To an
extent, the savings generated from a benefits cut would be illu-
sory. Retirees at lower incomes would be forced to enroll in Med-
icaid, Supplemental Security Income (a low-income welfare
program), and other public support programs to make up for the
income lost through the lowered benefits. The net effect would be
Saving Social Security: The Options
51
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

only to shift some of the savings in the Social Security deficit to
other federal programs. This is perceived as little more than a
governmental shell game. The problem is not solved; it is merely
sent elsewhere. How would seniors (and those expecting to be-
come seniors) react to the reduced benefits? Ideally, they would
increase their personal savings to make up for the anticipated
lower Social Security benefits. But what if they do not? What if
the result is just to bring back the old-age poverty that Social Se-
curity had earlier cured?
Raising taxes is not much more popular than cutting bene-
fits. But again, opponents raise issues other than public support.
If the FICA tax is raised on current workers, in effect those work-
ers are paying the full price for Social Security reform. Social Se-
curity is being saved by shifting the burden from today’s retirees
to current and future workers. Working Americans will have to
pay more taxes just to receive the same benefit. This too violates
the notion of fairness. Because the FICA tax is regressive (the rate
is the same at all levels of income until one reaches the earnings
limit), critics charge that it will be low-income workers who will
bear the brunt of the reform. They, who can afford it least, will ex-
perience the largest percentage reduction in their income. There
is also suspicion about how the government would allocate this
increased tax. Remember that contributions made today do not
have to be paid for a number of years. If the tax is used purely to
bolster Social Security, there is no problem. But if it is used for
other purposes, such as to finance new government programs,
the United States is in a worse position economically than if no
reform had occurred. Finally, we do not know how Americans
would react to the higher taxes. Specifically, would they respond
to this increased tax by paying for it with money that they other-
wise would have saved? Would they rather reduce their contribu-
tions to other savings programs, such as individual retirement
accounts, than to cut their consumption? If so, senior citizens will
be no better off at the time of their retirement. They will have
saved Social Security at the cost of their other retirement invest-
ments. A last complaint about increasing the FICA tax is that, un-
less the dependency ratio changes, this tax will need to be
continually revised upward over the life of Social Security. It is
not a permanent fix. No one wants a program for which the tax
must be constantly increased.
The second method of increasing taxes, raising or eliminat-
ing the ceiling on the maximum covered earnings that is taxed,
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

also draws its critics. This reform is clearly aimed at upper in-
comes. To opponents such as former Republican House Majority
Leader Tom DeLay and former Speaker of the House Dennis
Hastert, this raises the fairness argument once more. Why should
some Americans have to pay for a problem that affects all Ameri-
cans? Unfairness also pops up in the problem of double taxation.
A wealthier American is going to pay the FICA tax and the income
tax on the income that is earned, and then is going to pay the in-
come tax again on the benefits when they are received. Under re-
alistic scenarios, the marginal tax rate on this income could be
well above 50 percent. Is that fair? Even if it is, if one includes all
income as covered earnings, rich Americans are going to get huge
Social Security checks. These big checks are going to eat up a por-
tion of the savings expected from raising the coverage maximum.
A draconian response would be to make wealthier Americans pay
the taxes but deny them the benefits that with go with it. But this
might make these Americans oppose the whole program, and
erode its political support. And, equally likely, an industry would
grow up around helping these Americans find loopholes and
other methods of hiding their income so as to not pay such a dis-
agreeable tax. A final, not inconsiderable, criticism of ending the
ceiling is that, in the American system, the employer has to pay
half of the FICA tax. When the earnings ceiling is raised, a large
tax bill goes to the companies that employ these individuals. The
cost of doing business goes up. Is that good for these companies,
or for America’s economy and global competitiveness?
A Sidelight: Means Testing—The Reform No One Wants
Before moving to the more dramatic reforms that have been pro-
posed for Social Security, one incremental reform that has proved
almost uniformly unpopular must be mentioned: building means
testing into the Social Security program. Social Security is an enti-
tlement; every American who qualifies gets a benefit. There is no
judgment of whether the recipient deserves it or not. Other
American programs, such as Medicaid, are linked to income. This
is called “means testing.” To receive benefits under a means-
tested program, one must have an income below a specified
threshold. If one makes too much money, one is ineligible for the
benefits. There is no reason that Social Security could not be
made a means-tested program, wherein only those below a cer-
tain income would get monthly checks. In fact, however, very
few people urge this reform.
Saving Social Security: The Options
53
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

One reason for the unpopularity of a means-tested program
is that wealthier people currently do not get gigantic Social Secu-
rity benefits, thanks to the earnings ceiling. Removing them from
the rolls might not save enough to justify the reform. Another
reason is that it is unclear what unit of measure should be used in
means testing, income or wealth. In either case, incentives are cre-
ated to hide or disguise assets in order to qualify for benefits
under the means test. Furthermore, means testing creates nega-
tive incentives. Workers who prepare for their retirement by
building up their own savings are likely to find themselves dis-
qualified under the means test. Discouraging an individual from
saving is not a message that the government or anyone else
wishes to send. But by far the most important reason why almost
everyone is reluctant to endorse means testing reflects a fear of
President Franklin Roosevelt at the start of the program: to means
test Social Security is to give the perception that it is a welfare
program, that it is meant for poor people only. Ultimately, this
conception could mean the political death of Social Security.
Thus, even though means testing is feasible and perhaps even
fair, it has very few supporters.
Privatizing Social Security
Many observers believe that the flaws of the current Social Secu-
rity system are essentially beyond repair. Restoring the program
to pay-as-you-go principles is impossible, undesirable, or both.
Incremental reforms and short-term fixes will only put off the
day of reckoning. None of the reforms discussed above would
permanently solve Social Security’s financing problem. They
would only extend the life of the current program. The continu-
ing change in demographics and the automatic increases in Social
Security payments that occur under the program’s benefit calcu-
lations would eventually force another crisis, and another round
of reforms. In the meantime, the United States has a retirement
program that is increasingly unsound and an ever worse deal for
those who contribute to it. What the United States needs, in the
eyes of these reformers, is an altogether new retirement system. It
needs a permanent fix. This new retirement system should be fis-
cally sound and should allow Americans to maximize their own
retirement benefits through the management of their own retire-
ment portfolios. American workers should be allowed to place a
portion of their FICA contributions into their own, individual in-
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

vestment accounts. The money earned in these accounts would
then be used to help support them during their own retirement.
This, after all, is the way that many private pensions and
government tax-advantaged savings programs work. And these
programs have been very successful.  They have encouraged sav-
ings, and they have typically offered high rates of return on those
savings.  Changing Social Security to a program that operates on
these principles has become known as “privatizing Social Secu-
rity.” A number of those who support this idea go so far as to say
that this reform will actually make a better America. It will shrink
the size of government as its largest social program withers and
will encourage Americans to take “ownership” of their economic
future, building a more responsible and more entrepreneurial cit-
izenry. Needless to say, this view is not universally held. A fierce
debate over whether, how, or how far Social Security should be
changed toward this path has been the result.
Bush’s Personal Retirement Accounts
The biggest endorsement of partially privatizing Social Security
has come from President George W. Bush. In his 2005 State of the
Union Address, President Bush, noting that the current Social Se-
curity system “is headed for bankruptcy,” called for solving the
“problems of Social Security once and for all” through a compre-
hensive reform of Social Security centering upon the develop-
ment of voluntary personal retirement accounts for each working
American born after 1950 (Bush 2005). Under this plan, workers
could elect to place up to 4 percent of their payroll taxes into their
own personal retirement accounts. (A transition period would be
in place during which the allowable contributions to the account
would gradually increase from $1,000 to the full 4 percent.) The
money in this account would be used for living expenses during
one’s retirement, but any amount left at death could be passed on
to the worker’s heirs. Workers who opted for these accounts
would pick a private investment fund from a government-ap-
proved list to manage their accounts. The program would offer a
set of investment plans and would otherwise place limits on how
the money could be invested to prevent unwise speculation or in-
vestment choices. At the time of retirement, workers would have
several options as to how to withdraw their money to use during
their senior years.
The plan is voluntary. Workers who chose not to open a
personal retirement account would continue to draw all of their
Saving Social Security: The Options
55
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

benefits from traditional Social Security. However, their benefits
would be reduced so that the program would be permanently
sustainable. Workers who did opt into the new program would
still draw a Social Security check, too, because they would still
place three-quarters of their FICA contributions into the old pro-
gram. But the size of their benefits from traditional Social Secu-
rity would also be reduced to reflect their smaller contributions.
This simple overview of the proposal is enough to suggest that
moving from today’s program to one that is partially privatized
would be quite complex. Some of the details are discussed below.
Breaking It Up Is Hard to Do
The fundamental complexity with privatizing Social Security is
that there is no easy way to dismantle all or part of the current
program without imposing substantial costs on some Americans.
American society is a continuum, stretching from its most elderly,
well into retirement, to its youngest, not yet in the workforce.
Any attempt to “retire” today’s Social Security program will af-
fect each point in this continuum differently. Finding a way to
shift out of Social Security into a new program seamlessly, that is,
without placing anyone at a disadvantage, is immensely difficult.
Here is an example: Imagine three individuals. One is a retired
worker, say, 75 years old. The second is a 50-year-old worker. The
third is a 25-year-old worker. Now, try to shift mind-sets from
today’s Social Security to a program based on each individual
taking responsibility for his or her own retirement. The first prob-
lem is obvious. The 75-year-old retiree is unable to take this re-
sponsibility. This individual is no longer working and must rely
on the promises that were made years earlier through the existing
Social Security system. Remember that today’s system operates
by transferring current contributions to current retirees. If the
program is changed so that current contributions now go into the
“private” accounts of the workers who made them, and not into a
general trust fund, where does the money come from to pay the
benefits promised to this individual? There are only three possi-
bilities: the government can raise taxes, it can cut other programs
and use the money saved to make Social Security payments, or it
can attempt to borrow the money. As there are more than 40 mil-
lion retired Americans, the amount of money this would involve
would be immense.
The scenario does not get much easier regarding the other
two workers. The 50-year-old exemplifies another difficulty. This
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

individual has paid into Social Security, perhaps for more than 30
years. If the program is ended, what does that person get for
three decades of taxation? So long as the Trust Fund is extant, one
could entertain the possibility of dividing what is left after pay-
ing all current retirees by the number of working Americans, and
then sending each a check. But this check would be very small
compared with the contributions paid or the benefits that were
promised. In addition, a person with perhaps 15 years until re-
tirement could hardly hope to save enough money to replace the
expected Social Security benefits in that amount of time. In retire-
ment terms, the situation for this worker would not be all that
different from the 75-year-old retiree. At first glance, the 25-year-
old should be in the best financial shape. With 30 years or more of
working life ahead of them, this individual has time to build up
contributions in the new program. This assessment is accurate,
but only so long as the younger worker is not required to take
care of the first two individuals through extra taxes or reductions
in other programs (e.g., education, health, transportation, or de-
fense) that matter a great deal. In that case, the younger worker
would see her or his disposable income drained away to enable
the payments to the older workers and retirees.
This example illustrates the general problem: it is very diffi-
cult to maintain benefits while changing the nature of contribu-
tions. This problem is widely understood, but difficult to resolve.
The U.S. Government Accountability Office has estimated that
the transition costs of moving to a partially privatized Social Se-
curity system will be between $1 and $2 trillion, over the next 75
years, depending upon the specifics of the program (GAO 2005,
45.). Advocates for partial privatizing argue that eventually the
savings made via the lower benefits schedules will repay this
money. But in the meantime, where does the money come from to
fund this transition? The reason that many privatization pro-
grams sound so complicated is that they must accommodate this
cost if they are going to work. Politics aside, the economics of pri-
vatization is tricky. FDR was quite right in his prediction that the
program he was creating would be very difficult to get rid of.
The Choice of Choices
The transition cost is the major financial obstacle to privatizing
Social Security. But once past this obstacle, there are a number of
choices that must be made as to how the partial privatization will
work. Each choice is yet another opportunity for debate between
Saving Social Security: The Options
57
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

advocates and opponents. Should the new program be added on
top of Social Security, or should it replace a part of the existing
program? Should the privatization be voluntary or mandatory?
How much of the existing program should the new system ab-
sorb? What if some workers wind up with a smaller retirement
income than if they had stuck with the old program? Should
there be an effort to guarantee a minimum monthly payment, no
matter what? Finally, should the new program attempt to main-
tain the progressivity of the existing program?
President Clinton, as part of his effort to reform Social Se-
curity, asked for the creation of “universal savings accounts”
(USA accounts) for each working American. Americans could
use their USA account to invest as they saw fit to help prepare
for their retirement. As a further inducement, those with the
lowest incomes would receive a match of federal money when
they opened their account, much in the same way that employ-
ers match employee savings in a 401(k) or other tax-deferred
pension account. This is an example of an “add-on,” an individ-
ual investment account that is added on top of the existing Social
Security system. It is perhaps the simplest form of partial priva-
tization. Add-ons are claimed to have a number of advantages as
a way of reforming Social Security. Transition costs are mini-
mized because the financing of the traditional Social Security
program is not touched. Workers are encouraged to prepare,
through the add-on, for the reduced benefits that are likely to be
paid in future years. As they contribute to their add-ons, na-
tional savings are increased, better enabling the United States to
handle the coming entitlement crunch, in Medicare as well as in
Social Security. The growth in savings has other beneficial effects
on the American economy, such as lower interest rates and faster
economic growth. Add-ons appear to be a low-cost method of
accomplishing these desirable goals.
To critics, one of those goals would not be rescuing Social
Security. An add-on, by itself, would in no way affect the coming
Social Security crisis. Since an add-on does not change the exist-
ing system, it cannot solve its problems. It would accomplish
nothing, unless coupled with substantial Social Security benefit
cuts. There is also skepticism that an add-on would actually lead
to increased savings. The evidence from private and government
tax-deferred programs suggests that very few people take advan-
tage of these programs, perhaps as few as 5 percent. Incentives
would have to be offered to get Americans into the program.
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

(President Clinton’s incentive was the match of government
money, but this was offered during the time of large budget sur-
pluses. This option is not available today.) The typical incentive is
to shelter the money placed into the add-on from the income tax.
Money placed into the program either would not be taxed in the
year it was deposited or would not be taxed when withdrawn.
The difficulty is that the loss of tax revenue from such an incen-
tive could be quite large. One estimate is that the federal govern-
ment would lose $600 billion in tax revenues over the next 75
years (Furman 2005, 18). This loss of tax revenue immensely
worsens the U.S. budget deficit. Also at issue is whether anyone’s
savings would actually increase. Many of the people who would
utilize the program would likely just be shifting money from ex-
isting savings to the new program in order to capture the tax ad-
vantages. If private companies then dropped their existing 401(k)
programs in response to a new, and similar, governmental alter-
native, the effect on savings could even be worse.
The alternative to an add-on program is what is now known
as a “carve-out.” Rather than placing a second program on top of
Social Security, carve-outs steer a portion of the contributions
now going into the Trust Fund into individual retirement ac-
counts instead. President Bush’s plan, discussed above, is a
carve-out, allowing Americans to divert about a third of their
FICA contributions into their own accounts (4 percentage points
of the 12.4 percent payroll tax). The idea is that the portion going
into the individual account will help provide for that worker’s re-
tirement, while the remainder still going into the old program
will pay a smaller benefit to that worker and also continue to pay
benefits for those who, for whatever reason, must continue to
draw from it exclusively. Sometimes, reformers speak of the new
Social Security as having a Part A and a Part B, like the Medicare
program, to differentiate these two streams of contributions and
benefits. A carve-out does not need incentives to get Americans
to join the program or to save, since it is simply using a portion of
their current payroll taxes. It should not have any significant new
effect on the American economy. However, the issue of transition
costs moves front and center. The old, now reduced, Social Secu-
rity program will not have enough money to pay those still ex-
pected to draw from it, and so over a lengthy period of 20 years
or more the government must find other money to fill the gap. As
noted earlier, the proposal of President Bush offers personal re-
tirement accounts only to those born after 1950. The reason is that
Saving Social Security: The Options
59
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

one cannot reasonably expect someone before that date to have
built up enough savings in their own retirement account to sus-
tain them economically. There will have to be enough funds re-
maining in the old Social Security program so that they can be
paid their monthly checks. Any carve-out has to face this prob-
lem of financing.
Once the issue of privatizing via an add-on or a carve-out
has been addressed, a second decision awaits. Should the new
program be voluntary or mandatory? Voluntary add-on pro-
grams are expected to be underutilized without incentives to join.
A mandatory add-on, on the other hand, could increase savings
at lower cost to the government (but not at no cost, if the add-on
were given any tax-advantaged status). However, it also has po-
tentially grave economic side effects and could be a real burden
for lower-income individuals. Someone who needs all of his or
her income just to make ends meet could suffer a genuine decline
in quality of life if forced to place a portion of that income into a
new retirement savings vehicle. For the entire economy, the effect
of a mandatory program might be to reduce spending generally
as people were forced to save more for retirement. Lower spend-
ing could translate into lower economic growth and, ultimately,
lower employment and incomes. This, obviously, would not be in
Americans’ long-term interest. As is so often the case, balancing
the gains of increased savings against the cost of decreased
spending depends very much on one’s economic assumptions.
Experts disagree about which effect would be greater under a
mandatory add-on.
Moving to a carve-out plan does not remove the choice of
whether to make it voluntary or mandatory. President Bush’s
proposal, for example, was voluntary. If a worker prefers, she or
he could opt to continue in the old program, albeit with reduced
benefits. The primary justification for a voluntary program is
choice. Those who fear the uncertainties of leaving the existing
Social Security program do not have to do so. Those who remain
in the old program also ease the transition costs of the new one.
Not all experts are enamored with a voluntary plan, however.
Voluntary plans are much more difficult for government budget-
ing, because federal budget planners will not know how many
workers will choose the plan, and for individual budgeting, be-
cause a worker must decide whether to choose the plan many
years before the date of retirement. Someone just entering the
workforce is not in a position to know the trajectory of his or her
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

life: how much money will be earned and how many years one’s
career will last. Yet knowing these outcomes is vital to a wise
choice. A mandatory program at least ends uncertainty about
how many individuals will join and about whether a specific in-
dividual should join.
“Adverse selection” is the other potential problem of a
voluntary program. It is unlikely that a random selection of
Americans would choose the carve-out. One might predict that
the most likely participants would be workers who had other
retirement savings and were thus able to take on the extra risk
of managing their own Social Security investments, and those
workers who reasonably expect they will not have to retire
early, before they have the time to build up their investments.
Workers falling under both of these scenarios will be dispropor-
tionately those with relatively high incomes. Workers with
lower incomes may be more inclined to remain with the existing
system. If this happens, any gains that accrue to private ac-
counts will go mostly to those who are already better off. Mean-
while, the reduced benefits and extra political risk of a more
weakly financed traditional Social Security program will fall
upon those with lower incomes. A mandatory program would
not suffer from adverse selection. On the other hand, it has a
larger exposure to the risks associated with the next decision
that must be made; what happens if the promised greater re-
turns of an individual account do not materialize?
The promise of a partially privatized Social Security system
is a higher rate of return for its participants. But if workers are al-
lowed complete freedom in how they choose to invest their re-
tirement funds, there is no guarantee that in fact they will earn
more than if they had stayed with the original program. For this
reason, most proposals limit the options of those in the program
to a set of approved stock and bond funds. This is to prevent
workers from placing their money in unusually risky or unsound
investments. The Bush proposal, for example, was based on a rel-
atively safe, conservative investment program into which partici-
pants are automatically enrolled. They may then, at their option,
move the funds in their retirement accounts to other investment
programs, but only under strict limits.
Even so, what if a worker, thanks to bad investments or just
bad luck, winds up with a smaller retirement nest egg than if he
or she had stayed in the old Social Security program? Should that
worker be guaranteed a pension that is just as large as if he or she
Saving Social Security: The Options
61
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

had not opted for an individual account? Some say no. Risk is
part of retirement, and part of choice. The existing system pro-
vides no true guarantees of how large a pension will be. Why
should individual retirement accounts provide such guarantees?
Others say that if such a guarantee is not made, workers with
lower incomes, those most dependent upon Social Security for
their retirement, will not be able to take the risk of opting for an
individual account. They will be stuck with the reduced benefits
of traditional Social Security.
How might such a guarantee be made? One could demand
that government approval for a private investment fund to man-
age individual accounts be made contingent upon that fund of-
fering such a guarantee itself. If a company markets personal
retirement accounts, it must guarantee a monthly benefit at least
equal to what the old Social Security program pays. Or one could
use complicated systems that would use calculation formulas to
transfer monies from the Social Security program or from other
workers who had exceeded the guaranteed amounts to those
who had come up short. The decision of whether to offer guaran-
teed benefit levels would be a critical factor to the operations of a
partially privatized system. It would undoubtedly have a large
impact upon how many workers choose to enter the new system,
if the choice was made a voluntary one.
The next choice is to decide how much of the existing FICA
contributions should be steered into the individual accounts. Ob-
servers agree that anything less than 2 percentage points of the
current 12.4 percent of earnings would not allow workers to
build a large enough nest egg to provide for their needs in retire-
ment. Anything over 10 percentage points would have over-
whelming transition costs. So the viable range of the payroll tax
to be shifted into the new accounts is somewhere between these
two figures. The trade-off would be between increasing the size
of the individual accounts and decreasing the transition costs of
the shift. Note that the smaller the remaining pay-as-you-go por-
tion of Social Security, the greater is the impact of any risk or dif-
ficulty with the individual retirement accounts and the burden of
providing benefits for those who can or must remain in the origi-
nal program. As with any trade-off, there is no “best choice” to
this decision. It is a question of personal values and best guesses
of the future.
The final major question in designing a partially privatized
Social Security program is whether one wishes to continue the
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

progressivity of the current program. As explained above,
today’s Social Security provides relatively greater retirement ben-
efits for those with lower incomes. It does this through the calcu-
lation formula for the worker’s initial PIA. Partial privatization
potentially threatens this aspect of the program. FICA contribu-
tions shifted into personal accounts are not then available to re-
distribute to other workers. The whole point of a personal
account is that the money placed in an account belongs to that
worker. The larger the percentage of the FICA contribution
placed into these accounts, the larger is the reduction in the pro-
gram’s progressivity. If one wishes to maintain this aspect, the
only options are to substantially alter the benefit formula within
what remains of the old Social Security program or to add new
rules that enable the program to redistribute the investments
earned through the individual accounts. Because these accounts
would be notional, and not actually held by the worker until the
date of retirement, this would not be impossible to do. One could
also redistribute the benefits through taxation. But this is another
difficult choice that any plan to partially privatize the program
must make.
Clearly, there are a number of choices to be made when de-
vising a program to partially privatize Social Security. This is
why the plans that have been offered often appear so complex.
While the major choices have been explored here, there are still
others to be considered. Any program that includes individual
accounts must develop new institutional mechanisms to manage
those accounts; create procedures to pick and oversee the private
companies that will actually do the investing; and formulate the
methods by which workers will exchange their retirement ac-
counts for the income, annuity, or other form of benefits that they
will begin receiving at the time of their retirement.
The Benefits of Partial Privatization: Real or Illusory?
Given the complexity of partially privatizing Social Security, is it
worth it? To many, the answer is an emphatic yes. The complex-
ity of designing a program is a small obstacle to overcome when
set against the huge advantages it can provide. Topping the list
of advantages is honesty. Social Security is going broke. Even the
Social Security Administration estimates that the cost of fixing it
will run to more than $10 trillion. The existing system cannot
continue. Partially privatizing the program acknowledges this
reality up front. Drastic action must be taken if Social Security is
Saving Social Security: The Options
63
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

to survive permanently. Partial privatization, unlike the reforms
considered above, is a permanent fix; this problem will not have
to be revisited again and again in the coming years.
But equally important, to advocates, is the fact that a par-
tially privatized system will be a better deal for retirees. The rate
of return on workers’ investments (i.e., the FICA tax) will be far
superior if they can control those investments themselves. First,
it is argued, the existing system is a very bad deal for those who
expect to retire in the years ahead. The rate of return under
today’s program is very low; some even claim that it will eventu-
ally be negative. The first generations to draw upon Social Secu-
rity had a very good deal indeed. Over the course of their
retirement, they received far more Social Security benefits than
the contributions they had made. In part this was because many
spent a portion of their working lives before the advent of Social
Security, and thus paid little or no FICA taxes. But it is also due
to the rapid rise in benefits that occurred in the decades after
World War II. Recall that these benefits were not linked to
equally large rises in contributions. Workers who retired in 1960
received back all of the FICA contributions that they and their
employers had made in only 2.8 years. After that, their benefits
were, in effect, coming from someone else’s contributions. The
legacy of this generosity is that future generations cannot expect
such largesse when they retire. It is matter of simple accounting
that the net value of the Social Security transfers of the past (the
extent to which benefits exceeded contributions) must be borne
by later generations. That debt does not just disappear. Not sur-
prisingly, then, it will take someone who retired in 2000 much
longer, around 17 years, to receive back all of his or her contribu-
tions, and by 2020, that length of time will be up to 21.6 years. At
some point, people just will not be able to live long enough to
get back all that they paid into the system. This is but another
way of saying that the rate of return on the FICA contribution is
falling. How much this rate will fall depends upon a number of
assumptions, both about the economy and about how the United
States will decide to reform Social Security at the time the Trust
Fund runs out. But one study has calculated that if the govern-
ment raises the revenue necessary to keep the Trust Fund sol-
vent, a typical 35-year-old male with an average income should
expect to see a lifetime loss of $133,600 in wealth because of his
participation in the current Social Security program (Murphy
and Welch 1998).
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

If workers were allowed to invest as they wished, not only
would they be (partially) relieved of this dire prospect but also
they would be able to capture the higher rates of return available
by investing in something other than U.S. Treasury securities.
This, of course, is the same argument for diversifying Social Secu-
rity’s investments that we examined earlier. However, advocates
of partial privatization claim that giving this investment choice to
the individual eliminates the political and economic problems as-
sociated with having the Social Security system invest a portion
of the entire Trust Fund into stocks or other assets.
The honesty of acknowledging the program’s problems and
the possibility of earning a better investment through individual
retirement accounts combine to produce a third positive aspect of
partial privatization. The benefit reductions needed to truly save
Social Security can be made. The benefits available under the old
program can be scaled back because workers will have a better
alternative through which to more than make up for this loss.
This alternative, the individual retirement account, will make the
necessary benefit reductions politically possible.
Proponents of this reform also argue that it will provide a
series of additional gains for Americans. Allowing each working
American to have ownership of his or her retirement funds en-
ables far more flexibility than today’s system. A worker who rea-
sonably anticipated, for example, early disability or death would
be able to cash in her or his retirement early and receive the
money when it could be of use. Those with other retirement sav-
ings may be able to coordinate them with the utilization of their
Social Security account to better manage their retirement. There
might be a variety of ways by which to receive this new benefit
beyond the standard monthly payment of today’s program. In
short, partial privatization would end the “one size fits all” men-
tality of the current program in favor of one that can be tailored
to the specific needs of each retiree. Another benefit would be
that workers who died before retiring, or retirees who died with
income still available, could leave the income in their account to
their heirs. Americans could use these accounts to help their
children. Some advocates of partial privatization say that such a
program would actually lead many to put off the day of their re-
tirement because they could clearly see the advantages of contin-
uing to build up their retirement accounts. This powerful
incentive could thus ease the demographic pressures on all U.S.
retirement plans, including Social Security. There are even those
Saving Social Security: The Options
65
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

who maintain that ownership of private accounts, and the
knowledge that they were successfully preparing for their own
retirement, could produce a number of positive effects on the
health, social behaviors, and emotional lives of those in the pro-
gram. Giving people a stake in the system reinforces and ener-
gizes the qualities of entrepreneurship and hard work that have
made the United States so economically successful.
Thus, great claims are made for the effects of partial privati-
zation. But even those new to the Social Security debate are prob-
ably aware of how controversial these plans are. President Bush
received so much opposition to his idea that he did not introduce
his proposals for congressional consideration, even a full two
years after he initially proposed it. Why is there such an argu-
ment over partial privatization?
Opponents of individual retirement accounts reject virtu-
ally every claim made for them. Partial privatization will not save
Social Security, it will not offer participants a better return on
their contributions, and it will not offer Americans a safe alterna-
tive to the current system.
Individual retirement accounts will not affect Social Secu-
rity’s financing shortfall. Add-on accounts clearly have no impact
on the program one way or the other. But even carve-outs will
not solve the problem. The benefit reductions in the old program
that will come with the individual accounts will not occur for
decades. Until those reductions are seen, diverting a portion of
new contributions to individual accounts does not affect the
promises that the program has already made to beneficiaries. The
money has to be found to pay them. Losing a portion of the exist-
ing FICA taxes only makes the problem worse. As one example, it
has been charged that the Bush proposal would have added $4.9
trillion to U.S. debt between 2009, the first year of its operation,
and 2028 (Furman and Greenstein 2005, 1). (The developers of the
Bush plan have estimated the costs at $754 billion.) This is the
gap between the promises made and the amounts still in the
Trust Fund (along with the expected future FICA contributions)
that would be available to honor them. At some point, far in the
future, the individual retirement accounts may begin to pay for
themselves and make Social Security sustainable. But the inter-
vening years would saddle the United States with an uncon-
scionable level of debt, one that would have real economic
consequences. Critics deride the supposed honesty of individual
retirement accounts, noting the savings included in such plans
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

are generally gained through the reduced benefits offered to re-
tirees in the Social Security program, not through the operation of
the accounts themselves. This is the case with the Bush proposal,
where the savings actually occur through a combination of bene-
fit reductions and changing from wage indexing to price index-
ing in the calculation of the PIA.
The opponents of partial privatization also dispute that So-
cial Security yields a lower rate of return than would individual
accounts. A minor but still significant point is that individual ac-
counts would necessitate higher administrative costs and the
payment of fees to the private firm that handled the investments.
These costs reduce the rate of return and should be incorporated
when making comparisons. The major point, though, is that com-
paring the rate of return of individual accounts versus existing
Social Security is unfair unless one includes the cost of transition.
An individual account may gain a substantially higher rate of re-
turn than a government bond, but this possibility ignores that the
fact that, to get this account, its holder must pay her or his share
of the transition costs for the whole program, either by higher
taxes, lower benefits from the existing Social Security program, or
the lower income that would follow from the slower economic
growth caused by increased U.S. debt. If this cost is subtracted
from an individual retirement account’s rate of return, it is not at
all clear that it would be higher than that of the current program.
In fact, the most thorough investigation of this question found
that the two rates of return would not be much different
(Genakoplos, Mitchell, and Zeldes 2000).
Moreover, there is no guarantee that the promised higher
rate of return will even appear. For any investment, return is re-
lated to risk. High returns are gained by taking high risks. Risk
implies that the outcome is unknown. The higher the risk, the
more it is unknown. History is a guide to how investments have
fared in the past, but they cannot tell us how they will fare in the
future. As the Wall Street advertisements caution, “past perfor-
mance is no guarantee of future results.” In theory, allowing in-
dividuals to invest on their own might be a great idea. Some
investors will be wise (or lucky) and indeed build a large nest
egg. But others will be ill-advised (or unlucky) and not fare well
financially. If the latter must rely on their poor investment re-
sults for their retirement years, what happens to them? It is easy
for those who are more successful to say “tough luck.” But luck
often is not involved in the outcome. If the United States today
Saving Social Security: The Options
67
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

had individual retirement accounts that were returned to the
owner at the date of retirement, an individual who reached re-
tirement age in 1999 would have received a pension 40 percent
larger than an individual who retired in 2001, even if both had
made the exact same investments. This simply reflects the mas-
sive fall in stock prices that occurred during those two years. It
would not have been the fault of either investor. The noted econ-
omist Robert Schiller has calculated that 32 percent of the time,
one should expect even a conservative life-cycle investment
fund, an option recommended in President Bush’s proposal, to
return less money than if the individual had opted to stay en-
tirely in the old program (Schiller 2005). If one presumes that
stock markets are likely to offer lower rates of return in the fu-
ture than they have in the past, which is the view of Schiller and
other experts, that 32 percent increases to 71 percent. Is a safe,
successful retirement system best built upon substantial risk? A
senior citizen who did not do well is going to fall back upon the
rest of the American social safety net, Medicaid and other wel-
fare programs, to make up for the failed investments. Other gov-
ernment programs must grow to cover these retirees.
The position of many critics is that the United States already
has excellent tax-advantaged savings programs in place. These
include 401(k) and Keough plans. Workers are better advised to
make use of these existing programs, through which they will
gain all the benefits of individual accounts. They would not be
well served to abandon a successful retirement program to un-
dertake new and uncertain risks and dangerously expose their
senior years to the possibility of inadequate income.
Complete Privatization of Social Security
A more dramatic alternative to partial privatization is to get rid of
today’s Social Security altogether. Any virtue associated with
partial privatization could be claimed to be more fully realized
through total privatization. The practical issue is how to achieve
privatization. Most adherents of an eventually completely pri-
vate national retirement system see partial privatization as a
halfway house to that end. The diversion of the FICA contribu-
tion into individual retirement accounts can slowly be increased
until the entire payroll tax goes into these accounts. At that point,
the system is completely privatized. The arguments for and
against doing this are not much different from the pros and cons
of partial privatization, and they will not be revisited here.
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Note, however, that once the traditional program is gone,
there will be no dedicated retirement resources to augment indi-
vidual accounts for any reason. But advocates of total privatiza-
tion respond that the only reason for the government to increase
the resources going to an individual would be an investment ac-
count that turned out to be too small to retire upon. This is a form
of poverty and ought to be handled as other poverty programs.
American poverty programs are generally means tested. So one
method of complete privatization would be to implement indi-
vidual retirement accounts plus a means-tested program to sup-
plement those accounts for senior citizens whose retirement
income is below a stipulated level. This money would come from
the general revenues, as with any other poverty program. It
would not involve a large, government retirement program.
The most audacious privatization plan is simply to return a
portion of federal taxes each year to working Americans. The
FICA tax and the income tax could be rolled together to make this
calculation. Each person could then do what he or she wanted
with the money received, subject to reasonable strictures on its
use. Charles Murray has recently suggested such a reform. Each
American over the age of 21 would receive $10,000 a year free of
taxes (Murray 2007). The government would recommend, but not
require, that $2,000 of this be invested for purposes of retirement.
(The remainder would be used for health care and other pur-
poses.) Individuals at higher incomes would have to return a por-
tion of their annual grants. Murray suggests that, as retirement
approaches, an annuity purchased with the 40 or more years of
invested money that had been accrued would provide for a gen-
erous pension. Plans such as this also anticipate, as a result, a
greatly reduced American government, which is generally
claimed to be one of the strongest benefits of totally privatizing
Social Security.
Supporters of today’s Social Security are against these radi-
cal reforms. They remake their points that these plans blithely
wave away the huge transition costs and substantially offload the
risks of retirement from the U.S. government to individual Amer-
ican workers. Indeed, this latter complaint goes to the heart of the
debate over privatizing Social Security. Those who oppose priva-
tization say that Social Security was never intended to be a pro-
gram for building private fortunes. Focusing upon rates of return
and benefit amounts confuses this issue. There are other mecha-
nisms for enhancing personal wealth. Social Security is, first and
Saving Social Security: The Options
69
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

foremost, an insurance program. It is meant to handle the risks
and vicissitudes of old age. It is a guaranteed floor, beneath
which no working American can ever sink, no matter what might
go wrong. Unlike private plans, it is a benefit that one can never
outlive. The metaphor should not be the trampoline, from which
one can jump ever higher, but the safety net, which catches you
when you fall. That is why the program includes features such as
survivors’ benefits and spousal benefits. Those components are
not about wealth, but about need. If one correctly sees what So-
cial Security is, according to this view, one sees that the necessary
reform is to repair the safety net, not build a better trampoline.
Leaving It Alone
There is one final approach to solving the Social Security crisis. It
is the approach that rejects any reform. After reading everything
discussed in this chapter, this may appear crazy. The program
will soon in be crisis. It must be reformed, right? Not everyone
agrees. The Social Security Administration’s most optimistic sce-
nario is that the Trust Fund may not empty until well after 2042.
Given that all estimates of the future are but guesses, whether
those of the Social Security Administration or anyone else, why
not wait until we have better information? The economist Robert
Gordon is one who forcefully argues that the predictions of the
Social Security Administration are too pessimistic. American pro-
ductivity and economic growth are likely to be significantly
higher in the future than it estimates. If Gordon is right, FICA
contributions will be substantially larger than anticipated, and
the Trust Fund will not become exhausted until years later. In
fact, any public policy that boosts economic growth will save So-
cial Security as a by-product. So why not focus instead on the
goal of economic growth? Even if productivity or growth does
not turn out to be greater than forecasted, one could argue that
the massive cost and complexity of reform suggest that it not be
undertaken when economic uncertainty is large. Perhaps it is bet-
ter to put off such reform until the contours of what is necessary
are better understood. Supporters of this position further argue
that the Social Security program will not break down for nearly
40 years, even under standard assumptions. Do we know that,
when the time comes, reform of Social Security will have the best
claim on U.S. resources? We must also remember that the United
States is likely to be a substantially wealthier nation by that time.
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

One could argue that the richer United States of 2040 or beyond
is, and ought to be, more able to carry out the necessary reforms
than the United States of today. For all these reasons, some argue
that the best thing to do right now is nothing.
It must be admitted that this is a minority view. Most ana-
lysts believe that the best estimates are just that, the best esti-
mates. In fact, the Social Security Administration has historically
been too optimistic in its forecasts. And even the organization it-
self gives its best scenario only a 10 percent probability of coming
true. It would be foolish to base policy upon a hope that unlikely
scenarios will rescue us from difficult decisions. The cost of re-
forming Social Security is thought to rise by about $600 billion
each year that it is not undertaken. Putting reform off until to-
morrow, never mind nearly 40 years of tomorrows, is fantasti-
cally expensive. Why burden the next generation with what we
have failed to solve? It is far better to act now and make revisions
if they are necessary later. In the eyes of many, with all of the
knowledge that we already have, failing to act is irresponsible.
Conclusion
America’s Social Security program is very likely to encounter se-
vere problems in just a few decades. One can see that there is no
lack of options to remedy the situation. We have examined the
pros and cons of these options in some detail. Unfortunately, all
have two characteristics. First, they become more difficult to im-
plement as the years go by. Modest changes avoided now will be-
come drastic changes if they are enacted 30 or 40 years later. The
longer the United States waits, the greater the reforms it must
make to save Social Security. Second, they are all controversial.
There is no consensus on how to approach changes to Social Se-
curity. Further, the controversy operates at many levels. There is
often dispute over the financial and economic impacts of specific
proposals. How much will really be saved? How great will be the
cost? There is dispute over fairness. Who will bear the brunt of re-
form? Who should bear it? Is it right that some will lose more
than others? There is dispute over risk. Are the virtues of owner-
ship worth the cost of more variable returns? Is security the para-
mount value of Social Security? There is dispute over the goal.
Should the reforms preserve Social Security as it is? Or should the
program be remade in accordance with the economic realities of
Conclusion
71
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

the United States in the 21st century? There is dispute over pur-
pose. Should Social Security continue to be the financial mainstay
of America’s senior citizens? Or should individuals in an increas-
ingly wealthy society be prepared to take on more of the burden
of their own retirement? These controversies are over values as
well as fact. For this reason, they are very difficult to resolve. Re-
sponsible participants in the Social Security debate realize these
difficulties. They know that the reform that does occur will likely
be drawn from those bits and pieces among the entire menu of
choices that can best and first command consensus. The position
of the powerful AARP reflects the realities of today’s debate.
While clearly stating, and fighting for, their preferred reforms,
AARP also takes the position that reform will be difficult. It un-
derstands that all positions need to be considered, and it accepts
that some of the reforms that are ultimately made will not be de-
sirable to its members. This is the view of many of those who are
most intimately involved in the attempts to reform Social Secu-
rity. We frequently see experts first critiquing a reform, admitting
its weaknesses, and then recommending it as the best possible so-
lution under the circumstances.
Tracing the controversies over the reform of Social Security
does not, of course, tell us what the ultimate resolution will be.
That will result from the debate that is now ongoing and will no
doubt continue for years to come. For most Americans, Social Se-
curity is or will be one of the most important government pro-
grams that will ever affect them. For that reason alone, this is a
debate in which every American has an interest.
References
Burtless, Gary. 1998. Increasing the Eligibility Age for Social Security
Pensions. Testimony before the Senate Special Committee on Aging, July
15, 1998. Brookings Institution. http://www.brookings.edu/views
/testimony/burtless/19980715.htm (accessed November 29, 2007).
Bush, George W. 2005. State of the Union Address. GPO Access, February
2. http://www.gpoaccess.gov/sou/index.html (accessed November 29,
2007). 
Clinton, William Jefferson. 1999. State of the Union Address. GPO Access,
January 19. http://www.gpoaccess.gov/sou/index.html (accessed No-
vember 29, 2007). 
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Diamond, Peter A., and Peter R. Orszag. 2005. “Saving Social Security.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (2): 11–32.
Dwyer, Gerald P., Jr. 2005. “Social Security Private Accounts: A Risky
Proposition?” Economic Review 90 (3): 7.
Furman, Jason. 2005. Evaluating Alternative Social Security Reforms. Wash-
ington, D.C.: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. http://www.cbpp
.org/5-12-05socsec-test.pdf (accessed November 29, 2007).
Furman, Jason, and Robert Greenstein. 2005. An Overview of Issues Raised
by the Administration’s Social Security Plan. Washington, D.C.: Center on
Budget and Policy Priorities. http://www.cbpp.org/2-2-05socsec4.htm
(accessed November 29, 2007).
Genakoplos, John, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2000. Would
a Privatized Social Security System Really Pay a Higher Rate of Return?
NBER Working Paper, No. 6713. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Greenspan, Alan. 2000. Testimony before the Special Senate Committee
on Aging. Federal Reserve Board, March 27. http://www.federalreserve
.gov/BoardDocs/Testimony/2000/20000327.htm (accessed November
29, 2007).
Munnell, Alicia, and Mauricio Soto. 2005. “What Does Price Indexing
Mean for Social Security Benefits?” Just the Facts on Retirement Issues, No.
14. Boston: Boston College, Center for Retirement Research.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Finis Welch. 1998. Perspectives on the Social Se-
curity Crisis and Proposed Solutions. American Economic Association Pa-
pers and Proceedings 88: 142–150.
Murray, Charles. 2006. In Our Hands: A Plan to Replace the Welfare State.
Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute Press.
National Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention,U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Birth Data.
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/births.htm#news%20releases (accessed De-
cember 31, 2007).
Samuelson, Robert J. 2005. “It’s More than Social Security.” Washington
Post. January 14:A19.
Schiller, Robert. 2005. “The Life-Cycle Personal Accounts Proposal for
Social Security.” March. http://www.irrationalexuberance.com (ac-
cessed November 29, 2007). 
Social Security Administration. 2007. 2007 Annual Report of the Board of
Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Benefit Insurance and Disability
References
73
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Insurance Trust Funds. http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/TR/TR07 (accessed
November 29, 2007).
U.S. Congressional Budget Office. 1998. Long-Term Budgetary Pressures
and Policy Options, May. www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/4xx/doc492/ltbudg98
.pdf (accessed November 29, 2007).
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2005. Social Security Reform: An-
swers to Key Questions, May. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05193sp
.pdf (accessed December 26, 2007).
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

3
Worldwide Perspectives
V
irtually every country on Earth has a public old-age pension
system. Though under different names and with different fea-
tures, each attempts to provide a generous, but affordable, re-
tirement for its citizens. Not surprisingly, these systems have
been carefully examined by those who worry about the fate of the
U.S. Social Security program. What do the experiences of these
other countries teach us? Are there ideas and policies, developed
and employed abroad, that can improve, even “save,” Social Se-
curity? This chapter places the American debate over Social Secu-
rity in this international context. How have other nations reacted
to the same problems that are anticipated for the American pro-
gram? What did they do to solve them? Did those measures
work? This chapter explores their reforms with an eye to how
they might operate in the United States. Often experts do not al-
ways agree on the results. When this is the case, insight is pro-
vided into the reasons for their disagreement.
Many countries, either for reasons of their poverty or be-
cause of very different economic systems, do not offer broad
lessons that are appropriate for the United States. So this chapter
focuses, for the most part, upon those nations that offer similarly
comprehensive retirement programs that can be meaningfully
compared with Social Security. In fact, most countries in the ad-
vanced industrialized world have programs quite similar to the
U.S. Social Security system, and they too face the same challenge
as the United States. They must operate an ever more expensive
retirement program in the face of unfavorable demographic
trends. Under this pressure, several of these nations have em-
barked upon major reforms to save their social security programs.
It is these countries that will form the core of the investigation in
75
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

this chapter. Six such countries, and the reforms they made, are
discussed, roughly in the order of how dramatically their systems
were changed by reform. Then the chapter draws lessons of those
reforms for the United States.
Canada: Moderate Reforms 
with Big Results?
An excellent place to begin is Canada. Not only is it a familiar
country and in many ways similar to the United States but its re-
tirement program shares many of the features of U.S. Social Secu-
rity. In the 1990s, Canada had the same debate as the United
States over the future of its program. Unlike the United States,
however, Canada’s debate led to a substantial overhaul of its re-
tirement program. As a result, the Canadian government believes
that it has reestablished a sound pension system for the foresee-
able future. Today, there is little continuing public debate over
that system, or its reforms. Is this belief premature, or have the
Canadians found a way to shore up its pension system, one that
America can also take?
The Canadian old-age pension system dates back to the
Roaring Twenties, although full federal funding did not occur
until 1952. It does in one major respect differ from the system that
was later developed in the United States: the original pension
program, today called Old Age Security (OAS), is neither a con-
tributions-based nor an earnings-based program. It is simply a
flat monthly payment given to each retired Canadian that is paid
out of the general revenues of the Canadian government. (We are
ignoring here a great complexity of the Canadian system, the re-
lationship between the federal government and the Canadian
provinces. Essentially, the provinces have greater taxing power
than the U.S. states, and greater responsibilities for social welfare.
Thus the provinces were much more important in the creation
and operation of the Canadian pension programs than were the
U.S. states in Social Security. As this difference is not important to
the development of the recent Canadian reforms, we will not ex-
pand upon this complexity.) Perhaps signaling a cultural differ-
ence with the United States, the Canadian OAS program is not
means tested, as this sort of welfare-oriented program would
likely be in the United States, but it is residence tested. Originally,
76
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

one had to reside in Canada for 20 years to collect this monthly
payment. The initial amount was quite small, $20 a month. Since
its inception, it has been substantially increased and is now ad-
justed every three months to the Canadian consumer price index.
As a result, the current monthly payment averages C$466.98, an
amount equal to 16 percent of the average Canadian monthly
wage. It is universally available to Canadians over the age of 65.
An interesting feature of the OAS, though, is the “claw-
back” provision. Beginning in 1989, wealthier Canadians have
had to return a portion of their OAS checks to the government.
They must repay 15 percent of the amount of their incomes over
C$63,511 (using 2007 figures) against their anticipated OAS bene-
fit. As a result, Canadians with incomes over C$102,865 do not re-
ceive any OAS money. This clawback, which affects about 5
percent of Canadian seniors, is an increasingly discussed method
of reducing pension benefits to high-income retirees in an equi-
table manner and is now found in the retirement programs of
several countries.
The OAS program operates alongside a second Canadian
retirement program, the Canadian Pension Plan (CPP). This plan,
initiated in 1966 and administered in Quebec as the Quebec Pen-
sion Plan (QPP), is quite similar to the U.S. Social Security sys-
tem. Workers and their employers each contribute equally into
the program, and, at retirement, workers receive a monthly pen-
sion equal to 25 percent of their “pensionable earnings.” Full re-
tirement was originally set at age 70 but today is 65. In the 1970s,
following a resolution of jurisdictional issues between the federal
government and the provinces, numerous reforms were made
that resulted in the CPP resembling even closer U.S. Social Secu-
rity. Survivors’ and spousal benefits were begun, and a cost-of-
living adjustment (COLA) was added. One interesting difference
between the two systems, however, is that, in Canada, workers
who leave employment or shift to part-time employment to care
for a child under the age of seven can have these years of reduced
earnings excluded from the calculation of their monthly benefit
amounts. In other words, depending upon how one looks at it,
the Canadian system does not punish those responsible for child
care with lower pensions, or, alternatively, it offers a state subsidy
to those who choose full-time child care over remaining in the
workforce. A second difference is that all CPP benefits are fully
taxable. In 2007, the average monthly benefit under the CPP was
C$473.09. The OAS and the CPP combined, then, to an average
Canada: Moderate Reforms with Big Results?
77
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

pension of C$940, compared with the average U.S. Social Security
pension of $1,044.
In the 1980s, this pay-as-you-go pension system encoun-
tered the same difficulties as its U.S. counterpart. Unexpected in-
flation and wage increases dramatically raised benefits, while
long-term demographic trends threatened the future of the pro-
gram’s financing. As in the United States, the debate over how to
resolve the financing problems was inconclusive. In 1981, the
government called for a national conference on pensions but ulti-
mately had to concede that no consensus could be gained on
what steps to take to solve these problems. Three years later, the
Conservative government of Brian Mulroney floated the question
of whether Canada should continue a program of universal pen-
sion benefits (the OAS) and proposed lowering the COLA index-
ing formula, but the response was very similar to that which
greeted the Reagan administration’s cutbacks that were an-
nounced at this same time. The Canadian government also
quickly backed off.
The debate began anew, though, when the chief actuary of
the CPP announced in 1995 that the Canadian pension fund
would be exhausted in 2015. This provoked the Reform Party to
call for a privatization of the system. The ruling Liberal Party pre-
ferred the existing system, but it knew the pressure to reform
would only continue to mount. Thus, after a series of consulta-
tions, the minister of Finance, Paul Martin, unveiled a reform
package in 1996 to save the program. The reforms centered upon
changing the CPP from pay-as-you-go financing to a prefunded
pension system.
As defined in chapter 2, a prefunded system is one in
which sufficient reserves are built in advance to enable the pro-
gram to pay future retirees their full promised benefits. Unlike
pay-as-you-go programs, it does not rely on a given year’s bene-
fits being taken from that same year’s worker contributions. The
object of the Canadian reforms was to redesign the CPP so that it
would have the money on hand to guarantee full payment of
promised pensions for the foreseeable future. In this sense, it
was somewhat like the U.S. reforms of 1983, which substantially,
albeit temporarily, prefunded the Social Security Trust Fund.
However, the Canadian objective was to ensure a near-perma-
nent prefunding.
The Liberal government defined the needed level of pre-
funding as the creation of a CPP trust fund that holds five years’
78
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

worth of benefits. The boosted trust fund would then be com-
bined with “steady state financing,” a system that automatically
ensures that the contributions entering into the program will be
sufficient to pay the benefits that have been guaranteed. How did
Canada achieve this prefunding? The government began with a
standard approach of modest reforms in raising taxes and reduc-
ing benefits, along with efforts to raise the rate of return on the re-
serves held by the CPP.
Reform of the CPP required the consent of the provinces,
and British Columbia was the most adamant against one “leg” of
reform, that of cutting benefits. (Interestingly, the provincial gov-
ernment of Alberta continued to favor partial privatization, but
could find no allies.) The failure to gain consensus led the gov-
ernment to drop all of its major proposed benefits cuts. This left
only tax increases and higher rates of return. Prefunding would
have to rest upon these. And so it did, in a package that passed
the Canadian Parliament in 1998.
Steady state financing necessitated a substantial hike in the
payroll tax. Experts determined that, given a healthy pension
fund, a payroll tax of 9.9 percent, shared equally between worker
and employer, would be sufficient to meet expected benefit
claims. In 1998, that tax was 5.85 percent. The reform package
thus mandated a nearly 70 percent rise in the payroll tax from
1998 to 2003, when it would reach 9.9 percent. (Note that this rate
is still below the U.S. payroll tax rate, but, on the other hand, the
Canadian payroll tax only pays for about half of the total pen-
sion. The other half comes from the general revenues.) To go with
this increased payroll tax, the lower bound of taxable income was
frozen. The CPP payroll tax has both a minimum floor and a
maximum ceiling on taxed earnings. (The United States only has
the ceiling.) Both previously were adjusted upward as incomes
rose. But with the new reform, the floor will remain at C$3,500,
even as the ceiling continues to rise. This amounts to a tax in-
crease, and it is a particularly important one for those at low in-
come levels. To make certain that this expanded payroll tax is
always sufficient to pay for the benefits, the CPP is obligated to
report if it ever appears that the payroll tax will not be able to
cover promised benefits. Following such a finding, the payroll
tax is automatically raised for a three-year period, and COLA in-
creases are stopped. Only a vote of Parliament can intervene to
prevent this almost homeostatic correction that ensures that suffi-
cient revenues arrive to pay for the promised benefits.
Canada: Moderate Reforms with Big Results?
79
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The most innovative reform, however, was not this sizable
tax increase; it was the creation of the Canadian Pension Plan In-
vestment Board. To boost the rate of return on its pension re-
serves, the government of Canada decided to allow the CPP to
invest those reserves just as if it were a mutual fund. No longer
would it suffer restrictions such as those imposed upon the U.S.
Social Security Trust Fund to invest only in government securi-
ties. Here Canada drew upon the province of Quebec, where such
an investment board was already operating as part of the QPP. It
had experienced a number of years of very good financial re-
turns, often higher than 10 percent. The CPP Investment Board
was given but one mandate: invest so as to gain the highest re-
turn possible without undue risk. As a result, it invests in stocks,
bonds, real estate, and other assets, both Canadian and interna-
tional. (Foreign investments are, however, limited to 30 percent of
the total.) It has become Canada’s largest investment fund. The
CPP estimates that not until the year 2022 will any portion of the
income earned through the Investment Board’s activities need to
be used to pay on benefits. Thus there are 16 years for the board
to grow as large a reserve as it can to prefund that need.
In devising this board, the government was attuned to the
issue that has so vexed U.S. efforts to move in this direction: how
does such an instrument keep from gaining too much political in-
fluence over the market? This was the reason that the board was
given no instructions other than to gain the best return. It was
specifically to prevent political motivations or influence from
creeping into the board’s investment choices. Moreover, no gov-
ernment official may serve on the board. Instead the Investment
Board is chosen from independent professional investment advis-
ers. The Investment Board does not operate under the CPP; it has
its own board of directors. In short, the system is actually orga-
nized very much along the lines of a private mutual fund.
To date, the Canadian government is very satisfied with its
reform package (Office of the Chief Actuary 2007, 6). Over the
four fiscal years from 2003 to 2007, the Investment Board’s annu-
alized rate of return was 13.6 percent (Canadian Pension Plan In-
vestment Board 2007). This amount substantially exceeds the
interest paid to the U.S. Social Security Trust Fund over the same
period. In fact, if the Trust Fund had received a rate of return sim-
ilar to that of the Investment Board’s, it would have earned an
additional $25 billion during these years. In 2006, a review of the
CPP reaffirmed that the 9.9 percent payroll tax continues to sat-
80
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

isfy the steady state financing condition and will do so for the
foreseeable future.
Essentially, then, the Canadian reform approach is to hike
the payroll tax significantly, using the initial years of increased
revenues to prefund the system, and to make automatic any fu-
ture hikes that may be needed. The prefunded contributions are
then invested much as a mutual fund, so as to maximize the size
of the pension fund to be drawn upon in the future.
Is this approach a good model for the United States to fol-
low? The answer depends upon one’s view of the tax increase
and of the likely future of a trust fund invested across a variety of
stocks, bonds, and other assets. No prominent policy analyst or
interest group has propounded a steady state payroll tax in the
United States along the Canadian lines, or estimated what that
tax would be. Because Social Security does not rely on any gen-
eral revenues, the payroll tax would be significantly higher than
that in Canada. The two issues to consider are whether such a tax
increase is the fairest method of solving the problem and whether
this tax increase would have any negative effects on economic
growth. Canada does not appear to have suffered economically
from its increased payroll tax, but one could argue that this is be-
cause it is still at a lower level than the U.S. Federal Insurance
Contributions Act (FICA) tax. The Canada Pension Plan Invest-
ment Board, and its investment activities, does not seem to attract
Canada: Moderate Reforms with Big Results?
81
TABLE 3.1
Comparing Rates of Return: Canada vs. the United States
United States (%)
Canada (%)
1998
7.3
40.1
1999
7
3.2
2000
6.9
7
2001
6.7
4
2002
6.4
–1.5
2003
6
17.6
2004
5.7
8.5
2005
5.4
15.5
2006
5.3
12.9
Note: U.S. rates are for the calendar year. Canadian rates are for the fiscal year ending the following April 1. 
Source: Social Security Administration, Trust Fund Data (ssa.gov/OACT/ProgData/IntRates.html), Canadian Pension
Investment Board (http:www.cppib.ca/Results).
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

great criticism in that country. There are no fears of excessive
politicization or economic influence. But would the same senti-
ment hold in the United States? President Clinton’s more limited
plan to invest some of the Trust Fund in the stock market at-
tracted great controversy, so it does seem clear that there is
greater political resistance in the United States to this solution.
Prefunding through broadening investments also attracts con-
cern because of the undeniable fact that the annual rate of return
varies much more when stocks and other investments are held by
the pension program. A quick comparison across the two coun-
tries quickly establishes this. The great unknown, stated in any
stock market prospectus, is that future returns cannot be pre-
dicted. Ultimately, the desire to emulate the Canadian decision to
invest in markets depends upon the level of risk the United States
is prepared to accept: the risk of poorer-than-expected returns
versus the risk of whatever other reform the United States
chooses to engage in. One’s view of the Canadian reforms likely
turns on one’s views of the tax hikes and the increased risk that
are entailed in the new Canadian old-age pension system.
Germany: Clamping Down on Benefits?
Not only is Germany the home of the world’s first public retire-
ment system but today it offers just about the most generous pen-
sion program anywhere on earth. The average German retiree
receives a pension that equals approximately 70 percent of his or
her earnings when still in the workforce. Compare this to the So-
cial Security system in the United States, in which the average re-
tiree obtains less than half of his or her average earnings through
Social Security payments. Clearly, the German system is more ex-
pensive to fund than is Social Security. To make matters worse,
demographic trends in Germany are far starker than those in the
United States. Germans have significantly fewer children per
family, and Germany has fewer immigrants as well. Thus the
Germany dependency ratio of retirees to workers is deteriorating
much faster than in North America. The result has been tremen-
dous pressure for reform.
Because of this pressure, the German government has made
some painful choices—different choices, however, than were
made in Canada. Germany has focused on the benefits side—re-
ducing the outgo—not on the contribution side, as did Canada.
82
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The different approaches thus make for an interesting contrast in
the discussion of how to reform Social Security.
The original Bismarckian pension system did not, of
course, survive Germany’s experiences of the 20th century. So
while there has been a continuous system since the 1880s, the
current program dates back only to 1957. In broad form it oper-
ates much like Social Security. Employees and employers each
pay half into the program, and workers retire on full pension at
age 65 (rising to age 67 by 2029). There are benefits for survivors
and children. The program is almost completely pay as you go.
The pension system currently has a reserve fund that amounts
to only 14 days’ worth of pension obligations. The system is
more generous than that in the United States for several rea-
sons. First, and perhaps more important, the goal of the German
pension system is to provide retirees with a standard of living
comparable to that when they were in the labor force. Early re-
tirement is also easier to opt for and more generous, and thus
the average German leaves the workforce earlier than the aver-
age American. The level of pension contributions is modestly
higher (by about 1 percent of income) than in the United States.
Finally, benefit growth is linked not to prices, as in North Amer-
ica, but to wages. The German pension rises with wage in-
creases and not via a COLA. As discussed earlier, wages grow
faster than prices, and so benefits linked to wages grow faster
than if linked to the cost of living. This final generous feature
was enacted during the favorable economic conditions of the
early 1970s; it was then that the Germany pension was set at 70
percent of average earnings.
But, again as in the United States, by the 1980s experts were
realizing that the German program was not going to be sustain-
able into the future. Just as across the Atlantic, reform commis-
sion after reform commission investigated what to do to ensure a
viable pension program. A 1992 reform added incentives to not
retire early, and Germany began basing benefit increases on net
wages rather than gross wages (net wages are wages after the
contributions are excluded). Even this reduced benefit remained
more generous than it would have been using a COLA. The gov-
ernment also stiffened the incentives to not retire before the age
of 65. This set of reforms, however, was quickly undone by the
unification of Germany. The pension situation of the former East
Germany was extremely poor, and adding that population to the
West German National Pension Fund degraded the soundness of
Germany: Clamping Down on Beneﬁts?
83
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

the latter, with the result that the united Germany found itself
under renewed pressure to fix its retirement system.
The debates that followed produced consensus on one
point: the already high contributions tax cannot be further hiked
(Capretta 2007, 20). As a result, recent pension reforms have in-
cluded mandatory caps on the size of future pension contribu-
tions. This decision, the opposite of that made in Canada, closes a
number of options. Germany has a minuscule reserve fund. If
contributions cannot be increased, the Canadian choice of raising
the rate of return on that reserve fund is not available. Reform
has to be either within the operations of a completely pay-as-you-
go system or via dismantling that system in some substantial
way. Few, so far, are prepared to contemplate the latter radical al-
ternative. All that is logically left is to make some reform on the
benefit side of the program, and this is what has happened. To
make up for the benefit cuts, a new voluntary retirement account
program has been created on top of the old program.
A direct cut in benefits was, not surprisingly, politically im-
possible. Even the more limited reforms that were offered
brought a threat from some labor leaders to take the issue “to the
streets.” Instead, Germany adopted a system of deflating or re-
ducing benefits in line with its worsening dependency ratio. As
the ratio of retirees to workers grows, that is, as the gap between
the contributions coming into the system and the benefits that
must be paid out from it increases, benefits will be shrunk ac-
cordingly. In theory, this automatic adjustment in the benefits for-
mula should save the system.
The first effort to develop such a formula actually failed. The
initial idea was to add a “demographic factor” to the benefits for-
mula. This factor would automatically lower benefits as the life
expectancy of a German worker increased. Essentially, it multi-
plied any year’s expected pension benefit by the ratio of the antic-
ipated life expectancy two years earlier divided by the anticipated
life expectancy of one year earlier. If the life expectancy increased,
this ratio would be less than one, and the benefit would go down.
The next year would begin with that lower benefit, again multi-
plied by the ratio, and so forth. So over the long haul, there would
be steadily lower benefits. (In truth, the demographic factor was a
somewhat more complicated mathematical formula than pre-
sented here, but this is the basic idea.) This idea was developed by
a German pension reform commission in the late 1990s and
adopted by the then Christian Democrat German government.
84
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

But in 1998, an election placed the rival Social Democratic party in
power, and it refused to carry out this reform.
So a second reform commission was left to pick up the
pieces and try again. This time it was a success. Beginning in
2005, a “sustainability factor” has been incorporated into the Ger-
man pension benefit formula. The exact formula is rather compli-
cated, but simply put, benefit payments are indexed to the state
of the dependency ratio. If the dependency ratio worsens from
one year to the next (i.e., the ratio of workers to retirees goes
down), the increase in benefit payments is reduced accordingly.
The index formula is set so that the government can intervene to
alter the benefit reduction that results, if this reduction is thought
too severe. Currently, the formula lowers benefits growth by 0.25
percent for every 1 percent worsening of the dependency ratio.
German estimates show that the net long-term effects of this re-
form will be to decrease the value of German pension benefits
from the current 70 percent of one’s pre-retirement income to 67
to 68 percent of that amount (Börsch-Supan and Wilke 2006, 591).
This does raise the question of how to prepare for reduced
benefits. The German solution is “Riester Pensions,” a voluntary
individual retirement pension that has been available since 2002.
These pensions, named after Walter Riester, the German labor
minister of the time, sit on top of the existing National Pension
Insurance Plan. They are offered by a variety of private compa-
nies and operate along the lines of an individual retirement ac-
count (IRA) or a U.S. 401(k) plan, subject to a variety of
government regulations. German workers are able to place up to
4 percent of their salary in one of these pensions, should they
wish. To encourage use of Riester Pensions, the government of-
fers subsidies to low-income workers and tax breaks to higher-in-
come workers. The subsidies operate like matching funds, with
the government matching up to 90 percent of the worker’s own
contributions, depending upon the level of income. An interest-
ing feature is that the subsidies are also increased to mothers with
children in an effort to reward fertility (and, thus, eventually,
help the dependency ratio). Higher-income workers were
thought to be more interested in reducing taxes than in obtaining
these matching funds, and thus the Riester Pensions are sheltered
from taxes for those who make more money.
These pensions, it is hoped, will more than make up for the
retirement income lost because of the new benefits formula. In
fact, this new income stream was made part of the revamped
Germany: Clamping Down on Beneﬁts?
85
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

benefits formula. The anticipated financial gain made by the av-
erage holder of a Riester Pension is used to further index the ben-
efits. As the return on the Riester grows, benefits are again
adjusted downward. Needless to say, this should act as another
incentive to enroll in one of these pensions, because individuals
will see their benefits indexed whether they do or do not start
their own account.
In sum, Germany has basically attacked pensions from the
opposite direction as Canada. It has focused, albeit with diffi-
culty, on the benefits side. A new benefits formula will automat-
ically lower monthly payments both as the dependency ratio
worsens and as new, voluntary supplemental retirement ac-
counts kick in as an alternative source of retirement income. The
concentration on benefits is also seen by the way Germany is
handling its immediate pensions crunch (recall that there is no
reserve fund to fall back on). There were no benefits increases at
all between 2004 and 2006, as the country strove to continue its
generous system under adverse demographic and economic
conditions.
Is the German system a viable model for the United States?
The answer likely revolves around three questions. The new ben-
efits formula is such that a German born in 1985 can expect to see
almost 40 percent of his or her retirement income come from the
Riester Pension rather than from the existing system. In other
words, as time progresses, the voluntary add-on pension plan in-
creasingly supplements the basic pension. So an essential issue is,
how many workers will in fact enroll in a plan? Those who do not
may face a very limited retirement. To date, more than half of the
eligible workforce have established Riester-style accounts. How-
ever, the evidence also seems to show that up to half of these ac-
counts are merely transfers of money from other investments that
the worker already had (Börsch-Supan 2005, 136). There has been
no increase of net savings for retirement. Some have argued that
an IRA-type add-on will only work if it is mandatory. Otherwise,
the accompanying lower benefits will fall heavily upon those
who do not or cannot open the voluntary account. For these
groups, the future cut in their pensions could be substantial.
A second issue revolves around political will. Many ob-
servers are already saying that the new benefits formula will not
sufficiently reduce German pension benefits to avoid running
into the contributions cap (Börsch-Supan and Wilke 2006, 599). If
this is the case, the hardest decisions are still being pushed off
86
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

into the future. When the contributions cap is hit, will benefits be
further slashed? When benefits cuts are faced, will the govern-
ment lose its stomach and use its ability to reset the formula to
avoid them? Perhaps this will not be a problem because, when
the time comes, Germany will be better positioned to make the
further reforms necessary. Or perhaps the recent reform is just
passing the buck onto the next generation. A political system that
cannot face a larger benefit cut today is not going to have an eas-
ier time accepting it tomorrow. The decision in 2007 to increase
the retirement age to 67 indicates that there may not be complete
faith in the ability of benefits cuts alone to do the job.
Finally, the German reform clearly involves a large inter-
generational transfer of resources. Those currently retired are ex-
empted from the recent reforms. This means that those still
working are paying the same level of contributions as their elders
but will be getting relatively lower benefits. Furthermore, those
who are a number of years into their working careers will likely
not ever obtain the retirement income from their Riester Pension
that someone just entering the workforce can reasonably expect
to receive. As a result, that middle generation will pay most of the
cost of the reforms, the younger generation will pay some, and
the older generation will pay none. Is this fair?
The German reforms, focused on reduction of benefits by
automatically taking account of the dependency ratio and the
performance of a voluntary add-on program, can be neatly con-
trasted with the Canadian program, which attempts to leave
benefits uncut and turns to a tax increase and a more ambitious
investment strategy instead. Could one of these options work
for the United States, or is there a third possibility that’s better
than both?
Australia: Putting Means Testing to Work?
The U.S. Social Security program has shied away from employing
means testing to determine the size of benefits (although a much
smaller program, Supplemental Security Income, is used to pro-
vide means-tested benefits to low-income senior citizens). Recall
that a means-tested program is one that subjects benefits to the
level of wealth or income of the recipient. Only lower-income re-
tirees receive full benefits. Beginning with President Franklin
Roosevelt, most supporters of Social Security have feared that
Australia: Putting Means Testing to Work?
87
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

placing a means test on the program could make it appear to the
public as if it were a welfare program and cause it to lose popular
support. But more than 70 years after its implementation, is it
time to revisit this question? Means testing is one certain way of
reducing the program’s cost. Australia, where means testing has
become part of the strategy to preserve its old-age retirement sys-
tem, serves as an example of how such a reform might work.
The Australian retirement program, called the Age Pension,
was, in certain key respects, never much like the U.S. Social Secu-
rity system. Begun in 1909, it was neither a contributions-based
nor a pay-as-you-go program. Instead, all Australians were eligi-
ble for the program regardless of their work history, and it was
paid for from the government’s general revenues. The Age Pen-
sion initially had an income means test, but it was progressively
loosened over time. By the 1970s, the means test was abolished
altogether for those over age 70.
In spite of these key differences, Australia found itself in
the same position as the United States in the early 1980s. Unfa-
vorable demographics—the government estimates that the
growth of the Australian workforce will approach zero some-
time in the 2040s—and growing benefits made the existing pro-
gram unsustainable. The government budget just would not be
big enough to pay for all the pension outlays it would face. Since
Australia has no reserve fund or other mechanism to prefund
the coming retirements, this path for reform was unavailable.
What to do? The problem for Australia is that any effort to shift
the burden of reform onto either contributions or benefits, à la
Canada or Germany, would have a huge, direct impact on its
budget. The old-age program is not separately financed. So, in
1983, the Australian government decided to take a different tack.
It turned to tightening its means test, expanding it to include all
those over the age of 70. (Currently, the retirement age in Aus-
tralia is 65 for men. It is lower for women, but that age is being
gradually raised to age 65 as well.) It also closed an obvious
loophole with means testing. Previously, an individual could
spend down whatever is being “tested” and move his or her
wealth into property or some other nontested asset. For exam-
ple, someone could retire, take her or his company pension as a
lump sum, and buy a vacation home. This would evade a means
test on income. To prevent this movement of funds to nontested
assets, Australia now places a dual means test on both income
and assets.
88
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Here is how this means-tested program works. The full ben-
efit provided through the Age Pension program is set to provide
an income equal to 25 percent of the average Australian wage. So,
in 2007, an Australian couple with a monthly income of up to
$256 Australian dollars (usually abbreviated as A$)  would re-
ceive A$877 each month for their Age Pension. (The Australian
system actually pays benefits every two weeks; here the figures
are converted to monthly amounts in order to make the compari-
son with the U.S. system.) Above A$256 the means test is trig-
gered. For each additional dollar the couple’s income rises above
this minimum, their Age Pension is reduced by 40 cents. If their
income should reach A$5,765 a month, the amount they receive
from the Age Pension would fall to zero. Above that figure, the
couple is not given any public pension. On top of this income
means test is the second test, that for assets. If our couple are
homeowners, they will receive a full pension only if their total as-
sets fall below A$161,500. Above that, they lose A$6.00 a month
for every additional A$1,000 in assets that they possess. By the
time they reach A$338,500, they will not receive any pension at
all. (Assets are counted differently for those without homes.)
Since both means tests are used, the actual monthly benefit is
some combination of how the couple fares under both. Because of
this means test, nearly 30 percent of retiring Australians do not
receive any benefits from the Age Pension, which substantially
eases the size of the pension bill that the government must pay.
Australia recognized two limitations of simple means test-
ing, however, and has attempted to rectify both. The first is a
question of responsibility. What happens to the Australian work-
ers who can expect to receive no Age Pension and to the many
who will receive a reduced pension? Should they be left to sup-
port themselves however they can, or does the government still
have some obligation to ensure that they will have an adequate
retirement? Second, as (or if) government pension expenditures
continue to increase, how can the means test be tightened fur-
ther? The current income and assets levels are chosen because of
a belief that, below those levels, retirees really do need some fi-
nancial help. But this means that if the government does ever
need to further tighten the existing means tests, at least some in-
dividuals will be left with an inadequate retirement. These are
both difficult questions.
Australia has developed “superannuation” to solve these
problems. Essentially, it asks employers to pick up the slack. 
Australia: Putting Means Testing to Work?
89
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Recognizing that only about half of Australian companies pro-
vided their own pension programs, in 1986 the government man-
dated that all do so. The idea is that private pensions will
progressively augment the Age Pension, and workers will rely on
those pensions for an increasing proportion of their retirement. In
1992, this proposal was further reformed as the Superannuation
Guarantee. It is now all but impossible for an Australian firm to
evade offering its employees a defined-contribution benefit plan.
Ninety-five percent of Australian workers are enrolled in such a
plan. The plans themselves, however, are portable. Workers may
take their plans with them if they change employers. Every Aus-
tralian company is required to place, each year, an amount equal to
9 percent of an employee’s wage into a pension fund for that em-
ployee. Originally the employer chose the pension fund, but today
most workers can select their own plans. There are a wide variety
of superannuation funds to choose from. A company may offer its
own plan, or there may be an industrywide superannuation fund.
Alternatively, workers may enroll in a retail defined-contribution
plan, or they may open a “retirement savings account,” an invest-
ment plan specifically developed for superannuation by banks, in-
surance companies, and other financial firms.
Employees are not required to pay into these plans; only
employers are required to do so. However, to encourage further
savings, the government allows individuals to contribute into
their plan the equivalent of an additional 2 to 3 percent of their
income if they so wish. This contribution is tax advantaged. For
those with lower incomes, the government also offers to match
the contributions. Because of the expectation that this superannu-
ation will provide an increasing share of a worker’s retirement,
Australia adds a final fail-safe provision to its new program. This
is the “guarantee” in the Superannuation Guarantee. All retirees
are guaranteed that they will receive a total retirement pension at
least equal the amount they would have received under the origi-
nal Age Pension, no matter how their own superannuation plan
fares. If their private pension for some reason performed very
poorly, the government will step in to make up the difference.
The Australian government believes its program is working
well. A generation from now, one-third of Australian retirees are
still expected to receive full benefits from the Age Pension, while
three-quarters will still be receiving partial benefits. Superannua-
tion is not expected to make the old plan redundant. However,
the belief is that the superannuation plans will provide half of
90
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Australia’s total retirement benefits. One estimate is that it also
will reduce the future cost of the government’s pension obliga-
tions by one-third (Rothman 1998, 6).
How does this approach compare with the other reforms
considered to fix the U.S. Social Security system? First, one big
unknown must be accounted for. The success of the Australian
plan will likely depend upon the success of the superannuation
pensions that it is encouraging. There is an alarming disagree-
ment among experts about how well they will work. Some esti-
mate that Australian workers will wind up with two to three
times the amount from their employer pensions that they could
have expected from the Age Pension (Mitchell and O’Quinn
1997). But others claim that future retirees will have pensions that
will be far less generous than this (Korczyk 2003, 21). To an ex-
tent, this is a version of the old “half empty versus half full” argu-
ment. The Age Pension only promised 25 percent of average
working salary. So from one perspective, any pension that ex-
ceeded this figure  would be a great improvement for most citi-
zens. Yet about half of Australia’s workforce already had private
pensions before the onset of superannuation pensions, and to this
group, such a performance may not be much, or indeed any, im-
provement over their situation before these reforms.
Much of this disagreement in evaluation is because it is not
yet known what patterns of behavior will take shape. How much
will the average worker place in her or his private pension? Over
a working career, the difference between no contributions and a
steady 2 or 3 percent contribution would be huge. Will the sav-
ings placed in superannuation pensions be new money? Or will it
simply be transferred from existing savings to take advantage of
the tax breaks? In the former case, workers will retire better off. In
the latter, they will just be running in place. And will workers
choose smart pension plans? There is some evidence that pension
providers are investing their contributors’ savings too conserva-
tively (Congressional Budget Office 1999, 57). There is a fear that
investment advisers are too cautious because they fear that a sin-
gle quarter’s bad results could stampede investors out of their
fund. Finally, though easiest to remedy, Australia does allow
lump-sum withdrawals from the superannuation funds at retire-
ment. Through skillful manipulation of the system, or maybe just
bad choices, a retiree can run through this lump sum payout and
wind up back on the Age Pension, producing no advantage to the
program.
Australia: Putting Means Testing to Work?
91
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

At a deeper level, the superannuation funds do not evade
the difficult trade-offs in contributions and benefits. Nor will they
end the increasing financial burden on the Australian state. Even
with means testing, the government will still have to double the
amount it spends on the Age Pension by 2050. The addition of a 9
percent employer payment almost certainly amounts to lower
wages for the employee. This is might be seen as the equivalent
of an increased tax. Moreover, today’s employees must experi-
ence these reduced earnings while they continue to pay the same
formal taxes that provide for the Age Pensions of today’s retirees.
Whether an increasingly tough means test should be considered
the equivalent of a benefit cut is more arguable. It will certainly
reduce the benefits that some Australians receive from the Age
Pension, though, as discussed, the promise is that overall benefits
will not be lower. A last issue in evaluating this reform goes back
to a difference between the Australian program and the U.S. pro-
gram. Australia does not demand worker contributions. But the
United States does. What is the ethics, or the political persuasive-
ness, of insisting that some pay into a pension program from
which they will never receive any benefits? That is the ultimate
trade-off with a means test. Perhaps that is the issue that would
first rise to the fore if the United States should wish to follow the
Australian example.
Sweden: Fully Funding without Privatizing?
As discussed in chapter 2, the leading alternative to pay-as-you-
go pension systems, such as the U.S. Social Security program, is a
fully funded system. Fully funded pensions are not drawn from a
common pool of contributions or from the government’s general
revenues. Instead, each worker funds her or his own retirement
through her or his own contributions. Because benefits are tied to
the specific contributions made, the system is called a “defined
contribution” program. Social Security operated along these lines
before the 1939 reforms, but today fully funded pension systems
are usually in the form of private IRAs. Experts agree that fully
funded systems are financially sound. The problem is the transi-
tion costs of moving to such a system. How do you pay for the
pensions of those who are already retired or who are too ad-
vanced in years to build up an IRA large enough to retire on, if
the contributions of today’s workers do not continue to pour in?
92
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Sweden has led the way in creating a new retirement system that,
it claims, solves this problem. Sweden calls its new system one of
“notional defined contributions.” Could this be the answer to
saving Social Security?
Sweden is rightfully proud that it has the world’s oldest
truly universal pension system. It began in 1913. Like many sys-
tems it evolved from a fully funded program into one that was
pay as you go. By the 1980s, it consisted of a flat-rate basic pen-
sion, called the “folkpension,” that everyone received, and an
additional benefit based on earnings. It was funded by contribu-
tions. The amount of a worker’s benefit was determined by
“pension points” that were accumulated over one’s career. The
benefit, as with the other countries we have examined, was then
linked to rising wages and rising prices. The system also con-
tained a reserve fund that held about five years’ worth of bene-
fits. An oddity of this system was that, for the earnings portion,
the ceiling on taxable earnings was so low that the Swedish pen-
sion program was actually slowly evolving toward one in which
everyone got the same benefit. (Essentially, everyone’s income
was hitting that ceiling. It would be as if every worker in the
United States was earning more than the U.S. maximum earn-
ings for calculating Social Security benefits.) Like many Euro-
pean systems, Sweden’s benefits are quite generous. They are
around 65 percent of average earnings. It is also important to
note that almost every Swede has a private pension from his or
her company or occupation. So the standard of living for
Swedish retirees is currently very high.
In the 1980s, a parliamentary commission investigated the
operations of this retirement system and found that it would
not be sustainable into the future. The reserve fund was ex-
pected to be depleted around the year 2020, and the contribu-
tions rate was expected to rise dramatically after that—perhaps
to 25 to 35 percent of a worker’s annual income. The reasons for
this rise were the same as elsewhere in the world: an increasing
life expectancy and a worsening dependency ratio. Sweden re-
ceived an additional shock in the early 1990s when it experi-
enced several years of negative economic growth. How could
benefits continue to increase if the economy, and government
revenues, began shrinking?
In 1994, the Swedish government responded to this antici-
pated pension crisis by creating a new old-age benefit program. It
is a novel attempt to combine the virtues of a fully funded system
Sweden: Fully Funding without Privatizing?
93
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

with the realities of a pay-as-you-go system that cannot easily
be replaced. Creating this new program was not easy. While all
political parties agreed on its necessity, and even on the need to
move to some form of a fully funded program, they disagreed
on how to do this. The right-of-center parties, which then gov-
erned the country, wanted to move to a privatized system of
IRAs. The left-of-center opposition wanted to continue to use
the old pension program. The result was a compromise to do
both. The new pension system would have one tier drawn from
the old pension program and a second tier that used IRAs. A
third, means-tested tier was then added for those with low in-
comes. The most novel element of the new system is this first
tier, which involves converting the existing pay-as-you-go pro-
gram to a fully funded one. 
Sweden created what amounts to an imaginary fully
funded pension system that sits within its existing pay-as-you-go
retirement program. This is why it is called a “notional” defined-
contribution program. Underneath, the financing continues to
operate as it did when it was a simple pay-as-you-go system.
Contributions are made by employers and employees, and they
equal 16 percent of a worker’s annual earnings. (Unlike in the
United States, in Sweden, contributions are not 50–50. Employers
pay 62 percent and employees 38 percent.) Workers accrue pen-
sion points in the retirement program. The number of points ac-
crued depends upon the level of income, although points are also
given for years spent in military service, obtaining higher educa-
tion, and caring for children. The points are indexed each year to
the growth of real Swedish wages, so that the size of the eventual
benefit continues to grow. So far, this is a pretty standard pay-as-
you-go system.
But now comes the difference. Every year, the pension
points accumulated by any individual worker equal an amount
of money that is specifically credited to that worker within the
pension system. Year by year, this amount grows. A worker can
actually calculate how much savings he or she has in the Swedish
retirement system at any point in time. It is “their” money. It is as
if each worker had her or his own retirement account within the
larger pension system. And it is the money that is in that account
that will determine the size of the worker’s pension.
So what is the practical difference? Why should these no-
tional defined contributions solve the problems of a pay-as-you-
go system? In essence, it is because this type of pension system
94
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

will not pay out more than it takes in. In the U.S. system, a
worker can receive benefits far in excess of what that worker ever
contributed to Social Security. In Sweden, a worker will receive
what is in his or her account at the time of retirement (plus inter-
est). And that is all. Thus the program is financially balanced; it
should never go into the red.
At retirement, in Sweden, the retiree has a total defined pen-
sion entitlement. This is the amount of money that has been con-
tributed over that person’s working career (plus interest), as
indexed by wage growth. It is a matter of spreading this “notional
wealth” over the rest of the retiree’s life. This is done by dividing
the wealth by the number of years that the person is expected to
live during his or her retirement. For example, the Swedish gov-
ernment currently expects that someone who was born in 1960
and retires in 2025 (at age 65) will live another 17 years (Settergren
2005, 50). So, in 2025, this person’s notional pension wealth will be
divided by 17 (if this life expectancy has not changed by then).
That will be the amount of benefits paid to that person each year
for the rest of his or her life. As life expectancy increases, annual
benefits must decrease because this “annuity divisor” will become
larger and therefore the benefits will be lower. At least to the
Swedes, this is a defensible limit on benefits since it is fairly tied to
a worker’s income, and it preserves the financial health of the
pension system. If a worker wishes to obtain more benefits, he or
she must continue to work a little longer. Because as one continues
to work, the notional wealth rises and the divisor of future life ex-
pectancy goes down, making for a bigger benefit.
There is, however, one last complexity to consider. Retirees
do not receive their benefits in a lump sum. They get a portion
every year. What happens to the remainder of the benefits that
are yet to be received? Sweden has developed a rather compli-
cated way to handle these funds. Based on historical experience,
Sweden believes that in the long run, its economy grows by 1.6
percent per year. According to economic theory, real interest rates
should hover around the economic growth rate. So, to proxy the
earnings from interest, at the time of retirement this 1.6 percent
figure is incorporated into the life expectancy divisor in a manner
that makes the divisor smaller. This results in a bigger pension. It
roughly equals the effects of earning interest, although with the
twist that the retiree actually gets the impact of that interest the
day that retirement begins, rather than spread out over his or her
remaining life.
Sweden: Fully Funding without Privatizing?
95
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Sharp readers may have spotted a flaw, however. What hap-
pens if the economy actually grows more or less than that 1.6 per-
cent? The difficulty for the government is that if economic
growth is more, or less, than expected, the amount of contribu-
tions coming into the system is going to be more or less than ex-
pected. If no correction is made for unexpectedly high or low
economic growth, the system loses its notional full funding. For
example, if economic growth is lower than expected, the contri-
butions that come in that year will not be enough to pay for the
promised benefits that year and the system will be in trouble.
Therefore, pension benefits are adjusted annually if economic
growth does not turn out to be 1.6 percent for the year. Benefits
are reduced if economic growth is lower than that figure, and
they are increased if it is greater.
This difficulty suggests a second problem, which Sweden
has also had to solve. What happens if people turn out to live
longer than expected, or, for that matter, if fewer new workers
enter the labor force than expected? Either situation will lead to a
shortfall in money available to pay the promised benefits. To pre-
vent this shortfall, Sweden has added an “automatic balance
mechanism” that is triggered when the pension system’s ratio of
assets to future liabilities falls below 1. Outgoing benefits are then
multiplied by this mechanism, which further reduces benefits so
as to restore the system to balance.
Critics have claimed that the Swedish formulas are so diffi-
cult and so uncertain that, in reality, Swedish workers cannot re-
ally see “their” money as the new program promises (e.g.
Kotlikoff 2002, 207). In theory, more simple formulas could be
used for a notional defined-contribution system. But in fact the
combination of politics and the inherent uncertainty of the future
may produce formulas similar to those used in Sweden.
The operations of the automatic balancing mechanism
and the annuity divisor will almost certainly reduce Swedish
pensions. This is where the second tier of the new system, the
individual retirement accounts, enters the picture. Swedish
workers are asked to place 2.5 percent of their earnings into an
IRA. They have more than 700 investment funds to choose
from. If the worker does not choose a fund, the government
places that worker’s 2.5 percent into a default “life-cycle” in-
vestment fund. The Swedish government is the sole provider of
these investment funds and guarantees a minimum rate of re-
turn of 2.7 percent. Unlike the notional accounts in the first tier
96
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

of the retirement system, the IRAs are real money. At retire-
ment, workers have access to the funds to which they con-
tributed during their working years. Because these funds are
expected to generate higher returns than the notional defined-
contribution system, Sweden anticipates that they will more
than make up for the loss in benefits that a worker would oth-
erwise suffer under the new pension program. Experts believe
that these IRAs must earn between 2 and 5 percent a year to do
this. Historically, Swedish stocks have returned 8.6 percent a
year, and bonds have grown 3.1 percent a year.
The final tier of the new Swedish pension plan is a guaran-
teed retirement income for those who had no or little income over
their working years. This guaranteed pension is set to the con-
sumer price index. An individual who had no income whatso-
ever receives a pension that is roughly equal to $12,500 in 2007.
This person would also receive a housing allowance. The guaran-
teed benefit is means tested. It gradually falls to zero as the
earned pension of a worker rises.
The new Swedish system became fully operative in 2003.
Anyone born before 1938 remains fully in the old system. Anyone
born after 1953 is fully in the new system. Those in between re-
ceive some of their benefits from the old, the rest from the new. To
date, the new plan seems popular. The greatest difficulties have
actually been with its IRA portion. It turns out that many Swedes
are overwhelmed with the choice of 700 investment funds. Only
about 10 percent of entering workers actually choose a fund; the
rest are content to let their money go into the government’s de-
fault fund. An investigatory agency has recently recommended
that Sweden sharply reduce the number of available investment
funds and give workers more help in selecting among them.
But what of notional defined contributions? Is instituting
them a good path for reform? There are some clear positives.
Sweden is no longer under the burden of future pension liabili-
ties that it had promised but for which it could not pay. This is the
essential argument for its plan. Notional defined-contribution
plans offer a way to manage the transition costs that otherwise
swamp efforts to abandon unaffordable pay-as-you-go old-age
retirement systems. They ensure that today’s workers will not be
burdened with paying for today’s retirees, at an increasingly
steep cost. Instead, the risk is shifted to the retirees themselves,
who, after all, can choose, by the number of years they work, the
size of the pension they will receive. The IRA add-ons also allow
Sweden: Fully Funding without Privatizing?
97
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

workers to obtain some of the advantages of the higher rates of
return available in the stock and bond markets while remaining
within the safety of a large government retirement program.
To critics, however, notional defined-contribution programs
do not escape some of the worst effects of pay-as-you go pro-
grams. They only add additional risk to them. The pay-as-you-go
system that hums underneath the new program maintains the
relatively low rate of return that one generally finds in such sys-
tems. And it also maintains the intergenerational transfer that
characterizes these systems. Today’s workers must pay set de-
fined contributions to provide for today’s retirees, but in fact
when they retire they will receive relatively smaller pensions
than today’s retirees due to the operations of the life expectancy
divisor and the automatic balance mechanism. In other words,
the shift of money from today’s workers to current pensioners
continues. But in addition, today’s workers have also taken on
more risk. Indeed, a notional defined-contribution plan is a way
of shifting risk from the government to the workforce. The gov-
ernment escapes unaffordable pension claims by automatically
reducing benefits when necessary. However, the burden of the re-
duced benefits rests entirely on those either living on pensions or
planning for them. They must make up the difference out of their
own savings, if they have any. The government projects that, by
2055, retirement benefits will have been cut by 18 percent (Setter-
gren 2005, 49). Sweden argues that the generosity of the Swedish
retirement, combined with the fact that almost all Swedes have a
second private pension, makes this justifiable. The government
also notes that this cut amounts to slightly more than two years
of work. A delay in retirement of that length is all that is neces-
sary to bring benefits back to today’s level.
Americans must face the fact that U.S. retirees receive much
less than their Swedish counterparts, and far fewer U.S. workers
than Swedish workers have private pensions to supplement So-
cial Security. The average American Social Security benefit is not
all that different from the minimum that a Swede receives from
the means-tested program available to those with little or no life-
time earnings. Even after the anticipated cuts, a Swede will re-
ceive a government pension valued at about 55 percent of his or
her earnings, whereas an American’s Social Security benefit will
only be about 40 percent of his or her earnings.. For this reason,
the benefit cuts entailed in a U.S. notional defined-contribution
plan might have a far greater impact than the cuts that will occur
98
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

in Sweden. (Another Swedish reform might cause some hackles
to be raised in the United States, too, though it is not connected to
notional defined contributions. Sweden has ended its survivor’s
benefits on grounds of gender equality. Everyone, it is thought,
has the right to enter the workforce and earn his or her own pen-
sion; therefore, Sweden gives a surviving spouse a one-year ad-
justment to meet his or her new situation.)
Sweden is one of the few industrialized nations to success-
fully climb out from under its pension obligations. Its method of
doing so has yet to attract many adherents in the United States,
but many other nations are closely examining it. For a system as
intimately tied to pay-as-you-go financing as is Social Security,
is Sweden’s approach the best way to salvage the U.S. old-age
system?
The United Kingdom: Voluntary Carve-Outs?
Many proposals to reform U.S. Social Security, including that of-
fered by President George W. Bush in 2005, involve giving work-
ers the option to move a portion of their contributions into their
own personal accounts. At retirement, they would draw on these
accounts for their income, along with a smaller traditional Social
Security benefit. Plans of this type are called voluntary carve-outs
because they remove a portion of the contributions that were
going into the old Social Security system. (Carve-outs can be con-
trasted with voluntary add-ons, where workers are given the op-
tion to make additional contributions into their own personal
accounts. One example of this is the German Riester Pensions.)
Only one nation has much experience with voluntary carve-outs:
the United Kingdom. How has that reform worked out?
The United Kingdom has perhaps the most complicated
old-age pension program in the world. On top of that, it is per-
haps the most frequently changed old-age pension program in
the world. More than a dozen major reforms have been made
over the past two decades, with the last, made in 2007, yet to be
implemented. Here the discussion focuses on the main details;
there are many complications and regulations that will not be
considered.
The United Kingdom’s current old-age system really dates
from the years after World War II. It is based on very different
conceptions than those that animated the U.S. program. In 1946,
The United Kingdom: Voluntary Carve-Outs?
99
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

following an influential report by William Beveridge, the United
Kingdom developed a comprehensive cradle-to-the-grave social
welfare system. It includes national health insurance, unemploy-
ment benefits, and old-age pensions, among other programs. The
entire program is funded by one tax, called the National Insur-
ance Contribution (NIC). This tax is paid both by the worker and
the employer according to a complicated formula. A key princi-
ple of the system is equality: everyone should receive the same
benefits. Thus the old-age program that was created, the Basic
State Pension (BSP), is not earnings based. It is a flat-rate pension
that is determined simply by how many years one has worked.
To get a full pension, the retiree needs to have spent 44 years in
the workforce. A recent reform will reduce that number to 30
years. (The British retirement age is 65 for men, 60 for women, al-
though the latter is being raised to 65 as well.) As in most Euro-
pean systems, one can get credit for years spent engaged in child
care, on disability, or if unemployed. The flip side of this univer-
sal, egalitarian pension is that it is rather small. It was conceived
as offering a minimal pension on which a retiree could live. Any-
thing above that would come from other pensions or from the
worker’s savings. In 2007, the full Basic State Pension amounted
to £4,540 a year. This pension was originally indexed by wages,
reindexed to prices during the 1980s, and now slated to be re-
turned to wage indexation again.
The relatively small size of this pension produced political
pressure to increase it. In 1959, the United Kingdom thus added a
second pension program on top of the BSP that paid benefits ac-
cording to lifetime earnings. This program has borne several
names. It was substantially expanded in 1975 and titled the State-
Earnings-Related-Pension-Scheme (SERPS). SERPS initially paid
a benefit equal to 25 percent of a worker’s best 20 years of NIC-
taxed earnings. This benefit was reduced to 20 percent in 1986. In
2002, the State Second Pension Scheme (S2P) in turn replaced the
SERPS. The S2P is weighted to provide relatively larger benefits
to lower-income earners than did the SERPS, so it has a more
complicated benefits formula. A significant limitation of this sec-
ond pension is that it is not open to workers who are self-em-
ployed. Currently, the minimum pension that a qualifying retiree
can obtain from the State Second Pension is about £3,120 a year. A
high-income worker will receive close to double that amount. All
this too will change again in a few years because recent legisla-
tion will impose yet another formula on the S2P that will make it,
100
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

by the year 2030, a flat-rate pension, just like the Basic State Pen-
sion. After that, British workers will be receiving two flat-rate
pensions, one stacked on top of the other. Each pension will pay
about the same, so qualifying retirees will get a total pension of at
least about £7,300 in 2007 dollars.
That is, however, if the worker elects to stay in the S2P. For
here is where the innovation lies. The United Kingdom has cre-
ated the option to “contract out” of the second pension program.
Before describing this, the third leg of the British old-age pension
system is discussed. The United Kingdom has a “pension credit”
program for workers with very low incomes or who do not qual-
ify for either of the state pensions. It includes a guaranteed mini-
mum pension that is indexed to earnings (the Minimum Income
Guarantee), and a “savings credit” through which low-income
workers receive benefits on a sliding scale that takes account of
their prebenefit income. The pension credit produces pension
benefits similar to the low end of a pension drawn from the BSP
and the S2P.
By the time a current worker retires, he or she has lived
under, and made contributions to, several different pension pro-
grams. The government has an incredibly complex set of formu-
las to calculate how much one will get from each pension
program. It is this constant churning of pension programs that
has, perhaps ironically, made it easier for the United Kingdom to
make large changes in its old-age pension system. For there is lit-
tle political loyalty to any one pension program. After all, any one
of them has only been around for a few years. Moreover, neither
workers nor retirees can identify how much of their benefits are
coming from which program. Unlike the U.S. Social Security sys-
tem, nothing about the British system is politically, economically,
or morally entrenched.
This ease of reform lay behind the United Kingdom’s devel-
opment of a voluntary carve-out to its second pension program.
When Margaret Thatcher, the British prime minister in the 1980s,
decided to reform her country’s old-age system, she was able to
take radical measures that U.S. reformers could only dream of (or
have nightmares about). It was she who simply cut the SERPS
benefit from 25 percent to 20 percent of taxed income. She was
also the one who changed the BSP from being indexed to wages
to being indexed to prices. Her most daring reform, though, was
to encourage British workers to simply opt out of the SERPS plan
altogether. When the second British pension was created, it was
The United Kingdom: Voluntary Carve-Outs?
101
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

thought to be primarily a supplementary program for those
without other retirement pensions. So the initial program al-
lowed workers who already had an occupational pension to con-
tract out of the new government pension. If they did, both they
and their employers were given a rebate on their National Insur-
ance Contributions.
In 1986, Prime Minister Thatcher moved to reward workers
who opted out of SERPS by giving them a substantially larger
NIC rebate if they did so. Workers were also allowed to move
their pensions from an occupational pension plan—with typical
British complexity, there are six types—into a “personal pension
scheme” sold by a financial services company. One estimate is
that the rebate given to workers after this reform was twice as
large as the savings the government could expect to generate
through the carve-out (Budd and Campbell 1998).
The SERPS program was only eight years old when these
changes were made, revealing one key limitation on any U.S. at-
tempt to follow the British example: after only eight years, the
amount of contributions paid into the program, and the liabilities
accrued, were still modest. As a result, the transition costs were
not great. It would be a far different situation if Social Security
tried to emulate this reform. Moreover, the United Kingdom han-
dled much of its small transitions costs via the benefit cuts made
by the Thatcher government.
As it turned out, millions of British workers eligible for
SERPS, and later the S2P, contracted out of the program. Liter-
ally tens of thousands of private and occupational pension
funds were developed by employers and the financial services
industry to cater to them. However, a series of difficulties led
the government to substantially reduce the choices offered
workers and to significantly increase the regulation of the pri-
vate pension industry.
The most serious problem involved the marketing practices
of some financial service companies and the financial soundness
of many of the private pension funds. The financial service indus-
try rapidly developed many pension products and, of course, at-
tempted to sell them to the public. Agents convinced many
British workers to drop their old occupational plans in favor of a
new personal pension scheme. However, bad advice was often
given. Many workers were encouraged to leave their old retire-
ment pensions and buy into replacements that would pay much
lower benefits. This practice, which came to be called “mis-sell-
102
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ing,” ended in a scandal and a government order that the finan-
cial services industry pay some £13 billion in damages to harmed
workers and retirees. Personal pension schemes also proved to
have quite high administrative fees and charges, not infrequently
five times more than that of the occupational pensions. Another
government reform has capped private pension fees at 1.5 per-
cent, but this is still much higher than the cost of government or
occupational pension alternatives.
Among the large number of pensions offered, many proved
not to be financially sound. Some 85,000 British workers have lost
their pension contributions due to private pension plan failures
(BBC News 2006). Because employers were not required to match
worker contributions, many of the new occupational pension
funds were also underfunded. They are pension shells that did
little more than meet formal requirements. These funding issues
produced a second scandal, addressed by the Pensions Act of
2004. This law increased regulation of occupational and private
pensions and created the Pension Protection Fund to insure
workers against their losses if their private pension plan fails.
Nevertheless, the funding of the personal pension schemes
still remains a problem. In 10 years’ time, less than half of the
schemes will still be receiving contributions from their owners. In
fact, more than a third of these plans have lapsed altogether, and
this number is growing. Also, both workers and employers have
responded to the opportunity to opt out in other ways that are
likely to harm their future pensions. Employers saw the opportu-
nity to move from defined-benefit plans, the mainstay before
1986, to defined-contribution plans. The latter are easier for com-
panies to fund, but they impose additional uncertainty on work-
ers preparing for their retirement and may offer lower benefits as
well. Some workers have taken the rational but chaotic strategy
of contracting out of the SERPS or S2P but then coming back in
when reaching their highest earning years. Other workers simply
could not figure out which of their many alternatives was their
best choice.
In short, this voluntary carve-out experienced a very rocky
start. So rocky, in fact, that the United Kingdom is all but ending
the experiment. Upon taking power from the Conservatives in
1997, Tony Blair and his Labour Party took a series of steps to
reimpose sharp limitations on the ability of British workers to
contract out from their government pension program. After the
S2P was created to replace the SERPS, a “stakeholder pension
The United Kingdom: Voluntary Carve-Outs?
103
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

scheme” was first developed to offer far more regulated private
pension plans than the existing personal pension schemes. Then
in 2007, a final Pensions Bill was enacted that will end both stake-
holder and personal pension schemes. Only defined-benefit em-
ployer pensions will now be allowed to contract out of the
system. Everyone else must remain in what will become, as dis-
cussed above, a flat-rate pension program. Personal voluntary
carve-out plans also will all but disappear. (The Labour govern-
ment has also moved to return the program to one indexed to
wages, not prices. This action, too, may also hold lessons for the
United States.)
The British government has instead turned in a different di-
rection. Following the recommendations of a national pensions
commission, it now intends to offer not a carve-out but an add-on
pension program. It has established a commission to develop
such a program by 2012. Workers will contribute 4 percent of
their NIC-taxed earnings, employers will contribute an amount
equal to 3 percent of a worker’s earnings, and the British govern-
ment will add the equivalent of 1 percent of earnings in the form
of a tax credit to this as yet unnamed plan. These contributions
will be on top of the existing NIC tax. Workers will be automati-
cally enrolled in this program, though they may opt out. If they
do opt out, they are re-enrolled every three years. In other words,
a worker must continue to express a desire not to be in the pro-
gram. Within the program, workers will be able to choose from a
small number of selected, regulated pension funds. It is not yet
clear whether these funds will be private or government man-
aged. The British government believes that the combination of
the flat-rate Basic State Pension, this add-on plan, and existing
employer pensions will produce a total retirement that is suffi-
ciently generous while also financially sustainable (Department
of Work and Pensions 2006, 41). Because the program is yet to be
implemented, it is impossible to know if it will really succeed in
accomplishing this goal.
What, then, is the lesson for voluntary carve-outs? Because
of the problems discussed above, many organizations, includ-
ing the Trades Union Congress, the United Kingdom’s major
labor union, had already been recommending to all workers
that they not contract out of the SERPS/S2P. The number who
did choose to leave began falling in the early 1990s. But perhaps
the most significant measure of how little popularity the carve-
outs had developed is the fact that, during the Parliamentary
104
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

debates of 2007, no political party opposed the proposal to get
rid of them.
Should it thus be concluded that voluntary carve-outs do
not work? Against the criticisms raised above, some experts re-
tort that the British experience does not prove this at all; it only
provides a lesson of how not to implement them. A virtually un-
regulated carve-out program was bound to cause problems.
There were too many choices, and there was too little oversight of
them. The carve-outs were placed within an almost ludicrously
complicated pension system. Voluntary carve-outs can and
should be much simpler to understand and execute. Finally, some
British pension experts have claimed that the greater financial
knowledge of most Americans makes the United States better
suited for a system of private retirement plans than is the United
Kingdom. So whether the United Kingdom provides proof that
partial privatization of government pensions does not work or
just serves as a model for how not to do it remains in dispute.
President Bush’s 2005 initiative demonstrates that the idea, at
least, is alive and well. Nevertheless, whatever position one
takes, the past two decades of the British schemes of voluntary
carve-outs does offer critical information about how this type of
reform actually might work and what must be done if an admin-
istration wants to implement this sort of reform most effectively.
Chile: Privatization?
The most audacious, and controversial, way of reforming U.S. So-
cial Security is simply to get rid of the program. Carve-out all of
Social Security, if you will. This means making workers responsi-
ble for their own retirement. They have to save the money, in
their own accounts, that they will need during their retirement.
Most of those who favor this sort of reform continue to see the
government as useful for setting guidelines and regulating how
these accounts should operate, but beyond that, it should let the
private sector take over. Supporters of this approach often cite the
case of Chile, the first country to try such a plan. The “Chilean
model” has spread to other countries in Latin America. What is
this model, and how has it performed?
Prior to its current model, Chile had a standard pay-as-you-
go retirement system. It was, in fact, directly based on the Ger-
man program. But the system experienced a crisis in the 1970s.
Chile: Privatization?
105
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The program became insolvent. Generous benefits, a worsening
dependency ratio, and financial mismanagement were the main
culprits. Chile had no reserve fund left, and it had to pay more
benefits than it received in contributions. The government
needed to pay more than a quarter of all the benefits owed out of
the nation’s general tax revenues. This system simply could not
be sustained. A larger political crisis intervened when a military
coup ousted the country’s president, Salvador Allende, in 1973.
The new government, led by General Augusto Pinochet, believed
that restoring Chile’s fiscal soundness was essential, at whatever
cost. As a military dictatorship, Chile’s government had certain
obvious advantages in its ability to eliminate its unaffordable old
program and to replace it with one that would meet the test of
soundness.
The Pinochet government drew on the work of Milton
Friedman, a Nobel Prize–winning economist, who argued that
retirement was a personal, not a governmental, responsibility.
Each individual knows her or his retirement needs better than
does anyone else, including the government. Therefore, it is that
individual who should make the necessary choices, not the gov-
ernment. The best way to help that individual is to create the
legal environment to protect and support each worker’s retire-
ment savings, and then get out of the way.
This is what Chile proceeded to do. It began preparing for
an end to its pay-as-you-go system in the late 1970s by cutting
government spending so as to produce the large budget sur-
pluses that would be needed to fund the transition from the old
program. That achieved, in 1981, the government announced
that it was closing the old program. Workers in the program
could stay in, with reduced benefits, or they could move into
the new program and receive government bonds, called “recog-
nition bonds,” that contained a portion of the assets of the old
system. The bonds cannot be cashed until the date of retirement,
but they are guaranteed to grow each year at a rate of 4 percent.
New workers were not given a choice. They had to join the new
system.
This new system is quite simple. Workers are required to
pay 10 percent of their income into a state-approved retirement
account. (If one includes the requirement to contribute to a dis-
ability program and to a survivor’s pension fund, this number
grows to 12.5 to 13 percent.) Because employers are no longer re-
quired to make contributions, the Chilean government passed
106
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

legislation that mandated they raise the salaries of their workers
who had joined the new system by the amount of their old em-
ployer contributions. This operated as a further incentive to get
workers to switch into it. Today only about one in seven workers
remains in the old system.
This contribution of 10 percent of earnings is placed into
an individual retirement account that is managed by a private
financial company approved by the government. These compa-
nies are called AFPs (administradora de fandos de pensiones). A
company must meet a number of requirements that concern size
and financial solvency, among other factors. The number of
companies that seek to be AFPs has varied over the years. Cur-
rently, a worker can choose from six AFPs. Each AFP offers five
funds, with each of the funds having a different level of risk.
The government, through its Superintendent of Pension Fund
Management, has firmly regulated what investments can be
held in each of these five funds. For example, the “safest” fund
holds no stocks, while the most risky fund is allowed to hold a
significant percentage of its portfolio in stocks, as well in for-
eign assets. Since the 1980s, the government has gradually re-
laxed its rules on risk. In the program’s first years, no stocks at
all were allowed in any AFP fund. The theory behind having
multiple AFPs is that they will compete with one another for the
workers’ accounts.
Unlike a defined-benefit plan, the AFPs cannot guarantee
the size of future pensions; this will depend upon how skillfully
the company has invested and how the market has fared during a
worker’s years of contributions. But the government still com-
mands that AFPs return to the worker a stipulated minimum
pension at the time of retirement. The AFP must draw from its
own financial resources, if necessary, to meet this criterion. If the
company cannot do so, for whatever reason, the government
steps in and provides the resources. AFPs must also offer fairly
stable rates of return. For any given year, the deviation from the
average annual growth rate of an AFP fund cannot exceed either
2 percentage points or one-half of that average growth rate,
whichever is the greater number. If an AFP fund grows faster
than this rate, the company is obligated to put the extra money
into a special reserve fund that will be used should the deviation
ever be lower than that allowed. All of these regulations are in-
tended to maximize the security and stability of the private funds
into which Chilean workers will place their retirement savings.
Chile: Privatization?
107
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Superintendent of Pension Fund Management pro-
vides additional financial support for low-income workers.
Originally, there was a “minimum pension guarantee” set at 27
percent of the average earnings of a worker with 20 or more
years of employment. However, in 2008, a new two-tier plan re-
places this guarantee. All Chilean workers, upon retirement,
now receive a “basic solidarity pension.” Currently, the basic
solidarity pension is set at about $111 a month. (Because of a
history of high inflation, Chile uses a basket of international
currencies, not its peso, to denominate much of its pension sys-
tem.) Then, retirees with small individual retirement accounts
have their accounts “topped off” by the Chilean government
until they also reach $111. In other words, the effective mini-
mum Chilean pension is really $222 per month. This money will
come from Chile’s general revenues, an interesting deviation
from the principle of privatization.
At the date that workers retire, they have three options for
how to collect their pensions. First, they may buy an annuity
from a life insurance company, using the money in their individ-
ual pension account. The annuity, which is government insured,
will pay an annual benefit for the rest of their lives. However, re-
tirees will not be able to deed any of their annuity to their heirs.
Second, a retiree can choose to take programmed withdrawals
from his or her existing pension fund. In this case, the Chilean
government has calculated a withdrawal formula based on mor-
tality rates and expected interest rates. The retiree can withdraw
the amount each year that is stipulated by the formula. If money
remains at the time of death, it goes to the heirs. The trade-off is
that it is possible, if retirees are long lived, that their pension will
be exhausted and they might run out of money before they die.
Because of this worry, most retirees currently choose the annuity.
However, a third plan, which combines the ability to leave one’s
money to one’s estate with annuity-type guarantee that one can-
not outlive the pension, has recently been developed.
Chile anticipated that its new plan would provide a gener-
ous retirement if its average individual retirement account could
return 5 percent a year. In this case, someone who had worked for
40 years could expect to receive an annual pension valued at 60
percent of his or her final average wage. If these accounts could
achieve a return of 10 percent, the annual pension would grow to
85 percent of the average wage. Relative to the average wages of
Chile and the United States, both scenarios in Chile’s pension
108
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

program yield substantially larger pensions than does U.S. Social
Security. Thus far, Chilean accounts have performed better than
expected. The rate of return has exceeded 10 percent since the
start of the program (Tamborini 2007, 14). This outcome is the
genesis of the argument supporting a similar program for the
United States. In addition to the solid financial performance of
the Chilean system, supporters also point to the freedom of
choice it allows Chilean workers and to real benefits the program
has brought to the country’s economy. The national savings rate
has grown rapidly since the inauguration of the program. This
trend is thought to have contributed to the many years of strong
overall economic growth that the nation has experienced. And
Chile never need worry about its government pension program
again becoming insolvent or becoming a huge burden upon gov-
ernment finances.
So what are the negative aspects of such a system? While
opponents have focused on inequalities produced by the pro-
gram (e.g. Sinha 2002), in fact the largest problem, should the
United States choose to move in this direction, is the cost. Unlike
Chile, the United States has been running deep budget deficits.
Recall that Chile had to sustain years of surpluses to pay for the
costs of transitioning to the new program. (In fact, Chile is now
using its surpluses to create a pension reserve fund from which it
will pay for its basic solidarity pensions and for its topping up of
worker pensions that fall below the minimum.) But Chile still
must pay transition costs for as long as a single retiree is left in its
old system, and that transition is estimated to take another 40
years. If the transition cost for the United States is similar to that
of Chile’s, at its peak the cost would be more than $600 billion a
year. This amount is approaching half of the size of all the annual
revenues gained through the personal income tax in the United
States. One has to ask whether the United States could ever as-
semble the money it would need for such a transition.
Transition costs may be the biggest practical barrier, but
most opposition turns on the more politically charged questions
of the risk and fairness of privatization. So far, the Chilean pro-
gram has turned in very good numbers. But were the decades of
the 1980s and 1990s typical or unusual? The excellent financial
returns of those years were in fact what made the Chilean pro-
gram successful. If the program had been launched in a less fa-
vorable investment era, it might very well have failed. Critics
charge that one cannot presume that the next decades will match
Chile: Privatization?
109
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

the rates of return seen recently and that it is very risky to as-
sume that they will.
Most independent observers agree that the new Chilean
program has worked well for those with steady, stable jobs. They
have been able to regularly accumulate enough funds for a good
retirement. Those who cannot enter the program (currently the
self-employed) or who do not work regularly, though, have more
difficulty accumulating funds. Fifteen years into its life, half of
Chile’s workers had accumulated less than $1,500 in their plans
(Shah 1997, 9). Why? The average Chilean worker actually con-
tributes to a retirement fund during only 21 years of her or his ca-
reer. This shortened contribution period occurs for a variety of
reasons, including years of self-employment and years out of the
workforce, as well as time spent working in the “informal” econ-
omy or otherwise avoiding having to make the required contri-
butions. As a result, this average worker will wind up with
benefit amounts below those offered by Chile’s soon-to-be-ended
minimum pension program. Whether these same problems
would affect the United States would depend upon the percent-
age of workers brought into the system and the course of the typ-
ical American work career. A program that provides a guaranteed
minimum income that many workers will not reach on their own
could become surprisingly expensive for the government.
Another argument concerns the expense of the Chilean pro-
gram. Critics charge that it is far too expensive. Its administrative
costs are more than double those of the U.S. Social Security pro-
gram. Pension fund fees strip away a quarter of the accumulation
of Chilean workers. Because the fees are charged on contribu-
tions, not accounts, they are especially burdensome for newer
contributors. The AFPs have been charging 10 to 15 percent of the
initial contributions as fund fees and charges (Soto 2005, 5). These
fees appear to many observers to be excessive. They have re-
duced the true rate of return that a worker actually sees by nearly
40 percent. Supporters retort that this fee structure is not much
different from that used by U.S financial firms for U.S individual
retirement accounts. A Chilean worker who has been employed
for 40 years will actually end up paying less than 1 percent of his
or her assets in fees. Furthermore, the Chilean government has
taken steps to reduce the fees. It has banned flat-rate fees alto-
gether, and it will soon begin automatically placing the accounts
of new workers in the AFP with the lowest fees to encourage
price competition. It has also moved to expand the pool of AFPs.
110
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Banks, in particular, are now encouraged to enter this market.
Calculating the cost of a pension program is quite technical and a
little obscure, but it is of great importance, as even small differ-
ences in expenses will, over the decades, make a very large differ-
ence in the size of a pension someone will receive.
A final argument over the value of Chile’s program is sim-
ply whether the average worker is financially savvy enough to
succeed in the program. The Chilean president, Michelle
Bachelet, has worried that he or she is not (Pension Research
Council 2006, 3). Choosing a fund is the easy part. Understanding
the financial effects of when one enters and leaves the workforce,
how often one contributes, and how one interprets an annual rate
of return takes a lot more sophistication. Perhaps U.S. workers
have more experience with financial information (most Chilean
workers never even read their fund statements) and are less
likely to make bad choices. Perhaps not. There is much debate
surrounding this issue.
Chile’s program is certainly the most drastic reform yet un-
dertaken of a major government pension program. Since it is
more than two decades old, it cannot be claimed that nothing is
known about how the system will perform. President Bachelet
has continued to back the new system, and it is proving popular
elsewhere in Latin America. But clearly many questions remain
to be settled. The least that can be said is that this reform would
be one of the greatest magnitude should the United States try to
emulate it.
Too Many Alternatives?
The world holds a wide variety of public pension programs.
There is certainly no lack of models for any country wishing to
reform its own program. This discussion has considered only
six countries; more than a dozen others, including Japan,
France, Mexico, and several in Eastern Europe and South Amer-
ica, have undertaken significant reforms of their retirement pro-
grams in recent years. Perhaps this fact reinforces a point made
in chapter 2: It is not that the United States has no options for re-
forming Social Security. Rather, it is that the number that are
available is bewildering.
Beginning in the 1980s, most of the world experienced the
same problems as those that afflict the U.S. program. Increasing life
Too Many Alternatives?
111
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

expectancy, a decreasing ratio of workers to retirees, and indexed
benefits that grow relentlessly combine to put most retirement pro-
grams in jeopardy. As discussed above, different countries took
very different paths to reform. Most of these reforms are quite re-
cent, and it is still perhaps too early to judge the results, a fact that
makes it even more difficult to determine in which direction the
United States should go. But what conclusions, if any, can be
drawn from the experiences of these other countries?
The first obvious point is that every reform has imposed costs
upon some sector of society. Most of the difficulty of reforming
pension programs is not technical; it is political. Who should pay
the costs? Current workers, as in Canada, those receiving benefits,
as in Germany, or wealthier individuals, as in Australia? A second
point is that risk is the hallmark of any pension system. A huge ele-
ment in how one views the various reforms discussed here is how
one approaches the question of risk. How much is acceptable, and
upon which elements of society is the risk best placed? Should the
risk be borne by everyone in the system, as in Sweden, or by the in-
dividual worker, as in Chile? A third point is that the biggest diffi-
culty that most of these nations has had to face is how to pay for
the transition costs of moving from their old systems to their new
ones. In many cases it was public money that made this transition
possible. For the United States, too, this is likely to be the biggest
practical obstacle to reform. Abandoning pay-as-you-go systems
turns out to be rather difficult. The only completely successful ef-
fort took place in Chile, under a military dictatorship.
Comparing reforms across nations reveals the good news
that saving Social Security is certainly possible. There are many
paths. But such an exercise also demonstrates the difficult nature
of taking any one of these paths. No model stands out as com-
pletely and clearly superior to any other. All those with a stake in
the future of America’s Social Security program should analyze
each reform carefully and watch closely their successes, and their
difficulties, in the years ahead.
References
Börsch-Supan, Axel. 2005. “Mind the Gap: The Effectiveness of Incen-
tives to Boost Retirement Saving in Europe.” OECD Economic Studies.
39:111-143 www.oecd.org/dataoecd/18/60/35664007.pdf.
112
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Börsch-Supan, Axel, and Christina B. Wilke. 2006. “The German Public
Pension System: How It Will Become an NDC System Look-Alike.” In
Pension Reform: Issues and Prospects for Non-Defined Financial Contribution
Schemes, ed. Robert Holtzman and Edward Palmer, 573-610. Washington:
The World Bank 
BBC News (British Broadcasting Company). 2006. Q & A: Ombudsmen’s
Pension Report. (March 14). http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business
/4764098.stm.
Budd, Alan, and Nigel Campbell. 1998. The Roles of the Public and Pri-
vate Sectors in the U.K. Pension System. In Privatizing Social Security, ed.
Martin Feldstein. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Canadian Pension Plan Investment Board. 2007. 2007 Annual Report.
http://www.cppib.ca/.
Capretta, James C. 2007. Global Aging and the Sustainability of Public Pen-
sion Systems: An Assessment of Reform Efforts in Twelve Developed Coun-
tries. Washington: Center for Strategic and International Studies.
(January). http://csis.org/gai.
Capretta, James C. 2006. Building Automatic Solvency into U.S. Social Secu-
rity: Insights from Sweden and Germany. Policy Brief #151 (March). Wash-
ington: The Brookings Institution.
Congressional Budget Office. United States Congress.1999. Social Secu-
rity Privatization: Experiences Abroad. Washington: CBO. http://www
.cbo.gov/ftpdoc.cfm?index=1065&type=0.
Department of Work and Pensions (United Kingdom). 2006. Personal Ac-
counts: A New Way to Save. Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of
State for Work and Pensions (December). http://www.dwp.gov
.uk/pensionsreform/pdfs/PA_PersonalAccountsFull.pdf.
Korczyk, Sophie M. 2003. Women and Individual Social Security Accounts in
Chile, Australia, and the United Kingdom. Washington: AARP. http:
//assets.aarp.org/rgcenter/econ/2003_09_wmnss.pdf.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. 2002. Comments on Edward Palmer, “Swedish
Pension Reform: Its Past and Its Future.” In Martin Feldstein and Horst
Siebert, eds. Social Security Pension Reform in Europe. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Mitchell, Daniel J., and Robert P. O’Quinn. 1997. “Australia’s Privatized
Retirement System: Lessons for the United States.” Backgrounder, 1149.
Washington: The Heritage Foundation (December 8). http://www
.heritage.org/research/socialsecurity/.
Office of the Chief Actuary (Canada). 2007. Optimal Funding of the Canada
Pension Plan. Ottawa: Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institu-
tions. (April)
References
113
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Pension Research Council. 2006. Lesson from Pension Reform in the Ameri-
cas. Pension Research Council Working Paper 2006-8. Philadelphia: Pen-
sion Research Council, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Rothman, George P. 1998. Projections of Key Aggregates for Australia’s
Aged—Government Outlays, Financial Assets, and Incomes. Paper Pre-
sented at the Sixth Colloquium of Superannuation Researchers, July
1998, in Melbourne, Australia. http://rim.treasury.gov.au/content
/CP98_2.asp.
Settergren, Ole, ed. 2005. The Swedish Pension System Annual Report, 2005.
Stockholm: Swedish Social Insurance Agency. http://www.fk.se/filer
/publikationer/pdf/par05-e.pdf.
Shah, Hemant. 1997. Towards Better Regulation of Private Pension Funds.
Policy Research Working Paper No. 1791, World Bank. http://www
.worldbank.org/html/dec/Publications/Workpapers/WPS1700series
/wps1791/wps1791.pdf.
Sinha, Tapen. 2002. “Can Latin American Experience Teach Us Some-
thing About Privatized Pensions with Individual Accounts?” Retirement
Implications of Demographic and Family Change Symposium Monograph.
Schaumburg IL: Society of Actuaries. http://ssrn.com/abstract=390720.
Soto, Mauricio. 2005. Chilean Pension Reform: The Good, the Bad, and the In
Between. Issue Brief #31 (June). Boston: Center for Retirement Research,
Boston College.
Tamborini, Christopher. 2007. Social Security: The Chilean Approach  to Re-
tirement. CRS Report to Congress (May 17). Washington: United States
Congress, Congressional Research Service.
114
Worldwide Perspectives
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

4
Chronology
T
his chronology indicates the dates of significant events in the
history of the U.S. Social Security program. It also provides the
dates of the major reforms and innovations that have occurred
elsewhere among the world’s many government pension systems.
These reforms and innovations may be of interest to those who
wish to know more about the options available to the United States.
U.S. Chronology
1890
The Disability Pension Act of 1890 (also called the De-
pendency Pension Act) becomes law. The United
States will now pay every Union Civil War veteran
over the age of 62 a monthly pension. The act breaks
the link between having suffered a disability during
the war and receiving a pension. All veterans are eli-
gible. Pensions are also given to widows of veterans.
This is America’s first large-scale government pen-
sion program. Two-thirds of the nonimmigrant males
in the North who are over the age of 65 will draw
pensions under this program, roughly the same per-
centage as under the German program.
1909
The first old-age pension bill is introduced in the U.S.
Congress. It does not pass.
1914
Arizona becomes the first state to pass an old-age
pension law. The law is declared unconstitutional by
the Arizona Supreme Court in 1916.
115
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1915
The territory of Alaska enacts a limited old-age pen-
sion program. It is not challenged in court. This is the
first public pension program in the United States.
1929
The Great Depression begins. Unparalleled unem-
ployment and financial distress lead to calls for new
U.S. programs to remedy old-age poverty.
1932
Franklin Delano Roosevelt is elected president. Roo-
sevelt is the first president to support an old-age pen-
sion program and becomes the key actor in the
development and passage of such a program in the
United States. He appoints Arthur Altmeyer, a Wis-
consin academic and administrator, to be assistant
secretary of labor. Altmeyer goes on to become the
commissioner of the Social Security Board.
1933
Francis Townsend, a retired doctor in Long Beach,
California, publishes his Townsend Old-Age Re-
volving Pension Plan. The plan, which offers a pen-
sion to every retired American over age 60, provided
that the pension is spent within a month, is to be
funded by a national sales tax. Within months, thou-
sands of Townsend clubs are organized around the
United States to pressure for the Townsend Plan’s
adoption.
1935
Senator Huey Long (D-La.) delivers a speech in which
he offers a plan to “share the wealth.” The plan in-
cludes a guaranteed pension for all retired Americans,
to be financed by greater taxation on the wealthy.
The Social Security Act of 1935 is signed into law. This
massive bill includes unemployment insurance and
income assistance programs for the aged, the blind,
the disabled, and poor mothers and their children, as
well an old-age pension plan. The pension plan,
which later becomes known simply as “Social Secu-
rity,” is a fully funded program based on equal em-
ployer and worker contributions and pays monthly
benefits based on the worker’s average earnings. The
retirement age is set at 65.
116
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1936
The Social Security Administration issues the first So-
cial Security number.
1937
By a vote of 7–2, the Supreme Court rules that the
U.S. Social Security program is constitutional.
1939
The United States enacts the Social Security amend-
ments of 1939. These amendments significantly in-
crease the number of eligible workers and increase
both benefit and contribution levels. Benefits will
now also be provided to the survivors of a de-
ceased worker. Significantly, following the Swedish
example, the program is shifted to pay-as-you-go
financing.
1940
Ida M. Fuller, of Ludlow, Vermont, receives the first
monthly benefit paid under the U.S. Social Security
program. Her check is for $22.54.
1944
One million Americans are receiving benefits under
Social Security.
1945
President Harry S Truman proposes adding a com-
prehensive medical insurance plan to the Social Secu-
rity system. Congress does not act on his proposal.
1950
The Social Security Amendments of 1950 again signif-
icantly expand the U.S. Social Security system by lib-
eralizing eligibility and adding more than 10 million
workers to the program. The amendments also in-
clude a large increase in benefits.
1954
The U.S. Social Security program is extended to the
self-employed in specified professions, most impor-
tantly including farmers, and, on a voluntary basis, to
members of state and local government.
1956
The Social Security Amendments of 1956 add a pro-
gram for disabled workers between the ages of 50 and
64, with its own trust fund. Children of eligible work-
ers who become disabled before the age of 18 are also
included in the program.
Chronology
117
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1961
Male workers are allowed to opt for early retirement,
at age 62. Workers who elect early retirement will,
however, receive lower monthly Social Security bene-
fits. (Most women had gained this right in 1956.)
1965
Medicare and Medicaid are added to the Social Secu-
rity Act. Medicare is given its own trust fund, from
which it will pay most hospital-related medical ex-
penses for all Americans over the age of 65. Medic-
aid is established to pay for the medical care of those
with low incomes. These programs are administered
separately from the old-age pension program but are
financed by a portion of the Federal Insurance Con-
tributions Act (FICA) tax that also supports Social
Security.
U.S. Social Security benefits are extended to divorced
wives.
1968
The Social Security Amendments of 1967 begin a se-
ries of double-digit annual increases in pension bene-
fits under the U.S. Social Security program.
1972
The United States increases Social Security benefits by
20 percent but also changes the system of future bene-
fit increases. Instead of congressional vote, the Con-
sumer Price Index (CPI) will be used to adjust future
benefit levels. Pensions are linked to the CPI and will
be increased each January in line with the rise of that
index. This increase is called a cost-of-living adjust-
ment (COLA).
1974
Congress passes the Employee Retirement Income Se-
curity Act. This act creates tax-deductible “individual
retirement accounts” [called IRAs or 401(k)s] that
workers may utilize to save for their retirement
needs. The funds accrued through IRAs will provide
retirement income in addition to that received under
Social Security.
1981
Because of the rapid deterioration of the Social Se-
curity Trust Fund, President Ronald Reagan estab-
118
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

lishes the bipartisan National Commission on Social
Security Reform. The commission is headed by the
future chair of the Federal Reserve Board, Alan
Greenspan.
1983
Following the report of the Greenspan committee and
faced with the looming exhaustion of the Social Secu-
rity Trust Fund, the United States revises the Social
Security system. The United States raises the retire-
ment age, increases the FICA tax, and taxes some So-
cial Security benefits, along with a series of smaller
reforms.
1986
U.S. federal government workers hired after 1983 are
brought into the Social Security system.
1994
The Social Security Advisory Board is created to re-
place the program’s Advisory Council, which had pe-
riodically met in previous years.
1995
The shutdown of the U.S. government, following a
budget impasse, briefly stops the issuance of Social
Security checks.
1997
The last Advisory Council on Social Security issues its
final report. It offers three different options for bol-
stering the Social Security program, but there is no
unanimous agreement for any of them.
1998
In his State of the Union Address, President Bill Clin-
ton exhorts the United States not to spend any of its
expected budget surplus before it is able to “save So-
cial Security.”
The National Commission on Retirement Policy,
sponsored by the Center for Strategic and Interna-
tional Studies, issues its report. It recommends raising
the retirement age to 70, ending the retirement earn-
ings test, and placing a portion of the FICA tax into
IRAs. A bill to enact these reforms is offered in Con-
gress but is not voted upon.
Chronology
119
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1999
President Clinton calls for voluntary “universal sav-
ings accounts” (USA accounts). Each American
worker would contribute an additional contribution
above the current FICA tax into an IRA. The govern-
ment would guarantee a small contribution for lower-
income workers and would match contributions for
those with middle incomes. At retirement, income
from the USA accounts would supplement Social Se-
curity. Congress does not act on this plan.
2000
Congress passes the Senior Citizens Freedom to Work
Act, the last major change to Social Security as of the
time of this book’s publication. The act ends the earn-
ings test for workers who retire at age 65 or later. (Pre-
viously, the Social Security benefit had been reduced
for individuals who continued to remain in the work-
force while they drew a Social Security check.)
2001
President George W. Bush establishes a bipartisan
study group, the Commission to Strengthen Social
Security, to examine possible reforms for the Social
Security program which include its partial privatiza-
tion. The commission offers three different plans to
add private accounts to Social Security, but it does
not officially endorse any.
2005
In his State of the Union Address, President George
W. Bush states that Social Security is “headed for
bankruptcy” and calls for partial privatization of the
system. He urges the United States to allow workers
to place a portion of their FICA tax into an individual
account to be invested in stocks and bonds. Their re-
tirement pension would then be composed of the re-
turn on their individual account along with a reduced
payment from the Social Security Trust Fund. Amidst
much controversy, President Bush does not submit
specific legislation to Congress, and the proposal is
not acted upon.
2007
The Social Security Trustee’s Report estimates that the
Trust Fund will be exhausted in 2041.
120
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

World Chronology
1889
Germany enacts the world’s first old-age pension sys-
tem. Called the Law on Invalidity and Old Age Insur-
ance for Workers, Journeymen and Apprentices, it
provides a pension for all German workers, regard-
less of their income. The program is funded by a com-
bination of government revenues and payroll taxes
on workers and their employers.
1908
The United Kingdom enacts the Old Age Pensions
Act, a means-tested old-age pension program. The
program is supported by general revenues, not
worker contributions, and the pension begins at age
70. Benefits are set at a minimal level.
1909
Australia creates the Age Pension, a plan that offers
monthly benefits to aged Australians that is paid
from the government’s general revenues.
1913
Sweden passes the National Pension Act, the world’s
first universal pension system. All Swedes will re-
ceive a basic retirement pension based on the level of
their earnings. The program is fully funded from
worker contributions. A second supplemental pen-
sion, financed by government revenues, is given to
those who are permanently disabled.
1925
The United Kingdom enacts the Widows’, Orphans
and Old Age Contributory Pensions Act of 1925. Pro-
moted by Neville Chamberlain, who would later be-
come prime minister, this act reduces the retirement
age to 65 and adds a widow’s benefit.
1926
Chile enacts a pension program entitled the Workers
Security Fund. The program operates on the same
principles as German chancellor Otto von Bismarck’s
program.
1927
The Canadian government enacts the Old-Age Pen-
sion Act, agreeing to pay half of the cost of each
Chronology
121
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

province that participates in the system. All Canadian
residents who earn less than $365 a year are eligible.
1935
Sweden becomes the first major country to adopt a
pay-as-you-go pension system. The system is based
on employer and employee contributions, from
which current retirees are given pensions. The level of
pensions is substantially increased, and a retired
worker no longer need be invalided to receive the
supplemental pension.
1942
Japan establishes the Workers Pension System, a fully
funded pension program and the precursor to the
country’s current retirement system.
1943
Mexico enacts its first pension system. Called The
Mexican Institute for Social Security, the system re-
quires a minimum number of weeks worked before a
pension can be drawn. The pension is based on aver-
age earnings and begins at age 65. The system is
funded by employer and worker contributions, as
well as general revenues. However, it is limited to
workers in the mining, transportation, and commerce
industries. Other workers are allowed to join on a vol-
untary basis.
1946
The United Kingdom’s new Labour government passes
the National Insurance Act, a universal system of retire-
ment pensions for the United Kingdom. The program is
jointly funded by government revenues, employer con-
tributions, and worker contributions. Beneficiaries re-
ceive pensions based upon years of contribution,
regardless of earnings level. The act follows proposals
outlined in William Beveridge’s influential report that
argue for a “cradle to the grave” social welfare system
that includes pensions, unemployment insurance, and
national health care. Together, the programs ensure a
minimum standard of living for all people in the United
Kingdom. Many date the birth of the modern “welfare
state” to the passage of this act together with its sister
Family Allowance Act (1945) and the National Health
Care Act (1948).
122
Chronology
1927
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1952
Canada enacts the Old Age Security (OAS) Act, its
first fully national pension program. The program is
financed out of the general revenues, not worker or
employer contributions. Retirement can begin at age
70 (reduced to 65 in 1965). The size of the basic benefit
is determined by how long one has lived in Canada.
For those with little or no additional income, there is a
supplementary allowance based on marital status
and income.
Chile amends its pension program, now titled the So-
cial Insurance Service. The operations of the program
differ depending upon the occupational status of the
worker.
1954
Japan rebuilds its pension program, creating a two-
tiered system. All retirees receive a flat, basic pension
and then a second pension that is based on earnings.
1955
The Central Provident Fund is designed in Singapore.
This is a compulsory savings account for citizens of
Singapore. Workers and their employers must make
annual contributions to individual workers’ accounts,
which are then used to fund workers’ retirement.
However, the accounts are also used to fund health
care and disability insurance. They are later made
available for certain other economic activities, such as
purchasing a house, in addition to retirement pay-
ments. At age 55, an account holder must set aside a
portion of the funds in the account for his or her re-
tirement and may take the rest as a lump-sum pay-
ment. Similar provident funds are later adopted for
the retirement systems of other Southeast Asian na-
tions, such as Indonesia.
1959
The British National Insurance Act is amended to add
a second level of contributions and pensions, based
upon earnings, to the existing flat-rate system created
in 1946. However, employers can opt out of this new
system if they offer their own pensions. This program
creates the first partial privatization of a Social Secu-
rity system.
Chronology
123
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Sweden adds a second earning-related pension bene-
fit, called the Allmän Tillägspension (ATP), to its re-
tirement program.
1966
The Canadian Pension Plan (CPP) comes into force. It
is a new retirement and disability pension program
based on worker and employer contributions. The re-
sulting benefit is set at 25 percent of “pensionable
earnings.” (The plan is operated as the Quebec Pen-
sion Plan in that province.)
1972
Canada adds a cost-of-living adjustment to its Old
Age Security program. A COLA is added to the CPP
two years later.
Japan adds a cost-of-living adjustment to its National
Pension Law.
Switzerland becomes the first country to add compul-
sory private accounts to its pension program. This
structure is added to its existing pay-as-you-go pro-
gram. (However, the private accounts are not actually
introduced until 1985.)
1975
The United Kingdom passes the Social Security Pen-
sions Act. This act substantially raises pension bene-
fits by adding the State Earnings-Related Pension
Scheme (SERPS) and indexes future benefits to the
higher of the growth in wages or prices (changed to
prices only in 1980). British employers can still opt
out of SERPS, keeping the system partially privatized.
1979
Switzerland introduces a new form of indexation that
it uses in its calculation formula for both earnings and
benefits increases. Called “Swiss indexation,” it reval-
ues lifetime earnings and increases annual pension
benefits using an index created by taking the average
of the increase in the consumer price index and the in-
crease in the wage index. Other countries also adopt
this form of indexation.
1981
Chile becomes the first nation to create a fully priva-
tized pension system. The Augusto Pinochet govern-
124
Chronology
1959
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ment ends contributions to the national system. All
new workers must establish retirement accounts with
a private pension fund company. Existing workers are
encouraged to move their retirement investments to
one of these companies as well. Employers no longer
make any contributions.
1985
Japan becomes one of the first nations to reduce its
overall benefits through changing its benefits calcula-
tion formula. It begins to calculate benefits based on
40 years of employment rather than on 25 years, as
was previously done.
1986
Australia demands that all employers offer a pension
program for their workers. This program is called
“superannuation.”
Under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, the United
Kingdom engages in a major overhaul of its pension
system. Employers as well as individual employees
are allowed to opt out of the SERPS. Workers who
opt out must instead place their contributions in a
tax-deferred “approved personal pension,” a type of
IRA. Benefits are cut for those who remain in the old
program.
1989
The Berlin Wall is torn down and the countries of
Eastern Europe gain their freedom. Most of these
countries suffer from poorly constructed, socialist-era
pension programs that are financially threatened. As
a result, these countries design a series of new pen-
sion programs, and countries such as Poland, Slova-
kia, and Hungary become among the first to adopt
the new pension ideas that have been developed in
the 1980s and 1990s.
Canada adds a “clawback” provision to the OAS
program.
Mexico indexes its pension system to the minimum
wage. As the minimum wages increase, pensions in-
crease by the same amount.
Chronology
125
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1992
Australia creates the Superannuation Guarantee, clos-
ing loopholes in the superannuation system and
promising all workers that the government will en-
sure a pension at least equal to the old state pension
no matter how their own superannuation fund may
have fared.
1993
Peru reforms its pension system to offer its workers
the choice of entering either a traditional pay-as-you-
go pension program or a Chilean-style system of fully
privatized personal retirement accounts. The two
pension programs compete for workers. This variant
of Chile’s privatization system encounters problems
and must be relaunched in 1995, but it has since been
adopted by several other countries.
1994
Sweden develops a new pension system composed of
three pillars: notional defined contributions, individ-
ual retirement accounts, and a means-tested guaran-
teed pension.
Japan passes a law mandating that the country re-
view the actuarial soundness of its pension program
every five years. The retirement age is raised to 65 for
any kind of government pension.
1996
Latvia becomes the first country to adopt a pension
system based on notional defined accounts. (While it
is the first, it drew heavily on the debates then occur-
ring in Sweden for the specifics of its reform.)
1997
Mexico begins major reforms of its pension system.
The state pension system is replaced by a system of
private retirement accounts similar to that in Chile.
However, Mexican workers who contributed to the
old system are still able to draw benefits from that
system. All Mexican workers choose a privately run
pension company to handle their contributions, but
they must also contribute to a publicly owned hous-
ing fund that offers a safe, but small, basic pension.
126
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Kazakhstan goes even further than Chile in its efforts
to privatize old-age pensions. On January 1, it closes
its old pay-as-you-go system and all citizens are re-
quired to move into a new system of private individ-
ual accounts. Moreover, the government does not
offer any guarantees on the rate of returns that will be
provided through the new IRAs, nor does it offer a
minimum level of benefits. (In 2005, “citizens pen-
sions,” a flat-rate payment to all retirees, is added.)
Singapore allows its citizens to place a portion of the
money in their accounts within the Central Provident
Fund (CPF) into the new Central Provident Invest-
ment Scheme. The latter allows for investment of this
money into a wider variety of assets (such as stocks or
real estate) than simply government bonds, to which
the CPF is restricted.
China establishes its Unified Pension System. It re-
mains available to only a modest percentage of Chi-
nese workers and is not yet implemented nationally.
Building from its older system, the first pillar is a pay-
as-you-go system with employee and employer con-
tributions. The second pillar is individual retirement
accounts for each eligible worker, into which the em-
ployee and employer contribute. The third pillar is
private employer–provided pensions. This system is
broadly in line with World Bank recommendations.
1998
Canada reforms the CPP, moving to prefund a sub-
stantial portion of the Canadian retirement system. It
does this through greatly increasing the payroll tax
and creating the CPP Investment Board, an invest-
ment body that is given the mandate to invest tax re-
ceipts in stocks, bonds, or other assets so as to
maximize the rate of return on its holdings.
Sweden reforms its pension system. The program is
changed from a defined-benefit to a notional defined-
contribution program. Though the program is still a
pay-as-you-go system, it now holds each worker’s
contributions in a separate account, and the amount
Chronology
127
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

in the account at the time of retirement is used to
purchase an annuity for the worker. A portion of
each individual’s pension tax also goes into an IRA
of the individual’s choosing. Individuals can choose
from up to five different private companies from a
list of government-approved IRA funds, or they may
keep their contributions in a state-operated fund.
The retirement age is made flexible, starting as early
as age 61.
1999
British Prime Minister Tony Blair introduces “stake-
holders pension” schemes and broadens retirement
pensions to include widowers. Stakeholders pensions
are available to lower-income workers as an alterna-
tive to SERPS or to personal pensions.
Ireland begins a program to prefund a portion of its
future pension obligations. The government will de-
posit the equivalent of 1 percent of the country’s gross
national product in a reserve fund each year until the
year 2026. The reserve fund will be allowed to invest
in a wide variety of assets, such as stocks, bonds, and
real estate. By 2026, the fund is expected to be able to
pay one-third of the amount of the country’s pen-
sions. This program is enacted as the National Pen-
sions Reserve Fund in 2000.
2000
Japan reduces its earnings-related pensions benefits
by 5 percent and shifts the calculations formula from
using wage indexation to using price indexation.
(This shift results in a lower benefit as well.)
2001
Japan creates a national defined-contribution pension
program as a third tier to its pension system. Em-
ployer-funded accounts are created, in which em-
ployers deposit retirement monies on behalf of their
workers, as well as personal accounts, into which
workers can contribute up to 4 percent of their annual
earnings.
2003
Sweden’s 
notional 
defined-contribution 
system
comes fully into force.
128
Chronology
1998
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Dominican Republic becomes the sixth Latin
American nation to fully privatize its pension pro-
gram along the lines established by Chile.
2004
Japan reforms its pension system. It substantially in-
creases the contribution rate for both workers and
employers and lowers benefits from 59 percent of an-
nual salary to no less than 50 percent. An automatic
adjustment mechanism is added to further reduce
benefits, if necessary, based upon trends in the coun-
try’s economic growth and population projections.
Nigeria becomes one of the first African countries to
develop a pension program based on mandatory per-
sonal retirement accounts. The program has yet to be
fully implemented.
2005
Germany adds a “sustainability factor” to its old-age
pensions system. This factor reduces benefits if and
when the dependency ratio of retirees to workers
worsens. “Riester Pensions” are offered to German
workers as a voluntary add-on to make up for the ex-
pected benefits cut.
Slovakia becomes the seventh, and most recent, coun-
try to adopt a pension system based on notional ac-
counts.
2006
New Zealand creates a system of voluntary private
retirement accounts called KiwiSaver. Workers are
automatically enrolled into an account, from which
they can opt out if they wish. If they remain in the
program, each payday 4 or 8 percent of their pay (the
worker chooses the figure) is automatically deducted
and placed into their account. Their employer will
make an additional annual contribution to their ac-
count. Under a 2008 reform, employers are mandated
to contribute the equivalent of 1 percent of a worker’s
income to that individual’s KiwiSaver account. This
amount will grow to 4 percent by 2011. KiwiSaver
accounts offer a variety of investment choices and
will provide retirement income supplemental to the
Chronology
129
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

country’s basic, flat-rate pension. However, the ac-
counts can also used to finance the purchase a first
home or for other purposes in cases of financial
hardship.
2007
The United Kingdom passes the Pensions Act, which
turns its state pension into a flat-rate pension, returns
the program to being indexed on wages, and sharply
curtails the ability of workers to “contract out” of the
system by opening personal retirement accounts. The
act also includes the creation of voluntary individual
retirement accounts that can be added on top of the
state pension.
Germany passages legislation to raise its retirement
age to 67 by the year 2029.
Argentina becomes one of the first countries to allow
workers to shift from being in a mandatory personal
retirement account program back into the country’s
pay-as-you-go program. Previously, and consistent
with other countries following Chilean-type reforms,
it had only allowed workers to transfer from the lat-
ter into the former. Argentina also reverted to auto-
matically placing new workers in the pay-as-you-go
program rather than in the private accounts pro-
gram. Argentina’s measures may represent the first
serious backtracking among those countries that
have chosen to partially or fully privatize their pen-
sion programs.
South Africa announces its intent to develop its first
full government pensions program by 2010. The pro-
gram will feature the creation of a pay-as-you-go pen-
sion program that all workers must join, mandatory
private or occupational pensions for wealthier South
Africans, and voluntary private accounts for those
who wish to enroll in them.
2008
Chile has plans in place to replace its pension guaran-
tee program with a new two-tier program. The first
130
Chronology
2006
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

will offer a flat, guaranteed minimum pension to all
Chilean workers. The second will commit the govern-
ment to add monies into all private accounts up to the
level necessary for those accounts to pay a monthly
benefit equaling the same sum as the flat pension.
Chronology
131
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

5
Biographical Sketches
Arthur Altmeyer (1891–1972)
Sometimes referred to as “Mr. Social Security,” Arthur Alt-
meyer was a key developer of the U.S. Social Security program.
Altmeyer began his career as a high school teacher before re-
turning to the University of Wisconsin to complete a doctorate.
At Wisconsin, he was deeply influenced by his professors, who
had been important figures in the development of the progres-
sive social policies for which the state was then famous. In the
1920s, he rose to become the secretary of the Wisconsin State
Industrial Commission. In this capacity he often went to Wash-
ington, D.C., where he made a mark as a consistent supporter
of policies to expand the U.S. social welfare system. Based on
this reputation, President Franklin Roosevelt (also known as
FDR) first asked him to help organize his new administration
and then selected him to become an assistant secretary of
Labor. FDR then appointed Altmeyer to be a member of the
1934 committee that drafted Roosevelt’s Social Security legisla-
tion. Altmeyer was chair of the committee’s Technical Board
and perhaps the primary figure in crafting the new program. In
1937, he was asked to serve as the second chair of the Social Se-
curity Board. In 1946, when the Social Security Administration
was developed to replace the board, Altmeyer became its first
chair, serving until 1953. In these positions, he continually ar-
gued for expanding the Social Security program. It was his idea
to add survivors’ benefits to the Social Security program. Alt-
meyer was the vital force behind both the 1939 and the 1950
133
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Amendments to the Social Security Act. These two sets of
amendments largely achieved his goal of a universal system
with relatively generous benefits. He was also behind the push
to develop a worker’s disability program within Social Secu-
rity. On the other hand, he failed in his desire to keep Roo-
sevelt’s reserve account intact, and he had to oversee the
change to a pay-as-you-go program, in spite of his warnings
that the change would lead to a financing crisis in the future. In
acknowledgment of his contributions to the development of
Social Security, the national headquarters of the Social Security
Administration, in Baltimore, is named after him.
Robert Ball (1914–)
Credited as the most important administrative figure to the de-
velopment of Social Security in the years after 1950, Robert Ball
joined the Social Security program in 1939 and rose to become
the Commissioner of Social Security from 1962 to 1973. Perhaps
his most important influence was in the early 1950s, when he
played a critical role in expanding both the number of workers
included under Social Security and the size of the program’s
monthly benefits. This accomplishment, obtained through skill-
ful management of the 1947–1948 Social Security Advisory
Council, made Social Security a truly universal retirement pro-
gram and completed the shift from its earlier emphasis on public
assistance to that of being a contributions-based social insurance
program. Ball, working with labor groups, later spearheaded the
addition of a disability program (1956) as well as Medicare
(1965). After his retirement, Ball remained active in Social Secu-
rity’s politics, serving on independent reform committees and on
a Social Security Advisory Council through the 1990s. Personally
aligned with the Democratic Party, Ball was one of the de facto
leaders of the Democrats on the Greenspan Commission
(1981–1983). Ball continues to offer his ideas on Social Security
reform and has written several books on the subject. His most re-
cent plan focuses upon raising the amount of income subject to
the income tax, devoting a portion of the estate tax to Social Se-
curity, and investing the Trust Fund in the stock market. These
measures, he states, will solve the funding problem for at least
the next 75 years.
134
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

William Beveridge (1879–1963)
As much as any individual, William Beveridge may be called the
intellectual father of the welfare state. Born in Bengal, India, Bev-
eridge was trained as a lawyer but achieved influence as a writer
on social insurance. Because of his expertise, in 1908 he was
asked to join the United Kingdom’s Board of Trade, and his ideas
were used to develop that country’s National Insurance Act
(1911), its first old-age pension plan. Beveridge later became the
director of the London School of Economics. During World War
II, he was asked to lead a study examining how the United King-
dom should rebuild after the war. Known as the Beveridge Re-
port, his resulting study argued for the development of a “cradle
to the grave” social security system, including free health care,
for all citizens. This approach is the major alternative to a means-
tested welfare system, such as that found in the United States. In
1945, the United Kingdom’s Labour Party, upon its election vic-
tory, announced that it would enact the major provisions of the
Beveridge Report. This led to the significant liberalization of the
British old-age pension program. After briefly serving in the
House of Commons, in 1946 Beveridge was made a peer of the
House of Lords.
Carl Bildt (1943–)
In the relatively consensual world of Swedish politics, it is diffi-
cult to identify a single individual who was primarily responsible
for that country’s pension reform. However, former Prime Minis-
ter Nils Daniel Carl Bildt has as good a claim as any to that status.
The leader of a coalition government from 1991 to 1994, Bildt
launched the negotiations that led to the major Swedish reform
that included the new notional defined-contribution accounts.
From a distinguished Swedish family, Bildt entered the Swedish
parliament in 1979 and rose to become the leader of the Moderate
Party in 1986. Sweden, then as now, was dominated by the Social
Democrat party, which has held power for most of the past cen-
tury. The Social Democrats were the creators of Sweden’s famous
welfare state, including its generous pension program. In the late
1980s, Sweden entered a recessionary period that imperiled this
pension program. Political leaders generally recognized the need
Biographical Sketches
135
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

for reform, but the Social Democrats, in particular, were reluctant
to attack their own creation. Promising policies to liberalize the
economic system and return growth, Bildt led four nonsocialist
parties to victory in the elections of 1991. Somewhat surprisingly,
Bildt immediately focused upon pensions and used his inaugural
address to invite all of Sweden’s parties to hold negotiations on
reforming the system. Outside interest groups were excluded. A
parliamentary committee of these parties, headed by Bo Könberg,
minister of Health and Social Affairs, then produced successfully
a reform package that was enacted into law in 1994. That same
year, though, new elections returned the Social Democrats to
power. Bildt later resigned as leader of his party to engage in var-
ious diplomatic missions. In 2006, following another victory by
the nonsocialist parties, Bildt was appointed minister of Foreign
Affairs.
George W. Bush (1946–)
The most powerful advocate to date of partially privatizing U.S.
Social Security, George W. Bush, the 43rd president of the United
States, proposed such a plan during his second term in office.
After a career in the Texas oil industry, Bush, the son of President
George H. W. Bush, advised his father in Washington and then re-
turned to Texas to become the managing partner of the Texas
Rangers Major League Baseball club. In 1994 he became governor
of Texas and served until his very narrow victory in the presiden-
tial race of 2000. He had campaigned on entitlement reform and
quickly appointed a bipartisan commission to examine the Social
Security program. However, the September 11, 2001, terrorist at-
tacks took the administration in a very different direction. Bush
did not return his attention to Social Security until after his re-
election in 2004. He then used the report of the earlier bipartisan
commission to develop a series of reforms. From a programmatic
standpoint, the most important may have been a change in the
wage indexing formula. But both the administration and its crit-
ics devoted nearly all of their attention to the “personal retire-
ment accounts” that were the centerpiece of the plan. These were
to be voluntary private accounts into which workers could place
a portion of their FICA contributions. The workers would control
the money themselves, subject to federal guidelines. In exchange,
there would be a reduced traditional Social Security benefit. The
136
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Bush package did not fare well politically, suffering from low
popular support and the administration’s difficulties with the
war in Iraq. As a result, Congress did not take it under considera-
tion. In 2006, under even more unfavorable circumstances, Presi-
dent Bush again included the plan, with more detail, in his
proposed budget to Congress.
Benjamin Cardozo (1870–1938)
In May 1937, U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice Benjamin Car-
dozo wrote the Court’s opinion that established the constitution-
ality of Social Security. Considered one of the greatest jurists of
the United States, both for the acuity of his analyses and the clar-
ity of his prose, Cardozo advocated the principle that U.S. com-
mon law was not fixed but grew and changed to meet the
demands of the times. Previously serving as chief justice of the
New York Court of Appeals, he was a virtually unanimous choice
to replace Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes upon
the latter’s death in 1932. The Court he joined was soon factional-
ized by a succession of New Deal cases. Cardozo was among the
three “progressive” members who supported the New Deal laws,
which, one by one, were ruled unconstitutional by the majority.
In this environment, a shareholder of Boston’s Edison Electric Il-
lumination Company brought suit claiming that the Social Secu-
rity tax on his company was illegal. The Constitution did not
enumerate a power to devise national insurance systems; they
were unconstitutional under the Tenth Amendment. The U.S. Cir-
cuit Court of Appeals agreed, and the case, Helvering v. Davis,
went to the Supreme Court. The drama was intensified by the
politics of the day. President Roosevelt had announced a plan to
“pack” the Court with more justices, ostensibly on grounds that
the existing Court was too aged. The plan met a firestorm of con-
troversy, but it greatly ratcheted the pressure on those justices op-
posing his policies. By a margin of 7–2, the Court would find that
Social Security was indeed constitutional. Cardozo’s opinion fol-
lowed the administration’s brief: the magnitude of the problem,
and its national scope, justified the program under Congress’s
authority to “provide for the general welfare.” This accorded
with his principle that the very meaning of “general welfare”
must change with the times. Social Security had survived. Only a
year after writing this decision, Cardozo died of a stroke.
Biographical Sketches
137
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

William J. Clinton (1946–)
The 42nd president of the United States, Bill Clinton proposed the
most significant changes to the funding of the Social Security pro-
gram since it became a primarily pay-as-you-go program in 1939.
Clinton rose from difficult circumstances to become governor of
Arkansas in 1978. After being defeated for reelection, he was
again elected in 1982 and served for another 10 years. In 1992, he
gained the presidency in a three-way race with George H. W. Bush
and H. Ross Perot. The 1990s were years in which worries over the
future of Social Security rose to the fore. After his reelection in
1996, President Clinton asked his advisers to develop a reform
plan to extend the life of the program. These advisers recognized
that the large government budget surplus that had emerged could
form the backbone of reform. In his 1998 State of the Union ad-
dress, Clinton announced a program to “Save Social Security
First” by dedicating the surplus to Social Security. In his 1999 ad-
dress, he offered the specifics for reform: 62 percent of the surplus
would be steered into the Trust Fund, and a portion of the Trust
Fund would then be used to purchase stocks. This measure would
“prefund” future benefits payments and extend the life of the pro-
gram. Moreover, a second portion of the surplus would be used to
create “universal savings accounts” for all Americans. These ac-
counts, which would operate like 401(k) or other tax-advantaged
savings plans, would further boost retirement savings. The gov-
ernment would match the monies placed in their accounts by
poorer Americans. While this ambitious proposal placed both the
use of the stock market and the use of add-on retirement accounts
firmly on the political agenda, the combination of a hostile Con-
gress and Clinton’s impeachment difficulties doomed its passage.
Wilbur Cohen (1913–1987)
Another “Mr. Social Security” (this time so named by President
John Kennedy), Wilbur Cohen was a key behind-the-signs actor
for many of the U.S. Social Security program’s most significant
changes. Cohen, the son of immigrants, studied at the University
of Wisconsin when it was considered the preeminent institution
for the development of new social programs. He went to Wash-
ington, D.C., in 1934 to join his professor, Edwin Witte, who had
been named a member of President Roosevelt’s Committee on
138
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Economic Security, charged with designing Social Security. In
1935, Cohen became the first employee of the Social Security
Board and later served as the program’s chief legislative liaison
for 20 years. Cohen provided the staff work behind the 1939
Amendments, advised President Harry Truman on his health
care plan, played a major role in the passage of the Social Security
amendments in the early 1950s (bringing nearly every working
American into the program), and was a leading advocate of the
disability program that was added in 1956. Cohen is credited for
fusing the coalition of congressional leaders with labor organiza-
tions and other supportive interests that would come to make So-
cial Security politically impregnable. Cohen succeeded in
implanting his view that Social Security was better advanced
through small steps than large reforms. After a brief stint in aca -
demia, Cohen returned to Washington in the Kennedy adminis-
tration, and, under President Lyndon Johnson, led the fight for
Medicare. After succeeding, Cohen would become the secretary
of Health, Education, and Welfare (1968–1969).
Nelson Cruikshank (1902–1986)
The U.S. labor movement has been the most powerful supporter
of Social Security for much of the program’s existence. For
decades, its chief expert and lobbyist was Nelson Cruikshank.
Numerous reforms, most importantly the addition of disability
insurance in 1956, were, in significant part, due to his efforts.
Cruikshank was a deckhand on Great Lakes freighters before en-
tering college and eventually being ordained as a Methodist min-
ister. In 1944, he joined the American Federation of Labor (AFL),
becoming its director of social insurance. He then served as a
member of four of the succeeding six Social Security Advisory
Councils, the chief venues for policy reforms. In 1955, Cruik-
shank became the head of the AFL’s new Department of Social
Security, continuing in that position after the merger of the AFL
with the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) later that
year. His strong belief was that many workers, because their
trades did not enable them to spend their careers with one em-
ployer or even in one location, had need of a generous, national
pension program. His first great success was the lobbying effort
behind the 1950 amendments that expanded both the benefits
and the coverage of the Social Security program. He was then an
Biographical Sketches
139
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

even more central player in the development and passage of the
1956 disability program. After successfully lobbying for
Medicare, he retired from the AFL-CIO. However, Cruikshank
went on to a second career leading retiree interest groups, first
the labor-financed National Council of Senior Citizens and then,
in 1980, Save Our Security, launched in association with Wilbur
Cohen as an omnibus lobbying group opposed to reductions in
Social Security benefits. From 1977 to 1980, Cruikshank served as
chair of the Federal Council on Aging.
Marion Folsom (1893–1976)
Marion Folsom probably did more to end the antipathy of
American business toward Social Security than any other per-
son. Folsom was a pioneer in the development of pension pro-
grams. At Eastman Kodak Company, he devised one of the first
private retirement plans in the United States. Because of his ex-
perience, he was asked to join the Committee on Economic Se-
curity’s Business Advisory Council in 1934. There he supported
a national pension plan, although he favored a small program
so that private pensions would still be relevant. However, most
businesses continued to oppose Social Security, even after its
passage. Folsom undertook major efforts to change this senti-
ment. Operating through positions in the Chamber of Com-
merce and the National Association of Manufacturers, he
developed educational materials to convince business of the
program’s value. Folsom served on Social Security’s second
Advisory Council, where he was one of the leaders in develop-
ing the recommendation that the program shift to a pay-as-
you-go basis. In the 1940s, he opposed raising taxes or benefits
for Social Security, but, as a member of the 1947 Advisory
Council, he changed his mind. He then, once again, led the ef-
fort to bring business to support the large benefits increase of
1950. In 1953, President Dwight Eisenhower appointed him un-
dersecretary of the Treasury, where he had responsibility for
Social Security. He would later become the secretary of Health,
Education and Welfare (1955–1958). Though he did oppose the
disability benefits added in 1956, his support for Social Secu-
rity was critical in the first days of the administration when, as
the first GOP government since the Herbert Hoover adminis-
tration, it faced important questions about whether it would
continue to endorse the program. Folsom returned from retire-
140
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ment to serve again on the 1963 Advisory Council that met at
the opening of the Medicare debate.
Milton Friedman (1912–2006)
One of the most influential economists of the 20th century, Milton
Friedman is considered the intellectual father of efforts to priva-
tize Social Security. The son of immigrants, Friedman earned a
doctorate from Columbia University after holding a series of gov-
ernment jobs during the New Deal era and World War II. In 1946,
he took a faculty position at the University of Chicago and was in-
strumental in the construction of perhaps the world’s most
renowned and influential department of economics. Friedman
himself became the leader of “monetarism,” the belief that the
money supply is fundamental to inflation and economic growth.
He became the major critic of the Keynesian economic theory that
dominated the Western world after World War II. His contribu-
tions to monetarism, economic history, the consumption function,
and the permanent income hypothesis earned him the Nobel
Prize in Economics in 1976. Early in his career, Friedman became a
fierce advocate of limited government, arguing that the individual
should always have the freedom to choose, even on questions
such as prostitution or the use of drugs. He made this argument
on both moral and economic grounds. He claimed to have always
opposed Social Security for this reason. He believed that a one-
size-fits-all program was inevitably inferior to a program in which
each citizen could make his or her own choice about how to fi-
nance retirement. He claimed that no government could know as
much about the citizens as those citizens knew about themselves
and that therefore any individual was better able to understand
his or her retirement needs than could the government. He cham-
pioned his views both in the United States and abroad and is often
credited with being the inspiration for the privatization program
undertaken by Chile. Friedman remained an active participant in
economic debates over Social Security and other issues almost to
his death from heart failure at age 94.
Alan Greenspan (1926–)
An economist, a presidential adviser, and chair of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve of the United States (1987–2006),
Biographical Sketches
141
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Alan Greenspan headed perhaps the most significant Social Se-
curity reform commission since the advent of the program. After
a successful business career, Greenspan became an adviser to
presidents Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford and served as the
chair of the Council of Economic Advisors from 1974 to 1977. By
the early 1980s, it was all but certain that the Social Security sys-
tem would go into a small deficit within two years. Neverthe-
less, President Ronald Reagan aroused a storm of controversy
over his proposals to thus limit cost-of-living adjustments
(COLAs) and otherwise trim the Social Security program. As a
result, the president suggested a bipartisan committee to study
the issue and develop proposals to save Social Security. In 1981,
Greenspan was chosen to chair the National Commission on So-
cial Security Reform, soon to be generally known as the
“Greenspan Commission.” Though nominally a committee of 15,
a smaller group of members, including Greenspan, conducted all
of the hard negotiating. By 1983, they had developed a set of
proposals that essentially traded off Republican and Democrat
views on needed reforms. These reforms included raising the re-
tirement age, raising payroll taxes, and subjecting higher-income
recipients to an income tax on their benefits. Congress then en-
acted these proposals into law. Greenspan’s ability to bring the
commission to a successful completion (only three conservative
Republicans dissented) was a tremendous relief to the Reagan
administration and was one factor behind Reagan’s later choice
of Greenspan to head the Federal Reserve, a position in which
Greenspan attained near celebrity status.
Paul Keating (1944–)
While serving as treasurer and prime minister of Australia, Paul
Keating became the chief architect of Australia’s superannuation
program. From a trade union background, Keating was elected as
a member of the Labour Party to Australia’s House of Represen-
tatives in 1969. His sharp tongue and debating skills led him to
the party’s front benches. He became treasurer (finance minister)
upon Labour’s victory in the 1983 general election, inheriting a
very difficult situation. Australia was deep in debt and seemingly
in economic decline. Though politically on the left, Keating and
his prime minister, Bob Hawke, were committed to reversing this
slide through market-friendly policies. Keating engaged in a vari-
142
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

ety of reforms that together did indeed turn the country around.
He approached the problem of pensions from this same perspec-
tive. The nation needed a truly universal retirement system, but it
had to be achieved through a program that harnessed the effi-
ciencies of the market. Indebted Australia could not afford a sys-
tem based on government money; the ideal program would
increase private savings instead. On this basis, Keating and the
leader of Australia’s labor unions struck a deal in 1986 in which
the unions agreed to defer a wage increase in favor of having 3
percent of workers’ salaries placed into private investment funds
that would be available for use after their retirement. This was
the birth of “award superannuation.” Hawke and Keating had a
falling out  in 1991, and Keating was removed from the govern-
ment. However, within months he had returned to defeat Hawke
and to become prime minister that year. He served until his party
was defeated in the election of 1996. As prime minister he contin-
ued his work on superannuation, drawing up the reforms of 1992
that created the Superannuation Guarantee, Australia’s current
program that mandates compulsory contributions into superan-
nuation funds by all of the country’s employers. After 1996, Keat-
ing left politics to become the chief executive officer (CEO) of an
Australian investment bank. He remains an active participant in
the Australian pension debate, calling, in 2007, for an increase in
superannuation payments from the current 9 percent to 15 per-
cent of wages.
Huey Long (1893–1935)
Vowing to make “every man a king,” Senator Huey Long (D-La.),
“the Kingfish,” offered his “Share the Wealth” program as a
competitor to Social Security in the 1930s. In a relatively brief
life, Long became one of America’s most flamboyant and contro-
versial political figures. Long was elected governor of Louisiana
in 1928 and quickly used his powers to build, by means fair and
foul, an immense political machine. As governor, enacting a se-
ries of bills to build roads and hospitals, lower gas prices, and
give children free textbooks made him a hero throughout rural
Louisiana. In 1930, Long, still governor, was also elected to the
U.S. Senate. Initially he supported Franklin Roosevelt, but the
two became political enemies as Long accused the president of
being too timid in attacking the Great Depression. In 1934, he
Biographical Sketches
143
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

unveiled his Share the Wealth plan, which entailed using the tax
code to limit any individual’s wealth to $50 million. It would
also set ceilings on incomes and inheritances. The money taken
would be redistributed to U.S. families via a minimum guaran-
teed income and household grants. The money would also fi-
nance an old-age pension program for every American over the
age of 60. The Share the Wealth Society, created by Long to sup-
port his proposal, soon had more than 7 million members. Long
fought against FDR’s alternative, Social Security. Rumors grew
that he would run against Roosevelt in 1936, but fate intervened.
From his Senate seat, Long still essentially ran the government of
Louisiana. Power struggles within the state grew more intense.
Finally, in 1935, a doctor approached Long and his bodyguards
in the Louisiana capitol building. What happened next is still de-
bated, but in a barrage of bullets, Senator Long was killed.
Paul Martin, Jr. (1938–)
As the finance minister and prime minister of Canada, Paul Mar-
tin led the reform of the Canadian pension system in the 1990s.
The son of a prominent Canadian politician who was an early
supporter of the Canadian Pension Plan (CPP), Martin first pur-
sued a career in business, rising to become president and CEO of
the Canadian Steamship Lines Group (CSL). He left CSL to enter
Parliament in 1988 as a member of the Liberal Party. In 1993, he
became Canada’s minister of finance. He is widely credited for
restoring the country’s financial footing while holding this office.
He resigned in 2002 but returned to office as prime minister, serv-
ing from 2003 to 2006. In his tenure as finance minister, Martin
pressed several major pension reforms. The first was unsuccess-
ful. In 1995, he proposed a plan called “the Seniors Benefit.” Es-
sentially, it would have combined the two existing national
pension programs under a new calculation formula that would
reduce benefits to middle- and upper-income Canadians while
somewhat increasing them for poorer Canadians. This reform
would have cut the cost of the retirement system by 10 percent.
However, it did not have the support of the prime minister, Jean
Chrétien, and it was delayed until after the following election. By
then, an improving budget combined with opposition from many
interest groups doomed the idea. However, Martin was already
pursuing another avenue of reform. In 1996, he opened negotia-
144
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

tions with the finance ministers of all of the provinces to reform
the financing of the Canadian Pension Plan. The reforms in-
volved increasing the contributions rate and slightly reducing
benefits in order to substantially prefund the plan. He then over-
saw the creation of the CPP Investment Board to invest these
monies in stocks and other assets in order to gain a higher return.
These changes were enacted in 1998. As prime minister, Martin
suffered the fallout of a corruption scandal that eventually led to
his party’s defeat in 2006. After leaving power, Martin announced
his retirement from politics.
Wilbur Mills (1909–1992)
Once called “Social Security’s congressional Godfather,” Repre-
sentative Wilbur Mills (D-Ark.) is perhaps the most significant
legislator in the history of the Social Security program. Mills
was elected to Congress in Arkansas’ Second District in 1938
and served until 1977. From 1957 to 1975, he was the chair of the
House Ways and Means Committee, then considered the most
powerful committee in Congress. Mills himself was generally
considered the most powerful man in Congress. Because his
committee had jurisdiction over the Social Security program, he
controlled the fate of any and all proposals for its change or de-
velopment. His influence began even before attaining the chair.
In 1955, he helped secretly craft the legislation that added a dis-
ability plan to the Social Security program. For the next 20
years, Mills set Social Security benefits increases and FICA tax
rates, keeping the program fiscally sound. However, in the early
1970s, in a quixotic bid to win the presidency, he first sponsored
ruinously large annual benefits increases and then supported
cost-of-living adjustments, both in a bid to attract the vote of se-
nior citizens. Mills led the passage of the 1972 COLA reform.
Mills’s most important contribution to the Social Security pro-
gram, however, was the passage of the Social Security amend-
ments that created Medicare and Medicaid. At first, Mills
opposed the programs, but he shifted to support them in 1965.
Today’s Medicare is a program drafted by Mills, containing the
compromises he felt desirable or necessary. Mills’s career ended
in scandal when he was stopped by Washington, D.C., police
and an Argentine stripper ran from his car and jumped into the
nearby Tidal Basin, after which Mills acknowledged a problem
Biographical Sketches
145
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

with alcohol. Following a second unseemly incident, he was re-
moved as committee chair, and he retired after the next election.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan (1927–2003)
The iconoclastic Daniel Patrick Moynihan was the leading congres-
sional expert on Social Security in the last decades of the 20th cen-
tury. He offered a number of controversial reforms for the program.
Moynihan served in the Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, and Ford ad-
ministrations, where he was an architect of the War on Poverty, a
major supporter of a guaranteed minimum income, an ambassador
to India, and an ambassador to the United Nations. Meanwhile, his
academic research garnered great attention, and he occupied a pro-
fessorship at Harvard University. In 1976, he was elected to the U.S.
Senate from New York, serving until 2001. Senator Moynihan was a
leader on the Greenspan Commission, which developed the Social
Security reforms of 1983. He led legislation to establish Social Secu-
rity as an independent government agency and is responsible for
the annual statement of expected Social Security benefits that every
working American now receives. Moynihan came to the belief that
the program was not financially sustainable and that the Trust Fund
was encouraging fiscal irresponsibility in Washington. So he at-
tempted to recreate Social Security as a true pay-as-you-go system.
In 1990, he proposed shrinking the Trust Fund by cutting the pay-
roll tax, and he later supported reducing benefits to the level of in-
coming receipts. He raised the argument that the Consumer Price
Index led to overly generous COLAs. In 1998, he cosponsored the
first serious bill to create individual retirement accounts within So-
cial Security. (He believed this would help poor Americans who did
not have access to 401(k) and other tax-sheltered savings pro-
grams.) In 2001, President George W. Bush appointed him the
cochair of the Commission to Strengthen Social Security, which en-
dorsed a partial privatization of Social Security. It is his series of re-
form proposals that have set the terms of the contemporary debate
over Social Security.
Robert J. Myers (1912–)
The long-time chief actuary of the Social Security program,
Robert Myers was intimately involved in most of its major deci-
146
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

sions and reforms. A quick way of seeing his importance is that
the Guinness Book of World Records shows Myers to have testified
before Congress more times than anyone else in history. Myers,
trained as an actuary, was part of the 1934 Committee on Eco-
nomic Security’s technical staff. He then held a variety of actuar-
ial positions in the new program before becoming the chief
actuary of the Social Security Administration in 1947. Myers de-
veloped the program’s cost estimates. The use of long-run cost es-
timates for the program was his innovation, and he began the
publication of the long-range estimates of Social Security’s actual
balance now included in the annual Trustee’s Report. Our knowl-
edge of Social Security’s future is based on his methods. In 1969,
he devised the wage-indexing formula that has been added to So-
cial Security. His authority and apparent nonpartisanship were
important elements in the favorable reception accorded Social Se-
curity proposals on Capitol Hill during his 33 years as chief actu-
ary. In 1970, he abruptly resigned when he believed the
program’s administrators were violating their obligation to be
nonpartisan by pushing to expand the Social Security program
far beyond the wishes of their nominal superior, the Nixon ad-
ministration. Myers returned to Washington when he was ap-
pointed a Social Security commissioner by President Reagan. He
resigned shortly thereafter to become the executive director of the
Greenspan Commission, which developed the 1983 Social Secu-
rity reforms. In later years he continued to speak and write on So-
cial Security, favoring extending the life of the program by raising
the retirement age. In 2005, Myers came out against President
George W. Bush’s efforts to partially privatize the program.
Francis Perkins (1882–1965)
As President Roosevelt’s secretary of Labor, Francis Perkins was
FDR’s primary influence in developing the Social Security pro-
gram. Perkins has the dual honor of being both the first woman
cabinet member in American history and the longest serving Sec-
retary of Labor in U.S. history. Though born in Boston, she made
her career in New York. She did early work at Hull House and
other prominent antipoverty organizations. Already secretary of
the New York Consumer’s League, a group dedicated to educa-
tion about worker’s rights, she saw the famous 1911 Triangle
Shirt Waist Company fire, which killed more than 100 employees
Biographical Sketches
147
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

because illegally locked doors prevented their escape. This expe-
rience led to Perkins obtaining a position on the Factory Investi-
gating Commission, a seat on the New York Industrial Board, and
eventually a close association with New York Governor Al Smith,
as she became his chief adviser on social issues. She continued
this role with Franklin Roosevelt when he became governor of
New York. In 1933, now President Roosevelt asked her to come to
Washington as his secretary of Labor. She served in that position
for 12 years. She began advocating a national old-age assistance
plan shortly after arriving in Washington, well before FDR or his
other advisers picked up the issue. She suggested forming a com-
mittee to study the issue. When Roosevelt agreed, in 1934, he
named Perkins as its chair. She thus oversaw the drafting of the
Social Security Act, even quasi-secretly consulting with Supreme
Court Justice Harlan Stone for advice on how to make it with-
stand tests of constitutionality. This was but one of many pieces
of social legislation she developed during the New Deal years.
After resigning from her position following FDR’s death, she
served on the Civil Service Commission until 1953 and continued
to lecture for years thereafter.
James Jerrell Pickle (1913–2005)
A long-serving Texas congressman, J. J. Pickle is the person most
responsible for raising the retirement age of Social Security from
65 to 67. A close associate of Lyndon Johnson, Pickle held John-
son’s former House seat from 1963 to 1995. Pickle became chair of
the Ways and Means subcommittee responsible for Social Secu-
rity in 1979. He was one of the first to recognize the coming ex-
haustion of the Trust Fund that would lead to the Greenspan
Commission and the reforms of 1983. He believed that the solu-
tion was not to move to a full pay-as-you-go system but to in-
crease the size of the fund. This could be done by encouraging
Americans to stay longer in the workforce, both by ending the
benefit penalty on those who continued to work after their retire-
ment age and by increasing the age at which one could retire on a
full pension. In 1981, he sponsored legislation to slowly raise the
retirement age from 65 to 68. This failed, and the Speaker of the
House (and fellow Democrat) Tip O’Neill demanded that he not
renew his efforts lest it harm the Democrats’ ability to campaign
on Social Security. Yet Pickle continued. When the Greenspan
148
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Commission reforms were brought to Congress, he insisted on an
amendment to those reforms that would increase the retirement
age (now to 67). The amendment passed. By the 1990s, Pickle was
endorsing a further extension to age 70, along with the reduction
of early retirement and spousal benefits, as the mechanisms to
best keep the program healthy. He retired in 1995 and died of
cancer a decade later.
José Piñera (1948–)
Probably the most important advocate of social security privati-
zation in the world, José Piñera is the architect of the Chilean
pension system. Born to a prominent Chilean family, he earned a
doctorate in economics at Harvard University in 1974 and re-
turned to teach in Chile. Four years later, he joined the cabinet of
Augusto Pinochet as minister of Labor and Social Security. A
strong advocate of free markets and small government, Piñera
then led the design of a fully privatized pension program based
upon private personal retirement accounts to replace the coun-
try’s failing retirement system. It was the world’s first such pro-
gram. In 1980, he became minister of Mining but left the cabinet a
year later to fight for Chile’s return to democratic rule. In 1994, he
founded an international center to promote the Chilean model of
pension reform to other countries. He also joined the Cato Insti-
tute, a U.S. think tank that supports privatization. He has written
many books and articles on the Chilean system and the privatiza-
tion of social security.
Augusto Pinochet (1915–2006)
The Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet is the unlikely founder of
the world’s most celebrated privatized retirement system.
Pinochet was a career soldier who, by 1972, had risen to become
the general chief of staff of the Chilean army. Not two years later,
he participated in the military coup that removed the elected
president of Chile, Salvador Allende. As leader of the largest
branch of the military, Pinochet became the head of the junta that
then took power. The coup was followed by months of savage re-
pression against supporters of Allende and others identified as
being on the political left. In 1980, Pinochet appointed himself
Biographical Sketches
149
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

president of Chile, and a year later he added to his list of titles
that of captain general. Like most of those who participated in the
coup, or supported it, Pinochet blamed the socialist Allende for
perpetuating an overregulated dysfunctional economic system
that stymied the development of the country. The dictator sought
to reverse this situation by supporting free market policies that
would revive the economy and develop personal responsibility
and entrepreneurship among the Chilean people. Thus he
strongly supported the efforts of his minister of Labor and Social
Security, José Piñera, to develop a system of private personal ac-
counts to replace the old Chilean pension system. After losing a
referendum in 1988, Pinochet turned power over to an elected
civilian government in 1990. However, he held his position as
leader of the army until 1998. His own retirement was not peace-
ful. While visiting the United Kingdom, he was arrested under a
Spanish warrant accusing him of human rights violations. After
returning to Chile, he was removed from the Chilean Senate and
later indicted first for tax evasion and then for the 1973 kidnap-
ping and murder of aides of President Allende.
Walter Riester (1943–)
The German Riester Pension (“Riester-Rente”) is named after its
author, Walter Riester, a leader of the country’s Social Demo-
cratic Party (SPD). Riester came from a labor background, rising
to become deputy chair of IG Metal, the large (more than 2 mil-
lion members) German industrial trade union, in 1993. He was
also active in the SPD and joined the party’s federal executive
committee in 1988. He entered the government of Prime Minister
Gerhard Schroeder in 1998 after a coalition of the SPD and the
Green Party took power, serving as the minister of Labor and So-
cial Affairs. The election of that year had turned on the country’s
economic difficulties, very much including the cost of its social
welfare programs. The SPD had opposed benefits cuts desired
by the outgoing parties, but it needed to offer a benefits reform
of its own. Riester’s job was to design this reform. He decided
not to raise the contributions rate but to focus on a new calcula-
tion formula that would bring benefits payments in line with
Germany’s financial resources. Realizing that this would amount
to a benefits cut in future years, he first argued for adding a sys-
tem of compulsory individual retirement accounts to make up
150
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

for this loss. German workers would place a percentage of their
income into tax-advantaged accounts managed by private com-
panies. However, this proposal aroused a storm of opposition,
including his labor union base, and he retreated to an optional
plan in which workers could deposit up to 4 percent of their in-
come in a private individual account. This was combined with
incentives to encourage them to do so. The resulting individual
retirement accounts were soon dubbed Riester Pensions. In 2002,
the German government eliminated the Ministry of Labor and
Social Affairs, costing Riester his cabinet position. He took up a
seat in the Bundestag, the German legislature, where he contin-
ues to serve.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt (1882–1945)
The 32nd president of the United States, Franklin Roosevelt is the
father of the U.S. Social Security program. The contours of Roo-
sevelt’s life are well known. From a prominent New York family,
Roosevelt was a rising star of the Democrat Party until stricken
by polio in 1921. He was presumed to be politically finished. In-
stead, through almost unbelievable force of will, Roosevelt
learned to overcome the total paralysis of his legs and reentered
politics. He was twice elected governor of New York before his
election to the presidency in 1932. There he began his famous
New Deal to combat the Great Depression. In 1934, FDR and
aides believed that the emergency of the Depression was over.
Expecting a large victory in that year’s elections, they felt it was
time to move to a more ambitious and permanent set of social re-
forms, since labeled the “second New Deal.” Roosevelt included
in this reform package a program for unemployment benefits he
called “economic security.” But this program was greeted as too
tepid by his supporters, and, under the pressure of the Townsend
Plan and Huey Long’s call to “Share the Wealth,” Roosevelt de-
cided to develop a larger plan that would include old-age pen-
sions. He created a committee to develop such a plan and insisted
that the program be one of monthly benefits to be paid from ear-
lier worker contributions, so that it would neither appear to be
welfare nor draw from the government’s general revenues. He
also pushed for the notion of a trust fund to hold the contribu-
tions. Social Security was passed by Congress primarily because
of the president’s unmatched political skills. He would go on to
Biographical Sketches
151
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

be elected four times to the office and serve as the U.S. leader in
World War II.
Isaac Rubinow (1875–1936)
Perhaps the best claim to being the intellectual father of the U.S.
Social Security program can be made by an immigrant from czarist
Russia, Isaac Rubinow. Shocked by the poverty he discovered in
his New York medical practice, Rubinow turned to the study of so-
cial reform. In 1913, he published Social Insurance, often cited as the
first and most significant book in the development of Social Secu-
rity. After studying the social insurance systems of Europe, Rubi-
now argued that the modern economy created problems, such as
unemployment, health care, and financial support during old age,
that were beyond the control of the individual. The government
thus had the necessary role of creating programs to assist Ameri-
cans through these difficulties. Since it was impossible to know in
advance which individuals would have need of these programs,
the assistance was best provided on insurance principles. All
would pay, creating a universal fund from which those with needs
could draw. These programs would effectively redistribute income
to those who had the greatest need for it. Rubinow’s ideas were en-
thusiastically adopted in the Progressive movement, and became
part of the platform of Theodore Roosevelt’s Bull Moose Party. Ru-
binow continued to promote his ideas for the next 20 years. When
Franklin Roosevelt took office as president, Rubinow urged that
social insurance be included as part of the New Deal. In 1934, he
published a second important volume, The Quest for Security, pub-
licizing his ideas. FDR is said to have been reading the book during
the writing of the Social Security Act. Though in certain features
that act deviated from Rubinow’s stances—he preferred using the
general revenues to dedicated worker contributions, and he fa-
vored the redistribution of money to the needy aged as opposed to
universal old-age pensions—it is his general argument that moti-
vates today’s program.
David Stockman (1946–)
As President Reagan’s budget director, David Stockman under-
took the largest effort to date to reduce Social Security expendi-
152
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

tures. This effort indirectly led to the program’s major reforms of
1983 and directly led to the program becoming the “third rail” of
American politics for the next generation. Stockman had a mete-
oric political career. In 1976, he was elected to the House of Rep-
resentatives at the age of 30, and only four years later he was
appointed the director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Responsible for the new president’s ambitious economic pro-
gram, Stockman needed to find some $75 billion in government
spending cuts to go with the major tax cuts the administration
was proposing. Through a variety of small reforms, and one big
one, he found half of the needed cuts in the Social Security pro-
gram. The big reform was an immediate and permanent reduc-
tion in the early retirement benefit (from 80 percent to 55 percent
of the full benefit). It was a political bombshell. Facing a biparti-
san outcry, President Reagan disavowed the cuts. As political
cover, the administration instead created the Greenspan Commis-
sion to examine the program. Stockman was an active partici-
pant, shaping the congressional reforms that followed. But the
tremendous reaction to Stockman’s proposals signaled the politi-
cal dangers that awaited anyone wishing to change Social Secu-
rity. The journalist William Greider  later published an article in
which Stockman shared his doubts about the soundness of the
budget he had prepared. This comment sharply reduced his po-
litical influence, and he left the Reagan administration for Wall
Street in 1985. He later became the CEO of an auto parts com-
pany. In 2007, he was arrested for fraud relating to its financial
operations.
Margaret Thatcher (1925–)
Margaret Thatcher, known as “the Iron Lady,” was among the
most important prime ministers in British history. An ardent free
marketeer, she pushed the partial privatization of the United
Kingdom’s pension system, one of the first such attempts in the
world. Originally trained as a chemist, Thatcher later became a
lawyer before being elected to Parliament in 1959. In 1961, she en-
tered the Conservative government as the parliamentary secretary
at the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance. She became
the leader of the Conservative Party in 1975 and prime minister
after the elections of 1979. As prime minister, Thatcher took vigor-
ous action to end the endemic British inflation, willingly suffering
Biographical Sketches
153
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

a major recession to do so. This course of action succeeded, and
Thatcher went on to tackle an ambitious agenda that included
breaking the power of the British trade unions, deregulating the
British economy, and raising the international profile of the
United Kingdom. Faced with funding difficulties similar to those
in the United States at that time, she won approval of a social se-
curity act that changed the indexation formula for calculating
pensions. It sharply reduced the size of British pensions. She then
floated the idea of privatizing the British system by ending its
State-Earnings-Related-Pension-Scheme (SERPS) program in
favor of compulsory private retirement accounts. This proved too
daring, and she settled for partial privatization through a 1986
parliamentary act that greatly boosted the incentives to opt out of
the SERPS in favor of private personal accounts. After two more
electoral victories (1983 and 1987), Thatcher became the longest
serving British prime minister in nearly two centuries. Not until
1990 did an unpopular poll tax, economic difficulties, and dis-
putes over the United Kingdom’s relationship with the European
Union combine to divide the Conservative Party and lead to her
fall from power. For many years thereafter, she continued to speak
in favor of free market economics and a muscular foreign policy in
defense of Western interests.
Francis Townsend (1867–1960)
In 1934, Dr. Francis Townsend created the “Townsend Plan,” the
most politically important old-age pension proposal offered prior
to Social Security. The plan, and the mass movement that fol-
lowed, pressured President Roosevelt to develop and offer his
own plan. Dr. Townsend was the assistant city health director in
Long Beach, California, but lost his job during the Great Depres-
sion. Witnessing the poverty around him, Townsend developed
an idea that he believed could end it. The federal government
should place a sales tax on all commercial transactions. The tax
would fund a monthly pension of $200 for every American over
the age of 60. To receive the pension, the individual had to
promise to completely retire from the workforce and to spend the
entire amount of the monthly benefit within 30 days. Townsend
believed that the resulting spending spree would lift the United
States out of the Depression. His friend, a Long Beach real estate
154
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

agent, Robert Earl Clements, is mostly responsible for the attention
the plan gained. Clements “sold” it using methods he had learned
in his business. Together, the two organized Townsend Clubs
across the United States. These would ultimately have a combined
membership of some 5 million people. Townsend thought FDR
would adopt the plan, but Roosevelt, like mainstream economists,
believed it unworkable and financially unsound. The plan contin-
ued to be proposed in Congress throughout the 1930s, but it faded
in light of Roosevelt’s alternative Social Security plan. Embittered,
Townsend broke with Clements and joined the far right. His influ-
ence largely ended with the poor showing by his allies in the 1936
elections. However, he maintained his organization for some years
thereafter. As late as 1958, he was writing President Eisenhower to
reconsider his plan.
Harry S Truman (1884 –1972)
President Harry Truman led the transformation of Social Secu-
rity from essentially an old-age welfare program into a livable
pension for senior citizens. Truman rose from a Missouri
county judge to become a U.S. senator in 1935. His work on a
military preparedness committee gave him a national reputa-
tion, and he was nominated as President Roosevelt’s vice presi-
dent in 1944. He became the 33rd president upon Roosevelt’s
death in 1945. His presidency was most marked by a series of
foreign policy crises, but Truman remained committed to Roo-
sevelt’s social policies. Social Security was then on the defen-
sive. Congress refused to raise benefits and struck workers
from the program’s rolls. The Senate initiated a Social Security
Advisory Council to examine more reforms in 1947. In 1948,
Congress attempted to remove another 500,000 workers. But
Truman vetoed the bill and made it an issue in his famous
“whistle-stop” campaign that produced a stunning upset vic-
tory in the 1948 election. Newly energized, he developed a set
of social reforms he called “the Fair Deal.” It included a na-
tional health care plan (which failed) and, using the Advisory
Council’s recommendations, a vast immediate increase in So-
cial Security benefits along with the extension of the program
to self-employed, farm, and domestic workers. At stake was
whether Social Security would be defined as a bare minimum
Biographical Sketches
155
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

on which to survive, as conservatives argued, or as a full pen-
sion plan. Truman fought for the latter, and won. In 1950, Con-
gress added 10 million workers to Social Security and increased
the monthly benefit by an average of 77 percent. Social Security
was now cast as a true old-age pension program. Truman fol-
lowed with a second benefits increase in 1952.
Adrian Turner (1955–)
A self-described “technocrat,” Adrian Turner is the primary au-
thor of the substantial reforms to the British pension system that
were enacted in 2007. Turner has spent most of his life in the busi-
ness world, becoming a partner in the McKinsey consulting firm
and later the vice chairman of Merrill Lynch Europe. He was the
director of the British Confederation of Industry from 1995 to
1999. Upon taking office in 1997, the victorious Labour Party was
faced with growing problems in the country’s complex retire-
ment system. Prime Minister Tony Blair and Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer Gordon Brown differed on how to proceed, and they
compromised by establishing an independent commission to
offer reforms to improve its operations. Turner, then close to Blair,
was named the chair of the three-person Pension Commission.
The commission delivered its first report, more than 400 hundred
pages, in late 2004. Its reforms were primarily authored by
Turner. He called for a higher state pension, relinking that pen-
sion to earnings and not to the rate of inflation, increasing the re-
tirement age to 68, and creating an employer-sponsored add-on
savings program. He also called for the system to be one from
which workers must opt out, rather than a system in which they
must opt in, the opposite of the Thatcher reforms of 20 years ear-
lier. Though generally well received, Turner’s report did appar-
ently clash with the desires of Gordon Brown, who thought these
reforms too expensive and preferred to use means testing as a
method to increase pensions to the poorest retirees. But Blair and
Brown reached a compromise largely favorable to the commis-
sion’s recommendations. Its reforms were then mostly enacted
into law by the British Parliament in 2007. Turner remained chair
of the commission until its final report was issued in mid-2006. In
2007, he became the chair of the United Kingdom’s Economic and
Social Research Council. In 2005, Turner was elevated to the peer-
age as Baron Turner of Ecchinswell.
156
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Arthur Vandenberg (1884–1951)
Michigan Senator Arthur Vandenberg was the surprising initiator
of perhaps the single most important change in Social Security,
from being a fully funded program to today’s pay-as-you-go sys-
tem. Vandenberg served in the U.S. Senate from 1928 to 1951. He
became the Senate’s Republican minority leader in 1935. A gifted
orator, he was most known for his vociferous isolationism. Van-
denberg had broken with many Republicans to vote for Social Se-
curity. With his small minority, Vandenberg’s tactic was not to
attack New Deal programs as such, but rather to find significant
flaws in their operations. By 1937, as funds poured into the new
Social Security reserve account, he claimed to find such a flaw.
Benefits did not begin until 1942. Vandenberg pointed out that
the gap in time from the collection to disbursement of funds
would produce a huge surplus in the account. He estimated that
it would grow to $47 billion by 1980, an unbelievable amount of
money then. He argued that the government would find it politi-
cally impossible not to tap this fund and spend its resources reck-
lessly on any number of social programs. He asked Social
Security Chair Arthur Altmeyer to convene an advisory council
to study the issue. To blunt Vandenberg’s charges, that council
recommended ending the reserve account, beginning increased
benefits payments before 1942, and adding survivors’ benefits.
The effect was to create a largely pay-as-you-go program. Con-
gress duly passed these changes. Vandenberg gained his greatest
fame after World War II, when he changed his position from iso-
lationism to internationalism and supported the foreign policies
of presidents Roosevelt and Truman. His actions are credited
with creating the bipartisan foreign policy that characterized
much of the Cold War era.
Robert Wagner (1877– 1953)
Arguably the author of more significant social legislation than
any other U.S. politician, Senator Robert Wagner (D-NY) was the
congressional sponsor of the Social Security Act of 1935. A Ger-
man immigrant, Wagner became the lieutenant governor of New
York and a justice on its Court of Appeals before being elected to
the first of his four terms in the Senate in 1926. A social progres-
sive and ardent New Dealer, Wagner wrote or sponsored a list of
Biographical Sketches
157
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

important bills that is second to none. It includes the Federal
Emergency Relief Administration Act and the National Industrial
Recovery Act—the two centerpieces of the New Deal—the Na-
tional Labor Relations Act (which gave labor the right to orga-
nize), and the Wagner-Steagall Act (which created the U.S.
Housing Authority). In 1934, Wagner introduced both a national
unemployment compensation plan and a government pension
program for railway workers. The latter was very similar to the
future Social Security program. It was declared unconstitutional
in 1934, a decision of great concern to those writing the Social Se-
curity bill. Though Wagner was not directly involved in drafting
the Social Security Act, his prestige, support, and position on the
Labor Committee made him the act’s obvious sponsor. He then
played an active role in its passage. Wagner spent much of the
following decade in an unsuccessful effort to add a national
health care plan to Social Security. He later served on the U.S. ne-
gotiating team that devised the postwar international monetary
order at the Bretton Woods conference before resigning from the
Senate shortly before his death.
John Winant (1889–1947)
One of America’s most distinguished public servants, John Winant
was the first chair of the Social Security Board. Winant began his
career as a teacher but, upon returning from World War I, entered
the political arena and rose to become governor of New Hamp-
shire. A lifelong Republican, Governor Winant became one of the
nation’s leading social reformers. During his terms in office, the
state adopted a minimum wage, a limited workweek for women
and children, and a series of Depression relief programs; in addi-
tion, the state became the first to fill its Civilian Conservation
Corps enrollment quota. Often compared to President Abraham
Lincoln, for both his policies and his personal appearance, Winant
was a rumored GOP candidate for the presidency in 1936. In the
eyes of President Roosevelt, Winant’s party affiliation and record
of reform made him the perfect person to head the new Social Se-
curity program. Winant performed ably in the first difficult deci-
sions of the program, keeping Social Security operating in the face
of a Huey Long filibuster and engaging in arduous negotiations
with members of Congress who sought specific favors in exchange
for support of its administrative funding. Winant then unexpect-
158
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

edly resigned in late 1936. The 1936 Republican presidential candi-
date, Alf Landon, was making his opposition to Social Security a
centerpiece of his campaign. Winant wished to publicly defend the
program but believed that, as long as he remained a nonpartisan
public official, he could not do so. Roosevelt reluctantly accepted
the resignation but went on to secure Winant’s appointment as di-
rector of the International Labour Organization (1939–1941) and
U.S. ambassador to the United Kingdom through World War II
(1941–1946). Regrettably, Winant committed suicide in 1947.
Edwin Witte (1887–1960)
Economics professor and public official Edwin Witte has been
called the “father of Social Security” because he wrote the initial
report that developed the plan. Witte was a prominent academic
at the University of Wisconsin. His primary interest was unem-
ployment policy. Associated with the “Wisconsin School” of social
reform, he was an author of that state’s pathbreaking unemploy-
ment compensation program. Because of his prominence and
technical expertise, he was chosen by President Roosevelt to be
the executive director of the 1934 Committee on Economic Secu-
rity, the group charged with creating the Social Security program.
Over the six months of the committee’s existence, Witte coordi-
nated the shaping of the program and then wrote the committee
report. Some participants felt that Witte was actually rather luke-
warm in his support for old-age insurance and that his preference
for a state-run pension program (like that of unemployment insur-
ance) over a national plan lost to the views of the committee’s
technical experts. But Witte strongly intervened to support a con-
tributions-based pension program as opposed to the more redis-
tributive system preferred by Isaac Rubinow and the committee’s
other experts, which would have been based on the government’s
general revenues. After drafting the report, Witte was the first per-
son to testify for Social Security before Congress. His work done,
he returned to his position as professor. Later, he participated in
the Advisory Council that produced the 1939 reforms. There he
was a strong opponent of recreating Social Security as a pay-as-
you-go system. He argued for keeping a large reserve fund to en-
sure that the program would always be adequately financed. He
lost this argument. Again returning to the academy, in 1956 he
was chair of the American Economics Association.
Biographical Sketches
159
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

6
Data and Documents
T
his chapter includes excerpts from among the most important
reports, speeches, and Supreme Court opinions that relate to
the U.S. Social Security program. It also contains recent
trustee reports on the financial status of Social Security. The
chapter begins with a brief guide to the complex law that creates
the Federal Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Bene-
fits program.
The Social Security Act
The foundation of the U.S. Social Security program is the Social Se-
curity Act of 1935. Title II of that act established the program that is
today called the Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance pro-
gram, or more informally, Social Security. After more than 70 years
of revisions and extensions, the Social Security Act (more techni-
cally, Subchapter II of Chapter 7 of Title 42 of the U.S. Legal Code)
has grown to two printed volumes of great detail and complexity.
One may read the law, in all of its complexity, as it appears in the
compilation of the U.S. Code at the Web site of the U.S. Code (http:
//www.access.gpo.gov/uscode/title42/chapter7_subchapterii_.html)
or in volume 22 of the printed U.S. Code (Washington: Government
Printing Office, 2000). Alternatively, one may consult the Social Se-
curity Act in the “Compilation of the Social Security Laws” held at
the Social Security Administration Web site (http://ssa.gov/OP_
Home/ssact/comp-ssa.htm).
Note that the sections pertaining to the Old-Age, Survivors, and
Disability Insurance Program are prefixed by a “2” in the Social Security
161
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Act itself (section 201, 202, etc.) but by a “4” in the U.S. Code (sec-
tion 401, 402, etc.). Otherwise, they correspond directly with each
other.
The Preamble is not part of the U.S. Code, but it does offer the
statement of purpose for the program, as well as an early defense of its
constitutionality (“provide for the general welfare”).
The Preamble to the 
Social Security Act of 1935
An act to provide for the general welfare by establishing a system of Fed-
eral old-age benefits, and by enabling the several States to make more
adequate provision for aged persons, blind persons, dependent and crip-
pled children, maternal and child welfare, public health, and the admin-
istration of their unemployment compensation laws; to establish a Social
Security Board; to raise revenue; and for other purposes.
The Supreme Court Opinion: 
Helvering v. Davis
The Social Security program was almost immediately challenged on
grounds of its constitutionality. Even President Franklin Roosevelt and
his aides feared that the program would be annulled by the courts. The
test came in the form of Helvering v. Davis. A stockholder of the Edi-
son Electric Company, George Davis, sued to prove that his company
should not have to pay its half of the Social Security contribution on the
grounds that the program was unconstitutional. Davis lost the case in
U.S. District Court, but he won on appeal. IRS Commissioner Guy
Helvering then asked that the case be taken up by the U.S. Supreme
Court. The Supreme Court, in a decision written by Justice Benjamin
Cardozo, found that Titles II and VIII of the Social Security Act (the ti-
tles that established and funded the old-age pension program) were in-
deed constitutional. This decision carefully explains why the program
meets the test of constitutionality. In doing so, it also offers a good sum-
mation of how the program was to operate. The Court’s decision did
more than save Social Security; it allowed for the large expansion of the
program in the years to follow.
The decision is presented here in only slightly edited format. Most
references to other cases and statutes have been deleted.
162
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

United States Supreme Court, October Term 1936
Guy T. Helvering, Commissioner of Internal Revenue, and William M.
Welch, Collector of Internal Revenue, for the District of Massachusetts, The
Edison Electric Illuminating Company of Boston, Petitioners vs. George P.
Davis, Respondent.
On Writ of Certiorari to the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for
the First Circuit.
Mr. Justice Cardozo delivered the opinion of the Court.
[May 24, 1937]
The Social Security Act . . . is challenged once again.
. . . In this case Titles VIII and II are the subject of attack. Title VIII
lays another excise upon employers . . . It lays a special income tax upon
employees to be deducted from their wages and paid by the employers.
Title II provides for the payment of Old Age Benefits, and supplies the
motive and occasion, in the view of the assailants of the statute, for the
levy of the taxes imposed by Title VIII. The plan of the two titles will
now be summarized more fully.
Title VIII, as we have said, lays two different types of tax, an “in-
come tax on employees,” and “an excise tax on employers.” The income
tax on employees is measured by wages paid during the calendar year.
The excise tax on the employer is to be paid “with respect to having in-
dividuals in his employ,” and, like the tax on employees, is measured by
wages. Neither tax is applicable to certain types of employment, such as
agricultural labor, domestic service, service for the national or state gov-
ernments, and service performed by persons who have attained the age
of 65 years. The two taxes are at the same rate. . . . The income tax on
employees is to be collected by the employer, who is to deduct the
amount from the wages “as and when paid.” He is indemnified against
claims and demands of any person by reason of such payment. The pro-
ceeds of both taxes are to be paid into the Treasury like internal-revenue
taxes generally, and are not earmarked in any way. There are penalties
for nonpayment.
Title II has the caption “Federal Old-Age Benefits.” The benefits
are of two types, first, monthly pensions, and second, lump sum pay-
ments, the payments of the second class being relatively few and
unimportant.
The first section of this title creates an account in the United States
Treasury to be known as the “Old-Age Reserve Account.” No present ap-
propriation, however, is made to that account. All that the statute does is
to authorize appropriations annually thereafter, beginning with the fiscal
year which ends June 30, 1937. How large they shall be is not known in
advance. The “amount sufficient as an annual premium” to provide for
the required payments is “to be determined on a reserve basis in accor-
dance with accepted actuarial principles, and based upon such tables of
The Supreme Court Opinion: Helvering v. Davis
163
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

mortality as the Secretary of the Treasury shall from time to time adopt,
and upon an interest rate of 3 per centum per annum compounded annu-
ally.” Not a dollar goes into the Account by force of the challenged act
alone, unaided by acts to follow.
Section 202 and later sections prescribe the form of benefits. The
principal type is a monthly pension payable to a person after he has at-
tained the age of 65. . . . They are to be measured . . . by a percentage of
the wages the percentage decreasing at stated intervals as the wages be-
come higher. In addition to the monthly benefits, provision is made in
certain contingencies for “lump sum payments” of secondary impor-
tance. . . . This suit is brought by a shareholder of the Edison Electric Illu-
minating Company of Boston, a Massachusetts corporation, to restrain
the corporation from making the payments and deductions called for by
the act, which is stated to be void under the Constitution of the United
States. . . . The expected consequences are indicated substantially as fol-
lows: The deductions from the wages of the employees will produce un-
rest among them, and will be followed, it is predicted, by demands that
wages be increased. If the exactions shall ultimately be held void, the
company will have parted with moneys which as a practical matter it
will be impossible to recover. Nothing is said in the bill about the
promise of indemnity. The prediction is made also that serious conse-
quences will ensue if there is a submission to the excise. The corporation
and its shareholders will suffer irreparable loss, and many thousands of
dollars will be subtracted from the value of the shares. The prayer is for
an injunction and for a declaration that the act is void.
. . . The District Court held that the tax upon employees was not
properly at issue, and that the tax upon employers was constitutional. It
thereupon denied the prayer for an injunction, and dismissed the bill.
On appeal to the Circuit Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, the decree
was reversed, one judge dissenting. The court held that Title II was void
as an invasion of powers reserved by the Tenth Amendment to the states
or to the people and that Title II in collapsing carried Title VIII along
with it. As an additional reason for invalidating the tax upon employers,
the court held that it was not an excise as excises were understood when
the Constitution was adopted. . . .
A petition for certiorari followed. It was filed by the intervening de-
fendants, the Commissioner and the Collector, and brought two questions,
and two only, to our notice. We were asked to determine: (1) “whether the
tax imposed upon employers by Section 804 of the Social Security Act is
within the power of Congress under the Constitution,” and (2) “whether
the validity of the tax imposed upon employees by Section 801 of the So-
cial Security Act is properly in issue in this case, and if it is, whether that
tax is within the power of Congress under the Constitution.” The defen-
dant corporation gave notice to the Clerk that it joined in the petition, but
it has taken no part in any subsequent proceedings. . . .
First: Questions as to the remedy invoked by the complainant con-
front us at the outset.
164
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

. . . a majority of the court . . . find in this case extraordinary fea-
tures making it fitting in their judgment to determine whether the bene-
fits and the taxes are valid or invalid. . . . The ruling of the majority
removes from the case the preliminary objection as to the nature of the
remedy which we took of our own motion at the beginning of the argu-
ment. Under the compulsion of that ruling, the merits are now here.
Second: The scheme of benefits created by the provisions of Title II
is not in contravention of the limitations of the Tenth Amendment.
Congress may spend money in aid of the “general welfare.” Con-
stitution, Art. I, section 8. There have been great statesmen in our his-
tory who have stood for other views. We will not resurrect the contest. It
is now settled by decision. United States v. Butler, supra. The conception
of the spending power advocated by Hamilton and strongly reinforced
by Story has prevailed over that of Madison, which has not been lacking
in adherents. Yet difficulties are left when the power is conceded. The
line must still be drawn between one welfare and another, between par-
ticular and general. Where this shall be placed cannot be known
through a formula in advance of the event. There is a middle ground or
certainly a penumbra in which discretion is at large. The discretion,
however, is not confided to the courts. The discretion belongs to Con-
gress, unless the choice is clearly wrong, a display of arbitrary power is
not an exercise of judgment. This is now familiar law. “When such a
contention comes here we naturally require a showing that by no rea-
sonable possibility can the challenged legislation fall within the wide
range of discretion permitted to the Congress.” . . . Nor is the concept of
the general welfare static. Needs that were narrow or parochial a cen-
tury ago may be interwoven in our day with the well-being of the na-
tion. What is critical or urgent changes with the times.
The purge of nation-wide calamity that began in 1929 has taught us
many lessons. Not the least is the solidarity of interests that may once
have seemed to be divided. Unemployment spreads from state to state,
the hinterland now settled that in pioneer days gave an avenue of escape.
. . . Spreading from state to state, unemployment is an ill not particular
but general, which may be checked, if Congress so determines, by the re-
sources of the nation. If this can have been doubtful until now, our ruling
today in the case of the Steward Machine Co. supra, has set the doubt at
rest. But the ill is all one or at least not greatly different whether men are
thrown out of work because there is no longer work to do or because the
disabilities of age make them incapable of doing it. Rescue becomes nec-
essary irrespective of the cause. The hope behind this statute is to save
men and women from the rigors of the poor house as well as from the
haunting fear that such a lot awaits them when journey’s end is near.
Congress did not improvise a judgment when it found that the
award of old age benefits would be conducive to the general welfare The
President’s Committee on Economic Security made an investigation and
report, aided by a research staff of Government officers and employees,
and by an Advisory Council and seven other advisory groups. Extensive
United States Supreme Court, October Term 1936
165
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

hearings followed before the House Committee on Ways and Means and
the Senate Committee on Finance. A great mass of evidence was brought
together supporting the policy which finds expression in the act. Among
the relevant facts are these: The number of persons in the United States 65
years of age or over is increasing proportionately as well as absolutely.
What is even more important the number of such persons unable to take
care of themselves is growing at a threatening pace. More and more our
population is becoming urban and industrial instead of rural and agricul-
tural. The evidence is impressive that among industrial workers the
younger men and women are preferred over the older. In time of retrench-
ment the older are commonly the first to go, and even if retained, their
wages are likely to be lowered. . . . With the loss of savings inevitable in
periods of idleness, the fate of workers over 65, when thrown out of work,
is little less than desperate. A recent study of the Social Security Board in-
forms us that “one-fifth of the aged in the United States were receiving old
age assistance, emergency relief, institutional care, employment under the
works program, or some other form of aid from public or private funds;
two-fifths to one-half were dependent on friends and relatives, one-eighth
had some income from earnings; and possibly one-sixth had some savings
or property. Approximately three out of four persons 65 or over were
probably dependent wholly or partially on others for support.”
. . . The problem is plainly national in area and dimensions. More-
over laws of the separate states cannot deal with it effectively. Congress,
at least, had a basis for that belief. States and local governments are often
lacking in the resources that are necessary to finance an adequate pro-
gram of security for the aged. This is brought out with a wealth of illus-
tration in recent studies of the problem. Apart from the failure of
resources, states and local governments are at times reluctant to increase
so heavily the burden of taxation to be borne by their residents for fear of
placing themselves in a position of economic disadvantage as compared
with neighbors or competitors. . . . A system of old age pensions has spe-
cial dangers of its own, if put in force in one state and rejected in another.
The existence of such a system is a bait to the needy and dependent else-
where, encouraging them to migrate and seek a haven of repose. Only a
power that is national call serve the interests of all.
Whether wisdom or unwisdom resides in the scheme of benefits set
forth in Title II, it is not for us to say. The answer to such inquiries must
come from Congress, not the courts. Our concern here as often is with
power, not with wisdom. Counsel for respondent has recalled to us the
virtues of self-reliance and frugality. There is a possibility, he says, that
aid from a paternal government may sap those sturdy virtues and breed a
race of weaklings. If Massachusetts so believes and shapes her laws in
that conviction must her breed of sons be changed, he asks, because some
other philosophy of government finds favor in the halls of Congress? But
the answer is not doubtful. One might ask with equal reason whether the
system of protective tariffs is to be set aside at will in one state or another
166
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

whenever local policy prefers the rule of laissez faire. The issue is a closed
one. It was fought out long ago. When money is spent to promote the
general welfare, the concept of welfare or the opposite is shaped by Con-
gress, not the states. So the concept be not arbitrary, the locality must
yield. Constitution, Art VI, Par. 2.
Third: Title II being valid, there is no occasion to inquire whether
Title VIII would have to fall if Title II were set at naught.
The argument for the respondent is that the provisions of the two
titles dovetail in such a way as to justify the conclusion that Congress
would have been unwilling to pass one without the other. The argument
for petitioners is that the tax moneys are not earmarked, and that Con-
gress is at liberty to spend them as it will. The usual separability clause is
embodied in the act.
We find it unnecessary to make a choice between the arguments
and so leave the question open.
Fourth: The tax upon employers is a valid excise or duty upon the
relation of employment.
As to this we need not add to our opinion in Steward Machine vs.
Davis, supra, where we considered a like question in respect of Title IX.
Fifth: The tax is not invalid as a result of its exemptions.
Here again the opinion in Steward Machine Co. v. Davis supra
says all that need be said.
Sixth: The decree of the Court of Appeals should be reversed and
that of the District Court affirmed.
Source: Helvering v. Davis 301 U.S 619(1937)
Principal Presidential 
Speeches and Messages
A handful of presidential addresses stand out for their importance to the
development of the Social Security program. Below are excerpts from each.
Franklin Roosevelt: Message to 
Congress Reviewing the Broad Objectives 
and Accomplishments of the Administration,
June 8, 1934
In the summer of 1934, President Roosevelt informed Congress of his
intent to offer a government pension program. Here he presents his ra-
tionale and the basic principles that would guide his development of this
program.
Principal Presidential Speeches and Messages
167
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

You are completing a work begun in March 1933, which will be re-
garded for a long time as a splendid justification of the vitality of repre-
sentative government. I greet you and express once more my
appreciation of the cooperation which has proved so effective. Only a
small number of the items of our program remain to be enacted and I am
confident that you will pass on them before adjournment. . . .
Next winter we may well undertake the great task of furthering
the security of the citizen and his family through social insurance.
This is not an untried experiment. Lessons of experience are
available from States, from industries and from many Nations of the
civilized world. The various types of social insurance are interrelated;
and I think it is difficult to attempt to solve them piecemeal. Hence, I
am looking for a sound means which I can recommend to provide at
once security against several of the great disturbing factors in life—es-
pecially those which relate to unemployment and old age. I believe
there should be a maximum of cooperation between States and the
Federal Government. I believe that the funds necessary to provide this
insurance should be raised by contribution rather than by an increase
in general taxation. Above all, I am convinced that social insurance
should be national in scope, although the several States should meet at
least a large portion of the cost of management, leaving to the Federal
Government the responsibility of investing, maintaining and safe-
guarding the funds constituting the necessary insurance reserves. I
have commenced to make, with the greatest of care, the necessary actu-
arial and other studies for the formulation of plans for the considera-
tion of the 74th Congress.
These three great objectives the security of the home, the security
of livelihood, and the security of social insurance—are, it seems to me, a
minimum of the promise that we can offer to the American people. They
constitute a right which belongs to every individual and every family
willing to work. They are the essential fulfillment of measures already
taken toward relief, recovery and reconstruction.
This seeking for a greater measure of welfare and happiness does
not indicate a change in values. It is rather a return to values lost in the
course of our economic development and expansion.
. . . The third factor relates to security against the hazards and vi-
cissitudes of life. Fear and worry based on unknown danger contribute
to social unrest and economic demoralization. If, as our Constitution
tells us, our Federal Government was established among other things,
“to promote the general welfare,” it is our plain duty to provide for that
security upon which welfare depends.
Source: Rosenman, Samuel I., ed. 1938. Public Papers and Addresses
of Franklin D. Roosevelt, vol. III. New York: Random House, 1938.
168
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

FDR’s speeches are also available online through the American
Presidency Project at http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/.
Franklin Roosevelt: Message to Congress 
on Social Security, January 17, 1935
This is an excerpt of President Roosevelt’s message introducing what
would become the Social Security Act of 1935 to Congress. Of particu-
lar interest today are his final remarks, in which he appears to endorse a
program of voluntary contributions in addition to the government-sup-
ported pensions. Was he urging the creation of a program of individual
retirement accounts? There is much dispute over these words.
In addressing you on June eighth, 1934, I summarized the main
objectives of our American program. Among these was, and is, the secu-
rity of the men, women, and children of the Nation against certain haz-
ards and vicissitudes of life. This purpose is an essential part of our task.
In my annual message to you I promised to submit a definite program of
action. This I do in the form of a report to me by a Committee on Eco-
nomic Security, appointed by me for the purpose of surveying the field
and of recommending the basis of legislation.
I am gratified with the work of this Committee and of those who
have helped it: . . . It is my best judgment that this legislation should be
brought forward with a minimum of delay.
. . . Three principles should be observed in legislation on this sub-
ject. First, the system adopted, except for the money necessary to initiate
it, should be self-sustaining in the sense that funds for the payment of in-
surance benefits should not come from the proceeds of general taxation.
Second, excepting in old-age insurance, actual management should be
left to the States subject to standards established by the Federal Govern-
ment. Third, sound financial management of the funds and the reserves,
and protection of the credit structure of the Nation should be assured by
retaining Federal control over all funds through trustees in the Treasury
of the United States.
. . . In the important field of security for our old people, it seems
necessary to adopt three principles: First, non-contributory old-age pen-
sions for those who are now too old to build up their own insurance. It
is, of course, clear that for perhaps thirty years to come funds will have
to be provided by the States and the Federal Government to meet these
pensions. Second, compulsory contributory annuities which in time will
establish a self-supporting system for those now young and for future
generations. Third, voluntary contributory annuities by which individ-
ual initiative can increase the annual amounts received in old age. It is
proposed that the Federal Government assume one-half of the cost of the
Principal Presidential Speeches and Messages
169
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

old-age pension plan, which ought ultimately to be supplanted by self-
supporting annuity plans.
Source: Rosenman, Samuel I., ed. 1938. Public Papers and Addresses
of Franklin D. Roosevelt, vol. IV. New York: Random House. FDR’s
speeches are also available online through the American Presi-
dency Project at http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/.
Franklin Roosevelt: State of the 
Union Address, January 11, 1944
In 1944, President Roosevelt offered what has become known as his
“Economic Bill of Rights.” This speech became and remains the rallying
cry of those who wish a more generous or expansive social security sys-
tem in the United States.
We have come to a clear realization of the fact that true individual
freedom cannot exist without economic security and independence.
“Necessitous men are not free men.” People who are hungry and out of a
job are the stuff of which dictatorships are made.
In our day these economic truths have become accepted as self-ev-
ident. We have accepted, so to speak, a second Bill of Rights under which
a new basis of security and prosperity can be established for all regard-
less of station, race, or creed.
Among these are:
The right to a useful and remunerative job in the industries or
shops or farms or mines of the Nation;
The right to earn enough to provide adequate food and clothing
and recreation;
The right of every farmer to raise and sell his products at a return
which will give him and his family a decent living;
The right of every businessman, large and small, to trade in an
atmosphere of freedom from unfair competition and domination by mo-
nopolies at home or abroad;
The right of every family to a decent home;
The right to adequate medical care and the opportunity to achieve
and enjoy good health;
The right to adequate protection from the economic fears of old
age, sickness, accident, and unemployment;
The right to a good education.
All of these rights spell security. And after this war is won we must
be prepared to move forward, in the implementation of these rights, to
new goals of human happiness and well-being.
America’s own rightful place in the world depends in large part
upon how fully these and similar rights have been carried into practice.
170
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Source: American Presidency Project. http://www.presidency
.ucsb.edu/sou/php.
Harry S Truman: State of the Union Address,
January 14, 1946
It is often forgotten that Social Security remained a controversial pro-
gram for many years after its passage. By the late 1940s, Congress was
rejecting the schedule of Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA)
tax increases and the program remained narrow in size and coverage.
The expansion of Social Security into the program recognized by Amer-
icans today began with this speech by President Truman. Here he makes
clear that he will focus upon extending and revitalizing Social Security
to create a large program that would include all of American society. He
also announces what would be his unsuccessful effort to add national
health insurance to the Social Security system.
To the Congress of the United States . . .
. . . Our Social Security System has just celebrated its tenth an-
niversary. During the past decade this program has supported the wel-
fare and morale of a large part of our people by removing some of the
hazards and hardships of the aged, the unemployed, and widows and
dependent children.
But, looking back over 10 years’ experience and ahead to the fu-
ture, we cannot fail to see defects and serious inadequacies in our system
as it now exists. Benefits are in many cases inadequate; a great many per-
sons are excluded from coverage; and provision has not been made for
social insurance to cover the cost of medical care and the earnings lost by
the sick and the disabled.
In the field of old-age security, there seems to be no adequate rea-
son for excluding such groups as the self-employed, agricultural and do-
mestic workers, and employees of nonprofit organizations. Since many
of these groups earn wages too low to permit significant savings for old
age, they are in special need of the assured income that can be provided
by old-age insurance.
We must take urgent measures for the readjustment period ahead.
The Congress for some time has been considering legislation designed to
supplement . . . compensation payments to the unemployed . . . it is
sound economic policy. A sustained high level of consumer purchases is
a basic ingredient of a prosperous economy.
. . . The need for a program that will give everyone opportunity for
medical care is obvious. Nor can there be any serious doubt of the Gov-
ernment’s responsibility for helping in this human and social problem.
The comprehensive health program which I recommended on No-
vember 19, 1945, will require substantial additions to the Social Security
Principal Presidential Speeches and Messages
171
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

System and, in conjunction with other changes that need to be made,
will require further consideration of the financial basis for social security.
The system of prepaid medical care which I have recommended is ex-
pected eventually to require amounts equivalent to 4 percent of earnings
up to $3,600 a year, which is about the average of present expenditures
by individuals for medical care. The pooling of medical costs, under a
plan which permits each individual to make a free choice of doctor and
hospital, would assure that individuals receive adequate treatment and
hospitalization when they are faced with emergencies for which they
cannot budget individually. In addition, I recommended insurance bene-
fits to replace part of the earnings lost through temporary sickness and
permanent disability.
Even without these proposed major additions, it would now be
time to undertake a thorough reconsideration of our social security laws.
The structure should be expanded and liberalized. Provision should be
made for extending coverage credit to veterans for the period of their
service in the armed forces. In the financial provisions we must reconcile
the actuarial needs of social security, including health insurance, with
the requirements of a revenue system that is designed to promote a high
level of consumption and full employment.
. . . The plain people of this country found the courage and the
strength, the self-discipline, and the mutual respect to fight and to win,
with the help of our allies, under God. I doubt if the tasks of the future
are more difficult. But if they are, then I say that our strength and our
knowledge and our understanding will be equal to those tasks.
Source: American Presidency Project. http://www.presidency
.ucsb.edu/sou.php
Dwight Eisenhower: State of the 
Union Address, February 2, 1953
Though buried deep in his first State of the Union address, President
Eisenhower’s words on Social Security were of major importance. Since
the program’s enactment, large sections of the Republican Party had op-
posed it. President Eisenhower was the first Republican president to be
elected after its passage. Would he support the program or, heeding calls
from many in his party, work to reduce or eliminate it? Here he not only
announces his full-fledged support for Social Security but he clearly
calls for its expansion. This speech marks the end of any real political re-
sistance to the U.S. old-age pension plan.
Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Eighty-third Congress:
I welcome the honor of appearing before you to deliver my first
message to the Congress.
172
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

. . . This administration is profoundly aware of two great needs
born of our living in a complex industrial economy. First, the individual
citizen must have safeguards against personal disaster inflicted by forces
beyond his control; second, the welfare of the people demands effective
and economical performance by the Government of certain indispens-
able social services.
In the light of this responsibility, certain general purposes and cer-
tain concrete measures are plainly indicated now.
There is urgent need for greater effectiveness in our programs,
both public and private, offering safeguards against the privations that
too often come with unemployment, old age, illness, and accident. The
provisions of the old-age and survivors insurance law should promptly
be extended to cover millions of citizens who have been left out of the
social-security system. No less important is the encouragement of pri-
vately sponsored pension plans. Most important of all, of course, is re-
newed effort to check the inflation which destroys so much of the value
of all social-security payments.
. . . There is, in our affairs at home, a middle way between untram-
meled freedom of the individual and the demands for the welfare of the
whole Nation. This way must avoid government by bureaucracy as care-
fully as it avoids neglect of the helpless.
. . . In this spirit must we live and labor: confident of our strength,
compassionate in our heart, clear in our mind. . . .
Source: American Presidency Project. http://www.presidency
.ucsb.edu/sou.php
William Jefferson Clinton: State of 
the Union Address, January 19, 1999
After an absence of many years, Social Security returned to the forefront
of the presidential agenda in 1999. Recognizing increasing fears about
the future of Social Security, President Clinton announced a set of pro-
posed reforms in his State of the Union address. None became law, but
they have profoundly influenced the course of the debate over reforming
the program.
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress, honored
guests, my fellow Americans. Tonight, I have the honor of reporting to
you on the State of the Union.
. . . So with our budget surplus growing, our economy expanding,
our confidence rising, now is the moment for this generation to meet our
historic responsibility to the 21st century. Our fiscal discipline gives us
an unsurpassed opportunity to address a remarkable new challenge: the
aging of America. With the number of elderly Americans set to double
by 2030, the baby boom will become a “senior boom.” So first and above
Principal Presidential Speeches and Messages
173
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

all, we must save Social Security for the 21st century. Early in this cen-
tury, being old meant being poor. When President Roosevelt created So-
cial Security, thousands wrote to thank him for eliminating what one
woman called the “stark terror of penniless, helpless old age.” Even
today, without Social Security, half our nation’s elderly would be forced
into poverty. Today, Social Security is strong. But by 2013, payroll taxes
will no longer be sufficient to cover monthly payments. And by 2032,
the trust fund will be exhausted, and Social Security will be unable to
pay out the full benefits older Americans have been promised. The best
way to keep Social Security a rock-solid guarantee is not to make drastic
cuts in benefits; not to raise payroll tax rates; and not to drain resources
from Social Security in the name of saving it. Instead, I propose that we
make the historic decision to invest the surplus to save Social Security.
Specifically, I propose that we commit 60 percent of the budget surplus
for the next 15 years to Social Security, investing a small portion in the
private sector just as any private or state government pension would
do. This will earn a higher return and keep Social Security sound for 55
years. But we must aim higher. We should put Social Security on a
sound footing for the next 75 years. We should reduce poverty among
elderly women, who are nearly twice as likely to be poor as our other
seniors—and we should eliminate the limits on what seniors on Social
Security can earn. Now, these changes will require difficult but fully
achievable choices over and above the dedication of the surplus. They
must be made on a bipartisan basis. They should be made this year. So
let me say to you tonight, I reach out my hand to all of you in both
houses and both parties and ask that we join together in saying to the
American people: We will save Social Security now. Now, last year, we
wisely reserved all of the surplus until we knew what it would take to
save Social Security. Again, I say, we shouldn’t spend any of it, not any
of it, until after Social Security is truly saved. First things first. . . . Third,
we must help all Americans, from their first day on the job, to save, to
invest, to create wealth. From its beginning, Americans have supple-
mented Social Security with private pensions and savings. Yet today,
millions of people retire with little to live on other than Social Security.
Americans living longer than ever simply must save more than ever.
Therefore, in addition to saving Social Security and Medicare, I propose
a new pension initiative for retirement security in the 21st century. I
propose that we use a little over 11 percent of the surplus to establish
universal savings accounts—USA accounts—to give all Americans the
means to save. With these new accounts, Americans can invest as they
choose, and receive funds to match a portion of their savings, with extra
help for those least able to save. USA accounts will help all Americans
to share in our nation’s wealth, and to enjoy a more secure retirement. I
ask you to support them.
. . . Saving Social Security and Medicare, creating USA accounts—
this is the right way to use the surplus. If we do so—if we do so—we will
174
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

still have the resources to meet critical needs in education and defense.
And I want to point out that this proposal is fiscally sound. Listen to this:
If we set aside 60 percent of the surplus for Social Security and 16 per-
cent for Medicare, over the next 15 years that saving will achieve the
lowest level of publicly held debt since right before World War I, in 1917.
So With these four measures—saving Social Security, strengthening
Medicare, establishing the USA accounts, supporting long-term care—
we can begin to meet our generation’s historic responsibility to establish
true security for 21st century seniors.
. . . My fellow Americans, this is our moment. Let us lift our eyes as
one nation, and from the mountaintop of this American century, look
ahead to the next one, asking God’s blessing on our endeavors and on
our beloved country. Thank you, and good evening.
Source: American Presidency Project. http://www.presidency
.ucsb.edu/sou.php
George Walker Bush: State of the 
Union Address, February 2, 2005
After his reelection in 2004, President Bush returned to the issue of re-
forming Social Security. In this address, he calls for the partial privati-
zation of Social Security through creating private individual retirement
accounts. Though initially unsuccessful, his words again framed the de-
bate for the years to come.
Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress, fellow
citizens:
As a new Congress gathers, all of us in the elected branches of gov-
ernment share a great privilege: we have been placed in office by the
votes of the people we serve.  . . .Two weeks ago, I stood on the steps of
this Capitol and renewed the commitment of our nation to the guiding
ideal of liberty for all. This evening I will set forth policies to advance
that ideal at home and around the world.
. . . One of America’s most important institutions—a symbol of the
trust between generations—is also in need of wise and effective reform.
Social Security was a great moral success of the 20th century, and we
must honor its great purposes in this new century. The system, however,
on its current path, is headed toward bankruptcy. And so we must join
together to strengthen and save Social Security.
Today, more than 45 million Americans receive Social Security bene-
fits, and millions more are nearing retirement—and for them the system is
sound and fiscally strong. I have a message for every American who is 55
or older: Do not let anyone mislead you. For you, the Social Security sys-
tem will not change in any way.
Principal Presidential Speeches and Messages
175
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

For younger workers, the Social Security system has serious prob-
lems that will grow worse with time. Social Security was created decades
ago, for a very different era. In those days people did not live as long,
benefits were much lower than they are today, and a half century ago,
about 16 workers paid into the system for each person drawing benefits.
Our society has changed in ways the founders of Social Security could
not have foreseen. In today’s world, people are living longer and there-
fore drawing benefits longer—and those benefits are scheduled to rise
dramatically over the next few decades. And instead of 16 workers pay-
ing in for every beneficiary, right now it’s only about three workers—
and over the next few decades, that number will fall to just two workers
per beneficiary. With each passing year, fewer workers are paying ever-
higher benefits to an ever-larger number of retirees.
So here is the result: Thirteen years from now, in 2018, Social Secu-
rity will be paying out more than it takes in. And every year afterward
will bring a new shortfall, bigger than the year before. For example, in
the year 2027, the government will somehow have to come up with an
extra $200 billion to keep the system afloat—and by 2033, the annual
shortfall would be more than $300 billion. By the year 2042, the entire
system would be exhausted and bankrupt. If steps are not taken to avert
that outcome, the only solutions would be drastically higher taxes, mas-
sive new borrowing, or sudden and severe cuts in Social Security bene-
fits or other government programs.
I recognize that 2018 and 2042 may seem like a long way off. But
those dates are not so distant, as any parent will tell you. If you have a
5-year-old, you’re already concerned about how you’ll pay for college
tuition 13 years down the road. If you’ve got children in their 20s, as
some of us do, the idea of Social Security collapsing before they retire
does not seem like a small matter. And it should not be a small matter
to the United States Congress.
You and I share a responsibility. We must pass reforms that solve
the financial problems of Social Security once and for all.
Fixing Social Security permanently will require an open, candid
review of the options. Some have suggested limiting benefits for wealthy
retirees. Former Congressman Tim Penny has raised the possibility of in-
dexing benefits to prices rather than wages. During the 1990s, my prede-
cessor, President Clinton, spoke of increasing the retirement age. Former
Sen. John Breaux suggested discouraging early collection of Social Secu-
rity benefits. The late Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan recommended
changing the way benefits are calculated.
All these ideas are on the table. I know that none of these reforms
would be easy. But we have to move ahead with courage and honesty,
because our children’s retirement security is more important than par-
tisan politics. I will work with members of Congress to find the most
effective combination of reforms. I will listen to anyone who has a
176
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

good idea to offer. We must, however, be guided by some basic princi-
ples. We must make Social Security permanently sound, not leave that
task for another day. We must not jeopardize our economic strength by
increasing payroll taxes. We must ensure that lower income Americans
get the help they need to have dignity and peace of mind in their retire-
ment. We must guarantee that there is no change for those now retired
or nearing retirement. And we must take care that any changes in the
system are gradual, so younger workers have years to prepare and
plan for their future.
As we fix Social Security, we also have the responsibility to make
the system a better deal for younger workers. And the best way to reach
that goal is through voluntary personal retirement accounts. Here is how
the idea works. Right now, a set portion of the money you earn is taken
out of your paycheck to pay for the Social Security benefits of today’s re-
tirees. If you are a younger worker, I believe you should be able to set
aside part of that money in your own retirement account, so you can
build a nest egg for your own future.
Here is why personal accounts are a better deal. Your money
will grow, over time, at a greater rate than anything the current system
can deliver—and your account will provide money for retirement over
and above the check you will receive from Social Security. In addition,
you’ll be able to pass along the money that accumulates in your per-
sonal account, if you wish, to your children or grandchildren. And
best of all, the money in the account is yours, and the government can
never take it away.
The goal here is greater security in retirement, so we will set care-
ful guidelines for personal accounts. We will make sure the money can
only go into a conservative mix of bonds and stock funds. We will make
sure that your earnings are not eaten up by hidden Wall Street fees. We
will make sure there are good options to protect your investments from
sudden market swings on the eve of your retirement. We will make sure
a personal account can’t be emptied out all at once, but rather paid out
over time, as an addition to traditional Social Security benefits. And we
will make sure this plan is fiscally responsible, by starting personal re-
tirement accounts gradually, and raising the yearly limits on contribu-
tions over time, eventually permitting all workers to set aside four
percentage points of their payroll taxes in their accounts.
Personal retirement accounts should be familiar to federal employ-
ees, because you already have something similar, called the Thrift Sav-
ings Plan, which lets workers deposit a portion of their paychecks into
any of five different broadly based investment funds. It is time to extend
the same security, and choice, and ownership to young Americans. . . .
Source: American Presidency Project. http://www.presidency
.ucsb.edu/sou.php
Principal Presidential Speeches and Messages
177
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Reform Commission and 
Advisory Council Reports
For most of the history of Social Security, major program reforms were
first developed and promoted through councils or commissions devised
for that purpose.  Until 1994, Advisory Councils were convened period-
ically within the Social Security system to examine the operations of the
program. Based on their findings, changes were made for the improve-
ment of the program. On occasion, outside groups of experts and politi-
cal figures have been asked to meet and examine the Social Security
system, with an eye to reform. These have typically been called “com-
missions.” The most influential have been those organized by the presi-
dent of the United States.
The current era of “saving Social Security” has seen the reports of
three major bodies—two presidential commissions and one Advisory
Council. They have to a significant degree set the agenda for later con-
gressional legislation and for the societal debate over what (if any) re-
forms to make to the program. Below are excerpts from the final reports
of three important bodies.
Report of the National Commission 
on Social Security Reform
(The Greenspan Commission). 
January 1983
The commission was established on December 16, 1981, by President
Ronald Reagan. It was composed of 15 members: eight Republicans and
seven Democrats. Five members were selected by the president; five
were selected by the senate majority leader, in consultation with the sen-
ate minority leader; and five were selected by the speaker of the House of
Representatives, in consultation with the House minority leader. It was
asked to examine the current and long-term financial condition of the
Trust Funds, to identify problems with the operations of the Social Se-
curity system, and to offer recommendations to solve them.
. . . Findings and Recommendations
The National Commission has agreed that there is a financing prob-
lem for the OASDI program for both the short run, 1983–89 (as measured
using pessimistic economic assumptions) and the long range, 1983–2056 (as
measured by an intermediate cost estimate) and that action should be taken
to strengthen the financial status of the program. The National Commis-
sion recognized that, under the intermediate cost estimate, the financial sta-
178
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

tus of the OASDI program in the 1990s and early 2000s will be favorable
(i.e., income will significantly exceed outgo). The National Commission
also recognized that, under the intermediate cost estimate, the financial sta-
tus of the HI program becomes increasingly unfavorable from 1990 until
the end of the period for which the estimates are made. . . .
The National Commission makes the following recommendations
unanimously:
(1) The members of the National Commission believe that the Con-
gress, in its deliberations on financing proposals, should not alter the
fundamental structure of the Social Security program or undermine its
fundamental principles. The National Commission considered, but re-
jected, proposals to make the Social Security program a voluntary one or
to transform it into a program under which benefits are a product exclu-
sively of the contributions paid, or to convert it into a fully-funded pro-
gram, or to change it to a program under which benefits are conditioned
on the showing of financial need. (2) The National Commission recom-
mends that, for purposes of considering the short-range financial status
of the OASDI Trust Funds, $150–200 billion in either additional income
or in decreased outgo (or a combination of both) should be provided for
the OASDI Trust Funds in calendar years 1983–89.
(3) The National Commission finds that, for purposes of consider-
ing the long-range financial status of the OASDI Trust Funds, its actuar-
ial imbalance for the 75-year valuation period is an average of 1.80% of
taxable payroll . . .
The National Commission was able to reach a consensus for meet-
ing the short-range and long-range financial requirements, by a vote of
12 to 3. . . .
The 12 members of the National Commission voting in favor of the
“consensus” package agreed to a single set of proposals to meet the
short-range deficit. . . . They further agreed that the long-range deficit
should be reduced to approximately zero. The single set of recommenda-
tions would meet about two-thirds of the long-range financial require-
ments. Seven of the 12 members agreed that the remaining one-third of
the long-range financial requirements should be met by a deferred, grad-
ual increase in the normal retirement age, while the other 5 members
agreed to an increase in the contribution rates in 2010 of slightly less than
one-half percent (0.46%) of covered earnings on the employer and the
same amount on the employee, with the employee’s share of the increase
offset by a refundable income-tax credit.
Provisions of “Consensus” Package
. . . The “consensus” package would provide an estimated $168 bil-
lion in additional financial resources to the OASDI program in calendar
years 1983–89. This amount is very close to the midpoint of the $150–200
billion range stated in Recommendation No. 2. . . .
. . . The National Commission recommends that coverage under
the OASDI program should be extended on a mandatory basis . . . to all
Reform Commission and Advisory Council Reports
179
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

newly hired civilian employees of the Federal Government. The Na-
tional Commission also recommends that OASDI-HI coverage should
be extended on a mandatory basis . . . to all employees of nonprofit
organizations.
. . . The National Commission recommends that State and local
governments which have elected coverage for their employees under the
OASDI-HI program should not be permitted to terminate such coverage
in the future—specifically, termination notices now pending would be
invalid if the process of termination is not completed by the enactment
date of the new legislation.
. . . The National Commission is concerned about the relatively
large OASDI benefits that can accrue to individuals who spend most of
their working careers in noncovered employment from which they de-
rive pension rights, but who also become eligible for OASDI benefits as a
result of relatively short periods in covered employment with other em-
ployers. Accordingly, the National Commission recommends that the
method of computing benefits should be revised for persons who first
become eligible for pensions from non-covered employment, after 1983,
so as to eliminate “windfall” benefits.
. . . The National Commission recommends that, beginning with
1984, 50% of OASDI benefits should be considered as taxable income for
income-tax purposes for persons with Adjusted Gross Income (before in-
cluding therein any OASDI benefits) of $20,000 if single and $25,000 if
married. The proceeds from such taxation, as estimated by the Treasury
Department, would be credited to the OASDI Trust Funds under a per-
manent appropriation.
It is estimated that about 10% of OASDI beneficiaries would be af-
fected by this provision. The National Commission noted that a “notch”
is present in this provision in that those with Adjusted Gross Income of
just under the limit of $20,000/$25,000 would have a larger total income
(including OASDI benefits) than those with Adjusted Gross Income just
over the limit. The National Commission points out the presence of this
“notch” and trusts that it will be rectified in the legislative process.
. . . The National Commission recommends that the automatic
cost-of-living adjustments of OASDI benefits should, beginning in 1983,
be made applicable to the December benefit checks (payable early in Jan-
uary), rather than being first applicable to the June payments. The Na-
tional Commission also recommends that the amount of the disregard of
OASDI benefits for purposes of determining Supplemental Security In-
come payment levels should be increased from $20 a month to $50.
. . . The National Commission recommends that the following
changes in benefit provisions which affect mainly women should be made:
(a) Present law permits the continuation of benefits for surviving
spouses who remarry after age 60. This would also be done for (1) dis-
abled surviving spouses aged 50–59, (2) disabled divorced surviving
spouses aged 50–59, and (3) divorced surviving spouses aged 60 or over.
180
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

(b) Spouse benefits for divorced spouses would be payable at age
62 or over (subject to the requirement that the divorce has lasted for a
significant period) if the former spouse is eligible for retirement benefits,
whether or not they have been claimed (or they have been suspended
because of substantial employment).
(c) Deferred surviving-spouse benefits would continue to be in-
dexed as under present law, except that the indexing would be based on
the increases in wages after the death of the worker (instead of by the in-
creases in the CPI, as under present law).
(d) The benefit rate for disabled widows and widowers aged 50–59
at disablement would be the same as that for non-disabled widows and
widowers first claiming benefits at age 60 . . . instead of the lower rates
under present law. . . . Such change would not only be applicable to new
cases, but would also be applicable to beneficiaries of this category who
are on the rolls on the effective date of the provision.
. . . The National Commission recommends that the OASDI tax
schedule should be revised so that the 1985 rate would be moved to
1984, the 1985–87 rates would remain as scheduled under present law,
part of the 1990 rate would be moved to 1988, and the rate for 1990 and
after would remain unchanged. . . .
. . . The National Commission recommends that the OASDI tax
rates for self-employed persons should, beginning in 1984, be equal to
the combined employer-employee rates. One-half of the OASDI taxes
paid by self-employed persons should then be considered as a business
expense for income-tax purposes (but not for purposes of determining
the OASDI-HI tax).
. . . The National Commission recommends that the proposed
OASDI tax rates should be allocated between the OASI and DI Trust
Funds in a manner different from present law, in order that both funds
will have about the same fund ratios.
. . . The National Commission recommends that the authority for
inter-fund borrowing by the OASDI Trust Funds from the HI Trust Fund
be authorized for 1983–87.
. . . The National Commission recommends that a lump-sum pay-
ment should be made to the OASDI Trust Funds from the General Fund
of the Treasury for the following items:
(a) The present value of the estimated additional benefits arising
from the gratuitous military service wage credits for service before 1957
(subject to subsequent adjustments if the experience deviates from the
estimates).
(b) The amount of the combined employer-employee OASDI
taxes on the gratuitous military service wage credits for service after
1956 and before 1983 . . . The payment would include interest, but
would be reduced for any costs therefor which were paid in the past to
the OASDI Trust Funds from the General Fund of the Treasury. In the
future, the OASDI Trust Funds would be reimbursed on a current basis
Reform Commission and Advisory Council Reports
181
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

for such employer-employee taxes on such wage credits for service
after 1982.
(c) The amount of uncashed OASDI checks issued in the past
(which were charged against the trust funds at time of issue), estimated
at about $300–400 million. (The problem of uncashed checks in the future
has been corrected as a result of changed procedures of the Treasury De-
partment with regard to checks which are uncashed for a long time.)
. . . The National Commission recommends that, beginning with
1988, if the fund ratio of the combined OASDI Trust Funds as of the be-
ginning of a year is less than 20.0% . . . the automatic cost-of-living
(COLA) adjustments of OASDI benefits should be based on the lower of
the CPI increase or the increase in wages. If the fund ratio is 32.0% or
more at the beginning of a year, payments will be made during the fol-
lowing year as supplements to monthly benefits otherwise payable to
make up to individuals for any use of wage increases instead of CPI in-
creases in the past, but only to the extent that sufficient funds are avail-
able over those needed to maintain a fund ratio of 32.0%.
[The fund ratio is the balance in the fund, exclusive of any out-
standing loan from the HI Trust Fund, as a percentage of the estimated
outgo from the fund in the year.]
This provision will serve as a stabilizer against the possibility of ex-
ceptionally poor economic performance over a period of time.
The increases in wages would be determined from the “SSA aver-
age wage index,” the series used by the Social Security Administration in
determining such elements of the program as the maximum taxable
earnings base and the “bend points” in the formula for the Primary In-
surance Amount. As an example, assuming that this new indexing
method were applicable for 1995 (for the December checks), the COLA
percentage would be the smaller of (1) the percentage increase in the CPI
from the third quarter of 1994, to the third quarter of 1995 or (2) the per-
centage increase in the “SSA average wage index” from 1993 to 1994.
. . . The National Commission recommends that the Delayed-Re-
tirement Credit should be increased from the present 3% (for persons
who attained age 65 after 1981) to 8%, to be phased in over the period
1990–2010.
Under present law, persons who do not receive benefits after age
65 . . . receive increases in their benefit (and in their widowed spouse’s
benefit, but not in any other auxiliary benefit) at the rate of 3% for each
year of delay in receipt of benefits from age 65 through age 71. Under the
proposal, the Delayed Retirement Credit for months in 1990 would be at
the rate of 3 1/4%, those for 1991 would be at the rate of 3 1/2%, etc.
until an 8% rate would be reached in 2009 and after . . . 
Source: Social Security Administration. 1983. Report of the National
Commission on Social Security Reform, January. http://www.ssa
.gov/history/reports/gspan.html.
182
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Report of the 1994–1996 Advisory 
Council on Social Security
This is the last Advisory Council report. This council was charged with
the examination of the long-term financing of Social Security and the
development of a policy response.
Findings and Recommendations
While the Council has not found any short-term financing prob-
lems with the Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability (OASDI) program,
there are serious problems in the long run. Because of the time required
for workers to prepare for their retirement, and the greater fairnes of
gradual changes, even long-run problems require attention in the near
term.
The Council identified four major areas of concern.
[The] Long-Term Balance. Under their intermediate assumptions,
the Trustees of the Social Security Funds estimated that income (the sum
of the revenue sources plus interest on accumulated funds) will exceed
expenses each year until 2020. The trust fund balances will then start to
decline as investments are cashed in to meet the payments coming due.
The Trustees estimated that although 75 percent of costs would continue
to be met from current payroll and income taxes, in the absence of any
changes full benefits could not be paid on time beginning in 2030.
The deficit over the traditional 75-year projection period was 2.17
percent of taxable payroll . . . Consequently, one of the three major tasks
the Council set for itself in the area of financing was to make recommen-
dations that would eliminate the 2.17 percent of taxable payroll deficit.
All members of the Council agree that this should be done, though there
are differences of opinion on how the goal should be met.
The second major problem with Social Security financing is the de-
terioration in the program’s long-range balance that occurs solely be-
cause of the passage of time. Because of the aging of the U.S. population,
whenever the program is brought into 75-year balance under a stable tax
rate, it can be reasonably forecast that, without any changes in assump-
tions or experience, the simple passage of time will put the system into
deficit . . . All members of the Council agree that it is an unsatisfactory
situation to have the passage of time alone put the system into long-run
actuarial deficit, though there are again differences on how the problem
should be corrected.
The third area of concern for the Council arises from the fact that
from now on many young workers and workers of future generations
under present law will be paying over their working lifetimes employee
and employer taxes that add to considerably more than the present
value of their anticipated benefits. This is the inevitable result of a pay-
as-you-go system such as the United States has had, and an aging popu-
lation. Although the money’s worth that workers get from Social
Security is only one of many criteria for judging the value of the Social
Reform Commission and Advisory Council Reports
183
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Security system, the Council believes that the system should meet a test
of providing a reasonable money’s worth return on the contributions of
younger workers and future generations, while taking account of the re-
distributive nature of the Social Security system.
The Council is breaking new ground by dealing so explicitly with
money’s worth issues. It does so because of concerns about equity from
one generation to another. The Council feels that equity among genera-
tions is a serious issue and that it is important to improve the return on
retirement saving for young people.
All members of the Council favor the objective of improving the
money’s worth given by Social Security to younger generations. There
are again differences on how this objective should be achieved.
The final issue involves public confidence in the system. Polling
data suggest that younger people have unprecedentedly low levels of
confidence that Social Security benefits “will be there” for them when
they retire. Polling data also suggest some erosion in public confidence
in Social Security over time. While some of this skepticism runs well be-
yond issues the Council was dealing with, the Council does want to reas-
sure people about the future viability and fairness of Social Security.
. . . In the past, efforts to deal with Social Security’s financial diffi-
culties have generally featured cutting benefits and raising tax rates on a
pay-as-you-go basis. All Council members agree that the pay-as-you-go
approach should be changed. But despite its best efforts, the Council was
not able to agree on one single plan for dealing with Social Security’s fi-
nancial difficulties. Rather, Council members expressed interest in three
different approaches to restoring financial solvency and improving
money’s worth returns.
One group of members favors an approach, labeled the Mainte-
nance of Benefits (MB) plan, that involves an increase in income taxes on
Social Security benefits, a redirection to the OASDI funds beginning in
2010 of the part of the revenue from taxes on OASDI benefits now going
to the Hospital Insurance (HI) Trust Fund, coverage of newly hired State
and local government workers not currently covered by Social Security,
a payroll tax increase in 2045, and serious consideration of a plan allow-
ing the Government to begin investing a portion of trust fund assets di-
rectly in common stocks indexed to the broad market. Historically,
returns on equities have exceeded those on Government bonds (where
all Social Security funds are now invested). If this equity premium per-
sists, it would be possible to maintain Social Security benefits for all in-
come groups of workers, greatly improving the money’s worth for
younger workers, without incurring the risks that could accompany in-
dividual investment.
Another group of members supports an approach, labeled the In-
dividual Accounts (IA) plan, that creates individual accounts alongside
the Social Security system. This plan involves an increase in the income
taxation of benefits (though not the redirection of HI funds), State and
184
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

local coverage, an acceleration of the already-scheduled increase in the
age of eligibility for full benefits up to year 2011 and then an automatic
increase in that age tied to longevity, a reduction in the growth of future
Social Security that benefits is structured to affect middle- and high-
wage workers the most, and an increase in employees’ mandatory con-
tribution to Social Security of 1.6 percent of covered payroll, which
would be allocated to individual defined contribution accounts. These
individual accounts would be held by the Government but with con-
strained investment choices available to individuals. If individuals were
to devote the same share of their IA funds to equities as they now do for
their 401(k) private pension funds, the combination of the annuity in-
come attributable to their individual accounts and their scaled-back So-
cial Security benefits would on average yield essentially the same
benefits as promised under the current system for all income groups.
A third group of members favors an approach, labeled the Per-
sonal Security Accounts (PSA) plan, that creates even larger, fully-
funded individual accounts which would replace a portion of Social
Security. Under this plan, workers would direct 5 percentage points of
the current payroll tax into a PSA, which would be managed privately
and could be invested in a range of financial instruments. The balance of
the payroll tax would go to fund a modified retirement program and
modified disability and survivor benefits. When fully phased in, the
modified retirement program would offer all full-career workers a flat
dollar benefit (the equivalent of $410 monthly in 1996, the amount being
automatically increased to reflect increases in national average wages
prior to retirement) plus the proceeds of their PSAs. This plan also
would involve a change in benefit taxation, State and local coverage, an
acceleration of the already-scheduled increase from 65 to 67 in the age of
eligibility for full retirement benefits, with the age increased in future
years to reflect increases in longevity, a gradual increase from 62 to 65 in
the age of eligibility for early retirement benefits (although workers
could begin withdrawing the proceeds of their PSAs at 62), a reduction
in future benefits for disabled workers, a reduction in benefits for
women who never worked outside the home, and an increase in benefits
for many elderly widows.
If individuals allocated the assets in their PSAs in the same pro-
portion as they do for their 401(k) private pension plans, the combina-
tion of the flat benefit payment and the income from their PSAs would,
on average, exceed the benefits promised under the current system for
all income groups. There would be a cost associated with the transition
to this new system equivalent to 1.52 percent of payroll for 72 years. This
transition cost would be met through a combination of increased tax rev-
enues and additional borrowing from the public.
All of these approaches have in common that they seek to
achieve more advance funding of Social Security’s long-term obliga-
tions. They would also result in a higher level of national saving for
Reform Commission and Advisory Council Reports
185
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

retirement, although the impact on the nation’s overall retirement sav-
ing would differ under the plans. The two individual account plans
would raise overall retirement and national saving much more than
the MB plan in the early years of the forecast horizon through the
mandatory contributions of the IA plan or the transition tax of the PSA
plan. These two plans are then likely to generate higher national in-
come in the 21st century.
While each of the proposals would increase investment in the
stock market, one approach invests new Social Security funds directly
into equities to realize a higher rate of return; another approach adds ad-
ditional, mandatory saving on top of a scaled-back version of the exist-
ing benefit system; and the third approach moves from the current
pay-as-you-go, largely unfunded system to one in which future benefits
are more than 50 percent funded through PSAs. Each of these plans has
different potential to create real wealth for retirement and provides for
different ownership of that wealth. And each involves a very different
vision for the future evolution of the U.S. retirement system.
Source: Social Security Administration. 1997. Report of the 1994–
1996 Advisory Council on Social Security. Volume I: Findings and
Recommendations. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
http://ssa.gov/history/reports/adcouncil/report/toc.htm.
The 2001 President’s Commission to
Strengthen Social Security (The Moynihan 
Commission). December 21, 2001
On May 2, 2001, President George W. Bush appointed a bipartisan panel
of 16 individuals to study the future financing of Social Security. The
commission was chartered with providing bipartisan recommendations to
the president for modernizing and restoring fiscal soundness to the Social
Security system according to the following principles: modernization
must not change Social Security benefits for retirees or near retirees; the
entire Social Security surplus must be dedicated to Social Security only;
Social Security payroll taxes must not be increased; the government must
not invest Social Security funds in the stock market; modernization must
preserve Social Security’s disability and survivors’ components; and
modernization must include individually controlled, voluntary personal
retirement accounts, which will augment the Social Security safety net.
Final Report. “Strengthening Social Security and Creating Per-
sonal Wealth for all Americans.”
From the first, Social Security was a work in progress. It remains
so now. In 1939, just four years after enactment, the Administration and
Congress added major provisions. FDR called for more. As he signed the
186
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

1939 Amendments he stated: “we must expect a great program of social
legislation, as such as is represented in the Social Security Act, to be im-
proved and strengthened in the light of additional experience and un-
derstanding.” He urged an “active study” of future possibilities. 
One such possibility – personal retirement accounts that would
endow workers with a measure of wealth – has emerged as the central
issue in the ongoing national debate over social insurance. 
There are a number of reasons for this. The first is the most obvi-
ous, if perhaps the least commented upon: Social Security retirement
benefits are no longer the bargain they once were. There is nothing sinis-
ter about this. Early retirees benefited from the fixed formula of retire-
ment benefits. For years the Social Security Administration would
distribute photographs of Ida May Fuller of Ludlow, Vermont, who hav-
ing paid $24.75 in Social Security taxes lived to age 100 and collected
$22,889 in benefits. 
In Miss Fuller’s time there were almost 42 covered workers for
each Social Security beneficiary. We are now down to 3.4 workers per
beneficiary. As a result, Social Security as a retirement measure has be-
come a poor investment. It is, even so, an essential program. Widows
and dependent children are very reliant on dependent benefits. For wid-
ows, widowers, singles and children, the monthly check can be a steady,
stabilizing factor in life. That said, however, Social Security’s [sic] actuar-
ies estimate that, for a single male worker born in 2000 with average
earnings, the real annual return on his currently-scheduled contributions
to Social Security will be only 0.86 percent. This is not what sends savers
to savings banks. For workers who earn the maximum amount taxed
(currently $80,400, indexed to wages) the real annual return is minus
0.72 percent. 
This should come as no surprise. Demography is a kind of destiny.
The founders of Social Security always assumed it would be supple-
mented by individual forms of savings. (In his original Message to Con-
gress, President Roosevelt envisioned pensioners owning annuities.) . . . 
The post–World War II growth period was reflected . . . in the stock
market. More important, a new form of investment, the mutual fund,
was developed which enabled small savers to “pool” their investments
over a range of stocks and bonds. . . .
The surge in mutual fund ownership began in the early 1980s.
One of the more notable innovations was the development of a similar
fund, the Thrift Savings Plan, as part of the retirement arrangements for
Federal employees. . . . The results have been stunning. . . . Three funds
were available, in whatever combination the employee chose. A “G”
Fund is invested in short-term non-marketable U.S. Treasury securities
specially issued to the TSP. An “F” Fund is invested in a commercial
bond index; and a “C” Fund is invested in an equity index fund. The
compound rates of return for the closing decade of the last century were
as follows: 
Reform Commission and Advisory Council Reports
187
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

G Fund
6.7 percent 
F Fund 
7.9 percent 
C Fund 
17.4 percent 
Actual trading is contracted out and administrative expenses are mini-
mal. . . . As of September 2001, 86.6 percent of all Federal employees par-
ticipated in the program. It is a singular success.
. . . The Social Security tax (F.I.C.A. for Federal Insurance Contri-
bution Act) began at two percent and has been raised more than twenty
times, reaching the present 12.4 percent. This is a regressive tax that is
paid on the first dollar of income by rich and poor alike. In fact, as of
1997, 79 percent of American households paid more in payroll taxes than
in income taxes. 
One egregious failing of the present system is its effect on minori-
ties with shorter life spans than the white majority. For black men age 20,
only some 65 percent can be expected to survive to age 65. Thus, one of
every three black youths will pay for retirement benefits they will never
collect . . . because Social Security provides no property rights to its con-
tributors – the Supreme Court has twice so ruled – a worker could easily
work forty years then die and own not a penny of the contributions he
has made for retirement benefits he will never collect . . . far too many
never receive any retirement benefits and leave no estate. 
Similarly, the present Social Security program can prove unjust to
women, especially divorced women who too often share nothing of the
benefits acquired by a previous spouse. It is time we addressed this
matter. . . .
By the 1990s, the time had come for Personal Retirement Accounts
. . . the task was feasible – the Thrift Savings Accounts were already in
place – and the cost modest . . . 
Personal retirement accounts within Social Security could be de-
signed and financed in a number of ways, some of which are analyzed by
the Commission in detail in the pages that follow. . . . The system is not
sustainable as currently structured, . . .  Regardless of how policymakers
come to terms with the underlying sustainability issues, however, one
thing is clear to us: the time to include personal accounts in such action
has, indeed, arrived.
. . . Social Security will be strengthened if modernized to include a
system of voluntary personal accounts. Personal accounts improve re-
tirement security by facilitating wealth creation and providing partici-
pants with assets that they own and that can be inherited, rather than
providing only claims to benefits that remain subject to political negotia-
tion. By allowing investment choice, individuals would be free to pursue
higher expected rates of return on their Social Security contributions.
Furthermore, strengthening Social Security through personal accounts
can add valuable protections for widows, divorced per-sons, low-income
households and other Americans at risk of poverty in old age. Partial ad-
188
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

vance funding of Social Security should be a goal of any effort to
strengthen the system. Advance funding within Social Security can best
be accomplished through personal accounts rather than direct govern-
ment investment. . . . 
Personal accounts can also contribute towards the fiscal sustain-
ability of the Social Security system. While there are multiple paths to
fiscal sustainability that are consistent with the President’s principles
for Social Security reform, we have chosen to include three reform mod-
els in the report that improve the fiscal sustainability of the current sys-
tem, are costed honestly, and are preferable to the current Social
Security system. . . .
The Commission believes that no matter which approach is taken,
personal accounts can increase expected benefits to future participants in
the Social Security system. 
Each of the three reform plans abides by the President’s Principles
for reform.
•
The Commission has developed three alternative models for
Social Security reform that feature personal accounts as a
central component. Under all three reform plans, future
retirees can expect to receive benefits that are at least as high
as those received by today’s retirees, even after adjusting for
inflation. . . .
•
Because the Commission believes that the benefits currently
paid to low-wage workers are too low, it has included a
provision in two of the three plans that would enhance the
existing Social Security system’s progressivity. This provision
will raise even more of our low-income elderly – most of
whom are women – out of poverty. Two of the three models
also boost survivor benefits for below-average income
widows and widowers. . . . 
•
All three reform models improve the fiscal sustainability of
the program, though some move farther than others. Model 1
would require additional revenues in perpetuity in order to
pay scheduled Social Security benefits under the plan. Model
3 prescribes an amount of additional revenues needed to pay
scheduled benefits under the plan, an amount smaller than
that required under Model 1. Model 2 does not require
permanent additional funding.
•
All three models also require transitional investments to
move to a system that includes Personal Accounts. These
transitional investments advance fund future benefits, thus
substantially reducing the cost on future generations.
•
All three models reduce the long-term need for general
revenues as compared to the current, unsustainable system. In
two of the three plans (Models 2 and 3), the system’s cash flow
Reform Commission and Advisory Council Reports
189
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

needs are met so that the benefits promised by each plan can be
paid as retirees need them.
•
All three of the models are expected to increase national
saving, though some would do so more than others.
•
The Commission concludes that building substantial wealth
in personal accounts can be and should be a viable
component of strengthening Social Security. We commend
our three models to the President, the Members of Congress
and to the American public in order to enrich national
understanding of the opportunities for moving forward.
[Plan 1.] Workers can voluntarily invest 2 percent of their taxable
wages in a personal account
In exchange, traditional Social Security benefits are offset by the
worker’s personal account contributions compounded at an interest rate
of 3.5 percent above inflation. 
No other changes are made to traditional Social Security. . . .
Workers, retirees, and taxpayers continue to face uncertainty be-
cause a large financing gap remains requiring future benefit changes or
substantial new revenues.
Additional revenues are needed to keep the trust fund solvent
starting in the 2030s.
[Plan 2.] Workers can voluntarily redirect 4 percent of their pay-
roll taxes up to $1000 annually to a personal account (the maximum
contribution is indexed annually to wage growth). No additional con-
tribution from the worker would be required. 
In exchange for the account, traditional Social Security benefits are
offset by the worker’s personal account contributions compounded at an
interest rate of 2 percent above inflation. 
Workers opting for personal accounts can reasonably expect com-
bined benefits greater than those paid to current retirees; greater than
those paid to workers without accounts; and greater than the future ben-
efits payable under the current system should it not be reformed.
The plan makes Social Security more progressive by establishing a
minimum benefit payable to 30-year minimum wage workers of 120 per-
cent of the poverty line. Additional protections against poverty are pro-
vided for survivors as well.
Benefits under the traditional component of Social Security would
be price indexed, beginning in 2009. . . .
[Plan 3.] Personal accounts are created by a match of part of the
payroll tax – 2.5 percent up to $1000 annually (indexed annually for
wage growth) – for any worker who contributes an additional 1 percent
of wages subject to Social Security payroll taxes. 
The add-on contribution is partially subsidized for workers in a
progressive manner by a refundable tax credit. 
190
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

In exchange, traditional Social Security benefits are offset by the
worker’s personal account contributions compounded at an interest rate
of 2.5 percent above inflation. 
The plan makes the traditional Social Security system more pro-
gressive by establishing a minimum benefit payable to 30-year mini-
mum wage workers of 100 percent of the poverty line. . . . This minimum
benefit would be indexed to wage growth. Additional protections
against poverty are provided for survivors as well.
Benefits under the traditional component of Social Security would
be adjusted by 
•
adjusting the growth rate in benefits for actual future changes
in life expectancy, 
•
increasing work incentives by decreasing the benefits for
early retirement and increasing the benefits for late
retirement, and 
•
flattening out the benefit formula (reducing the third bend
point factor from 15 to 10 percent). . . . 
New sources of dedicated revenue are added in the equivalent
amount of 0.6 percent of payroll over the 75-year period, and continuing
thereafter. 
Additional temporary transfers from general revenues would be
needed to keep the Trust Fund solvent between 2034 and 2063. . . .
Source: Commission to Strengthen Social Security. 2001. Strength-
ening Social Security and Creating Personal Wealth for All Americans,
the Final Report of the President’s Commission to Strengthen Social Se-
curity. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. http:
//www.csss.gov/reports/.
Social Security Annual Trustees Report
Each year the trustees of the Social Security Board are required to issue
a report outlining the operations of the Social Security programs and
their funding. The report is usually released in the spring. It is this re-
port that has become famous for announcing the predicted date at which
the Trust Fund will be exhausted. Presented below is the published
summary of the 2007 Annual Trustees Report and the summary of the
Social Security program contained in the report of the Status of the So-
cial Security and Medicare Programs. The full reports, which run
many pages and are issued each year, may be found at the Social Secu-
rity Administration Web site (go to http://ssa.gov and type “trustee re-
port” in the Web site’s search engine).
Social Security Annual Trustees Report
191
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

A Summary of the 2007 
Annual Trustees Report
. . . The Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) program
in the United States makes available a basic level of monthly income
upon the attainment of retirement eligibility age, death, or disability by
insured workers. The OASDI program consists of two separate parts
which pay benefits to workers and their families-Old-Age and Survivors
Insurance (OASI) and Disability Insurance (DI). Under OASI, monthly
benefits are paid to retired workers and their families and to survivors of
deceased workers. Under DI, monthly benefits are paid to disabled
workers and their families.
The Board of Trustees was established under the Social Security
Act to oversee the financial operations of the OASI and DI Trust Funds.
The Board is composed of six members. Four members serve by virtue of
their positions in the Federal Government: the Secretary of the Treasury,
who is the Managing Trustee; the Secretary of Labor; the Secretary of
Health and Human Services; and the Commissioner of Social Security.
The other two members, John L. Palmer and Thomas R. Saving, are pub-
lic representatives initially appointed by President William J. Clinton on
October 28, 2000, and reappointed by President George W. Bush on April
18, 2006. The Deputy Commissioner of the Social Security Administra-
tion (SSA) is designated as Secretary of the Board.
The Social Security Act requires that the Board, among other du-
ties, report annually to the Congress on the financial and actuarial status
of the OASI and DI Trust Funds. This annual report, for 2007, is the 67th
such report . . . 
The report’s major findings are summarized below.
In 2006
At the end of 2006, 49 million people were receiving benefits: 34 million
retired workers and their dependents, 7 million survivors of deceased
workers, and 9 million disabled workers and their dependents. During
the year an estimated 162 million people had earnings covered by Social
Security and paid payroll taxes. Total benefits paid in 2006 were $546 bil-
lion. Income was $745 billion, and assets held in special issue U.S. Trea-
sury securities grew to $2.0 trillion.
Short-Range Results
The OASI and DI Trust Funds, individually and combined, are adequately
financed over the next 10 years under the intermediate assumptions. The
combined assets of the OASI and DI Trust Funds are projected to increase
from $2,048 billion at the beginning of 2007, or 345 percent of annual ex-
penditures, to $4,210 billion at the beginning of 2016, or 407 percent of an-
nual expenditures in that year. Combined assets were projected in last
192
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

year’s report to rise to 344 percent of annual expenditures at the beginning
of 2007, and 407 percent at the beginning of 2016.
Long-Range Results
Under the intermediate assumptions, OASDI cost will increase more
rapidly than tax income between about 2010 and 2030, due to the retire-
ment of the large baby-boom generation. After 2030, increases in life ex-
pectancy and relatively low fertility rates will continue to increase Social
Security system costs relative to tax income, but more slowly. Annual cost
will exceed tax income starting in 2017 at which time the annual gap will
be covered with cash from redemptions of special obligations of the Trea-
sury that make up the trust fund assets, until these assets are exhausted in
2041. Separately, the DI fund is projected to be exhausted in 2026 and the
OASI fund in 2042. For the 75-year projection period, the actuarial deficit
is 1.95 percent of taxable payroll, 0.06 percentage point smaller than in
last year’s report. The open group unfunded obligation for OASDI over
the 75-year period is $4.7 trillion in present value, and is $0.1 trillion
above the measured level of a year ago. In the absence of any changes in
assumptions, methods, and starting values, the unfunded obligation
would have risen to $4.8 trillion due to the change in the valuation date.
The OASDI annual cost rate is projected to increase from 11.21 per-
cent of taxable payroll in 2007, to 16.59 percent in 2030, and to 18.55 per-
cent in 2081, or to a level that is 5.20 percent of taxable payroll more than
the projected income rate for 2081. In last year’s report the OASDI cost
for 2080 was estimated at 18.74 percent, or 5.38 percent of payroll more
than the annual income rate for that year. Expressed in relation to the
projected gross domestic product (GDP), OASDI cost is estimated to rise
from the current level of 4.3 percent of GDP, to 6.2 percent in 2030, and to
6.3 percent in 2081.
Conclusion
Annual cost will begin to exceed tax income in 2017 for the combined
OASDI Trust Funds, which are projected to become exhausted and thus
unable to pay scheduled benefits in full on a timely basis in 2041 under
the long-range intermediate assumptions. For the trust funds to remain
solvent throughout the 75-year projection period, the combined payroll
tax rate could be increased during the period in a manner equivalent to
an immediate and permanent increase of 1.95 percentage points, benefits
could be reduced during the period in a manner equivalent to an imme-
diate and permanent reduction of 13.0 percent, general revenue transfers
equivalent to $4.7 trillion in present value could be made during the pe-
riod, or some combination of approaches could be adopted. Significantly
larger changes would be required to maintain solvency beyond 75 years.
The projected trust fund deficits should be addressed in a timely way
to allow for a gradual phasing in of the necessary changes and to provide
Social Security Annual Trustees Report
193
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

advance notice to workers. Making adjustments sooner will allow them to
be spread over more generations. Social Security plays a critical role in the
lives of this year’s (2007) 50 million beneficiaries and 163 million covered
workers and their families. With informed discussion, creative thinking,
and timely legislative action, we will work with Congress and others to en-
sure that Social Security continues to protect future generations.
Status of the Social Security and 
Medicare Programs. (Social Security Section).
The annual cost of Social Security benefits represented 4.2 percent of
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2006, is projected to increase to 6.2
percent of GDP in 2030, and then rise slowly to 6.3 percent of GDP in
2081. The projected 75-year actuarial deficit in the combined Old-Age
and Survivors and Disability Insurance (OASDI) Trust Fund is 1.95 per-
cent of taxable payroll, down from 2.02 percent in last year’s report. This
decrease is due primarily to revisions in key assumptions and to changes
in methods. Although the program passes our short-range test of finan-
cial adequacy, it continues to fail our long-range test of close actuarial
balance by a wide margin. Projected OASDI tax income will begin to fall
short of outlays in 2017, and will be sufficient to finance only 75 percent
of scheduled annual benefits in 2041, when the combined OASDI Trust
Fund is projected to be exhausted.
Social Security could be brought into actuarial balance over the
next 75 years in various ways, including an immediate increase of 16
percent in payroll tax revenues or an immediate reduction in benefits of
13 percent or some combination of the two. Ensuring that the system is
solvent on a sustainable basis beyond the next 75 years would require
larger changes. To the extent that changes are delayed or phased in grad-
ually, larger adjustments in scheduled benefits and revenues would be
required that would be spread over fewer generations. . . . 
Conclusion
The financial difficulties facing Social Security and Medicare pose enor-
mous, but not insurmountable, challenges. The sooner these challenges
are addressed, the more varied and less disruptive their solutions can be.
We urge the public to engage in informed discussion and policymakers
to think creatively about the changing needs and preferences of working
and retired Americans. Such a national conversation and timely political
action are essential to ensure that Social Security and Medicare continue
to play a critical role in the lives of all Americans.
Henry M. Paulsen, Jr.,
Elaine L. Chao
Secretary of the Treasury, 
Secretary of Labor,
and Managing Trustee
and Trustee
194
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Michael O. Leavitt,
Michael J. Astrue,
Secretary of Health
Commissioner of
and Human Services,
Social Security,
and Trustee
and Trustee
John L. Palmer,
Thomas R. Saving,
Trustee
Trustee
Source: Social Security Administration. 2007. Social Security An-
nual Trustees Report. http://ssa.gov.
Social Security Annual Trustees Report
195
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

7
Directory of Organizations
T
he policy and politics of Social Security are of immense impor-
tance to a great many people. Thus it is not surprising that
many groups and organizations are active in developing and
influencing, or attempting to influence, today’s Social Security
program and the debates that surround it. Below are descriptions
of the most important of these actors, summarizing who they are,
where they came from, and their basic interest or perspective.
The actors are divided into governmental institutions, lobbying
groups, and think tanks active on this issue.
Institutions and Organizations 
of the U.S. Government
Congress
House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means
By the rules of the House of Representatives, all legislation and
matters pertaining to Social Security must be submitted to the
Committee on Ways and Means. This committee investigates,
holds hearings, and drafts legislation concerning Social Security.
It is thus the fulcrum of Social Security’s politics in Congress. It is
no accident that the program is under the jurisdiction of this
powerful committee, as the Ways and Means Committee is given
oversight of all government programs that involve the raising of
revenues, as is the case for Social Security. Every major reform or
change of Social Security since its enactment in 1935 has gone
through this committee, and the program has been extensively
influenced by its desires. Because this is a committee of Congress,
it can be intensely partisan. In surveying information from this
197
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

committee, remember that its majority party controls the framing
of the materials that it releases to the public. The committee has a
Subcommittee on Social Security, a standing body to which it
refers all legislation involving the program.
Web site: http://waysandmeans.house.gov/
Senate Committee on Finance
The Committee on Finance is the Senate analog of the House’s
Committee on Ways and Means. It has responsibility for all Social
Security legislation in that body. The Committee on Finance has
had great influence over Social Security, especially in recent
years. However, it has generally been less decisive than the Ways
and Means Committee because Senate committees tend to be less
powerful than House committees and because a provision of the
Constitution mandates that all revenue bills be first introduced in
the House of Representatives. This mandate means that any
changes in the financing of Social Security must start there.
Web site: http://www.senate.gov/~finance
Executive Branch
Office of Management and Budget
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) began as the Bu-
reau of the Budget in 1922. It has the task of drafting the presi-
dential budget and coordinating the activities of all the federal
agencies and organizations in developing and implementing that
budget. It has therefore become the president’s right arm in man-
aging the federal bureaucracy and in drafting new programs that
involve it. For this reason, the director of the OMB has more than
once been a key actor in the Social Security debate. As seen in
chapter 1, the most recent major changes in Social Security fol-
lowed efforts by President Ronald Reagan’s OMB director to re-
form the program. Because the OMB acts as a management tool
for the president, its analyses and recommendations almost al-
ways reflect the views and priorities of that president. OMB re-
ports should not be viewed as nonpartisan or objective, even
though the analytic quality is generally quite high.
Web site: http://www.omb.gov
White House—Council of Economic Advisors
The President of the United States is, of course, a key actor in
the politics and policy of Social Security. The president usually
198
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

attempts to influence the debate by using the OMB or other
cabinet departments, friendly members of Congress, or the
White House staff. Important here is the Council of Economic
Advisors (CEA). This is a group of experts, usually prominent
academics, who analyze and develop policy prescriptions for
the president. It is debatable whether this group independently
influences the president or whether, instead, it primarily re-
sponds to the president’s agenda and priorities, but in either
case they can play a large role in developing the specifics of
any program reforms that the president may wish to offer. The
CEA annually publishes the Economic Report of the President,
which often contains a discussion of the Social Security pro-
gram. This document develops and defends the president’s
proposals at a level that is both very readable and quite sophis-
ticated analytically.
Web site: http://whitehouse.gov
Social Security Administration
Obviously an important actor, the Social Security Administration
manages all of Social Security’s programs. Social Security has
been reorganized several times since its creation in 1935. Origi-
nally, it was administered by a board of three members appointed
by the president who in turn hired whatever staff they needed.
But in 1946, the board was replaced by the Social Security Admin-
istration, a larger, more complex bureaucracy headed by a com-
missioner who was appointed by the president. In 1953,
President Dwight Eisenhower did away with this structure and
moved the Social Security program within the new cabinet de-
partment known as the Department of Health, Education and
Welfare. The program thus fell under the domain of the secretary
of that department. Following another cabinet reorganization
under President Jimmy Carter in 1980, Social Security was placed
in the Department of Health and Human Services. In 1983, the
National Commission on Social Security Reform (also known as
the Greenspan Commission), however, recommended that the
government examine the possibility of returning Social Security
to an independent status. A year later, a study endorsed this idea,
and in 1994, the Social Security Administration was again made
an independent federal agency with a commissioner nominated
by the president and confirmed by Congress. That is the organi-
zation’s status today.
Directory of Organizations
199
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Social Security Administration currently employs
more than 62,000 people in its central office (headquartered in
Baltimore), 10 regional offices, six processing centers, and 1,300
field offices. Its employees and commissioner are enjoined to be
nonpartisan. There has been some recent debate about whether
the commissioner has shown favoritism toward proposals to
privatize the system, but in general the administration in power
has stayed out of the debate over the reform of Social Security.
This was not always the case, as the first generation of Social Se-
curity Board members and commissioners were undoubtedly
advocates for the expansion of the program. Within the Social
Security system, Social Security Advisory Councils, which met
irregularly, were given the task of examining reforms to the So-
cial Security program. Advisory Councils were the one tool
available to those inside the program who wished to influence
the debates surrounding it. The last Advisory Council met from
1994 to 1996.
The Social Security Trust Funds (recall that there are sepa-
rate trust funds for the retirement program and the disability pro-
gram) have their own set of trustees, led by the secretary of the
Treasury, that are responsible for their financial soundness. By
law, the trustees must submit an annual report on the state of the
Trust Funds. This report has become a major factor in current So-
cial Security reform debates, because it includes estimated dates
for when the Trust Funds will turn negative, and when they will
be exhausted.
Web site: http://ssa.gov.
Social Security Advisory Board
This is a seven-member board that advises Congress, the presi-
dent, and the Social Security Administration on matters relating
to the operations of the Social Security program. The idea of the
board was developed by the Greenspan Commission in 1983, but
it was not created until 1994. The board, which meets monthly, is
bipartisan and primarily takes an interest in technical matters in-
volving the workings of the Social Security and the Supplemental
Security Income programs. The board refrains from specific pro-
posals to reform Social Security, but it repeatedly urges Congress
and the president to take action to shore up the financing of the
program.
Web site: http://ssab.gov.
200
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Interest Groups and Lobbying Organizations
Until relatively recently, few groups actively attempted to influ-
ence or reform the operations or policies of the Social Security
program. Today scores of organizations lobby Congress and
mount public campaigns on this issue. Most of this growth has
come in the past two decades, after fears about the future of So-
cial Security first emerged. Many other groups joined the fray
after President George W. Bush’s effort to partially privatize the
program in 2005. Currently, more than 100 registered lobbying
organizations list Social Security as a program in which they have
an active interest. For better or worse, Social Security has become
bound with the growing left/right divide in the United States, as
many organizations and interest groups connected to conserva-
tive issues and the Republican Party became active in support of
efforts at privatization, while other groups connected to liberal
concerns and the Democrats were equally motivated to enter the
battle in opposition to this idea. The following groups and inter-
ests are among those with the greatest impact on the Social Secu-
rity reform agenda and the politics that swirl around it.
AARP
When a question of Social Security arises, there is little doubt
about which interest group has the highest political profile—it is
the AARP. Formerly known as the American Association of Re-
tired Persons, the organization boasts more than 35 million mem-
bers and is often cited as one of the most powerful lobbying
groups in Washington.
The AARP is open to all Americans over the age of 50 years.
A member does not even have to be retired, hence the organiza-
tion’s name change in 1999. However, the average age of an
AARP member is 65, so Social Security remains an issue of funda-
mental importance to its membership. The organization was
founded in 1958, growing out of a smaller organization of retired
teachers. It first focused on health insurance, but Social Security
rose to the fore after the passage of Medicare in 1965. Senior citi-
zens are attracted to join the organization by favorable insurance
programs and a wide variety of member discounts on everything
from magazine subscriptions to hotel rooms. The AARP main-
tains a significant presence in Washington, with a number of lob-
byists and a formidable mail and fund-raising operation.
Directory of Organizations
201
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The organization’s formal position on Social Security is that
reform is needed before a funding crisis occurs and that it is pre-
pared to accept significant reforms even if they are not the ones
preferred by the AARP. But it strongly opposes efforts at privati-
zation. It prefers instead to make a set of gradual reforms to the
existing program. It is fair to say that the organization is more
skeptical of reforms that would reduce existing benefits than it is
of other proposed changes. The AARP also lobbies against any
policy that would appear to penalize senior citizens for continu-
ing to remain in the workforce. In addition, it argues that em-
ployers should be made to offer meaningful pensions and that all
Americans should be encouraged, through government incen-
tives, to save more for their retirement.
Web site: http://www.aarp.org
Alliance for Retired Americans
This is a newly active lobbying and campaign fund-raising group
affiliated with the AFL-CIO and other labor unions. Founded in
2001, the Alliance for Retired Americans claims 3 million mem-
bers, most of whom only obtained membership through the
unions to which they belong. The Alliance vociferously opposes
the Social Security reforms supported by President George W.
Bush, and indeed any efforts at privatization. Its views are basi-
cally those of the organizations that sponsor it.
Web site: http://retiredamericans.org
Alliance for Worker Retirement Security
This umbrella group of 35 organizations that support private
personal retirement accounts includes the National Association
of Manufacturers, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and the Na-
tional Federation of Independent Business. The conservative
Cato Institute played a key role in the organization of the Al-
liance in 1998. The Alliance was created to push for personal re-
tirement accounts, and it raises money and sponsors
educational programs to that purpose. It is linked to CoMPASS
(see below), and together the two groups claim to have raised
between $50 million and $150 million to further their policy
agenda.
Web site: http://retiresecure.org
202
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

American Academy of Actuaries
Somewhere between a professional organization and a lobbying
group, the American Academy of Actuaries keeps a strong inter-
est in Social Security due to the professional concerns of its mem-
bership. Formed in 1956, it is a presence in Washington, where its
representatives frequently testify before Congress and other fed-
eral bodies. The organization’s standing Committee on Social In-
surance keeps an eye on Social Security as well as other
retirement programs. This committee takes the position that “pre-
ventive maintenance” is needed for Social Security and that re-
form should come as soon as possible. However, it takes no
public position on which reform is superior. Its reports are non-
partisan and often excellent introductions to the various reforms
that are circulating around the Capitol.
Web site: http://actuary.org
American Council of Life Insurers
The life insurance industry has a big interest in retirement poli-
cies because of its stake in the market for pension annuities, the
traditional mode of saving for one’s retirement. Its powerful lob-
bying organization crosses party lines and includes prominent
Democrats and Republicans. The primary focus of its efforts in
the Social Security debate is the preservation of a favorable tax
status toward annuities, but it has come out against personal re-
tirement accounts because of the possible effects of an individual
retirement account (IRA) program on annuities purchases.
Web site: http://www.acli.com
American Federation of Labor 
and Congress of Industrial 
Organizations (AFL-CIO)
The AFL-CIO is the largest labor union federation in the United
States. Today it includes 55 member labor unions and some 10
million workers. It was created in 1955 by a merger of the AFL
and the CIO. Since its origins, the AFL-CIO has been among the
most active and influential players in the politics of Social Se-
curity. For a generation, it was perhaps the most powerful in-
terest pushing for a more generous Social Security program. It
was equally as or more responsible than any other actor for the
Directory of Organizations
203
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

addition of a disability program to Social Security in the mid-
1950s. Its Social Security Committee of that era was a leader in
both research and policy advocacy. The AFL-CIO continues to
support a generous public pension program, but it is opposed
to personal retirement accounts and other forms of privatiza-
tion. In addition to its own activity, it funds a number of other
organizations active in the Social Security issue.
Web site: http://www.aflcio.org
American Federation of State, 
County and Municipal Employees
An affiliate of the AFL-CIO, with its 1.4 million members the
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees
is itself a powerful labor organization in Washington. It shares
the AFL-CIO’s positions on Social Security and funds several um-
brella groups that have organized to fight reforms that would pri-
vatize the Social Security system.
Web site: http://www.afscme.org
American Savings Education Council
A public interest coalition focused on raising interest in retire-
ment planning, the American Savings Education Council’s activi-
ties are focused on supporting efforts to educate the public and to
create incentives that will lead Americans to save more outside of
the Social Security system. The Council’s membership includes a
range of groups stretching from the AARP to Fidelity Invest-
ments to the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.
Generally, it works to support the creation and maintenance of
tax incentives on monies saved for retirement.
Web site: http://www.asec.org
Americans United for Change
Formerly known as “Americans United to Protect Social Secu-
rity,” this is a coalition of some 200 left-of-center organizations
that oppose private retirement accounts. It dates from 2005, when
it was organized in response to President George W. Bush’s Social
Security plan. It has since expanded its activities to oppose a vari-
ety of the president’s other policies.
Web site: http://www.americansunitedforchange.org
204
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Campaign for America’s Future/
Institute for America’s Future
The Campaign for America’s Future is a sister organization to
Americans United for Change that was created during the de-
bates over President George W. Bush’s personal retirement ac-
count proposal. Politically on the left, it has been associated with
the progressive Democrat Internet fund-raising group MoveOn
.org and the AFL-CIO. It strenuously opposes the Bush Social Se-
curity plan.
Web site: http://home.ourfuture.org (the organization
maintains a number of Web sites with similar URLs)
Century Foundation
Somewhere between a lobbying group and a think tank, the Cen-
tury Foundation was initiated by department store baron Ed-
ward A. Filene in 1919. The Foundation was an active supporter
of the Social Security Act of 1935 and continues to follow the pro-
gram. Since 1997, it has sponsored the Social Security Network,
which collects information about Social Security. Its perspective
might be termed moderate left. It opposes privatization but calls
for moderate reforms to the system. It is relatively close to the
AARP in perspective, with the two organizations frequently link-
ing their information to one another. A number of prominent re-
searchers and academics are associated with the Foundation and
its research activities.
Web sites: http://www.tcf.org/ and http://www.socsec.org/
Club for Growth
A rather high-profile conservative group, the Club for Growth is
primarily a campaign fund-raiser for congressional candidates
who support tax cuts and limits on government spending. It was
founded in 1999 by Stephen Moore, a conservative activist for-
merly associated with the Cato Institute (see “Think Tanks”
below). It has recently added Social Security choice to its con-
cerns and has joined the battle in favor of personal retirement ac-
counts within the Social Security system. Because of its success in
raising campaign monies it is a significant force, particularly
within the Republican Party.
Web site: http://www.clubforgrowth.org
Directory of Organizations
205
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Coalition for American Financial Security
Formed in early 2000, this is an umbrella organization of banks
and life insurance companies that support the partial privatiza-
tion of Social Security. (Many other banks and life insurance com-
panies do not, or take no position; the industry is divided.) The
Coalition supports political candidates that take this position. Be-
cause the Coalition is close to the GOP, the candidates it supports
are usually Republicans.
Web site: none
Coalition for the Modernization and 
Protection of America’s Social Security
Created in 2002 with support from the National Association of
Manufacturers, the Business Roundtable, and the Cato Institute,
this group, also known as CoMPASS, was apparently organized
with the sole purpose of providing support for President George
W. Bush’s initiative to create personal retirement accounts. It has
worked fairly closely with the Bush White House in campaigning
for the passage of a Social Security personal retirement account
program.
Web site: http://www.generationstogether.net.
Coalition to Preserve Retirement Security
Another specialized lobbying organization, the Coalition to Pre-
serve Retirement Security is composed of state and local govern-
ment employee groups that oppose the mandatory participation
of all government workers in the Social Security system. Recall
that this was a reform suggested by the Greenspan Commission
in 1983. The leadership of the group is almost entirely drawn
from state employee and local teachers unions.
Web site: http://www.retirementsecurity.org
Committee for Economic Development
The Committee for Economic Development (CED) is a 65-year-
old organization of business leaders and educators. Again some-
where between a think tank and an advocacy organization, the
CED is placed here as an interest group because the organization
does take a formal stand on the issues of the day, including Social
206
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Security. The defined mission of the organization is to work for
programs that would increase economic growth and productivity
in the United States, support an open global economy, and pro-
vide greater opportunity for all Americans. The CED’s board is
studded with present or retired university presidents and chief
executive officers of major corporations, and it is backed by a
staff of prominent academics. Its stance on Social Security is that
the current program needs changes in its benefits and coverage
structures, and a second program of add-on personal retirement
accounts needs to be added to the current program to maintain
its financial viability.
Web site: http://www.ced.org
Concord Coalition
A public information organization, the Concord Coalition was
created in 1992 by former senators Paul Tsongas (D-Mass.) and
Warren Rudman (R-NH), along with former Commerce Secretary
Peter Peterson. It was established in the wake of the unusually
large federal deficits that began in the mid-1980s in the belief that
these deficits were unsustainable and needed to be ended. Social
Security is the U.S. government’s most expensive program, so it
not surprising that the organization soon took an interest in re-
forms that would restore the financial footing of the program.
The Concord Coalition argues that reform is necessary but will be
painful. It has not supported efforts at privatization, including
the program developed by President George W. Bush, because it
believes that this will not restore Social Security’s finances. It in-
stead has supported ideas such as mandatory add-on private ac-
counts or changes in indexing formulas. The prominence of the
organization’s leaders gives the group significant media access.
Web site: http://www.concordcoalition.org
FreedomWorks
FreedomWorks dates from 2004, following a merger of two con-
servative organizations, Citizens for a Sound Economy, headed
by former House Majority Leader Dick Armey, and Empower
America, headed by Jack Kemp, the Republican vice presidential
candidate in 1996 and a leading “supply sider” (supply siders
argue that reducing taxes will actually increase government rev-
enues and lower the budget deficit). Though primarily interested
Directory of Organizations
207
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

in lowering taxes, it has endorsed personal retirement accounts
and lobbies in favor of Social Security privatization.
Web site: www.freedomworks.org
Gray Panthers
Listed here more for reasons of historical interest than because of
its political power, the Gray Panthers was organized in 1970 by
five progressive (or left wing) activists in the New York City area.
The group was dubbed the “gray panthers” because its radical
agenda and style brought comparisons to the Black Panthers and
other revolutionary groups of the 1960s. It has since relocated to
Washington, D.C., where it operates in support of progressive
policies for elders. Its stance on Social Security is that it must
fight to preserve existing Social Security benefits and to prevent
“destructive changes” to the program.
Web site: http://graypanthers.org
Institute for Policy Innovation/
Alliance for Retirement Prosperity
The Institute for Policy Innovation (IPI) was founded in 1987 in
Lewisville, Texas, by future House Republican Majority Leader
Dick Armey (R-Texas). In 2004, it created the Alliance for Retire-
ment Prosperity as its arm for its Social Security efforts. The IPI
pushes for a major overhaul of Social Security that would place
half of worker Social Security contributions into personal retire-
ment accounts. The organization terms itself a think tank and in-
cludes a small staff of economists. The leadership of the group is
also tied to FreedomWorks (see above).
Web site: http://www.ipi.org
Investment Company Institute
Representing close to 10,000 investment funds with assets of
more than $11 billion, the Investment Company Institute (ICI) is
something of an elephant in the closet when it comes to the Social
Security debate. Founded in 1940, the ICI works to advance the
interests of the mutual fund industry, which has an immense
stake in U.S. retirement policies. It lobbies in support of 401(k)
and other retirement vehicles. To date, this powerful group has
not developed a public stance on Social Security reform, but it
208
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

has recently hired additional lobbyists known to be favorable to
personal retirement accounts. This move may herald a change of
direction that would be of some importance to the constellation
of forces in Washington given the financial clout of the member-
ship of this organization.
Web site: http://www.ici.org
MoveOn.org
Organized in 1998 to fight the impeachment of President Bill
Clinton, MoveOn’s great success at Internet fund-raising has
made it a significant force in U.S. politics. In 2005, MoveOn
added Social Security to its priorities, primarily through its finan-
cial support of the Americans United to Protect Social Security.
Closely linked to the Democratic Party, MoveOn can be expected
to oppose Social Security reform efforts that are identified with
the Republicans.
Web site: http://moveon.org
National Center for Policy Analysis
The National Center for Policy Analysis dates from 1983 and,
though officially nonpartisan, is generally aligned with conserva-
tives on issues such as lower taxes and less government regula-
tion. It is one of the few organizations headquartered outside of
Washington (it is in Dallas). Its members include a mix of
academ ics and (mostly Republican) politicians. Its formal goals
are to find private alternatives for government regulations and
programs. As might be expected, it is a strong supporter of per-
sonal retirement accounts as a way to reform Social Security. Be-
cause the organization formally advocates this position and
generally does not develop new research, it is placed in this sec-
tion rather than under the “Think Tanks” section.
Web site: http://www.ncpa.org and http://www.mysocial -
security.org
National Committee to Preserve 
Social Security and Medicare 
A public interest group, the National Committee to Preserve So-
cial Security and Medicare was founded by James Roosevelt,
President Franklin Roosevelt’s oldest son, in 1982, as controversy
Directory of Organizations
209
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

swirled around the efforts of the Reagan administration to trim
Social Security benefits. It was organized to oppose Reagan’s
plans. Today it mostly lobbies and raises funds to oppose Social
Security reforms that involve privatization. It is currently headed
by Barbara Kennelly, a former Democratic member of Congress
from Connecticut, and, not surprisingly, is linked to the leader-
ship of the Democratic Party. Its positions are in accordance with
those leaders.
Web site: http://www.ncpssm.org
National Federation of Independent Business
The National Federation of Independent Business (NFIB) is one
of Washington’s most effective lobbying organizations. Formed
in 1943, it is the largest organization that represents small and in-
dependent businesses. Not surprisingly, it takes pro-business po-
sitions on issues that are of concern to its members. Only in the
last decade has it become interested in Social Security, where it
now strongly supports Social Security reform and personal retire-
ment accounts. Its particular concern is the impact on payroll
taxes of any changes in the Social Security program. In recent
years the NFIB has usually been closely associated with congres-
sional Republicans.
Web site: http://www.nfib.com
National Organization for Women
The National Organization for Women (NOW) claims to be the
largest feminist organization in the United States. It is certainly
the most prominent. Founded in 1966, it now has 500,000 individ-
ual members. In the wake of the privatization issue, NOW en-
tered the Social Security debate by taking a position opposing
personal retirement accounts and any cuts of benefits.
Web site: http://www.now.org
Progress for America
Progress for America is an organization developed in 2001 to sup-
port the policies of George W. Bush. It is closely connected to the
Bush White House and the Republican Party. It has spent more
than $30 million to support President Bush’s personal account
plan. The group attracted some controversy when Thomas R.
210
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Saving, one of the seven trustees of the Social Security Adminis-
tration, joined the Progress for America as an adviser. Some ac-
cused him of a conflict of interest and accused the White House
of potentially politicizing the Social Security Administration.
Web site: http://progressforamerica.org (note that the site
contains only a statement relating to a Federal Elections Commis-
sion settlement with the group)
ProtectYourCheck.org
Recently organized by former Clinton officials and other Demo-
crats, the group is related to Americans United for Change. Protec-
tYourCheck.org specifically opposes President Bush’s privatization
plan. The organization is close to the Democratic Party.
Web site: http://www.protectyourcheck.org
Securities Industry and Financial 
Markets Association
The Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association is a
well-heeled and influential lobbying group that focuses upon is-
sues of concern to bankers and Wall Street. For retirement issues,
it has mostly focused on congressional actions that affect IRA
programs, but it has recently, if mutedly, announced its opposi-
tion to personal retirement accounts. It argues that the fees
earned by this industry in managing these accounts would likely
be less than the fees currently earned through managing mutual
funds. Therefore, if individuals responded to the new IRAs by
taking savings out their mutual funds, the industry would stand
to lose.
Web site: http://www.sifma.org
60 Plus Organization
An institution that claims to be a conservative counterpart of the
AARP, the 60 Plus Organization was formed by former Republi-
can members of Congress and staffers. The group boasts 500,000
members and offers insurance programs and discounts similar to
those of the AARP. Its primary lobbying issue is the abolition of
the estate tax, but it also promotes reforming Social Security to in-
clude personal retirement accounts.
Web site: http://www.60plus.org
Directory of Organizations
211
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

USA Next
USA Next is perhaps most known for its close ties to the “Swift
Boat” campaign against Senator John Kerry in the 2004 presiden-
tial election. Its forerunner was founded in 1991 by conservative
fund-raising whiz Richard Viguerie. It can fairly be considered an
organization that supports the positions of the Republican Party.
It has recently taken up the cudgel of personal retirement ac-
counts. The organization is linked to United Seniors Associates,
which is chaired by retired television personality Art Linkletter.
The United Seniors Associates is rather like the conservative mir-
ror image of the AARP. It offers discounts and other member ben-
efits similar to the AARP (or its fellow conservative 60 Plus
Organization) while attacking the policy positions of that organi-
zation. United Seniors Associates, too, supports reforming Social
Security into a personal retirement account program.
Web site: http://www.unitedseniors.org
U.S. Chamber of Commerce
This well-known organization was founded in 1912 and
presently includes more than 3 million businesses that are orga-
nized into some 3,000 local chambers. It has long been a powerful
presence in Washington, lobbying for legislation and regulation
favorable to business interests. It, too, has only recently become
involved in the Social Security issue (though it did oppose the
plan 60 years ago). It now includes Social Security reform, includ-
ing the support for personal retirement accounts, as one of its
policy priorities. It favors program reforms that preserve Social
Security’s viability with “as little impact on taxes and benefits as
possible.”
Web site: http://www.uschamber.com
Think Tanks
“Think tanks” are institutions, formally nonpartisan, that engage
in the research and analysis of public policy issues. Most are
staffed by academics, retired government officials, and other pol-
icy experts. They regularly publish working papers, policy pa-
pers, or journals and other research materials. Their members
frequently testify before Congress and are seen on television
212
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

news programs. Because these individuals are recognized for
their expertise, they often can have a significant impact on public
debate. These individuals are also very frequently the originators
of specific reform ideas and plans. They engage in the “politics of
ideas” that goes alongside the “politics of interest” explored
above. Most think tanks emerged after World War II. Beginning
in the late 1970s, when Social Security reemerged on the public
agenda, many of these institutions began to take an interest in the
issue. That interest has greatly expanded in recent years follow-
ing the privatization debate. Below are the most significant think
tanks that participate in the Social Security debate.
American Enterprise Institute for 
Public Policy Research
Dating from 1943, the American Enterprise Institute (AEI) is
today one of the most influential think tanks in the United States,
and it is considered by many to be the most influential conserva-
tive think tank. It is a large organization, with more than 50 full-
time researchers on staff, and it is often the home of retired
conservative members of Congress. In recent years it has been
linked with the neoconservative movement. As indicated by its
name, the AEI attempts to promote the free enterprise system and
opposes large government programs. AEI research is often of
high quality, the equal of work that appears in refereed journals.
In the area of Social Security, AEI researchers have been reliable
supporters of personal retirement accounts. Martin Feldstein, a
professor of economics at Harvard University and perhaps the
most prominent academic in support of this reform, has pub-
lished a good portion of his work through this organization.
Web site: http://www.aei.org
Brookings Institution
Probably the best known and most influential of the think tanks,
as well as the oldest, the Brookings Institution was formed in 1927
through a merger of several older institutions. Critics have
dubbed it “the Democratic Party government-in-exile,” but it is
politically more centrist, though perhaps leaning a bit to the left. A
number of the leading Social Security researchers work at, or have
published through, the Brookings Institution. Though they have
developed a variety of reform plans, and one cannot associate any
Directory of Organizations
213
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

one perspective to the organization, Brookings’ researchers gener-
ally support modest reforms to the benefits structure, contribution
ceilings, or indexing formulas in preference to major changes to
the Social Security system. Few support privatization of the sys-
tem (though some do urge mandatory add-on personal accounts).
Research published through Brookings is reliably of very high
quality.
Web site: http://www.brook.edu
Cato Institute
A prominent think tank, the Cato Institute was founded in 1977.
Its basic perspective is libertarian, reflecting the view that private
markets are almost always superior to government action in the
provision of goods and services. Cato’s founders were previously
active in the Libertarian Party. The name comes from “Cato’s Let-
ters,” a set of pamphlets written around the time of the American
Revolution that argued against the need for a strong government.
The Cato Institute has a “project on social security choice” that
conducts research on this issue. Not surprisingly, the Institute
and its members argue for a fully privatized Social Security sys-
tem. They advocate a model something along the lines of the cur-
rent Chilean system. If a study bears the Cato imprint, one can
usually expect a well-argued defense of letting private markets
handle the retirement needs of U.S. senior citizens.
Web site: http://www.cato.org
Center for American Progress
Founded by President Clinton’s former chief of staff, John
Podesta, in 2003, the Center for American Progress remains
closely connected to the Clinton family. Podesta aimed to create a
counter to the Heritage Foundation, and the Center sports a
lineup of experts that is moderately left of center. However, this
new think tank is nowhere near the size of those described above.
Researchers at the Center for American Progress have tended to
focus on raising the ceiling on earned income subject to the Fed-
eral Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) tax as a solution to the
Social Security problem. The Center is linked to the Center for
American Progress Action Fund, a political fund-raising organi-
zation.
Web site: http://www.americanprogress.org
214
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP) think tank
was founded in 1981 to analyze federal budget priorities. It fo-
cuses upon the impact of budget choices on low-income Ameri-
cans. Surveys of members of Congress and of federal officials
have found that the CBPP is among the most respected and influ-
ential think tanks currently operating. Most research that comes
out of the Center is politically in the center or perhaps on the
moderate left. Most of its researchers endorse gradual reforms of
Social Security, including benefit changes and increased rev-
enues, to maintain the program’s financial soundness. The re-
searchers are often quite distinguished academics and retired
federal officials, many of whom are also linked, or have been
linked, to the Brookings Institution. In fact, Web links found on
the Center’s Web site often go to the Brookings Web site.
Web site: http://www.cbpp.org
Center for Economic and Policy Research
The Center for Economic and Policy Research (CEPR) was estab-
lished in 1999 by several economists but today has grown to have
an advisory board of some of America’s most illustrious econo-
mists, including two Nobel Prize winners. The CEPR publishes
high-quality research on a variety of public policy issues. They are
generally from a somewhat left-of-center perspective. In the area
of Social Security, its lead researcher is its cofounder, Dean Baker,
who has written a book in which he argues that Social Security
can be saved by making but modest reforms. He vigorously op-
poses privatizing the system. This is the typical perspective of re-
search that issues from the CEPR. However, some of its
researchers do endorse add-on personal accounts.
Web site: http://www.cepr.net
Economic Policy Institute
The Economic Policy Institute (EPI) was created in 1986. It is
largely funded by labor unions, and its research takes a pro-
union perspective on most issues. Its stated purpose is to include
the interests of low- and middle-income workers in any discus-
sion of economic policy. The EPI generally favors governmental
action and expanded social programs. For Social Security, this
Directory of Organizations
215
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

means opposition to private accounts or other forms of privatiza-
tion along with a defense of existing benefit levels.
Web site: http://www.epi.org
Employee Benefit Research Institute
The Employee Benefit Research Institute (EBRI) is the only orga-
nization dedicated to providing data and research on employee
retirement and benefit programs. Created in 1978, it has provided
research on Social Security since 1982. The EBRI has developed a
large computer model through which one can calculate the ef-
fects of proposed changes to Social Security on its performance.
EBRI researchers provide economic analyses of the costs and op-
erations of the Social Security system and of the reforms offered
to alter it. The Institute also offers public surveys and other infor-
mation. It is nonpartisan and does not endorse any particular re-
form or set of reforms.
Web site: http://www.ebri.org
Heritage Foundation
A reliably conservative think tank, the Heritage Foundation orig-
inated in 1973 and was funded by major conservative figures
such as Joseph Coors (of the Colorado-based beer company by
the same name). The Heritage Foundation subscribes to a philos-
ophy of public policies based on “free enterprise, limited govern-
ment, individual freedom, traditional American values, and a
strong national defense.” Its position on Social Security is similar
to that of the AEI, with the Heritage Foundation’s researchers
more likely to endorse full privatization of the system. Though
the two organizations share a similar philosophy, the AEI’s list of
fellows and academic researchers is more prominent than is the
Heritage Foundation’s.
Web site: http://www.heritage.org
National Academy of Social Insurance
The National Academy of Social Insurance was created by long-
time Social Security official and advocate Robert M. Ball. It is fi-
nanced by a wide range of corporations, labor unions, private
foundations, medical groups, and the AARP. It currently has
some 750 experts affiliated with it. Its mission is to provide non-
216
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

partisan information about social insurance programs and their
operations. Much of its attention is devoted to Social Security. It
offers analyses of the current system and its future, as well of pro-
posed reforms. Though the Academy takes no formal positions
on the reform proposals that have been advanced, its research
typically defends the existing system. This was certainly the per-
spective of its founder. Most of the Academy’s work favors Social
Security reforms other than the provision of personal retirement
accounts.
Web site: http://www.nasi.org
Urban Institute
The Urban Institute dates from 1968, after a commission of civic
leaders recommended to President Lyndon Johnson that an inde-
pendent research center be established to analyze the problems
facing U.S. cities. Since then, the Urban Institute has expanded its
interests to other areas, such as Social Security. It has created the
Income and Benefits Policy Center, which studies Social Security,
among other issues. The Urban Institute sponsors numerous
studies and meetings on the topic, and its research has a very
solid reputation. Politically it is moderate to moderate-left in ori-
entation and has been the home to more prominent Democrats
than Republicans. But its publications are nonpartisan and do not
all hew to the same policy positions.
Web site: http://www.urban.org
Directory of Organizations
217
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

8
Resources
T
here are innumerable sources of information about the U.S.
Social Security program and the pension programs of other
governments. There is also a wealth of material on the issues
and the problems of national public retirement programs in gen-
eral. This chapter gives the citations and references that were
used in writing this book, along with additional materials that
will enable you to begin your own further research on this topic.
The chapter first presents the Internet sites of the major American
and international public agencies that collect information and
analyses on Social Security. They are increasingly becoming the
best place to seek initial information on this issue. Presented next
are particularly good Web sites compiled and maintained by two
news journals and several television networks. That section is fol-
lowed by Web sites from which recent academic research on the
Social Security program can be obtained.
The number of books and articles on Social Security must be
numbered in the thousands. Those included here are among the
most current, important, and detailed.
Note that because of the rapid evolution of program re-
forms and debates, much of this material is in the form of pam-
phlets and policy briefings. These materials are divided into
those that pertain to the history of the program and those that
pertain to the current debate on Social Security’s future.
Finally, there is bibliography of works relating to the other
major government retirement programs discussed in chapter 3.
This list is organized by country, beginning with that country’s
national pension program Web site(s). The bibliography also in-
cludes entries for Mexico and Japan, two countries with interest-
ing pension systems well worthy of study, although they were not
219
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

included in this volume. In all cases, where a Web link to the ma-
terial is available, the URL is provided. Note that many materials
are published by think tanks and other participants in the Social
Security debate. Please refer back to chapter 7 to review the orien-
tations and ideological predilections of these publishers.
Public Agencies
U.S. Government: Federal Agencies
Social Security Administration
The first and best source of information about Social Security is
found on the Web pages of the agency that administers the pro-
gram. The Social Security Web site is a treasure trove of informa-
tion. The main pages detail the operations of today’s Social Security
system. You can also retrieve your own Social Security statement
and calculate your likely Social Security retirement pension. The
Web site contains the full text of the Social Security Act (http://
www.ssa.gov/OP_Home/ssact/comp-ssa.htm) as well as the text
of all legislation relating to Social Security that has been passed
since 1987. You will find on the site the annual report of the Social
Security trustees. This report, usually released in April, details the
financial operations of the program and estimates its future, includ-
ing forecasts of the year that the Trust Fund will be exhausted.
The history pages (http://www.ssa.gov/history/history
.html) contain a remarkable collection of oral histories, articles,
speeches, biographies, and other materials relating to the passage
of the Social Security Act of 1935 and its subsequent develop-
ment. These pages also give a full administrative history of the
Social Security Administration, as well as the earlier Social Secu-
rity Board. Video and audio clips relating to Social Security’s his-
tory are held here as well.
Also to be found on the site is the Social Security Bulletin
(http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/ssb/). This is a quarterly
publication that includes articles about the history and adminis-
tration of Social Security as well as discussions of proposed re-
forms to the program.
The research pages (http://www.ssa.gov/policy/research
.html) contain a variety of often quite technical analyses of vari-
ous aspects relating to the economics, demographics, program fi-
220
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

nancing, and other issues important to the operations of the pro-
gram. Here you can also find a monthly update of changes and
reforms that have occurred in other pension systems around the
world (http://www.ssa.gov/policy/research_sub50.html).
In short, this is the logical place to start for anyone inter-
ested in pursuing more information about Social Security.
General Social Security Web site: http://www.ssa.gov/
Council of Economic Advisors
The Council of Economic Advisors (CEA) is located in the
White House. It offers the president advice on economic policy.
It also serves as the in-house think tank for developing eco-
nomic policies desired by the president. Every year, it pub-
lishes The Economic Report of the President. Though the topics
covered in this document vary annually, very often there is a
chapter on Social Security. In years where the president has of-
fered a major proposal on Social Security, there will invariably
be a detailed discussion of the Social Security system and the
president’s proposed legislation. As an arm of the presidency,
the CEA’s discussion in this document will reflect the perspec-
tive of the White House. Past editions of the Economic Report of
the President are archived on the Web site of the Government
Printing Office (GPO).
CEA Web site: http://www.whitehouse.gov/cea/
GPO Web site: http://www.gpoaccess.gov/eop/download
.html
U.S. Government: Congress
House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means
The Ways and Means Committee has jurisdiction over all Social
Security legislation in the House. Its Web site thus contains infor-
mation about current hearings and legislation that involve the
program. This information is located under the Ways and Means
Subcommittee on Social Security. Note that the party that controls
the House also controls this committee, and the policies and pro-
grams favored by that party are given the lion’s share of favor-
able attention.
Ways and Means Committee Web site: http://waysand -
means.house.gov/
Public Agencies
221
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Senate Finance Committee
The Finance Committee is the Senate counterpart to the House
Ways and Means Committee. It has jurisdiction over Social Secu-
rity in that body. Senate hearings and legislation that involve So-
cial Security is found here. As with the House, the information is
posted to put the party in power in the best possible light.
Senate Finance Committee Web site: http://www.senate
.gov/~finance/
Congressional Budget Office
The CBO was established as part of the new federal budget
process that was created in 1974. Its task is to develop unbiased
analyses of the cost and impact of federal programs, or proposed
federal programs, in order to aid Congress in its task of develop-
ing an annual federal budget. Today, it is generally believed to
be the most objective of the various governmental bodies
charged with delivering budget estimates and program analy-
ses. In the CBO’s work, it frequently addresses the issue of Social
Security. On its Web site you will find many statements, analy-
ses, and testimonies before Congress that relate to Social Secu-
rity: its cost, its future, as well as estimates of the effects of
proposed reforms
CBO Web site: http://cbo.gov/publications/bysubject.cfm
?cat=11
Government Accountability Office
The GAO (formerly the General Accounting Office) is an inves-
tigative arm of Congress, created in 1921, that evaluates and au-
dits federal programs. Generally, its reports are in response to
official requests by Congress. Today it produces more than 1,000
reports a year. Because of its mandates, it produces a wide variety
of reports relating to the Social Security program and proposed
changes to it. Its search mechanism is a little clumsy. A suggestion
upon entering its Web site is to click “Reports and Testimony,”
then “Agency,” and then “Social Security Administration.” This
will lead to its collection of reports on Social Security.
GAO Web site: http://www.gao.gov/index.html
Library of Congress
The Library of Congress’s Thomas database was established by
Congress in 1995. It is a searchable record of every piece of legis-
222
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

lation that has been introduced in Congress since that date. Re-
searchers can discover the fate of any individual piece of Social
Security legislation, obtain a detailed history of the hearings and
debate that surrounded it, or learn which members of Congress
voted for or against it.
Library of Congress Thomas Web site: http://thomas.loc
.gov/home/abt_thom.html
International Organizations
Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development
The OECD is an international organization of 30 countries, in-
cluding the United States, that researches and analyzes economic
and social policies around the world. Founded in 1961 and lo-
cated in Paris, it is sometimes called the “Rich Country Club” be-
cause its member states are the world’s high-income countries. Its
Web site features statistics, comparisons, and analyses of the re-
tirement demographics, pension programs, and old-age security
issues of its member nations. You can locate the “browse” tab and
click “by topics” to access this material.
OECD Web site: http://www.oecd.org/home/
International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development
The World Bank, as this organization is more commonly called,
has been a major player in global debates over Social Security
and pension reform. As part of its interest in global economic de-
velopment, it has offered policy advice to and has analyzed pen-
sion programs in some 80 countries over the past decade. The
“Pensions” area of its Web page offers a compilation of pension
legislation from around the world (though focusing especially on
the developing world) as well as a huge holding of World Bank
publications and seminars on pension systems and retirement is-
sues. It has tended to recommend fully funded pension systems
over pay-as-you-go financed systems.
World Bank Web site: http://www.worldbank.org/
International Organizations
223
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

International Labour Organization
The International Labour Organization (ILO), created in 1919, has
the charge of monitoring working conditions around the world.
As part of this effort, its Social Security Department compiles sta-
tistics on global social security expenditures. They are found on
the site’s “statistical knowledge base.”
ILO Web site (for Social Security): http://www.ilo.org
/public/english/protection/secsoc/areas/stat/ssi.htm
Media and Press Sites
Recent events and developments in Social Security are, of course,
most easily followed through the the news media.. In addition to
the major daily newspapers and weekly news magazines, the fol-
lowing specialized media cover the politics and policies of Social
Security in great detail.
National Journal and Congressional 
Quarterly Weekly Report
Both are weekly publications and provide in-depth analysis. Each
is primarily focused on Congress, and on the course of legislation
that has been introduced in Congress, but also offers coverage of
the Executive Branch, the budget, and other topics of concern to
Social Security. They are excellent resources to “catch up” on the
politics and policy of Social Security. Both have Web sites, but
they do not offer a great deal beyond the information contained
in their core print publications.
National Journal Web site: http://nationaljournal.com
Congressional Quarterly Web site: http://cq.com
CNN
In conjunction with Money and Fortune magazines, the CNN net-
work maintains a Social Security Web page that contains recent
news, commentary, and other archived materials on the Social Se-
curity system.
CNN Web site: http://money.cnn.com/news/specials
/socsec/
224
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

C-SPAN
Created in 1979 as a public service to provide televised access to
congressional debates and other political activities, C-SPAN main-
tains a Social Security Web page. Though most of the print materi-
als are available elsewhere, the site holds the videos of recent
Social Security events that have appeared in its programming.
C-SPAN Web site: http://www.c-span.org/
National Public Radio
National Public Radio (NPR) frequently runs news stories and in-
terviews about Social Security and its proposed reforms. It main-
tains an audio archive of this material.
NPR Social Security Web site: http://www.npr.org
/templates/topics/topic.php?topicId=1083
Internet Research Sites
Among the many organizations that post analyses and research
of research, two of the foremost are the Public Agenda and the
National Bureau for Economic Research. The former site contains
numerous materials on various aspects of Social Security and the
debate over its reform. It is resolutely nonpartisan and oriented
to the general reader. The latter is far more analytically high pow-
ered. Many articles are quite technical, but they are also the cut-
ting edge of academic research.
Public Agenda Web site: http://www.publicagenda.org
/issues/frontdoor.cfm?issue_type=ss
National Bureau for Economic Research Web site: www
.nber.org/papers
Books and Articles
General History
Achenbaum, W. Andrew. 1986. Social Security: Visions and Re-
visions. New York: Cambridge University Press. 320 pages.
An authoritative history of Social Security in the 1970s, the years
when the program encountered its first crisis after the implemen-
tation of the cost-of-living adjustment (COLA).
Books and Articles
225
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Altman, Nancy. 2005. The Battle for Social Security: From FDR’s
Vision to Bush’s Gamble. New York: John Wiley. 362 pages.
A history of the politics that have surrounded the passage of So-
cial Security and subsequent efforts at reform, the book is sharply
critical of efforts to privatize the program.
Altmeyer, Arthur J. 1966. The Formative Years of Social Security.
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 314 pages.
An insider’s history of the beginnings of Social Security, written
by one of the program’s early leaders.
Amenta, Edward. 2006. When Movements Matter: The Townsend
Plan and the Rise of Social Security. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press. 336 pages.
This is the best single history of Dr. Francis Townsend’s pension
plan and the politics that surrounded it.
Arnold, Douglas R., Michael Graetz, and Alicia H. Munnell.
1998. Framing the Social Security Debate: Values, Politics, and
Economics. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution. 200 pages.
This book is a hodge-podge of information about the politics of
Social Security, albeit a hodge-podge written at a very high level.
It includes a discussion of how economists view Social Security
versus political scientists, how to use public opinion polls in eval-
uating support for Social Security, and the political feasibility of
reforming the system, among other topics.
Ball, Robert M., with Thomas N. Bethell. 1998. Straight Talk
about Social Security. New York: Century Fund/Twentieth Cen-
tury Fund. 79 pages.
Long-time advocate and Social Security official Robert Ball pro-
vides a vigorous defense of the program, opposing major reforms
to it, but he also offers interesting historical vignettes about Social
Security as it developed in its first decades.
Beland, Daniel. 2005. Social Security: History and Politics from
the New Deal to the Privatization Debate. Studies in Govern-
ment and Public Policy. Lawrence, KS: University Press of
Kansas. 252 pages.
226
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Another history of the politics that have shaped Social Security,
this volume is a bit more academic and focuses on the interaction
of deeply held American beliefs with the institutions of govern-
ment in the creation and evolution of the program.
Benavie, Arthur. 2003. Social Security under the Gun: What
Every Informed Citizen Needs to Know about Pension Reform.
New York: Palgrave MacMillan. 160 pages.
Somewhere between a history and user’s guide for those receiv-
ing or about to receive Social Security benefits, this book also vig-
orously argues that the present system will survive and attacks
efforts at privatization.
Berkowitz, Edward. 1995. Mr. Social Security: The Life of Wilbur
J. Cohen. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. 416 pages.
A rare biography of a major figure in the history of Social Secu-
rity. Berkowitz is perhaps the leading historian of the Social Secu-
rity program.
Berkowitz, Edward. 1991. America’s Welfare State: From Roo-
sevelt to Reagan. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
240 pages.
Though beginning to date a bit, this remains the standard history
of the Social Security program. It is perhaps the easiest to read of
the many histories, though readers may detect the author’s criti-
cal position toward most conservative politicians.
Berkowitz, Edward. 2003. Robert M. Ball and the Politics of So-
cial Security. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 455
pages.
A bookend with Berkowitz’s biography of Wilbur Cohen. Ball
was perhaps the leading figure in Social Security’s history over
the second half of the 20th century.
Berkowitz, Edward, and Kim McQuaid. 1998. Creating the Wel-
fare State: The Political Economy of Twentieth Century Reform.
New York: Praeger. 272 pages.
The authors reject an earlier consensus that U.S. business op-
posed Social Security and other government programs. They
Books and Articles
227
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

show how business was in fact critical to its creation. They also
place Social Security’s history within the larger history of the con-
struction of the post–New Deal American welfare state.
Cates, Jerry R. 1983. Insuring Inequality: Administrative Leader-
ship in Social Security: 1934–1954. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press. 200 pages.
This study of the first years of the Social Security Board, the ini-
tial federal agency that managed the program, is critical of the
decisions that the board took in developing the program.
Derthick, Martha. 1979. Policymaking for Social Security. Wash-
ington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. 460 pages.
A recognized classic in the field of public policy, Derthick’s vol-
ume offers a first-rate analysis of how the Social Security pro-
gram was developed and administered in the years after World
War II. This may be the definitive account of the policies and pol-
itics of the program’s first four decades.
Derthick, Martha. 1990. Agency Under Stress: The Social Secu-
rity Administration in American Government. Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution. 245 pages.
Another often-cited work, here Derthick analyzes why the Social
Security Administration performed so poorly in administering
program changes in the 1970s and 1980s. It is an account of why it
is so difficult to manage this huge program.
Elmendorf, Douglas W., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and David W.
Wilcox. 2002. “Fiscal Policy and Social Security Policy During
the 1990s,” 61–138. In Jeffrey A. Frankel and Peter R. Orszag,
eds., American Economic Policy in the 1990s. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. 1,119 pages.
The best single account of Social Security policy, and the debates
surrounding it, during the Clinton presidency. It is written by for-
mer administration officials and includes commentary from a
panel of experts.
Epstein, Abraham. 1938. Insecurity: A Challenge to America.
New York: Random House. 939 pages.
228
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

A leading figure in the development of Social Security defends
national unemployment and retirement pension programs
against its early critics.
Glasson, William H. 1918. Federal Military Pensions in the
United States. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 305 pages.
The U.S. pension system was originally tied to military service.
Admittedly an obscure volume, this is the history of that system,
the forerunner to the Social Security program.
Greider, William. 1986. The Education of David Stockman and
Other Americans. New York: Dutton. 161 pages.
A bombshell in its day, Greider reported the inside story of the
making of the first Ronald Reagan budget. It includes much in-
formation about that administration’s initial plans for Social Se-
curity reductions. These plans eventually produced the
National Commission on Social Security Reform (the Greenspan
Commission).
Hacker, Jacob S. 2002. The Divided Welfare State: The Battle
Over Public and Private Social Benefits in the United States.
New York: Cambridge University Press. 464 pages.
Why is part of the U.S. retirement program public (Social Security)
and part private (employer pensions), and what difference does it
make? Hacker addresses this in the first section of this book.
Light, Paul. 1985. Artful Work: The Politics of Social Security
Reform. New York: Random House. 256 pages.
A public policy analyst examines the politics of Social Security re-
form through the era of the Greenspan Commission. While it is
very complete, some old Social Security hands found it sensation-
alistic in its conclusions.
Leff, Mark H. 1983. “Taxing the Forgotten Man: The Politics of
Social Security Finance in the New Deal.” Journal of American
History 70 (3): 359–381.
Now that the program’s financing is again controversial, it is in-
teresting to compare the politics over the same issue at the time
of the program’s founding. This is the definitive article on that
subject.
Books and Articles
229
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Livingston, Steven G. 2002. Student’s Guide to Landmark Con-
gressional Laws on Social Security and Welfare. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press. 258 pages.
The book provides a brief legislative history of each major reform
to the U.S. Social Security system, as well as edited extracts from
the relevant legislation that was enacted.
Marmor, Theodore R., Jerry L. Mashaw, and Philip L. Harvey.
1990. America’s Misunderstood Welfare State: Persistent Myths,
Enduring Realities. New York: Basic. 292 pages.
As the title indicates, this book argues that most Americans do
not understand how their own country’s social programs operate
and that much of the criticism of these programs comes from this
lack of knowledge. The book offers a slightly dated history of the
major social programs, including Social Security, to rectify this.
Mommsen, Wolfgang J., ed. 1981. The Emergence of the Welfare
State in Britain and Germany: 1850–1950. London: Croom Helm.
443 pages.
An accessible study of how the world’s first social security pro-
grams were developed.
Myers, Robert J. 1970. Expansionism in Social Insurance. Lon-
don: Institute of Economic Affairs. 31 pages.
A brief, revisionist history of Social Security by a long-time offi-
cial. Myers argues that, contrary to what other officials might
have been saying, the program was structured for inexorable
growth in benefits and cost. That is what agency officials wanted
from the start. Obviously controversial.
Quadagno, Jill. 1988. The Transformation of Old-Age Security:
Class and Politics in the American Welfare State. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press. 268 pages.
An academic study of the origins of Social Security. At times con-
troversial, the author attempts to show the impact of class, race,
and region on the creation of the program.
Rubinow, I. M. 1913. Social Insurance, with Special Reference to
American Conditions. New York: Henry Holt. 525 pages.
230
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Perhaps of limited analytic interest today, it is included here be-
cause this work had a greater impact on the development of the
U.S. Social Security system than did any other publication.
Rubinow, I. M. 1934. The Quest for Security. New York: Henry
Holt. 638 pages.
A second volume primarily of historical interest. Rubinow ar-
gued, in mid-Depression, that the American worker was the most
insecure of any in the world owing to the lack of unemployment
or old-age policies. President Roosevelt is believed to have read
this book while he was initiating his plan for Social Security.
Schlabach, Theron. 1969. Edward E. Witte: Cautious Reformer.
Madison, WI: State Historical Society of Wisconsin. 290 pages.
A biography of the author of the government report that led to
the Social Security program.
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. 1988. The Age of Roosevelt: The Com-
ing of the New Deal. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 669 pages.
The classic account that positions Social Security within the con-
text of Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal.
Skocpol, Theda. 1992. Protecting Soldiers and Mothers. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 736 pages.
The best history and analysis of the U.S. government pension
programs that preceded Social Security.
Solomon, Carmen D. 1986. “Major Decisions in the House and
Senate Chambers on Social Security.” CRS Report for Congress.
Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress. Washing-
ton, D.C.: Government Printing Office. 117 pages.
This is a useful guide to all major legislative decisions taken by
the U.S. Congress during the first 50 years of Social Security.
Stevens, Robert B., ed. 1970. Statutory History of the United
States: Income Security. New York: Chelsea House. 919 pages.
A compilation of laws that includes the full texts of the initial So-
cial Security Act and its amendments up to 1970.
Books and Articles
231
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Van Atta, Dale. 1998. Trust Betrayed: Inside the AARP. Wash-
ington, D.C.: Regnery. 208 pages.
The author takes a very dim view of the political influence and
operations of the largest interest group interested in Social Secu-
rity. Though very critical, this is probably the most detailed of
several books about the AARP.
Vandenberg, Arthur H. 1937. “The $47,000,000,000 Blight.” Sat-
urday Evening Post 209 (43):  5–7.
This article by Senator Vandenberg initiated the 1939 amend-
ments and the conversion of Social Security into a pay-as-you-go
program.
Weaver, Carolyne L. 1996. “Birth of an Entitlement: Learning
from the Origins of Social Security.” AEI Online, May.
http://www.aei.org/publications/pubID.6500/pub_detail.asp.
Originally written for a libertarian magazine (Reason), this is a
brief but very informative history of the initial design of the So-
cial Security program and the issues surrounding it. The author
links those issues to her own preference that the system now be
privatized.
Wise, David A., Richard G. Woodbury, and Rudolph Penner.
1995. “Policy Toward the Aged,” 741–794. In Martin Feldstein,
American Economic Policy in the 1980s. National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research Conference Report. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. 834 pages.
The most complete evaluation of Social Security policy during
the Reagan and early George H. W. Bush presidencies. A panel of
experts offers commentary on the policy making of this era.
Witte, Edwin. 1963. Development of the Social Security Act.
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press. 239 pages.
An inside history of the Social Security Act of 1935 written by one
of the program’s pioneers.
Current Issues
Below are listed, alphabetically, works that address particular So-
cial Security reform proposals or other issues that are currently in
debate.
232
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Demographics
Clark, Robert L., Richard V. Burkhauser, Marilyn Moon, Joseph
F. Quinn, and Timothy M. Smeeding. 2004. The Economics of an
Aging Society. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 376 pages.
The issues around Social Security ultimately rest upon the chang-
ing demographics of the United States. This book is a recent, up-
to-date survey and analysis of those demographics.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Scott Burns. 2004. The Coming Gen-
erational Storm: What You Need to Know about America’s Eco-
nomic Future. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 274 pages.
The authors claim that an aging population will play havoc with
most U.S. social programs. To save Social Security, they suggest
moving to a system of government-managed private accounts.
Krugman Paul. 2005. “America’s Senior Moment.” New York
Review of Books 52 (4): 6–8.
The economist and New York Times columnist argues that demo-
graphic trends will actually have but a modest effect on Amer-
ica’s ability to finance its social programs. (This article is a review
of Kotlikoff and Burns, The Coming Generational Storm.)
Peterson, Peter. 1999. The Gray Dawn: How the Coming Age
Wage Will Transform America—And the World. New York: Ran-
dom House. 288 pages.
An interesting and passionate (for Social Security) discussion of
the impact of the large growth in senior citizens that is expected
in the coming years. Peterson compares the effects across policies
and across countries.
Solow, Robert M. 1999. “On Golden Pond.” New York Review
of Books 46: 8.
Nobel Prize–winning economist Solow argues that the demo-
graphic situation, while undoubtedly a coming cause of financ-
ing problems for Social Security, is not as dire as some claim (the
article is a review of Peterson’s The Gray Dawn).
The Rate of Return Question
Beach, William W., and Gareth G. Davis. 1998. Social Security’s
Rate of Return. Washington, D.C.: Heritage Foundation.
Books and Articles
233
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

An argument that Social Security offers a poor rate of financial re-
turn for many Americans. Controversially, it asserts that African
Americans and low-income earners do particularly poorly under
the current system.
Furman, Jason. 2005. Would Private Accounts Provide a Higher
Rate of Return than Social Security? Washington, D.C.: Center
on Budget and Policy Priorities. http:/www.cbpp.org. 14 pages.
The author concludes no, they would not.
Orszag, Peter R. 1999. Individual Accounts and Social Security:
Does Social Security Really Provide a Lower Rate of Return?
Washington, D.C.: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
http:/www.cbpp.org. 47 pages.
Presented as an argument against an individual retirement ac-
count (IRA) carve-out, Orszag attempts to demonstrate that re-
forms to Social Security would not affect its rate of return.
Overviews of Reform Proposals and Debates
Anders, Susan B., and David S. Hulse 2006. “Social Security:
The Past, the Present, and Options for Reform.” Online CPA
Journal, May. http://www.nysscpa.org/cpajournal/2006/506/in -
focus/p20.htm.
Written for accountants, this article is an excellent survey of the
impact of demographics on the future of Social Security. It clearly
explains how the Trust Fund operates and why it will vanish.
Concord Coalition. 2005. “Automatic Cost Growth Drives the
Problem” Social Security Series, Issue No. 7. http://www
.concord coalition.org/issues/.
Though written as an advocacy piece, this brief online exposition
nicely explains why Social Security becomes more costly over
time
Concord Coalition. 1998. Saving Social Security: A Framework
for Reform. Volume 2: Options for Reform. http://www.concord -
coalition.org/issues/. 36 pages.
A second useful piece by the Concord Coalition. After arguing
that reform is necessary, this work gives a careful overview of
234
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

many of the reform proposals that have been made and summa-
rizes the pros and cons of each.
Diamond, Peter. 2002. Social Security Reform. New York: Ox-
ford University Press. 100 pages.
This is a relatively brief explanation of how Social Security re-
form is bound with the operations of the U.S. labor and capital
markets. This sounds quite complex, but the book is presented at
a nontechnical level by one of the issue’s leading analysts.
Gebhardtsbauer, Ron. 2000. “Understanding Social Security.
How Social Security Works, Social Security’s Long-Range Fi-
nancial Problem, and Pros and Cons of Social Security Reform
Proposals.” Washington, D.C.: American Academy of Actuaries.
http://www.actuary.org/pdf/socialsecurity/ss_speech0800.pdf. 43
pages.
Though presented to an audience of insurance actuaries and
most attentive to insurance issues, this presentation is admirably
clear in introducing and summarizing many of the reforms to So-
cial Security that have been developed. The author frequently
works through the likely results of given reforms.
Graetz, Michael, and Jerry L. Mashaw. 1999. True Security: Re-
thinking American Social Insurance. New Haven, CT: Yale Uni-
versity Press. 369 pages.
Placing Social Security in historical context as part of a larger U.S.
social insurance system, the authors offer recommendations for
building a more complete, and more affordable, system for all
Americans.
Kingson, Eric R., and James H. Schulz. 1997. Social Security in
the Twenty-First Century. New York: Oxford University Press.
313 pages.
This edited volume features articles on a number of major issues,
including the economic impact of Social Security, whether the
program ought to be means tested, and whether the system is fair
to women. The authors are diverse in their perspectives on the
Social Security program.
Books and Articles
235
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Nuschler, Dawn. 2006. “Social Security Reform.” CRS Issue
Brief for Congress. Congressional Research Service, Library of
Congress. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Congress. 19 pages
This is a brief survey of recent issues and debates over Social Se-
curity. It includes information on public opinion polling and leg-
islation that has been proposed in recent sessions of Congress.
This publication is available at a number of sites over the Inter-
net. Because it is occasionally updated, and not all sites follow the
updates, it is perhaps best to search for the article. It was origi-
nally prepared for use by members of Congress and their staffs.
Schaviro, Daniel. 2000. Making Sense of Social Security Reform.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 185 pages.
Though written before the most recent privatization debates, this
volume is a basic primer on the economics behind Social Security
and balanced discussion of many of the proposals to reform it.
Shieber, Sylvester, and John B. Shoven. 1999. The Real Deal:
The History and Future of Social Security. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press. 450 pages.
This is a remarkably complete examination of how Social Secu-
rity has developed and the options for its reform. The authors
present their own plan for reforming Social Security, which they
call “personal security accounts.”
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2005. Social Security
Reform: Answers to Key Questions. GAO-05-193SP (May). Wash-
ington, 
D.C.: 
Government 
Printing 
Office. 
69 
pages.
http://www.gao.gov/index.html.
A very good survey of the potential impact of proposed reforms.
The material is presented as answers to a long list of questions
that one might have about Social Security.
Pay-as-You-Go Financing
Congressional Budget Office. United States Congress. 2004.
“How Pension Financing Affects Returns to Different Genera-
tions.” Long-Term Fiscal Policy Brief 12. Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Budget Office. http://www.cbo.gov. 6 pages.
This is a relatively accessible synopsis of a difficult but important
issue: as the demographics of a society change, how does the rate
236
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

of return on the Social Security contributions vary across differ-
ent generations?
Feldstein, Martin. 1974. “Social Security, Induced Retirement,
and Aggregate Capital Accumulation.” Journal of Political
Economy 82 (5): 905–926.
A bit technical, but an initial argument against pay-as-you-go fi-
nancing. It is written by one of the major scholars of the Social Se-
curity program.
Gramlich, Edward M. 1998. Is It Time to Reform Social Secu-
rity? Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 120 pages.
The chair of the 1994–1996 Advisory Commission on Social Secu-
rity offers his thoughts on reform. He believes the program
should move to greater reliance on the advance funding of bene-
fits, as opposed to the current pay-as-you-go structure.
Viard, Alan D. 2002. “Pay-as-You-Go Social Security and the
Aging of America: An Economic Analysis.” Economic and Fi-
nancial Policy Review 1 (4): 1–25.
A thorough discussion of how pay-as-you-go financing operates
and how demographic changes will affect a social security sys-
tem that is so financed. The author presents an objective analysis;
no policy recommendations are made.
Changing the Benefits Formula
American Academy of Actuaries. 2004. “Social Security Re-
form: Changes to the Benefit Formula and Taxation of Bene-
fits.” Issue Brief (May). 8 pages. http://www.actuary.org.
Making no recommendations, this article explores the possibilities
of reforming Social Security through making these two changes.
Thompson, Lawrence H. 2004. “Social Security Reform and
Benefit Adequacy.” Retirement Project, Brief Series, 17. New
York: Urban Institute. 7 pages. http://www.urban.org/.
Thompson argues that too many retirees cannot afford to see
their benefits reduced. He provides a great deal of information
about the distribution of Social Security benefits in the United
States.
Books and Articles
237
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Changes in Indexing
Congressional Budget Office. Congress of the United States.
2003. “The Future Growth of Social Security: It’s Not Just Soci-
ety’s Aging.” Long Range Fiscal Policy Brief 9 (July). Washing-
ton, D.C.: Congressional Budget Office. http://www.cbo.gov. 4
pages.
This brief enables one to understand the effects of wage indexing
on the future cost of the Social Security program.
Congressional Budget Office. Congress of the United States.
2005. Projected Effects of Various Provisions on Social Security’s
Financial and Distributional Outcomes. (May 25), 23 pages.
http://www.cbo.gov.
This is an objective analysis of exactly how various changes in
index or benefits formulas would affect the Trust Fund and the fi-
nances of Social Security generally.
Greenstein, Robert. 2005. So-Called Price Indexing Proposal
Would Result in Deep Reductions over Time in Social Security
Benefits. Washington, D.C.: Center on Budget and Policy Priori-
ties. 11 pages. http://cbpp.org.
This is a response to a proposal by President George W. Bush of
shifting from wage to price indexing in the Social Security bene-
fits calculation.
Johnson, Richard W., Joshua H. Goldwyn, and Melissa M.
Favreault. 2004. “Social Security COLA Reductions Would
Weaken Financial Security for the Oldest and Poorest Re-
tirees.” Retirement Project, Brief Series, 18. New York: Urban
Institute (September). 9 pages. http://www.urban.org/.
As indicated by the title, this article shows that proposed COLA re-
ductions would sharply reduce the incomes of the poorest retirees. 
Munnell, Alicia H., and Mauricio Soto. 2005. “What Does Price
Indexing Mean for Social Security Benefits?” Just the Facts on
Retirement Issues, 14 (January). Boston: Center for Retirement
Research, Boston College. http://crr.bc.edu/index.php. 5 pages.
A primer on how price and wage indexing operate, and the dif-
ference between the two.
238
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Investing in the Stock Market
Aaron, Henry J., and Robert D. Reischauer. 1998. Countdown to
Reform: The Great Social Security Debate. New York: Century
Foundation Press.
An argument for incremental reform of the Social Security sys-
tem, including placing a portion of the Trust Fund into the stock
market, by two of the leading scholars on Social Security.
Baker, Dean. 2002. The Stock Market Bubble and Investing So-
cial Security in the Stock Market. Washington, D.C.: Center for
Economic and Policy Research. http://www.cepr.net/pub li ca -
tions/social_security_2002_07.htm.
This article makes the argument that investing in the stock mar-
ket will harm the economy and reduce the wealth of U.S. stock
investors.
Congressional Budget Office. Congress of the United States.
2003. Evaluating and Accounting for Federal Investment in Cor-
porate Stocks and Other Private Securities. Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Budget Office. http://www.cbo.gov. 36 pages.
The Congressional Budget Office studies the effects of investing
Social Security funds in the stock market on the U.S. economy
and government finances generally. It discusses the trade-offs of
such investment on other policy goals.
Individual Retirement Accounts
Concord Coalition. 2005. “Personal Retirement Accounts:
Should They Be Voluntary or Mandatory?” Social Security Re-
form 8. http://www.concordcoalition.org/issues/. 7 pages.
True to its focus on increasing Americans’ savings, the Concord
Coalition presents the case for mandatory IRAs as a part of Social
Security.
Congressional Budget Office. Congress of the United States.
2005. Congressional Budget Office Cost Estimate: H.R. 3304,
Growing Real Ownership for Workers Act, as Introduced on July
14, 2005. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Budget Office.
http://www.cbo.gov. 56 pages.
A detailed analysis of the financial costs and impact of H.R. 3304,
a bill that provides for diverting a portion of Social Security con-
tributions into IRA-type accounts. This bill is very similar to the
Books and Articles
239
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

proposal for Social Security reform made by President George W.
Bush.
Cordes, Joseph J., and C. Eugene Steurele. 1999. “A Primer on
Privatization.” Retirement Project, Occasional Paper No. 3.
New York: Urban Institute. http://www.urban.org/. 18 pages.
This careful study covers many issues, including investing in the
stock market, but focuses on the effects of partial privatization.
The authors do not oppose privatization but argue that it is no
panacea to the problems of the current system.
Furman, Jason. 2005. Evaluating Alternative Social Security Re-
forms. Washington, D.C.: Center for Budget and Policy Priori-
ties. http://cbpp.org. 21 pages.
This is Furman’s prepared testimony to the House Ways and
Means Committee. He is an opponent of President George W.
Bush’s privatization proposal, but here he offers a useful sum-
mary of the differences between carve-out and add-on individual
retirement accounts.
Horney, James, and Richard Kogan. 2005. Private Accounts
Would Substantially Increase Federal Debt and Interest Pay-
ments. Washington, D.C.: Center on Budget and Policy Priori-
ties. http://cbpp.org. 43 pages.
An argument that privatization would have severe effects on the
federal budget, and thus should be opposed.
John, David C. 2004. “How to Fix Social Security.” Back-
grounder 1811 (November 17). Washington, D.C.: Heritage
Foundation. http://heritage.org. 16 pages.
John concludes that Social Security IRAs are the only realistic re-
form for Social Security.
Orszag, Peter R., and Robert Greenstein. 2001. Voluntary Indi-
vidual Accounts for Social Security: What Are the Costs? Wash-
ington, D.C.: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. http:
//cbpp.org. 16 pages.
Leading analysts explain their opposition to IRA carve-outs.
240
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Privatization
Aaron, Henry J., and John B. Shoven. 1999. Should the United
States Privatize Social Security? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
190 pages.
This book is an excellent primer on privatization. It features one
chapter written by a prominent proponent of partial privatiza-
tion, and a second chapter written by an equally prominent op-
ponent. These chapters are followed by responses from a number
of leading economists.
Aaron, Henry J., and Robert Reischauer. 1998. There When You
Need It: Saving Social Security for Future Generations of Ameri-
cans. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution. 195 pages.
This is a general guide to Social Security reform proposals, but it
also contains a chapter that makes the case against privatizing the
system.
Feldstein, Martin, ed. 1998. Privatizing Social Security.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 488 pages.
Feldstein, the most academically prominent supporter of privati-
zation, and his colleagues explore in a favorable light how the
U.S. Social Security program might be turned into a program of
private, individual retirement accounts. Chapters are devoted to
the experiences of individual countries with privatization.
Kotlikoff, Lawrence J. 1996. “Privatization of Social Security:
How It Works and Why It Matters.” National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research Working Paper No. 5330 (October).
One of the first systematic examinations of Social Security privati-
zation, this paper outlines how a privatized retirement system
would operate and how it would differ from today’s Social Security.
Shoven, John, ed. 2000. Administrative Costs and Social Secu-
rity Privatization. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
What sounds like a particularly trivial topic is actually of great
importance, as the returns to any pension program, but most par-
ticularly to a privatized program, depend to a significant extent
upon its administrative costs. Estimates of whether privatization
Books and Articles
241
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

will or will not outperform other forms of Social Security reform
often turn on the assumptions about its administrative costs.
Tanner, Michael D., ed. 2004. Social Security and Its Discon-
tents: Perspectives on Choice. Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute.
386 pages.
The Cato Institute is a leading proponent of Social Security priva-
tization. This book is a well-regarded defense of that position.
Raising the Retirement Age
Burtless, Gary. 1998. Increasing the Eligibility Age for Social
Security Pensions: Testimony before the Senate Special Com-
mittee on Aging, July 15. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Insti-
tution. 
http://www.brookings.edu/views/testimony/burtless
/19980715.htm.
Burtless’s Senate testimony clearly outlines the issues surround-
ing raising the Social Security retirement age.
Response to Detailed Reform Plans
Diamond, Peter, and Peter R. Orszag. 2005. “Saving Social Se-
curity.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (2): 11–32.
A synopsis of the plan offered in the book by Diamond and
Orszag (below), it also provides an interesting overview of the
current debate on Social Security.
Diamond, Peter, and Peter R. Orszag. 2003. Saving Social Secu-
rity: A Balanced Approach. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institu-
tion. 287 pages.
The authors, experts on Social Security, present their own plan for
saving it. The plan is a mix of privatization along with changes in
existing operation.
Diamond, Peter, and Peter R. Orszag. 2002. Reducing Benefits
and Subsidizing Individual Accounts: An Analysis of the Plans
Proposed by the President’s Commission to Strengthen Social
Security. New York: Century Foundation; Washington, D.C.:
Center on the Budget and Policy Priorities. http://cbpp.org. 41
pages.
A very negative response to the recommendations of the Moyni-
han Commission report (below).
242
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Report of the President’s Commission on Social Security
(Daniel Moynihan and Richard Parsons, co-chairs). 2001.
Strengthening Social Security and Creating Personal Wealth for
All Americans. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
256 pages.
This is an authoritative and comprehensive examination of the
current Social Security program. However, it is most noted for its
support of a partial privatization program, and this report was
the basis for the Social Security reform that President George W.
Bush then offered.
World Bank. 1994. Averting the Old Age Crisis. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 402 pages.
This is an initial volume of recommendations from the World
Bank’s program on global pension programs. It argues of the
dangers of large trust funds and pay-as-you-go financing. It is in
this volume that the World Bank advances a “tri-pillar” strategy
for Social Security: each country should provide a minimum pub-
lic pension that is not linked to earnings, insist upon a second
pension to be provided by employers, and then offer a third vol-
untary pension program that is financed through individual con-
tributions. This is the standard advice that the World Bank now
gives to its member countries.
Ending Social Security Altogether
Aaron, Henry, and Robert D. Reischauer. 1999. “Should We Re-
tire Social Security? Grading the Reform.” Brookings Review,
6–11.
Two respected analysts argue that Social Security remains an ef-
fective retirement system. Reforms must be made, they claim, but
the system should not be ended.
Ferrara, Peter J. 1980. Social Security: The Inherent Contradic-
tion. San Francisco: Cato Institute.
A fierce argument in favor of ending the Social Security program
altogether.
Murray, Charles. 2006. In Our Hands: A Plan to Replace the Wel-
fare State. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute
Press. 230 pages.
Books and Articles
243
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

An audacious plan to end federal social programs and replace
them with annual grants of $10,000 to every American over the
age of 21. Murray is known for his provocative, right-of-center
ideas, and in that department this book does not disappoint.
Standing Pat: Not Yet Time for Reform?
Baker, Dean. 1998. “Nine Misconceptions about Social Secu-
rity.” Atlantic Monthly 282 (1): 34–39.
This article argues that most Social Security reforms are misguided.
The implicit argument is that the system should be kept  as it is.
Foreign Social Security Systems
Below are English-language materials for further research of the
programs presented in chapter 3. They are organized by country.
Also included are some materials on Japan and Mexico, two coun-
tries with recently reformed retirement programs that space pre-
cluded from coverage in chapter 3. They may also be of interest.
Cross-Country Comparisons
In addition to the Social Security Bulletin, the International Social
Security Review and the British Actuarial Journal regularly feature
articles on the operations, difficulties, and reforms of pension
systems around the world.
Blackburn, Robin. 2002. Banking on Death or, Investing in Life:
The History and Future of Pensions. New York: Verso Press. 550
pages.
Separate chapters are devoted to the British and U.S. retirement
systems, while additional chapters survey the global history of
pension systems. The perspective is from the left, with clear and
detailed discussions of how different pension systems operate.
Congressional Budget Office. United States Congress. 1999. So-
cial Security Privatization: Experiences Abroad. Washington,
D.C.: Congressional Budget Office. 101 pages.
Very detailed, with chapters on individual countries.
Feldstein, Martin, and Horst Siebert, eds. 2001. Social Security
Pension Reform in Europe. National Bureau of Economic Re-
244
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

search Conference Report. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. 500 pages.
The National Bureau of Economic Research, located in Cam-
bridge, Massachusetts, is one of the premier collections of eco-
nomic research in the United States. It compiles edited books,
such as this one, and working papers on a variety of economic
topics. It regularly publishes compendiums of articles on So-
cial Security systems around the world. These may sometimes
be highly technical, but they often give unparalleled under-
standing into the operations and problems of foreign pension
programs.
Gruber, Jonathan, and David A. Wise. 1999. Social Security and
Retirement Around the World. National Bureau of Economic Re-
search Conference Report. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. 496 pages.
This is an edited volume that looks at how retirement systems
have affected labor force participation across numerous coun-
tries. The book chapters offer thumbnail descriptions of many
foreign retirement programs. 
James, Estelle. 1998. “New Models for Old-Age Security: Exper-
iments, Evidence, and Unanswered Questions.” World Bank
Research Observer 13 (2): 271–301.
This article compares the “Latin American model,” reform
through privatization, to the “OECD model” of reform (referring
to the model developed by the Organisation for Economic Co-op-
eration and Development) that does not touch the pay-as-you-go
financing of the pension system. The bibliography includes
sources for information on pension systems not otherwise con-
sidered in this book.
James, Estelle. 2005. Reforming Social Security: Lessons from
Thirty Countries. NCPA Policy Report, 277. Dallas: National
Center for Policy Analysis. http://ncpa.org/pub/st/st277. 39 pages
Shows how exact questions of program design can have a huge
impact on the performance of a public pension system.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
2007. Pensions at a Glance: Public Policies across OECD
Books and Articles
245
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Countries. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development. 204 pages. http://www.oecdbookshop.org
/oecd/display.asp?CID=&LANG=EN&SF1=DI&ST1=5L4S6T
KVJ30P.
Published annually, this is a survey and comparison of retirement
policies across the 30 OECD member states. It includes brief sum-
maries of the pension system of each country along with a great
deal of statistical information.
Turner, John. 2005. Social Security Privatization Around the
World. Washington, D.C.: AARP. 33 pages.
The AARP has long opposed privatization, but this relatively up-
to-date survey simply and relatively objectively describes the
major privatization efforts that have been taken around the world
over the past two decades.
Urban Institute. 2006. Transcript of “An International Confer-
ence on Social Security Reform in Selected OECD Countries.”
Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute. 96 pages.
This is a very interesting panel discussion that took place Febru-
ary 24, 2006. Panelists presented overviews of how the retirement
systems of many of the major developed countries operate
(Canada, Japan, Germany, Sweden, United Kingdom, Italy) and
the recent reforms that have occurred in each. Discussants then
comment upon the presentation, and questions from the audi-
ence are entertained. A great way to quickly get up to speed on
many of the major pension topics and issues.
Valdes-Prieto, Salvador, ed. 1997. The Economics of Pensions:
Principles, Policies, and International Experiences. New York:
Cambridge University Press. 377 pages.
Written before many of the reforms have been made, this volume
is of more interest in its discussion of the pension problems that
were facing most countries in the 1990s. Chapters are devoted to
the experiences of a number of individual countries.
Canada
The government of Canada maintains several Web sites that ex-
plain the operations of its pension system. These are the places
to start for a serious investigation of how this system operates.
246
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Because the Canadian program is divided into the old-age secu-
rity plan and the Canadian pension plan, there are several sites
to examine.
The Web site for the old-age security plan:
http://www1.servicecanada.gc.ca/en/isp/oas/oastoc.shtml
The Web site for the Canada Pension Plan:
http://www.hrsdc.gc.ca/en/isp/cpp/cpptoc.shtml
The latter site includes fact sheets, benefits information, and a va-
riety of other materials.
The Web site for details on the 1998 Canadian reforms:
http://www.hrsdc.gc.ca/en/isp/cpp/cppchanges.shtml
The Web site for the Canadian Pension Plan annual reports: http://
www.hrsdc.gc.ca/en/isp/pub/cpp/pubcpptoc.shtml#annual
The investment board that manages the pension plan funds
maintains its own site. The investments, investment strategies,
and investment returns are discussed in detail.
The Web site for the Canadian Pension Plan funds:
http://www.cppib.ca/
The Canadian government produces financial reviews of the
soundness of its pension programs. They are available at
http://www.fin.gc.ca/cpp/indexe.html.
The Canadian Department of Human Resources and Social De-
velopment also provides a number of articles and fact sheets on
the Canadian retirement system.
http://www.hrsdc.gc.ca/en/gateways/topics/cpr-gxr.shtml
Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan. 2004. “In-
come Security Programs and Retirement in Canada,” 99–154. In
Jonathan Gruber and David Wise, eds., Social Security Programs
and Retirement Around the World: Microestimation. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Much of this paper is technical, focusing on the factors that en-
courage workers to retire, but part II is a very good history of the
development of the Canadian pension system.
Books and Articles
247
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Battle, Kenneth, and Edward Tamagno. 2007. “Public Pensions in
a Development Context: The Case of Canada.” Social Policy and
Development Programme Paper, 31. United Nations Research In-
stitute for Social Development. http://www.unrisd.org/unrisd
/website. 36 pages.
This article covers the recent reforms to the Canadian Pension
Plan, and the politics that surrounded them. It takes a favorable
view of the results.
Béland, Daniel. 2006. “The Politics of Social Learning: Finance,
Institutions, and Pension Reform in the United States and
Canada.” Governance: An International Journal of Policy, Ad-
ministration, and Institutions 19 (4): 559–583.
Generally a theoretical account of “learning,” but the middle sec-
tions of this piece trace the history of the recent Canadian reforms
and compare that history to Social Security debates in the United
States.
Béland, Daniel, and John Myles. 2005. “Stasis Amidst Change:
Canadian Pension Reform in an Age of Retrenchment,”
252–273. In Giuliano Bonoli and Toshimitsu Shinkawa, eds.,
Ageing and Pension Reform Around the World: Evidence from
Eleven Countries. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
A basic description of the new Canadian pension system, posi-
tioning its adoption in the context of the increasing costs of public
pension programs that all countries now face.
Finkel, Alvin. 2006. Social Policy and Practice in Canada: A His-
tory. Waterloo ON: Wilfred Laurier University Press. 396 pages.
An up-to-date history of the Canadian welfare state generally, but
with attention to the development of its national retirement sys-
tem. The author presents a “centrist” history, arguing that Cana-
dian programs and reforms have been neither as left-wing nor as
right-wing as often projected.
Guest, Dennis. 1997. The Emergence of Social Security in
Canada. Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia Press.
303 pages.
Though superseded by later reforms, this volume remains the
best history of the development of the Canadian pension pro-
248
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

gram. While the author clearly believes in an expansive program,
his account is comprehensive and complete.
Sarney, Mark, and Amy Prenata. 2001/2002. “The Canada Pen-
sion Plan’s Experience with Investing Its Portfolio in Equities.”
Social Security Bulletin 64 (2): 46–56.
A discussion of the Canadian reforms’ most controversial aspect.
Sass, Stephen A. 2006. “Reforming the Canadian Retirement
System: Investing Social Securities Assets in Equities.” Global
Issues in Brief 5 (April). Boston: Center for Retirement Re-
search, Boston College. http://crr.bc.edu/index.php. 13 pages.
A guarded but positive overview and account of the recent Cana-
dian reforms.
Australia
Because the Australian pension system has several components,
there are several official Web sites. The Australian Age Pension
program is carefully outlined at the following site. Much of the
information, of course, is directed at Australians interested in ob-
taining their benefits from the program.
The Web site for the Age Pension program:
http://www.centrelink.gov.au/internet/internet.nsf/payments/
age_pension.htm
The Web site for the superannuation program:
http://www.australia.gov.au/70
Australia also provides another user friendly Web site that ex-
plains the program: http://www.understandingmoney.gov.au
/content/consumer/financialliteracy/superannuation/.
To gather information on financing issues, the Australian taxation
office is helpful: http://www.ato.gov.au/super. Lastly, the gov-
ernment provides information to Australians about how to
choose a superannuation fund: http://www.superchoice.gov.au
/default.asp.
Commonwealth Treasury of Australia. 2001. “Towards Higher
Retirement Incomes for Australians: A History of the Aus-
tralian Retirement Income System since Federation.” Treasury
Books and Articles
249
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Economic Roundup Centenary Edition 2001. Canberra: Aus-
tralian 
Treasury 
Department. 
http://www.treasury.gov.au
/contentitem.asp?ContentID=110&NavID=.
A recent and good official history of the development of the Aus-
tralian pension system.
Department of Social Security of Australia. 1996. “Australian
Age Pension.” Older Australia at a Glance, vol. 20. Canberra:
Commonwealth of Australia.
A brief description of the Age Pension and how it operates.
Bateman, Hazel, and John Piggott. 2001. “Australia’s Mandatory
Retirement Saving Policy: A View from the New Millennium.”
Working Paper No. 23160. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/SOCIALPROTECTION/Res
ources/SP-Discussion-papers/Pensions-DP/0108.pdf. 46 pages.
A primer on the Australian system and how it is operating. The
article judges that system in the context of the World Bank’s pref-
erence for systems that are composed of a combination of public,
individual, and employer financing. 
Carney, Terry, and Peter Hanks. 1994. Social Security in Aus-
tralia. Oxford: Oxford University Press[A1]. 352 pages.
Dated, but a good source to follow the development of the Aus-
tralian welfare state, including its retirement system.
Heavey, Jerome F. 2006. “Superannuation and Social Security in
Australia and the United States.” Journal of Australian Politi-
cal Economy 53: 191–207.
This work is admittedly in a rather specialized journal, but it of-
fers a clear explanation of superannuation and a useful compari-
son between the U.S. and Australian retirement systems.
Mitchell, Daniel, and Robert P. O’Quinn. 1997. “Australia’s Pri-
vatized Retirement System: Lessons for the United States.”
Backgrounder 1149 (December 8). Washington, D.C.: Heritage
Foundation. http://www.heritage.org/research/socialsecurity/.
Though from the Heritage Foundation’s pro-privatization per-
spective, this provides a good overview of how Australia devel-
oped its superannuation program.
250
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Sass, Stephen A. 2004. “Reforming the Australian Retirement
System: Mandating Individual Accounts.” Global Issues in
Brief 2 (April). Boston: Center for Retirement Research, Boston
College. http://crr.bc.edu/index.php. 15 pages.
A relatively brief summary of the Australian program focusing
on superannuation and individual retirement accounts.
Germany
The English-language portions of the German pension Web site
are not particularly informative. However, the Web site does give
an overview of the German system.
The English-language Web Site for the German Pension system:
http://www.bmas.bund.de/Englisch/Navigation/pensions.html
Those who can read German should access the German lan-
guage pages, as more information is available there.
Börsch-Supan, Axel H., and Christina B. Wilke. 2006. “Reform-
ing the German Public Pension System.” Paper prepared for
the 2006 Annual Meeting of the American Economic Associa-
tion. 33 pages. http://www.rand.org/labor/aging/rsi/rsi_papers
/2006_axel1.pdf.
Discusses the 2001 and 2004 reforms. It also has a useful bibliog-
raphy. Börsch-Supan is the most prominent English-language
commentator upon the German system. This is his most recent
publication.
Capretta, James C. 2006. “Building Automatic Solvency into
U.S. Social Security: Insights from Sweden and Germany.”
Brookings Institution Policy Brief, 151. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings Institution. http://www.brook.edu. 8 pages.
A very good explanation of Germany’s “sustainability factor.”
U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2003. Social Security
Reform: Information Concerning Using a Voluntary Approach to
Individual Accounts. GAO-03-309 (March). Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office. http://www.gao.gov/index.html.
72 pages.
Appendix III discusses the German experience with individual
pension accounts.
Books and Articles
251
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Sweden
Sweden’s official pension pages are, helpfully, almost all avail-
able in English. There is not a great deal of information on the
Web pages themselves; it is best to look for the articles and publi-
cations available to be downloaded. The primary site is called
“Financial Security in Old Age,” maintained by the Ministry of
Health and Social Affairs.
The English-language Web site for the Swedish pension system:
http://www.sweden.gov.se/sb/d/3829
You may recall that Sweden has an add-on individual retirement
account program.
The Web site for the Premium Pension Fund: http://www.ppm
.nu/tpp/infodocument/1:1;201469,201304,201475,201481
Körnberg, Bo, Edward Palmer, and Annika Sundén. 2003. “The
NDC Reform in Sweden: The 1994 Legislation to the Present,”
449–466. In Robert Holzman and Edward Palmer, eds., Pension
Reform: Issues and Prospects for Non-Defined Financial Contri-
bution Schemes. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Covers the politics behind the creation of the new Swedish sys-
tem as well as an overview of how that system now operates.
Kruse, Agnata, and Edward Palmer. 2006. “The New Swedish
Pension System-Financial Stability and the Central Government
Budget.” Paper presented at the Urban Institute International
Conference on Social Security, February 24, 2006. 23 pages.
This is a background paper written for the Urban Institute confer-
ence described above (under Cross-Country Comparisons).
Lundberg, Urban. 2006. “Social Democracy Lost: The Social
Democrat Party in Sweden and the Politics of Pension Reform,
1978–1998.” In Lena Erikson and Eero Carroll, eds. Welfare Pol-
itics Cross-Examined: Eclecticist and Analytical Perspectives in
Sweden and the Developed World. New Brunswick, NJ: Transac-
tion Books. 334 pages.
Written for an audience more interested in academic theory, but
still the best article on the politics behind pension reform in
Sweden.
252
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Palme, Joakim. 2003. “Pension Reform in Sweden and the
Changing Boundaries between Public and Private.” In Gordon
L. Clark and Noel Whiteside, eds. Pension Security in the 21st
Century: Redrawing the Public-Private Debate. New York: Ox-
ford University Press. 308 pages.
A discussion of the Swedish pension system, and how its no-
tional system blurs traditional understandings of the differ-
ence between  pay-as-you-go and private defined contribution
systems.
Palme, Mårten, and Ingemar Svensson. 1999. “Social Security,
Occupational Pensions, and Retirement in Sweden,” 355–402.
In Jonathan Gruber and David Wise, eds. Social Security and
Retirement Around the World. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
This paper actually focuses on how the pension system has ac-
tually influenced the pattern of retirements in Sweden, but in
doing so, it presents a full overview of the Swedish pension
system.
Socialdepartementet. Ministry of Health and Social Affairs/
Riksförsäkringsverket. National Social Insurance Board. Gov-
ernment of Sweden. 2003. The Swedish National Pension Sys-
tem. http://www.sweden.gov.se/sb/d/2028/a/24221;jsessionid=aU
absLHkduo8. 25 pages.
A government publication that carefully explains the Swedish
system.
Swedish Social Insurance Agency. 2006. The Orange Report: The
Annual Report of the Swedish Pension System, 2006. Stockholm:
Swedish Social Insurance Agency. 94 pages. http://www
.forsakringskassan.se/sprak/eng/.
An extraordinarily useful compendium of information about the
Swedish system and pension programs generally. It is published
annually.
Weaver, R. Kent. 2005. “Social Security Smorgasbord? Lessons
from Sweden’s Individual Pension Accounts.” Brookings Insti-
tution Policy Brief, 140. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institu-
tion. http://www.brookings.edu. 8 pages.
Books and Articles
253
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

A survey of Sweden’s experience with its add-on personal 
accounts.
World Bank. 2001. Notional Accounts: Notional Defined Contri-
bution Plans as a Pension Reform Strategy. Washington, D.C.:
World Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTPENSIONS
/Resources/395443–1121194657824/PRPNoteNotionalAccts.pdf. 8
pages.
An introduction to notional accounts, the reform that is at the
heart of the new Swedish system.
United Kingdom
The British Department for Work and Pensions keeps the pri-
mary information site for the United Kingdom’s various pension
schemes and reforms. It features pension calculators and other
features, similar to the U.S. Social Security Web site.
http://www.dwp.gov.uk/lifeevent/penret/
The Pension Service itself, located within that department,
also has a Web site. The information here is directed particularly
to British citizens who are or will be drawing a retirement pen-
sion, but there is much additional information, too.
The Web site for the Pension Service:
http://www.thepensionservice.gov.uk/
Not surprisingly, given the complexity of the British system,
there is a special Web site that explains the coming reforms to the
British pension program:
http://www.dwp.gov.uk/pensionsreform/
For those interested in the finances of the British programs,
and national insurance contribution rates that must be paid into
them, that information is found at:
http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/rates/nic.htm
The state broadcasting company of the United Kingdom, the
British Broadcasting Company (BBC) also maintains a Web site on
retirement pension programs. It fully covers the pension debate
and the recent reforms in the United Kingdom, but there is also
coverage of a number of retirement systems across the globe.
254
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The BBC Web site:
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/in_depth/business/2005/turner_
report/default.stm
Beer, Alex. 2006. “UK Pensions and Pension Reform.” Paper
presented at the Urban Institute International Conference on
Social Security, February 24, 2006. 22 pages.
This is a background paper written for the Urban Institute confer-
ence described above (under the Cross-Country Comparisons
section).
Blake, David. 2002. “The United Kingdom Pension System:
Key Issues.” Discussion Paper PI-0107. London: Pensions Insti-
tute, Birkbeck College, University of London.
Already a little dated, but this brief paper outlines the major is-
sues that confront the British retirement system. 
Sass, Stephen A. 2004. “Reforming the UK Retirement System:
Privatization Plus a Safety Net.” Global Issues in Brief No. 3.
Boston: Center for Retirement Research, Boston College. 16
pages. http://crr.bc.edu/index.php.
A review of the impossibly complex British retirement system,
current through 2003. Sass notes how difficult it is to predict the
future operations or impact of the British programs.
Government of the United Kingdom. Financial Services Author-
ity. 2007. “The Second State Pension: Should You Be Contracted
Out?” FSA Factsheet (May). 6 pages. http://money made clear
.fsa.gov.uk.
The Financial Services Authority is an independent agency of the
British government. This brief survey clearly explains the Second
State Pension and how it operates.
United Kingdom. Department for Work and Pensions. Pen-
sions Service. 2005. A Guide to State Pensions. 113 pages. http:
//the pensions service.gov.uk.
Everything you wanted to know about the operations of Britain’s
State Pensions. Still the best overview, but now parts are super-
seded by the reforms of 2007.
Books and Articles
255
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

United Kingdom. Department for Work and Pensions. Pen-
sions Service. 2006. Personal Accounts: A New Way to Save. Ex-
ecutive Summary (December). 44 pages. http://dwp.gov.uk
/pensionsreform.
An explanation of the reforms passed by Parliament in 2007.
United Kingdom. Department for Work and Pensions. Pen-
sions Service. 2007. “Implementing a National Pension Savings
Scheme.” A New Pensions Settlement for the Twenty-first Cen-
tury 354–403. http://thepensionsservice.gov.uk.
Can be read as a supplement to the above to bring the reader up
to date.
United States Government Accountability Office. 2003. Social
Security Reform: Information Concerning Using a Voluntary Ap-
proach to Individual Accounts. GAO-03-309. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office. 72 pages. http://www.gao.gov
/index.html.
Appendix I discusses the British experience with individual pen-
sion accounts.
Whiteside, Noel. 2003. Constructing the Public-Private Divide:
Historical Perspectives and the Politics of Pension Reform. In
Gordon L. Clark and Noel Whiteside. Pension Security in the
21st Century: Redrawing the Public-Private Divide. Oxford:
Oxford University Press. 308 pages. 
Good on the politics behind the frequent reforms in Britain.
Chile
Chile has an excellent Web site for its pension system. However,
it is almost all in Spanish. An exception is the Web edition of “The
Chilean Pension System,” a very complete and useful survey of
all aspects of Chile’s pension program. It is available in English as
well as Spanish.
The Web site for La Superintendencia de Administradoras de Fondos de
Pensiones:
http://www.safp.cl/sist_previsional/index.html
256
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

The Web site of the English language edition of “The Chilean Pension
System”:
http://www.safp.cl/sischilpen/english.html
Diamond, Peter, and Salvador Valdés-Prieto. 1994. “Social Se-
curity Reforms.” In Barry P. Bosworth, Rudiger Dornbusch, and
Raul Lában, eds. The Chilean Economy: Policy Lessons and
Challenges. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution. 441 pages.
A relatively early narrative of the history of the Chilean policy
reforms.
Gill, Indermit, Truman Packard, and Juan Yermo. 2005. Keeping
the Promise of Social Security in Latin America. Palo Alto, CA:
Stanford University Press. 341 pages.
Many Latin American nations have followed the Chilean exam-
ple with major pension reforms of their own. This volume studies
the success of these various reforms.
James, Estelle. 2004. Private Pension Annuities in Chile. NCPA
Policy Report, 271. Washington, D.C.: National Center for Pol-
icy Analysis (December). 39 pages. http://www.ncpa.org.
Though a bit technical, this paper includes a very good discus-
sion of the Chilean system with emphasis upon how Chileans ac-
tually respond to the choices that are offered in this privatized
system. A useful bibliography is included as well.
Pension Research Council. 2006. Lessons from Pension Reform
in the Americas. Pension Research Council Working Paper,
2006–8. Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. 38 pages.
http://prc.wharton.upenn.edu/prc/prc.html.
This is a summary of a Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta confer-
ence on this topic. It includes a discussion of how knowledgeable
Chileans are of their new pension program, and what difference
that knowledge makes to their retirement planning.
Tamborini, Christopher. 2007. Social Security: The Chilean Ap-
proach to Retirement. CRS Research Report for Congress. Con-
gressional Research Service. United States Congress. 33 pages.
An objective assessment of the success of the Chilean program.
Books and Articles
257
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Japan
Japan has the oldest population in the world, and hence the most
precarious government pension system. It has attempted re-
forms, most recently in 2004, that in some respects mirror the re-
forms made in Germany. Here are several readings that introduce
the Japanese system. The Japanese Pension Bureau, which man-
ages the system, has a limited Web page in English. However, if
one follows the “Links to Related Documents,” one will find a
number of English-language materials available for download.
The Web site for the Japanese Pension Bureau:
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/org/policy/p36-37.html
Kabe, Tetsuo. 2006. “Japan’s Public Pension Reforms.” Paper
presented at the International Conference on Social Security
Reform(February 2006). New York: Urban Institute. 19 pages.
This paper discusses debates over the Japanese retirement sys-
tem that are, in many ways, similar to those that are occurring in
Germany.
National Institute of Population and Social Security Research.
2007. Social Security in Japan. Tokyo: Government of Japan. 51
pages. http://www.ipss.go.jp.
An up-to-date brief description of the Japanese retirement sys-
tem, with some emphasis on its demographic underpinnings.
Sakamoto, Junichi. 2005. Japan’s Pension Reform. SP Discus-
sion Paper, 0541. Washington, D.C.: World Bank (December). 76
pages.
Focuses on the reforms of 2004 and Japan’s effort to develop an
automatic balancing mechanism, along similar lines as that of
Germany.
Takayama, Noriyuki. 2003. “Pension Arrangements in the Old-
est Country: The Japanese Case,” 185–217. In Noriyuki
Takayama, ed. Taste of the Pie: Searching for Better Pension Pro-
visions in Developed Countries. Tokyo: Maruzen.
This chapter looks at the great difficulties Japan has faced in re-
forming its pension system under very unfavorable demographic
conditions.
258
Resources
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Takayama, Noriyuki. 2001. “Japanese Social Security Pensions
in the Twenty-first Century.” Paper presented at the Interna-
tional Conference on Pensions (March 2001), Tokyo. http:
//www.ier.hit-u.ac.jp.
Mexico
Mexico has also undertaken a major recent reform of its pension
system. It drew heavily from the Chilean example, but with sev-
eral of its own unique features. The readings below offer an intro-
duction to the new Mexican system. The Web site of the Mexican
pension regulatory agency, CONSAR, is exclusively in Spanish.
The Web site of CONSAR:
http://www.consar.gob.mx/
Espinosa-Vega, Marco A., and Tapin Sinha. 2001. “A Primer and
Assessment of Social Security Reform in Mexico.” Economic
Review 1–23.
This article is the best single introduction to the Mexican pension
system.
Grandolini, Gloria, and Luis Cerda. 1998. The 1997 Pension Re-
form in Mexico: Genesis and Design Features. Washington, D.C.:
World Bank. 42 pages.
More focused on the details of the new program than is Espinosa-
Vega and Sinha (2001) (mentioned above).
Rodriguez, L. Jacobo. 1999. “In Praise and Criticism of Mexico’s
Pension Reform.” Policy Analysis, No. 340. Cato Institute. 15
pages.
A survey of Mexico’s reforms from the perspective of those who
believe in full privatization.
Sandeval, Héctor. 2004. “Analysis of the Pension Reform in
Mexico.” Actuarial Research Clearing House. Society of Actuar-
ies. http://www.soa.org. 52 pages.
The author examines the Mexican system, in particular the im-
pact of its Chilean style reforms.
Books and Articles
259
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Glossary
Add-on
An individual retirement account that would supplement the
beneﬁts from Social Security. Add-ons could be voluntary or mandatory.
They would not change the operations of the Social Security system.
Annuity  A contract that guarantees a series of payments to a retired per-
son in exchange for an original lump-sum purchase or investment. Annu-
ities are typically purchased from life insurance companies. Social Security
is not an annuity program, though it was designed to look like one.
Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME)
When an individual re-
tires, her or his past monthly earnings are adjusted to account for the rise
in average earnings that has occurred since that time. The Social Security
Administration uses an “average wage index” to make this adjustment.
The resulting AIME is used to calculate the amount of the Social Security
beneﬁt. 
Carve-out
An individual retirement account (IRA) that would replace
a portion of the beneﬁts from Social Security. Typically, a portion of the
worker’s Federal Insurance Contribution Act (FICA) contributions
would go into the IRA, not into Social Security. Accordingly, at the time
of retirement, the beneﬁt from Social Security would be smaller.
Clawback
A rebate demanded from upper-income retirees against
their anticipated pension beneﬁts. Above a set income threshold, a re-
tiree must pay back a portion of his or her beneﬁts to the government, re-
ducing the pension beneﬁt that will be received. The Canadian
clawback, for example, demands a repayment of 15 percent of all bene-
ﬁts above the established threshold. 
Consumer Price Index (CPI)
A measure of the average increase (or de-
crease) over time in the prices paid by an individual or family for a bas-
ket of consumer goods and services. The Social Security program uses
the U.S. Department of Labor’s CPI for Urban Consumers to make its
annual cost-of-living adjustment.
261
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA)
Each January, Social Security ben-
eﬁts are automatically increased to offset inﬂation. The increase is based
on the rise of the Consumer Price Index. The annual Social Security
COLAs began in 1975.
Covered Worker, Covered Employment
Occupations for which one
must pay the Social Security contribution, and for which one gains the
Social Security beneﬁt.
CPP/QPP
The Canada Pension Plan/Quebec Pension Plan. One of
Canada’s two major old-age pension programs.
Credits, Social Security Credits
A worker typically needs 40 credits to
be eligible for Social Security beneﬁts. A credit is accrued each time the
worker reaches a stipulated level of earnings (this level changes every
year). A worker may accrue four credits per year. “Social Security credit”
is essentially synonymous with the older terms “quarter” or “quarter of
coverage.”
Deﬁned-Beneﬁt versus Deﬁned-Contribution Pension Plans
In a de-
ﬁned-contribution plan, an individual contributes to the retirement sys-
tem. The contributions are used to buy ﬁnancial assets (typically bonds
or stocks). Upon retirement, the individual’s retirement beneﬁts are
based upon the rate of return of the assets that had been purchased over
the course of the individual’s working life. For example, assume that an
individual had contributed $500,000 to the system during her or his
working years and that, at the time of retirement, this investment had
grown to $1,000,000. The individual’s pension would then be drawn
from this $1,000,000. In a deﬁned-beneﬁt pension plan, there is no neces-
sary connection between the contributions paid in and the beneﬁts paid
out. In a deﬁned-beneﬁts plan, an individual contributes to the retire-
ment system, but the beneﬁts that she or he will receive at retirement are
based not upon the returns to the contributions that were made but upon
a contract or formula that stipulates the size of the beneﬁt. The U.S. So-
cial Security program is a deﬁned-beneﬁt plan, with each retiree’s
monthly pension amount set by law, not by the level of contribution.
Dependency Ratio  The number of individuals who may draw from
Social Security divided by the number who contribute to it. This is usu-
ally calculated as the number of Americans over the age of 65 divided by
the number of Americans between the ages of 20 and 64. (Some authori-
ties prefer to use ages 15 and 64).
Early Retirement
Workers may opt to retire and collect Social Security
beneﬁts as early as age 62. If they do so, they will receive a lower
monthly beneﬁt than if they had waited until their full retirement age. 
Entitlement Program  A program of government beneﬁts to which an
individual has a legal right, provided that that individual meets the eli-
262
Glossary
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

gibility requirements speciﬁed in the law that authorizes the program.
The amount of the beneﬁts is not decided at the discretion of Congress; it
is stipulated in the law itself. Social Security is an entitlement program.
Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA)
The payroll tax that
funds Social Security and Medicare, FICA was enacted in 1939. The tax is
currently 12.4 percent of covered income. One-half of the FICA tax is di-
rectly paid by the worker; the other half is paid by the employer.
Fully Funded
A retirement program for which sufﬁcient money is put
aside each year to pay for all of the future beneﬁts is called a fully
funded program. Deﬁned-contribution plans are fully funded.
General Revenues
Government receipts collected from income, excise,
luxury, and other taxes, tolls, or customs that are not dedicated by law to
any certain purpose are placed in the General Fund of the Treasury. Con-
gress may appropriate these revenues, at its discretion, for any constitu-
tional purpose.
Individual Retirement Account (IRA)  Generally, IRAs are tax-ad-
vantaged investment plans into which individuals can place their own
savings during their working years. The funds can be withdrawn at the
time of their retirement. The choice of how to invest the monies in the
IRA is left to the worker. IRAs have been proposed, under innumerable
plans, to supplement or replace the traditional Social Security monthly
benefit payment. These plans are often called plans to “privatize” So-
cial Security.
Means Testing
An administrative or investigative process to deter-
mine if an individual is eligible to receive money from a government
program. The “test” usually is a requirement that the individual has an
income or ﬁnancial assets below a stipulated level. Social Security has no
such process or requirement and hence is not a means-tested program.
Notional Deﬁned Contributions
A pay-as-you-go pension system in
which each worker is given an individual account into which his or her
retirement beneﬁts accrue. These are termed “notional” because the ac-
count does not contain that worker’s actual contributions. It is simply an
accounting device that records the claims held on the system’s assets by
each worker. At retirement, the worker receives that claim, distributed
over annual or monthly increments. Sweden was the ﬁrst country to de-
velop a pension system based on this principle.
Old Age Security (OAS)  Canada’s oldest pension program. It is uni-
versal and funded from the general revenues.
Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI)
The ofﬁcial
name of the U.S. Social Security program. It includes the Disability In-
surance program and the Retirement and Survivors Insurance program.
Glossary
263
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Pay as You Go
A social security system that is funded by collecting
taxes from workers and then making direct payments to retired persons
from those taxes. The U.S. Social Security system has followed this prin-
ciple since 1939.
Payroll Tax
A tax on a worker’s earnings. The tax may be paid directly
by the worker, or indirectly by the worker’s employer (see Federal Insur-
ance Contribution Act).
Ponzi Scheme  A Ponzi scheme involves convincing individuals that
they will receive a great investment return on money they give to the or-
ganizer of the scheme. That organizer then convinces additional in-
vestors to give money; that money is paid to the old investors, meeting
the promises made to them. The scheme collapses when no more new in-
vestors can be found, and the organizer then has no money with which
to continue paying on the promises made.
Prefunding
A policy of increasing the revenues going into the Social
Security Trust Fund before its anticipated date of exhaustion. Enacting
such a proposal would enable the Social Security program to continue to
pay its promised beneﬁts to each worker for many more years, if not in-
deﬁnitely.
Price Indexation
A method of revising an earlier year’s or month’s ﬁ-
nancial or monetary ﬁgure to account for the rise in prices (i.e., inﬂation)
that has occurred since that time. The Consumer Price Index is the most
commonly used index for this purpose. It is used to index the Social Se-
curity COLA. 
Primary Insurance Amount
The formal title for the monthly Social Se-
curity beneﬁt paid to a retired (or disabled) worker. It is calculated from
the worker’s average indexed monthly earnings.
Progressive, Progressivity
A tax or beneﬁts system in which the rate of
taxation increases (or of beneﬁts decreases)  as one’s income rises. Under
such a system, wealthier individuals either pay a larger percentage of
their income than do poorer individuals or receive relatively lower bene-
ﬁts than do poorer individuals. The purpose of progressive taxation is to
redistribute wealth or program beneﬁts to those with the lowest in-
comes. The U.S. income tax system is progressive, as higher tax brackets
are imposed on larger incomes. The Social Security system is progressive
as well, as higher beneﬁts (as a percentage of monthly earnings) are paid
to those with lower earnings.
Rate of Return
The gain or loss from an investment, such as common
stocks or bonds, over a speciﬁc period of time. The annual rate of return
is the gain or loss over a period of one year.
Retirement Earnings Test
For most of the history of Social Security, the
monthly beneﬁt was reduced for those individuals who continued to
264
Glossary
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

work after their retirement age. Currently, only workers who take early
retirement and continue to earn more than a stipulated amount see their
monthly beneﬁts reduced.
Social Security Administration (SSA)
Headquartered in Baltimore,
with 1,300 ﬁeld ofﬁces and more than 60,000 employees, the SSA man-
ages the Social Security program. It issues Social Security numbers, man-
ages the Trust Funds, and administers the Disability Insurance program
and the Supplemental Security Income program in addition to the Re-
tirement and Survivors Insurance program.
Social Security Reserve Account  In the original Social Security pro-
gram, worker contributions were paid into this fund. The fund invested
the contributions in U.S. Treasury securities and then returned the con-
tributions, with interest, to the worker in the form of monthly payments
at the time of his or her retirement. The fund was eliminated in the 1939
amendments to the Social Security Act.
Social Security Trust Fund  There are two Social Security Trust Funds,
one for the Old-Age and Survivors Program and a second for the Dis-
ability Program. Each is primarily an accounting device to keep track of
the contributions to Social Security and the beneﬁts paid out. The exis-
tence of the funds allows the Social Security Administration to pay bene-
ﬁts without the need for speciﬁc legislation to do so. Monies that remain
after beneﬁts have been paid are invested in Treasury securities. Note
that, in spite of the name, the Social Security Trust Fund is neither legally
nor in its operations anything like a private trust fund. It does not hold
or manage a stock of ﬁnancial assets.
Steady State Financing
The level of taxation necessary to guarantee
that the pension system can pay all the beneﬁts that have been guaran-
teed to retirees and future retirees.
Superannuation
The name of the Australian principle that all employ-
ers must offer pension programs for their employees.
Survivor, Survivor’s Beneﬁts
If a recipient of Social Security dies, cer-
tain family members continue to receive beneﬁts. With exceptions, these
include the spouse of the deceased, children under age 18, and parents
(if the deceased provided for their support).
Sustainability Factor
An automatic reduction of pension beneﬁts that
occurs should the dependency ratio of workers to retirees decline. It is a
principle of the German retirement system.
Glossary
265
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Index
267
Note: t. indicates table; italic page
number indicates ﬁgure.
AARP (1999 ff.), 51, 72, 201–202.
See also American
Association of Retired
Persons
Add-ons, 58–59, 66
United Kingdom, 104
See also Riester Pensions
Advisory Board. See Social
Security Advisory Board
Advisory Council, 178
report of 1994–1996 council
(excerpt), 183–186
Allende, Salvador, 106
Alliance for Retired Americans,
202
Alliance for Worker Retirement
Security, 202
Altmeyer, Arthur, 13, 40
biographical sketch, 133–134
American Academy of Actuaries,
203
American Association of Retired
Persons (AARP, pre-1999),
21, 25. See also AARP
American Council of Life
Insurers, 203
American Enterprise Institute for
Public Policy Research, 213
American Federation of Labor
(AFL), 9
American Federation of Labor
and Congress of Industrial
Organizations (AFL-CIO),
139–140, 203–204
American Federation of State,
County and Municipal
Employees (AFSCME), 204
American Savings Education
Council, 204
Americans United for Change,
204, 205, 211
Anticipated funding problem, 28,
31, 71–72
and dependency ratio, 36–37,
37
and nature of beneﬁts formula,
37–38
no change, as solution to crisis,
38, 70–71
proposed solutions. See Pay-as-
you go system; Prefunding
proposals; Privatization
proposals
uncertainties in calculating, 38
See also Trust Fund
Australia
Age Pension program, 88, 89,
90–92
and means testing, 88–89
Superannuation Guarantee
(mandated employer
pension programs), 89–92
Average indexed monthly
earnings (AIME), 27, 46
Bachelet, Michelle, 111
Baker, James, 24
Ball, Robert, 45
biographical sketch, 134
Beneﬁts
calculation of, 27–28
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Beneﬁts (continued)
cut in (Reagan era), 23–24
distinction between tax and, 8
formula, and effect on Trust
Fund, 37–38
German cuts, 84–85, 86
Germany, 82, 83
indexed to wage increases,
37–38, 44
reduction in, as solution to
funding problem, 49, 51–52
See also Survivors beneﬁts
Bennett, Bob, 47–48
Beveridge, William, 99–100
biographical sketch, 135
Bildt, Carl, 135–136
Birth rate, 35–36, 36
Bismarck, Otto von, 2
Blair, Tony, 103
Boskin Commission, 44–45
Brookings Institution, 213–214
Bush, George W.
biographical sketch, 136–137
proposed privatizing of Social
Security, 55–56, 59, 60, 61,
66
on proposed reform of Social
Security, 175–177
proposed wage index revision,
46
Campaign for America’s
Future/Institute for
America’s Future, 205
Canada, 76
Canadian Pension Plan (CPP),
77–82
COLA issues, 77–78
CPP as prefunded program
(steady state ﬁnancing),
78–79
CPP Investment Board, 80,
81–82
establishment of OAS, 76
OAS clawback provision, 77
OAS residence testing, 76–77
Old Age Security (OAS)
program, 76–77
Quebec Pension Plan (QPP), 77
rates of return for Canadian
and U.S. pension fund
investments, 81t.
Cardozo, Benjamin, 11–12, 137
Carter, Jimmy, 22
Carve-outs, 59–60, 105
United Kingdom, 99, 101–105
Cato Institute, 214
Center for American Progress, 214
Center for Economic and Policy
Research, 215
Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities, 215
Century Foundation, 205
Chile
administrative costs of
privatization system,
110–111
AFPs (administradora de fandos
de pensiones), 107
basic solidarity pension
(minimum pension), 108
options for collecting one’s
pension, 108
previous pay-as-you-go
system, 105–106
as privatization model, 105
privatization scheme, 106–111
recognition bonds, 106
risk and fairness issues,
109–110
transition costs for
privatization system, 109
Church, Frank, 21
Civil War pensions (U.S.), 4
Clinton, Bill
biographical sketch, 138
proposal to prefund from
general revenues, 39, 40
proposal to prefund with stock
market investments, 40–43
proposed universal savings
accounts, 58, 59
268
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

on saving Social Security,
173–175
Club for Growth, 205
Coalition for American Financial
Security, 206
Coalition for the Modernization
and Protection of America’s
Social Security (CoMPASS),
202, 206
Coalition for the Modernization
and Protection of
America’s Social Security,
206
Coalition to Preserve Retirement
Security, 206
Cohen, Wilbur, 138–139
COLAs. See Cost-of-living
adjustments
Commission to Strengthen Social
Security (2001 report,
excerpt), 186–191
Commissions, 178. See also Boskin
Commission; Commission
to Strengthen Social
Security; National
Commission on Social
Security Reform
Committee for Economic
Development, 206–207
Committee on Economic Security,
6, 7–8
Concord Coalition, 46, 207
Congress. See U.S. Congress
Constitution. See U.S.
Constitution
Consumer Price Index (CPI), 20,
22–23, 44
Cost-of-living adjustments
(COLAs), 19–21
Canada, 77–78
and CPI, 22–23, 44
and inﬂation, 44–45
Council of Economic Advisors,
198–199
CPI. See Consumer Price Index
Credits, 26
Crisis in Social Security. See
Anticipated funding
problem
Cruikshank, Nelson, 139–140
Cummings, Homer, 6
Deﬁned contribution programs,
92
Sweden, 93, 94–96, 97–99
DeLay, Tom, 53
Demographic factors, 34–37
declining birth rate, 35–36, 36
dependency ratio (workers to
retirees), 23, 36–37, 37
immigration, 35–36
increased life expectancy, 35,
50
Disability Insurance Trust Fund,
19
Earnings test, 27
Economic Policy Institute,
215–216
Eisenhower, Dwight, 18–19
on support for and expansion
of Social Security, 172–173
Employee Beneﬁt Research
Institute, 216
Federal Insurance Contributions
Act (FICA), 8
FICA tax, 8, 26
increase, as solution to funding
problem, 39, 49–50, 52–53
Folsom, Marion, 140–141
Ford, Gerald, 22
FreedomWorks, 207–208
Friedman, Milton, 106
biographical sketch, 141
Fully funded pensions, 92. See also
Sweden
Funding problem. See Anticipated
funding problem
Future of Social Security. See
Anticipated funding
problem
Index
269
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Germany
demographic pressures, 82
effect of uniﬁcation, 83–84
as ﬁrst country with social
security program, 1–2, 82,
83
generous existing pension
beneﬁts (NPIP), 82, 83
National Pension Insurance
Plan (NPIP), 85
planned beneﬁt cuts (NPIP),
84–85, 86
possible problems with
reforms, 86–87
supplementary Riester
Pensions, 85–86, 150–151
Gompers, Samuel, 9
Gordon, Robert, 70
Gore, Thomas, 11
Governmental institutions and
organizations. See
Advisory Council;
Commissions; Council of
Economic Advisors; Office
of Management and
Budget; presidents’ names;
Social Security
Administration; Social
Security Advisory Board;
U.S. Congress; U.S.
Supreme Court
Gray Panthers, 208
Greenspan, Alan, 24, 41, 42
biographical sketch, 141–142
Greenspan Commission. See
National Commission on
Social Security Reform
Hastert, Dennis, 53
Health insurance proposals, 7–8,
17
Helvering v. Davis, 11, 137, 162
opinion (text), 163–167
Heritage Foundation, 216
Hoover, Herbert, 5
Hopkins, Harry, 6
Immigration, 35–36
Industrial Revolution, and
concept of retirement, 2–3
Institute for Policy
Innovation/Alliance for
Retirement Prosperity, 208
Interest groups, 201–212
Investment Company Institute,
208–209
Keating, Paul, 142–143
Kerrey, Bob, 44, 45
Kerry, John, 50
LaFollette, Robert, 14, 39
Lewis, Sinclair, 6
Life expectancy, 35, 50
Lobbying organizations, 201–212
Long, Huey
biographical sketch, 143–144
ﬁlibusters against Social
Security, 11
and Share the Wealth proposal,
5–6, 8–9
Long, Russell, 21
Martin, Paul, Jr., 78
biographical sketch, 144–145
Means testing, 48, 87–88
Australia, 88–89
Sweden, 97
U.S. aversion to, 20, 53–54
Medicaid, 19
Medicare, 19
and FICA tax, 26
Mills, Wilbur, 21–22
biographical sketch, 145–146
Morgenthau, Henry Jr., 6
MoveOn.org, 209
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick, 44, 45
biographical sketch, 146
Moynihan Commission. See
Commission to Strengthen
Social Security
Mulroney, Brian, 78
Murray, Charles, 69
270
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Myers, Robert J., 146–147
National Academy of Social
Insurance, 216–217
National Center for Policy
Analysis, 209
National Commission on Social
Security Reform
1983 report (excerpts), 178–182
and Social Security Advisory
Board, 200
National Committee to Preserve
Social Security and
Medicare, 209–210
National Federation of
Independent Business
(NFIB), 25, 210
National Organization for Women
(NOW), 210
Nixon, Richard, 20, 21
O’Neill, Thomas P. “Tip,” 24
OASDI Trust Fund. See Trust
Fund
Ofﬁce of Management and
Budget, 198
Ofﬁce of the Actuary, 22–23, 25
Old Age, Survivors, and
Disability Insurance
Program (OASDI), 19
Old-Age and Survivors Insurance
Program (OASI), 15, 17–18
Trust Fund, 32
Old-age pension programs
and American work ethic, 3–4
Australia, 87–92
Canada, 76–82
Chile, 105–111
Civil War pensions, 4
comparing programs of U.S.
and other countries, 75–76,
112
early development of, 1–2
and effect of Great Depression,
4–6
Germany, 82–87
as modern phenomenon, 2–3
Sweden, 92–99
United Kingdom, 99–105
worldwide diversity of
approaches, 75, 111–112
See also Social Security
Pay-as-you-go system, 32, 43–44
changing beneﬁts formulas,
44–48
development of, 12–15
and proposed incremental
changes, 48–54
as solution to funding
problem, 44–54
Pension programs. See Old-age
pension programs
Perkins, Frances, 6, 11
biographical sketch, 147–148
Pickle, James Jerrell (Jake), 23, 25
biographical sketch, 148–149
Piñera, José, 149
Pinochet, Augusto, 106
biographical sketch, 149–150
Prefunding, Canada, 78–79
Prefunding proposals, 39
funding from general
revenues, 39–40
investing in stock market,
40–43
Price indexing. See Wage indexing
Primary Insurance Amount (PIA),
27
adjustment as solution to
funding problem, 45–46
Privatization. See Chile; Deﬁned
contribution programs;
Fully funded pensions;
Privatization proposals
(U.S.)
Privatization proposals (U.S.),
54–55, 57–58
add-ons, 58–59, 66
and adverse selection, 61
carve-outs, 59–60
complete privatization, 68–70
Index
271
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

Privatization proposals (U.S.),
(continued)
difﬁculty of breaking up
current system, 56–57
G. W. Bush proposal, 55–56, 59,
60, 61, 66
perceived beneﬁts of, 63–66
perceived liabilities of, 66–68
and percentage of FICA
contributions allowed, 62
and progressivity, 62–63
and risk, 61–62, 67–68
voluntary vs. mandatory,
60–61
Progress for America, 210–211
ProtectYourCheck.org, 211
Reagan, Ronald, and
administration, 22
and cut in beneﬁts, 23–24
and National Commission on
Social Security Reform, 178
Reforms (proposed or enacted).
See Advisory Council;
Commissions; and under
presidents’ names; Social
Security.
Reserve Account, 10, 12, 13
investment in U.S. bonds, 12
and shift to pay-as-you-go
plan, 12–15
See also Trust Fund
Retirement, as modern concept,
2–3
Retirement age, 26–27
increase in, as solution to
funding problem, 48–49,
50–51
Riester, Walter, 85
biographical sketch, 150–151
and Riester Pensions, 85–86,
150–151
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 5, 137
on basic principles of proposed
Social Security (1934),
167–169
biographical sketch, 151–152
and development of Social
Security, 5–11
“Economic Bill of Rights” (text,
1944), 170–171
on means testing, 54
preference for insurance-like
program, 7
on proposed Social Security
Act (1935), 169–170
Rubinow, Isaac, 152
Sanders, Bernie, 45
Save Our Social Security, 24
Securities Industry and Financial
Markets Association, 211
60 Plus Organization, 211
Smith, Howard W., 10
Social Security
and American work ethic, 
3–4
and continual revisions, 1, 12,
19–20
current description, 25–28
delayed development of, 3
development of pay-as-you-go
system, 12–15
distinction between tax and
beneﬁt, 8
eligibility, 17–19, 25–26
exclusions, 10–11, 16, 17
future of, 28
history of compromises, 1
and insurance principles, 7,
69–70
lack of means testing, 20
1939 reforms, 12–16
1950 reforms, 16–19
1972 reforms (COLAs), 19–21
1980s crisis and reforms,
23–25
number of people receiving
old-age beneﬁts, 31
success of, 31
and workplace contributions,
9–10
272
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

See also Anticipated funding
problem; Ofﬁce of the
Actuary; Old-age pension
programs; Pay-as-you go
system; Prefunding
proposals; Privatization
proposals; Reserve Account;
Roosevelt, Franklin D.;
Trust Fund
Social Security Act of 1935,
161–162
development of, 8–10
exclusions, 10–11
legal challenges to, 11–12. See
also Helvering v. Davis
passage of, 11
preamble (text), 162
Social Security Administration,
11, 199–200
Social Security Advisory Board,
200
Steward Machine Co. v. Davis, 11
Stockman, David, 23–24
biographical sketch, 152–153
Supreme Court. See U.S. Supreme
Court
Survivors beneﬁts, 12–13, 14, 28
Sweden
annuity divisor, 95, 96
automatic balance mechanism,
96
folkpension, 93
individual retirement
accounts, 96–97
means testing and guaranteed
pension, 97
and notional deﬁned
contributions (fully funded
plus pay-as-you-go), 93,
94–96, 97–99
pension reforms (1994 –2003),
93–97
Taft, Robert, 18, 39
Thatcher, Margaret, 101–102
biographical sketch, 153–154
Think tanks, 212–217
Townsend, Francis
biographical sketch, 154–155
pension proposal, 6, 8–9, 16
Truman, Harry S, 17–18
biographical sketch, 155–156
on proposed health insurance
program, 171–172
on Social Security expansion,
171–172
Trust Fund, 14–15, 26
as accounting device, 33
anticipated deﬁcit, 33–34, 34
and beneﬁts formula, 37–38
and declining birth rate, 35–36,
36
and demographic changes,
34–37
and dependency ratio, 36–37,
37
description of, 32–33
development of, 43–44
and fears of insolvency, 22–23,
25, 191
and immigration, 35–36
and increased life expectancy,
35, 50
rates of return for Canadian
and U.S. pension fund
investments, 81t.
reasons for anticipated deﬁcit,
34–38
requirement to invest only in
Treasury securities, 40
and risk and return of various
ﬁnancial assets, 41t.
Status of the Social Security
and Medicare Programs
(text of Social Security
summary), 194–195
2007 Annual Trustees Report
(text of summary), 
191–194
See also Anticipated funding
problem; Reserve Account
Turner, Adrian, 156
Index
273
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 
212
U.S. Congress
House Committee on Ways
and Means, 197–198
Senate Committee on Finance,
198
U.S. Constitution
and debate on Social Security,
8, 9
silence on social security, 3
U.S. Supreme Court
and New Deal programs, 8
on Social Security Act of 1935,
11–12
United Kingdom, 99
add-on scheme, 104
Basic State Pension (BSP),
99–100
carve-outs for personal
pension schemes, 101–105
frequent changes in pension
system, 99, 101
National Insurance
Contribution (NIC), 
99–100
pension credit for low earners
or those not covered by
other pensions, 101
secondary pensions (SERPS
and S2P), 100–101
Thatcher reforms, 101–102
Universal savings accounts (USA
accounts), 58
Urban Institute, 217
USA Next, 212
Vandenberg, Arthur, 13
biographical sketch, 157
Wage indexing, 37–38, 44
proposed adjustment as
solution to funding
problem, 46–48
See also Average indexed
monthly earnings
Wagner, Robert, 157–158
Wallace, Henry, 6
White House—Council of
Economic Advisors,
198–199
Winant, John, 158–159
Witte, Edwin, 159
274
Index
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

About the Author
Steven G. Livingston is a professor of political science at Middle
Tennessee State University, and a senior research associate in its
Business and Economic Research Center. He holds a Ph.D. from
Harvard University. Livingston is the author of Student’s Guide to
Landmark Congressional Laws on Social Security and Welfare and of
numerous articles on political economy and public affairs.
275
www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

