
U.S. TRADE ISSUES

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner
Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry
Campaign and Election Reform, Glenn H. Utter and Ruth Ann 
Strickland
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine 
Vaughan
Corporate Crime, Richard D. Hartley
DNA Technology, David E. Newton 
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James 
Clay Moltz
Obesity, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Renewable and Alternative Energy Resources, Zachary A. Smith and 
Katrina D. Taylor
Rich and Poor in America, Geoffrey Gilbert
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Social Security, Steven G. Livingston
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
find the information they need to have a better understanding of 
the social, political, environmental, and economic issues facing 
the world today.

This page intentionally left blank

U.S. TRADE ISSUES
A Reference Handbook
Alfred E. Eckes, Jr.
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright 2009 by ABC-CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Eckes, Alfred E., 1942–
 U.S. trade issues : a reference handbook / Alfred E. Eckes, Jr.
   p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-59884-199-2 (hard copy : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-59884-200-5 
(ebook) 1. United States— Commercial policy—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
2. United States— Commerce—History—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 
I. Title. 
 HF1455.E35 2009
 382'.30973—dc22   2009020942
13 12 11 10 09  1 2 3 4 5
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook.
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America

To my wife, Sylvia,
Who introduced me to some of the most beautiful and 
soothing classical music— especially the work of Norwegian 
composer Edvard Grieg— as she practiced for forthcoming 
concerts and I worked on this trade-policy book.

This page intentionally left blank

ix
Contents
List of Tables, xiii
Preface, xv
1 
Background and History, 1
Factors Shaping the Trade Debate, 2
Free Trade, 2
Protectionism and Fair Trade, 4
Trade Surpluses and Deficits, 6
Trade Patterns, 8
Trade Politics, 9
Historical Overview, 11
American System of High Tariffs, 12
Promoting Recovery and Reciprocal Trade, 13
Multilateral Trade Liberalization, 15
Kennedy Round, 17
Fast Track and the Tokyo Round, 18
Reagan’s Free-Trade Initiatives, 19
North American Free Trade Agreement, 21
Uruguay Round—WTO, 24
The Battle of Seattle, 26
Admitting China to the WTO, 27
Regional and Bilateral Free Trade, 28
Summary, 31
References, 32
2 
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 37
Background to the Debate, 37
Future Trade Priorities, 39
Free Trade Fault Line, 40
Future Trade Negotiations, 45

x  Contents
Pending Agreements, 48
U.S.–Colombia FTA, 49
U.S.–Panama FTA, 50
U.S.–South Korea FTA, 50
WTO Negotiations, 52
Bilateral and Regional Trade Negotiations, 54
Debating the Gains and Losses from Trade, 56
Responding to China, 58
Cuban Trade, 62
Assisting Trade Dislocated Workers, 63
Trade and Human Rights, 64
Trade and Environment, 67
Trade and Sovereignty, 70
Trade and Safety, 71
Enforcing U.S. Trade Laws, 74
Trade and Economic Recovery, 77
Conclusion, 78
References, 79
3 
Worldwide Perspective, 91
Contemporary Trade Patterns, 91
Leading Trading Partners and Strategies, 97
European Union (EU), 97
China, 99
Japan, 100
Canada, 100
Mexico, 101
Russia, 102
Brazil, 103
Australia, 104
India, 105
South Africa, 106
World Trade Organization (WTO), 107
Tokyo Round, 108
Uruguay Round—WTO, 109
WTO Leadership Transition, 112
Cairns Group, 113
Group of Twenty, 114
Group of Thirty-Three, 114
WTO Dispute Settlement, 115
Alternative Trade Strategies—Bilateralism 
and Regionalism, 116

Contents  xi
European Union (EU), 117
Japan, 119
Canada, 120
China, 120
India, 121
Brazil, 121
Effects of RTAs, 122
Conclusion, 123
References, 123
4 
Chronology, 129
5 
Biographical Sketches, 155
Max Baucus, 155
Kevin Brady, 156
Sherrod C. Brown, 157
Dave Camp, 158
Lou Dobbs, 159
Timothy Geithner, 160
Charles (Chuck) Grassley, 161
Alexander Hamilton, 162
Cordell Hull, 163
Ron Kirk, 164
Pascal Lamy, 165
Sander (Sandy) Levin, 166
Friedrich List, 167
Gary Locke, 169
William McKinley, 170
Justin Smith Morrill, 171
Henry (Hank) Paulson, 172
Nancy Pelosi, 173
Raul Prebisch, 175
Charles Rangel, 176
David Ricardo, 177
Susan Schwab, 178
Adam Smith, 179
Reed Smoot, 180
Robert S. Strauss, 181
Lori Wallach, 183
Sir Eric Wyndham White, 184
Robert Zoellick, 185

xii  Contents
6 
Data and Documents, 187
International Comparisons, 189
U.S. Trade Indicators, 200
National Labor Committee Testimony on “Sweatshop” 
Practices, 209
U.S.– China Economic and Security Review Commission 
Report, 212
The U.S.–China Trade and Economic Relationship, 212
Conclusions, 213
Ambassador Carla Hills on the Future of U.S. Trade Policy, 218
Erosion of the Bipartisan Consensus Supporting 
Open Trade, 218
Making the Case for Trade, 219
Reducing Job Anxiety, 221
We Must Learn from History, 222
Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky on the Future 
of U.S. Trade Policy, 224
The Trade Agenda, 224
Procedures: “Comprehensive Rounds” and Fast-Track, 229
U.S. House of Representatives Joint Letter 
to President Obama, 230
President Obama’s Trade Agenda, 235
President Obama’s Policy Priorities, 237
Conclusion, 241
References, 241
7 
Directory of Organizations, 243
8 
Resources, 279
Books, 279
Government Documents, 295
U.S. Government, 295
Other Governments, 297
Intergovernmental Agencies, 298
Periodicals, Journals, and Newsletters, 300
Films and Video Recordings, 303
Book, 303
Films and Video Recordings, 303
Databases and Internet Resources, 304
Glossary, 327
Index, 333
About the Author, 341

xiii
List of Tables
6.1 
The 20 Most Populous Countries Compared, 190
6.2 
Shares of World Exports of Merchandise (%), 191
6.3 
Shares of World Imports of Merchandise (%), 192
6.4 
Shares of World Foreign Direct Investment Outward FDI 
Stock (in %), 193
6.5 
Shares of World Foreign Direct Investment Inward 
FDI Stock, 193
6.6 
Reserves of Foreign Exchange and Gold, 195
6.7 
Current Account Deficits and Surpluses (in U.S. Dollars), 196
6.8  
Country Comparisons: External Debt, 197
6.9 
World Oil Consumption (Barrels per Day), 198
6.10 World Oil Proved Reserves, 198
6.11 
World Oil Production (Barrels per Day), 199
6.12 Hourly Compensation Costs for Production Workers: 
In U.S. Dollars, 199
6.13 U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services (in Billions 
of U.S. Dollars), 200
6.14 U.S. Trade in Services by Major Category (in Billions of 
U.S. Dollars), 201
6.15 Top 15 Trading Partners of U.S., 2008 in Billions of U.S. 
Dollars (Goods), 202
6.16 Top 10 Countries with Which the U.S. Had a Trade 
Surplus in Goods, 2008, 203
6.17 Top 10 Countries with Which the U.S. Had a Trade 
Deficit in Goods, 2008, 203
6.18 U.S. Crude Oil and Petroleum Products Net Imports 
(Thousands of Barrels per Day), 204
6.19 U.S. Crude Oil and Petroleum Products Imports by 
Leading Suppliers (Thousands of Barrels per Day), 204

xiv List of Tables
6.20 Petroleum as a Share of Merchandise Trade Deficit (in 
Millions of U.S. Dollars), 205
6.21 U.S. Exports and Imports on a Principal End-Use Basis (in 
Billions of U.S. Dollars) (Not Seasonally Adjusted), 206
6.22 State Merchandise Exports to the World, 2008 (in Millions 
of U.S. Dollars), 207
6.23 Weekly Earnings of Production Workers, 1945–2008, 208
6.24 Employment and Earnings in U.S., 209

xv
Preface
A
s this book goes to press, the global economy is in the worst 
slump since the Great Depression of the 1930s. The Asian De-
velopment Bank says the world may have lost over $50 trillion 
in financial assets during the last year, equivalent to one year’s 
worth of world economic output (Asian 2009). The World Bank 
predicts that in 2009 global gross domestic product will decline 
for the first time since World War II. World trade is expected to 
record its greatest decline in 80 years (World Bank 2009).
The collapse of world trade has severely impacted nations 
everywhere. Developing countries, like China and India, which 
export manufactures and services to North America and Western 
Europe, have lost millions of jobs. In the United States and other 
high-income countries, the economic and financial crisis has had 
profound repercussions. Joblessness is mounting toward double-
digit levels, and the discontented are demanding greater govern-
ment regulation of the domestic and international economies. 
There is also growing pressure for governments to protect do-
mestic jobs with trade barriers, subsidies, and other procurement 
requirements.
In the United States the economic crisis is giving new life to 
an ongoing debate over trade policy. Critics of the current system 
claim U.S. trade policy has given priority to the interests of multi-
national corporations, and slighted the concerns of families, work-
ers, and ordinary citizens. They advocate a new trade-policy model 
that gives greater weight to labor, environmental, and safety is-
sues, and makes the country less dependent on foreign goods and 
foreign money to purchase those imports. Battling against this tide 
are proponents of the present rules-based world trading system. 
They seek to rally supporters of free trade and to sustain the 
 market-opening efforts of the post-World War II period.

xvi Preface
U.S. Trade Issues seeks to introduce a wide range of readers 
in high schools, colleges, and libraries to the key elements of the 
ongoing trade-policy debate. Government officials may find it 
a helpful one-volume synthesis. As a reference handbook, read-
ers will learn how to access the latest data and information about 
policy controversies from online sources—government and inter-
national agencies, lobbying and advocacy groups, and scholarly 
resources. Twenty years ago, when the author served on the U.S. 
International Trade Commission, the trade debate seemed rela-
tively uncomplicated. There were free traders, and protectionists, 
and others somewhere in between. Today, as a result of the glo-
balization of production and communications, there are many 
more shades of opinion on trade issues. In preparing this text, the 
author has made a deliberate effort to expose readers to as many 
sides of the contemporary debates as possible. Attention is given 
to the views of free traders and protectionists, and to Republicans 
and Democrats. But we also seek to give attention to business, 
consumers, environmentalists, labor, and others concerned with 
health and safety issues.
The volume has eight separate but interrelated chapters. 
Chapter 1 offers readers an introduction to the theories that under-
lie trade policy and a historical overview of U.S. policy debates 
from the 18th century to the present. It emphasizes how contem-
porary trade conflicts, involving China, the World Trade Orga-
nization (WTO), and the North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) have deep roots in American and international history. 
From the 18th century origins of the U.S. government, policymak-
ers in the executive branch and Congress, and other interested 
parties, have competed to shape U.S. trade policy. At times, those 
seeking to control access to the American market (“protection-
ists”) have prevailed, while in recent decades those eager to open 
the American market and gain access to foreign markets (“free 
traders”) have carried the day.
Chapter 2 examines the broad-ranging public debate over 
U.S. trade policy. It focuses on the leading controversies—
imbalances with China and East Asia, the future of multilateral 
negotiations in the WTO, and disputes over bilateral and regional 
free-trade agreements. It also considers emerging trade-related is-
sues, involving health and safety, labor standards, environmen-
tal protection, and efforts to make trade policy more beneficial to 
ordinary citizens. The chapter also considers the leading interest 

Preface xvii
groups seeking to influence the trade-policy process, among them 
lobbyists for multinational corporations, domestic businesses, or-
ganized labor, and consumer and environmental groups.
In Chapter 3, we provide a worldwide perspective on the trade 
policy debate, examining trade patterns among major nations and 
regions, and the strategies of key governments. The multilateral 
WTO trading system—its accomplishments and shortcomings—
also receives attention, as does the recent trend to negotiate bilat-
eral and regional trading agreements.
The next five chapters provide important supplementary in-
formation. In Chapter 4, readers can find a concise chronology of 
significant events in trade history. Chapter 5 provides short bio-
graphical sketches of some of the most important individuals in 
the trade-policy debate. They include key decision makers in the 
executive branch and Congress, and with international institutions. 
Chapter 6 offers an introduction to selected trade-related data 
obtained from domestic and international sources. It also pro-
vides several documents, selected to illustrate the different points 
of view in the ongoing debate, as well as the perspective of the 
incumbent Obama administration.
In Chapter 7, we present a directory of government and pri-
vate organizations with an interest in U.S. trade policy. Included 
are some of the most important lobbying groups, as well as 
government agencies in the United States, and selected foreign 
international organizations. Readers eager to follow the latest 
develop ments have only to access the Web sites of these organiza-
tions. Finally, Chapter 8 provides various print and nonprint re-
sources, including visual materials. This listing includes lobbying 
groups and governmental organizations (including foreign gov-
ernments and international organizations) that provide informa-
tion and perspectives on trade-policy issues.
This handbook also contains a glossary of key trade terms in-
tended to introduce readers to some of the technical terminology 
of trade, tariffs, and negotiations.
References
Asian Development Bank. 2009, March 9. “Global Financial Market Losses 
Reach $50 Trillion, Says Study.” Accessed March 2009 at http://www.adb.
org/Media/Articles/2009/12818-global-financial-crisis/default.asp.

xviii Preface
World Bank. 2009, March 8. Swimming Against the Tide: How Developing 
Countries Are Coping with the Global Crisis, 1. Accessed March 
2009 at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/NEWS/Resources/
swimmingagainstthetide-march2009.pdf.

1
1
Background and History
C
ontemporary trade-policy controversies, involving China, the 
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and the 
World Trade Organization (WTO), have deep roots in Ameri-
can and international history. Since the first days of the American 
Republic, the legislative and executive branches of the U.S. gov-
ernment have struggled to control trade policy and the trade-policy 
process. At times, these conflicts reflected divergent sectional and 
partisan, economic interests. In the 19th century, for example, 
southern Democrats favored low tariffs on imports so that for-
eign markets would remain open for its agricultural exports. But 
northern Republicans wanted high tariffs on imports to protect 
incipient domestic manufacturing from European competition. In 
more recent decades, the struggles to shape U.S. trade policy have 
frequently become more complex—involving more economic sec-
tors and a wider variety of interest groups. Companies actively 
involved in international business have sought to open world 
markets and lower U.S. trade restrictions. But firms threatened 
by imports, such as textile producers and labor unions, have at-
tempted to limit access to the American market. Pressure for U.S. 
import restrictions tends to rise sharply during world economic 
recessions when other governments often subsidize exports in ef-
forts to prop up employment.
In recent years, consumer and environmental interests joined 
the debate, calling attention to environmental, labor, and safety 
aspects of trade policy. On many occasions in the past, ideals and 
national security interests have also impacted trade policy. Gov-
ernment officials and the public attempted to use trade levers to 
achieve noneconomic objectives. They sought to assist Cold War 

2 Background and History
allies, and to promote human rights and opportunities for disad-
vantaged peoples.
This chapter revisits some of the most significant trade dis-
putes in more than two centuries of government, including 
American efforts to shape the international trading system for 
the benefit of its national security and commercial interests. It be-
gins by introducing readers to factors that shape American trade 
debates. These include free trade and protectionism, trade defi-
cits and currency rates, trade patterns with other countries, and 
politics. The last factor involves the complex interplay of interest 
groups, political parties, public opinion, and relations between 
Congress and the executive branch. Finally, the chapter offers a 
chronological overview of major developments. It considers the 
rise and decline of the American system of protection, reciprocal 
trade, the multilateral trading system, and the new emphasis on 
using bilateral and regional free-trade initiatives to structure the 
global economy.
Factors Shaping the Trade Debate
Free Trade
A good place to begin is with the economist’s case for unrestricted, 
or free, trade. To an economist, free trade means the international 
exchange of goods without barriers like tariffs and quotas. The 
term originated as a reaction to 18th-century mercantilism. Eu-
ropean leaders of that era sought to use monopolies, subsidies, 
and government regulations to control trade for the purpose of 
enhancing national wealth and power. But in 1776, Scottish phi-
losopher Adam Smith challenged the case for mercantilism. In 
The Wealth of Nations, he argued for removing barriers to expand 
trade. Smith’s theory of absolute advantage involved an interna-
tional division of labor. Nations specialized in producing different 
products, improved their productivity through larger scale opera-
tions, and exchanged their surpluses.
In 1817, David Ricardo, an English stockbroker, expanded 
on this theory to show how a country could benefit from imports. 
In his theory of comparative advantage, Ricardo explained why 
nations should specialize in items in which they have cost advan-
tages, thus enhancing global wealth and consumer gains. Ricardo 
presented his important insights with a simple static model—one 

Factors Shaping the Trade Debate 3
with only two countries and two products. Using arithmetic, he 
easily explained how if Great Britain specialized in the production 
of cloth and Portugal in wine, the two countries could engage in 
mutually beneficial exchange. Total production would be greater 
than if each country sought to produce both products.
The case for free trade holds up even when one country is 
more efficient in the production of both products. It also applies 
when more countries and products are added to the model. Free 
traders such as the late Nobel laureate Milton Friedman have 
insisted that free trade is advantageous even if practiced unilat-
erally (Friedman 1962, 73). Consumers gain, and enhance their 
own prosperity, when they spend their earnings as they like (Bou-
dreaux 2007).
Critics of Ricardo’s free-trade model note that the economic 
case rests on certain unrealistic assumptions. Among them is the 
assumption that only goods cross national borders, while capi-
tal and people do not. In the global economy of the 21st century, 
money moves instantaneously, at the click of a computer key. With 
jet travel, corporations move work and professionals around the 
world where they are needed. Even low-skilled workers, such as 
agricultural workers and maids, go abroad in search of jobs. Often 
they remit substantial portions of their earnings to family mem-
bers at home. It is arguable that if factors of production (labor 
and capital) move internationally, countries that have the greatest 
absolute advantage will obtain the benefits and others will lose 
(Roberts 2003).
Ricardo’s economic model also assumes that within coun-
tries the factors of production shift easily and swiftly from one 
use to another. Thus, the wine and textile workers of Great Britain 
and Portugal moved from one line of production to another as 
each country specialized in exporting products in which it had 
a comparative advantage. In practice, workers are sometimes re-
luctant, or unable, to leave home to take advantage of economic 
opportunities.
Basic free trade models have several other shortcomings. In 
the models, governments do not twist comparative advantages 
with subsidies, currency manipulation, or other interventions. 
They assume no chronic imbalances, resulting from one country 
buying more from another country than it sells for an extended pe-
riod of time. These assumptions differ from actual circumstances 
of trade where governments routinely aid politically  powerful 
constituencies. In the United States and Western Europe, for 

4 Background and History
example, many farmers receive substantial subsidies. This gives 
rich-country farmers a significant advantage when competing for 
export sales with farmers from poorer countries. Also, some gov-
ernments intervene in currency markets to manipulate exchange 
rates (e.g., China and Japan reportedly hold down the value of 
their currencies to promote exports). And, large multinational 
corporations move money, production, and jobs around the world 
to take advantage of cheaper production costs.
In recent years, a number of prominent economists have 
sought to update the free-trade argument, and to address some of 
the shortcomings. Ralph Gomory and William Baumol take into 
account major changes in the world economy—particularly the 
rapidly evolving world of technology and costly, large-scale 
manufacturing. They note that comparative advantages can be ac-
quired, and that beneficial outcomes for one nation can be harm-
ful for trading partners. Thus, while Smith and Ricardo assumed 
positive outcomes from trade, Gomory and Baumol conclude that 
there are inherent conflicts. One country’s gain may not be ad-
vantageous to another (Gomory and Baumol 2000). Nobel-prize 
winning economist Paul Samuelson has revisited the subject and 
concluded that free trade is not always a win-win situation (Sam-
uelson 2004). Paul Krugman, another Nobel laureate columnist 
for the New York Times, has expressed doubts about the distribu-
tion of the gains from trade between high-income and third-world 
countries with extraordinarily low wage rates. He asserts that the 
trade losers probably greatly outnumber well-educated work-
ers who gain from expanding trade with developing economies 
(Krugman 2007).
Protectionism and Fair Trade
Those who criticize free trade are often described in the media 
as protectionists. In 19th-century America, when protectionism 
was a badge of honor, protectionists favored high tariffs to shelter 
emerging domestic industries from well-established foreign com-
petitors. In contemporary times, officials in developing countries 
often use similar arguments to justify protecting infant industries 
from big transnational corporations. In high-income countries, 
such as the United States, import-sensitive industries—such as 
textiles and apparel—and labor unions often voice protectionist 
arguments. They seek to limit imports, and thus protect domestic 
producers and jobs.

Factors Shaping the Trade Debate 5
Many contemporary critics of NAFTA, the WTO, and free-
trade agreements prefer to rally behind the fair-trade banner. 
Proponents of fair trade favor a more equitable trade policy, sen-
sitive to environmental, health, labor, and consumer concerns. 
Many labor leaders and activists associate fair trade with worker 
rights and the willingness of employers to pay workers a fair wage 
in a local context. So long as countries manipulate currencies and 
allow their workers to labor long hours in unsafe and unsanitary 
conditions, they say free trade is a myth perpetrated by the rich 
and powerful (Lighthizer 2007; Mazur 2000). Some international-
trade lawyers use this fair-trade terminology differently. They 
argue that fair trade is trade that conforms to internationally 
agreed rules administered by the WTO.
Among academic economists, free trade has wide support. 
However, economists who focus on economic development is-
sues sometimes dissent. They question the relevance of orthodox 
free-trade theory for developing countries. Among the first was 
Friederich List, a German economist who migrated to the United 
States in the 1820s and helped inspire the American system of 
high-tariff protection. List argued that Great Britain, the leading 
economic power of that era, used infant industry protections to 
develop export competitive industry. Then it preached the virtues 
of free trade to late-comer nations. In pushing free trade, Great 
Britain effectively kicked “away the ladder” to deprive potential 
competitors of the means to develop manufacturing industries. 
Gunnar Myrdal, the Swedish economist who won the Nobel 
prize for economics in 1974, was also critical of traditional free-
trade theory. He offered a dynamic theory of comparative ad-
vantage that assigned import restrictions an important place in 
development (Ho 2008). Cambridge University economist  Ha-joon 
Chang, a South Korean, makes a similar point. He claims that 
all of the world’s now-developed countries—in Western Europe, 
North America, Japan, and Australia—went through a protec-
tionist phase when they used tariffs and quotas to shelter their 
emerging industries from foreign competition (Chang 2002, 4 – 5, 
65). However, enthusiastic free-traders like Anne Krueger, a for-
mer deputy managing director of the International Monetary 
Fund, respond that no country has sustained high rates of eco-
nomic growth without opening its economy to international 
trade (Krueger 2003). She insists that rapid growth is associated 
with free trade and open economies. In short, supporters and 
critics of orthodox trade theory offer quite different interpretations 

6 Background and History
of the rise of Asia, and China, and of the  significance of free 
trade.
Trade Surpluses and Deficits
To better understand the current debate over the effectiveness 
of U.S. trade policy, one needs some basic information about the 
way governments account for trade—that is, surpluses and defi-
cits. Unless governments manage trade, as the Nazis and Soviets 
tried to do, imbalances will develop in the marketplace between 
what a country buys (imports) and sells (exports). If a country 
exports more goods than it imports, it experiences a merchandise 
trade surplus. However, if it imports more goods than it exports, 
the country will have a merchandise trade deficit. Since 1994, the 
United States has had a chronic, cumulative trade deficit with 
the world—amounting to $6.6 trillion dollars. In 2008, the United 
States had a deficit with each of its top 10 trading partners. The 
deficit with China alone was $266.3 billion, or 32 percent of the 
trade-in-goods deficit (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2009). China also 
runs a large merchandise trade surplus with the European Union. 
By the end of 2008, it had $2 trillion in foreign exchange reserves, 
and owned $652 billion in U.S. Treasury debt (Landler 2008).
A broader measure of a nation’s international competitive-
ness is the balance on current account. It considers not only mer -
chandise trade but also trade in services (such as legal and 
pro fessional  services, shipping, tourism, and finance), unilateral 
transfers (such as the remittances of foreign workers and military 
expenditures), and earnings on overseas investments. Since 1982, 
the United States has experienced a cumulative current-account 
deficit of $7.4 trillion, of which nearly $5 trillion occurred in the 
last eight years (McMillion 2009).
Do these trade deficits matter? On this point economists dif-
fer. Some see deficits as a sign of good times. They bring lower 
prices for consumers and help business finance new investments 
(Griswold 1999). Other economists see chronic deficits as a sign 
of weakness. The trade deficits must be financed with borrowing, 
and this imposes a burden on later generations. For an enlight-
ening discussion of these issues, see the report of the U.S. Trade 
Deficit Review Commission.
At the end of 2007, the net international investment position 
of the United States had risen to a −$2.4 trillion, and amounted 

Factors Shaping the Trade Debate 7
to 17.7 percent of gross domestic product (Nguyen 2008). Most 
economists agree that a persistent current-account deficit of pres-
ent magnitude is unsustainable over the long term. It becomes 
increasingly difficult to service as it grows. Smaller countries with 
persistent deficits, such as Argentina and Thailand, have expe-
rienced financial crises, and sought financial assistance from the 
International Monetary Fund. As a condition for aid, they have 
been obliged to accept tough austerity plans that encroached on 
domestic sovereignty.
So far, the United States has escaped such international dis-
cipline and oversight. Because the U.S. dollar is the most widely 
used national currency, America’s creditors have generally wanted 
to hold dollars, which governments in the Middle East, China, 
and Japan then reinvest back into U.S. government securities. 
In late 2008, the largest holders of U.S. Treasury securities were 
China ($681.9 billion), Japan ($577.1 billion), the United Kingdom 
($360 billion), Caribbean banking centers ($220.8 billion), and oil-
exporting nations ($198 billion) (U.S. Treasury 2009). In effect, 
they have loaned money to the United States, so that American 
consumers could continue to buy their exports of oil and manu-
factured goods. But in 2007, some of America’s creditors began to 
diversify their foreign exchange holdings away from the dollar. 
The dollar’s share of total foreign currency reserves slipped from 
73 percent in 2001 to 64 percent in 2007. The euro gained share 
from 18 to 25 percent (Goodman 2008). In such circumstances, it 
is not surprising that the U.S. dollar fell sharply in value against 
the euro and other major currencies. This depreciation of the dol-
lar increased the price of U.S. imports (especially oil that is sold in 
dollars) but made U.S. exports more competitive.
Concerned about maintaining confidence in the dollar as well 
as restraining inflationary forces, the Federal Reserve pushed inter-
est rates upward in early 2007. But dire economic circumstances—
unstable financial markets and a global recession—soon forced 
monetary authorities to shift policy priorities. A banking liquidity 
crisis, resulting from bad loans to poorly-qualified borrowers, de-
stabilized the world financial system and depressed trade flows. 
This, coupled with a slowdown in the U.S. economy, prompted 
Washington to take a variety of emergency measures. Officials re-
duced interest rates, sent rebate checks to taxpayers, bailed out 
banks and auto companies, and initiated job-generating public 
works programs. Currencies gyrated as the crisis spread globally. 

8 Background and History
The dollar recovered in late 2008 as world investors sought safety 
in U.S. Treasury bonds, and then fell again as the Federal Reserve 
sliced interest rates to bargain-basement levels.
Trade Patterns
In the 21st century, the United States is one of the largest stake-
holders in the global economy. Despite the unification of Europe, 
the emergence of several large developing economies, and the 
global recession, it remains one of the world’s largest exporters 
of manufactures, agricultural products, and services, as well as 
a major source of investment capital. According to the WTO, the 
United States is both the world’s second leading exporter and im-
porter of commercial services. With respect to merchandise, it is 
the world’s leading importer and the third leading exporter (be-
hind the European Union and China). But, trade in goods and 
services amounts to only 27.2 percent of gross domestic product, 
considerably less trade dependence than most high-income coun-
tries. For Germany, the comparable figure is 83.3 percent; Canada, 
71.4 percent; the United Kingdom, 57.6 percent; and Japan, 31.5 
percent (WTO 2008). Nonetheless, the United States is highly de-
pendent on imports of petroleum, and other raw materials, as 
well as consumer goods. See data in Chapter 6. For these reasons, 
it is not surprising that the U.S. government has for more than 70 
years taken the lead in promoting trade liberalization agreements 
that open foreign markets for American products and services, 
and assure stable sources of supply for key raw materials. As a 
result, the United States has an average tariff of 3.5 percent ad 
valorem (as a percentage of value) on all dutiable imports, com-
pared to 5.2 percent for Germany and the United Kingdom, and 
5.1 percent for Japan. Developing countries typically have much 
higher rates: Brazil, 12.2 percent; China, 9.9 percent; and India 
14.5 percent (WTO 2008).
Interestingly, America’s first experience with international 
trade in the 18th century was like many poor, developing coun-
tries today. The United States exported agricultural products and 
raw materials—particularly of cotton, tobacco, and naval stores—
and imported manufactures. The United States also took a relaxed 
approach to technology transfer and patent issues, as China, Viet-
nam, and other countries are accused of doing in recent times. 
Some of the founding generation—including John Adams and 
Thomas Jefferson— encouraged industrial piracy, and helped steal 

Factors Shaping the Trade Debate 9
designs for advanced manufacturing equipment from Great Brit-
ain. Interestingly, renowned scientist and diplomat Benjamin 
Franklin favored the “free exchange of science and technology,” 
but his voice did not prevail. However, there is an important 
difference between American practice in the 18th century and 
emerging-market countries now. Not until 1883, when nations 
negotiated the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial 
Property, did international law promote respect for national pat-
ent and trademark laws (Ben-Atar 2004, 4).
Over time, the geography and composition of American trade 
have changed. Until the 1960s, U.S. trade was primarily with Eu-
ropean nations. Indeed, that year Europe took 36 percent of U.S. 
exports and supplied 29 percent of U.S. imports. A generation 
later, the Pacific Rim had become more important than the Atlan-
tic. In 1997, 31 percent of U.S. exports went to Asia and 41 percent 
of imports arrived from Asia, much of these imports being con-
sumer goods and manufactures (Carter 2006, 5:533 – 44). In 2008, 
America’s trade deficit with China and Japan ($339 billion) was 
larger than its combined deficit with Africa, Europe, South and 
Central America, and the Near East ($268.5 billion). It was also 
larger than the deficit with NAFTA partners Canada and Mexico 
($138.6 billion) (U.S. Bureau of the Census 2009).
Trade Politics
It is worth remembering that while ideas—such as free trade—
influence policy debates, so does political power. Trade politics 
has several dimensions: the influence of interest groups, politi-
cal parties, public opinion, and institutional competition between 
Congress and the executive.
In the tug-of-war to shape government policies, one of the 
most important conflicts is between export-competing and import-
competing industries. Typically, businesses that have competitive 
advantages in the global market (such as Boeing, Caterpillar, the 
Hollywood entertainment industry, Microsoft, and Wal-Mart, 
among others) favor freer trade and want assured access to for-
eign markets. Among business associations that lobby the U.S. 
government, those representing large firms such as the Business 
Roundtable (composed of corporate CEOs), the Chamber of Com-
merce of the United States, and the National Association of Manu-
facturers generally espouse free trade and open markets. Their 
members actively engage members of Congress and support them 

10 Background and History
with substantial campaign contributions. While big business is 
most comfortable with Republicans on trade issues, it worked 
closely with the pro-free-trade Clinton administration on a num-
ber of issues. Readers wishing to examine political contributions 
should consult: http://www.opensecrets.org.
In a case study involving efforts to influence the federal bu-
reaucracy, the Center for Public Integrity reports on efforts of 
the pharmaceutical industry to lobby the office of the U.S. Trade 
Representative. Drug makers use trade agreements to promote re-
spect for their pharmaceutical patents abroad (Center for Public 
Integrity 2005).
On the other side of the trade issue, businesses that face com-
petition from imports (such as the textile and apparel industries, 
sugar growers, family farmers, and small manufacturers) often 
lobby for import restrictions on overseas competitors. The anti-
free-trade forces also rely heavily on the money of organized labor 
(particularly industrial unions most impacted by imports) and on 
the activist networks of environmental and consumer groups. 
These groups can mobilize demonstrators and orchestrate a bliz-
zard of e-mails, or letters, on a topic of their choosing with only a 
few hours notice. In Congress, opponents of free trade work most 
effectively with Democrats from northern states, like Michigan, 
Ohio, and Pennsylvania, with large numbers of union members.
Another important factor shaping trade politics is public 
opinion. Polls show declining grass-roots support for trade liber-
alization since the mid-1970s (Eckes 1995, 209). Over that period, 
the well-educated and economic elites continued to endorse free 
trade, emphasizing its benefits to consumers and world income. 
But, ordinary Americans—many of whom have experienced 
first-hand job dislocations associated with import competition—
became more hostile. In May 2008, the Pew Research Center 
reported that in a survey of 1,502 adults, a 48-percent plurality 
thought free-trade agreements a bad thing, while 35 percent said 
they were a good thing (Pew 2008).
Another important dimension of trade politics involves the 
longstanding tension between Congress and the executive over 
trade policy. Part of this reflected different regional interests, 
some of it legal and some of it institutional differences. In writing 
the Constitution of 1787, the founders provided for a separation 
of powers between the executive and the legislative branches. The 
executive branch obtained the authority to conduct diplomatic 
negotiations and to negotiate treaties subject to the approval of 

Historical Overview 11
Congress (Article II: Section 2). Congress received the author-
ity to regulate commerce and impose taxes (Article I: Section 8). 
This separation of powers provided for the legal basis for later 
institutional conflicts. Susan Schwab, President George W. Bush’s 
U.S. Trade Representative, once described this arrangement as an 
“awkward marriage” of the president’s treaty-making power and 
the Constitution’s commerce clause (Schwab 1994, 4 – 5).
In practice, it frequently proved unworkable. During the 19th 
century, the executive branch set out to negotiate trade agreements 
with foreign powers on a number of occasions, but Congress re-
fused to approve the agreements or sought to modify them after 
the negotiations were complete. This occurred in the administra-
tions of John Tyler (term of office 1841 – 1845), Benjamin Harrison 
(term of office 1889 – 1893), and William McKinley (term of office 
1897 – 1901). During the Great Depression of the 1930s, the pen-
dulum swung in the opposite direction, when Secretary of State 
Cordell Hull persuaded Congress to grant the executive branch 
authority to raise or lower tariffs without the specific approval of 
Congress. As administered by the State Department before and 
after World War II, Hull’s mandate enabled the executive branch 
to cut tariffs sharply. With constituent complaints ringing in their 
ears, Congress sought in the 1960s to reclaim an active role in 
trade policy, one of the themes developed in the next section.
Historical Overview
Two conflicting ideas—free trade or protection for domestic 
 industries—have been at the root of many U.S. trade disputes 
since the early days of the American Republic. In the Washington 
administration, Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton and his 
rival Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson favored different trade 
strategies. Hamilton wanted to protect and encourage U.S. manu-
factures so that British manufacturers didn’t dominate the mar-
ket. Jefferson, who was suspicious of industry and cities, offered 
an agrarian vision of the republic prospering from export sales 
of agriculture and raw materials. It was a classic debate between 
protectionism and free trade. As it turned out, Congress chose to 
pursue a third course—passing a revenue tariff averaging about 
8.5 percent on an ad valorem basis—to generate income to pay 
the new government’s expenses (Eckes 1995, 14). America’s resort 
to a revenue tariff, paid on goods assessed at dockside customs 

12 Background and History
houses, was compatible with the approach of other countries 
at the time. Indeed, many developing countries still prefer rev-
enue tariffs because they are relatively easy to collect. In the 20th 
century developed countries would rely more on higher-yielding 
income taxes.
American System of High Tariffs
During the Napoleonic Wars and the War of 1812, the United 
States experienced the vulnerabilities and dislocations of depen-
dence on international trade. A more nationalistic trade policy 
resulted. Leaders came to appreciate that industrialization was 
vital to economic independence and prosperity. Henry Clay, the 
Kentucky Whig and a leader in Congress, pushed hard for the 
“American System” of using protective tariffs to build up infant 
industries. By 1828, when Congress passed the so-called Tariff of 
Abominations, the average duty on dutiable goods had increased 
to 61.7 percent, the highest in American history (Eckes 1995, 107).
Democrats succeeded in whittling down high protective tariff 
levels during the 1840s and 1850s, and enacting several reciproc-
ity agreements with China, Japan, and Canada. Their goal was a 
20 percent revenue tariff. This approach reflected the Democratic 
Party’s southern orientation and the growing international enthu-
siasm for free trade. In Great Britain, Cobdenites, the followers of 
textile magnate Richard Cobden, successfully pressed for repeal 
of the corn laws, an important step in opening the British market 
to imports. In the United States, President Franklin Pierce took 
a step in the same direction when his administration negotiated 
a limited reciprocity treaty with Canada. It provided for limited 
free trade in certain raw materials. Congress abrogated it after the 
Civil War (1866).
During the Civil War, Republican protectionists took charge 
of trade policy. Led by Vermont’s Justin Morrill, the chairman of 
the powerful Senate Finance Committee, the Republicans raised 
duties higher and higher, ostensibly to finance the war, but also to 
protect domestic industry. Morrill, a conservative Vermont farmer, 
pushed for abrogation of the Canadian reciprocity because he be-
lieved it harmed his state’s economic interests. U.S. trade policy 
remained highly protectionist until the Great Depression of the 
1930s. The average duty on dutiable products exceeded 40 percent 
from the Civil War to the Great Depression, except for the Wilson 
administration’s ill-fated unilateral effort to lower tariffs in 1913 

Historical Overview 13
(Eckes 1995, 107). While Democrats generally supported lower tar-
iffs, they did not control both Congress and the executive, except 
during Woodrow Wilson’s presidency. Republicans did continue 
to support reciprocal negotiations to open trade with America’s 
new colonies— Cuba and the Philippines—and with neighboring 
Canada. President William Howard Taft and his aides negotiated 
a reciprocity treaty with Canada in 1911, but Canada, fearful of 
America’s expansionist political ambitions, rejected it.
After World War I, high-tariff Republicans returned to power. 
President Warren Harding requested emergency tariff legislation, 
saying that he believed in protecting American industry, and it 
was his purpose to help America prosper first (Eckes 1995, 88). 
During the 1920s, Congress made two major revisions of the tariff: 
the Fordney-McCumber Act of 1922 and the Smoot-Hawley Tariff 
of 1930. The latter revision was named for Senator Reed Smoot 
of Utah, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, and Repre-
sentative Willis Hawley, chairman of the House Ways and Means 
Committee, the two committees most responsible for crafting tar-
iff legislation. Smoot-Hawley is often depicted as the apogee of 
protectionist sentiment, and an imprudent act that exacerbated 
the Great Depression. Enacted over the protests of 1,000 econo-
mists, Smoot-Hawley raised the average duty on dutiable im-
ports to nearly 44.6 percent, the highest since the Dingley Tariff of 
1897. According to some academics, these rates brought interna-
tional trade to a standstill, triggered foreign retaliation, and deep-
ened the Great Depression. Other scholars who have reviewed 
the archival evidence believe the conventional interpretation of 
Smoot-Hawley is much exaggerated. There was little foreign re-
taliation, and it was the Great Depression, not the Tariff Act of 
1930, that most impacted international trade patterns (Eckes 1995, 
100 – 139).
Promoting Recovery and Reciprocal Trade
During the Great Depression, the volume of world trade fell 
sharply, and political pressure compelled many governments to 
subsidize exports and restrict imports. Internationalist and free 
traders battled these protectionist impulses, and urged multilateral 
efforts to reduce tariffs and stabilize currencies. Secretary of State 
Cordell Hull, one of the leading advocates of trade liberalization in 
the United States, wanted President Franklin D. Roosevelt to take 
such an approach at the London Economic Conference of 1933, 

14 Background and History
but the president overruled him. Eager to promote domestic re-
covery, Roosevelt soon devalued the dollar, effectively subsidizing 
exports and taxing imports. Other major countries also pursued 
nationalistic remedies, such as depreciation and trade controls.
Despite adverse circumstances, Hull did not abandon his 
quest to open the channels of world trade. Emphasizing the link 
between exports and domestic jobs, he lobbied for a program of 
bilateral reciprocal tariff negotiations to create export opportuni-
ties. In 1934, Congress granted the executive branch temporary 
authority to raise or lower tariffs by 50 percent from 1930 lev-
els for a three-year period. Interestingly, the legislation did not 
mention tariff reduction as an explicit goal. Rather, the program 
proposed to expand export markets for American products by 
regulating imports in accordance with the needs of American pro-
duction (Lovett, Eckes, and Brinkman 2004, 56). In effect, Hull’s 
initiative produced a revolution in tariff-making. The program 
transferred tariff making from Congress, where it was reasonably 
transparent, to an executive agency—the State Department—with 
a foreign affairs agenda. Hull and his successors secretly negoti-
ated 32 agreements from 1935 to 1947. All but one (Iran) was with 
nations in Europe or the Western hemisphere. It is noteworthy 
that the State Department concluded only one agreement with a 
major trading partner: the 1938 pact with Great Britain.
Viewed from the early 21st century, the reciprocal trade 
program had a mixed record. Politically, it helped cement good 
relations with Great Britain, a partner in World War II, and it im-
proved relations with a number of smaller nations in Western 
Europe and the Americas. It succeeded in sharply lowering U.S. 
tariffs, benefiting consumers and importers. From 1934 to 1960, 
the ratio of duties calculated to total dutiable imports fell from 45 
percent to 10 percent (about half of the decline being attributable 
to tariff negotiations, the remainder to inflation and deflation) 
(Eckes 1995, 107).
Viewed in commercial terms, the agreements obtained only 
modest concessions for American exporters of agricultural and 
manufactured products. But, the long-term impact was quite con-
sequential. The bilateral concessions were extended to third par-
ties freely on an unconditional most-favored nation basis, meaning 
that they did not have to compensate the original parties for the 
benefits. In this way, U.S. reciprocal tariff reductions— particularly 
those to Great Britain in 1938—aided other low-cost countries 
to penetrate the American market after World War II without 

Historical Overview 15
opening their own markets to U.S. goods. Hull’s trade program, 
as it evolved, benefited free riders who themselves made few con-
cessions but enjoyed the benefits.
Multilateral Trade Liberalization
After World War II, the State Department sought to continue the 
bilateral trade liberalization program as part of a multilateral, or 
multi-country, initiative to lower trade barriers and establish an 
ITO. The U.S. Treasury separately devised plans for an Interna-
tional Monetary Fund and an International Bank for Reconstruc-
tion and Development at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in July 
1944. Along with establishing a parallel institution for trade, the 
State Department sought to break up the British preferential sys-
tem, which discriminated against American exports to British do-
minions. Another American goal was to integrate former enemies 
such as Germany and Japan into an open, market-driven, world 
trading system.
Bilateral negotiations took place between principal suppli-
ers within a multilateral framework at Geneva, Switzerland, in 
1947 and Torquay, England, in 1951. The United States invited 
19 nations, including the Soviet Union, to participate. Although 
the Soviets chose to pursue an autarkic course, 23 countries par-
ticipated in the Geneva negotiations. They were conducted on a 
product-by-product basis between principal suppliers (such as 
the top producers of automobiles). As with reciprocal trade, the 
concessions were extended to every other trading country on an 
unconditional most-favored-nation status. The various bilateral 
agreements became the basis of the multilateral General Agree-
ment on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
GATT took effect on January 1, 1948, and its first members 
were nine countries accounting for 80 percent of world trade at 
that time. They were Australia, Belgium, Canada, Cuba, France, 
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States. Over time, most of the important trading coun-
tries acceded to GATT—Italy (1949), West Germany (1951), and 
Japan (1955). Israel, Switzerland, and Spain joined in 1962. By 
the mid-1960s, GATT’s membership had grown to 75, and on its 
final day, December 31, 1994, membership had climbed to 128. 
Significantly, the most important nonmembers, Russia, China, 
and Taiwan, all wanted to join (Lovett, Eckes, and Brinkman 
2004, 60).

16 Background and History
GATT, a temporary forum for trade negotiations, would en-
dure for nearly half a century until the WTO was established on 
January 1, 1995. Indeed, the United States, the largest member by 
virtue of its economic power, opted to treat membership in GATT 
as a contractual arrangement, not as membership in an organiza-
tion, thus avoiding the need for congressional approval. Despite 
the structural shortcomings, GATT succeeded in holding a series 
of multilateral negotiating rounds: Annecy, France (1949), Torquay, 
England (1950 – 51), Geneva (1956), and Geneva (1960 – 62). These 
rounds used the same bilateral product-by-product negotiating 
approach between principal suppliers. The concessions were ex-
tended to all participants in the GATT system on an unconditional 
most-favored nation basis.
With other countries recovering from World War II, and fac-
ing difficult financial and economic problems in the transition pe-
riod, the U.S. trade negotiators chose not to drive hard bargains. 
U.S. tariffs were relatively high, and the few imported goods 
available had little impact on domestic production or employ-
ment. During the years before passage of the 1962 Trade Expan-
sion Act, the State Department administered trade policies that 
inevitably reflected foreign policy goals. The United States was 
engaged in a long Cold War struggle with the Soviet Union, and 
U.S. policy was to integrate its World War II enemies and allies 
into a prosperous economic system. As a result, at Torquay, the 
United States eased off on pressuring Great Britain to open its 
dominions to American exports. And, in negotiations with Japan, 
the United States was eager to help its former adversary export 
its way to recovery. The State Department took the view that the 
overriding interest was to strengthen national security by tying 
Japan to the non-Communist world (Eckes 1995, 170). In 1955, 
it opened bilateral negotiations with Japan as part of a required 
process for membership in the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade, a temporary forum pending establishment of an interna-
tional trade organization. While U.S. negotiators exhorted Japan to 
reduce duties on automobiles, electronics, chemicals, machine 
tools, and heavy machinery, because establishment of high-cost 
industries was incompatible with comparative advantage and 
the sound growth of a national economy, the Japanese demurred. 
K. Otabe, representing Japan’s Ministry of International Trade and 
Industry, argued that the logic of international trade theory was 
that the United States would specialize in automobiles and Japan 
in tuna. Rejecting that theory, he said Japan would continue to 

Historical Overview 17
encourage and protect industries believed important for reasons 
of national policy (Eckes 1995, 171).
As import competition grew from overseas producers of 
labor-intensive dinnerware, footwear, textiles, and apparel, con-
gressional opposition to reciprocal trade grew. In 1958, the Senate 
Finance Committee turned down the Eisenhower administration’s 
request for authority to negotiate down tariffs an additional 25 per-
cent and extend the program for five years (Eckes 1995, 175).
Kennedy Round
After President John F. Kennedy took office in 1961, the State De-
partment made another bid to resurrect the trade liberalization 
program. Under Secretary of State George Ball, himself a commit-
ted Europeanist who had represented foreign steel producers as a 
trade lawyer, warned of a trade challenge from the European Com-
mon Market. President Kennedy sent Congress a bold request to 
cut industrial tariffs by 50 percent in the next GATT round (Zeiler 
1992). The Trade Expansion Act (TEA) authorized major new ne-
gotiating authority for the Kennedy administration to deal with 
the challenge of the European Economic Community (EEC), and 
it forced a significant reorganization of the trade liberalization 
program. Congress stipulated that a special trade representative 
(STR), reporting directly to the president, not to the foreign-policy 
oriented State Department, would handle negotiations. With this 
authority, the United States and other GATT members engaged 
in major tariff reduction negotiations during the Kennedy Round 
(1964 – 1967). As well as slashing tariffs on industrial goods, nego-
tiators also made initial attempts to extend the multilateral system 
of rules to nontariff barriers. They negotiated an international an-
tidumping code. But there was no progress on reducing agricul-
tural protectionism and subsidies, nor did negotiators persuade 
Japan to provide genuine reciprocity and open its home market to 
foreign competition (Eckes 2000, 46 – 113).
The U.S. Congress was not pleased with the results. Criticisms 
of concessions on chemicals, steel, machine tools, and electronics 
led some business groups to petition Congress for quotas or tar-
iffs on imports. Chairman Russell Long (D-LA) and his colleagues 
on the Senate Finance Committee complained that the antidump-
ing agreement lacked congressional authorization and refused to 
implement several side deals. This congressional dissatisfaction 
had consequences for the trade liberalization program. In the future 

18 Background and History
Congress would insist on a more active role in negotiations, and 
U.S. negotiators could not strike a deal without taking into con-
sideration congressional opinion.
For American business, completion of the Kennedy Round 
was a significant event—in effect, it opened the U.S. market to 
global competition. At a time when jet travel and satellite com-
munications were rapidly overcoming barriers of time and dis-
tance, the Kennedy Round cuts lowered the average ad valorem 
equivalent on dutiable U.S. imports to 8.6 percent (from 12.2 per-
cent before concessions were implemented). Secretary of Com-
merce Alexander Trowbridge understood the significance: he 
warned that in the future, the American market would no lon-
ger be the “private preserve” of American business (Trowbridge 
1967, 127 – 129).
The round was also a turning point for the trade liberaliza-
tion program. Polls showed a significant shift in public opinion 
against the tariff-reduction program. Thus, the Kennedy Round 
marked the end of a long period of executive leadership in trade 
negotiations that began with Hull’s reciprocal trade program in 
1934. For the first time since the 1930s, a solid majority favored 
increased import restrictions. Besieged with complaints from con-
stituents, Congress effectively declared a pause in trade liberaliza-
tion and refused to renew the administration’s trade negotiating 
authority.
Fast Track and the Tokyo Round
Seven years later, despite the turbulence of the Vietnam War and 
the Watergate scandal, a more assertive Congress proposed a dif-
ferent formula for negotiations—one that gave Congress a more 
active role. In the Trade Act of 1974, Congress renewed the presi-
dent’s trade negotiating authority and authorized participation in 
the Tokyo Round of multilateral negotiations. It also established a 
fast-track procedure for expeditious consideration of the results. 
On the one hand, the executive committed to consulting regu-
larly with Congress and private-sector organizations during the 
course of the negotiations. On the other hand, Congress promised 
to waive the usual review procedures for executive agreements. 
Instead, it pledged to permit a vote on implementing legislation 
within 90 days, and the fast-track agreement prohibited legislative 
amendments. Congress also gained executive branch support for 
a more effective import-remedy program to facilitate adjustment 

Historical Overview 19
to international competition. An independent agency, the U.S. 
 International Trade Commission, could recommend temporary 
tariffs or quota relief in instances where increased imports were a 
substantial cause of serious injury to domestic industries.
During the negotiations, Robert Strauss, the Texas lawyer and 
political activist who President Jimmy Carter appointed special 
trade representative, worked closely with Congress and import-
sensitive industries. Many of the import-sensitive industries were 
exempt from the negotiations, so as to avoid controversy. While 
the Tokyo Round continued the multilateral trade liberalization 
process, it achieved far less than the Kennedy Round, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 3. However, the first experiment with fast-track 
negotiating authority worked reasonably well. Congress kept its 
end of the bargain, passing the accords with little discussion or 
dissent. Thanks to Robert Strauss’s successful lobbying, the Trade 
Agreements Act of 1979 passed the House of Representatives 395 
to 7, and the Senate 90 to 4 with substantial bipartisan majorities. 
Despite the overwhelming vote, Congress remained somewhat 
skeptical that other governments would implement their obliga-
tions. Thus, it amended section 301of the trade law to give the 
president broad authority to enforce U.S. rights unilaterally. The 
1979 act authorized the president to retaliate against unreason-
able, or discriminatory, practices that affected commerce (Lovett, 
Eckes, and Brinkman 2004, 73 – 74).
In retrospect, the Tokyo Round was a high-water mark in co-
operation between the executive and the Congress. Enthusiasm 
for the agreements soon began to fade. In 1987, the Senate Finance 
Committee complained that the Tokyo Round agreements “have 
not had the effect of improving the American standard of living as 
intended” (U.S. Senate, Finance Committee 1987, 2 – 3).
Reagan’s Free-Trade Initiatives
During the early 1980s, the Reagan administration attempted to 
reinvigorate the multilateral process. It wished to improve upon 
the Tokyo Round agreements and to extend the scope of the GATT 
regime to agriculture and services, trade-related investments, and 
intellectual property. But Europe and Japan were not interested. 
The former was in a deep recession, and its governments were 
more focused on regional negotiations to widen and deepen the 
European Community. Japan had little interest in opening its do-
mestic agricultural and industrial markets to expanded foreign 

20 Background and History
competition. Concerned that the long multilateral quest for freer 
trade might falter, U.S. Rep. Bill Brock urged GATT members to 
launch another round, and he began to pursue bilateral free-trade 
agreements with like-minded countries.
The bilateral path proved more productive in the short-run 
as the Reagan administration concluded a pioneering agreement 
with Israel in 1985, then another with Canada in 1987. America’s 
resort to bilateralism also spurred the multilateral process. Israel 
was a small trading partner, but political and strategic interests 
drove the two countries to negotiate in 1984. At a time when the 
U.S. economy was in recession and the administration wished to 
move forward on trade liberalization, an agreement with Israel 
had political appeal to Congress. The pact eliminated tariffs and 
nontariff barriers on almost all trade between the two countries 
over a 10-year period. This first bilateral free-trade agreement 
(FTA) also included items not covered in GATT, such as trade in 
services, intellectual property, and trade-related performance re-
quirements. However, Israel retained certain nontariff barriers and 
levies on agricultural items, and the United States did the same on 
textiles and apparel. The FTA with Israel, a small middle-income 
country with 4.2 million people, had relatively little economic 
significance for the United States. Interestingly, the bilateral U.S. 
trade surplus (which had existed before the FTA) disappeared by 
January 1995 when the agreement was fully implemented (Lovett, 
Eckes, and Brinkman 2004, 79).
The Canadian FTA, signed in January 1988, was far more 
significant, and controversial. The two North American neigh-
bors shared a 3,000-mile border, spoke a common language, and 
had similar governmental institutions, laws, and practices. They 
were both mature and prosperous economies, and each was the 
other’s largest trading partner. For Canadians, the prospects of 
assured access to the U.S. market was important if Canadian 
business was to compete successfully in the global economy. At 
a time when Europe seemed to be turning inward, and growing 
use of countervailing and antidumping duties threatened Cana-
dian access to the U.S. market, an FTA looked attractive. For the 
United States, it was the culmination of aspirations more than a 
century old to integrate the North American market. It was also 
an opportunity to set an example for the Uruguay Round GATT 
negotiations by establishing rules regarding services, intellec-
tual property, and subsidies that might influence the multilateral 
negotiations.

Historical Overview 21
The FTA provided for the elimination of tariffs and nontariff 
barriers by January 1998. In the controversial area of agricultural 
trade, the two sides agreed to eliminate all tariff over a 10-year pe-
riod and reduce nontariff barriers. Interestingly, the FTA retained 
the 1965 U.S.–Canada Automotive Products Trade Agreement 
(APTA), which provided a limited form of free trade beneficial 
to existing producers (but not apparently to foreign producers 
that might set up factories in North America). The agreement in-
dicated that provisions relating to government procurement were 
intended to serve as an impetus to GATT negotiations. The FTA 
established dispute settlement procedures intended to  provide 
 effective and expeditious dispute settlement procedures, and these 
included bi-national dispute resolution panels. While each country 
would continue to apply its own antidumping and countervailing 
duty laws to imports, the FTA provided for a special bi-national 
panel of trade experts to review appeals.
The negotiators did not address a number of sensitive issues, 
including Canada’s desire to preserve and maintain its unique cul-
tural heritage. As a result, the agreement generally excluded pub-
lishing and communications from the nontariff provisions. Nor 
did the two sides reach agreement on financial services and subsi-
dies. As the FTA negotiations did not address exchange rates, some 
of the benefits to the bargain for the United States were nullified 
as the Canadian dollar depreciated. Finally, while the agreement 
established a structure for dismantling trade barriers between the 
United States and Canada, it did nothing to remove intra- provincial 
barriers. Twenty years later—in 2007—Ottawa and Quebec would 
talk about negotiating their own free trade pacts. Thus, critics can 
point out that the FTA gave Canadian business access to the entire 
U.S. market, but it did little to remove commercial barriers within 
the Canadian federation (White 2007).
North American Free Trade Agreement
Frustrated with continuing delays in multilateral negotiations, the 
United States moved to turn the U.S.–Canadian bilateral agree-
ment into a North American regional pact of more than 400 million 
consumers. President George H. W. Bush and his trade negotiator 
Carla Hills proposed to add Mexico and to integrate the North 
American regional market. For Mexican President Carlos Salinas 
de Gotari, a Yale educated economist, NAFTA was an opportu-
nity to transform Mexico and immerse it in the emerging global 

22 Background and History
economy. With more openness and a more favorable climate for 
business, Mexico could attract the foreign capital needed to cre-
ate jobs and opportunities for its burgeoning population. Mak-
ers of U.S. foreign policy were concerned about instability and 
rising illegal immigration, and wanted to integrate Mexico into 
a regional agreement that would revive its economy and reduce 
border tensions. The U.S. business community, eager to invest in 
the medium-sized Mexican market, wanted guarantees against 
expropriation and fewer restrictions on exporting and use of do-
mestic content. In February 1991, the two leaders, and Canadian 
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, announced their intention to pur-
sue a trilateral FTA intended to liberalize trade in goods and ser-
vices, foreign investment, protection of intellectual property, and 
dispute settlement. In the summer of 1992, leaders of the three 
governments hailed a successful conclusion, and their subordi-
nates raced to complete work on the text. It was initialed at a cer-
emony in San Antonio, Texas, a month before the U.S. presidential 
election.
The deal included tariff eliminations. In 1992, average U.S. 
duties on imports from Mexico were 3 percent and Mexican du-
ties were about 10 percent on U.S. products (Lovett, Eckes, and 
Brinkman 2004, 81). But in agricultural trade there were signifi-
cant quantitative barriers that discouraged trade. For the United 
States, one of the big gains was a Mexican commitment to open the 
home market to U.S. agriculture over a 15-year period. Over time, 
as these provisions were phased in, Mexican consumers would 
gain, but inefficient family farmers—the campesinos—would leave 
the land. Some moved into Mexican cities, others migrated north-
ward to the United States in pursuit of economic opportunities.
At the core of NAFTA were the investment provisions. They 
opened the Mexican market to big U.S. banks and financial ser-
vice providers, and encouraged the automobile industry and 
other big manufacturers to open Mexican plants. Until NAFTA, 
Mexico had strictly regulated foreign investment and prohibited 
or limited investment in many sectors. Nonetheless, the Mexican 
petroleum sector remained off limits to foreign investors. Most 
of all, NAFTA ensured that foreign investors would receive na-
tional treatment (the same as local investors), prohibited expro-
priation except for “public purpose”, and provided in such cases 
for prompt compensation at market prices (NAFTA, Chapter 11). 
A controversial provision of Chapter 11, relating to investor rights, 

Historical Overview 23
allowed foreign investors to sue signatory governments in special 
tribunals to obtain cash compensation for government actions 
or policies that violated their rights under NAFTA. Mandatory 
dispute settlement thus was an important component of the 
NAFTA package.
Big transnational business generally supported NAFTA—
especially the investment provisions—and their lobbyists worked 
hand-in-hand with the Democratic administration to persuade 
members of Congress. So did big agriculture, such as the wheat, 
corn, and pork producers, who also saw great export opportuni-
ties. Small business and labor-intensive business—such as textile 
and apparel producers—generally opposed NAFTA, fearful that 
it would open the door to competition from inexpensive Mexi-
can labor. So did organized labor, and some environmental and 
consumer groups. Proponents and opponents differed widely 
about the impact of NAFTA on U.S. jobs. Some studies showed 
relatively little impact, but others forecast job losses as high as 
500,000 low-skill workers in industries such as textiles. Sugar and 
vegetable producers, as well as family farmers generally, worried 
that NAFTA would open the domestic market to cheap competi-
tion (Gerstenzang 1993).
President Bill Clinton found the controversial NAFTA hot po-
tato on his plate upon taking office in January 1993. Believing that 
NAFTA was good for the American economy, Clinton determined 
to press forward with the agreement. But he negotiated some 
labor and environmental side agreements to placate NAFTA’s 
opponents, and then pushed for swift congressional approval in 
November 1993.
The ensuing debate was vigorous, and the Clinton adminis-
tration pulled out all the stops to win. To gain congressional ap-
proval, Clinton emphasized export opportunities and minimized 
job dislocations to American workers. Practicing retail politics, he 
promised to go duck hunting with one Oklahoma congressman, 
to have the vice president host a fund raiser for another, and to 
support public works projects for others. The 900-page agree-
ment passed the House 234 to 200 on November 17, even though 
a majority of Democrats opposed their president. NAFTA passed 
the Senate more easily 61-to-38 three days later. According to the 
Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch, proponents of NAFTA spent 
$22.8 million on campaign contributions and $8 million on adver-
tising to win congressional approval (Public Citizen 2000).

24 Background and History
Uruguay Round—WTO
Meanwhile, the competitive pressure of bilateral and regional 
free trade initiatives helped persuade the European Community 
and Japan to enter another multilateral round. In September 1986, 
a GATT ministerial at Punta del Este, Uruguay, launched the 
eighth, and last, round of GATT negotiations. This one focused 
on improving the workings of the GATT system, particularly in 
agriculture, subsidies, safeguards, dispute settlement, and non-
tariff measures. In particular, the United States wanted to revise 
the ineffective GATT dispute settlement process. It also sought 
greater export opportunities for agricultural products, and im-
provements in GATT provisions to define, deter, and discourage 
unfair trading practices. Frustrated with free-riding countries 
and the lack of reciprocity, Congress also insisted that develop-
ing countries provide reciprocal benefits and assume equivalent 
obligations.
The Uruguay Round was an exercise in frustrations. Whereas 
previously the United States and the European Community were 
the major players, this time developing countries took a larger 
role. As a result, the round stretched over eight years and con-
sumed the attention of four U.S. trade negotiators: Bill Brock, Clay-
ton Yeutter, Carla Hills, and Mickey Kantor. It concluded April 15, 
1994, after intense bargains and many concessions by the United 
States. The key to the final agreement was a deal involving devel-
oping and developed nations. The latter agreed to phase out re-
straints on textiles and apparel and to improve market access for 
developing world agricultural products, in exchange for extend-
ing the multilateral system to cover intellectual property, services, 
and trade-related investment measures. Behind the deal was this 
reality: large transnational corporations based principally in the 
Northern Hemisphere were irritated at local-content restrictions in 
host countries and sought greater freedom to run their operations 
in the most efficient way possible. Also, Wall Street, the insurance 
industry, and telecommunications giants wanted an opportunity 
to sell their products and services in developing markets on the 
same terms as host-country competitors. The entertainment and 
pharmaceuticals industries insisted on stronger protections for 
patents and copyrights. In the Uruguay Round, governments in 
high-income countries responded to these requests, and effec-
tively traded off import-competing, labor-intensive industries. It 
was a familiar pattern evident in prior trade negotiations.

Historical Overview 25
The agreement replaced the temporary GATT with a perma-
nent institution: the World Trade Organization (WTO). It would 
serve as a forum and a vehicle for implementing trade agreements, 
as a tribunal for resolving trade disputes. For further discussion of 
this organization, see Chapter 3.
President Clinton hailed the results, calling the Uruguay Round 
Agreements “the broadest, most comprehensive trade agreements 
in history.” The agreements would “add $100 – 200 billion to the 
U.S. economy each year and create hundreds of thousands of new, 
well-paying American jobs.” According to the president, the  results 
would ensure that fast-growing markets in Asia and Latin Amer-
ica “will be open to international competition and that all of our 
trading partners will play by international trading rules” (Clinton 
1994b). Clinton forecast that the agreement would “provide a global 
tax cut of $740 billion, reducing tariffs worldwide by more than a 
third” (Clinton 1994a).
Big business was joyous. A spokesman for the Business 
Roundtable said the agreement would make it difficult for coun-
tries to impose investment restrictions that limited job creation 
and distorted trade. He predicted that the multilateral agreement 
would create “hundreds of thousands of high-wage, high-skills 
jobs in the United States” (Junkins 1994). Other major business 
associations concurred. Opposing the agreement were labor and 
consumer groups. Jack Sheinkman, president of the Amalgamated 
Clothing and Textile Workers Union, complained that his 230,000 
members felt betrayed. The phase-out of textile quotas, so that 
developing nations could share in the U.S. market, would result 
in at least a million lost jobs (Sheinkman 1994).
One of the criticisms of GATT had been that it had a tooth-
less dispute resolution procedure. A single member (usually the 
country accused of violating international trade rules) could block 
implementation of a ruling. In the Uruguay Round, U.S. negotia-
tors wanted a strong dispute resolution body, and used the threat 
of unilateral sanctions under Section 301 as a negotiating tool to 
make dispute resolution palatable to other members. But dispute 
resolution was a two-edged sword. It could be used to open for-
eign markets for America’s large corporations, and the American 
market for foreign competitors.
Especially controversial in the U.S. debate was Article XVI of 
the WTO agreement. It stipulated: “Each Member shall ensure the 
conformity of its laws, regulations, and administrative procedures 
with its obligations as provided in the annexed Agreements” 

26 Background and History
(WTO 1994, Chapter XVI). This provision appeared to allow the 
WTO to override the U.S. Constitution and domestic laws. Thus, 
members of the WTO could use the agreement to challenge na-
tional laws, including those of local governments, that appeared 
inconsistent with the trade-liberalization purposes of the WTO. 
According to some critics of the agreements, local health and 
safety concerns would take a back seat to trade liberalization and 
the harmonization of rules. Consumer advocate Ralph Nader 
said the agreement would undermine democratic decision mak-
ing. The international rules would subordinate health and safety 
considerations to the requirements of international trade (Nader 
1994). Nobel Prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz agreed that 
WTO agreements “threaten the autonomy of countries to set pru-
dent rules” (Stiglitz 2005). However, Judith Bello, a former gen-
eral counsel of the U.S. Trade Representative’s office, responded 
that WTO rulings were not binding in a traditional sense. “The 
WTO has no jailhouse, no bail bondsmen, no blue helmets, no 
truncheons, or tear gas.” Instead, the WTO would rely on volun-
tary compliance (Bello 1996).
The Battle of Seattle
Public opposition to the WTO flared at the December 1999 WTO 
Summit in Seattle, Washington. The United States and other trade 
powers had hoped to launch a new millennial multilateral nego-
tiating round after governments in attendance agreed on a nego-
tiating agenda. But, led by Citizen Trade Watch’s Lori Wallach, 
representatives of organized labor, environmental, small farm, 
and other activists challenged government representatives, block-
ing access to the Seattle Convention Center where the sessions 
were to meet. The activists complained that the trade negotiat-
ing process was undemocratic and controlled by large transna-
tional corporations. Their street protests, involving more than 
40,000 demonstrators, produced violent conflicts with police, and 
succeeded in disrupting the conference. With television looking 
on, riot police and masked demonstrators clashed as clouds of 
tear gas and pepper spray made downtown Seattle a battle zone. 
While most of the demonstrators were from the United States, 
hundreds had come from far reaches of the world to disrupt the 
ministerial meeting and to protest the institutions of globaliza-
tion. Subsequently, activists would target meetings of the Inter-
national Monetary Fund and World Bank in Washington, D.C., a 

Historical Overview 27
hemispheric free trade summit in Quebec, and other meetings of 
government leaders. From the numbers of people involved, it was 
evident that trade policy, once an arcane area of interest only to 
trade specialists, had energized a diverse public constituency.
Admitting China to the WTO
The next big trade fight in Washington, D.C., pertained to perma-
nent tariff treatment for China. Whereas in the Soviet Union, the 
Communist Party had resisted change—and lost power—the Chi-
nese Communists sought to retain power by embracing capital-
ism and transforming China’s state-run economic system. From 
the standpoint of the Chinese government, membership in the 
WTO would enhance China’s prestige as a world power, assure 
its exports access to the world’s most lucrative export markets at 
the lowest tariff levels, and provide export-related employment 
for millions of its workers eager to leave rural poverty for factory 
jobs. Expanded trade would also help China to acquire advanced 
technologies to improve its military capabilities.
China had negotiated terms of accession with WTO mem-
bers. But to comply with its obligations to the WTO, the United 
States needed to approve legislation providing China with per-
manent most-favored-nation treatment (that is, the same benefits 
that it provided other members of the WTO). This is also called 
Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR). In the United States, 
a conjunction of foreign policy and business interests supported 
Chinese membership. The Clinton administration wanted to in-
tegrate China, a county with over 1 billion people, into a market-
 oriented world trading system. Transnational business saw the 
unique economic opportunities involved. If China joined the WTO 
and integrated its economy into the global economy, its trading 
practices must conform to international rules. In short, China 
would be subject to international scrutiny and to dispute settle-
ment procedures favorable to international investors. Improved 
access to the Chinese market for American corporations meant 
expanded opportunities to serve large numbers of new custom-
ers and to employ some of the world’s cheapest workers produc-
ing for export. Many Chinese workers earned considerably less 
than two dollars per day in manufacturing and assembly (Lett 
and Banister 2006, 40).
To gain passage of PNTR legislation, the Chinese government 
did not need to hire Washington lobbyists. Boeing, Caterpillar, 

28 Background and History
and other transnational firms eager to benefit from business op-
portunities backed congressional approval, as did the Clinton 
administration. In testimony to Congress, the chairman of the pow-
erful Business Roundtable described the deal as the “economic 
equivalent of tearing down the Berlin Wall” (Business Round-
table 2000). The CEO of another large firm doing business in China 
testified that normal trade relations with China served the “clear 
interest” of America’s consumers, exporters, and  farmers (Hill 
2000, 16).
Labor, human rights, and small-business groups again 
fought hard to block PNTR. But in the end, the administration 
and big business prevailed. In the House, the measure passed 217 
to 197 in May 2000. The Senate gave more lopsided approval to 
a normal trading relationship 83 to 15. Public Citizen reported 
that corporate interests spent more than $113 million in lobby-
ing, political donations, and advertising to pass China PNTR. Of 
that sum, the largest amount involved $68.2 million in contribu-
tions to political parties and members of Congress. One member 
of Congress reported being offered as much as $200,000 in cam-
paign contributions to support the measure. In other instances, 
corporate lobbyists threatened to cut off campaign contributions 
to legislators who opposed PNTR (Public Citizen 2000; Schle-
singer 2000).
Robert Cassidy, one of the negotiators of the China trade 
agreement, later admitted that the pact failed to deliver on expec-
tations. Although China made most of the concessions, the United 
States lost 2.7 million manufacturing jobs as imports from China 
soared. Cassidy blamed China’s currency manipulation for keep-
ing down labor costs and stimulating its exports (Cassidy 2009).
Regional and Bilateral Free Trade
Clinton and his Republican successor George W. Bush continued 
the free trade initiatives begun under Reagan and George H. W. 
Bush. Both were fervent advocates of free trade, believing that it 
promoted prosperity and democracy. With the Cold War over and 
improvements in communications and transportation ushering in 
an age of globalization, they chose to help construct a new world 
economic order for the 21st century. It would be based on market-
driven economics and business-friendly international rules and 
institutions. They sought to integrate developing countries into a 
prosperous global economy. When controversies with developing 

Historical Overview 29
countries muddled WTO negotiations, they opted for regional 
and bilateral approaches.
In 1994, President Clinton and leaders of 33 other Western 
hemisphere nations met in Miami and agreed to work toward es-
tablishing a Free Trade Area for the Americas (FTAA) by 2005. 
They proposed to progressively eliminate trade and invest-
ment barriers. That initiative subsequently stalled as opposition 
mounted from farmers, environmentalist, and others, and as left-
ist governments in Venezuela and Bolivia voiced opposition. Ven-
ezuelan President Hugo Chavez denounced the FTAA as a “tool 
of imperialism” (Dominica 2008). Brazil, the leader of the South 
American Mercosur group, demanded that the United States 
eliminate agricultural subsidies.
The Clinton administration also launched bilateral free-trade 
negotiations with Chile, Jordan, and Singapore. All three agree-
ments were concluded under President George W. Bush after the 
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Bush made free trade an 
integral element of his strategic response. Emphasizing the need 
to combat terrorism with open markets and trade opportunities, 
Bush succeeded in gaining renewed fast-track trade negotiating 
authority from Congress that did not allow for amendments. In 
July 2002, that legislation passed the House of Representatives 
by a thin 215 to 212 margin with a majority of Republicans sup-
porting Bush and a majority of Democrats opposing (“Victory for 
Bush on Fast Track” 2002).
The president and his chief trade negotiator, Robert Zoellick, 
promptly launched an ambitious effort to promote free trade 
around the world. Using three separate negotiating tracks— 
multilateral, regional, and bilateral—they attempted to open 
markets for American exports. Zoellick, Bush’s first U.S. Trade Rep-
resentative (USTR) and the architect of this competitive liberaliza-
tion strategy, declared that the administration wanted to encourage 
reformers who favored free trade. He vowed to move forward with 
those countries prepared to open their markets (Zoellick 2002).
The office of the USTR, which has about 200 employees, was 
responsible for advancing Bush’s free-trade agenda. It attempted 
to negotiate 17 FTAs with 47 countries. With the exception of Bra-
zil and Australia, the negotiating partners had relatively small 
markets. Trade with countries selected for FTA negotiations 
comprised 16 percent of U.S. trade, and about 16 percent of U.S. 
foreign direct investment. The United States did not press for ne-
gotiations with a number of large trading partners, such as the 

30 Background and History
European Union, Japan, and Switzerland. It anticipated difficulty 
negotiating sensitive sectors, such as agriculture and intellectual 
property rights (U.S. General Accounting Office 2007).
Foreign policy influenced the choice of negotiating partners 
(Reinsch 2007). In Latin America, the goal was to isolate radical re-
gimes, like Venezuela and Cuba, and encourage market-oriented 
development. In the Middle East, the goal was to strengthen long-
term American allies, such as Jordan and smaller states in the Per-
sian Gulf, and to reward other allies, such as Australia, Chile, and 
Singapore with a history of commitment to free trade and open 
markets.
In January 2009 when Bush left office, his administration 
had compiled an impressive record. There were seven bilateral 
FTA negotiations completed and approved by Congress (Austra-
lia, Bahrain, Chile, Morocco, Oman, Peru, and Singapore) as well 
as a regional agreement CAFTA-Dominican Republic (CAFTA), 
involving another six countries: Costa Rica, the Dominican Re-
public, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua. Three 
other more controversial FTAs—involving Colombia, Panama, 
and South Korea—lay on the table awaiting congressional ap-
proval. Other bilateral negotiations with Bolivia, Brunei, Ecuador, 
Malaysia, New Zealand, SACU (the Southern African Customs 
Union), Thailand, and the United Arab Emirates were incom-
plete, or suspended. In addition, Bush had pursued a Free Trade 
Area of the Americas (FTAA), a Middle East Free Trade Initia-
tive (MEFTA), and a multilateral agreement in the WTO’s Doha 
 Development Round.
CAFTA proved especially controversial. The Bush adminis-
tration viewed it as part of an effort to extend NAFTA southward, 
and said CAFTA would bring “stability and security” to the region 
(Bush 2005a). The business community noted that Central Ameri-
can countries generally had free access to the American market as 
a result of prior trade concessions, but CAFTA would ensure free 
access for American exports, as well as benefit consumers. Critics, 
especially in the textile industry, saw it primarily as an investment 
agreement that would accelerate the movement of assembly-type 
manufacturing jobs out of the United States.
A coalition of opponents, including environmental, consumer, 
and labor groups, waged an intensive campaign, and appeared to 
have enough votes to block CAFTA in the House of Represen-
tatives. But Speaker Dennis Hastert (R-IL) resorted to unusual 

Summary 31
procedures. He extended the 15 minutes allotted for voting so that 
lobbyists could convert a few recalcitrant legislators. Forty-seven 
minutes later the administration’s supporters prevailed. The mar-
gin was a razor-thin 217 – 215. President Bush signed CAFTA into 
law, and said it was “more than a trade deal,” hinting at national-
security implications (Bush 2005b).
As the close vote indicated, trade politics had become much 
more partisan than 20 years earlier. Congress had approved the 
Tokyo Round agreements with only a few dissenting votes. But the 
battles over NAFTA, China PNTR, and CAFTA imposed a heavy 
toll on bipartisan support for trade liberalization. By 2005, a ma-
jority of Democrats, and a significant number of Republicans, in 
the House had awakened to public concerns about globalization 
and flawed trade policies. In the 2006 congressional elections, 37 
free-trade seats flipped to trade-policy critics (7 seats in the Sen-
ate, 30 in the House), according to Lori Wallach of Citizen Trade 
Watch. In 2008, fair traders, as those favoring a fundamental over-
haul of U.S. trade policies were known, gained 35 seats net (7 in 
the Senate, 28 in the House). Citizen Trade Watch claimed the new 
composition of Congress more closely reflected public opinion on 
trade matters (Wallach 2006; Public Citizen 2009).
Summary
Over the course of the 20th century, the United States, once an 
ardent practitioner of protectionism, evolved into an enthusiastic 
advocate of free trade and open markets. As this chapter shows, 
this policy change reflected not only America’s responsibilities as 
a global power but also the new technological and business reali-
ties of globalization. It also occurred because Congress ceded its 
lead role in tariff-making to the executive branch. A series of pres-
idents beginning with Franklin D. Roosevelt and continuing to 
the present used these trade-negotiating mandates to lower tariff 
levels and to integrate the United States into an emerging global 
economy. While free trade remained popular with business and 
government elites, opposition grew at the grassroots level. With 
plants closing and jobs disappearing overseas, many questioned 
whether the gains from free trade surpassed the costs to ordinary 
citizens, corporations, and communities. The next two chapters 
will offer contemporary perspectives on key trade-policy issues.

32 Background and History
References
Bello, Judith. 1996. “The WTO Dispute Settlement Understanding: Less 
is More.” American Journal of International Law 90 (3): 416.
Ben-Atar, Doron S. 2004. Trade Secrets: Intellectual Piracy and the Origins of 
the American Industrial Power. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Boudreaux, Donald. 2007, May 9. “Free Trade, Unilaterally.” Daily 
Speculations. Accessed January 2008 at http://www.dailyspeculations.
com/wordpress/?cat=289.
Bush, George W. 2005a, June 6. “President Discusses Trade, CAFTA at 
Organization of American States.” Accessed January 2008 at http://
www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2005/06/20050606 – 1.html.
Bush, George W. 2005b, August 2. “President Signs CAFTA-DR.” 
Accessed February 2008 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/
releases/2005/08/20050802 – 2.html.
Business Roundtable. 2000, January 26. “The Business Roundtable 
Launches Campaign for China PNTR.” Press Release. Accessed January 
2008 at http://www.businessroundtable.org//newsroom/.
Carter, Susan B., Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. 
Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright, eds. 2006. Historical 
Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Cassidy, Robert B. 2009, January 27. “False Expectations of Trade 
Agreements: Lessons for Change.” Accessed January 2009 at http://
www.epi.org/publications/entry/20090127_cassidy/.
Center for Public Integrity. 2005, July 7. “Exporting Prices.” Accessed 
May 2008 at http://www.publicintegrity.org/Content.aspx?src=search&
context=article&id=718.
Chang, Ha-joon. 2002. Kicking Away the Ladder: Development Strategy in 
Historical Perspective. London: Anthem Press.
Clinton, William J. 1994a, September 20. “Remarks Prior to a Meeting 
with Congressional Leaders.” Accessed at http://www.presidency.ucsb.
edu/ws/index.php?pid=49114.
Clinton, William J. 1994b, September 30. “Message to the Congress on 
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.” Accessed January 2008 at 
http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov.
“Dominica to Sign Venezuelan-backed Trade Agreement.” 2008, January 13. 
BBC Monitoring Latin America. Accessed February 2008 at LexisNexis 
Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Dryden, Steve. 1995. Trade Warriors: USTR and the American Crusade for 
Free Trade. New York: Oxford University Press.

References 33
Eckes, Alfred E., Jr. 1995. Opening America’s Market: U.S. Foreign Trade 
Policy since 1776. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Eckes, Alfred E., Jr. 2000. Revisiting U.S. Trade Policy: Decisions in 
Perspective. Athens: Ohio University Press.
Friedman, Milton. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Gerstenzang, James. 1993, November 14. “Treaty Hinges on Jobs to Be 
Gained— Or Lost.” Chicago Sun-Times, 34.
Gomory, Ralph, and William Baumol. 2000. Global Trade and Conflicting 
National Interests. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goodman, Peter S. 2008, May 12. “Dollar Shows Its Staying Power.” 
International Herald Tribune, 14.
Griswold, Daniel T. 1999, September 1. “A Rising Trade Deficit Signals 
Good Times for U.S. Economy.” Accessed May 2008 at http://www.cato.
org/pub_display.php?pub_id=4995.
Hill, Andrew. 2000, May 24. “Greed and Fear Fuel Pro-China Deal 
Campaign.” Financial Times, 16.
Ho, P. Sai-wing. 2008, June. “Arguing for Policy Space to Promote 
Economic Development: Prebisch, Myrdal, and Singer.” Journal of 
Economic Issues 42 (509 – 516).
Junkins, Jerry. 1994, February 22. “Testimony” to Committee on Ways 
and Means, U.S. House of Representatives, 103rd Congress, 2d sess. 
Accessed February 2008 Federal Document Clearing House.
Krueger, Anne O. 2003, September 10. “Address at the Fifth WTO 
Ministerial Conference.” Accessed January 2008 at http://www.imf.org/
external/np/speeches/2003/091003.htm.
Krugman, Paul. 2007, December 28. “Trouble with Trade.” New York 
Times, 23.
Landler, Mark. 2008, December 26. “Dollar Shift: Chinese Pockets Filled 
as Americans’ Emptied.” New York Times, 1.
Lett, Erin, and Judith Banister. 2006, November. “Labor Costs of 
Manufacturing Employees in China: An Update to 2003 – 04.” Monthly 
Labor Review, 40 – 46. Accessed May 2008 at http://www.bls.gov/opub/
mlr/2006/11/art4full.pdf.
Lighthizer, Robert. 2007, June 12. “Testimony on Trade Enforcement for 
a Twenty-first Century Economy,” Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate, 
110th Congress, 1st sess. Accessed January 2008 at http://www.senate.
gov/~finance/hearings/testimony/2007test/061207testrl.pdf.
Lovett, William, Alfred Eckes, and Richard Brinkman. 2004. U.S. Trade 
Policy: History, Theory, and the WTO. 2nd ed., Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.

34 Background and History
Mazur, Jay. 2000, January-February. “Labor’s New Internationalism,” 
Foreign Affairs, 79. Accessed January 2008 at http://www.globalpolicy.
org/socecon/labor/01internationalism.htm.
McMillion, Charles. 2009, January 16. “The Economic State of the Union: 
2009.” Manufacturing News, 16/1, 5.
Nader, Ralph. 1994, March 16. “Testimony” to Committee on Finance, 
U.S. Senate, 103rd Congress, 2nd sess. Accessed 01/2008 at Federal 
Document Clearing House.
Nguyen, Elena L. 2008, July. “The International Investment Position of 
the United States at Yearend 2007.” Survey of Current Business, 9.
North American Free Trade Agreement. 1994. “Chapter Eleven.” 
Accessed February 2008 at http://www.nafta-sec-alena.org/
DefaultSite/index_e.aspx?DetailID=78.
Pew Research Center. 2008, May 1. “Public Support for Free Trade 
Declines.” Accessed May 2008 at http://people-press.org/reports/
display.php3?ReportID=414.
Public Citizen. 2000. “Lobbying, Advertising and Political Donations 
Surpass All Previous Records.” Accessed January 2008 at http://www.
citizen.org/print_article.cfm?ID=6081.
Public Citizen. 2009, January 8. “Election 2008: Fair Trade Gets 
an Upgrade.” Accessed January 2009 at http://www.citizen.org/
documents/ElectionReportFINAL.pdf.
Reinsch, Bill. 2007, October 1. “Word from the President.” Accessed January 
2008 at http://www.nftc.org/default.asp?Mode=DirectorDisplay&id=205.
Roberts, Paul Craig. 2003, August 17. “Trade No Think.” VDARE.
com. Accessed January 2008 at http://www.vdare.com/roberts/trade_
nothink.htm.
Samuelson, Paul. 2004. “Where Ricardo and Mill Rebut and Confirm 
Arguments of Mainstream Economists Supporting Globalization.” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 18:3 (Summer), 135 – 46. Accessed January 
2008 at http://www.aeaweb.org/jep/contents/#7.
Schlesinger, Robert. 2000. “GOP Colleagues Fail to Help Cook.” The Hill, 3.
Schwab, Susan. 1994. Trade-Offs: Negotiating the Omnibus Trade and 
Competitiveness Act. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Sheinkman, Joel. 1994, March 16. “Testimony” to Committee on Finance, 
U.S. Senate, 103rd Congress, 2nd Sess. Accessed February 2008 at 
Federal Document Clearing House.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 2005. “The Overselling of Globalization.” Globalization: 
What’s New. Edited by Michael M. Weinstein. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 235.

References 35
Trowbridge, Alexander. 1967, July 31. U.S. Department of State 
Bulletin, 127 – 29.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2009. Foreign Trade Statistics. Accessed 
February 2009 at http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/statistics/.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 2007, November 7. An Analysis 
of Free Trade Agreements and Congressional and Private Sector 
Consultations under Trade Promotion Authority. GAO-08 – 59. 
Washington, D.C.: GAO.
U.S. House of Representatives. Committee on Ways and Means. 1994, 
September 27. Uruguay Round Trade Agreements, Texts of Agreements, 
Implementing Bill, Statement of Administrative Action, and Required 
Supporting Statements, 103rd Cong., 2nd sess., 1 – 2.
U.S. Senate. Committee on Finance. 1987, June 12. Omnibus Trade Act of 
1987, Report on S. 490, 100th Cong., 1st sess., Report 100 – 71, 2 – 3.
U.S. Trade Deficit Review Commission. 2000. The U.S. Trade Deficit: 
Causes, Consequences, and Recommendations for Action. Washington, D.C.: 
GPO. Accessed January 2008 at http://govinfo.library.unt.edu/tdrc/
reports/reports.html.
U.S. Treasury. 2009, January 16. “Major Foreign Holders of Treasury 
Securities.” Accessed February 2009 at http://www.treas.gov/tic/mfh.txt.
“Victory for Bush on Fast Track.” 2002. CQ Almanac. Washington, D.C.: 
Congressional Quarterly. Accessed May 2008 at http://library.cqpress.
com/cqalmanac/cqual02 – 236 – 10371 – 664226.
Wallach, Lori. 2006, November 8. “Nationwide Candidates Win by 
Battling for New Trade Policies.” Hot Issues. Accessed January 2008 at 
http://www.citizen.org/hot_issues/issue.cfm?ID=1471.
White, Marianne. 2007, November 27. “Ontario, Quebec Eye Trade 
Deal.” The Windsor Star, A-11.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 1994, April 15. “Agreement 
Establishing the World Trade Organization.” Accessed May 
2008 at http://www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/legal_
ehtm#wtoagreement.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2008. “Trade Profiles.” Accessed 
November 2008 at http://stat.wto.org/CountryProfile/WSDB
CountryPFHome.aspx?Lang.
Zeiler, Thomas W. 1992. American Trade & Power in the 1960s. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Zoellick, Robert. 2002, December 7. “Unleashing the Trade Winds,” 
The Economist, special report. Accessed January 2009 at LexisNexis 
Academic.http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.

This page intentionally left blank

37
2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
A 
wide-ranging debate over future U.S. trade policy is under 
way in the United States. It involves officials in the executive 
branch and Congress, and a variety of private and public in-
terest groups with stakes in trade policy. This chapter strives to 
introduce some of the key issues and parties to the debate, and to 
identify possible solutions. Readers seeking more information on 
the latest developments are encouraged to examine resources and 
Web sites mentioned in Chapter 7.
Background to the Debate
During the administrations of Bill Clinton (1993 –2001) and 
George W. Bush (2001– 2009), U.S. officials pushed hard for free-
trade agreements (FTAs). But these pacts differed markedly from 
the free-trade agreements envisaged by the classical economists 
and discussed in academic textbooks. Economists frequently 
write about FTAs as if they involve only eliminating tariffs and 
quantitative restraints (quotas) on goods moving between two or 
more countries. Such agreements, they say, could be written on 
the back of a postcard. The FTAs negotiated under Clinton and 
Bush were much longer, and contained hundreds of pages of legal 
text; NAFTA has 824 pages, the FTA with Singapore 1,586 pages, 
and the CAFTA-Dominican Agreement 3,725 pages. In addition 
to eliminating tariffs and quotas on trade in goods, these arrange-
ments address services, finance, and information. They include 
dispute-resolution procedures, intellectual property protections, 
investment guarantees, government procurement, and various 

38 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
other provisions intended to establish rules for global business 
in the 21st century. Written by lawyers, not economists, these 
FTAs seek to facilitate access to markets and to accord foreign 
businesses treatment equal to that provided domestic businesses 
in the host country. Some say they should be more accurately la-
beled market-sharing agreements, rather than free-trade agree-
ments, because they spell out in detailed language the terms of 
competition between domestic and foreign firms.
While popular with international lawyers and business ex-
ecutives, these FTAs generated little enthusiasm in mainstream 
America. Even before the 2008 –2009 recession, public opinion polls 
showed support for trade liberalization and globalization had 
 declined during the Clinton and Bush presidencies. Citizens seemed 
less interested in how imports benefitted consumers than in the 
visible costs of globalization. Job layoffs, associated with rising 
imports and factory closings, generated headlines, and focused 
attention on trade-impacted individuals, industries, and commu-
nities. In January 2008, Fortune magazine released a poll of 1,000 re-
spondents indicating that Americans were souring on free trade. 
Sixty-three percent believed international trade was bad for the 
United States because it resulted in loss of jobs and lower wages. 
Only 30 percent thought trade beneficial because it led to lower 
consumer prices. Seventy-seven percent were extremely or very 
concerned about the safety of imported products. Only 3 percent 
were  unconcerned. The poll also revealed that by a 64-to-30 per-
cent  margin, Americans said they would be willing to pay higher 
prices on consumer goods to keep down foreign competition 
(Easton 2008). Other polls showed similar results (Public Citizen 
2009a, 28 –29).
Many ordinary people associated manufacturing job losses— 
over 4 million from 2000 to 2008 — with rising imports from 
NAFTA and China (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2008). Fear of 
foreign competition was not limited to blue-collar workers. As cor-
porations contracted out activities (outsourcing) and moved jobs 
overseas (offshoring), many white-collar workers and profession-
als also worried about employment opportunities. Alan Blinder, 
a prominent Princeton University economist, warned that 28 to 
42 million service-sector jobs could move offshore (Blinder 2006).
Helping to fan the flames of criticism was CNN commenta-
tor Lou Dobbs, an independent populist. In hard-hitting, nightly 
news programs, he attacked flawed trade agreements, faith-based 
free trade, and the outsourcing of American jobs to cheap labor 

Future Trade Priorities 39
countries at the expense of the middle class. Dobbs’s commentar-
ies helped focus public ire on trade issues and elected officials in 
Washington (Fleischer 2005).
Also contributing to the negative mood was a steady flow of 
product recalls and media headlines highlighting health and safety 
issues. Stories about Chinese toothpaste tainted with antifreeze 
and Chinese toys containing excessive amounts of lead revealed 
the hidden, and unforeseen, costs of globalization (Smith-Spark 
2007). In an open unregulated world economy in which national 
regulatory standards and governance varied widely, consumers 
found themselves vulnerable to harmful deceptions. Certainly, 
expanding trade produced rapid growth and lower prices. But, 
it also enhanced income inequality and dislocations for those 
least able to cope and adapt. The consequence was to stir a far-
ranging, and increasingly partisan, debate over how the United 
States should shape and regulate its trade in the volatile new age 
of globalization.
Future Trade Priorities
What trade policies should the United States pursue? Hostility 
to one-sided trade agreements and globalization — the new fair 
trade sentiment — contributed importantly to the outcome of con-
gressional elections in 2006 when Democrats took control of Con-
gress. Trade remained an important issue in the 2008 elections. 
With stock markets declining and unemployment mounting, 
Democrats strengthened their congressional majorities and won 
the presidency (Public Citizen 2009a).
During the presidential primaries, Democratic candidates 
generally criticized President Bush’s free-trade policies, and urged 
changes. Senators Hillary Clinton (D-NY) and Barack Obama (D-IL) 
both voiced opposition to FTAs negotiated with Colombia and 
South Korea, and urged renegotiation of NAFTA. They blamed 
the Bush administration for inattention to labor, safety, and envi-
ronmental standards, and for failure to enforce existing U.S. trade 
laws against unfair practices. The Democrats urged expanded ad-
justment assistance to dislocated workers in order to lessen dis-
content and to prepare workers for better job opportunities.
Obama, at heart an internationalist, said he recognized the 
reality of globalization and the benefits of trade, but insisted that 
existing trade agreements should provide reciprocal benefits. 

40 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
Concerned that the protectionist rhetoric of the primaries might 
be misinterpreted, his staff signaled to the Canadian government 
that criticisms of trade policy should be treated as political postur-
ing, not as a statement of policy plans (Goldstein 2008).
During the transition, Obama continued to straddle the con-
flicting trade debate. Labor supporters applauded his opposition 
to Bush’s bilateral FTAs, his promise to renegotiate NAFTA, and 
his pledge to enforce existing agreements. Business supporters 
noted that in selecting former Dallas mayor Ron Kirk, as U.S. 
Trade Representative, Obama had assigned the key trade-policy 
post to a free trader. What did these statements and appointments 
mean for Obama’s policies? His supporters did not know. Some 
insiders, such as former U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kan-
tor, forecast that an Obama administration would emphasize big 
multilateral and regional deals, not bilateral deals, as the Bush 
administration had done (Davis and Meckler 2008). Others sus-
pected that the many controversies, and the deep divisions among 
Democrats in Congress on this issue, would force Obama to de-
emphasize trade and focus on other urgent matters, such as creat-
ing jobs and stimulating the economy (Drajem 2008).
Free Trade Fault Line
U.S. presidents receive advice on trade policy from many sources. 
One recommendation, enjoying favor with Wall Street and the 
transnational business community, involves a renewed commit-
ment to freeing trade and opening markets, and most importantly 
to avoiding protectionist actions. This approach has support in 
both major political parties, particularly among large business and 
financial campaign contributors. Many of them hope the Obama 
administration will continue the internationalist, trade-opening 
policies of Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, a Republican.
In trade politics, the voice of transnational business is well 
represented by the Business Roundtable, the Chamber of Com-
merce, the U.S. Council for International Business, the Emergency 
Committee on American Trade (ECAT), the National Associa-
tion of Manufacturers, and the National Foreign Trade Council, 
among others. These powerful lobbying groups insist that Amer-
ica must continue to provide trade leadership to open markets 
and respond to the challenges of globalization in a rapidly chang-
ing world. For them, the path out of the world recession involves 

Free Trade Fault Line 41
 American engagement with the global economy (Business Round-
table, 2009).
In essence, big business wants government to continue trad-
ing assured access to the mature American market for similar 
business opportunities in foreign markets — especially, the high-
growth, emerging markets: Brazil, Russia, India, and China. The 
business agenda involves far more than trade in goods and agricul-
tural products. Many free-trade supporters are service providers 
involved with banking, insurance, shipping and transportation, 
and software. Others seek foreign investment opportunities. To 
conduct business in the 21st century, global business wants na-
tional treatment in foreign countries. That is, it wants treatment 
equal to that received by domestic companies in those countries. 
From the standpoint of big business, the unresolved trade issues 
are not border problems, like tariffs, quotas, and customs regula-
tions. They are internal regulatory issues involving such things as 
product standards, investment policies, protection for intellectual 
property, government procurement, and fair and effective dispute 
settlement procedures. The last item raises sensitive political and 
constitutional issues involving governance and the rule-of-law.
Advocates for transnational business reject the argument 
that the United States should turn its back on foreign business 
opportunities and focus on rebuilding the domestic economy. 
They claim the United States is competing effectively in the world 
economy. Officials of the Business Roundtable, and other corpo-
rate leaders, cite statistics showing America’s world-class farm-
ers, manufacturers, and service providers have made steady gains 
from expanding trade. More than 15 million U.S. jobs depend on 
exports, they say, and these typically pay 13-to-18 percent above 
the average wage. Big business also asserts that ordinary Ameri-
cans benefit in multiple ways from imports. Imports hold down 
inflation and give consumers greater purchasing power. They 
provide jobs to millions of Americans in transportation, distribu-
tion, and retail. Imports even enable U.S. manufacturers to ob-
tain lower-priced components and thus stay competitive globally 
while producing in America, advocates for the large corporations 
claim (McGraw 2007).
Transnational corporations believe that trade agreements 
should cover investment issues because the two subjects are in-
separable. They want to move capital freely around the world 
in response to global market conditions and opportunities. Big 
business says outflows of foreign direct investment benefit U.S. 

42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
exports. Exports to foreign affiliates of U.S. firms account for nearly 
one-quarter of U.S. exports of goods. U.S. companies with  foreign 
investments, they say, account for two-thirds of U.S. exports. Mean-
while, foreign investments in the United States employ 5.3 million 
workers (McGraw 2007, Business Roundtable 2009).
In essence, business proponents of free trade claim that what 
is good for transnational business is good for the world, and the 
United States. The Council for International Business, the U.S. 
affiliate of the International Chamber of Commerce that repre-
sents 300 multinational corporations, says it desires to promote 
an open system of global trade, finance, and investment in which 
the private sector can prosper and contribute to economic growth, 
human welfare, and protection of the environment (U.S. Council 
for International Business 2008). Big multinational corporations 
strongly oppose “Buy-American” policies intended to shelter the 
domestic producers from foreign competition. Such initiatives, 
they say, would send the wrong signal to trading partners, invit-
ing them to adopt buy-local rules and thus undermining global 
commerce (U.S. Council for International Business 2009).
Business support for free trade and open markets is not lim-
ited to transnational firms eager to produce globally. The free 
traders include farm groups and food processors eager to end 
trade barriers to food product exports, U.S.-based manufacturing 
firms anxious to obtain cheap components, and retailers such as 
Wal-Mart, reliant on foreign supplies.
Worried that grassroots America may embrace isolationism 
and turn its back on worldwide trade and investment opportu-
nities, lobbyists for big business seek to blunt the appeal of fair-
trade and protectionist solutions. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce 
pledged $60 million in the 2008 elections to defeat populist types 
(Hamburger 2008). When economic conditions in the United 
States worsened during 2008 and early 2009, transnational busi-
ness, and its internationalist allies, sought to make the case that 
the overwhelming majority of citizens benefit greatly from inter-
national economic engagement (U.S. Chamber 2009). They urged 
newly-elected leaders to reject Smoot-Hawley type unilateral-
ism that many economists think worsened the Great Depression 
(Bergsten 2008b).
On the other side of the trade priorities debate is a loose coali-
tion of small and medium-sized businesses, labor unions, and activ-
ists representing environmentalists, small farmers, and consumers. 
This alliance includes liberals and conservatives, small-town 

Free Trade Fault Line 43
Republicans, and labor-oriented Democrats. Industries such as 
steel and textiles also are often found on the protectionist side of the 
debate. These groups agree generally on the need to delay future 
trade negotiations and to defeat proposed free-trade agreements. 
Some of them favor vigorous enforcement of U.S. trade-remedy 
laws to offset injury caused by foreign dumping and export subsi-
dies. For a discussion of these quasi-judicial laws, see later in this 
chapter.
Opponents of further trade liberalization dispute the benefi-
cial claims of free-trade enthusiasts. These critics say the transna-
tional firms overstate the gains from trade and minimize losses. 
They hold transnationals responsible for offshoring large numbers 
of manufacturing, research, and middle-management jobs. The 
trade skeptics blame the large firms for the huge and growing 
trade deficit with China (“NAM Committee 2005). They also criti-
cize the multinationals opposing “Buy-American” purchasing 
requirements in government spending programs. Global Trade 
Watch says the real reason is that the big companies have moved 
much of their production to low-wage foreign locations and may 
benefit less from “Buy-American” government spending (Public 
Citizen 2009b).
Organized labor, which has lost millions of members in man-
ufacturing industries like automobiles and steel, castigates big 
corporations for shipping 525,000 white collar and 3 million man-
ufacturing jobs overseas since 1992. According to the AFL-CIO, 
business-led globalization drives down labor standards around 
the world, as the private sector seeks to avoid regulations and re-
sponsibilities to workers and communities (AFL-CIO 2009). Labor 
is especially concerned about the impact of free trade and global-
ization on working people’s incomes. It blames America’s massive 
trade deficit accounts for massive job losses in the manufacturing 
sector. It claims that wages for nonsupervisory workers (80% of 
the labor force) have stagnated, while the White House enthusias-
tically pushed free-trade agreements. Economist Lawrence Mishel 
of the Economic Policy Institute, which has close ties to organized 
labor, calculates that trade has probably cost the median house-
hold between $2,000 and $6,000 in annual earnings. He argues 
that cheap shoes, clothes, and consumer goods do not compensate 
workers for the burdens of globalization (Mishel 2007).
Organized labor is eager to restore balance to trade policy. It 
says the Bush administration aggressively pursued the interests 
of multinational corporations — rules on investment, intellectual 

44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
property, government procurement, and service sector access—
while ignoring workers rights and the environment. According 
to Thea Lee, the AFL-CIO’s Policy Director, U.S. trade policy has 
advanced corporate rights at the exclusion of other legitimate 
concerns (Lee 2007). Organized labor hopes that the Obama ad-
ministration will be more sensitive to the circumstances of domes-
tic workers.
Representatives of small and medium-sized businesses agree 
that the U.S. government has advanced the free-trade agenda of 
transnationals at the expense of smaller firms and their workers. 
Many small and medium-size businesses (having fewer than 500 
employees) are rooted in local communities, have local owner-
ship, and retain close ties to their workers, who often are union-
ized. Owners of such firms have little desire to produce in foreign 
countries and sell in global markets. They blame large U.S. mul-
tinational corporations for using free trade to break the power of 
unions and reduce the wages of workers in their effort to remain 
globally competitive (Roeser 2003).
Associations representing import-sensitive manufacturers 
urge the Obama administration to replace the current flawed trade 
model and level the playing field for domestic manufacturers. Call-
ing the current world trading system a “Ponzi scheme dwarfing 
Bernie Madoff’s,” Kevin Kearns of the U.S. Business and Indus-
trial Council exhorts President Obama to ensure that any stimulus 
plan for the American economy create new jobs in this country, 
and does not reward consumers for buying foreign-made goods 
(Kearns 2009). Auggie Tantillo of the American Manufacturing 
Trade Action Coalition (AMTAC) urges the U.S. government to use 
access to its market as a lever to remove unfair foreign trade prac-
tices such as China’s WTO-illegal export subsidies and artificially-
 cheap currency (AMTAC 2008b).
At the local and state level, a variety of activists engage the 
trade debate. One coalition of 347 national, state, and local or-
ganizations — mostly environmental, faith, labor, and consumer 
groups — has urged President Obama and Congress to support 
campaign promises to reform U.S. trade policies. The activists 
blame the current free-trade model and mismanaged trade deals 
for soaring trade deficits, lost jobs, environmental destruction, lost 
local taxes, and unsafe products. The activists accuse the federal 
government of trading away self-determination, personal free-
dom, and democratic processes (Citizens Trade Campaign 2009). 
The Alliance for American Manufacturing, an advocacy group 

Future Trade Negotiations 45
funded by organized labor and some domestic manufacturers, 
has also sought to rally grassroots opinion. During the 2008 elec-
tions, it held a series of town-hall meetings in major cities fea-
turing television star John Ratzenberger, who played Cliff in the 
hit series Cheers. He told voters that they must hold politicians 
accountable for flawed trade policies contributing to the loss of 
American manufacturing jobs (Majors 2007).
Future Trade Negotiations
With the world in a recession, and nations seeking to protect do-
mestic jobs, trade negotiations did not seem an immediate prior-
ity for many elected officials in 2009. Despite its focus on domestic 
recovery and reforming the financial system, the Obama admin-
istration faces pressure to resume trade negotiations at the multi-
lateral, regional, and bilateral levels. Pascal Lamy, the head of the 
WTO, has urged Obama to engage the international community 
through negotiations, rather than building walls as the United 
States did during the Great Depression of the 1930s (Lamy 2008).
If history is any guide, the Obama administration at some 
point will ask Congress for a new mandate of trade negotiating 
authority. Trade-promotion authority (TPA), or fast-track, as it was 
previously called, involves a deal between the executive and the 
Congress to streamline and simplify the congressional approval 
process. In return for extensive consultations during the negotia-
tions, Congress agrees to vote on a trade agreement promptly and 
without amendments. USTR desires fast-track authority so that 
foreign negotiators can make their best offers, knowing that Con-
gress will not try to shake them down for additional concessions 
after the agreement is signed. Key members of Congress seem to 
like fast-track because the process involves consultations. Con-
gress thus has some opportunity to influence negotiations before 
being presented with a signed agreement.
Fast-track came into existence with the 1974 Trade Act. For 
40 years after passage of Cordell Hull’s reciprocal trade act in 
1934, Congress had ceded tariff reduction power to the executive. 
But, during the Kennedy Round Congress, as noted in Chapter 1, 
Congress concluded that the Johnson administration had gone 
beyond tariff-cutting and had negotiated on nontariff issues with-
out specific approval. Congress balked on renewing negotiating 
authority until 1974, when the Nixon administration proposed a 

46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
fast-track compromise. It authorized the president to negotiate 
agreements in consultation with Congress. After entering into 
a trade agreement, the president was required to submit imple-
menting legislation. The House and Senate then had 90 legislative 
days to vote on the bill. No amendments were allowed in com-
mittee or upon the floor, thus forcing an up-or-down vote on the 
entire bill (Eckes 1999).
The original fast-track legislation lapsed in 1994. By then, the 
United States had entered into the Uruguay Round agreements 
setting up the World Trade Organization and the North American 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). A Republican-controlled Con-
gress, headed by Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich, refused 
to renew fast-track authority for President Bill Clinton. However, 
after the election of President George W. Bush, the Republican-
controlled Congress chose in 2002 to renew fast-track for five years. 
It was relabeled trade promotion authority (TPA). The legislative 
initiative took 18 months, and succeeded only after the Bush ad-
ministration agreed to expand benefits for trade-displaced work-
ers. This enabled a number of probusiness Democrats to support 
the trade promotion authority.
TPA expired on July 1, 2007, and a Democrat-controlled Con-
gress took no action to renew it. In the 2006 congressional elec-
tions, outsourcing and free trade had been controversial, and the 
new Democratic leadership in Congress had no disposition to 
give Bush another blank check on trade (Smith 2008).
Should Congress give the Obama administration this author-
ity? To U.S.-based transnational business, the renewal of presi-
dential trade negotiating authority is important. Their argument 
is a pragmatic one. U.S. exporters pay no duties when they sell 
to free-trade partners, but they pay an average of 14 percent to 
countries not having free-trade agreements with the United States 
(NAM 2007a). In the absence of a free-trade agreement, this gives 
European and Asian competitors who do have free-trade pacts a 
significant cost advantage. Consequently, U.S. business wants 
to level the playing field. The Business Roundtable claims that 
between 1994 and 2002, when the president did not have fast-
track authority, U.S. exporters lost market share in Latin America, 
Africa, and Asia (McGraw 2007). Eager to open global markets 
for manufactures, farmers, and service providers, big business 
wants the executive branch and Congress to work together on 
trade issues in a bipartisan way (Reinsch 2007a; Business Round-
table 2009).

Future Trade Negotiations 47
On TPA renewal, there is no clear consensus. Even the busi-
ness community is divided. Opposing reauthorization are groups 
representing domestic manufacturers. Their arguments include 
constitutional concerns. Auggie Tantillo, president of AMTAC, 
argues that fast-track is a blank check for the executive branch to 
offshore U.S. industries. In his view, trade promotion authority 
allows the president to usurp constitutional powers granted to 
the legislative branch to regulate commerce. It benefits special in-
terests who write big checks for political campaigns, not ordinary 
Americans (AMTAC 2007, 2008a).
Labor unions also oppose TPA. The AFL-CIO claims that 
Bush-administration free trade policies resulted in bad agree-
ments, spiraling deficits, stagnant wages, and lost jobs. Organized 
labor wants global trade rules that link protection for workers’ 
fundamental human rights to market access. It argues there must 
be a better balance between domestic rule-making and interna-
tional obligations. This way, trade agreements would not jeopar-
dize the ability of governments to provide services and to regulate 
public health, consumer safety, the environment, and labor mar-
kets (AFL-CIO 2007a).
Environmental and consumer groups offer specific examples 
of how trade agreements have trumped other concerns. Earthjus-
tice points to Chapter 11 of the NAFTA agreement, which allows 
investors to sue state governments if it appears that they have 
taken actions that might infringe the terms of the trade agreement. 
In one much-discussed case, Methanex, a Canadian firm that pro-
duced a gasoline additive MTBE, sued California in 2001 when it 
banned the chemical saying it was poisoning supplies of drink-
ing water (Earthjustice 2001). Lori Wallach, the director of Public 
Citizen’s Global Trade Watch, asserts that fast-track trumps con-
stitutional checks and balances, and flattens federalism. Elected 
officials at the federal, state, and local levels have difficulty hold-
ing U.S. trade negotiators accountable for concessions. In her 
view, corporate lobbyists call the shots (Wallach 2007a, Wallach 
2007b).
Whether or not the Obama administration can gain support 
for trade negotiations may depend on a group of fair-trade Demo-
crats, such as Sherrod Brown of Ohio and Byron Dorgan of North 
Dakota. They have long opposed what they consider job-killing 
trade pacts and flawed free-trade policies. They and colleagues 
want to develop a trade policy that works for workers and U.S. 
businesses, not simply for big business. The fair-trade Democrats 

48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
seek to revamp trade agreements, and enhance oversight and ac-
countability by including benchmarks. They propose giving the 
Treasury Department greater authority to address China’s cur-
rency manipulation, and product safety. These legislators say 
they favor more trade, but they want trade that produces posi-
tive results, not hazardous products, extensive job losses, and gar-
gantuan trade deficits. They argue that future trade agreements 
should have enforceable environmental, labor, and anticounter-
feiting standards (Brown, Sherrod 2007).
In light of the wide opposition to open-ended negotiating au-
thority, the Obama administration could choose to avoid a bitter 
fight over this procedure. It might focus instead on building con-
gressional support for individual agreements, an approach rec-
ommended by Charlene Barshefsky, a former USTR in the Clinton 
administration. She argues that the focus on fast-track is misplaced 
and its value in negotiations overstated (Barshefsky 2008).
Pending Agreements
One vexing issue is how to handle bilateral agreements that the 
George W. Bush administration negotiated with Colombia, Pan-
ama, and South Korea. In early 2008, Bush urged Congress to ap-
prove these three pacts in order to level the playing field, provide 
access to nearly 100 million customers, and promote America’s 
strategic interests. Failure to pass the Colombian agreement, 
he warned, would “embolden the purveyors of false populism 
in our hemisphere,” a slap at Venezuelan leader Hugo Chavez 
(Bush 2008).
Bush’s appeal failed to sway a Congress caught up in 
election-year politics. Organized labor, a powerful voice in the 
Democratic presidential primaries, considered Bush out of touch 
with the concerns of working families and it criticized violence in 
Colombia against labor leaders. Congressional leaders dismissed 
Bush’s call for an early vote on Colombia. When the president 
insisted on submitting the Colombia FTA to the House of Repre-
sentatives in April under fast-track rules, Speaker Nancy Pelosi 
acted to delay consideration. By a 224 to 195 vote, the House 
voted along partisan lines to suspend the 90-day voting require-
ment in fast-track. Pelosi gained the support of 6 Republicans 
and lost only 10 Democrats. Bush and fellow Republicans de-
nounced the unprecedented move. Democrats saw it as a way 

Pending Agreements 49
to avoid dividing the party over a trade issue in a presidential 
election (Hulse 2008).
U.S.– Colombia FTA
What are the merits of the controversial Colombia FTA? A country 
with 46 million consumers, Colombia is the second-largest country 
in South America (after Brazil), but it accounts for only 0.5 per-
cent of U.S. trade. With two-way trade amounting to over $14 bil-
lion, the FTA would be the biggest in the Western hemisphere 
since NAFTA was approved in 1994. According to the U.S. trade 
representative, over 80 percent of U.S. exports to Colombia would 
become duty-free immediately and the rest over 10 years. The 
pact would create new opportunities for farmers and ranchers. 
U.S. exports of beef, cotton, wheat, and soybeans would immedi-
ately gain duty-free status. Also, the FTA offers strong protections 
for U.S. investors, including a binding international arbitration 
mechanism, and expanded access for service providers, including 
financial services. There would also be greater protection for intel-
lectual property rights, an open and competitive telecommunica-
tions market, and increased transparency in dispute settlement 
mechanisms. The agreement, USTR says, includes internationally-
 recognized labor rights and commitments to protect the environ-
ment (USTR 2008c).
Implementation of the pact was expected to have few adverse 
effects for U.S. industry and employment. Sugar imports might 
increase. Export-oriented U.S. agriculture anticipated big gains. 
When fully implemented, the FTA was expected to boost prof-
its of the average U.S. pork producer by 14 percent (Witness for 
Peace 2006; National Pork Producers 2007). Some opponents in 
Colombia feared free trade in agricultural products —wheat, pork, 
soybeans — would drive thousands of campesinos off the land, as 
NAFTA had done in Mexico (“Faces of Colombia” 2006).
The principal reasons for the AFL-CIO’s vigorous opposition 
relate to domestic circumstances in Colombia. Organized labor 
said that in 2006, 72 Colombian trade unionists were murdered 
for exercising basic labor rights, and in 2007 another 39 were 
killed, the highest rate in the world. Opponents of the FTA allege 
that Colombia’s government has ties to right-wing paramilitary 
groups blamed for the killings. U.S. labor unions lack confidence 
in Colombia’s commitment to meet International Labor Organiza-
tion standards. In effect, labor has chosen to link its support of the 

50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
trade agreement to a resolution of specific human-rights concerns 
(AFL-CIO 2008b).
Despite the intense opposition of unions, and their close ties 
to congressional Democrats, business took up the fight for the 
pact. Caterpillar, Citigroup, and Wal-Mart teamed up to mobilize 
business support under the auspices of the 1,000-member Latin 
American Trade Coalition, an affiliate of the U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce (Heflin 2008). Supporters of the pact have pushed the 
national-security argument. They allege that refusal to approve 
the agreement would be a propaganda triumph for Venezuelan 
dictator Chavez, and a catastrophic setback for U.S. plans to pro-
mote a broader free-trade arrangement in the Americas.
U.S.–Panama FTA
At first impression, the proposed FTA with Panama appears less 
controversial than the one with Colombia. Panama is a small 
country with a service-based economy, centered on the Panama 
Canal, and it has longstanding economic ties to the United States. 
The U.S. dollar is Panama’s principal currency. Moreover, the 
U.S.–Panama FTA has strong champions among the service indus-
tries. Fedex and UPS want the pact to better protect their opera-
tions. The service industries say the agreement would promote 
a secure and predictable legal framework for U.S. investors in 
Panama (USTR 2007a). Firms eager to participate in expansion of 
the Panama Canal, like Caterpillar, see vast business opportuni-
ties. However, the deal hit an obstacle when Panama elected a 
legislative leader accused of killing a U.S. soldier in 1992. Other 
concerns related to labor issues and to Panama’s status as a tax 
haven for those seeking to dodge U.S. income taxes (Cohn 2009). 
The pact languished at the end of the Bush administration, but 
the Obama administration has indicated it wants to win congres-
sional approval (Lacey 2007; Rosenberg 2009).
U.S.–South Korea FTA
The proposed free-trade agreement with the Republic of Korea, 
the world’s tenth largest economy, is far more significant eco-
nomically and strategically. South Korea has 49 million consum-
ers with a per capita gross domestic product of nearly $25,000, 
approximately double that of Mexico. South Korea is America’s 

Pending Agreements 51
seventh largest trading partner, and its sixth largest export market 
for agricultural products (USTR 2006).
The pact pleases many in big business. The U.S.–Korea FTA 
Business Coalition, which includes 500 businesses, among them 
Boeing, Chevron, Citigroup, and UPS, applauds the agreement 
(US-Korea FTA 2008). It would make almost 95 percent of goods 
trade duty-free within three years, and eliminate significant non-
tariff market access barriers to providers of goods, services, and 
investments (USTR 2007b). The NAM also is enthusiastic about 
the intellectual-property provisions. John Engler, its president, 
says approval of the agreement would be a plus for most U.S. 
industries (NAM 2007b).
But Democrats in Congress chose to oppose the South Ko-
rean FTA. They say it does not address effectively South Korean 
nontariff barriers blocking U.S. exports of manufactured prod-
ucts. They are particularly concerned about the one-sided rela-
tionship in automotive trade and the labor provisions. South 
Korea exports more than 700,000 cars to the United States but im-
ports fewer than 5,000. The AFL-CIO complains that the pact does 
more to protect the interests of multinational corporations than 
to promote equitable development and balanced trade (AFL-CIO 
2007b). They also observe that South Korean labor leaders oppose 
the FTA as it maximizes profits while putting the working class in 
poverty and exploitation.
U.S. agriculture, which has powerful friends in Congress, was 
disappointed with the results. Because of intense opposition from 
militant farmers, South Korea refused to negotiate on rice. It also 
declined to remove a ban on beef imports from the United States 
imposed after concerns about mad-cow disease. This disturbed 
Senator Max Baucus (D-MT), a key congressional gatekeeper. As 
chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, which must approve 
the agreement, Baucus had the power to block congressional con-
sideration. As a senator from Montana, a major cattle raising state, 
Baucus was understandably sensitive to the concerns of the Na-
tional Cattleman’s Association that the agreement did not provide 
for a resumption of commercially viable beef trade.
South Korean president Lee Myung-bak sought to break the 
stalemate during a state visit to the United States in April 2008. 
He announced that Seoul would lift U.S. restrictions on beef. In 
South Korea, farmers took to the streets in protest, and the South 
Korean government backed away from its pledge to open the beef 

52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
market. As this volume went to press, the outcome of the South 
Korean agreement remains in doubt (“Where’s the Beef?” 2008). 
The Obama administration wants to renegotiate the agreement to 
improve terms for U.S. automakers and beef exporters, but South 
Korea has refused to reopen the agreement.
WTO Negotiations
Another important dimension of the wide-ranging trade debate 
relates to the stalled Doha Development Round of multilateral 
trade negotiations. The WTO launched the so-called Doha Round 
in November, 2001, at a meeting in Doha, Qatar. One important 
goal was to integrate the least developed countries into the global 
trading system by providing market access for their agricultural 
exports and manufactures. Nations also committed to phasing 
out all forms of export subsidies and trade-distorting domestic 
support as part of the agricultural negotiations. In manufactures, 
the round sought to reduce or eliminate tariffs and nontariff barri-
ers. It was expected, in turn, that the developing countries would 
consent to terms of access for services and to greater protection of 
intellectual property.
As discussed in Chapter 3, a stalemate developed between 
developing and developed countries, and the Doha Round has 
floundered. Developing countries, led by Brazil and India, resisted 
opening their markets to services and manufactures without im-
proved opportunities for sales of developing-country agricultural 
exports. However, Japan and the European Union oppose liberal-
izing agricultural trade, and some say the United States did not 
offer to reduce farm subsidies sufficiently.
Despite disappointments, many in the transnational business 
community continue to stress the importance of a breakthrough 
agreement in the Doha round with the 153 members of the WTO. 
Big business desires a broad agreement that includes liberalization 
in trade, services, and agriculture. To break the deadlock, some vet-
eran observers, such as Bill Reinsch of the National Foreign Trade 
Council, suggest that it may be time to drop agriculture, and to 
seek free trade with Europe and Japan in manufactures and ser-
vices that will stimulate job growth in the United States (Reinsch 
2007b).
For the politically powerful farmers, this suggestion is unap-
pealing. Farmers have long insisted that their support for the Doha 
Round hinges on obtaining substantial export opportunities. For 

Pending Agreements 53
decades, big U.S. agriculture has sought the reduction or elimi-
nation of export subsidies and state trading, harmonization of 
trade-distorting domestic subsidies, and expanded market access 
to foreign markets. The American Farm Bureau, which seeks to 
represent all farmers and be the voice of agriculture, supports 
WTO negotiations to create a fair and level playing field for U.S. 
farmers (American Farm Bureau 2008). But recognizing that other 
countries are reluctant to open up their agricultural markets as 
part of a multilateral agreement, the farm bureau has pushed for 
bilateral deals, as well as renewed trade promotion authority for 
the president (U.S. Department of Agriculture 2007). The power-
ful farm lobby traditionally has exerted significant clout on trade 
negotiations through Congress. Chairman Max Baucus of the Sen-
ate Finance Committee and ranking Republican Chuck Grassley 
of Iowa, both from agricultural states, can be counted on to stand 
up for protrade farm interests when their committee reviews any 
trade agreement.
While big agriculture generally supports trade negotiations, 
family farmers do not. Groups like the National Farmers Union 
(NFU), which represents family farmers and ranchers, have vig-
orously opposed renewal of trade negotiating authority and con-
clusion of the WTO round. NFU complains that the results of 
FTA negotiations have consistently failed to match the promises 
and rhetoric of free-trade exponents. NFU President Tom Buis 
has accused U.S. trade negotiators of seeking to trade away the 
interests of America’s family farmers and ranchers in the Doha 
round for the benefit of multinational trading companies. He also 
argues that America’s family farms are being forced to compete 
with countries that do not have to meet our high labor, environ-
mental, and health standards (National Farmers Union 2009). The 
National Family Farm Coalition (NFFC) applauded the failure of 
Doha Round negotiations in August 2008. It favors an agricultural 
trade policy based on principles of food sovereignty emphasiz-
ing local farms rather than the free-trade model that puts farmers 
around the world on a race to the bottom. It blames the trans-
national corporate trading companies for promoting free trade 
policies that expose consumers to harmful and poisonous food 
products, while driving small family farmers off the land (Na-
tional Family Farm Coalition 2007, 2008).
Organized labor has little positive to say about concluding 
the Doha negotiations. It is not a priority. Before the United States 
removes remaining trade and investment barriers, labor wants 

54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
the government and the private sector to improve domestic edu-
cation, training, research, and infrastructure so that companies 
can remain in America and compete successfully in the global 
economy (Lee 2008).
While the Obama administration may choose to invest its ne-
gotiating resources in an effort to salvage the Doha Round, many 
experts believe the multilateral approach is no longer viable. The 
balance of power in the WTO has shifted from developed coun-
tries in the Atlantic region to developing countries led by Brazil, 
China, and India. One blue-ribbon panel of former trade officials 
has urged the United States to emphasize pluralistic agreements 
on specific topics with like-minded countries. One example might 
be an information technology agreement under WTO auspices. 
The group has also urged Obama to focus on helping bilateral 
free-trade agreements evolve into broader regional arrangements, 
an approach that could reenergize regional FTAs for Latin Amer-
ica, the Middle East, and the Asia Pacific (Yerkey 2008).
Bilateral and Regional Trade Negotiations
Big business is likely to keep pushing the U.S. government to en-
gage the world and knock down market barriers abroad despite 
adverse economic conditions in many markets (U.S. Chamber 
2008b; Business Roundtable 2008). Leaders of the politically-
 powerful Consumer Electronics Association, the Motion Picture 
Association of America, and the Recording Industry Association 
of America are also strong supporters of the bilateral approach. 
They argue bilateral trade agreements would eliminate harm-
ful tariffs, reinforce America’s commitment to strong intellectual 
property rights, and establish a level playing field for U.S. work-
ers by insisting on greater standards and transparencies abroad. 
The result would benefit our industry, economy, artists, and con-
sumers (Shapiro 2008).
In such circumstances, the Obama administration may choose 
to develop a new template for bilateral and regional trade negotia-
tions. Critics of Bush’s approach claimed U.S. negotiators pursued 
a cookie cutter approach (American Friends Service Committee 
2006; Levin 2005). Since embarking on the bilateral FTA approach 
with Israel, Canada, and then NAFTA, the United States devel-
oped a comprehensive formula for FTAs that involved far more 
than trade. In each FTA, the United States proposed to negoti-
ate on tariffs, nontariff barriers, agriculture, intellectual property, 

Pending Agreements 55
services, and investments. Among the goals in each agreement 
were promoting transparency in government procurement, liber-
alizing finances and services, promoting privatization, and pro-
tecting investors from discrimination. The agreements sought to 
encourage reform and openness, strengthen regulatory environ-
ments, and promote democratic decision-making.
Obama’s allies think negotiators should give greater attention 
in trade pacts to labor, environmental, and safety issues, and to 
monitoring enforcement than the Bush administration did. Popu-
list Senate Democrats, led by Sherrod Brown and Byron Dorgan, 
have proposed that FTA implementing legislation contain bench-
marks for gauging the agreement’s impact on U.S. jobs, wages, 
exports, and effects on labor and environmental conditions. If the 
targets are not met, legislators might force a vote on withdrawing 
from the FTA (Cohn 2008).
Obama and Congress may also choose to rethink the Bush 
administration’s emphasis on using trade agreements to advance 
foreign policy objectives. During the Bush years, foreign policy 
goals influenced the choice of FTA partners. Among the U.S. goals 
were strengthening strategic relationships and promoting reform 
in partner countries (U.S. General Accounting Office 2007). After 
the September 11 attacks, the Bush administration proposed 
a Middle East free trade initiative, and pursued free-trade ini-
tiatives with a number of moderate Arab countries, including 
Morocco, Bahrain, Oman, and the United Arab Emirates. USTR 
made specific reference to national security issues in announcing 
its intent to negotiate with Oman and Panama. With Morocco, 
the United States suggested that the FTA would add momentum 
to political reforms. With members of CAFTA and the Domini-
can Republic, as well as the Andean countries, the United States 
wanted to promote free-market reforms, deepen democracy, 
strengthen the rule of law, and promote sustainable develop-
ment. With South Korea, the United States sought to strengthen 
regulatory transparency.
Many of the bilateral and regional initiatives related to broader 
efforts to achieve regional free-trade agreements. The negotiations 
with Andean countries, CAFTA, and the Dominican Republic 
complemented the broader Free Trade for the Americas  initiative. 
Indeed, the negotiators contemplated that CAFTA might be folded 
into the Free Trade Agreement for the Americans. The Bush ad-
ministration also considered negotiations with Asian and Middle 
Eastern countries part of broader regional undertakings.

56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
Critics of this approach, such as Dorgan, question whether 
foreign-policy goals should continue to shape trade policy. They 
argue that current trade policy is “soft-headed foreign policy” (Dor-
gan 2003). It exposes American workers and factories to import 
competition in order to advance unrealistic strategic advantages, 
and the interests of large corporations and investors. Former U.S. 
trade negotiator Robert Cassidy offers similar criticisms (Cassidy 
2009).
While key officials in Congress and the executive branch 
seem to think the multitrack approach is an effective way to lower 
barriers, some academic economists and supporters of the multi-
lateral approach disagree. They claim it undercuts  existing com-
mitments to nondiscrimination and promotes confusion. One 
prominent critic is Jagdish Bhagwati of Columbia University, a 
free-trade enthusiast and consultant to the World Trade Orga-
nization. When Bush’s chief trade negotiator Robert Zoellick 
first announced his competitive approach, Bhagwati criticized a 
lemming-like rush into bilateral agreements that posed a deadly 
threat to the global trading system. He predicted that the prolif-
eration of bilateral pacts would result in a spaghetti bowl of rules 
and tariff schedules. He also accused Washington of adopting bi-
lateral FTAs to advance the interests of domestic lobbyists and 
interest groups. On this point Bhagwati was apparently thinking 
of provisions in agreements relating to environmental and labor 
standards, protection of intellectual property, and a ban on the use 
of capital controls (Bhagwati and Panagariya 2003).
Defenders of the FTA approach, such as Daniel Griswold, an 
analyst at the Cato Institute, a free-trade oriented think-tank in 
Washington, D.C., claim that FTAs can serve as useful templates 
for broader multilateral negotiations. Signed bilateral and regional 
agreements prevent backsliding in hard times, thus assuring foreign 
investors that reforms will remain permanent. From this per-
spective, any agreement to remove trade barriers promotes free-
dom and development (Griswold 2003).
Debating the Gains 
and Losses from Trade
The ongoing public debate over trade policy also focuses on how 
trade liberalization has benefited, or harmed, American workers 

Debating the Gains and Losses from Trade  57
and consumers. Not surprisingly, USTR claims that exports have 
risen faster to countries with free-trade agreements than to non-
free-trade agreement countries. USTR also estimates that annual 
incomes in the United States are $9,000 higher per household ($1 
trillion total) as a result of trade liberalization since 1945 (USTR 
2008a). The USTR concludes that exports of manufactures provide 
an estimated 5.7 million jobs in the United States, including one in 
six manufacturing jobs. Agriculture exports (including processed 
food) provide 806,000 jobs. Also, jobs supported by exports of 
goods pay more than the U.S. national average; an estimated 13 per-
cent to 18 percent more. Based on this, USTR suggests that further 
reductions in trade barriers will spur the creation of more, higher 
paying jobs in the United States. And, because services account 
for 8 out of 10 jobs in the United States, they could benefit signifi-
cantly from the conclusion of a successful Doha Round. And, if 
the remaining barriers to trade flows were eliminated, the USTR 
has asserted this would add another $500 billion to annual income 
or $4,500 per U.S. household (Schwab 2007).
Opponents of the trade liberalization program challenge US-
TR’s numbers and its analysis. Josh Bivens of the Economic Policy 
Institute, affiliated with organized labor, disputes the claim that 
trade liberalization has produced income-gains of $1 trillion. He 
says the economic gains from the integration of the U.S. economy 
with a much poorer global economy are quite small. He accuses 
some zealous free traders of reaching beyond the evidence to 
make a case for trade liberalization (Bivens 2007a, 2007b).
Citizen Trade Watch, an affiliate of consumer advocate Ralph 
Nader’s organization, also rebuts USTR’s principal claims. It ar-
gues that trade liberalization has been harmful to U.S. workers 
and costly to consumers. While USTR claims domestically that 
trade agreements boost exports more than to non-FTA countries, 
the Nader organization retorts that claim is valid only if the USTR 
ignores Mexico, Canada, and Israel. These are the three FTA coun-
tries with which the United States has had large deficits. Indeed, 
Citizen Trade Watch claims that U.S. trade officials know that trade 
agreements are more beneficial to trading partners. In a speech to 
a South Korean audience, Deputy USTR Karan Bhatia denied the 
United States would get the bulk of the benefits from a FTA. His-
tory, he said, shows that the bilateral trade surpluses of our FTA 
trading partners go up (Wallach 2007b; Bhatia 2006).
In congressional testimony, Citizen Trade Watch Director Lori 
Wallach has explained that the average American worker makes 

58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
only a nickel more per hour, after adjustment for inflation, than 
in 1973 before Congress passed the fast-track negotiating author-
ity. In the absence of trade agreements that place American work-
ers in a race-to-the-bottom with low-wage workers worldwide, 
she asserts that U.S. workers would see wage increases that more 
closely track productivity improvements. She charges that the 
free-trade pacts have been used to extend drug patent protections 
from 17 to 20 years, effectively providing wind-fall patent protec-
tionism to the drug industry at the expense of consumers ( Wallach 
2007b).
As noted earlier, other critics of government trade policy 
claim it has weakened the nation’s manufacturing base and con-
tributed to the loss of more than 3 million manufacturing jobs 
since January 2001. Since implementation of NAFTA in 1994, the 
textile and apparel industry has lost 1.1 million jobs. Defenders of 
the textile industry say the jobs lost typically pay 194 percent of 
jobs in the leisure and hospitality sectors, where many dislocated 
workers end up (McMillion 2008).
Responding to China
One of the most difficult issues facing U.S. leadership is how to 
handle the complex relationship with the People’s Republic of 
China. That country is ruled by the Communist Party, which tol-
erates little dissent, and is viewed by the Pentagon as a strategic 
rival. Over the last two decades, China has also become one of 
America’s leading trading partners. In 2007, China replaced Can-
ada as the leading source of U.S. imports, and in 2008 supplied 
$337.8 billion of goods. But while Americans imported more and 
more toys, apparel, electronics, and other products from China’s 
factories, U.S. exports to China lagged. In 2008, the United States 
exported only $71.5 billion for a bilateral deficit of $266.3 billion, 
the largest deficit ever recorded with a single country (U.S. Cen-
sus 2009). One firm, the giant retailer Wal-Mart, accounts for a 
substantial portion of the deficit (Wal-Mart 2007).
The unbalanced trading relationship, which has continued 
for more than 20 years, has stirred controversy and aroused calls 
for a unilateral response. Critics note that approximately half 
of the total U.S. trade deficit in manufacture is with China. The 
deficit is not confined to cheap-labor manufactures. In 2008, the 
United States ran an advanced technology deficit of $72.7 billion 

Responding to China 59
with China, evidence that Chinese exports have become increas-
ingly sophisticated (U.S. Census 2009). This pattern reflects the 
fact that many major companies are shifting research and devel-
opment to East Asia. Since 2000, more than 700 foreign companies 
have opened research and development (R&D) facilities in China, 
including 8 of the 10 largest R&D spending companies in the world 
(Atkinson 2007). As a result of the one-sided trade, China has ac-
cumulated huge hard-currency reserves of over $2 trillion (CIA 
2009). China then invests the dollar reserves in U.S. treasury bonds 
and other assets, helping to keep interest rates low, so that Ameri-
can consumers can continue buying Chinese goods (Bradsher 
2009).
What explains the persistent trade deficit? One factor is 
cheap Chinese labor. Hourly compensation costs in China, while 
rising, are about one-eighth of U.S. levels (Holland 2009; Lett and 
Banister 2006). Globalization has enabled large transnational cor-
porations to make use of China’s cheap labor for manufacturing 
products to serve global markets. Chinese workers frequently work 
long hours in unsafe and unhealthy conditions.
Other explanations for the deficit involve China’s govern-
ment policies. Some, such as Robert Cassidy, a former USTR ne-
gotiator, blame China for manipulating its currency, the renminbi 
(Cassidy 2009). It remains cheap, perhaps undervalued as much 
as 40 percent (China Currency Coalition 2008). This benefits Chi-
nese exports and provides jobs in export-competing industries for 
young people eager to leave agricultural villages. It promotes so-
cial stability in China.
Another interpretation focuses on various unfair trade prac-
tices. These are described in USTR’s annual reports to Congress, 
the National Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers. These 
official reports detail China’s problems with intellectual property 
enforcement, subsidies, industrial policy, and import and export 
restrictions (USTR 2008b). During the global recession that began 
in 2008, China has taken additional steps to aid exporters with 
grants and cheap loans in an effort to preserve jobs and maintain 
political stability (Engardio 2009).
What should be done, if anything? Many economists say 
that consumers in high-income countries are big winners from 
Chinese export production. They purchase large quantities of 
inexpensively-priced Chinese televisions and cameras, clothing, 
footwear, and toys. In August 2007, the Club for Growth released 
a petition, signed by 1,028 of America’s top economists, opposing 

60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
protectionist action against China. The economists argued that 
expanding trade with China had led to strong job growth, higher 
productivity, more affordable goods, and a higher standard of liv-
ing for residents of both countries (Club for Growth 2007).
The U.S. business community appears divided over the one-
sided trading relationship with China. Big business, which has 
invested heavily in the China relationship, does not want to rock 
the boat. It counsels engagement and dialogue, observing that the 
proportion of our global trade deficit coming from East Asia is 
less than a decade earlier, and that the “Made in China” label is 
misleading. Multinational companies from Japan, South Korea, 
Taiwan, the United States, and other countries use China as the 
final assembly point for their global supply chains. A decade ago, 
many of these goods probably said “Made in Japan” (U.S.–China 
Business Council 2009).
Big business also emphasizes future opportunities in a rapidly 
growing Asia. The U.S.–China Business Council, whose leader-
ship board includes representation from Boeing, Caterpillar, Dow, 
Fedex, Fluor, Ford, Motorola, Proctor and Gamble, and Wal-Mart 
among others, advocates a balanced approach to trade relations 
with China, one that seeks to remove trade barriers. They would 
like to see greater access to the China market, more regulatory 
transparency, and better intellectual property rights protection for 
foreign firms operating in China. But, the USCBC has opposed 
retaliatory measures against China for its trade surpluses and cur-
rency practices, claiming these will do more harm than good. It 
holds out the prospect of increased U.S. service exports over the 
next decade. In 2007, the United States ran about a $5.4 billion 
surplus on service trade with China. USCBC cites an economic 
study that the surplus in services could rise to $60 billion by 2015 
(U.S.–China Business Council 2009; China Business Forum 2007).
Small and medium-sized manufacturers based in the United 
States generally disagree with trade policies facilitating Chinese 
exports to the United States. Many import-competing domes-
tic manufacturers complain that Chinese prices are so low— 
sometimes even lower than the cost of the raw materials —that 
they cannot compete in the United States.
As a result, several splinter business groups have emerged 
to lobby for a more confrontational approach to China. They 
blame transnational firms for the huge and growing trade deficit 
and for offshoring of American jobs. The Alliance for American 
Manufacturing (AAM), a partnership of the United Steelworkers 

Responding to China 61
and steel-related manufacturers, blames illegal subsidies, cur-
rency manipulation, and other unfair trade practices for China’s 
huge bilateral trade surplus. AAM claims the trade deficit with 
China has dislocated 2.3 million American workers. It notes that 
displaced American workers often have no choice but to accept 
jobs in lower-paying industries, such as retail and services, with 
few retirement and healthcare benefits (AAM 2008; Scott 2008). It 
urges vigorous enforcement of U.S. trade remedy laws, and con-
gressional action to declare China’s currency manipulation prac-
tices a subsidy that warrants countervailing duties.
Some economists argue that the key to China’s trade imbal-
ance with the United States is currency revaluation. An increase in 
the value of China’s currency versus the U.S. dollar would make 
its exports more costly to American consumers. Economist C. Fred 
Bergsten, founder of the Peterson Institute of International Eco-
nomics, a free-trade oriented think-tank, says that China’s current 
account surplus is rapidly becoming the central global imbalance. 
He estimates that China’s surplus (about $400 billion in 2007) 
could reach $500 billion (11 percent of GDP) in 2009. Bergsten calls 
on China for a further 30 percent appreciation of the renminbi, 
and warns that a future U.S. administration and its European 
counterpart might turn to trade sanctions (Bergsten 2008a). The 
International Monetary Fund and the G7 group of industrialized 
countries have also issued statements urging faster appreciation 
of China’s currency (IMF 2008; G7 2007).
In the absence of a positive response from China, Congress 
and U.S. interest groups have pressed unilateral measures to force 
the needed currency realignment. The China Currency Coalition, 
headed by attorney Skip Hartquist, is an alliance of unions and 
domestic manufacturers that seeks immediate elimination of Chi-
na’s currency undervaluation, estimated at 40 percent. This coali-
tion urges the Congress convening in 2009 to pass, and President 
Obama to sign, legislation making currency misalignment and 
manipulation actionable under U.S. trade remedy laws (China 
Currency Coalition 2008). Proponents believe that such legisla-
tion would be compatible with Washington’s obligations under 
the World Trade Organization (AMTAC 2007).
Organized labor sees currency realignment as part of the so-
lution, but it offers other remedies as well. The unions claim that 
cheap labor from China, Vietnam, and other low-income countries 
pose a clear and present threat to the wages and working condi-
tions of American factory workers. While generally promoting 

62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
workers’ basic rights and union activity, where possible, the 
AFL-CIO plays up sweatshop working conditions and it has en-
couraged student boycotts of goods from developing countries 
(AFL-CIO 2008a).
For the Obama administration, the China trade issue has 
many dimensions. On the one hand, while Obama campaigned 
for office, he echoed the concerns of voters in manufacturing 
states about China’s currency manipulation and unfair subsidies, 
and pledged to address the one-sided relationship. Obama also 
pledged to use trade agreements to spread good labor and en-
vironmental standards around the world. As a result, some in 
China worry the administration might call for all imported goods 
to meet basic labor and environmental standards, a response that 
would hit Chinese manufacturers who spend little on environ-
mental compliance (Holland 2009) Against that is the financial 
reality that the United States has become dependent on Chinese 
capital to finance its budget deficits. Obama needs to sell more 
than $1 trillion in government bonds, and this may prove difficult 
if he takes action to reduce Chinese exports and protect American 
manufacturing jobs (Orlik 2009).
Cuban Trade
For nearly 50 years — since February 1962— the United States has 
embargoed trade with Cuba, an action taken after the government 
of President Fidel Castro expropriated properties of U.S. corpora-
tions and citizens. It has also sought to isolate Cuba diplomati-
cally, to limit travel, and block investments.
During the Clinton administration, the embargo was modi-
fied to allow the sale of certain U.S. food and medicine, but with 
government licensing. In 2008, the United States sold $718 mil-
lion in goods to Cuba. The Obama administration has hinted that 
it might be willing to ease restrictions on travel and remittances 
(Gomez 2008).
Many Cuban-Americans support the embargo, arguing that 
any unilateral lifting of sanctions would simply strengthen the 
Castro regime. But, a variety of business and farm groups have 
been pressing Congress to ease the sanctions. The American Farm 
Bureau, the business Roundtable, and the U.S. Chamber of Com-
merce, along with other business groups, have urged President 
Obama to suspend the embargo and help open a new market for 

Assisting Trade Dislocated Workers 63
American business (USA *Engage 2008). Any change in Wash-
ington’s position on Cuban trade is bound to be controversial and 
will involve foreign-policy decision-makers at the White House, 
the National Security Council, and the State Department.
Assisting Trade Dislocated Workers
How should society help the workers dislocated by global trade 
competition? Free traders argue that trade is so beneficial that 
the winners from trade could compensate the losers and everyone 
would be better off. But, in most market-based economies, there 
is no effective mechanism for distributing a share of the gains to 
those who lose jobs and incomes. Thus, free traders often sup-
port programs of adjustment assistance to enable trade-impacted 
workers to train for new jobs and economic opportunities. Free 
traders often view adjustment assistance as a safety valve against 
a build-up of broad-based protectionist sentiment.
Since 1962, the United States has administered a program of 
trade adjustment assistance (TAA). It involved a package of cash 
benefits, training programs, health-insurance rebates, relocation 
assistance, and, wage insurance for workers aged 50 and older. 
Workers certified as dislocated by imports could obtain up to 130 
weeks of training, and 52 weeks of income support on top of the 
26 weeks in unemployment insurance provided by states. It costs 
the federal government about $1 billion per year (U.S. Depart-
ment of Labor 2008).
In the past, adjustment assistance has not worked well, ac-
cording to several studies. Reportedly, most eligible workers did 
not sign up for the program. For those who completed training, 
one-third had difficulty finding new jobs. Among those finding 
new jobs, 75 percent took jobs that paid less than their old wages 
(Sparshott 2005). Another study showed that among those reem-
ployed after trade-related job losses, the average earned 10 per-
cent less than before (Bernstein 2004).
Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch observes that a worker 
who loses a job when an employer moves a plant to China may be 
ineligible for benefits. However, if the employer moves the job to 
Mexico — a country with which the United States has a free-trade 
agreement — the worker may be eligible. Even in manufactur-
ing plants, nonproduction workers may have no access to ben-
efits (Public Citizen 2008a). Also, many workers do not receive 

64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
adjustment assistance because of inadequate federal funding. As 
a result, the AFL-CIO has urged Congress to enact a better fund-
ing formula and to extend eligibility to include technology and 
service workers (Parks 2007).
Interestingly, global business sees an expanded program of 
adjustment assistance as necessary to mitigate protectionist senti-
ment attributable to the maldistribution of gains from globaliza-
tion. Major business groups, such as the U.S. Chamber of  Commerce 
and the Business Roundtable, have favored programs to improve 
worker competitiveness and facilitate adjustment to globalization 
(U.S. Chamber 2008a; Business Roundtable 2009).
Opposition comes from libertarian economists like Sallie 
James of the Cato Institution. She considers adjustment assistance a 
relic of the past, and wants Congress to end the program. The 
program no longer buys political support for trade liberalization. 
Furthermore, Democrats in Congress want to expand the pro-
gram to include service workers and workers affected by trade 
with countries such as India and China, with which the United 
States does not have free-trade agreements (James 2007).
Congress and the Obama administration succeeded in revis-
ing the adjustment assistance program early in 2009. During the 
presidential campaign, Obama had committed himself to updat-
ing the current system by extending coverage to service indus-
tries, creating flexible education accounts to help workers retrain, 
and providing retraining assistance to workers in industries vul-
nerable to dislocations (Obama 2008). In the economic stimulus 
package approved in February 2009, Congress agreed to expand 
benefits to service sectors and to workers affected by offshoring, 
not simply countries with which the United States had a free-
trade agreement. With improved benefits, the TAA changes were 
expected to cost $1.6 billion.
Trade and Human Rights
Another emerging issue in trade policy is human rights. It is a 
broad subject, encompassing working conditions and labor rights, 
democracy and transparency, and even the rights of authors and 
artists to profit from their creations. Some economists, such as 
Jagdish Bhagwati, take the traditional view that trade issues are 
not human rights issues, and trade organizations like the WTO 
have no responsibility to address them (Bhagwati 1988, 122 –123; 

Trade and Human Rights 65
Hedges 2000). But there is another interpretation offered by legal 
scholars such as Ernst-Ulrich Petersmann: citizens are valid sub-
jects for WTO consideration (Petersmann 2000).
Human rights advocates often promote integration of social 
clauses found in the International Covenant on Economic, Social, 
and Cultural Rights into the WTO. Activists say these could fa-
cilitate the organization of unions, place more controls on child 
labor, outlaw forced labor and overtime, and replace prevailing 
subsistence wages with a decent standard of living (Aaronson 
2007, 23 –24).
In the past, the United States has used trade sanctions as an 
instrument to promote human rights. In the Tariff Act of 1930, 
the United States banned goods produced through forced labor, 
a provision aimed at the Soviet Union. Subsequent administra-
tions chose not to enforce that provision, because vigorous ad-
ministration would undercut other foreign policy objectives such 
as détente with the Soviet Union. However, on other occasions, the 
United States has acted unilaterally, using trade sanctions against 
countries accused of human rights violations. Examples include 
the Helms-Burton embargo on trade with Fidel Castro’s Cuba, 
imposed for political repression. Also, the Jackson-Vanik effort to 
tie most-favored-nation tariff treatment for the Soviet Union to 
that government’s respect for the rights of Jews to emigrate. More 
recently, Congress has banned imports from Myanmar (Burma), a 
country accused of slave labor and other egregious human-rights 
violations. The U.S. Congress also uses hearings on trade relations 
to call attention to human rights conditions — one of the most re-
cent being hearings on the U.S.–Colombia FTA (Aaronson and 
Zimmerman 2008, 162 –163).
As part of a bargain with the Bush administration in March 
2007, leaders of congressional Democrats agreed to seek approval 
of certain FTA agreements if the administration agreed to seek ad-
herence to core International Labor Organization labor standards 
in trade agreements. These included the freedom of association 
and the right to organize and bargain collectively, as well as pro-
hibitions on child labor, forced labor, and discrimination in em-
ployment. The AFL-CIO had insisted on these protections from 
its friends in Congress. It wanted enforceable provisions subject 
to the same dispute settlement provisions in commercial areas of 
the FTAs (Aaronson and Zimmerman 2008, 163).
Free trade economists blasted the compromise, saying it was 
a ploy by prounion Democrats to drive up labor costs in poor 

66 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
countries in order to lessen competition with U.S. producers. 
They argued that gains in labor standards do not come from a 
foreign government using the threat of trade penalties but by eco-
nomic growth and rising living standards associated with trade 
expansion (Brown, Stern, Deardorff, and Bhagwati 2007). Bhag-
wati warned that major developing countries, such as Brazil and 
India, were generally opposed to including labor standards in 
trade agreements (Bhagwati 2007). The economists suggested a 
more constructive approach would be for Democrats to help U.S. 
workers adapt to globalization through wage insurance, more 
extensive retraining programs, and portable pensions. They also 
favored universal health insurance.
From the standpoint of business and the Bush administration, 
such labor commitments had a hidden dimension. Because they 
applied to all parties to an agreement, they could be viewed as a 
union effort to use trade agreements to change U.S. labor laws. 
It was feared that trading partners could use dispute settlement 
provisions to challenge U.S. law and thus encroach on U.S. sover-
eignty. Future U.S. presidents will need to revisit the issue. They 
must decide whether labor clauses are to be included in the core 
of future free-trade agreements, and how to administer them.
In the Jordan FTA, negotiated during the Clinton adminis-
tration and approved in 2001, negotiators placed labor rights in 
the main text. At the time, Congress worried that Jordan could 
challenge U.S. sovereignty over its labor laws. As it turned out, 
the two governments backed away from any commitments to use 
trade sanctions to enforce labor agreements. Enthusiasm for en-
forcement waned, and violations occurred.
In 2006, the National Labor Committee for Worker and 
Human Rights disclosed that guest workers (nearly 34,000) from 
Bangladesh and China were working in Jordanian garment fac-
tories receiving low pay and working in substandard conditions. 
The workers, producing garments for J. C. Penny, Sears, Target, 
Wal-Mart, and other U.S. retailers, complained of not being paid 
for months, being hit by supervisors, and working 20-hour days 
(Greenhouse and Barbaro 2006). It was evident that simply plac-
ing language about labor rights in trade agreements did not en-
sure compliance, or effective enforcement.
After adverse publicity, U.S. purchasers chose to suspend 
contracts. To satisfy their buyers, some of the Jordanian suppliers 
then agreed to a voluntary monitoring program, administered by 
the International Labour Organization. The majority of funding 

Trade and Environment 67
would come from the U.S. Agency for International Development, 
which administered aid funds (Ellis 2008).
The Bush administration also sought, with encouragement 
from Congress, to use FTAs to promote democracy in develop-
ing countries. In a speech to Congress in February 2001, President 
Bush asserted that free trade promotes greater political and per-
sonal freedom (Bush 2001). This advocacy, as business historian 
Susan Aaronson points out, is not new, and has bipartisan roots. 
Over the course of the last 60 years, the U.S. government has in-
cluded provisions in multilateral and bilateral trade agreements 
that require trade partners to encourage transparency, protect due 
process rights, and promote citizen participation in policymaking. 
Behind this approach is the belief that transparency and greater 
political participation create legitimacy for programs and pro-
mote stability (Aaronson and Zimmerman 2008, 183).
After September 11, 2001, the Bush administration saw FTAs 
as a way to encourage democracy, particularly in the Middle East, 
and to cement democracy in Central America. As a result, they 
have used foreign aid and other public funds to train foreign of-
ficials how to meet their WTO obligations. Aaronson’s research 
has led her to conclude that the longer a country remains in the 
GATT/WTO framework, the more democratic it tends to become. 
She suggests that WTO rules and procedures encourage due pro-
cess and political participation in member countries and may spill 
over to other aspects of the polity (Aaronson and Zimmerman 
2008). Even China, she says, now invites public participation in 
revisions to labor and intellectual property laws.
Trade and Environment
Another hot issue in trade policy involves the environment. The 
traditional view of economists and most advocates of the multi-
lateral trading system was that trade creates wealth and benefits 
humankind. This view held that trade was also good for the envi-
ronment. It expanded access to environmentally-friendly technol-
ogies, promoted efficiency and less waste, and created wealth that 
could be used for environmental improvements. Trade advocates, 
however, assigned primacy to the rules of the world trading sys-
tem. They worried that national governments might use environ-
mental considerations as a loophole to protect national industries 
and impair the terms of the trade bargain.

68 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
Environmentalists tend to look at the links between the two 
subjects quite differently. Many of them associate expanded eco-
nomic activity with greater environmental damage, and believe 
that the greater wealth created will not necessarily lead to envi-
ronmental improvements. They note that the free-market pricing 
system, the basis of most international trade, does not reflect the 
full costs of environmental damage. They further believe that 
national governments instinctively strive to protect national in-
dustries against costly environmental demands, thus the only ef-
fective solution involves a strong system of rules at the national 
and international levels (United Nations Environmental Program 
2005, 4 – 5).
In trade negotiations, these two perspectives — sometimes 
conflicting, sometimes compatible — increasingly arise. NAFTA 
broke new ground when it included language stating that where 
NAFTA law and multilateral agreements on the environment may 
conflict, the latter shall prevail. But, in the investment section, it 
appeared to assign higher priority to investors’ rights in the con-
troversial Chapter 11, allowing private parties to sue governments. 
Investors have invoked these types of investment treaty protec-
tions to challenge government actions involving waste manage-
ment, regulation of pollutants, and land-use planning.
The Uruguay Round agreements establishing the WTO also 
contain dispute settlement language allowing governments to 
challenge the trade restrictions of other governments. There have 
even been instances where foreign governments successfully 
used WTO dispute resolution panels to challenge U.S. domestic 
environmental laws as nontariff barriers. In each case, the United 
States chose to change its laws and regulations to avoid having 
to pay compensation. One famous case involved reformulated 
gasoline. Venezuela and Brazil challenged Environmental Protec-
tion Agency regulations on use of additives to reduce emissions 
claiming that the rules discriminated against foreign producers, a 
violation of GATT’s nondiscrimination principle. The WTO panel 
agreed and recommended the United States change its regulations 
to comply with GATT. The United States did so in 1997 (Woel-
lert 1997).
Another celebrated case involved turtles drowning in shrimp 
nets. The United States sought to ban imported shrimp from 
countries without sea turtle protections, but several Asian na-
tions filed a complaint with the WTO. The panel decided against 
the United States, effectively ordering Washington to change its 

Trade and Environment 69
environmental protection regulations, or pay penalties (Ylagan 
2006). According to Lori Wallach of Citizen Trade Watch, the 
United States has lost many WTO attacks against domestic public 
interest laws (Wallach 2007b).
It is not surprising then that nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs) supporting environmental issues have challenged the 
Bush administration’s push for FTAs. The Sierra Club, Friends 
of the Earth, and Citizen Trade Watch, among other NGOs, have 
warned that trade agreements containing provisions like NAF-
TA’s Chapter 11 threaten the ability of state governments to make 
laws protecting health and environment (Seligman 2005). They 
have also argued that trade agreements could have the effect of 
increasing global sprawl. Often times the rules pertaining to ser-
vices forbid limitations on the numbers of service providers, such 
as big-box stores, and regulations limiting advertising, licensing, 
or municipal zoning could face challenges in dispute settlement 
mechanisms (Sierra Club undated).
Environmental activists had some success in shaping the 
Trade Act of 2002. Eleven environmental organizations released 
a joint statement in January, 2000, asserting that trade agreements 
should support environmental protection, and not undermine it. 
They wanted assurances that private investors could not chal-
lenge domestic environmental laws and regulations, and they 
wanted trade agreements to defer to multilateral agreements on 
the environment when there were conflicts with trade rules (Pub-
lic Citizen 2000).
Although they did not succeed in placing the above language 
in the act, the Trade Act of 2002 does require environmental re-
views of trade agreements. USTR states that the U.S. government 
has been active in promoting a trade liberalization agenda that 
seeks to integrate economic, social, and environmental policies 
(USTR 2008c. The environmental reviews take into account public 
comments as well as those of government agencies. The review 
for the Colombia FTA, for example, included sections on trans-
boundary air and water pollution, various migratory species such 
as shrimp and turtles, tuna and dolphins, wildlife, and birds.
The conflict between trade and environmental priorities has 
also come up in debates over global-warming. Europeans, eager 
to counteract global warming, wish to reduce carbon emissions. 
In January, 2008, the European Commission released a climate 
strategy intended to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions by 20 per-
cent by 2020. The strategy involves auctioning carbon-emission 

70 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
certificates (Whitehead and Jones 2008). As there is fear that Euro-
pean industry may simply close factories and move to countries 
without strong environmental laws, the strategy must somehow 
address traded goods. How can Europe reduce imports of carbon-
 intensive goods — such as steel, cement, and aluminum—from 
countries such as the United States, India, and China which are 
not parties to the Kyoto climate-change protocol? France has pro-
posed a tax on carbon-intensive imports, an approach that the 
Bush administration quickly labeled protectionism (Stokes 2008). 
However, some in the Obama administration are considering a 
similar approach. Secretary of Energy Steven Chu has indicated 
that the administration might slap a carbon tariff on imports from 
countries that have not imposed greenhouse-gas reduction man-
dates. Critics say this approach would violate WTO commitments 
(Talley and Barkley 2009).
Trade and Sovereignty
One of the important legal issues growing out of NAFTA and 
U.S. membership in the World Trade Organization is whether 
those agreements encroach on national sovereignty,  essentially the 
legitimate authority to govern a nation state. Defenders of the Uru-
guay Round agreements establishing the controversial dispute 
settlement mechanism emphasize that the agreements do not 
give the international organization the power to change U.S. 
laws. Only Congress and the executive can do that. A ruling by 
the WTO that a U.S. statute or procedure violates the WTO has no 
domestic effect unless Congress alters the law. During congres-
sional hearings, then USTR Mickey Kantor stated that no dispute 
panel ruling could force the United States to change federal, state, 
or local laws. According to this line of reasoning, U.S. commit-
ments to the WTO were only contractual, and the United States 
retained the choice of paying compensation or obeying. At the 
time, critics challenged this view, and claimed that the WTO dis-
pute settlement mechanism created binding obligations for the 
United States. Some legal scholars concluded that Congress and 
the president had assigned sweeping legislative power to an un-
accountable, extra-constitutional body (McBride 2001).
Activists, such as Lori Wallach of Global Trade Watch, claim 
that domestic policies are being undermined by trade agreements. 
Whereas trade agreements previously dealt with issues at the 

Trade and Safety 71
border — such as tariffs, quotas, and customs issues —NAFTA and 
the WTO in effect require members to conform their domestic laws 
to broader requirements, the terms of the trade bargain. They ef-
fectively set constraints on domestic food safety standards, envi-
ronmental and product safety rules, regulation of service sectors, 
intellectual property standards, government procurement, tax 
policy, and investment policy. More than 90 percent of all disputes 
taken to the WTO have been decided on behalf of the complaining 
party. By mid-2008, complainants had won 6 of 51 cases brought 
against the United States (88%). WTO panels have declared ille-
gal certain clean air regulations, turtle protections, antidumping, 
farm subsidies, and tax policies (Public Citizen 2008b).
The Internet gambling case brought by Antigua against 
the United States in 2003 is a good example, critics say, of trade 
rules trumping public interest laws. Antigua claimed that U.S. 
antiracketeering statutes in effect banned Internet gambling and 
were trade barriers. A WTO panel agreed with Antigua. When the 
United States sought to withdraw the gambling and betting sec-
tor from the WTO’s purview, it was ordered to pay compensation. 
Antigua was awarded $21 million in compensation — and other 
settlements are expected for the European Union, Costa Rica, and 
Macau (Pruzin 2008).
Can the United States withdraw from the World Trade Orga-
nization? Under the terms of accession, Congress stipulated that 
USTR must provide a detailed report every five years on the costs 
and benefits of U.S. participation in the WTO. Any member of 
Congress may then introduce a bill to withdraw and leaders of 
Congress must allow a vote. In 2000, after the Clinton adminis-
tration reported, the House of Representatives voted 363 to 56 to 
reject the withdrawal resolution. Thirty-three Republicans and 
21 Democrats voted in favor of withdrawal (Abrams 2000). In 
2005, a similar vote occurred and this time the margin was 338 
to 86. Sponsoring the withdrawal resolution were Socialist Bernie 
Sanders of Vermont and libertarian Republican Ron Paul of Texas 
(Abrams 2005). The House of Representatives will have another 
opportunity to vote in 2010.
Trade and Safety
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and more recent epi-
sodes involving harmful imports of toys, food, toothpaste, and 

72 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
medicines, underscore a new reality. The global economy is rela-
tively open and efficient, and global supply chains present oppor-
tunities for those who would do harm as well as those who strive to 
do good.
The ubiquitous 20 or 40-foot shipping containers can conceal 
shoes, apparel, and nuclear weapons —perhaps all in the same 
large box. In 2007, the United States imported 17.9 million wa-
terborne containers (TEU), meaning that every minute of every 
day 34 containers from overseas suppliers were unloaded at U.S. 
 seaports (Army, 2008). Before September 11, 2001, Customs had 
the resources to physically inspect less than two percent of those 
containers (Tischler 2002). An intrusive physical inspection of a 
single container by two inspectors could take all day and delay 
a shipment with perishable contents for a day or more (Flynn 
2002).
The nightmare scenario is that foreign terrorists slip nuclear 
weapons into a container full of textiles or televisions, and deto-
nate bombs upon arrival in America, killing hundreds of thou-
sands. Such a catastrophic event would bring shipping to a halt, 
and bring crippling lawsuits against the shipper and importer. 
Congress has decreed that all containers entering the United 
States must have tamper-proof high security seals by 2008 and be 
scanned by 2012. While importers like Wal-Mart and customs offi-
cials think the scanning goal is unrealistic, the port of Hong Kong 
scans every container with radiation and gamma-ray screeners. 
It is estimated that screening of this kind at all major container 
ports could cost about $1.5 billion, or $15 per container (Bar-
telme 2007).
Shippers complain that the extra security measures are a 
“giant mistake” that will result in congestion at ports, and huge 
costs for suppliers, shippers, and consumers. Canadian and Euro-
pean shippers view the new law as a “barrier to trade,” and may 
urge their governments to challenge Washington’s action before 
the WTO. In their view, the United States has moved unilaterally 
to shift the burden of protecting the United States to its trading 
partners, and this contradicts WTO obligations to fair and consis-
tent trade policy (Collins 2007; Urquhart, 2007).
Imports of harmful products —including toys, food, and 
medicines — also pose new challenges for national regulatory au-
thorities in the era of global supply chains. Food imports have 
more than doubled since the United States joined the WTO, and 

Trade and Safety 73
the United States has become increasingly dependent on foreign 
food supplies (Public Citizen 2007b). With manufacturers sourcing 
more and more ingredients in China and other developing coun-
tries, safety concerns have emerged. A series of products ranging 
from children’s toys to pet food and toothpaste were discovered 
to contain poisonous substances.
Seafood is a particular item of concern. Seventy percent of 
the world’s farmed fish comes from China. With acute water 
shortages and sewage contaminating water supplies, Chinese fish 
farmers have mixed illegal veterinary drugs and pesticides into 
food to keep their fish alive. However, importing nations have 
discovered that these contain poisonous and carcinogenic resi-
dues posing health threats to consumers. As a result, regulators 
in the European Union and Japan have banned Chinese seafood, 
and U.S. officials have rejected shipments (Barboza 2007b).
Quality-control problems also abound with Chinese drugs 
exported to foreign markets. Since 2006, contaminated Chinese 
drugs have been blamed for more than 100 deaths in Central 
America and the Caribbean. In February, 2008, a Chinese factory 
owned by a U.S. firm was the source of an ingredient linked to an 
allergic reaction in a blood thinner sold by Baxter International. 
China reportedly does not inspect plants that make drugs solely 
for export, and it does not permit foreign inspectors to conduct 
surprise inspections (Greising and Japsen 2008). Nor does the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have the resources to in-
spect carefully the food it regulates. It spends only $3.5 million 
per year to inspect foreign drug production plants. In 2007, it 
was estimated that the FDA could inspect only 0.6 percent of the 
vegetables, fruit, seafood, grains, dairy, and animal feed at the 
border. The U.S. Department of Agriculture was able to inspect 
only 11 percent of beef, pork, and chicken imported (Martin and 
Palmer 2007).
However, China is not the only supplying country with prod-
uct problems. According to the New York Times, FDA inspectors re-
fused more produce from the Dominican Republic and Denmark 
than from China. The problem is that the rapidly-growing global 
supply chain simply has overwhelmed the resources of regula-
tory authorities to cope with the flood of imports (Martin and 
Palmer 2007).
With low prices driving the supply chain, unscrupulous pro-
ducers have financial incentives to scrimp on product quality. 

74 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
This is what the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission dis-
covered in an investigation of harmful toys from China. In an in-
tensely competitive environment, toy suppliers resorted to paint 
with high lead levels because this paint sold at one-third the price. 
Similar problems have also emerged in India, Malaysia, and Sin-
gapore. In China, while safety standards are reportedly high—
indeed, sometimes higher than in the United States —enforcement 
is lax (Barboza 2007a).
As consumer worries mounted about unsafe imports in 2007, 
President Bush created a cabinet-level Working Group on Im-
port Safety. Congress also conducted investigations. Among the 
ideas proposed was promoting stronger standards in supplying 
countries. The U.S. Department of Agriculture qualifies only 33 
countries to export meat or poultry to the United States, but the 
FDA attempts to monitor imports from 150 countries, many with 
much lower food standards than the United States (Schmit 2007). 
But the agency does not have enough staff to inspect in a timely 
way foreign plants making food products, medical devices, and 
drugs. At its current pace, the New York Times concluded that the 
FDA would need 13 years to inspect every foreign drug plant and 
1,900 years to check every foreign food plant. In 2007, the FDA in-
spected 100 of 190,000 foreign food plants, and 30 of 3,000 foreign 
drug plants, even though 80 percent of the nation’s drug supply is 
imported (Harris 2008).
One problem in inspecting foreign food imports are com-
mitments in free-trade agreements, and WTO obligations. These 
pledge nondiscrimination and “national treatment” for imports, 
and effectively bar the United States from inspecting imported 
foods at a greater rate than domestic foods. Thus, the United 
States is obliged to rely on possibly unreliable foreign inspectors 
to certify the safety of food imports (Public Citizen 2007a).
The Obama administration is expected to increase funding 
for the FDA and to attempt more effective enforcement of existing 
health and safety laws.
Enforcing U.S. Trade Laws
A familiar complaint from trade-impacted industries is that U.S. 
policymakers are unable, or unwilling, to enforce current U.S. 
trade remedy laws. As a result, some critics of trade policy claim 
the deck is stacked against U.S. manufacturers and workers (AAM 

Enforcing U.S. Trade Laws 75
2007). The AFL-CIO, in particular, has accused the Bush adminis-
tration of not enforcing existing laws (AFL-CIO 2007c).
Their concerns relate to a series of U.S. laws enacted by Con-
gress to assist domestic industries cope with increased import 
competition or to offset unfair foreign trade practices. These laws 
are considered compatible with WTO obligations, although sev-
eral WTO panel decisions have challenged certain aspects of U.S. 
administrative practice.
Under international trade law, temporary, not permanent, 
safeguard protection is allowed to cushion domestic producers 
from import competition and to facilitate orderly adjustment. The 
U.S. escape clause offers up to eight years of import protection 
to industries that can demonstrate that increased imports are a 
substantial cause of serious injury. If a hearing before the biparti-
san U.S. International Trade Commission leads to a recommenda-
tion for relief, the president and his administration must decide 
whether relief is consistent with the national economic interest. 
In recent years, the White House has been reluctant to provide 
import relief under this statute, although it did authorize tariffs 
for the domestic steel industry in 2002. Another reason for less 
successful escape-clause actions is that with the globalization of 
business, industries choose not to seek such relief. Members of 
a domestic industry with significant overseas exposure may not 
consider it advantageous to support a petition for import relief in 
the United States.
As part of the negotiations that led to most-favored-nation 
treatment for China, Beijing agreed to several safeguard provi-
sions. One was Section 421, which authorized the president of the 
United States to impose safeguard relief with respect to Chinese 
imports that are disrupting the U.S. market. In four cases, the In-
ternational Trade Commission found that the standard for relief 
had been met, but the administration denied relief, effectively 
rendering the law a dead letter. Some critics, including the AFL-
CIO, say the president’s discretion to deny remedies in safeguard 
actions needs to be severely curtailed, or eliminated.
Other trade remedy laws address certain practices consid-
ered unfair under international trade law. One is dumping when 
foreign exporters sell goods to importers at less than fair value. 
Another involves the use of government subsidies to benefit pro-
ducers, a practice that GATT and the WTO have held to distort 
international trade. U.S. law permits the imposition of antidump-
ing, or countervailing duties, when a domestic industry can show 

76 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
that it has been materially injured, or threatened with material in-
jury, by dumping or subsidies. These are quasi-judicial decisions 
involving the U.S. Department of Commerce (which investigates 
dumping and subsidy margins) and the U.S. International Trade 
Commission (which determines whether the domestic industry 
represented by the petitioner is materially injured, or threatened 
with material injury). If both agencies reach affirmative determi-
nations, duties are imposed to offset the margin of unfairness. 
The president cannot set aside such determinations for policy rea-
sons. Instead, parties can challenge decisions with legal appeals 
to the specialized U.S. Court of International Trade, located in 
New York City. For more details on this process, as well as other 
laws described in this section, see USTR’s Annual Report on the 
Trade Agreements Program and the U.S. International Trade Com-
mission’s Year in Review (USTR annual; U.S. International Trade 
Commission annual).
Antidumping and countervailing duty laws were used exten-
sively in the 1980s, particularly by the United States steel indus-
try. The volume of cases has declined considerably in recent years. 
Some who practice trade law claim that these laws have fallen out 
of favor because some commissioners at the ITC have interpreted 
the standard to demand a high level of injury. Also, the adminis-
tration has cut back appropriations for the Department of Com-
merce’s unit responsible for determining dumping and subsidy 
margins. Another negative factor has been a series of U.S. court 
and WTO dispute settlement decisions forcing changes in agency 
practices and creating uncertainty among the trade bar about the 
likely outcome of case filings (Hillman 2007). Some trade lawyers, 
such as Robert Lighthizer, a former deputy USTR and Senate fi-
nance committee staffer, blame the WTO dispute settlement pro-
cess. Lighthizer complains that rogue WTO panel decisions have 
consistently undermined U.S. interests, resulting in lost U.S. sov-
ereignty. In Lighthizer’s view, the WTO has chosen to judge U.S. 
tax policy, public morals, foreign policy, and environmental mea-
sures (Lighthizer 2007).
Responding to political pressures, the Bush administration 
signaled that it might support more assertive use of U.S. coun-
tervailing duty laws against China. Because the United States 
had considered China a nonmarket economy, it long exempted 
that country from U.S. countervailing duty law. But in March 
2007, the Department of Commerce reversed its long-standing 

Trade and Economic Recovery 77
position, effectively opening the way for case filings against 
China from U.S. producers. A surge in case filings followed as 
trade lawyers sought to use the quasi-judicial process to impose 
barriers on subsidized Chinese exports. Whether the Obama 
administration vigorously enforces these laws will depend on 
its appointments to the administering agencies (especially the 
Department of Commerce and the U.S. International Trade 
Commission).
Trade and Economic Recovery
During the Great Depression of the 1930s, nations unilaterally 
pursued domestic recovery with little regard for international 
consequences. In the United States, Congress enacted, and Presi-
dent Herbert Hoover signed, the controversial Smoot-Hawley 
tariff. After a change of presidential administrations in 1933, 
President Franklin D. Roosevelt torpedoed the London Economic 
Conference, convened under the League of Nations, and deval-
ued the dollar in terms of gold by 40 percent (Eichengreen 2008; 
James 2001). Other countries suspended currency convertibil-
ity and devalued. Some, like Nazi Germany, imposed exchange 
and trade controls. The United Kingdom devised a preferential 
trading system (Kindleberger 1973). The result was beggar-thy-
neighbor economics, and the collapse of international trade and 
finance. Not until World War II did many economies return to full 
employment.
In the early 21st century, the community of nations faced a 
similar economic challenge. With unemployment rising, and trade 
and financial flows shrinking as a result of the 2008 –2009 global 
recession, governments moved again to stimulate their econo-
mies through public-sector, deficit-spending and monetary ease. 
They also imposed unilaterally trade and financial restrictions. 
India embargoed imports of Chinese toys for six months. Russia 
placed new tariffs on imported cars and agricultural equipment. 
The European Union resumed export subsidies for dairy farm-
ers and the U.S. Congress considered an economic recovery bill 
with “Buy-American” provisions favoring domestic iron, steel, 
and manufactures over imports. With commercial and financial 
globalization apparently moving in reverse, it was no surprise 
that foreign governments and media pundits warned about the 

78 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
disastrous consequences of isolationism, protectionism, and na-
tionalism (Miller 2009).
President Obama blinked first. After Canada and the Euro-
pean Union protested that the “Buy-American” clause would trig-
ger retaliation and invite a trade war, the new president sought 
to water down the provision so that the preferences would be 
applied consistent with U.S. obligations under trade agreements 
and the WTO. The president would have authority to suspend 
“Buy-American” provisions for countries, party to the WTO gov-
ernment procurement agreement. This would exempt Canada, 
Japan, and most European countries, but not India, China, and 
Brazil. The latter had not signed the procurement pact. Nonethe-
less, big business with extensive commitments in the latter coun-
tries hoped to kill the controversial provision in a House-Senate 
conference over the bill (Scheid 2009). But, labor, consumer and 
other activist groups called on the Obama administration redeem 
campaign pledges to stimulate the economy and overhaul failed 
policies of the past.
The “Buy-American” debate raised a delicate issue: Did ex-
isting trade agreements limit the policy tools national govern-
ments required to address an economic crisis? If so, would the 
rules-based WTO trading system become a casualty of economic 
turbulence?
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have presented a survey of various trade policy 
issues, controversies, and solutions. Obviously, this is a rapidly-
changing topic. The global recession that began in 2008 has forced 
the Obama administration to emphasize domestic recovery, a key 
to the health of the international economy, while deferring further 
market-opening initiatives such as completion of the Doha multi-
lateral round of WTO trade negotiations. Some fear the preoccu-
pation of national governments with domestic employment and 
recovery may invite a wave of nationalism and protectionism, as 
in the 1930s. Another scenario is that the global economic crisis 
may produce greater consensus on the need for more extensive 
agreements to structure and regulate the international economy. 
Whatever the outcome, there is likely to be continuing debate be-
tween those who wish to open markets in the name of free trade 
and those who counsel a greater emphasis on national interest 

References 79
in trade negotiations. As it has for more than two centuries, U.S. 
trade policy remains controversial.
References
Aaronson, Susan A. 2007, June 11. “The Freedom Connection.” The 
American. Accessed February 2008 at http://www.american.com/
archive/2007/june-0607/the-freedom-connection.
Aaronson, Susan A., and Jamie M. Zimmerman. 2008. Trade Imbalance: 
The Struggle to Weigh Human Rights Concerns in Trade Policymaking. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.
Abrams, Jim. 2000, June 21. “House Votes to Stay in WTO,” Associated 
Press. Accessed May 2008 at LexisNexis Academic, http://www.
lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Abrams, Jim. 2005, June 9. “House Backs Continued U.S. Participation 
in WTO,” Associated Press. Accessed May 2008 at LexisNexis Academic, 
http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
AFL-CIO. 2007a, March 6. “Fast Track or the Right Track?” Accessed 
February 2008 at http://www.aflcio.org/aboutus/thisisthe aflcio/
ecouncil/ec03062007c.cfm.
AFL-CIO. 2007b, April 3. “Statement by AFL-CIO President John Sweeney 
on the Proposed Korea–U.S. Free Trade Agreement.” Accessed May 2008 at 
http://www.aflcio.org/mediacenter/prsptm/04032007a.cfm.
AFL-CIO. 2007c, August 7. Executive Council Statement. “Trade and 
Manufacturing: Real Change is Needed.” Accessed February 2008 at http://
www.aflcio.org/aboutus/thisistheaflcio/ecouncil/ec08072007g.cfm.
AFL-CIO. 2008a. “Trade Deficit: China.” Accessed May 2008 at http://
www.aflcio.org/issues/jobseconomy/globaleconomy/tradedeficit_
china.cfm.
AFL-CIO. 2008b, March 4. Executive Council Statement. “No Free 
Trade with Colombia until Workers’ Rights Are Respected.” Accessed 
May 2008 at http://www.aflcio.org/aboutus/thisistheaflcio/ecouncil/
eco03042008f.cfm.
AFL-CIO. 2009. “Exporting America.” Accessed January 2009 at http://
www.aflcio.org/issues/jobseconomy/exportingamerica/.
Alliance for American Manufacturing (AAM). 2008, July 30. “2.3 Million 
Jobs Lost to China since 2001.” Accessed January 2009 at http://www.
americanmanufacturing.org/newscenter/.
American Farm Bureau. 2008, November. “Expand Trade Markets.” 
Accessed January 2009 at http://www.fb.org/issues/docs/trade08.pdf.

80 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
American Friends Service Committee. 2006, March 27. “Equitable 
Trade and Southern Africa: A Cookie Cutter Approach Will Cost Lives 
and Livelihoods.” Accessed May 2008 at http://www.afsc.org/trade-
matters/trade-agreements/US-SACU-Statement.htm.
American Manufacturing Trade Action Coalition (AMTAC). 2007, 
January 31. “AMTAC Urges Congress to Reject Extension of TPA.” 
Accessed February 2008 at http://www.amtacdc.org/.
American Manufacturing Trade Action Coalition (AMTAC). 2008a. 
“2008 Agenda.” Accessed February 2008 at http://www.amtacdc.org/
Policy%20Issues/Pages/policyissues.aspx.
American Manufacturing Trade Action Coalition (AMTAC). 2008b, 
December 19. “USTR Files WTO Case Against Illegal Chinese Export 
Subsidies.” Accessed January 2009 at http://www.amtacdc.org.
Atkinson, Robert. 2007, October 4. “Globalization of R&D and 
Innovation: Testimony” before U.S. House of Representatives, 
Committee on Science and Technology Subcommittee on Technology 
and Innovation. Accessed January 2009 at LexisNexis Academic, http://
www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Barboza, David. 2007a, September 11. “Why Lead in Toy Paint? It’s 
Cheaper.” New York Times, 1.
Barboza, David. 2007b, December 15. “China’s Seafood Industry: Dirty 
Water, Dangerous Fish.” New York Times, 1.
Barshefsky, Charlene. 2008, July 29. “The Future of American 
Trade Policy: Testimony to the Senate Committee on Finance.” 
Accessed January 2009 at http://finance.senate.gov/hearings/
testimony/2008test/072908cbtest.pdf.
Bartelme, T. 2007, May 6. “Security at Port is a Quick Scan Away; Hong 
Kong Using Pilot Program.” Charleston Post and Courier (S.C.), 1.
Bergsten, C. Fred. 2008a, January. “Global Imbalances and Currency 
Misalignments.” Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for International 
Economics. Accessed February 2008 at http://www.iie.com/
publications/papers/print.cfm?doc=pub&ResearchID=873.
Bergsten, C. Fred. 2008b, December 12. “Stopping a Global Meltdown.” 
The Washington Post, A 19.
Bernstein, Aaron. 2004, December 6. “Shaking Up Trade Theory.” 
Business Week, 116.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1988. Protectionism. Boston, MA: MIT Press, 1988.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. 2007, May 22. “Foes of Free Trade Get A Foot in the 
Door.” Financial Times, 15.
Bhagwati, Jagdish, and A. Panagariya. 2003, July 14. “Bilateral Trade 
Agreements Are a Sham.” Financial Times, 17.

References 81
Bhatia, Karan. 2006, September 28. “U.S. Official Sees Strong Prospects 
for U.S.–Korea Trade Pact.” Accessed February 2008 at http://www.
america.gov/st/washfile-english/2006/September/20060928151619ASe
suarK0.2929651.html.
Bivens, Josh. 2007a, June 19. “Marketing the Gains from Trade.” 
Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy Institute. Accessed February 2008 at 
http://www.epi.org/content.cfm/ib233.
Bivens, Josh. 2007b, December 17. “The Marketing of Economics 
History.” Washington, D.C.: Economic Policy Institute. Accessed 
February 2008 at http://www.epi.org/content.cfm/ib238.
Blinder, Alan. 2006, March-April. “Offshoring: The Next Industrial 
Revolution.” Foreign Affairs, 113. Accessed February 2008 at http://
www.foreignaffairs.org/20060301faessay85209/alan-s-blinder/.
Bradsher, Keith. 2009, January 8. “U.S. Debt Is Losing Its Appeal in 
China.” International Herald Tribune.
Brown, Andrew, Robert Stern, Alan Deardorff, and Jagdish Bhagwati. 
2007, June 7. “U.S. Workers and Labour Standards.” Financial Times, 12.
Brown, Sherrod. 2007, June 28. “Fast Track” Set To Expire —Bicameral 
Coalition, Business, Labor, Advocacy Groups Demand New Direction 
For Trade.” Accessed February 2008 at LexisNexis Academic, http://
www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Bush, George W. 2001, February 28. “The President’s Budget: Transcript 
of President Bush’s Message to Congress on his Budget Proposal.” New 
York Times, 12.
Bush, George W. 2008, January 20. “President Bush Discusses Trade and 
Economy.” Accessed February 2008 at http://www.whitehouse.gov/
news/releases/2008/01/20080130 – 6.html.
Business Roundtable. 2008, December. “International Engagement 
Initiative.” Accessed January 2009 at http://www.businessroundtable.
org/initiatives/international.
Business Roundtable. 2009, April 23. “Regaining the Initiative: A 
Blueprint for U.S. Trade and Investment.” Accessed May 2009 at http://
www.businessrountdtable.org/publication/regaining_initiative_
blueprint_us_trade_and_investment
Cassidy, Robert B. 2009, January 27. “False Expectations of Trade 
Agreements: Lessons for Change.” Accessed January 2009 at http://
www.epi.org/publications/entry/20090127_cassidy/.
China Business Forum. 2007. “Services Trade with China Boosts 
U.S. Jobs, Payments.” Accessed February 2008 at http://www.
chinabusinessforum.org/pressreleases/07_01_23.html.

82 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
China Currency Coalition (CCC). 2008, November 5. “China 
Currency Coalition Congratulates President-Elect Obama and Urges 
Quick Passage in the Next Congress of Trade Legislation to Offset 
Injurious Currency Undervaluation by China and Other Countries.” 
Accessed January 2009 at http://www.chinacurrencycoalition.org/
pdfs/20081105_obama.pdf.
Citizens Trade Campaign. 2009, February 6. “Hundreds of 
Organizations Unite to Support a New Day in Trade Policy.” Press 
Release. Accessed February 2009 at http://www.citizentrade.org/.
Club for Growth. 2007, August 1. “1,028 Economists Oppose 
Protectionist Policies.” Accessed February 2008 at http://www.
clubforgrowth.org.
Cohn, Peter. 2008, February 7. “Brown, Dorgan Propose Process to 
Overturn Trade Deals.” National Journal’s CongressDailyPM.
Cohn, Peter. 2009, May 12. “Senate Finance Panel Plans Hearing on 
Panama Agreement.” National Journal’s CongressDailyPM.
Collins, Thomas R. 2007, December 3. “Security Law and Trade Reality.” 
Shipping Digest. Accessed February 2008 at LexisNexis Academic, 
http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Davis, Bob, and Laura Meckler. 2008, December 19. “Obama’s Picks 
Show Split on Trade.” Wall Street Journal. Accessed December 2008 at 
http://commerce.wsj.com/.
Dorgan, Byron. 2003, September 2. Congressional Record, S10959. 
Accessed May 2008 at http://www.gpoaccess.gov/cri/index.html.
Drajem, Mark. 2008, December 17. “Becerra Turned Down Obama Offer to 
Be U.S. Trade Representative.” Bloomberg News Accessed December 2008 at 
LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Earthjustice. 2001. “Statement on Fast Track, Trade Promotion 
Authority.” Accessed February 2008 at http://www.earthjustice.
org/news/press/001/earthjustice_statement_on_fast_track_trade_
promotion_authority.html.
Easton, Nina. 2008, January 25. “America Sours on Free Trade.” Fortune. 
Accessed February 2008 at http://money.cnn.com/2008/01/18/news/
economy/worldgoaway.fortune/index.htm.
Eckes, Alfred E. Jr. 1999, November 17. “U.S. Trade Policy in Historical 
Perspective.” Accessed February 2008 at http://www.foreignrelations.
org/public/resource.cgi?pub!3521.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2008. Globalizing Capital: A History of the International 
Monetary System. 2nd ed., Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ellis, Kristi. 2008, February 8. “Jordan Takes Steps to Improve Labor 
Conditions.” WWD.Com.

References 83
Engardio, Pete. 2009, January 12. “China: An Early Test for Obama.” 
Business Week, 19.
“Faces of Colombia: Who Are the Victims of Free Trade?” 2006. 
Accessed May 2008 at http://www.witnessforpeace.org/pdf/
FacesofColombiaFTAfinal.pdf.
Fleischer, Jeff. 2005, February 7. “Exporting America: An Interview with 
Lou Dobbs,” Mother Jones. Accessed May 2008 at http://www.mojones.
com/news/qa/2005/02/lou_dobbs.html.
Flynn, Stephen. 2002, January-February. “America the Vulnerable.” 
Foreign Affairs, 60. Accessed May 2008 at LexisNexis Academic, http://
www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Goldstein, Bonnie. 2008, March 4. “Canada’s Obama NAFTA Memo.” 
Slate Magazine. Accessed January 2009 at LexisNexis Academic http://
www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Gomez, Alan. 2008, December 7. “Obama Could Change Relations with 
Cuba.” USA Today. Accessed January 2009 at http://www.usatoday.
com/news/world/2008 – 12 – 07-obamacuba_N.htm.
Greenhouse, Steven, and Michael Barbaro. 2006, May 3. “An Ugly Side 
of Free Trade: Sweatshops in Jordan.” New York Times, 1.
Greising, David, and Bruce Japsen. 2008, February 16. “China Doesn’t 
Check Plants that Make U.S. Drugs.” Chicago Tribune. Accessed February 
2008 at LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/
lnacademic/.
Griswold, Dan. 2003, July 28. “Bilateral Deals Are No Threat to Global 
Trade.” Financial Times, 13.
“G7 Strengthens Currency Statement as China Bristles at IMF Changes.” 
2007, October 31. Inside US-China Trade. Accessed May 2008 at 
LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Hamburger, Tom. 2008, January 8. “Campaign ’08: A Warning from 
Business; Global Interest.” Los Angeles Times. Accessed February 2008 
at LexisNexis Academic, http://lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Harris, Gardiner. 2008, January 29. “For F.D.A., A Major Backlog 
Overseas.” New York Times,15.
Hedges, Chris. 2000, January 22. “He’s a Gadfly Who Stings Right and 
Left with Passion.” New York Times, B-9.
Heflin, Jay. 2008, January 8. “Chamber of Commerce: Trade Bills Stand a 
Chance of Passage.” CongressNow.
Hillman, Jennifer A. 2007, June 12. “Testimony” to U.S. Senate, 
Committee on Finance. Accessed February 2008 at http://finance.senate.
gov/hearings/testimony/2007test/061207testjh.pdf.

84 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
Holland, Tom. 2009, January 22. “Obama’s Soft Power May Be Hard for 
Beijing to Swallow.” South China Morning Post, 10.
Hulse, Carl. 2008, April 11. “House Votes to Put Off Trade Deal Bush 
Sought.” New York Times, 1.
“IMF Emphasized the Need for China and other Asian Economies To 
Tolerate Faster Currency Appreciation.” 2008, May 19. Action Economics 
Alerts. Accessed May 2008 at LexisNexis Academic, http://www.
lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
James, Harold. 2001. The End of Globalization: Lessons from the Great 
Depression. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
James, Sally. 2007, October 24. “Trading Down.” National Review.
Kearns, Kevin L. 2009, January 9. “Domestic Manufacturers Decry 
Nation’s Job Losses; Urge Trade Policy Overhaul as Key to Economic 
Recovery.” Accessed January 2009 at http://americaneconomicalert.
org/view_art.asp?Prod_ID=3124.
Kindleberger, Charles P. 1973. The World in Depression 1929–1939. 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lacey, Marc. 2007, November 28. “Fugitive from U.S. Justice Leads 
Panama’s Assembly.” New York Times, 3.
Lamy, Pascal. December 31, 2008. “Protectionism Won’t Work.” Newsweek.
Lee, Thea. 2007, March 28. “Testimony” before U.S. House of 
Representatives, Committee on Foreign Affairs. Accessed February 2008 
at http://www.internationalrelations.house.gov/110/lee032807.htm.
Lee, Thea. 2008, May 28. “Trade Agreements Should be Reexamined.” 
Policy Innovations. Accessed May 2008 at http://www.policyinnovations.
org/index.html.
Lett, Erin, and Judith Banister. 2006, November. “Labor Costs of 
Manufacturing Employees in China.” Monthly Labor Review 129 (11): 40.
Levin, Sander. 2005, December 7. “Levin Votes in Support of Bahrain 
FTA.” Accessed May 2008 at http://www.house.gov/apps/list/press/
mi12_levin/120705.shtml.
Lighthizer, Robert. 2007, June 12. “Testimony” before U.S. Senate, 
Committee on Finance. Accessed February 2008 at http://finance.senate.
gov/sitepages/hearing061207.htm.
Majors, Stephen. 2007, November 9. “ ‘Cheers’ Actor Goes on the 
Road to Promote U.S. Manufacturing.” Associated Press. Accessed 
February 2008 at http://www.boston.com/news/local/connecticut/
articles/2007/11/08/cheers_actor_ goes_on_the_road_to_ promote_us_
manufacturing/.
Martin, Andrew, and Griff Palmer. 2007, July 12. “China Not Sole Source 
of Dubious Food.” New York Times, 1.

References 85
McBride, Scott. 2001, March. “Dispute Settlement in the WTO.” Law and 
Policy in International Business 3:32, 643.
McGraw, Harold. 2007, January 30. “Testimony” before the U.S. 
House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means. Accessed 
February 2008 at http://waysandmeans.house.gov/hearings.
asp?formmode=view&id=5805.
McMillion, Charles W. 2008, May 15. “Textile and Apparel Production 
Plunge in April.” Accessed May 2008 at http://www.mbginfosvcs.com.
Meier, John. 2007, January 30. “Testimony” before U.S. House of 
Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means. Accessed February 
2008 at http://waysandmeans.house.gov/hearings.asp?formmode=de
tail&hearing=512.
Miller, John W. 2009, February 5. “Nations Rush to Establish New 
Barriers to Trade.” Wall Street Journal.
Mishel, Larry. 2007, January 30. “Testimony” before Committee on Ways 
and Means, U.S. House of Representatives. Accessed January 2008 at 
http://waysandmeans.house.gov/hearings.asp?formmode=print
friendly&id=5410.
“NAM Committee Approves a New Trade Policy: USBIC Attacks NAM, 
U.S. Chamber.” 2005, January 24. Manufacturing & Technology News, 7.
National Association of Manufacturers (NAM). 2007a, April. “To the 
Point: Talking Points for Manufacturers.” Accessed February 2008 at 
http://www.nam.org/.
National Association of Manufacturers (NAM). 2007b, June 30. “NAM 
Endorses Signing of U.S.–Korea FTA,” June 30, 2007. Accessed February 
2008 at http://www.nam.org/s_nam/doc1.asp?CID=67&DID=238970.
National Family Farm Coalition (NFFC). 2007, November 7. “Family 
Farmers and Ranchers Condemn Peru FTA Vote.” Accessed February 
2008 at http://www.nffc.net/pr/11.07.07.
National Family Farm Coalition (NFFC). 2008, August 13. “U.S. Family 
Farmers Applaud Demise of Doha Negotiations.” Accessed January 
2009 at http://www.nffc.net.
National Farmers Union. 2009. “Trade Negotiations & WTO.” Accessed 
May 2009 at http://nfu.org/issues/trade/negotiations-wto.
National Pork Producers. 2007. “2007 Congressional Pork Priorities.” 
Accessed February 2008 at http://www.nppc.org/public_ policy/trade.
html.
Obama, Barack. 2008. “The Economy.” Accessed January 2009 at http://
origin.barackobama.com/issues/economy/&hearing=512.
Orlik, Tom. 2009, January 20. “Can Obama Resist the Call of 
Protectionism?” South China Morning Post, 11.

86 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
Parks, James. 2007, June 6. “Jobless Workers Need Stronger Assistance 
Plans.” Accessed May 2008 at http://blog.aflcio.org/2007/06/06/
jobless-workers-need-strong-assistance-plans.
Petersmann, Ernst-Ulrich. 2000. “The WTO Constitution and Human 
Rights.” Journal of International Economic Law 3 (1): 19 – 25.
Pruzin, Daniel. 2008, January 30. “Antigua, Costa Rica Request 
Arbitration on Compensation from U.S. over Gambling,” BNA Daily 
Report for Executives.
Public Citizen, Global Trade Watch. 2000, January 1. “Trade & 
Environment Principles.” Accessed February 2008 at http://www.
citizen.org/trade/wto/ENVIRONMENT/articles.cfm?ID-5555.
Public Citizen, Global Trade Watch. 2007a, July. Trade Deficit in Food 
Safety. Accessed February 2008 at http://www.citizen.org/documents/
FoodSafetyReportFinal.pdf.
Public Citizen, Global Trade Watch. 2007b, July 25. “New Report 
Reveals How Pending Trade Agreements Will Worsen Imported Food 
Safety Problems by Increasing Food Imports.” Accessed May 2008 at 
http://www.citizen.org/pressroom/release.cfm?ID=2481.
Public Citizen, Global Trade Watch. 2008a. “(Consolidated) Trade 
Adjustment Assistance (2003-present).” Accessed May 2008 at http://
www.citizen.org/trade/forms/taa_search.cfm?dataset=3.
Public Citizen, Global Trade Watch. 2008b, May 9. “Fatally Flawed 
WTO Dispute System.” Accessed May 2008 at http://www.citizen.org/
documents/WTOPDisputesSummaryOnePagerwtables.pdf.
Public Citizen, Global Trade Watch. 2009a, January 8. “Election 2008: 
Fair Trade Gets an Upgrade.” Accessed January 2009 at http://www.
citizen.org/documents/ElectionReportFINAL.pdf.
Public Citizen, Global Trade Watch. 2009b, January 29. “Companies that 
Offshored Jobs Attacking ‘Buy America’/Stimulus on False Grounds.” 
Accessed February 2009 at http://www.citizen.org/hot_issues/issue.
cfm?ID2135.
Reinsch, Bill. 2007a, October 1. “Word from the President.” Accessed 
February 2008 at http://www.nftc.org.
Reinsch, Bill. 2007b, December 1. “Word from the President.” Accessed 
February 2008 at http://www.nftc.org.
“Reopening NAFTA Too Risky, Former Mexican President Salinas Says.” 
2008, May 16. Financial Post (Canada), 5.
Roeser, Tom. 2003, July 12. “Conservative Sees Free Trade as Threat to 
Manufacturing.” Chicago Sun-Times, 12.
Rosenberg, Mica. 2009, May 4. “Panama’s President-Elect to Push U.S. 
Trade Deal,” Reuters. Accessed May 2009 at www.reuters.com/article/
marketsNews/idUSN0441743720090504.

References 87
Scheid, Brian. 2009, February 6. “Business Groups Focused on Killing 
‘Buy-American’ Rules in Conference.” Inside US Trade.
Schmit, Julie. 2007, October 10. “Four Words Rarely Seen on Unsafe 
Imported Foods.” USA Today, 7A
Schwab, Susan. 2007, February 15. “U.S. Trade Update and Agenda.” 
Testimony to U.S. Senate, Committee on Finance. Accessed 
February 2008 at http://www.senate.gov/~finance/hearings/
testimony/2007test/021507sstest.pdf.
Scott, Robert. 2008, July 30. The China Trade Toll. Economic Policy 
Institute: Briefing Paper 219. Accessed January 2009 at http://www.epi.
org/publications/entry/bp219/.
Seligman, Daniel. 2005. Make Trade Safe, Clean & Fair. Washington, D.C.: 
Sierra Club. Accessed February 2008 at http://www.sierraclub.org/
trade/wto/cancun2.pdf.
Shapiro, Gary. 2008, January 7. “Keynote Address,” 2008 International 
Consumer Electronic Show. Accessed February 2008 at http://www.
cesweb.org/docs/Gary_Shapiro_CES_Keynote1 – 7-08.doc.
Sierra Club. Undated. “How Global Trade Could Increase Sprawl.” 
Washington, D.C.: Sierra Club. Accessed February 2008 at http://www.
sierraclub.org/trade/reports/.
Smith, Carolyn C. 2008, January 10. Trade Promotion Authority and 
Fast-Track Negotiating Authority for Trade Agreements: Major Votes (CRS 
Publication RS21004), Washington, D.C.: CRS. Accessed May 2008 at 
LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Smith-Spark, Laura. 2007, July 10. “Chinese Product Scares Prompt U.S. 
Fears.” BBC News. Accessed February 2008 at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/
hi/americas/6275758.stm.
Sparshott, Jeffrey. 2005, September 18. “The Hidden Cost of Free Trade: 
Worker Retaining for the Displaced Seldom Makeup for Job Losses.” 
Washington Times, A-1.
Stokes, Bruce. 2008, February 9. “Going Green in Trade Policy.” National 
Journal.
Talley, Ian, and Tom Barkley. 2009, March 18. “Energy Chief Says U.S. Is 
Open to Carbon Tariff.” Wall Street Journal.
Tischler, Bonni G. 2002, February 26. “Testimony to Congress.” Federal 
Document Clearing House Congressional Testimony. Accessed May 2008 at 
LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
“Trade and Prosperity.” 2007, December 23. New York Times, 7.
United Nations Environment Program. 2005. Environment and Trade: A 
Handbook. 2nd ed., Geneva: U.N. Environment Program.
Urquhart, Donald. 2007, August 15. “New U.S. Scanning Law Will Hit 
Asia Hardest.” Business Times Singapore.

88 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
USA *Engage. 2008, December 4. “Business Community Calls for New 
Cuba Policy.” Accessed January 2009 at http://www.usaengage.org/.
U.S. Army. 2008. U.S. Waterborne Container Traffic by Port/Waterway 
in 2007. Accessed February 2009 at http://www.iwr.usace.army.mil/
ndc/wcsc/by_portname07.htm.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2009. “Foreign Trade Statistics.” Accessed 
February 2009 at http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/statistics/
historical/index.html.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2008. “Employment, Hours, and 
Earnings from the Current Employment Statistics Survey, 1998 – 2008.” 
Accessed May 2008 at http://www.bls.gov/iag/tgs/iag31 – 33.
htm#workforce.
U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. 2009. The World Factbook. Accessed 
February 2009 at http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/index.html.
U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 2008a, January. “Creating American Jobs 
by Expanding Free and Fair Trade.” Accessed February 2008 at http://
www.chamberpost.com/2008/01/creating-americ.html.
U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 2008b, December. “International 
Engagement.” Accessed January 2009 at http://www.uschamber.com/
international/agenda/default.
U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 2009, January. “The State of American 
Business 2009.” Accessed January 2009 at http://www.uschamber.com/
sab/intltrade.
U.S.–China Business Council (USCBC). 2009, January. “China and the 
US Economy: Advancing a Winning Trade Agenda, Recommendations 
for the New Administration and Congress.” Accessed January 2009 
at http://www.uschina.org/public/documents/2009/china_policy_
recommendations.pdf.
U.S. Council for International Business. 2008. “Mission Statement.” 
Accessed February 2008 at http://www.uscib.org/docs/2009_02_03_
buy_american_senate.pdf.
U.S. Council for International Business. 2009, February 3. “Joint Letter to 
Senators Harry Reid and Mitch McConnell.” Accessed February 2009 at 
http://www.uscib.org/docs/2009_02_03.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). 2007, August 31. “Transcript of 
Roundtable Discussion on Free Trade Issues with Agriculture Secretary 
Mike Johanns, American Farm Bureau President Bob Stallman.” 
Accessed May 2008 at LexisNexis Academic http://www.lexisnexis.
com/us/lnacademic/.
U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration. 
2008. “Fact Sheet.” Accessed May 2008 at http://www.doleta.gov/
programs/factsht/taa.htm.

References 89
U.S. General Accounting Office. 2007, November 7. An Analysis of Free 
Trade Agreements and Congressional and Private Sector Consultations under 
Trade Promotion Authority. GAO-08 – 59. Washington, D.C.: GAO.
U.S. International Trade Commission. Annual. Year in Review. 
Washington, D.C.: USITC. Accessed May 2008 at http://hotdocs.usitc.
gov/docs/pubs/year_in_review/pub3915.pdf.
U.S.–Korea FTA Business Coalition. 2008. Accessed February 2008 at 
http://www.uskoreafta.org/portal/koreafta/default.
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). Annual. Annual Report of the President of 
the United States on the Trade Agreements Program (Washington, D.C.: GPO). 
Accessed May 2008 at http://www.ustr.gov/assets/Document_Library/.
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). 2006a, February 2. FTA: United States 
& Republic of Korea: Economic and Strategic Benefits. Washington, D.C.: 
USTR. Accessed May 2008 at http://www.ustr.gov/assets/Document_
Library/Fact_Sheets/2006/asset_upload_file650_8883.pdf.
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). 2007a, April 27. ITAC-10, Advisory 
Group Reports on Panama Trade. Washington, D.C.: USTR. Accessed 
February 2008 at http://www.ustr.gov/assets/Trade_Agreements/
Bilateral/Panama_FTA/Reports/asset_upload_file130_11239.pdf.
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). 2007b, April 27. U.S.–Korea Free Trade 
Agreement, Report of the Labor Advisory Committee for Trade Negotiations 
and Trade Policy. Washington, D.C.: USTR. Accessed February 2008 
at http://www.ustr.gov/Trade_Agreements/Bilateral/Republic_of_
Korea_FTA/Reports/Section_Index.html.
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). 2008a, February. “Trade Delivers 
Growth, Jobs, Prosperity, and Security at Home.” Accessed May 2009 at 
http://www.ustr.gov/assets/Document_Library/Fact_Sheets/2008/
asset_upload_file804_15077.pdf.
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). 2008b, March. National Trade Estimate 
Report on Foreign Trade Barriers. Washington, D.C.: USTR. Accessed 
May 2008 at http://www.ustr.gov/Document_Library/Reports_
Publications/2007/2007_NTE_Report/Section_Index_text.html.
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). 2008c, October. “The Case for the 
U.S.–Colombia Free Trade Agreement.” Accessed January 2009 at http://
www.ustr.gov/assets/Trade_Agreements/Bilateral/Colombia_FTA/
asset_upload_file372_13713.pdf.
“Victory for Bush on Fast Track.” 2002. CQ Almanac. Washington, D.C.: 
Congressional Quarterly. Accessed May 2008 at http://library.cqpress.
com/cqalmanac/cqual02 – 236 – 10371 – 664226.
Wallach, Lori. 2007a, January 30. “Statement to Committee on 
Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives.” Accessed 
February 2008 at http://waysandmeans.house.gov/hearings.
asp?formmode=view&id=5610.

90 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
Wallach, Lori. 2007b, April 18. “Is ‘Free Trade’ Working? Statement to 
U.S. Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation.” 
Accessed February 2008 at http://commerce.senate.gov/public/index.
cfm?FuseAction=Hearings.Hearing&Hearing_ID=1852.
“Wal-Mart & China.” 2007. Accessed May 2008 at http://
wakeupwalmart.com/facts/wmtchinareport.pdf.
“Where’s the Beef?” 2008, April 21. Wall Street Journal Asia.
Whitehead, Paul, and David Jones. 2008, January 24. “EU Adopts Major 
Climate Change Proposals.” Platts Oilgram News, 1. Accessed May 2008 
at LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Witness for Peace. 2006. “Faces of Colombia: Who are the Victims of 
Free Trade?” Accessed February 2008 at http://www.witnessforpeace.
org/pdf/FacesofColombiaFTAfinal.pdf.
Woellert, Lorraine. 1997, April 21. “EPA Settles Gasoline Dispute with 
Trade Organization.” Washington Times, 89.
Yerkey, Gary. 2008, December 16. “High-Powered Panel Urges Obama to 
Avoid Supporting New Round of WTO Trade Talks.” BNA: Daily Report 
for Executives, A-27.
Ylagan, Amelia H. C. 2006, October 23. “The Shrimp-Turtle Case,” 
Business World, S1/5. Accessed May 2008 at LexisNexis Academic, 
http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.

91
3
Worldwide Perspective
T
 his chapter offers a global perspective for the trade policy de-
bate in the United States. First, it considers how the contempo-
rary trading world emerged, examining patterns of commercial 
exchange among the most important trading nations and regions. 
Whether the global financial crisis and recession that began in 
2008 will alter these patterns and inaugurate a new era of gov-
ernment regulation and protectionism is a subject best left for 
future analysis. The present chapter also looks at national trade 
strategies, and how governments have responded to this market-
driven age of globalization. Then we focus on key institutional 
and legal foundations — particularly on the General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and its successor the World Trade 
Organization (WTO). The WTO oversees multilateral trade nego-
tiations, and administers the rules that govern the world trading 
system. Finally, the chapter considers the recent trend toward re-
gionalism. Major trading nations, frustrated with the slow pace 
of multilateral negotiations, have increasingly turned to bilateral 
and regional arrangements to widen and deepen commercial and 
financial relationships.
Contemporary Trade Patterns
From the end of World War II until the early 1970s, the world econ-
omy slowly recovered from the destruction of World War II and 
adjusted to new circumstances. Among them was the decoloniza-
tion of European empires, and the proliferation of new nations 
in Africa, Asia, and the Caribbean. Also, a protracted Cold War 

92 Worldwide Perspective
struggle between the United States and its allies, and the Soviet 
Union and its allies, left the international economy divided be-
tween two different economic and political systems. Democratic 
governments in Western Europe and North America relied on 
mixed economic systems, combining state ownership and inter-
vention with private-sector activity. The Soviet Union, and its al-
lies in Asia and Europe, confiscated private property and adopted 
state planning and autocratic governments. There was little trade 
between the two blocs.
During this phase (1948 – 1973), Western Europe and East 
Asia gradually revived. International trade expanded rapidly even 
though much of it was government managed or regulated. Until 
the mid-1970s, the Atlantic Ocean was the undisputed center of 
world trade. Europe and the Americas accounted for the bulk 
of world exports during that period — 74.5 percent in 1948, and 
72.5 percent in 1973, compared to 59.7 percent in 2007 (WTO 
2008a, 10).
In the last three decades of the 20th century, as the contempo-
rary phase of globalization accelerated, the trading world experi-
enced remarkable changes. The Cold War ended, and state-managed 
economies, such as China and the remnants of the Soviet Union, 
abandoned central planning and chose to compete in the global 
marketplace. Higher energy prices enriched the Organization of 
the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). The European Com-
mon Market, founded in 1957 with 6 members, expanded to add 
21 more nations. In other regions, similar trading blocs emerged—
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the Asso-
ciation of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), and Mercosur (the 
Southern Common Market including Brazil and Argentina). Most 
of all, improvements in transportation (wide-bodied jet aircraft 
and container ships) and communications (satellites, fiber optics, 
cell phones, and computers) interlinked peoples and  nations, and 
 facilitated business activity.
Under the auspices of the GATT (the WTO in 1995), trade 
liberalization and market integration continued. National gov-
ernments removed obstacles to trade at their borders and sub-
scribed to international rules for their domestic economies. They 
consented to more transparent decision making. Throughout the 
trading world, private enterprise revived and asserted political in-
fluence. With an agenda set by transnational business and finance, 
the revitalized private sector lobbied governments to privatize, 
de-regulate, and open economies to global competition.

Contemporary Trade Patterns 93
As globalization accelerated, traditional barriers of time and 
distance dissolved. Goods, services, money, labor, and informa-
tion moved easily from country to country, and around the world 
in 24 hours or less. Borders became less relevant, and flows of 
money, goods, services, information, and people multiplied.
On the trade front, the results were especially dramatic. 
Countries simplified and harmonized their tariff structures. They 
lowered tariffs and simplified other border obstacles — such as 
regulatory inspections and customs procedures. More and more 
countries became participants in a global trading system that had 
once been dominated by the rich countries of the North Atlantic 
region. The numbers told the story. In Western Europe and North 
America, gross domestic product (GDP) averaged gains of be-
tween 2.5 and 3 percent annually. In the developing world, the 
pattern was quite different. Africa and much of Latin America 
enjoyed uneven growth — some countries actually falling below 
colonial levels. But in the 1970s East Asia came alive. Japan and 
a group of smaller countries — Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, 
South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand — generated high rates of GDP 
and export growth. China, India, and Vietnam would follow. In 
the early 21st century, China’s growth soared above 10 percent, 
its exports of goods and services climbing 23 percent annually be-
tween 2000 and 2006. India followed along with GDP growth of 
between 8 and 9 percent, and exports of goods and services at an 
annual average rate of 16 percent between 2000 and 2006 (WDI; 
WTO 2008b).
Asia’s rapid development contributed to its emergence as a 
major center of world trade. Exports from the Asian region rose 
from 14.9 percent of the world total in 1973 to 27.9 percent in 2007. 
China’s exports soared from 1 percent of the world total in 1973 
to 8.9 percent in 2007. Six Asian countries — Hong Kong, Malay-
sia, South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, and Thailand — also did 
well — up from 3.4 percent to 9.3 percent (WTO 2008a, 10).
Asia’s gains meant lost market share for other regions. The 
United States’ share of world exports continued to slide from 
12.3 percent in 1973 to 8.5 percent in 2007, while U.S. economic 
growth averaged about 3 percent. South and Central America also 
lost market share, falling from 4.3 to 3.7 percent of world exports. 
In Africa, the pattern was also down—from 4.8 to 3.1 percent; and 
in Australia and New Zealand, declining from 2.1 to 1.2 percent. 
Europe was the big relative loser, falling from 50.9 percent of 
world exports in 1973 to 42.4 percent in 2007 (WTO 2008a, 10).

94 Worldwide Perspective
Despite the surge of Asian exports to the developed world, 
the majority of international trade remains intra-regional trade 
(within Europe, for example). Between 56 and 58 percent of world 
trade flows occur within regions. This fact suggests that distance 
still matters in an increasingly globalized world economy (WTO 
2008a, 3).
What explains the surging growth of Asia and its rapidly ex-
panding trade with the United States and Western Europe? Many 
factors obviously contributed—including the new technologies of 
transportation and communications—that enabled global pro-
duction. The Vietnam War initiated this trend. U.S. shipping firms 
carrying military cargoes to Vietnam looked for commercial 
shipments—shoes, textiles, and electronics—to carry on the re-
turn voyage. From these modest beginnings, U.S. producers and 
retailers gradually would shift their supply chain to emerging 
Asia where costs were lower—especially labor costs—and quality 
proved satisfactory (Levinson 2006, 186 –188). One key enabling 
factor was America’s relatively open market to imports. While 
America’s share of world exports declined, its share of world im-
ports rose from 12.3 percent in 1973 to 14.5 percent in 2007. But 
Asian growth also fueled a demand for imports — as Asia’s share 
of world imports rose sharply from 14.9 to 25.3 percent in 2005 
(WTO 2008a, 11; Chang 2003, 107–124).
As merchandise trade expanded over the last 30 years, and 
new Asian suppliers targeted world markets, huge imbalances 
appeared between what some countries exported and imported. 
One such imbalance involved the United States. America’s cur-
rent account deficit rose to 6.2 percent of GDP in 2006, and then 
declined to 4.7 percent in 2008. Major Asian countries had signifi-
cant surpluses: China’s current-account surplus was 10 percent of 
GDP in 2008; Taiwan, 6.4 percent; and Japan, 3.2 percent. Among 
oil exporters in 2008, Saudi Arabia ran a surplus of 28.9 percent of 
GDP in 2008, Norway, 18.4 percent; Venezuela, 12.3 percent; and 
Russia, 6.1 percent (IMF 2009).
Were these imbalances the result of flawed trade policies? 
WTO economists claim that the chronic imbalances are primarily 
a macroeconomic phenomenon and have little association with 
trade policy (WTO 2007b, 26). But, as noted in Chapter 2, many 
critics of U.S. trade policy think differently. They blame one-sided 
trade agreements, lax enforcement of mutual obligations, under-
valued foreign currencies, and market distortions, such as export 
subsidies, for the asymmetries.

Contemporary Trade Patterns 95
An important component of a nation’s overall balance with 
the rest of the world involves trade in services. This category in-
cludes many types of economic activity, ranging from banking 
and insurance, to shipping, tourism, and transportation. It also 
involves business consulting and information technology ser-
vices. Because business services often cross borders only in elec-
tronic form, they are difficult to count and measure. The United 
States was the leading exporter of commercial services in 2007, 
accounting for 13.9 percent of world exports and 10.9 percent of 
imports. Hong Kong and China together account for 6.2 percent 
of service exports, more than Japan but less than Germany. India, 
the twenty-sixth largest exporter of merchandise, is the ninth larg-
est exporter of services and the thirteenth largest importer (WTO 
2008a, 14).
Much of the world’s trade in services involves the transac-
tions of foreign affiliates of big corporations. The WTO estimates 
that foreign affiliates of U.S. service providers sell more than twice 
as much as conventional service exports, suggesting the difficulty 
of measuring a nation’s competitiveness in world trade (WTO 
2007a, 6).
While trade policy is the focus of this volume, any discussion 
of trade inevitably touches on finance. Before the 2007– 2008 re-
cession, world capital flows far surpassed world trade flows. Ac-
cording to the WTO, total world exports were about $11.8 trillion 
that year, but in foreign exchange markets daily trading amounted 
to over $3.2 trillion — suggesting annual financial flows far ex-
ceed trade flows (WTO 2007a, 10; Bank for International Settle-
ments 2007).
As in trade, the most active countries in private finance are 
located in Western Europe and North America. In 2007, developed 
countries exported $1,692 billion in foreign direct investment 
(FDI). Europe accounted for 61 percent and the United States for 
another 15.7 percent of the world total. Interestingly, developing 
economies exported $253.1 billion in FDI, or about 12.7 percent. 
While 68 percent of the FDI inflows went to developed countries 
(Europe 46.3%, and the United States 12.7%), China and East Asia 
received about $157 billion (8.5%) (UNCTAD 2008a, 2).
The growth of private investment in certain large, rapidly 
growing developing economies is a relatively new phenomenon. 
In 1985, the first year for which data was available, traditional 
relationships dominated flows of private investment. Residents 
of the United Kingdom and the Netherlands invested in America. 

96 Worldwide Perspective
Residents of the United States invested in Canada and the United 
Kingdom, but little capital flowed to developing countries. Twenty 
years later, the pattern was quite different. In 2005, the United 
States was the largest FDI recipient in the world but China was 
the leader for developing countries. China attracted large sums 
of investment capital from the Virgin Islands, Taiwan, Japan, 
the United States, and Hong Kong. Developing Asia, including 
China, attracted more than two-thirds of total inflows to develop-
ing countries in 2006. China was also a major exporter of invest-
ment capital — investing in petroleum and raw materials, as well 
as technology (UNCTAD 2007b, 19 – 20).
Over the last quarter century, transnational business has 
flourished. Of the 100 largest transnational corporations, 84 have 
their headquarters in the United States, Europe, or Japan. But, a 
recent trend is for firms in developing countries to compete on the 
global stage. According to UNCTAD data in 2007, among the 100 
largest transnationals there were seven from developing coun-
tries, six of these Asian, and one Mexican (UNCTAD 2007b, 24).
One proxy for the growing integration of financial markets 
was the proliferation of international agreements pertaining to in-
vestment issues. UNCTAD reported that at the end of 2007 there 
were approximately 5,600 international investment agreements, 
including 2,608 bilateral investment treaties (BITs), 2,730 double 
taxation treaties (DTTs), and 254 other agreements. Nearly every 
country had signed at least one. No single international author-
ity coordinated the overall structure. Many of these agreements 
were concluded in the period between 1997 and 2002. Developing 
countries were party to 76 percent of all BITs, 61 percent of all 
DTTs, and 81 percent of all other international investment agree-
ments. Many of the agreements were between developing coun-
tries, especially in the Southern Hemisphere (UNCTAD 2007b, 
16 –19; UNCTAD 2008b).
Before the sub-prime banking crisis spread globally in 2008, 
depressing equity and commodity markets, and disrupting world 
trade patterns, some observers perceived that the world economy 
was in the midst of a historic shift of power. Emerging market 
countries, like Brazil, China, India, and Russia, were growing 
rapidly. Chicago economist David Hale noted that in 2007 devel-
oping economies accounted for 29 percent of total world output 
compared with 18 percent in 1995. Developing countries held 
75 percent of the $6 trillion in world foreign exchange reserves, 
and their stock markets had a capitalization of $17.8 trillion, more 

Leading Trading Partners and Strategies  97
than $17.5 trillion for the U.S. market. Hale suggested that, while 
the United States was the engine of growth for the world economy 
in the late 20th century, developing markets may have taken over 
that role in the early 21st century (Hale 2008).
Leading Trading Partners 
and Strategies
In this section, we look briefly at some of the leading trading 
powers, and their trade strategies. The countries considered have 
extensive trading relationships with the United States and play 
leadership roles in the WTO and regional trading arrangements. 
They are discussed in descending order, according to their shares 
of world trade.
European Union (EU)
Because the 27 members of the European Union defer to the Eu-
ropean Commission in Brussels on trade policy issues, we treat 
them as a single unit. The European Union accounts for nearly 
40 percent of the world’s exports and imports. In 2007, it had a 
population of 494 million and a GDP of $13.8 trillion, exceeding 
the United States at $13.9 trillion. If trade among members of the 
European Union is excluded, it is the world’s leading exporter 
and second-largest importer, accounting for 16.4 percent of world 
exports in 2007 and 18.4 percent of world imports. The European 
Union is America’s largest trading partner, and the two work 
closely together, despite some differences (WTO 2008b).
The story of the giant European Union begins with efforts 
at the end of World War II to integrate the economies of Ger-
many and France, longtime political enemies, with an iron-and-
steel community. In 1957, the two former enemies, the Benelux 
countries, and Italy signed the Treaty of Rome, creating the Com-
mon Market, an experiment to erect a common external tariff 
(including a common agricultural policy) and remove internal 
barriers. Over time, the Common Market expanded, adding the 
United Kingdom, Ireland, and Denmark in 1973, and in the 1980s, 
Greece, Spain, and Portugal. In 1995, Austria, Finland, and Swe-
den joined, making 15 members. As a result of the Maastricht 
Treaty in 1992, the European Union deepened its bonds with 

98 Worldwide Perspective
cooperation in defense and foreign policy, legal and judicial mat-
ters, and creation of an economic and monetary union — removing 
final border barriers. Then on January 1, 1999, all of its members 
except the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Denmark launched a 
common currency, the euro, which in only a few years has be-
come one of the world’s leading currencies and a rival to the 
U.S. dollar (Eichengreen 2007). In 2004, 10 more countries joined 
the European Union: Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hun-
gary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia. 
Romania and Bulgaria acceded in 2007.
Because the 1957 Treaty of Rome established a customs 
union — with a common external tariff and no customs duties on 
internal trade — and a common agricultural policy, the European 
Commission in Brussels took charge of trade policy. Until the last 
decade of the 20th century, European trade policy had an Atlantic 
and Mediterranean focus. As a partner with the United States in 
the GATT, Europe promoted multilateral trade liberalization and 
a stronger rules-based international trading system. Meanwhile, 
Europe maintained preferential arrangements with former Eu-
ropean colonies in the Mediterranean region and the Caribbean. 
As the price for membership in Europe, the United Kingdom was 
obliged to reorient its trade to the continent and away from its 
former commonwealth and colonies.
While the United States and Europe were able to lower and 
then essentially remove manufacturing duties between them-
selves as part of the various GATT rounds, agricultural barriers 
lingered as a problem. On all imported goods, EU tariffs average 
5.2 percent, but agricultural products averaged 15 percent (WTO 
2008b). Protection for high-cost agriculture has been an integral 
part of the European Union experiment from 1957. To effect the 
common market, member countries accepted a costly program of 
subsidies and prices to benefit European farmers. Some in France 
saw this Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) as a way of retaining 
distinctive features of rural life. Although necessary politically, it 
has proven a costly drain on funds (44% of EU expenditures in 
2005), and a constant source of trade frictions.
The CAP continues to distort world agricultural trade. The 
World Bank calculates that the European Union provides half of 
all agricultural support in OECD countries. As a share of gross 
farm receipts, agricultural support during the period 2003 to 
2005 in the European Union amounted to 34 percent, in Japan 
58 percent, and in the United States 16 percent. One result is that 

Leading Trading Partners and Strategies  99
the European Union is the world’s leading exporter of agricultural 
products. It exports substantial quantities of products that might 
be imported more efficiently — including sugar, wheat, cheese, 
meat, and milk products (World Bank 2007, 97).
EU leaders have been reluctant to reduce agricultural subsi-
dies or to open the European Union market to increased imports 
of farm products from developing countries. In France and Ire-
land, opposition to changes in the common agricultural policy 
runs strong among rural voters. In both countries, concern over 
agricultural trade produced strong votes against the proposed 
new European Constitution, which would weaken the ability of 
national governments to protect farmers. Thus, it is not surpris-
ing that governments of developing countries blame farm lobbies 
in the rich countries for the deadlock in Doha Round agricultural 
trade negotiations.
China
With a population of 1.3 billion people, China is the world’s larg-
est, rapidly-growing economy. Its gross domestic product is about 
one-half the size of the American economy. Within the last two 
decades, China also has emerged as a major player in world trade. 
After the European Union, it ranks as the world’s second largest 
exporter, accounting for about 8.8 percent of exports. China is the 
world’s third-largest importer, taking 6.8 percent of imports. Chi-
na’s leading export markets are the European Union (20.1%), the 
United States (19.1%), and Hong Kong (15.1%). China’s imports 
come from Japan (14%), the European Union (11.6%), South Korea 
(10.9%), Taiwan (10.6%), and Hong Kong (9%). While the United 
States is China’s leading export market, the United States does 
not rank among China’s five leading suppliers of imports. China’s 
average duty on all imports is about 9.9 percent; on agricultural 
goods, 15.8 percent (WTO 2008b).
In 2008, China was the world’s factory, and a leading exporter 
of manufactures. China imports raw materials from Australia, Bra-
zil, and many other countries, then adds cheap labor, and exports 
the results. As a member of the WTO, China has gained assured 
access to export markets in North America and Western Europe.
Some commentators say China pursues a mercantilistic trade 
policy for national advantage. Mercantilist nations seek to export 
more than they import, and to accumulate monetary reserves 
for national advantage. William Hawkins, an analyst with the 

100 Worldwide Perspective
U.S. Business and Industrial Council, compares China to 18th-
century European empires. In its dealings with developing countries 
in Africa, Asia, and the Americas, China seeks markets for its manu-
factures and raw materials for its industry (Hawkins 2005). Eamonn 
Fingleton, an international trade analyst based in Tokyo, complains 
that American corporations have become instruments of this mer-
cantilism. He says they transfer advanced technology to China and 
lobby for the Chinese interests in Washington (Fingleton 2008).
Japan
With a population of about 128 million, Japan has an economy of 
more than $4.3 trillion, roughly one-third the size of the U.S. econ-
omy in production. Japan is the fourth-leading exporter of mer-
chandise and the third-leading exporter of commercial services. 
Its principal export markets are the United States (20.4%), China 
(15.3%), the European Union (14.8%), and South Korea (7.6%). 
On the import side, Japan is the fourth-leading importer of mer-
chandise, and the third-leading importer of commercial services. 
Japan’s principal suppliers are China (20.6%), the United States 
(11.6%), the European Union (10.5%), Saudi Arabia (5.7%), and the 
United Arab Emirates (5.2%). Like the European Union, Japan has 
relatively low average tariff levels (5.1%), but keeps tariffs on agri-
cultural products much higher (21.8%) (WTO 2008b). As a matter 
of national policy, Japan seeks to lift its food self-sufficiency above 
50 percent (“Japan to Set Roadmap” 2008).
Until the Seattle WTO conference of 1999, Japan was a strong 
backer of multilateral trade negotiations. While maneuvering to 
protect Japanese rice farmers and other agriculture, its trade pol-
icy was directed at maintaining secure access to its largest mar-
kets and gaining improved terms of access to developing markets 
through multilateral negotiations. In the GATT/WTO negotia-
tions, Japan usually maintained a low profile, offering few conces-
sions, but taking advantage of concessions offered by its trading 
partners to boost exports.
Canada
Long an important trading nation and active participant in world 
trade negotiations, Canada has about 33 million people and a 
$1.2 trillion economy. Among all trading nations, Canada ranks fifth 
in both exports and imports of goods (excluding intra-EU trade).

Leading Trading Partners and Strategies  101
Canada is highly dependent on the North American market; 
the United States takes 79.1 percent of its exports, and Mexico 
another 1.1 percent. The next largest markets are the European 
Union (7.7%), China (2.1%), and Japan (2%). As an importer, Can-
ada’s largest suppliers are the United States (54.2%), the European 
Union (12.1%), China (9.4%), Mexico (4.2%), and Japan (3.8%). 
Canada’s average applied duties are 5.5 percent on all goods, and 
17.9 percent on agricultural products (WTO 2008b).
Canada has long supported the multilateral trade liberaliza-
tion process to advance its economic interests. Its trade special-
ists take active part in WTO negotiations and help administer the 
global trading system. As a member of the Cairns group nations, 
Canada looks to the WTO to improve opportunities for its agricul-
tural exports. It has used the WTO dispute settlement mechanism 
to attack U.S. corn subsidies. With its vast deposits of oil sands in 
Alberta, Canada also has become a major player in international 
oil markets.
Because assured access to the U.S. market is vital to Canada’s 
economic health, it has not hesitated in recent years to pursue bi-
lateral and regional agreements — such as the Canada-US FTA in 
1988, and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 
1994. While seeking improved access to foreign markets, Canada 
seeks to preserve its distinctive culture with restrictions on foreign 
magazines and films. Foreign firms entering Canada quickly find 
that provincial barriers restrict internal trade. As a consequence, the 
provinces of Ontario and Quebec are discussing the negotiation of 
an inter-provincial free-trade agreement (Morrissy 2008).
Mexico
Until 1995, after NAFTA took effect, Mexico was not a member 
of the GATT/WTO system. Ruled by one political party since the 
Mexican Revolution, Mexico pursued isolationist economic poli-
cies, and sought to keep its distance from its large North American 
neighbor. But faced with a burgeoning population of 105 million 
(2007) and inadequate job creation, Mexico’s leadership made a 
decision to look outward for foreign investment to create jobs. 
Choosing to integrate with the international system, Mexico has 
lowered tariffs. Its average ad valorem tariff is 12.6 percent. Mex-
ico ranks tenth among the world’s exporters (excluding intra-EU 
trade) and eighth among importers. Of its exports, 82.2 percent 
go to the United States, 5.3 percent to the European Union, and 

102 Worldwide Perspective
2.4 percent to Canada. Of its imports, 49.8 percent arrive from the 
United States, 12 percent from the European Union, 10.5 percent 
from China, 5.8 percent from Japan, and 4.5 percent from South 
Korea (WTO 2008b).
Much of Mexico’s trade is cross-border trade in which com-
ponents arrive from the United States and are assembled by Mexi-
can labor. The final products are shipped back across the border to 
U.S. markets. Mexico exports more automobiles and auto parts to 
the United States than the United States does to the world. When 
higher energy prices hiked shipping costs in 2008, some United 
States and Canadian firms that shifted manufacturing assembly 
to China discussed moving factories back to Mexico to be nearer 
the North American market (Engardio 2008; Macdonald 2008).
Russia
The Russian Federation has 141.6 million people and a GDP of 
about $2 trillion. As the world’s largest exporter of natural gas 
and the second largest exporter of oil (USEIA 2008, 1), Russia en-
joys new significance in world trade. Fuels and mining products 
amount to 68 percent of exports. Its principal export markets are 
the EU (55.8%), Turkey (5.2%), the Ukraine (4.7%), China (4.5%), 
and Switzerland (4.1%) (WTO 2008b).
Russia wishes to join the World Trade Organization. From the 
Russian point of view, WTO membership is an important step to-
ward integrating the Russian economy into the global economy, 
and attracting foreign investment capital. Among the contentious 
issues have been energy pricing, intellectual property rights, and 
agriculture. European manufacturers worry that Russia’s energy-
pricing structure might give Russian industry an unfair advan-
tage in export markets (Cooper 2008b, 13 –14).
The United States and the European Union have been con-
cerned about Russia’s capacity to comply with the WTO’s Agree-
ment on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS). While Russia has taken steps to bring its laws into 
compliance with WTO rules, enforcement of those laws remains 
unsatisfactory to foreign interests. Foreign governments have com-
plained that the Russian judicial system has been slow to address 
issues of intellectual property infringement. Russian production 
of pirated DVDs has been a special problem. In 2006, U.S. holders 
of copyrights lost an estimated $2.1 billion to pirates. Counterfeit 

Leading Trading Partners and Strategies  103
 purchases of American products far exceed legitimate purchases 
of such products in Russia (Cooper 2008b, 11).
Agricultural policy is especially sensitive in Russia — given 
the dislocations in converting from a state-managed economy. 
Along with the vexing issue of agricultural subsidies, outside 
suppliers have been perturbed at Russia’s use of quotas on poul-
try, beef, and pork, allegedly for health reasons. In other areas of 
discussion — such as financial services and telecommunications—
the Russian government has sought to employ infant industry 
protection (USTR 2008, 467– 477).
If the Obama administration wishes to integrate Russia into 
the WTO, it must persuade Congress to modify existing U.S. laws 
so that Russia can receive permanent normal trade relations sta-
tus. Congress must exempt Russia from the Jackson-Vanik amend-
ment, which denies countries unconditional most-favored-nation 
status if they restrict freedom of emigration. Russia, Kazakhstan, 
and several other former communist states are still subject to this 
restriction (Cooper 2008a).
Brazil
The largest country in Latin America by area and population (192 
million), Brazil has a GDP of about $1.8 trillion. It is the world’s 
sixteenth-largest exporter of merchandise. Traditionally, Brazil’s 
largest export markets have been the European Union (25.2%), the 
United States (15.8%), Argentina (9.0%), China (6.7%), and Ven-
ezuela (2.9%). During 2009 Brazil’s exports to China have soared, 
and China became its leading trading partner (Duffy 2009). On 
the import side, Brazil is the 19th largest market for merchandise. 
Its tariffs average 12.2 percent, with nonagricultural goods aver-
aging 12.5 percent. Like many developing economies, Brazil has 
not bound its tariffs at these lower levels, and could lift them to 
higher levels — averaging 31.4 percent on all goods and 35.5 per-
cent on agricultural products — without violating commitments to 
the WTO ( WTO 2008b).
One of GATT’s original members, Brazil seeks to lead the de-
veloping world in the WTO. During the Doha Round, Brazil has 
represented the group of 21 developing countries on agricultural 
matters. Brazilian Ambassador Rubens Barbosa has emphasized 
that there is a new balance of power, and the WTO can no longer 
function as a club in which the big countries — the United States 

104 Worldwide Perspective
and the European Union — tell the others what to do (Hagstrom 
2003; Smith 2003).
With a large domestic market, a diversified economy with 
strengths in agriculture, raw materials, manufacturing, and tech-
nology, Brazil seeks market access for its products. It has histori-
cally pursued an import substitution policy (that is, substituting 
domestic production for imports), and even today it uses subsidy 
and government procurement policies to encourage national pro-
duction. In services, it has been slow to open up the domestic 
market to foreign financial services, telecommunications provid-
ers, and cable and media companies. But Brazil strives to attract 
foreign investment, and because of its market size and growth po-
tential, it has become one of the developing world’s most attrac-
tive hosts for foreign capital (USTR 2008).
Brazil has also taken an interest in encouraging South-South 
trade among countries in the Southern Hemisphere. It has used 
the WTO dispute settlement mechanism to successfully challenge 
U.S. farm subsidies for cotton and EU subsidies for sugar.
Australia
Australia, one of the leaders of the Cairns Group of food-exporting 
nations, is a good example of an agricultural and raw-materials-
oriented economy dependent on open trade. Australia has a popu-
lation of about 21 million and a gross domestic product of more 
than $733 billion. It ranks 19th in the world as an exporter, and 14th 
as an importer of merchandise. Australia’s principal export mar-
kets are Japan (19%), China (14%), the European Union (11.4%), 
South Korea (8%), and the United States (6%) (WTO 2008b).
Long a protectionist nation, Australia began to reduce its tar-
iffs in the late 1980s and now has applied tariffs comparable to 
other major trading countries. The average duty applied to all im-
ports is 3.5 percent, and 1.3 percent on agricultural products. The 
largest share of its imports come from the EU (21.9%), followed by 
China (15.5%), the United States (12.9%), Japan (9.6%), and Singa-
pore (5.6%) (WTO 2008b)
Eager to gain assured access to its major overseas markets, 
Australia has negotiated bilateral FTAs with Chile, New Zealand, 
Singapore, Thailand, and the United States. It is negotiating FTAs 
with China, the Gulf Cooperation Council, Japan, Malaysia, South 
Korea, and ASEAN. Under consideration are FTAs with India and 
Indonesia.

Leading Trading Partners and Strategies  105
India
India seeks to take an active role in global trade negotiations, and 
to provide leadership to developing countries, as befits a founding 
member of GATT/WTO and a country with the world’s second-
largest population of 1.1 billion people. Although it has a growing 
middle class of 300 million, the vast majority of its people have 
low incomes. It is estimated that 800 million Indians live on less 
than $1 per day. Total GDP is nearly $3 trillion on a purchasing 
power basis (WTO 2008b).
As a trading country, India ranks 18th in exports and 12th 
in imports if intra-European trade is excluded. In services, it is 
much more important. India is the fifth leading exporter and the 
seventh leading importer of services. India’s tariffs are relatively 
high — averaging 14.5 percent, with agricultural products averag-
ing 34.4 percent. Because it has not bound these tariffs against in-
creases, India could impose even higher rates without violating 
its international commitments (WTO 2008b).
India’s principal export markets are the European Union 
(21.7%), the United States (13.8%), the United Arab Emirates 
(9.9%), and China (6.5%). It buys from the United States (14.8%); 
China (11.2%); and the United States (6.5%) (WTO 2008b).
For much of its history, India rejected free-market economics 
and relied on central planning, industrial policy to promote manu-
facturing, and government control over foreign trade and foreign 
investment. Trade policy was highly protectionist and sought to 
substitute Indian production for imports. The average tariff sur-
passed 200 percent, and quotas also restricted trade. Compared 
to its neighbors in Southeast Asia, India has enjoyed a low rate of 
growth from 1950 to 1980 (3.5%).
With the collapse of its major trading partner, the Soviet 
Union, in the early 1990s, India began to liberalize its economy 
and open up to trade and investment. While inadequate ports, 
roads, power, and other infrastructure complicate India’s efforts 
to expand exports of manufactures, it has large numbers of well-
 educated people eager to take service-related jobs. Annually,  India’s 
colleges and universities turn out 2.5 million graduates, includ-
ing 350,000 engineers. This has attracted large numbers of U.S. 
and other transnational firms, such as General Electric, to set up 
operations and research centers in India. In addition, Indian en-
trepreneurs have developed a number of world-class competitors 
such as Tata in engineering and manufacturing, and Infosys and 

106 Worldwide Perspective
Wipro in software and information technology. Call centers and 
back-office operations flourish in India, as North American and 
European firms moved jobs to India to take advantage of well-
educated and relatively inexpensive labor. But India still restricts 
foreign investment in retail in order to protect small stores.
In trade policy, India has sought to rally developing countries 
in the WTO as a counterweight to the influence of the European 
Union and the United States. But while seeking market access for 
manufactures and agricultural exports in the rich industrial coun-
tries, it has been reluctant to open its own agricultural market 
to world competition and to lower its tariffs on manufactures as 
much as high-income countries wanted in Doha Round negotia-
tions. In deference to its generic drug manufacturers, who repro-
duced overseas patented drugs by a different process, and to its 
consumers who benefited from low prices, India has been slow to 
comply with the WTO’s TRIPS code (USTR 2008).
South Africa
As the African country with the highest standard of living, and 
enormous mineral wealth, South Africa, another founding mem-
ber of GATT, often takes a leadership role on regional trade mat-
ters. With a population of about 48 million, South Africa has a GDP 
of $463 billion. Despite its mineral riches, manufactures compose 
55 percent of South Africa’s exports, and these go to the European 
Union (33%), the United States (11.8%), Japan (11%), and China 
(6.5%). On the import side, South Africa’s applied tariffs average 
7.8 percent, and 9.2 percent on agricultural products. South Africa 
obtains 33.7 percent of its imports from the European Union, fol-
lowed by China (10.7%), and the United States (7.7%) (WTO 2008, 
October).
In WTO trade negotiations, South Africa has worked closely 
with Brazil and India to represent the interests of developing 
countries and to promote South-South trade, that is, trade among 
countries in the Southern Hemisphere.
One of its special priorities has been to obtain inexpensive 
drugs for AIDS patients from generic pharmaceutical produc-
ers in the developing world. However, pharmaceutical firms in 
India and Brazil copied drugs patented and produced in West-
ern Europe and the United States and then sold them to third-
world customers at a fraction of the price. This activity conflicted 
with the WTO’s TRIPS accord on intellectual property protection. 

World Trade Organization (W TO) 107
Eventually, in 2002, the United States agreed not to challenge poor 
countries that imported drugs from generic suppliers to fight 
HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and other infectious epidemics 
under compulsory licensing rules of the WTO (Jack 2006, 3).
World Trade Organization (W TO)
At the close of World War II, the victors established several inter-
national economic institutions: the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) to promote currency stability; the International Bank for Re-
construction and Development (now known as the World Bank) to 
promote economic development; and the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade (GATT), a temporary contractual arrangement 
pending establishment of the permanent International Trade Or-
ganization (the ITO). Fifty countries sent delegations to the UN 
Conference on Trade and Employment in Havana, Cuba, during 
the winter of 1947 – 1948 to negotiate the charter for the ITO. The 
draft charter extended beyond trade to cover commodity agree-
ments, employment, restrictive business practices, international 
investment, and services. As it turned out, the charter was too ad-
vanced and grandiose for its times. Fearful that rules represented 
an attempt to impose bureaucratic planning on the world econ-
omy in the name of freer trade, the U.S. business community suc-
cessfully lobbied Congress against the charter. As a consequence, 
the GATT, which was intended only as a transitional mechanism, 
endured for 47 years.
The GATT was both a forum for trade negotiations, and set of 
rules for trade relations. The protocols were provisional and the 
secretariat administering them remained an interim committee. 
Over eight negotiating rounds, beginning with the multilateral 
round at Geneva in 1947, this temporary arrangement succeeded 
in lowering duties on trade in manufactures. For a discussion of 
the early GATT rounds, see Chapter 1. In the early rounds, the 
principal producers of individual products negotiated reductions 
bilaterally on a product-by-product basis with principal suppli-
ers. Then they extended the concessions on a nondiscriminatory 
most-favored nation basis to other trading countries without 
them having to make reciprocal reductions. For example, the 
United Kingdom and the United States, the principal auto pro-
ducers of the postwar period, agreed to lower duties on the auto 
trade. Emerging industrial powers, such as South Korea and Japan, 

108 Worldwide Perspective
gained the benefits of these concessions without providing equiv-
alent access to their own markets. As a result, Japanese and South 
Korean auto manufacturers gained unobstructed access to the U.S. 
market for their exports, but a variety of trade barriers impeded 
sales of U.S. cars to their own consumers.
As the example suggests, the GATT was initially a small club 
dominated by the rich countries of Western Europe and North 
America. At its founding, GATT had 23 members, 12 of which 
were developed countries and 11 of which were developing. For 
more than a decade its membership remained small, and the mem-
bers made decisions by consensus. As late as the Dillon Round of 
1960 –1962, there were only 26 participants, but then the member-
ship began to expand under the leadership of its first director-
general, Eric Wyndham White of the United Kingdom. As more 
members joined the GATT in the 1960s — especially developing 
countries — the negotiations became more difficult and time con-
suming. Some of the new members lacked the capacity to honor 
their obligations and even to pay their dues (Eckes 2000, 12 – 23).
In the early GATT rounds, negotiators picked the low- hanging 
fruit of high tariffs on industrial goods. By the 1960s, GATT sought 
to address complex issues involving nontariff barriers and agri-
culture. With more members involved, each round took longer 
to conclude. In the Kennedy Round of the 1960s, 40 nations had 
participated and the negotiating process lasted three years. It pro-
duced tariff cuts of 36 to 39 percent for participating industrial 
countries. By the 1970s, the Tokyo Round, which lasted six years, 
engaged 102 members — many of them newcomers to the inter-
national trade system.
Tokyo Round
To backers of the multilateral trading system, the results of the 
Tokyo Round (1973 – 1979) proved disappointing. It achieved far 
less than the Kennedy Round. Advanced countries agreed to cut 
tariffs on industrial goods by about 33 percent (from about 8.1% 
ad valorem for the United States to 5.6 percent of total imports). 
While the United States had hoped to roll back the European Com-
munity’s variable levy system for protecting agriculture, these ef-
forts achieved little. But the Tokyo Round did extend GATT rules 
to nontariff matters. Governments approved a number of non-
tariff codes relating to countervailing duties and subsidies, anti-
dumping duties, product standards and technical barriers, import 

World Trade Organization (W TO) 109
licensing, government procurement, and customs valuation. Gen-
erally, these codes, binding only to GATT members who accepted 
them, established a large body of laws to deal with various techni-
cal issues. In effect, the negotiators sought to harmonize admin-
istrative procedures and national laws dealing with a variety of 
impediments to international trade (Lowenfeld 2002, 54 – 55).
Most developing nations did not participate actively in the 
Tokyo Round. Although they asserted rights to all of the tariff 
concessions granted by rich countries to one another, many of the 
poor countries looked to the United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development (UNCTAD), and its director Raul Prebisch for 
leadership. Prebisch, who in the 1950s and 1960s advocated tariffs 
and import substitution as the path to development, urged the 
rich countries to provide one-way tariff preferences to the exports 
of the poor countries. And, in the Tokyo Round, GATT members 
made permanent the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), 
essentially waiving the core principle of nondiscrimination for 
developing countries.
The U.S. program, for example, allowed GSP-eligible coun-
tries duty-free access to the U.S. market subject to certain condi-
tions. The executive branch retained authority to cancel a country’s 
eligibility if its exports exceeded certain limits, or in certain other 
circumstances. The European Community administered a similar 
GSP program. The net effect of these unilateral market access pro-
grams was that developing countries played a minor role in GATT 
and looked to bilateral negotiations with the European Union and 
the United States for trade benefits. They also made little effort to 
liberalize and bind their tariffs against future changes (Hoekman 
and Ozden 2005, 10).
As it turned out, the Tokyo Round did more than sustain the 
multilateral process. It took strides to accommodate the world 
trading system to the needs of multinational business, as it ex-
tended international trade rules to nontariff issues.
Uruguay Round—WTO
The eighth, and last, of the GATT rounds, the Uruguay Round, 
involved 123 countries and took seven and one-half years to con-
clude in 1994. Initially, there had been little enthusiasm for more 
multilateral negotiations after the Tokyo Round. But the pres-
sure of bilateral and regional free trade initiatives helped per-
suade the European Community and Japan to join in launching 

110 Worldwide Perspective
another round. They did so in September 1986, when GATT held 
a ministerial at Punta del Este, Uruguay.
The Uruguay Round focused on improving the workings of 
the international trade system, particularly in the areas of agri-
culture, subsidies, safeguards, dispute settlement, and nontariff 
measures. The United States sought to revise the ineffective GATT 
dispute settlement process, which allowed members to block an 
adverse finding. The United States also wanted to promote more 
open and fair conditions of trade in agricultural commodities and 
improvements in GATT provisions to address certain unfair trad-
ing practices. Frustrated with free-riding countries and the lack 
of reciprocity, Congress had instructed negotiators to obtain im-
proved market access for U.S. exports to developing countries. Al-
though differing on agriculture, the European Union had a similar 
set of interests: improving dispute settlement, establishing rules 
for services, and gaining greater access to developing country 
markets.
The Uruguay Round proved another exercise in frustrations. 
Whereas previously the United States and the European Commu-
nity were the major players, this time developing countries took 
a larger role. Two-thirds of the 123 participants were developing 
countries.
The key to the final agreement was a deal involving devel-
oping and developed nations. The latter agreed to phase out re-
straints on textiles and apparel and to improve market access for 
developing world agricultural products, in exchange for extend-
ing the multilateral system to cover intellectual property, services, 
and trade-related investment measures (TRIMs). Behind the deal 
was this reality: large transnational corporations based principally 
in the Northern Hemisphere were frustrated with local- content 
 restrictions in host countries and sought greater freedom to run 
their operations in the most efficient way possible. Also, Wall 
Street, the insurance industry, and telecommunications giants 
wanted an opportunity to sell their products and services in de-
veloping markets on the same terms as host-country competitors. 
And the entertainment and pharmaceuticals industries insisted 
on stronger protections for patents and copyrights.
The final agreement replaced the temporary GATT with a 
permanent institution: the World Trade Organization. It would 
serve as a forum and a vehicle for implementing trade agreements. 
The agreement also contained 13 different accords covering trade 
in goods and agriculture, as well as sanitary and phytosanitary 

World Trade Organization (W TO) 111
measures (covering risks associated with disease, pests, additives, 
toxins, and the like). Others concerned textiles and clothing; tech-
nical barriers to trade (standards); TRIMs; antidumping, customs 
valuation, preshipment inspection, rules of origin, import licens-
ing procedures, subsidies, and countervailing measures; and 
safeguards. In addition, participants approved a General Agree-
ment on Trade in Services (GATS); TRIPS; a dispute settlement 
understanding; trade policy review mechanism; and four pluri-
lateral trade agreements covering government procurement, civil 
aircraft, dairy, and bovine meat. These were known as plurilater-
als, because they applied only to their signers, a smaller group 
than the whole WTO membership. The final act also set out an 
additional negotiating agenda, one including financial services, 
basic telecommunications services, and civil aircraft. These mat-
ters were left largely unresolved until later negotiations. Those 
interested in the details of the Uruguay Round agreements are en-
couraged to consult books in the reference section to this chapter, 
particularly Barton, Goldstein, Josling, and Steinberg 2006; Beth-
lehem, McRae, Neufeld, and Van Damme, and for a critical point 
of view, Wallach and Sforza 1999.
From the standpoint of developing countries, agreements 
on textiles and clothing, and on agriculture were most impor-
tant. The textile pact promised to end country-by-country quotas 
on imports of textiles and apparel by January 1, 2005. This was 
implemented, benefiting low-cost textile exporters such as China, 
Bangladesh, and Vietnam. But many inefficient African producers 
experienced heavy losses, as did medium-income countries with 
higher cost structures, such as the Philippines, Taiwan, Turkey, 
and South Korea. In the agriculture agreement, member countries 
committed to establish a fair and market-oriented agricultural 
system. They pledged to improve access to their markets, cut sup-
port to agriculture, and reduce export subsidies. How these goals 
were to be achieved, the negotiators left for future discussions. 
Afterward, the poor countries would complain that the United 
States and the European Union did not keep their side of the 
 bargain.
Among the most controversial aspects of the trade package 
were the WTO’s voting formula and its dispute settlement mecha-
nism. The WTO sought to operate by consensus, but if consensus 
could not be achieved, it voted on a one country/one-vote basis. 
Each member was entitled to one vote, no matter the size of its 
stake in the global economy. Thus, the United States (then with 

112 Worldwide Perspective
a population of 285 million) had voting power equal to Grenada, 
which had a population of 108,000. As created in the Uruguay 
Round, the new WTO was no “rich man’s club.” Developing na-
tions now held more than two-thirds of the votes, although they 
accounted for only 38 percent of world trade. Even though the 
WTO sought to avoid votes, the concerns of the poorest countries 
shaped the WTO agenda far more than they did under the GATT.
WTO Leadership Transition
As noted previously, the United States and the European Union 
had dominated GATT. Smaller trading countries, such as Austra-
lia and Canada, took an active leadership role but the reality was 
that when Europe and the United States agreed, the others usually 
acquiesced. Even though GATT functioned by consensus (giving 
each member a veto), dissent was unusual.
In the WTO, an organization in which two-thirds of the mem-
bers were low-income countries, all longtime members of GATT, 
such as India, Brazil, and South Africa, sought to lead the develop-
ing world. Their first triumph came in 2002 when the developing 
countries challenged the United States and Europeans on the se-
lection of a new director general. Traditionally, the head of GATT 
had been a European, but in 1999 members deadlocked and de-
cided to share the six-year term between Mike Moore, a former 
prime minister of New Zealand, and Supachai Panitchpakdi of 
Thailand.
Moore had the misfortune to preside over the turbulent WTO 
ministerial in Seattle in December 1999. He had hoped to launch 
a development round of negotiations to address some of the com-
plaints about the uneven distribution of gains from the Uruguay 
Round. Poor countries complained that rich countries had agreed 
to cut farm subsidies, but did not. Frustrated at not having im-
proved access for their agricultural exports, developing countries 
refused to lower tariffs and open markets to manufactures and 
service providers from high-income countries.
If the unrest in Seattle was a blow to those who sought to 
strengthen the multilateral system, the terrorist attacks of Sep-
tember 2001 presented a second chance. This time nations united 
behind the launching of another trade round — the so-called Doha 
Development Round (DDR), named for Doha, Qatar, where the 
WTO met in November 2001. In this round, participants aspired 
to use trade liberalization to integrate poor countries into the 

World Trade Organization (W TO) 113
international system. They sought to reduce poverty and promote 
economic development, thus promoting greater prosperity, social 
stability, and world peace. Some members, notably the Europe-
ans, hoped to address a variety of new issues in the context of 
the multilateral round — these involved investment, competition, 
transparency in government procurement, and trade facilitation. 
These, the so-called Singapore issues, had been raised at a 1996 
WTO ministerial in that Asian city-state. Critics — particularly 
India — claimed that the first three of the Singapore issues were 
strictly-speaking nontrade issues and impinged on domestic sov-
ereignty (Khor 2004).
The DDR has had a turbulent history. From the initial aspira-
tions soon came frustrations, deadlock, and fiascos, such as the 
turbulent ministerial in Cancun, Mexico, in 2003. Gradually, the 
deadlock lead to postponement and eventual suspension of the ne-
gotiations in July 2006. Indian Trade Minister Kamal Nath  asserted 
the round was not dead but was “between intensive care and the 
crematorium” (Blustein 2006). While the United States and Eu-
rope pointed fingers at the other for the deadlock, the confronta-
tional approach of developing countries was another important 
factor.
Interestingly, several new groupings of nations used the 
Doha Round of negotiations to challenge the traditional leader-
ship role of the United States and the European Union. Among 
the most important of these new groupings are the Cairns group 
of 19 food-exporting countries, and the Group of Twenty (G-20) 
and the Group of Thirty-Three (G-33) developing nations.
Cairns Group
Formed in 1986 at Cairns, Australia, the members include de-
veloped and developing countries such as Argentina, Australia, 
Brazil, Canada, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan, the 
Philippines, South Africa, and Thailand among others. One of the 
group’s longtime goals is eliminating agricultural export subsi-
dies that distort world trade. In particular, they want the Doha 
Round to achieve new market access opportunities for farmers. 
Many of their concerns relate to EU and U.S. agricultural policies. 
They have called upon the European Union to make tariff cuts on 
sensitive agricultural products, and for the United States and the 
European Union to reduce significantly the amount they spend 
on trade-distorting domestic support.

114 Worldwide Perspective
Leading members of the group — Argentina, Australia, Can-
ada, and New Zealand — tend to have relatively low tariffs on im-
ports and do not have the resources to heavily subsidize agriculture 
as do governments of Japan, the United States and the European 
Union. They often align with the United States in negotiations. 
For further information, see http://www.cairnsgroup.org/.
Group of Twenty
Eager to offset the power of the United States and the European 
Union in WTO negotiations, Brazil, India, and South Africa or-
ganized the Group of Twenty (G-20) in August 2003. This group-
ing of developing nations was determined to press proposals for 
agricultural liberalization at the Cancun ministerial of the WTO. 
It emphasized that the greatest contribution to the success of the 
Doha Round must come from developed countries, not develop-
ing countries. The G-20 has 23 members, 5 from Africa including 
South Africa; 6 from Asia, including China and India; and 12 from 
Latin America. It claims to represent 60 percent of the world’s pop-
ulation, 70 percent of the world’s rural population, and 26 percent 
of the world’s agricultural exports. Significantly, the G-20 does 
not include such high-income agricultural producers as Australia, 
Canada, and New Zealand, members of the Cairns group. The G-20 
often employs a confrontational negotiating strategy in which it 
claims to represent the South against the North in trade debates.
While the confrontational approach has not been successful in 
the Doha Round, some scholars say the G-20 has eroded the influ-
ence of the United States and the European Union and made the 
WTO more democratic (Crump and Maswood 2007). Some think 
the G-20 has been punching above its weight and actual influ-
ence in world trade, and thus jeopardizing the future of the multi
lateral system. For further information, see http://www.g-20.mre.
gov.br/.
Group of Thirty-Three
This group, which now includes 46 developing countries, is con-
cerned with food security, and rural development needs. Indone-
sia and the Philippines organized the group, which first sought 
to exert influence at the 2003 WTO ministerial in Cancun, Mex-
ico. Members include poor countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin 

World Trade Organization (W TO) 115
America. Among the largest are China, India, Indonesia, South 
Korea, Nigeria, and the Philippines. The group wants to find solu-
tions to challenges facing small farmers in developing countries. 
They seek a special products and special security mechanism, 
which exempts certain products in order to protect food security, 
to promote rural development.
WTO Dispute Settlement
Unlike GATT, its predecessor, the WTO features an effective, le-
galistic dispute settlement process in which member nations, but 
not private parties, can file complaints alleging violation of WTO 
rules. The previous GATT dispute settlement mechanism tended 
to emphasize diplomatic solutions, in which obligations were not 
enforced to the letter (Srinivasan 2007, 1039 –1041). At the core of the 
new dispute settlement process is implementation, compensation, 
or retaliation. If the losing party to a complaint does not imple-
ment the decision and make compensation, the party bringing the 
complaint may retaliate by suspending equivalent concessions. In 
effect, the dispute settlement process makes the WTO an inter-
national regulatory authority, and many of its decisions curtail 
national economic governance (Van Damme 2008).
Since 1995, members had filed 392 complaints (through May 
2009). The United States and the European Union brought 171 
complaints (44%), and had to respond to 43 percent of the com-
plaints (170). The United States is a party — either a complainant 
or a respondent — in more than half of all cases (WTO 2009a). In 
recent years, complaints brought by the United States and the Eu-
ropean Union have declined, and increasing numbers have been 
filed by developing countries — such as Argentina, Brazil, India, 
Mexico, and Thailand. Developing countries have brought 39 per-
cent of all complaints. Least developed countries, including most 
of Africa, and other countries classified by the United Nations, 
seldom have been involved in dispute settlement cases (Leitner 
and Lester 2008, 180 – 181, 192). They tend to account for a small 
share of world trade, and lack the resources and experience to 
utilize dispute settlement successfully.
While the dispute settlement system is relatively new, schol-
arly analysis suggests that it has been relatively successful. The 
implementation rate of WTO panel decisions is about 75 percent. 
But there appear to be compliance problems in which remedies 

116 Worldwide Perspective
have been delayed or their implementation has been disputed. 
The United States, the country that promoted the rules-based ap-
proach to trade governance, is alleged to be the “biggest trouble-
maker” because of its refusal to implement major rulings. The 
reason given for noncompliance is congressional reluctance to 
enact implementing legislation. The troublesome U.S. cases in-
volve steel products, copyright law, trademarks, tax law involv-
ing foreign sales corporations, and the Byrd amendment case 
involving distribution of antidumping and countervailing duties 
collected to petitioning companies. The European Union has also 
refused to implement WTO decisions in high-profile cases involv-
ing bananas and meat hormones (Choi 2007).
For U.S. criticisms of the dispute-settlement process, see 
Chapter 2.
Alternative Trade Strategies—
Bilateralism and Regionalism
After the failure at Cancun and Hong Kong in 2005 to conclude 
the Doha Development Round, major trading powers increas-
ingly looked for alternatives to the multilateral system. In place 
of the many-sided WTO process, major trading nations began to 
negotiate bilateral and regional agreements with like-minded, or 
geographically near, partners. As of May 2009, the WTO reported 
247 agreements in force, including 148 FTAs (WTO 2009b).
At first impression, the regional, bilateral, and multilateral 
approaches appear contradictory. Bilateral and regional agree-
ments seem to contradict the principle of nondiscrimination that 
underlies GATT/WTO. Nonetheless, from its origins in 1947, 
GATT sought to accommodate bilateral and regional trade agree-
ments within the multilateral system. They would be a first step 
toward the extension of gains from trade to all countries. The 
General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) negotiated dur-
ing the Uruguay Round for services also envisaged bilateral and 
regional agreements. Basically, the WTO’s interest is that regional 
agreements promote trade openness and not lead to greater dis-
crimination against outside parties.
Many of the contemporary bilateral and regional agreements 
strive for deeper degrees of integration than under the WTO, parti-
cularly with measures to liberalize and harmonize trade-impeding 

Alternative Trade Strategies—Bilateralism and Regionalism 117
regulatory policies. Others seek to enlarge and integrate regional 
blocs in Europe, North America, South America, and Asia. Oth-
ers link countries in different regions and at different levels of 
development, such as U.S. agreements with Jordan and Chile. In 
light of these patterns, we need to examine more closely the trade-
 negotiating strategies of the leading economic powers. For a dis-
cussion of U.S. strategies, please see Chapter 2.
European Union (EU)
Like U.S. officials, Europe’s leaders have negotiated agreements 
outside the GATT/WTO multilateral process to advance the inter-
ests of European manufacturers, service providers, and investors. 
They pursued bilateral and regional economic arrangements with 
neighboring countries, former colonies, and major trading part-
ners in other corners of the world. Some of the EU initiatives are 
defensive moves intended to preserve access to a market, such as 
Mexico, where the United States apparently gained an advantage 
from NAFTA.
In 1995, the European Union and 10 Mediterranean 
governments —  Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, 
Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, and the Palestinian Authority — issued a 
declaration in Barcelona, Spain, calling for a Euro-Mediterranean 
Free Trade Area (EMFTA) by 2010. It involved negotiating bi-
lateral association agreements with each country and gradually 
implementing free trade. EMFTA envisaged free trade in manu-
factures and the gradual opening of trade in agricultural products. 
The bilateral agreements have all been concluded with the Euro-
pean Union, and the parties are committed to implementing free 
trade among themselves. The Euro-Mediterranean Association 
Agreements differ but have certain common aspects — including 
respect for human rights and democracy, establishment of WTO-
 compatible free trade over a 12-year transition period, and 
provisions relating to intellectual property, services, public pro-
curement, competition, subsidies, and monopolies. The EMFTA 
initiative reflected Europe’s appreciation that its own economic 
prosperity and political stability depended on improving eco-
nomic conditions in North Africa.
In 2000, the European Union proposed economic partner-
ship agreements with a number of developing nations: the so-
called Asia-Caribbean-Pacific (ACP) group, 79 former colonies 
with about 12 percent of the world’s population. For decades, 

118 Worldwide Perspective
these countries enjoyed preferential access to Europe’s market, 
but the preferences violated WTO rules requiring reciprocity, not 
dependency. The European Union proposed regional partnership 
arrangements, in which the countries would open their markets 
to EU businesses, enjoy generous access to the EU market, and 
trade more freely among themselves. Under the threat of losing 
preferences on their exports to the European Union, 35 countries 
conducted initial interim agreements with the European Union by 
a December 31, 2007, deadline. But the agreements are controver-
sial both in the developing countries and with other members of 
the WTO. Brazil has complained that these proposed preferential 
agreements conflict with efforts to promote so-called South-South 
commerce among developing countries. Governments that have 
economic partnerships with the European Union are required to 
extend to the European Union any more advantageous market ac-
cess terms that they negotiate with other significant economies. 
That is, the ACP agreements contain a most-favored-nation clause 
(“Sun Sets on Cotonou,” 2008).
After North American countries completed NAFTA, the Eu-
ropean Union, not wishing to be excluded from a fortress America, 
negotiated its own free-trade agreement with Mexico, which took 
effect in 2000. The European Union feared losing market share 
to the United States, and Mexico sought to diversify its exports 
and attract European investment capital so as to create jobs. In 
2007, the European Union took 5.3 percent of Mexico’s exports, 
and supplied 12 percent of Mexico’s imports, making it Mexico’s 
second-largest trading partner. The European Union also negoti-
ated one with Chile, which went into effect in February 2003, a 
year before a similar FTA agreement with the United States. The 
European Union takes 27.5 percent of Chile’s exports, and sup-
plies 15 percent of Chile’s imports, and is Chile’s leading trading 
partner (WTO 2008 October).
More recently, the European Union has turned its attention 
to other major trading partners in the Americas and Asia. It is 
negotiating bilateral free-trade agreements with the Association 
of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the Gulf Cooperation 
Council (GCC), two regional blocs, and with Canada, Central 
American countries, India, and South Korea. The European Union 
expects to conclude bilaterals with South Korea and India. It has 
also been negotiating a bilateral free-trade agreement with Merco-
sur in reaction to the U.S. initiative for a free-trade agreement for 
the Americas. This agreement was scheduled to be completed in 

Alternative Trade Strategies—Bilateralism and Regionalism 119
2004 but differences over Brazilian access to the European agricul-
tural market and EU access to the Brazilian telecommunications 
sector have stalled negotiations.
Japan
After the failure of the Seattle WTO conference to launch a new 
round of multilateral negotiations, Japan began to follow Europe 
and the United States along the bilateral-regional path with eco-
nomic partnership agreements (EPA), its term for FTAs. Japan’s 
goals included lessening its export dependence on the U.S. mar-
ket and counterbalancing China’s efforts to expand economic in-
fluence in the Asian region.
In October 2000, it signed a general framework for bilat-
eral free trade with the Association of South East Asian Nations 
(ASEAN). The negotiators reached agreement in April 2008, and 
within 10 years the signatories plan to eliminate tariffs on 90 per-
cent of their imports. The agreement covered trade in goods, 
services, investments, dispute settlement, sanitary and phyto-
sanitary regulations (such as restrictions on imported food and 
meat), intellectual property, rules of origin, and technical barriers 
to trade. Japan thus sought to achieve a stronger trade position in 
Asia relative to China, South Korea, and the United States.
On the bilateral side, Japan signed a free-trade agreement 
with Singapore in 2001. It did not include agriculture, but focused 
on liberalizing trade in services, especially finance and telecom-
munications, investments, the movement of people, and dispute 
settlement. Other bilaterals signed with Malaysia (2005) and Thai-
land (2007) are in effect. Other bilaterals with the Brunei, Indo-
nesia, the Philippines, and Vietnam await implementation. While 
Japan made concessions on admitting some agricultural products, 
rice is not included. The agreement with the Philippines opens 
Japan’s nursing care market to Japanese-speaking Filipinos.
Japan also made defensive trade moves in the Western hemi-
sphere. It signed a bilateral free-trade agreement with Mexico in 
September 2004 and with Chile in March 2007. The Mexican FTA 
was intended to ensure that Japanese corporations had access 
to NAFTA. Japan established import quotas for Mexican beef, 
chicken, and oranges, while Mexico agreed to liberalize imports 
of Japanese automobiles and steel. The agreement also covered 
dispute settlement, safeguards, competition policy, and invest-
ment protections. Japan negotiated a similar pact with Chile after 

120 Worldwide Perspective
that country signed FTAs with the United States and the Euro-
pean Union.
Japan has initiated other FTA negotiations, including the Gulf 
Cooperation Council (GCC) composed of Bahrain, Oman, Qatar, 
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Kuwait. It is also 
negotiating agreements with South Korea, India, Australia, and 
Switzerland.
Canada
While Canada strongly supports multilateral trade liberaliza-
tion, it was one of the first to play the bilateral card. Fearful of 
losing access to a fortress Europe and to the United States, it 
proposed free trade negotiations with the United States in 1985 
that led to the Canadian-U.S. Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA) 
bilateral and eventually to NAFTA (including Mexico) in 1994. 
Subsequently, it negotiated bilateral free-trade agreements with 
Israel (1997), Chile (1997), Costa Rica (2002), and in 2008 with Co-
lombia, Peru, and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA). 
EFTA includes Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, and Switzerland. 
In October 2008, Canada and the European Union announced 
their intentions to negotiate a broad economic partnership agree-
ment. Canada also has been negotiating FTAs with Jordan, South 
Korea, Singapore, and smaller countries in the Caribbean and 
Central America.
Generally, Canada has been slower than the United States to 
pursue bilateral and regional FTAs — preferring to think that the 
multilateral WTO negotiating process held the greatest poten-
tial for the largest gains. However, Canadian agriculture has ex-
pressed fears of falling behind the United States in negotiating 
FTAs with countries that are important markets.
China
Eager first to gain membership in the WTO and eligibility for 
most-favored-nation treatment, China was slow to jump on the 
FTA bandwagon, but it did so with a vengeance. China’s goals are 
to promote East Asian economic integration, tying smaller coun-
tries of the region more closely to China; and to promote a North-
east Asian FTA with Japan and South Korea. Using FTAs as a tool 
of diplomacy, China also seeks to secure access to critical energy 
and industrial raw materials (Hufbauer, Clyde and Schott 2007).

Alternative Trade Strategies—Bilateralism and Regionalism 121
It embarked on negotiations first with nations having close 
political and geographical ties, such as Hong Kong and Macao, 
ASEAN, Australia, and New Zealand. China also began negotia-
tions in November 2001 with the 10-member ASEAN bloc, and 
concluded a framework agreement in 2002. The FTA would take 
effect for 1.7 billion people in 2010 — and for newer members of 
ASEAN in 2015. The parties had an early harvest of agreements 
on goods, dispute settlement, and trade in services. China and 
Thailand concluded a limited FTA in October 2003 removing tar-
iffs for 188 types of fruits and vegetables. The two parties hoped 
to conclude a comprehensive agreement by 2010. In October 2008, 
China and Singapore signed a free-trade agreement.
China has also used FTAs to strengthen ties to natural re-
source suppliers such as the GCC, Australia, Chile, and South 
Africa.
Generally, the Chinese agreements are relatively brief and 
focus on trade in goods. Non-WTO matters such as labor and the 
environment are not included, nor is dispute settlement (Antkie-
wicz and Whalley 2004, 17). Chinese agreements typically do not 
deal with intellectual property rights, investment, and service 
 issues.
China and India have been discussing the possibilities of 
negotiating a bilateral free-trade agreement, and China has pro-
posed similar agreements with Brazil and other Latin American 
countries.
India
Like other major trading powers, India has increasingly turned 
to regional and bilateral trade agreements, including  agreements 
with  Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Sri Lanka, the Maldives, 
Nepal, China, and South Korea. There is also an economic cooper-
ation agreement with Singapore and framework agreements with 
ASEAN and Chile (World Bank-India 2008).
India’s policy has emphasized the South Asian region, but its 
agreements are riddled with exceptions and cover a small share of 
two-way trade (Hufbauer, Clyde and Schott 2007).
Brazil
As the leader of the Mercosur bloc, which includes Argentina, 
Paraguay, and Uruguay, Brazil is a regional leader determined to 

122 Worldwide Perspective
negotiate with the European Union and the United States as an 
equal (Klom 2003). It has promoted Venezuela’s full membership 
in the organization. Mercosur has concluded FTAs with Colom-
bia, Ecuador, Venezuela, and Peru to establish the base for a pro-
posed South American Community of Nations.
Effects of RTAs
There is no consensus among economists and policymakers as to 
whether the proliferation of bilateral and regional arrangements 
has been generally positive or harmful (Estevadeordal, Shearer, 
and Suominen 2007, 35 – 36). Defenders of the multilateral WTO 
system tend to see such preferential agreements as stumbling 
blocs to global free trade. From the founding of the European 
Common Market in the 1950s, many economists have insisted 
that the removal of trade barriers among members of a regional 
bloc will inevitably divert the trade of outsiders and undermine 
multilateral efforts to liberalize trade. Jagdish Bhagwati of Co-
lumbia University argues that regional arrangements revive dis-
criminatory practices and are thus termites undermining free 
trade (Bhagwati 2008).
There is concern that current world economic conditions may 
invite a return to the trade policies of the 1930s. During the Great 
Depression, most major trading nations pursued regional ar-
rangements, and internationalists, like Secretary of State Cordell 
Hull, claimed the resulting tensions contributed to a break-down 
of world peace. Instead of strengthening the global system, cur-
rent trends may reinforce the appeal of regionalism. It is not dif-
ficult to imagine China and Japan dominating the economies of 
East Asia; India, South Asia; Brazil, South America; the European 
Union, Western and Central Europe; and the United States, North 
America.
But there is another current of thought that RTAs can be in-
clusive and encourage interactions supportive of global free trade. 
Some analysts say regional agreements contribute to prosperity 
and peaceful political relationships by strengthening ties among 
nearby countries. The World Bank notes that North-South agree-
ments, especially those with the United States, have been effec-
tive in liberalizing service trade, in advancing intellectual property 
protections beyond WTO standards, and in expanding protections 

References 123
for foreign investors. They generally contain few provisions liber-
alizing the flow of temporary workers. South-South agreements 
among developing countries tend to focus on expanding merchan-
dise trade and lowering border costs, but often experience imple-
mentation problems. South-South agreements also seldom provide 
for the movement of temporary workers ( World Bank 2005).
Conclusion
This chapter takes a systemic approach to trade policy, looking 
at trade policy through the lenses of America’s most important 
trading partners. After surveying market patterns — particularly 
the rising influence of East Asia in world trade and the growing 
power of low-income nations in the World Trade Organization—
this section considers the strengths and shortcomings of the 
GATT/WTO multilateral system. It notes the continuing contro-
versies associated with the WTO’s legalistic dispute-settlement 
rules. Also, the WTO has increasingly become deadlocked, and 
as a result major trading nations have turned to bilateral and re-
gional arrangements to secure access to markets and essential raw 
materials. Whether regionalism and bilateralism are compatible 
with efforts to expand free trade and strengthen the multilateral 
system is an issue that divides economists and commentators.
References
Antkiewicz, Agata, and John Walley. 2004. “China’s New Regional Trade 
Agreements” (CATPRN Working Paper 2004  –1). Waterloo: University of 
Western Ontario.
Bank for International Settlements. 2007, December. BIS Quarterly 
Review, 64. Accessed February 2008 at http://www.bis.org/publ/
qtrpdf/r_qt0712g.htm.
Barton, John H., Judith L. Goldstein, Timothy E. Josling, and Richard H. 
Steinberg. 2006. The Evolution of the Trade Regime: Politics, Law, 
and Economics of the GATT and the WTO. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Bethlehem, Daniel, Donald McRae, Rodney Neufeld, and Isabelle Van 
Damme. 2009. The Oxford Handbook of International Trade Law. New York: 
Oxford University Press.

124 Worldwide Perspective
Bhagwati, Jagdish. 2008. Termites in the Trading System: How Preferential 
Agreements Undermine Free Trade. New York: Oxford University Press.
Blustein, Paul. 2006, July 25. “Trade Talks Fail after Stalemate over Farm 
Issues.” The Washington Post, D1.
Chang, Ha-joon, ed. 2003. Rethinking Development Economics. London, 
England: Anthem Press.
Choi, Won-Mog. 2007. “To Comply or Not to Comply? Non-
Implementation Problems in the WTO Dispute Settlement System.” 
Journal of World Trade 41 (5): 1043–1071.
Cooper, William H. 2008a, January 8. The Jackson-Vanik Amendment and 
Candidate Countries for WTO Accession: Issues for Congress (Order Code 
RS22398). Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service.
Cooper, William H. 2008b, January. Russia’s Accession to the WTO (Order 
Code RL 31979). Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service.
Crump, Larry, and S. Javed Maswood. 2007. Developing Countries and 
Global Trade Negotiations. London: Routledge.
Duffy, Gary. 2009, May 19. “Brazil and China Forge Closer Trade 
Links.” BBC News. Accessed May 2009 at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
business/8057048.stm.
Eckes, Alfred E., ed. 2000. Revisiting U.S. Trade Policy: Decisions in 
Perspective. Athens: Ohio University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2007. The European Economy Since 1945. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Engardio, Peter. 2008, June 30. “Can the U.S. Bring Jobs Back from 
China?” Business Week, 38.
Estevadeordal, Antoni, Matthew Shearer, and Kati Suominen. 2007, 
September 10 –12. “Multilateralizing RTAs in the Americas: State 
of Play and Ways Forward.” Paper presented at the conference 
on Multilateralising Regionalism, Geneva, Switzerland. Accessed 
March 2008 at http://www.wto.org.
Fingleton, Eamonn. 2008. In the Jaws of the Dragon: America’s Fate in the 
Coming Era of Chinese Hegemony. New York: St. Martin’s.
Hagstrom, Jerry. 2003, October 15. “Brazilian Ambassador Decries 
‘Clubby’ WTO Approach.” CongressDaily, 10 –11.
Hale, David. “Brave New Economy.” 2008, February 22. The Wall Street 
Journal, A14.
Hawkins, William. 2005, February 3. “China Pursues ‘Manifest Destiny’ 
Through Mercantilism and Imperialism.” American Economic Alert. 
Accessed March 2008 at http://www.americaneconomicalert.org/.
Hoekman, Bernard, and Caglar Ozden. 2005, April. “Trade Preferences 
and Differential Treatment of Developing Countries: A Selective 

References 125
Survey.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3566. Accessed 
March 2008 at http://go.worldbank.org/QSOH03FJMO.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, and Jeffrey J. Schott. 2007, September 10 –12. 
“Multilateralizing Regionalism: Fitting Asia-Pacific Agreements into 
the WTO System.” Geneva: WTO. Accessed March 2008 at http://www.
wto.org.
International Monetary Fund. 2009, April. World Economic Outlook 
Database. Accessed May 2009 at http://www.imf.org.
Jack, Andrew. 2006, December 1. “The Drug Companies: A New Mood 
of Cooperation.” Financial Times, 3.
“Japan to Set Roadmap for Lifting Food Self-Sufficiency above 50 Pct.” 
2008, July 3. Jiji Press Ticker Service. Accessed July 2008 at LexisNexis 
Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Khor, Martin. 2004, November. “The ‘Singapore Issues’ in the WTO: 
Implications and Recent Developments.” Singapore: Third World 
Network. Accessed March 2008 at http://www.twinside.org.sg/pos.htm.
Klom, Andy. 2003. “Mercosur and Brazil: A European Perspective.” 
International Affairs 79 (2): 351 – 368.
Leitner, Kara, and Simon Lester. 2008, February. “WTO Dispute 
Settlement 1995 – 2007: A Statistical Analysis.” Journal of International 
Economic Law 11 (1): 179 –192.
Levinson, Marc. 2006. The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the 
World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Lowenfeld, Andreas F. 2002. International Economic Law. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Macdonald, Don. 2008, June 27. “Will Oil Reverse Globalization?” 
Montreal Gazette.
Morrissy, John. 2008, April 2. “Time to Get Tough on Interprovincial 
Trade, Coalition Says.” Montreal Gazette, B8.
Smith, Patrick. 2003, September 30. “Poor Nations Keep Heat on Trade.” 
The Christian Science Monitor, 6.
Srinivasan, T. N. 2007. “The Dispute Settlement Mechanism of the WTO: 
A Brief History and an Evaluation from Economic, Contractarian and 
Legal Perspectives.” The World Economy, 1033 –1068.
“Sun Sets on Cotonou.” 2008, January 5. The Economist. Accessed 
February 2008 at, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development here 
(UNCTAD). 2007a. UNCTAD Handbook of Statistics On-line. Accessed 
February 2008 at http://www.unctad.org/Templates/Page.
asp?intItemID=1890&lang=1.

126 Worldwide Perspective
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 
2007b. World Investment Report 2007. Geneva: UNCTAD.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 
2008a. World Investment Report 2008. Geneva: UNCTAD.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 
2008b, September 1. Recent Developments in International Investment 
Agreements (2007-June 2008). Geneva: UNCTAD.
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). 2007, April 2. 2007 National Trade 
Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers. Washington, D.C.: USTR, 41– 48. 
Accessed February 2008 at http://www.ustr.gov/Document_Library/
Reports_Publications/2007/2007_NTE_Report/Section_Index.html.
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). 2008, March 28. 2008 National Trade 
Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers. Washington, D.C.: USTR. 
Accessed March 2008 at http://www.ustr.gov/assets/Document_
Library/Reports_Publications/2008/2008_NTE_Report/asset_
uploaded_file365_14652.pdf.
Van Damme, Isabelle. 2008. “Seventh Annual WTO Conference: an 
Overview.” Journal of International Economic Law 11 (1): 155 –165.
Wallach, Lori, and Michelle Sforza. 1999, October. Whose Trade 
Organization? Washington, D.C.: Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch.
World Bank. 2005. “Regional Trade Agreements and Development: 
Upside Potential and Downside Risks.” Washington, D.C.: World 
Bank Group.
World Bank. 2007. Agriculture for Development: World Development Report 
2008. Washington, D.C.: World Bank. Accessed February 2008 at http://
web.worldbank.org.
World Bank. 2008. “India: Foreign Trade Policy.” Washington, D.C.: 
World Bank Group. Accessed February 2008 at http://go.worldbank.
org/RJEB2JGTC0.
World Development Indicators (WDI). 2008. Washington, D.C.: 
World Bank Group. Accessed March 2008 at http://go.worldbank.
org/6HAYAHG8H0.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2007a. International Trade Statistics 
2007. Geneva: WTO.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2007b. World Trade Report 2007. 
Geneva: WTO. Accessed February 2008 at http://www.wto.org.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2008a. International Trade Statistics 
2008. Geneva: WTO.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2008b, October. Trade Profiles. 
Accessed November 2008 at http://www.wto.org.

References 127
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2009a. “Disputes by Country.” 
Accessed May 2009 at http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/
dispu_e/dispu_by_country_e.htm.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2009b. “Regional Trade Agreements 
Notified to the GATT/WTO and in Force.” Accessed May 2009 at 
http://rtais.wto.org/UI/publicsummarytable.aspx.

This page intentionally left blank

129
4
Chronology
1776 
Adam Smith authors The Wealth of Nations, one of the 
classics of economic thought. It attacks the prevailing 
system of mercantilism and makes the case for free 
trade and an international division of labor to increase 
wealth.
1787 
U.S. Constitutional Convention creates customs union 
with internal free trade and a common external tar-
iff. The Constitution specifies a separation of powers 
between executive and legislative branches. The ex-
ecutive branch gains authority to conduct diplomatic 
negotiations and to negotiate treaties subject to Sen-
ate approval. Congress acquires authority to regulate 
commerce and levy taxes. Both the legislative and ex-
ecutive branches thus have a legal responsibility for 
trade policy.
1789 
On July 4, the anniversary of Independence, Congress 
enacts its first law, a revenue tariff — averaging about 
8.5 percent ad valorem (as a percentage of value). 
Many of the actual duties were specific duties (for ex-
ample, 2 cents per pound of nails). For the purpose of 
comparing tariff acts, specific duties are usually con-
verted to their ad valorem equivalents.
1791 
Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton’s Report 
on Manufactures recommends that the national govern-
ment use subsidies and tariffs to encourage domestic 

130 Chronology
manufacturing. Hamilton’s approach, which has roots 
in European mercantilism, conflicts with Adam Smith’s 
laissez-faire approach. Hamilton’s thinking about eco-
nomic development later inspires governments across 
the developing world to pursue state-interventionist, 
industrial policies.
1817 
English stockbroker David Ricardo advances theory 
of comparative advantage. He shows how a country 
can benefit from trade even if it is less efficient in pro-
duction of products than its trading partner. Ricardo’s 
theory inspires free traders who seek to remove trade 
barriers.
1828 
U.S. Congress enacts Tariff of 1828, the so-called Tariff 
of Abominations, with the highest tariff rates in U.S. 
history. The average rate on dutiable goods climbs 
to 61.7 percent, higher than the much-reviled Smoot-
Hawley Tariff of 1930, and only 8 percent of goods 
enter duty free. The resulting political controversy—
including South Carolina’s nullification — leads Con-
gress to lower the tariff over the next decade to a 
20 percent revenue tariff.
1841 
Friedrich List’s book The National System of Politi-
cal Economy appears. Nationalist in tone, it attempts 
to rebut Adam Smith’s laissez-faire theories and the 
claims of free traders that the international specializa-
tion of production is the path to prosperity. List argues 
instead that for the national economy temporary pro-
tection of domestic industries is needed to facilitate 
industrialization. List’s thinking draws on former 
U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton. 
His book influences the protectionist policies of 19th-
 century America, and several Asian countries in the 
20th century.
1846 
British Parliament repeals the Corn Laws, taking a 
major step toward free trade. The corn laws, enacted 
during the Napoleonic Wars, protect agriculture and 
land owners, from cheap imported corn. Manufactur-
ing interests, led by free-trader Richard Cobden, lead 
the successful effort to repeal the laws, arguing that it 

Chronology 131
will benefit consumers of food. After repeal, Cobden 
and the British free traders embark on a campaign to 
persuade other European countries to adopt free trade. 
The Economist, founded in 1843, by anticorn law advo-
cates, becomes a powerful vehicle for the free-trade 
forces.
1855 –1898 Justin Morrill of Vermont serves in Congress and chairs 
at different times the House Ways and Means Com-
mittee and the Senate Finance Committee, the com-
mittees with jurisdiction over trade policy. A strong 
protectionist and defender of congressional preroga-
tives, Morrill resists executive-branch efforts to pro-
mote exports at the expense of imports. He succeeds 
in blocking reciprocity agreements and in abrogating 
the (1866) Canadian reciprocity agreement negotiated 
under President Franklin Pierce in 1854.
1883 
International Convention for the Protection of Indus-
trial Property is negotiated in Paris. Eleven countries 
sign the first multilateral treaty governing intellec-
tual property—patents, designs, trademarks. By 2008, 
there will be 178 members, and the World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO) will administer the 
 revised convention.
1890 
Congressman William McKinley (R-OH), chairman of 
the House Ways and Means Committee, authors the 
Tariff Act of 1890 (McKinley Tariff). Often described as 
a high-tariff measure because of the average duty on 
dutiable imports is 48.4 percent, the McKinley Tariff 
actually increases substantially the number of items on 
the free list (that is, with zero duties). The percentage 
of duty-free imports to total imports climbs to 52.4 per-
cent, far higher than under tariffs enacted during the 
Civil War (4.3%). The Tariff of 1890 also includes a bar-
gaining provision that permits the Secretary of State 
to negotiate lower duties with trading partners to 
expand U.S. exports. Significantly, a Republican Con-
gress delegates to the executive branch authority to 
negotiate reciprocity agreements and implement them 
without congressional approval.  Democrats claims 
this  delegation of authority is unlawful.

132 Chronology
1894 
The Tariff of 1894 (the so-called Wilson-Gorman Tariff 
named for Congressman William L. Wilson (D-VA), 
chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, and 
Senator Arthur Gorman (D-MD) lowers average duti-
able rates to 41 percent but reduces slightly the num-
ber of items on the free list. It imposes an income tax 
of two percent to compensate for lost tariff revenue. 
However, the Supreme Court later declares that in-
come tax unconstitutional in Pollock v. Farmers’ Loan & 
Trust Co. (157 U.S. 429). Republicans blame the 1894 
tariff, enacted by Democratic majorities in Congress, 
for exacerbating the depression of 1894. Republicans 
win the 1896 presidential election on a platform prom-
ising adequate protection to products of farms, mines, 
and factories.
1897 
Named for Congressman Nelson Dingley (R-ME), 
chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, the Tariff 
Act of 1897 reduces the number of items on the free list 
to 45.2 percent and raises tariffs as Republicans prom-
ised in the 1896 presidential campaign. The average 
dutiable rate is increased from 41 percent to 46.5 per-
cent. The Dingley Tariff also authorizes reciprocity 
negotiations, but any resulting treaties require Senate 
approval.
1909 
The Payne-Aldrich Tariff, named for Rep. Sereno Payne 
(R-NY) and Senator Nelson Aldrich (R-RI), represents 
an attempt to revise the tariff during William Howard 
Taft’s presidency. The new tariff lowers the average 
duty to 40.8 percent, and increases the percentage of 
duty-free imports to 52.6 percent.
1911 
The Taft administration negotiates a reciprocity agree-
ment with Canada. It places more than 40 percent of 
U.S. imports from Canada and 10 percent of Canadian 
imports from the United States on the nondutiable free 
list. Taft hopes to improve relations with neighboring 
Canada, where he frequently spends time during the 
summer months. Canadian voters, fearing U.S. conti-
nental expansionism, reject the plan in the 1911 gen-
eral election.

Chronology 133
1913 
The Underwood Tariff of 1913, named for Congress-
man Arthur Underwood (D-AL), the chairman of 
the House Ways and Means Committee, represents 
an attempt by President Woodrow Wilson and con-
gressional Democrats to lower the tariff. Average du-
ties are lowered to 27 percent, and the percentage of 
duty-free goods rises to 66.3 percent. Congress enacts 
Rep. Cordell Hull’s (D-TN) income-tax to compensate 
for lost revenue.
1922 
After World War I, Republicans move to raise the tariff 
again. The Fordney-McCumber Tariff of 1922 reduces 
the items on the free list to 63.8 percent and hikes the 
average duty to 38.5 percent. Act contains provisions 
permitting unilateral retaliation against foreign trade 
discrimination. Authors are Rep. Joseph Fordney (R-MI) 
and Sen. Porter McCumber (R-ND).
1930 
The Tariff Act of 1930, widely known as Hawley-Smoot 
or Smoot-Hawley, is authored by Rep. Willis Hawley 
(R-OR) and Senator Reed Smoot (R-UT). A compre-
hensive revision, it increases the percentage of duty-
free items to 69.5 percent and raises the average duty 
to 44.9 percent based on imports in the last months 
of 1930. During the depression, the average duty 
equivalent on dutiable imports rises higher because 
many items have specific duties (such as 10 cents per 
pound) and at a time of falling prices this results in 
higher equivalent tariffs. The act contains a flexible 
tariff provision that permits the bipartisan Tariff Com-
mission to raise or lower some duties subject to presi-
dential approval. Smoot-Hawley is widely blamed 
for worsening the depression, and provoking foreign 
retaliation, although newer studies question that 
 interpretation.
1934 
Secretary of State Cordell Hull, a low-tariff Democrat 
from Tennessee, persuades Congress to authorize a 
reciprocal trade program to expand U.S. exports dur-
ing the Great Depression. Congress delegates author-
ity to the executive branch to raise or lower tariffs 
50 percent. Between 1934 and 1947, the United States 

134 Chronology
concludes 32 reciprocal trade agreements, all being 
with countries in Western Europe or the Americas, 
except for a wartime agreement with Iran. Many of 
the agreements are driven by foreign policy priori-
ties, such as the 1938 pact with the United Kingdom. 
U.S. negotiators choose not to drive sharp bargains 
but to lower U.S. tariffs substantially, and by 1947 the 
average duty on dutiable imports has fallen to under 
20 percent. The United States also extends concessions 
in bilateral agreements to all trading partners on an 
unconditional most-favored-nation basis. This means 
that newly industrializing countries will have access to 
U.S. market without offering reciprocal concessions 
to U.S. exporters. Reciprocal trade is extended period-
ically until the Trade Expansion Act of 1962 substan-
tially modifies trade negotiating authority and policy 
process.
1938 
The United States and the United Kingdom conclude 
reciprocal trade agreement, the most important of the 
prewar trade pacts. Washington cuts its tariffs 50 per-
cent on many items, but the United Kingdom makes 
only modest concessions on manufactures and ag-
ricultural products. The United States does not dent 
the British preferential system. Negotiators consider 
the agreement a success because it reaffirms Anglo-
American cooperation at a time when Nazi Germany 
threatens European peace and stability.
1944 
At Bretton Woods (NH), delegates from 45 countries 
propose the creation of the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) and International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (IBRD, now called World Bank). The 
United States and the United Kingdom provide leader-
ship to help restore the international financial system. 
American economist Harry Dexter White and British 
economist John Maynard Keyes lead respective dele-
gations. They agree to make currencies convertible for 
trade purposes, based on a system of fixed but adjust-
able exchange rates, managed by the IMF. Because pri-
vate capital flows are not expected to revive quickly in 
a risky environment, delegates propose IBRD to lend 

Chronology 135
for reconstruction and development purposes. It has 
the authority to borrow from private lenders, but not 
to issue its own currency.
1947 
In negotiations at Geneva, Switzerland, negotiators 
work on plans for an International Trade Organization 
(ITO). As an interim step, they establish the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), pending es-
tablishing of the ITO. It is a contractual arrangement 
with a set of rules based on the principle of nondiscrim-
ination and offering a forum for trade  negotiations.
 
 Fifteen countries participate in the first round of 
multilateral tariff negotiations in Geneva. Results lead 
to 35 percent average reductions in U.S. tariffs, and 
promises of similar cuts by other participants. Many 
war-damaged countries are unable to implement their 
commitments. Once again, the United States fails to 
eliminate British commonwealth preferences that dis-
criminate against U.S. exports.
1948 
January— GATT takes effect with nine contracting par-
ties: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Cuba, France, Luxem-
bourg, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the 
United States. Thirteen others —Brazil, Burma, Cey-
lon, Chile, China, Czechoslovakia, India, Lebanon, 
New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, South Africa, and 
Southern Rhodesia — join later in the inaugural year. 
Eric Wyndham White of the United Kingdom be-
comes the first executive secretary and later director-
general.
 
March — Delegates from 53 countries, attending the 
UN Conference on Trade and Employment in Havana, 
Cuba, draw up a charter for an International Trade 
 Organization. The charter goes beyond trade to include 
commodity agreements, restrictive business practices, 
economic development, employment, and the ITO’s 
structure. The charter is based on the principles of 
nondiscrimination and trade liberalization, but at the 
urging of developing nations includes provisions al-
lowing exchange controls and trade restrictions. 
Investment provisions are weak and do not require 

136 Chronology
countries expropriating property to compensate own-
ers. Other countries wait for the United States to ap-
prove the charter. But the U.S. business community 
opposes the charter, and Congress never approves. 
The Truman administration is more concerned about 
passage of the Marshall Plan and other foreign policy 
priorities.
1950 
Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Finland, Greece, 
Haiti, Indonesia, Italy, Liberia, Nicaragua, and Swe-
den join the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT).
1951 
Austria, Peru, Turkey, and West Germany enter GATT.
1955 
Japan joins GATT.
1957 
Treaty of Rome establishes the European Economic 
Community (EEC) with six members: Belgium, France, 
Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and West Ger-
many. It abolishes internal customs duties and estab-
lishes a customs union with a common external tariff. 
A central pillar of the EEC is the Common Agricultural 
Policy (CAP), which excludes non-EEC products to 
maintain domestic prices, and involves subsidies to 
farmers. By the 1990s, agricultural expenditures rep-
resent over 60 percent of the EU’s budget.
1961 
Dillon Round of GATT negotiations with 26 partici-
pants concludes with modest reductions. U.S. nego-
tiators have little bargaining authority, and members 
of the European Economic Community focus on de-
signing a common agricultural policy. Concerned with 
regional arrangements, they have little disposition to 
lower barriers to U.S. farm exports.
1962 
Congress approves President Kennedy’s Trade Ex-
pansion Act (TEA). President gains five-year mandate 
for trade negotiations. A Special Trade Representa-
tive (STR), reporting directly to the president, will 
handle trade negotiations. Congress authorizes ex-
ecutive branch to negotiate tariff reductions of up to 
50 percent — and to eliminate duties on some items—

Chronology 137
without further approval of Congress. Federal gov-
ernment will provide trade adjustment assistance for 
workers losing jobs because of tariff concessions. Bill 
passes the House of Representatives 298 to 125 with 
Democrats overwhelmingly supporting the measure 
(218 – 35). Eighty Republicans back the TEA, but a 
majority of 90 Republicans oppose. In the Senate, the 
TEA passes 78 – 8 with Senator Prescott Bush (R-CN), 
father of President George H. W. Bush, leading the 
 opposition.
 
Long-Term Agreement on International Trade in Cot-
ton Textiles (LTA) is signed under GATT auspices 
allowing textile importers to restrict imports from 
supplying countries.
1964 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
is established in 1964. Organization seeks to maximize 
trade, investment, and development opportunities for 
developing countries. Argentine economist Raul Pre-
bisch becomes the first secretary-general. He urges 
developed countries to offer preferential access for ex-
ports of manufactures from developing countries.
1965 
Canada and the United States negotiate automotive 
trade agreements. It removes tariffs at the manufac-
turer’s level on autos and auto parts, and envisages 
full integration of the North American auto industry. 
Implementing legislation passes the House of Repre-
sentatives 280 – 113 and the Senate 54 – 18 with biparti-
san majorities.
1967 
The Kennedy Round of GATT negotiations concludes. 
Agreement lowers tariffs an average of 35 percent on 
60,000 items — mostly manufactures. Reductions are 
gradually implemented over a five-year period. Ken-
nedy Round does little to reduce protectionism in agri-
culture, or to address nontariff barriers.
 
Public opinion polls show rising opposition to trade 
liberalization. Organized labor and friends in Con-
gress remain critical of Kennedy Round results.

138 Chronology
 
At year’s end, the U.S. trade balance for goods and 
services is a positive $2.6 billion.
 
South Korea joins GATT.
1971 
Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates, and 
gold convertibility, comes to an end. The United States 
is unable to maintain its obligations to convert dollars 
to gold under gold-exchange standard. As a result of 
the Smithsonian agreement, the dollar is devalued and 
major currencies soon fluctuate in response to market 
forces.
1973 
The United Kingdom, Ireland, and Denmark join the 
European Community (EC), formerly known as Euro-
pean Economic Community (EEC).
1974 
Congress approves a fast-track negotiating process in 
the Trade Act of 1974 authorizing U.S. participation in 
the Tokyo Round of GATT negotiations. Special Trade 
Representative (STR) becomes accountable to both the 
president and Congress. The U.S. Tariff Commission 
is renamed the U.S. International Trade Commission. 
The Jackson-Vanik amendment, named for Sen. Henry 
“Scoop” Jackson (D-WA) and Rep. Charles Vanik 
(D-OH), denies most-favored-nation trade treatment 
to countries with nonmarket economies that restrict 
 emigration.
 
The Multi Fiber Agreement on Textiles and Apparel 
replaces Long-Term Agreement on Cotton Textiles. It 
allows developed countries to regulate by quotas the 
amount of textiles and apparel imported from devel-
oping countries.
1976 
Long period of chronic current account deficits begins, 
as U.S. payments for imports of goods, services, invest-
ment income, and other transfers exceed U.S. earnings 
for the same items. At year’s end, the U.S. trade bal-
ance for goods and services is –$6 billion. The net in-
ternational investment position of the United States is 
positive $164.8 billion.

Chronology 139
1977 
President Jimmy Carter appoints Texas lawyer and 
political fundraiser Robert Strauss as U.S. Trade Rep-
resentative.
1979 
President Carter approves most-favored-nation treat-
ment for China, allowing it to qualify for tariff rates 
available to most U.S. trading partners.
 
Tokyo Round ends with modest gains. There is little 
progress on agricultural trade, but negotiators approve 
codes dealing with antidumping, subsidies, customs 
valuation, product standards, government procure-
ment, and related matters. GATT makes permanent 
Generalized System of  Preferences (GSP) for  developing 
countries.
 
Congress approves implementing legislation, Trade 
Agreements Act of 1979. Section 301 gives the execu-
tive branch unilateral enforcement authority. STR is 
renamed Office of U.S. Trade Representative (USTR). 
The Trade Agreements Act of 1979 passes Congress 
with substantial bipartisan majorities. The House ap-
proves 395 – 7, and the Senate approves 90 – 4.
1980 
The House and Senate approve joint resolution nor-
malizing trade relations with China. The House vote 
is 294 to 88; the Senate vote is 74 to 8 with bipartisan 
majorities.
1981 
President Ronald Reagan enters office and selects for-
mer Tennessee Senator William Brock as U.S. Trade 
Representative.
 
Greece joins the European Community.
 
Vigorous enforcement of U.S. countervailing duty 
and antidumping laws begins, as a result of Tokyo 
Round trade agreements. U.S. Department of Com-
merce and U.S. International Trade Commission have 
responsibility for quasi-judicial decision making. Of 
613 antidumping complaints filed under 1979 act, 
259 (42%) lead to offsetting duties on foreign goods.

140 Chronology
1984 
The United States negotiates with Israel its first bilat-
eral free-trade agreement (FTA). The two countries 
agree to protect certain agricultural sectors with quo-
tas and other devices.
1985 
Clayton Yeutter, an agricultural economist and lawyer, 
succeeds Brock as U.S. Trade Representative.
 
Israel free-trade pact sails through Congress, passing 
the House of Representatives 422 – 0 and the Senate by 
voice vote. The pact takes effect September 1.
 
At year’s end, the trade deficit for goods and services 
is $121.9 billion. U.S. goods deficit with China is $6 bil-
lion and with Japan $46.2 billion. Japan’s chronic trade 
surplus with the United States continues to trouble 
Congress.
1986 
GATT ministerial meeting at Punta del Este, Uruguay, 
in September launches eighth round of multilateral 
negotiations, called the Uruguay Round. The Uruguay 
Round is expected to bring further reductions on in-
dustrial tariffs, as well as to liberalize trade in agricul-
ture and textiles, extend the GATT regime intellectual 
property and services, improve the dispute settlement 
mechanism, and address a variety of nontariff barriers 
issues.
 
Spain and Portugal join the European Community.
 
Cairns Group of agricultural exporting nations—
including Argentina, Australia, Canada, and New 
Zealand — organizes to advance agricultural issues in 
Uruguay Round.
 
Hong Kong and Mexico join GATT.
1987 
The Reagan administration negotiates second bilateral 
FTA — this one with Canada, its largest trading partner. 
It removes duties over a 10-year period. Canadian du-
ties average 9 percent on U.S. goods, while U.S. duties 
average 4 percent on Canadian exports. The pact guar-
antees U.S. access to Canada’s gas, oil, and uranium. 

Chronology 141
It ends some restrictions on cross-border investments 
and trade in services. Pact does not cover such thorny 
issues as subsidies, intellectual property rights, and 
cultural issues. Each country retains antidumping and 
countervailing duty laws, but provides for bi-national 
panels to settle disputes. Canada gains access to huge 
American market, but within Canada trade between 
provinces remains subject to internal barriers.
 
In his seventh State of the Union message, President 
Reagan proposes to expand the U.S.–Canada FTA to 
the entire Western hemisphere, uniting people from 
the tip of Tierra del Fuego to the Arctic Circle.
1988 
Congress approves Omnibus Trade Act of 1988. It 
passes the House of Representatives with a bipartisan 
376 – 45 majority in July, and the Senate with a bipar-
tisan majority in August by 85 – 11. The bill focuses 
on unfair foreign trade practices and relief for trade-
impacted domestic industries. It also seeks to address 
currency imbalances, intellectual property issues, and 
bribery.
 
The Reagan administration gains congressional ap-
proval for FTA with Canada. It passes the House of 
Representatives 366 – 40, and the Senate 83 – 9 with bi-
partisan majorities.
1989 
The U.S.–Canada FTA takes effect January 1.
 
President George H. W. Bush nominates Carla A. Hills, 
a lawyer and former cabinet official in the Ford ad-
ministration, as U.S. Trade Representative.
1990 
Germany is reunified. Communist Party of Soviet 
Union agrees to give up monopoly power.
 
Mexico proposes free-trade agreement with the United 
States and Canada.
 
At year’s end, the U.S. trade deficit for goods and ser-
vices is $80.8 billion. The U.S. international investment 
position is also –$245.3 billion.

142 Chronology
1991 
Canada, Mexico, and the United States announce plans 
to negotiate a North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA). It would create a large market of 360 mil-
lion consumers, and provide business with a reliable 
long-term framework in which to conduct business. 
Negotiators expect to dismantle trade and investment 
barriers, and offer greater protections for intellectual 
property like copyrights and patents. Rules of origin 
for goods would prevent outside countries, such as Eu-
rope and Japan, from benefiting from the agreement.
 
The Soviet Union dissolves in December.
 
Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, and Paraguay sign the 
Treaty of Asuncion to create a customs union by De-
cember 1994. It is called Mercosur, a shortened version 
of Mercado Comun del Sur.
 
In Europe, the Maastricht summit in December agrees 
to establish the European Union and a single market 
with 12 members. Members commit to creating a sin-
gle currency and regional central bank by 1999. An-
other goal is cooperating in defense and foreign policy, 
harmonizing laws, and removing all types of barriers 
among members of the union. It takes effect Novem-
ber 1, 1993.
1992 
President George H. W. Bush, Canadian Prime Min-
ister Brian Mulroney, and Mexican President Carlos 
Salinas sign NAFTA agreement in October before the 
U.S. presidential election.
1993 
President Bill Clinton names Mickey Kantor, a Clinton-
 Gore campaign official and Los Angeles lawyer, as U.S. 
Trade Representative.
 
President Bill Clinton’s administration negotiates 
labor and environmental side agreements to NAFTA, 
and submits bill to Congress under fast-track author-
ity guaranteeing a vote within 90 legislative days.
 
The House of Representatives passes NAFTA by 234 
to 200 votes on November 17 after intense lobbying. 

Chronology 143
The winning coalition is composed of 102 Democrats 
and 132 Republicans. A majority of Democrats (156) 
oppose the measure, as do 43 Republicans. The Senate 
approves the measure three days later by a 61 – 38 vote. 
Thirty-four Republicans and 27 Democrats support 
NAFTA; 28 Democrats and 10 Republicans oppose 
it. The NAFTA battle thus divides the Democrats in 
Congress and the Clinton administration, and signals 
the end of bipartisan majorities in Congress for trade 
expansion.
1994 
Uruguay Round negotiations conclude in April. Trade 
ministers of 123 countries meet in Marrakech, Mo-
rocco, to sign multilateral trade accords, replacing 
GATT with the World Trade Organization (WTO). 
Negotiations are said to reduce tariffs worldwide by 
40 percent and to end textile restraints (MFA). Agree-
ments also extend GATT regime to intellectual prop-
erty rights, services, and agriculture. Participants 
approve a General Agreement on Trade in Services 
(GATS), and agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). New WTO will 
have mandatory dispute-settlement, which critics 
claim jeopardizes U.S. sovereignty. Fast-track trade 
negotiating authority lapses.
 
Republicans take control of the Senate and the House 
of Representatives in U.S. elections.
 
Congress approves Uruguay Round implementing 
legislation in lame-duck session after congressional 
elections. The House passes legislation 288 – 146 with a 
majority of both Democrats and Republicans support-
ing. The Senate passes legislation 76 – 24.
 
In November, Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation 
(APEC), a forum for 18 Pacific Rim countries, proposes 
in Bogor, Indonesia, goals of free and open trade and 
investment in the Asia-Pacific by 2010 for developed 
economies and by 2020 for developing economies.
 
President Bill Clinton and leaders of 32 other West-
ern hemisphere governments hold a Summit of the 

144 Chronology
Americas in Miami in December. They agree in prin-
ciple to negotiate a Free Trade Area for the Americas 
(FTAA) by 2005 with implementation by 2015. Clin-
ton sees it as an expansion of NAFTA to the whole 
hemisphere. But Brazil, the largest economic power in 
South America, is cool to the FTAA design. It wants to 
focus on implementing the Mercosur regional agree-
ment among South American nations.
1995 
WTO succeeds GATT in January, and has 81 found-
ing members representing more than 90 percent of 
world trade.
 
Barcelona Declaration in November calls for Euro-
Mediterranean Free Trade Area by 2010. Represen-
tatives of 27 European and Mediterranean countries 
agree to the vague declaration. It is to be achieved 
through agreements between the European Union 
and Mediterranean countries, and FTAs between the 
Mediterranean partners.
1996 
WTO holds its first ministerial summit in Singapore 
in December. Advanced countries seek to add in-
vestments, competition, transparency in government 
procurement, and trade facilitation to agenda for ne-
gotiating round, but developing countries oppose. 
The latter want improved export opportunities for ag-
riculture and manufactures.
1997 
President Clinton selects trade lawyer Charlene 
Barshefsky as U.S. Trade Representative.
 
Asian economic crisis impacts Thailand, Indonesia, 
Malaysia, and South Korea among other countries. 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) provides stabili-
zation loans and structural adjustment programs with 
tough-conditions for borrowing countries.
 
Pew Research Center survey in September finds more 
adults think the impact of free-trade agreements on 
the United States is a good thing (47%) than a bad 
thing (30%).

Chronology 145
 
The Kyoto Protocol to UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change is adopted on December 11. It strives 
to reduce greenhouse gases causing climate change. 
Thirty-six developed countries must reduce green-
house gas emissions to specified levels. The United 
States signs but does not ratify protocol. Although not 
a trade agreement, the Kyoto pact intersects trade is-
sues in a variety of ways. Efforts to limit greenhouse 
gas emissions require nations to take actions that favor 
domestic over foreign producers, apparently contra-
dicting WTO commitments to nondiscrimination and 
national treatment.
 
The Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), 
which includes Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, 
Singapore, and Thailand, releases Vision 2020 pro-
posing free trade area by 2020. Members also seek to 
achieve the free flow of investments, and intensify and 
expand economic cooperation among members with 
500 million people.
1999 
A coalition of antiglobalization activists, organized 
by Lori Wallach of Citizen Trade Watch, disrupt the 
WTO ministerial in Seattle. Trade ministers fail to 
launch a new multilateral negotiating round, as dif-
ferences between developing and developed nations 
flare. Developing countries, led by India and Brazil, 
demand improved access for their exports of agricul-
tural products and manufactures. Advanced countries 
seek greater protection for intellectual property and 
market access for services.
2000 
Congress approves permanent normal trade relations 
for China (PNTR), as China joins the WTO. Bill passes 
House 237 – 197: 164 Republicans and 73 Democrats 
vote in favor; 57 Republicans, 138 Democrats, and 2 in-
dependents vote against. A majority of Democrats vote 
against President Clinton’s position, further evidence 
that bipartisanship congressional support for trade ex-
pansion has ended. Senate passes bill 83 – 15 with seven 
Democrats and eight Republicans opposing.

146 Chronology
 
EU proposes partnership agreements with Asia-
Caribbean-Pacific (ACP) group of former European 
colonies, further signaling that another of the world’s 
leading trading powers is giving priority to regional 
and bilateral trading arrangements while doubts grow 
about the prospects for successful multilateral nego-
tiations under the auspices of the WTO.
 
European (EU) Free Trade Agreement with Mexico 
takes effect.
 
Japan signs framework agreement for bilateral free-
trade agreements with ASEAN. A long-time sup-
porter of multilateral commercial diplomacy, Japan, 
the most advanced economy of East Asia, is one of the 
last trading powers to pursue to bilateral and regional 
 arrangements.
 
Jordan and the United States agree to FTA in October. 
Both governments pledge to eliminate tariffs on virtu-
ally all trade between the two countries over a 10-year 
period. Agreement is first bilateral FTA to contain en-
vironmental protection and labor standards.
 
The United States becomes increasingly dependent 
on foreign manufactures, energy, and raw materials, 
while borrowing from abroad to finance this trade. At 
year end, the U.S. trade deficit for goods and services 
is $379.8 billion. Goods deficit with China is $83.8 bil-
lion and with Japan $81.6 billion. Net U.S. international 
investment position for U.S. is now –$1.381 trillion.
2001 
Incoming U.S. President George W. Bush appoints 
Robert Zoellick, a lawyer and State Department offi-
cial in the previous Bush administration, to the posi-
tion of U.S. Trade Representative.
 
Arab terrorists attack the World Trade Center in New 
York City and the Pentagon in Washington D.C., on 
September 11, killing more than 3,000 people. Two 
months later, members of the WTO launch the Doha 
Development Round of multilateral negotiations in 
Doha, Qatar, a Middle East country.

Chronology 147
 
Pew Research Center survey in September reports that 
American adults by 49 – 29 plurality think free-trade 
agreements are good for the country.
 
The House of Representatives approves presidential 
trade promotion authority by 215 – 214 vote in Decem-
ber with Rep. Jim DeMint (R-SC) casting the deciding 
vote. The Senate postpones action. A majority of Re-
publicans support trade negotiating authority; a ma-
jority of House Democrats oppose.
 
Congress approves FTA with Jordan. House and 
 Senate approve by voice votes — meaning individual 
members are not required to cast a potentially contro-
versial recorded vote.
2002 
On January 1, the euro becomes legal tender in 12 of 15 
European Union member countries, replacing national 
currencies. Participating members are Austria, Bel-
gium, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain.
 
Fast-track trade negotiating authority, now called 
trade promotion authority, is extended for five years. 
Under provisions, Congress must vote on trade agree-
ments without amendments within 90 days of re-
ceiving a pact from the president. Trade adjustment 
assistance for workers who lost jobs or wages because 
of increased imports is extended for five years. Act 
also sets overall objectives for U.S. trade negotiators, 
including reciprocal market access, and commitments 
not to weaken labor or environmental laws to promote 
trade. House approves conference report by 215 – 212 
on July 27 at 3:30 a.m. after arm-twisting by leaders 
and the White House. Republicans favor the bill by 
190 to 27, while the Democrats oppose it by 183 to 25. 
Two independents vote against the bill. The Senate 
approves the bill 64 – 34. Those in favor include 43 Re-
publicans, 20 Democrats, and one independent. The 
opposition includes 29 Democrats and five Republi-
cans. Once again, those favoring trade negotiations 
prevail but only by a narrow margin.

148 Chronology
 
China concludes framework free-trade agreement 
with ASEAN, evidence of its enthusiasm for regional 
agreements.
 
President George W. Bush announces plan to negoti-
ate the Central American Free Trade Agreement with 
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and 
Nicaragua. Dominican Republic joins in 2004. It is part 
of the broad plan originally proposed by President 
Ronald Reagan, and sustained in the first Bush and 
Clinton administrations, to extend NAFTA to the rest 
of the Western hemisphere.
 
U.S. and Chile reach agreement on bilateral free trade.
2003 
Antigua complains that U.S. action to regulate Inter-
net gambling violates WTO’s General Agreement on 
Trade in Services (GATS).
 
“Exporting America” series begins in May on CNN 
news commentator Lou Dobbs’s nightly newscast. It 
emphasizes the broken promises of international trade 
and the threat to the middle class from jobs and plants 
being exported overseas.
 
The United States and Southern African Customs 
Union (SACU) launch regional FTA negotiations in 
June, as Bush seeks to extend free trade to Africa.
 
The United States and Chile sign FTA on June 6.
 
The House of Representatives approves FTA with Sin-
gapore by vote of 272 to 155, and with Chile by a vote 
of 270 to 156 on July 23.
 
Group of Twenty developing nations, led by Brazil, 
India, and South Africa, organizes to press developing 
world agenda in WTO negotiations.
 
The Senate approves FTAs on August 1 with Singa-
pore (66 – 32) and Chile (66 – 31).
 
The European Union, Japan, Canada, and other coun-
tries win WTO decision holding as illegal the U.S. Byrd 

Chronology 149
Amendment (named for Sen. Robert Byrd — D-WV). 
Under the Byrd amendment, the U.S. government 
pays companies from duties collected for prevailing in 
antidumping cases against foreign competitors.
 
Ministerial summit of WTO in Cancun, Mexico, ends in 
September without agreement on Doha Round negoti-
ations. Developing countries led by India, China, and 
Brazil vehemently object to inclusion of the so-called 
Singapore issues — rules for competition, government 
procurement, investment and trade facilitation. They 
demand improved access for agricultural exports in 
developed markets. The impasse at Cancun indicates 
that developed countries do not control the WTO, as 
they did GATT.
 
The European Free Trade Agreement with Chile takes 
effect.
2004 
Bush administration pushes forward with bilateral 
and regional FTAs. It concludes the bilateral agreement 
with Australia, an ally in the war against terrorism. It 
also signs FTAs with the governments of Morocco and 
Bahrain, as part of Bush’s initiative to promote free 
trade in the Middle East. USTR announces intent to 
negotiate an FTA with the United Arab Emirates.
 
One of the most significant negotiations is the Domini-
can Republic-Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(DR-CAFTA). The Bush administration considers DR-
CAFTA an expansion of NAFTA and a significant step 
toward the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas. Be-
cause a large quantity of DR-CAFTA imports enter the 
United States duty-free as a result of U.S. preferences 
to developing areas, DR-CAFTA is driven by Washing-
ton’s desire to gain lower duties for its exports and to 
improve the climate for foreign investors. DR-CAFTA 
countries favor the agreement because it would make 
permanent their access to the large U.S. market.
 
The House of Representatives passes Australia FTA by 
314 to 109 margin in July.

150 Chronology
 
The House approves Morocco FTA by 323 – 99 vote on 
July 22. The Senate passes it 85 – 13 on July 21.
 
Japan continues its pursuit of bilateral and regional 
agreements, signing a free-trade agreement with Mex-
ico in September.
 
European Union adds 10 more members: Cyprus, the 
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, 
Malta, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia.
 
U.S. trading partners win major decisions against the 
United States from WTO dispute settlement panels. 
Brazil successfully challenges U.S. government pay-
ments to cotton farmers as unlawful subsidies. Anti-
gua wins WTO decision holding that U.S. efforts to 
prohibit online gambling violated Antigua’s rights as 
a member of the WTO. Antigua files claim for $3.4 bil-
lion in compensation.
2005 
The U.S.–Australia FTA implemented on January 1.
 
Multi Fiber Arrangement (MFA) on textiles and ap-
parel ends on January 1. Developed countries no 
longer use quotas to limit amounts of textiles and 
apparel imported from developing countries. End of 
agreement benefits low-cost producers like China, and 
harms high-cost producers.
 
President George W. Bush nominates congressman 
Rob Portman (R-OH) as U.S. Trade Representative on 
April 29.
 
U.S. Senate approves DR-CAFTA by 54 – 45 vote on 
June 30. Voting in support are 43 Republicans, 10 Dem-
ocrats, and one independent. Voting against are 12 Re-
publicans and 33 Democrats. A majority of Democrats 
oppose the agreement, which is vigorously opposed 
by the AFL-CIO.
 
The House of Representatives approves DR-CAFTA on 
July 28 by a vote of 217 – 215. House Republican lead-
ers extend the voting period to over one hour to round 

Chronology 151
up votes. In all, 15 of 202 House Democrats support 
accord; 27 of 232 Republicans vote against it. A major-
ity of House Democrats thus vote against a significant 
trade liberalization agreement, continuing a pattern of 
opposing FTAs with cheap labor countries.
 
Pascal Lamy, a French bureaucrat, becomes director-
general of the WTO in September.
 
The House of Representatives approves Bahrain FTA 
by 327 votes to 95 on December 7. A majority (115) of 
Democrats support the bill. Bahrain is a minor trad-
ing partner, and the agreement poses no threat to U.S. 
agricultural and manufacturing interests.
 
Hong Kong ministerial summit of the WTO in Decem-
ber ends with members announcing determination to 
conclude Doha Development Round in 2006.
 
At end of the year, the U.S. trade deficit for goods and 
services is $714.3 billion. U.S. current account trade 
deficit is $805 billion, amounting to 7 percent of gross 
domestic product, a record share. The net international 
investment position is –$2.2 trillion.
2006 
President George W. Bush nominates Susan Schwab, a 
former congressional staffer and University of Mary-
land official, as U.S. Trade Representative in April.
 
In November, U.S. congressional elections, supporters 
of free trade lose 7 Senate seats and 30 House seats.
 
The United States and Colombia sign FTA on Novem-
ber 22. For the United States, it marks an extension of 
NAFTA to one of the larger South American markets. 
The United States has worked closely with the Colom-
bian government to stem the flow of illegal drugs and 
to promote stability in the region. U.S. labor unions 
raise human rights objections, relating to deaths of Co-
lombian labor leaders, and fear Colombia may become 
another base for offshore production to serve the U.S. 
market.

152 Chronology
 
Congress clears legislation in December to normal-
ize trade relations with Vietnam. House approves by 
212 – 184 margins. Republicans favor 120 – 87, while a 
majority of Democrats oppose 92 – 96. Senate clears bill 
by 79 – 9 margin.
 
Huge imbalances distort global economy. America’s 
current account deficit is 6.2 percent of GDP, while 
China (11.7%), Germany (5.4%), Japan (4.5%), and 
Saudi Arabia (11.7%) have huge surpluses. At the end 
of the year, the U.S. trade deficit for goods and services 
is $758.5 billion. Goods deficit with China is $232.6; 
goods deficit with Japan is $88.6 billion. Net inter-
national investment position of the United States is 
–$2.5 trillion. The United States continues to consume 
more goods than it produces, and borrows $2 billion 
per month to sustain its dependence on imports.
2007 
Canada and 32 other countries file WTO complaint 
challenging U.S. farm subsidies.
 
U.S. industry claims 3.4 million manufacturing jobs 
lost since January 2001.
 
More than 1.3 million jobs lost in the textile and ap-
parel industry since the implementation of NAFTA.
 
Japan signs free-trade agreement with Chile in March.
 
Fast-track trade negotiating authority expires on July 1.
 
The House of Representatives approves the Peru FTA 
by 285 votes to 132 on November 8. The agreement is 
opposed by 116 of 225 Democrats, and supported by 
176 of 192 Republicans. The Senate approves the Peru 
FTA on December 4 by 77 – 18 votes. On the controver-
sial trade bills, the House of Representatives continues 
to divide along partisan lines with a majority of Re-
publicans supporting the Bush administration, and a 
majority of Democrats opposing.
 
The European Union continues regional expansion as 
Romania and Bulgaria become members.

Chronology 153
 
Public opinion polls show growing opposition to free 
trade and globalization in high-income countries. The 
Pew Research Center finds in November that Ameri-
can adults are now evenly divided on whether free 
trade is a good thing for the country (40 – 40). Survey 
for German Marshall Fund of U.S. opinion finds in 
December that a growing number of Americans (57%) 
believe free trade deals cost more jobs than they create. 
In Europe, 46% say trade costs jobs.
 
Global imbalances continue to widen. At end of the 
year, the U.S. trade deficit for goods and services is 
$700.3 billion. Merchandise trade deficit with China 
is $256.3 billion. The United States runs a deficit with 
China of $67.7 billion on advanced technology items.
2008 
Trade becomes an issue in the U.S. presidential cam-
paign. GOP nominee John McCain backs NAFTA, and 
free trade. He travels to Canada, Mexico, and Colom-
bia to give speeches backing free trade and global-
ization. Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton and 
Barack Obama oppose bilateral FTAs with Colombia 
and South Korea, and urge renegotiation of NAFTA.
 
China reports $1.68 trillion in foreign reserves in April, 
up 40 percent from a year earlier.
 
The U.S. dollar falls against major currencies boost-
ing U.S. exports. Oil exporting countries push price 
of oil upward to nearly $150 per barrel as commodity 
prices peak.
 
Pew survey finds public support for free trade continu-
ing to decline. A 48 percent plurality think free-trade 
agreements a bad thing, while 35 percent say they 
are good.
 
Disagreements over agricultural trade lead to a break-
down of the Doha Development Round of WTO ne-
gotiations. India and China seek to protect domestic 
farmers from international competition. The United 
States and other major agricultural exporters demand 
improved market access.

154 Chronology
 
In the United States, Barack Obama is elected presi-
dent. Fair traders and critics of NAFTA gain 37 seats 
net in Congress (7 in Senate, 30 House).
 
Global economy enters severe recession.
 
The U.S. trade deficit on goods and services is $677.1 bil-
lion, or 4.7 percent of GDP.
2009 
President Barack Obama nominates ex-Dallas mayor 
Ron Kirk as the U.S. Trade Representative.
 
Pascal Lamy of WTO warns of rising protectionism 
and economic instability.
 
World trade declines for the first time since 1982.

155
5
Biographical Sketches
I
t is important to remember that people make trade policy and 
negotiate trade agreements. In this chapter, we meet some of 
the individuals who have had a lasting influence on the subject, 
as well as some of the contemporary decision-makers involved 
in shaping the future. Some are elected officials, such as the con-
gressional leaders directly responsible for trade policy, others are 
presidential appointees. Some are lawyers, economists, lobby-
ists, commentators, and activists. The sketches also include some 
of the economists who shaped the intellectual underpinnings of 
trade policy—individuals like Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and 
Friedrich List. In this chapter, we have endeavored to include 
both supporters of current policies and critics of it.
Max Baucus (1941–)
A six-term senator from Montana, Democrat Max Baucus is chair-
man of the powerful Committee on Finance that has jurisdiction 
over all legislation relating to trade and taxes. Baucus is a native 
of Helena, Montana, and a graduate of Stanford University and its 
law school. A moderate who votes with fellow Democrats about 
86 percent of the time, Baucus is sensitive to the concerns of his 
conservative constituents.
Baucus usually looks at trade issues through the lenses of 
Montana interests, especially its exporters. While he has joined 
prolabor Democrats in calling for stronger environmental and 
labor standards in trade agreements, he has also supported free-
trade agreements and the WTO negotiations. Baucus backed 

156 Biographical Sketches
PNTR with China and Vietnam, and bilateral FTAs with Australia 
and Oman. But he opposed CAFTA and criticized the Bush ad-
ministration’s decision to push forward on approval of the FTA 
with Colombia. Baucus wanted the Bush administration to extend 
trade adjustment assistance to cover service workers before the 
Senate took up the Colombia pact.
On issues of importance to Montana, Baucus can be tena-
cious. He pushed hard to open the Japanese market for U.S. beef. 
As chairman of the powerful Finance Committee, he threatened 
to block Senate consideration of the pending South Korean FTA 
until South Korea agreed to remove import barriers to U.S. beef. 
On sensitive Canadian trade issues — such as softwood lumber, 
durum wheat, and beef — Baucus has pushed hard for his state’s 
interests, much to the discomfort of Canadians. One Canadian 
ambassador to the United States described the senior senator from 
Montana as “the scourge of Canada” (Cole 2008).
In 2009 Chairman Baucus pushed for passage of new trade 
adjustment legislation, the Panama FTA, and better enforcement 
of existing agreements.
Further Reading
His official Web site: http://baucus.senate.gov/.
Cole, Trevor. 2008, April 25. “Blame Canada.” The (Toronto) Globe and 
Mail, 82.
“Max Baucus.” Almanac of American Politics 2008. Accessed April 2008 at 
http://www.NationalJournal.com.
“Max Baucus.” OpenCongress.org. Accessed May 2008 at http://www.
opencongress.org/.
Kevin Brady (1955 –)
As the ranking Republican member of the House Ways and 
Means Trade Subcommittee, the seven-term congressman from 
East Texas is the GOP point person on all legislation dealing with 
trade and tariffs. A native of South Dakota, Brady graduated from 
the University of South Dakota and then migrated to Texas. He 
served 20 years as a local Chamber of Commerce executive be-
fore entering state politics. After six years in the Texas legislature, 
Brady ran successfully for Congress in 1996. He is a strong voice 
for business and trade in the 111th Congress. During the Bush 

Biographical Sketches 157
administration, Brady led efforts to win support for CAFTA/Do-
minican Republic.
While Brady thinks the United States should press China 
on intellectual property protection and on export subsidies, he 
has opposed efforts to brand China as a currency manipulator. 
He backs Bush-era free-trade agreements with Colombia and 
 Panama.
Further Reading
His official Web site: http://www.house.gov/brady/.
Neumann, Dan. 2009, January 14. “New Republican Trade Panel Chief 
Warns China Bill Could Backfire.” Inside US-China Trade.
“Rep. Kevin Brady (R).” 2008. Almanac of American Politics. Accessed 
January 2009 at LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/
lnacademic/.
Sherrod C. Brown (1952 –)
The junior senator from Ohio (elected in 2006), Sherrod Brown 
reflects the more combative mood of Senate Democrats on trade 
issues. Running for election in a state devastated by the loss of 
industrial jobs, Brown sought to appeal to middle-class voters 
facing job insecurity. His “Change is Coming” campaign ham-
mered away on trade issues. He accused the Republican incum-
bent of supporting corporate-backed free trade deals that sent 
Ohio jobs overseas.
Brown, a graduate of Yale, entered politics during the Viet-
nam War as an antiestablishment candidate. He served 14 years in 
the U.S. House of Representatives before running for the Senate. 
Brown has close ties to organized labor, and received a 100 per-
cent rating from AFL-CIO in 2007.
In the House, he voted against NAFTA as a freshman, against 
permanent trade relations with China in 2000, and then helped 
lead the fight against CAFTA in 2005. Brown correctly predicted 
that if CAFTA passed the House it would take place in the middle 
of the night, with the leadership extending the 15-minute roll call 
so as to twist arms. Later, as a member of the Senate, he voted 
against the Peruvian FTA, calling it another job-killing pact that 
would result in more unsafe food in family kitchens and con-
sumer products in children’s playrooms. Brown urges a “strate-
gic pause” in NAFTA-like free-trade agreements. He wants a new 

158 Biographical Sketches
model for trade agreements that gives greater attention to labor, 
food, and environmental standards.
Further Reading
His official Web site: http://brown.senate.gov/.
Brown, Sherrod. 2004. Myths of Free Trade: Why American Trade Policy Has 
Failed. New York: New Press.
Hayes, Christopher. 2005, November 21. “Who is Sherrod Brown?” 
In These Times. Accessed April 2008 at http://www.chrishayes.org/
articles/who-is-sherrod-brown/.
“Sherrod Brown.” 2008. Almanac of American Politics 2008. Accessed May 
2008 at http://www.NationalJournal.com.
“Sherrod Brown.” 2008. OpenCongress.org. Accessed May 2008 at 
http://www.opencongress.org/.
Dave Camp (1953 –)
As the senior Republican on the House Ways and Means Com-
mittee, Dave Camp from Midland, Michigan, is a key legislator 
on all matters passing through the powerful committee, includ-
ing taxation, health care, and trade. Camp is considered a hard-
working legislator, not a publicity hound. Since joining the House 
in 1990, this lawyer has focused on welfare and family issues. In 
the 111th Congress, he will also be an important voice on trade 
policy. A free trader who has supported NAFTA and CAFTA, as 
well as bilateral agreements with Colombia and Peru, among oth-
ers, Camp is considered a pragmatist. In supporting CAFTA he 
called himself a strong believer in fair trade and a level playing 
field for American business, farmers, and workers. He has urged 
a special trade prosecutor to argue cases before the WTO against 
countries violating international trade laws. He has supported a 
continuation of tariff-quotas for import-sensitive sugar beet farm-
ers in his district, and urged Republicans to back a bail-out for the 
Michigan auto industry.
Further Reading
His official Web site: http://camp.house.gov/.
“David ‘Dave’ Camp.” 2009, January 22. Associated Press Candidate 
Biographies. Accessed January 2009 at LexisNexis Academic, http://
www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/

Biographical Sketches 159
Miller, John J. 2007, December 3. “Republican from Michigan—Dave 
Camp —Is a Quiet But Effective Congressman.” National Review. 
Accessed January 2009 at LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.
com/us/lnacademic/.
“Rep. Dave Camp (R).” 2008. Almanac of American Politics. Accessed 
January 2009 at LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/
lnacademic/.
Lou Dobbs (1945–)
As host of Lou Dobbs Tonight, a program of news, debate, and opin-
ion on CNN, Dobbs revels in turning the spotlight on trade and 
immigration issues. His program has some of the highest viewer 
ratings on CNN. In a regular segment labeled “Exporting Amer-
ica” Dobbs exposes companies that have moved jobs offshore to 
other countries and criticizes U.S. trade policy for failing to pro-
tect the jobs of American workers. Another segment, “Broken Bor-
ders”, calls attention to illegal immigration and perceived flaws 
in the administration of U.S. immigration policies. Dobbs also 
emphasizes how politicians, reliant on campaign contributions 
from large corporations, make war on the middle class. In 2009, 
he was an enthusiastic backer of “Buy-American” provisions in 
the Obama financial stimulus plan.
A native of Texas who grew up in rural Rupert, Idaho, Dobbs 
is a registered Republican. He has a bachelor’s degree from Har-
vard University, where he majored in economics, and belongs to 
the prestigious American Economic Association.
On television, and in life, he comes across as a raving pop-
ulist certain of his position and intolerant of any opposition. 
Dobbs rails at exorbitant CEO pay, incompetent public officials, 
and faith-based economic policies. He dismisses free-market 
economists as idiots and jackasses (Dobbs 2007). He delights in 
thundering at visitors who have the temerity to back opposing 
policies. Described by the free-trade-oriented Economist as a 
“globophobic blowhard,” Dobbs insists that he favors balanced 
trade (Fanfare 2006).
Protrade spokesmen claim that through misinformation and 
demagoguery, Dobbs is reshaping public opinion on trade and 
immigration issues. Members of Congress say his opinions are 
increasingly influential on Capitol Hill. Sometimes legislators 
attempt to calculate how their votes with play on Lou Dobbs’ 

160 Biographical Sketches
 program. Love him or hate him, Lou Dobbs is shaping the great 
trade debate while boosting his ratings.
Further Reading
Dobbs, Lou. 2004. Exporting America: Why Corporate Greed is Shipping 
American Jobs Overseas. New York: Warner Books.
Dobbs, Lou. 2006. War on the Middle Class: How the Government, Big 
Business, and Special Interest Groups are Waging War on the American 
Dream and How to Fight Back. New York: Viking Press.
“Fanfare for the Common Man.” 2006, November 25. The Economist.
“Lou Dobbs Tonight.” 2007, August 13. CNN Transcript. Accessed 
April 2008 at LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/
lnacademic/.
“Lou Dobbs.” 2007. Contemporary Authors Online. Farmington Hills, MI.: 
Thomson Gale.
Mullins, Luke. 2006, November 28. “The Secret Life of Lou Dobbs.” 
The American. Accessed April 2008 at http://www.american.com/
archive/2006/november/lou-dobbs.
Timothy Geithner (1961–)
As Secretary of the Treasury, Tim Geithner has broad responsi-
bilities that impact trade. At his confirmation hearings, Geithner 
made headlines when he said that President Obama believed 
China manipulates its currency. This statement, which appeared 
to signal a policy shift from the Bush administration’s policy, an-
gered Chinese leaders and pleased some members of Congress 
who want the Treasury to declare officially that China manipu-
lates the value of its currency. Such a finding could trigger sanc-
tions against Chinese imports into the United States.
The key official on currency and financial issues, Geithner is 
a former president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, the 
second most important position in the Federal Reserve System. In 
that post, he worked closely with Treasury officials, such as Henry 
Paulson, to fix credit markets and bolster financial institutions.
Geithner grew up in Africa and Asia, attending high school 
in Bangkok, Thailand. His father was an official with the U.S. 
Agency for International Development and the Ford Foundation. 
A graduate of Dartmouth College and the School for Advanced 
International Studies at Johns Hopkins, Geithner has studied 

Biographical Sketches 161
 Chinese and Japanese languages. During the Clinton administra-
tion, he worked closely with Treasury secretaries Robert Rubin 
and Lawrence Summers. As a Treasury official, he traveled the 
globe and negotiated financial aid packages. Unlike many who 
have held the Treasury post, Geithner has little experience in com-
mercial banking or the private sector, having held a series of posi-
tions with the Treasury and the International Monetary Fund.
Further Reading
Mooney, Brian C. “N.Y. Fed Chief an Unconventional, but Compatible, 
Choice.” The Boston Globe, A 14. Accessed February 2009 at LexisNexis 
Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Simon, Ellen, and Madlen Read. 2008, November 24. “Obama’s Pick 
for Treasury Has Had Hand in Bailouts.” Associated Press. Accessed 
February 2009 at LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/
lnacademic/.
Charles (Chuck) Grassley (1933 –)
As the senior, or ranking, Republican on the Senate Finance Com-
mittee, Chuck Grassley is a key senator on trade issues. When the 
GOP controlled the Senate (during the first half of 2001 and from 
January 2003 to December 2006), Grassley chaired the committee 
and frequently represented President Bush’s position.
A popular legislator from Iowa, Grassley graduated from the 
University of Northern Iowa and was an assembly-line worker 
and a farmer before entering politics. He served three terms in the 
U.S. House of Representatives before being elected in 1980 to his 
present Senate seat. Grassley cultivates a penny-pincher image in 
a state that dislikes extravagance. He exposed examples of Pen-
tagon waste, such as spending $7,200 for coffee pots and $600 
for toilet seats. He champions the causes of government whistle 
blowers, the elderly, and farmers.
On trade issues, Grassley has worked to promote agricultural 
interests in trade agreements and to fight foreign trade barriers on 
farm exports, such as South Korean and European restrictions on 
U.S. beef exports. As a conservative and a free-trader, he has sought 
to limit agricultural subsidies. He and Democrat Max Baucus 
have worked together to achieve greater market access for Amer-
ican farmers in multilateral trade negotiations under the WTO. 
Grassley also backs regional and bilateral initiatives— including 

162 Biographical Sketches
NAFTA, CAFTA, and the Australian FTA. When Iowa farm in-
terests are jeopardized, Grassley puts local concerns first. He is 
an enthusiastic backer of ethanol production, which benefits Iowa 
corn farmers, and has worked to keep out competitive sugar-
based ethanol from Brazil.
Further Reading
His official Web site: http://grassley.senate.gov/.
Anderson, Curt. 2001, January 29. “Two Senators Control Key Parts 
of Bush Agenda.” Associated Press. Accessed April 2008 at LexisNexis, 
http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
“Charles Grassley.” 2008. Almanac of American Politics 2008. Accessed 
April 2008 at http://www.NationalJournal.com.
“Charles Grassley.” OpenCongress.org. Accessed May 2008 at http://
www.opencongress.org/.
Norman, Jane. 2007, January 14. “Grassley Gracefully Hands over 
Chairmanship.” The Des Moines Register. Accessed 04/08 at News Bank 
America’s Newspapers
Alexander Hamilton (1757–1804)
For countries seeking advice on how to achieve economic de-
velopment and high incomes, Alexander Hamilton’s thinking 
remains relevant. The illegitimate son of a Scottish trader and a 
French mother, Hamilton was born in the West Indies, but came 
to the American colonies for a college education. During the 
Revolution, he served as an aide to General George Washington, 
and displayed extraordinary intelligence and energy.
As Secretary of the Treasury in President George Washing-
ton’s administration, Hamilton developed plans for financing the 
new government. As part of his proposals to Congress, he rec-
ommended in his famous Report on Manufactures (1791) that 
the new government intervene to support infant industries and 
reduce dependence on British imports. Hamilton also sought to 
rebut Adam Smith’s free-trade theories. Smith observed in The 
Wealth of Nations that America’s focus on agriculture was a princi-
pal cause of rapid progress. He warned that stopping the importa-
tion of European manufactures would obstruct efforts to promote 
America’s wealth and greatness. Hamilton retorted that in the 
absence of equal treatment and reciprocal access to the British 

Biographical Sketches 163
market, an America reliant on trade in agricultural products could 
become a victim of foreign interests and be impoverished. He 
favored a program of low tariffs and subsidies to encourage in-
fant domestic manufactures. Others such as Hamilton’s assistant 
Tench Coxe and domestic manufactures favored higher protective 
tariffs, but Hamilton wanted only revenue tariffs to fund the new 
government.
Hamilton’s enthusiasm for tariff protectionism was restrained, 
but economic historians credit him with the origins of the infant 
industry argument for protection that was elaborated by Friedrich 
List and others.
Further Reading
Cooke, Jacob E. 1978. Tench Coxe and the Early Republic. Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press, 1978.
McDonald, Forrest. 1979. Alexander Hamilton: A Biography. New York: 
Norton.
Peskin, Laurence A. 2003. Manufacturing Revolution: The Intellectual 
Origins of Early American Industry. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins.
Cordell Hull (1871–1955)
The official to serve longest as Secretary of State (1933 –1944), 
Cordell Hull is remembered in trade policy circles as the architect 
of the reciprocal trade agreements program during the adminis-
trations of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. A low-tariff Democrat 
from Tennessee, who served in Congress for 24 years, Hull be-
lieved fervently that trade promoted world peace. He associated 
high tariffs and trade barriers with war. Hull was also a pragmatic 
politician who as chairman of the Democratic Party in the early 
1920s fretted at how high-tariff manufacturing interests funded 
rival Republicans. Anticipating that good policy could also be 
good politics, Hull saw the opportunity to create a new trade-
 oriented coalition based in southern agriculture and northern 
mass-production industries and unionized labor.
In 1934, Hull persuaded Congress to enact his reciprocal 
trade program, advertised as an emergency initiative to open for-
eign markets to U.S. exports in exchange for lowering U.S. tariffs. 
Congress authorized the administration to cut duties as much as 
50 percent. In Hull’s hands, the program quickly lowered the U.S. 
tariff from its depression-era high of nearly 60 percent ad valorem 

164 Biographical Sketches
equivalent on dutiable items. A generation later, the average U.S. 
duty had fallen to 12 percent. Hull and his associates concluded 
32 bilateral reciprocal trade agreements between 1934 and 1947, 
all with nations in the Americas or Western Europe. Hull’s pro-
gram would be the foundation for the proposed International 
Trade Organization and GATT.
As administered by the State Department, the reciprocal 
trade program was a device to reward friends and allies, and to 
help them resist economic pressures from Nazi Germany. While 
congressional critics grumbled the administration was surrender-
ing American markets for illusory gains in foreign markets, the 
concessions made during Hull’s tenure appear to have had little 
immediate adverse impact on U.S. industries.
Further Reading
Butler, Michael. 1998. Cautious Visionary: Cordell Hull and Trade Reform, 
1933 –1937. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press.
Eckes, Alfred Eckes. 1995. Opening America’s Market: U.S. Foreign 
Trade Policy since 1776 Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press.
Zeiler, Thomas. 1999. Free Trade, Free World: The Advent of GATT. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Ron Kirk (1954 –)
A former mayor of Dallas, Texas, and partner in the prestigious 
Texas law firm of Vinson & Elkins, Ron Kirk is the first African 
American to hold the position of U.S. Trade Representative. He and 
President Barack Obama bonded in 2002. They shared the com-
mon experience of running as voices of unity in state-wide elec-
tions for the U.S. Senate. Both have professional wives and two 
small daughters.
Kirk has little federal experience, or familiarity with trade pol-
icy. In Texas, he served as Secretary of State and later had lobbied 
the legislature for corporate and governmental entities, experience 
that may serve him well as he negotiates with Congress over trade 
issues. Corporate interests are pleased that Kirk boosted NAFTA, 
free trade, and China’s membership in the WTO, while serving 
as mayor of Dallas. But Kirk is no free-trade ideologue. As U.S. 
trade representative he pledged to promote  President Obama’s 

Biographical Sketches 165
trade agenda. Obama explained that this involves assuring there 
is reciprocity in trade agreements, and seeing that they contain 
enforceable labor and environmental provisions so that “we don’t 
have a race to the bottom” (Federal News).
Labor and consumer groups are wary of Kirk’s commitment 
to reform trade policy and make it more responsive to public 
opinion. He was not their first choice. They were more enthusi-
astic when Obama first indicated a desire to nominate California 
U.S. Rep. Xavier Becerra. Although voting for NAFTA, Becerra 
became a vigorous opponent of CAFTA and renewed trade nego-
tiating authority for the Bush administration. However, he chose 
not to accept the appointment in the apparent belief that trade 
policy would not be a high priority for the Obama administration 
(Schatz 2008).
Further Reading
Federal News Service. December 19, 2008. President-elect Obama’s 
News Conference. Accessed December 2008 on LexisNexis Academic, 
http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Gilliam, Todd J. December 20, 2008. “Ron Kirk Says Free Trade Key to 
Economic Recovery.” Dallas Morning News. Accessed December 2008 at 
LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Jeffers Jr., Gromer. December 20, 2008. “Shared Paths to History 
Brought Obama, Ron Kirk together.” The Dallas Morning News. Accessed 
December 2008 at LexisNexis Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/
us/lnacademic/.
Schatz, Joseph J. December 6, 2008. “Drawing a Fine Line on Trade.” 
Congressional Quarterly Weekly.
Pascal Lamy (1947–)
The director-general of the World Trade Organization since 
September 2005, Pascal Lamy is a French economist who grad-
uated second in his class at the prestigious Ecole Nationale 
d’Administration, and then held a number of government posts. 
A socialist, he advised Finance Minister Jacques Delors and then 
served as chief of staff when Delors served as president of the Eu-
ropean Commission. He helped rescue Credit Lyonnais and then 
served as the bank’s CEO. From 1999 to 2004, Lamy was the com-
missioner responsible for external trade relations at the European 
Commission. In that role, he negotiated a number of high- profile 

166 Biographical Sketches
disputes with the United States, involving steel, genetically-
 modified crops, and aviation subsidies. He developed a reputa-
tion as a tough, pragmatic, and focused negotiator. The energetic 
Lamy and his U.S. negotiator counterpart Robert Zoellick some-
times jogged together after a day of negotiations.
Lamy favors rules-based, or managed, globalization. He be-
lieves that market-opening strategies can be insufficient unless 
someone pushes for the full benefit of all nations. Appreciating 
the rising influence and concerns of developing nations, Lamy 
has sought to make the WTO system more equitable and relevant 
to the needs of emerging countries. While promoting the integra-
tion of developing countries, he has also attempted to make the 
WTO more sensitive to environmental and aid-related issues.
As leader of the WTO, Lamy sought to bring the Doha Round 
of multilateral negotiations to a successful close in 2008, but an 
impasse over agricultural issues led to a break-down in negotia-
tions. Appreciative of Lamy’s efforts in a difficult world economic 
conditions, members of the WTO gave him a new four-year term 
as director-general in 2009 so that Lamy might continue to press 
the case for multilateral trade liberalization.
Further Reading
“A Blunt, Tough and Focused Horse Trader. . . .” 2005, December 14. 
South China Morning Post, 8.
Becker, Elizabeth. 2005, May 14. “French Economist to Lead World 
Trade Organization.” New York Times, 3.
“Expected WTO Head Lamy Veteran of World Trade Disputes.” 2005, 
May 13. Dow Jones International News.
Wright, Tom. 2005, September 2. “Lamy Takes WTO Helm as Trade Deal 
Hopes Wane,” International Herald Tribune, 16.
Sander (Sandy) Levin (1931–)
As the chairman of the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Inter-
national Trade, Congressman Sander Levin from Michigan is a 
key legislator on all trade issues. A liberal Democrat from Detroit’s 
northern suburbs, Levin earned college degrees at the University 
of Chicago, Colombia University, and the Harvard University 
Law School.
A friend of organized labor (with a 96% rating), he was first 
elected to Congress in 1982. On the powerful Ways and Means 

Biographical Sketches 167
Committee, he has exhibited a special interest in trade and social 
security issues. A self-described internationalist, Levin opposed 
NAFTA in 1993, but in 2000 he offered the Clinton administration 
a monitoring plan that enabled some Democrats, concerned about 
labor and human rights issues, including himself, to support per-
manent normal trade relations with China.
Levin has a reputation as an intelligent, hardworking legisla-
tor interested in solving problems. He says he is trying to change 
U.S. trade policy dramatically to shape globalization. Insisting 
that all trade agreements have workers rights and environmen-
tal standards, he, and Chairman Charles Rangel, forced the Bush 
administration to insert such provisions in the Peru FTA, which 
Congress then approved in 2007.
Levin wants to improve enforcement of existing trade agree-
ments to address China’s persistent currency manipulation, and 
distortions from unfair trade subsidies. He proposes an office of 
the Congressional Trade Enforcer to prepare unfair trade cases 
to be filed by USTR. He exhorts the administration to vigorously 
oppose efforts to weaken U.S. trade remedy laws in multilateral 
negotiations. And, as becomes a representative from Michigan, a 
center of automotive manufacture, Levin complains that the FTA 
negotiated with South Korea does not eliminate trade barriers on 
auto trade.
Further Reading
His official Web site: http://www.house.gov/levin/.
Homan, Timothy R. 2008, February 11. “A Party Adrift in Still Trade 
Winds,” CQ Weekly: 346 – 348.
“Sander Levin.” 2008. Almanac of American Politics 2008. Accessed May 
2008 at http://www.NationalJournal.com.
Schmitt, Eric. 2000. 2000, April 17. “An Unlikely Champion of a New 
Trade Pact with China.” New York Times, 12.
Friedrich List (1789 –1846)
Like his contemporaries Adam Smith and Karl Marx, Friedrich 
List, a native of Wurttemberg in Germany, had a great influence on 
government officials and policymakers outside his native land. 
Drawing on the thinking of Alexander Hamilton and those he 
encountered in America during the 1820s, List developed a 

168 Biographical Sketches
systematic theory for using the tools of economic nationalism—
tariffs, subsidies, and industrial policy—to promote economic 
development.
Relatively little is known about List’s career and the fac-
tors that motivated his travels and writings. After escaping from 
prison in Germany, he accompanied Baron Lafayette, a hero of the 
Revolution, to America in 1825. List resided briefly in Pennsylva-
nia where he invested in railroads and coal mines. His writings 
influenced Henry Clay’s American System. In 1828, he supported 
Andrew Jackson for president, and later became U.S. consul in 
Leipzig. He committed suicide in 1846.
In the National System of Political Economy (1841), List dis-
tinguished his emphasis on the national economy from the clas-
sical economists, like Adam Smith. They seemed preoccupied 
with the welfare of individuals and “cosmopolitan” welfare of 
humankind. However, List argued that adoption of global free 
trade would benefit those countries that industrialized first and 
hamper the development of poor nations. He warned that self-
interest drove England’s promotion of free trade. He accused the 
British of kicking away the ladder so as to deprive other countries 
of the trade restrictions and subsidies that enabled Great Britain 
to  develop first.
Standard histories of economic thought have long neglected 
List. Economists have viewed him as more of a journalist wed-
ded to economic nationalism than a sophisticated analyst who 
understood the theory underlying the doctrine of free trade. 
But Alfred Marshall, one of the most important neo-classical 
economists, recognized List as a “brilliant genius” who chal-
lenged the self-confident followers of David Ricardo and called 
attention to the harmful indirect effects of free trade (Marshall 
1948).
In fact, List was no knee-jerk protectionist. He argued that 
free trade was advantageous for countries at similar levels of de-
velopment, and even advocated a customs union for the German 
states. List was more interested in economic development than 
international trade. During the 19th century, his thinking most in-
fluenced policymakers in the United States and Germany. Later in 
the 20th century, Japan, South Korea, and other East Asians would 
discover and practice his interventionist recommendations. List’s 
thinking was the forerunner of the East Asian industrialization 
model, and may have influenced the export-oriented develop-
ment policies of mainland China.

Biographical Sketches 169
Further Reading
Chang, Ha-joon. 2002. Kicking Away the Ladder: Development Strategy in 
Historical Perspective. London, England: Anthem Press.
Henderson, William O. 1983. Friedrich List: Economist and Visionary, 
1789 –1846. London, England: F. Cass.
Ho, P. Sai-wing. 2005. “Distortions in the Trade Policy for Development 
Debate: A Re-examination of Friedrich List.” Cambridge Journal of 
Economics 29: 729– 45.
List, Friedrich. 1841. The National System of Political Economy. London: 
Longmans, Green, Chapter 33. Accessed March 2008 at http://oll.
libertyfund.org/.
Marshall, Alfred. 1948. Principles of Economics. 8th ed., New York: 
Macmillan, Appendix B33, para 1864.
Gary Locke (1950 –)
As Secretary of Commerce in the Obama administration, Gary 
Locke, the former governor of the state of Washington, has an im-
portant role in the administration of trade policy. The Department 
of Commerce has 36,000 employees and a budget of $10 billion. It 
has a wide range of trade-related responsibilities — including col-
lecting and reporting statistics, promoting exports, administering 
import remedies and export controls, and protecting intellectual 
property rights.
Locke, a third-generation American of Chinese ancestry, 
graduated from Yale University and Boston University School of 
Law. During his two terms as governor, he led efforts among U.S. 
governors to gain support for China’s membership in the WTO. 
He enthusiastically promoted trade with China on behalf of Wash-
ington state business interests, such as Boeing and Microsoft, and 
gained the ear of Hu Jintao, China’s leader. Locke left public office 
in 2005 to practice with an international law firm, representing 
multinational firms doing business in China and Chinese firms 
eager to invest in the United States.
As a result of his close ties with China, President Obama is 
optimistic that Locke can be an effective ambassador for Ameri-
can industry. Obama’s two previous nominees to the Commerce 
post, New Mexico governor Bill Richardson and New Hamp-
shire senator Judd Gregg, withdrew from consideration. Locke’s 
predecessor as secretary of Commerce was Carlos Gutierrez, a 

170 Biographical Sketches
 Cuban-born business executive who had served as the chief ex-
ecutive of  Kellogg’s.
Further Reading
Heim, Kristi. 2009, February 26. “Many Believe China Ties Were Big Plus 
for Locke.” The Seattle Times, A1. Accessed March 2009 at LexisNexis 
Academic, http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Kammerer, Peter. 2005, September 28. “Locke’s Stock.” South China 
Morning Post. Accessed February 2009 on LexisNexis Academic, http://
www.lexisnexis.com/us/lnacademic/.
Neumann, Dan, and Luke Engan. 2009, March 4. “Questions Raised 
Over Locke’s Representation of Chinese Firm.” Inside US-China Trade.
Zajac, Andrew. 2009, March 1. “Locke’s Ties to China May Be A Selling 
Point.” Los Angeles Times.
William McKinley (1843 –1901)
The former Ohio governor and Republican legislator who became 
the 25th president (1897–1901) was one chief executive who had 
an active interest in trade and tariff issues. McKinley, a native of 
Niles, Ohio, fought with the Union Army in the Civil War, and 
served six terms in the U.S. House of Representatives. He chaired 
the prestigious Ways and Means Committee, which writes tax 
and tariff legislation, and wrote the highly protective McKinley 
Tariff of 1890.
McKinley, sometimes called the Napoleon of  protectionism 
for the way he mobilized support for tariff legislation in the 
House, warned that free trade would give American money, 
manufactures, and markets to foreign nations. He preached class 
harmony and argued that high tariffs would benefit American 
manufacturers with high profits and workers with high wages, 
while providing an expanded market for the products of agri-
culture. Fearful that imports made by cheap foreign labor would 
displace American workers and close plants, McKinley was cool 
initially to reciprocity proposals. But, as U.S. industry grew and 
developed new products with international sales potential, it be-
came more supportive of market-opening initiatives. In writing 
the 1890 tariff, McKinley agreed to a compromise with Secretary 
of State James Blaine involving use of a bargaining tariff to open 
some Latin American markets.

Biographical Sketches 171
Later, as president, McKinley became a strong advocate of 
reciprocity. Understanding that the telegraph and the steam ship 
were binding national markets, McKinley supported opening the 
American market to gain improved access abroad. Still, until his 
death at the hands of an assassin in 1901, McKinley assigned pri-
ority to producer and worker interests, not to the consumer’s free-
dom to buy cheap imports.
Further Reading
Eckes, Alfred E., Jr. 1995. Opening America’s Market: U.S. Foreign Trade 
Policy since 1776. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Morgan, H. Wayne. 1963. William McKinley and His America. Syracuse, 
NY: Syracuse University Press.
Skrabec, Quentin R., Jr. 2008. William McKinley: Apostle of Protectionism. 
New York: Algora Publishing.
Justin Smith Morrill (1810 –1898)
No elected official did more in the late 19th century to defend 
the American System of high-tariff protection than Justin S. Mor-
rill of Vermont. Morrill, a prosperous merchant in his home state 
who entered elective politics at age 44, he served the next 44 years 
(from 1854 until his death in 1898) in Congress, first as a Whig 
and then as a Republican. During that period, he chaired both the 
House Ways and Means Committee (1865 – 1867) and the Senate 
Finance Committee (1877– 1879, 1881– 1893, 1895 – 1898) — the two 
congressional committees with jurisdiction over tax and trade is-
sues. He presided over the Finance Committee a record 17 years. 
In the 1890s, his colleagues respectfully referred to him as “Father 
of the Senate.”
In Congress, Morrill was a Republican moderate, an aboli-
tionist, an opponent of polygamy, and a tireless advocate of sound 
money and conservative fiscal policies. He is best remembered 
for the Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862 granting federal lands to 
the states for the establishment of colleges of agricultural and 
 mechanical arts.
On tariff matters, Morrill was a vigorous protectionist de-
termined to protect American industry and preserve congressio-
nal tariff-writing prerogatives. He criticized free-trade theories 
for abjuring patriotism, and for treating labor no better than the 

172 Biographical Sketches
“ barbarian on the Danube or the cooly on the Ganges” (Morrill 
1860). Morrill was suspicious of the State Department’s interest in 
negotiating reciprocity treaties, and feared the executive branch 
was using treaties and foreign agreements, ostensibly to promote 
export opportunities, to trade off domestic manufacturing inter-
ests and to modify the Constitution.
He anticipated that nations eligible for most-favored- nation 
treatment, such as Great Britain, might request the same  treatment, 
thus using reciprocity treaties to undermine the American  protective 
system. The senator from Vermont was especially critical of pro-
posed trade agreements with poorer countries like Mexico, for 
these had small markets for U.S. exports but gained access to the 
much larger and prosperous U.S. market. On trade issues, Mor-
rill reflected the thinking of U.S. industry, which in the post–Civil 
War period sought primarily to expand and serve the growing 
continental market.
Further Reading
Andrews, William G. “Justin Smith Morrill,” American National Biography.
Baker, Richard A. “April 14, 1810: Justin S. Morrill” The Hill (April 21, 
2004), 20.
Eckes, Alfred E., Jr., Opening America’s Market: U.S. Foreign Trade Policy 
since 1776. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995.
Morrill, Justin S. 1860, April 23. Congressional Globe, 1832.
Parker, William Belmont. 1924. The Life and Public Services of Justin Smith 
Morrill. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Henry (Hank) Paulson (1946 –)
The third, and final, Treasury secretary to serve President George 
W. Bush, Henry (Hank) Paulson emerged as a major player in 
trade, usually not the province of a financial leader. Paulson is the 
former CEO of Goldman Sachs, a pillar of the Wall Street invest-
ment community. At Goldman he accumulated a net worth of $700 
million, and gained the private sector experience the Bush admin-
istration hoped would inspire confidence in financial markets and 
foreign lenders. Bush made Paulson an active participant in the 
formulation of economic policy, and assigned him special respon-
sibility for dealing with the Chinese. The United States depends 
on China, and other creditors, to supply more than $1.8 billion per 

Biographical Sketches 173
day to finance its current-account trade deficit. In 2008 that deficit 
was $673 billion.
With China running huge trade surpluses with the United 
States and maintaining what many observers believe is an under-
valued currency, Congress and the Bush administration wanted 
to place greater pressure on China to crack down on unfair cur-
rency and trade policies. With his close contacts in China’s finance 
sector and government, Paulson seemed the ideal candidate to 
take on the China account. On Wall Street he had a reputation as 
a tenacious and effective salesman. Soon after taking office in the 
Treasury, Paulson announced a semi-annual “strategic economic 
dialogue” with top Chinese policymakers to convince them that 
appreciation of the currency was in their best interest.
Paulson’s dialogues initially left the American side and Con-
gress grumbling. He preached patience but produced few results. 
The bilateral merchandise deficit, which reached $256 billion in 
2007, rose to $266 billion in 2008. But there were some indications 
of change. By 2008, the Chinese currency was more flexible — it 
had appreciated 15 percent since July 2005. However, some econ-
omists in the United States said a 40 to 50 percent appreciation 
of the yuan would be necessary to achieve better balance in the 
international accounts.
Further Reading
Bartiromo, Maria. 2006. 2006, December 25. “Hank Paulson on China 
and the Year Ahead,” Business Week, 162.
Blustein, Paul, and Peter S. Goodman. 2006, September 29. “Paulson 
Wins Friends, but Can He Influence the People’s Republic?” The 
Washington Post, D1.
Mandel, Michael. 2006, June 12. “Mr. Risk Goes to Washington.” 
Business Week, 46.
Thomas, Landon Jr. 2006, May 31. “Paulson Comes Full Circle,” New 
York Times, C1.
Nancy Pelosi (1940 –)
The first woman and first Californian to preside over the House of 
Representatives as Speaker, Nancy Pelosi has a significant role in 
trade policy matters. She appoints committee chairmen, such as 
Charles Rangel of Ways and Means, and controls the scheduling 

174 Biographical Sketches
of legislation. Thus, in April 2008 when President Bush sent for-
ward a proposed free-trade agreement with Colombia on a 90-
day fast-track timetable previously agreed with Congress, Pelosi 
opted to change the rules; she delayed the vote until an unde-
termined time. Bush, congressional Republicans, and the Colom-
bian government protested the move. Editorial writers compared 
the speaker to Smoot and Hawley, authors of the 1930 tariff that 
many think ignited a wave of tariff retaliation. From Pelosi’s point 
of view, the delaying tactic avoided a controversial vote during 
the presidential campaign, when trade issues loomed large in 
public discussions, and it gave her a big bargaining chip with the 
Bush administration. Pelosi said the free-trade bill would fail if 
brought to a vote immediately under the 90-day timetable.
Pelosi’s willingness to play hardball politics with the White 
House was no surprise to those who knew the 68 year old grand-
mother who stands next to the Vice President in the line of suc-
cession to the presidency. She grew up in a political family. Her 
father, Thomas D’Alesandro, Jr., served five terms in Congress 
from Maryland and later was elected mayor of Baltimore. Mar-
ried to Paul Pelosi, a California real estate developer, the speaker 
is ranked as the ninth richest member of the House with assets 
estimated at $38.5 million. Elected to Congress in 1987 to fill an 
unexpired term, she has represented the liberal fifth district of 
California for over 20 years. Pelosi has close ties to the AFL-CIO, 
one of her largest contributors. The AFL-CIO rated her 100 percent 
in 2007 for her votes on legislation of interest to working families. 
On trade issues, Pelosi has often supported union positions. She 
opposed CAFTA, WTO-membership for China, and an extension 
of presidential trade negotiating authority in 2002. But she sup-
ported President Clinton on NAFTA in 1993 and voted to approve 
President George W. Bush’s bilateral free-trade agreements with 
Australia, Chile, Morocco, Peru, and Singapore.
Further Reading
Barshay, Jill. 2006, November 13. “Woman of the House Brings a Sense 
of Power,” CQ Weekly Online, 2970 – 2973.
Homan, Timothy R. 2008, February 11. “A Party Adrift in Still Trade 
Winds,” CQ Weekly Online, 346 – 348.
“Nancy Pelosi.” 2008. Almanac of American Politics 2008. Accessed May 
2008 at http://www.NationalJournal.com.
“Nancy Pelosi.” OpenCongress.org Accessed May 2008 at http://www.
opencongress.org/.

Biographical Sketches 175
Sandalow, Marc. 2008. Madam Speaker: Nancy Pelosi’s Life, Times, and Rise 
to Power. New York: Rodale Books.
Raul Prebisch (1901–1986)
As the long time leader of the UN Economic Commission for 
Latin America and the first secretary-general of the United Na-
tions Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), Prebi-
sch was an influential advocate for the developing world. As a 
development economist, he is most remembered for contributions 
to the Prebisch-Singer thesis that the secular terms of trade (ex-
port prices/import prices) tended to move against countries ex-
porting primary products. Both he and Hans Singer of the United 
Nations concluded that this occurred because primary products 
were sold in competitive markets. However, big corporations 
in the rich countries produced industrial products and had the 
power to administer prices and pass along higher costs. Prebisch 
argued that Latin America and developing countries should pro-
mote their own industrialization, substituting domestic produc-
tion for goods previously imported.
In advocating active government involvement through tar-
iffs and exchange controls to facilitate development, Prebisch’s 
protectionist advice echoed the teachings of Alexander Hamilton 
and Friedrich List in earlier times. It conflicted with the advice 
of free-trade oriented economists in the United States and the 
United Kingdom who argued that governments should disman-
tle trade and exchange barriers, and allow trade to serve as the 
engine of growth. Over the longer term, Prebisch’s work shaped 
the thinking of Latin American dependency theorists, like Andre 
Gunder Frank.
Born in Tucuman, Argentina, Prebisch studied economics at 
the University of Buenos Aires and held a number of posts in the 
Argentine government, including director-general of the Argen-
tine Central Bank (1935 to 1948). He achieved his greatest fame 
as head of the Economic Commission for Latin America, and as 
secretary-general of UNCTAD, where he was a vigorous critic of 
GATT and a tireless advocate for the third world.
Further Reading
Di Marco, Luis E., ed. 1972. International Economics and Development; 
Essays in Honor of Raul Prebisch. New York: Academic Press.

176 Biographical Sketches
Klein, Naomi. 2007. The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. 
New York: Metropolitan Books.
“Raul Prebisch,” 1998. Encyclopedia of World Biography. 2nd ed, Detroit, 
MI: Gale Research.
Toye, John and Richard. 2004. The UN and Global Political Economy: Trade, 
Finance and Development. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Charles Rangel (1930 –)
As chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means, Rep. Char-
ley Rangel is a practical liberal and wily dealmaker. A free trader, 
friendly to the business community, he is the most powerful mem-
ber of the House of Representatives on trade issues. He has rep-
resented Upper Manhattan, including Harlem, since 1971. During 
the Korean War, Rangel served with distinction in the Army.
The first African American to chair the prestigious trade and 
tax committee, Rangel cultivates close ties with Wall Street and 
corporate America while representing a low-income district. By 
early 2008, Rangel had raised a staggering $5 million — mostly 
from lobbyists who took the pragmatic view that they could work 
with Rangel. The chairman has been involved in several ethics 
controversies, including one involving failure to pay taxes on 
rental property in the Dominican Republic. He declined to step 
down from his chairmanship of the tax-writing committee during 
the investigation (Kocieniewski 2009).
On trade issues, Rangel promoted the African Growth and 
Opportunity Act (AGOA) in 2000 to provide one-way trade 
preferences to African countries even though critics thought it 
would benefit multinational corporations and African elites. He 
has also called for an end to the embargo on trade with Cuba. On 
CAFTA, Rangel maneuvered to see that the Dominican Republic 
was included, although he opposed it on final passage. During 
2007, he sought to broker a deal between House Democrats and 
the Bush administration that would facilitate passage of certain 
bilateral free-trade agreements. Some members saw it as an ef-
fort by congressional Democrats to curry favor with Wall Street 
and corporate interests. In return for moving the Peruvian FTA, 
Rangel demanded improved environmental and labor clauses 
inserted in the treaty that would appease fellow Democrats. But 
Speaker Nancy Pelosi, and other Democrats more  sensitive to 

Biographical Sketches 177
the concerns of organized labor and constituent discontent, re-
fused to move forward on FTAs involving Colombia and South 
Korea.
Further Reading
Homan, Timothy R. 2008, February 11. “A Party Adrift in Still Trade 
Winds,” CQ Weekly, 346 – 348.
Kocieniewski, David. 2009. February 5. “Rangel’s Financial Disclosures 
Omitted Data over 30 Years, A Reports Says.” New York Times, 25.
Ota, Alan K. 2007, March 26. “Rangel Sets Out on a ‘Middle Road’ ” CQ 
Weekly, 868 – 869
“Rep. Charles Rangel (D).” 2005. Almanac of American Politics. Accessed 
April 2008 at http://www.NationalJournal.com.
David Ricardo (1772–1823)
Among economists, Ricardo is remembered as the father of com-
parative advantage. His theory has enduring significance in shap-
ing thought on international economics.
The third son of a Jewish stockbroker, whose ancestors had 
migrated from Spain and Portugal to the United Kingdom, David 
Ricardo entered his father’s stock business. Upon marrying a 
Quaker and becoming a Unitarian, young Ricardo was disinher-
ited, and forced out of the family business. But he remained active 
in the stock market and accumulated a substantial fortune, so that 
by 1815 he could retire from business and concentrate on politi-
cal economy and politics. In 1819, he bought a seat in Parliament 
and for four years until his death used the position to argue for 
free-trade.
Ricardo had no university degrees, but his interest in econom-
ics emerged from reading Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations in 
1799. Smith had posited trade on the basis of absolute advantage, 
that is, each nation was more efficient in the production of a good, 
and therefore they exchanged. In such a situation, what would 
happen to the country that was less efficient in the production of 
both products? Could it still benefit from trade? Ricardo’s theory 
of comparative advantage held that both could benefit because of 
opportunity costs. If one country could produce shoes more ef-
ficiently than it could produce textiles, it would benefit that coun-
try to specialize in shoe production and import textiles.

178 Biographical Sketches
However, as development economists have pointed out, this 
theory has static assumptions. It does not take into account that a 
backward country might absorb new technologies, and in a market 
sheltered from international competition develop even greater cost 
advantages. As a result, many latecomer countries have rejected 
Ricardo’s thinking as free-trade imperialism, and used industrial 
policies, such as tariffs, to develop competitive advantages.
Further Reading
Chang, Ha-joon. 2008. Bad Samaritans: The Myth of Free-Trade and the 
Secret History of Capitalism. London: Bloomsbury Press.
Henderson, John P. 1997. The Life and Economics of David Ricardo. Boston, 
MA: Kluwer.
Irwin, Douglas. 1996. Against the Tide. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Lovett, William, Alfred E. Eckes, and Richard L. Brinkman. 2004. U.S. 
Trade Policy: History, Theory and the WTO. 2nd ed., Armonk, NY: M.E. 
Sharpe.
Peach, Terry. 2006, October. “Ricardo, David (172–1823).” Oxford 
Dictionary of National Biography. Oxford University Press, online ed.
Weatherall, David. 1976. David Ricardo: A Biography. The Hague, 
Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff.
Susan Schwab (1955 –)
As U.S. Trade Representative during the final two years of Presi-
dent George W. Bush’s second term, Susan Schwab inherited the 
difficult task of winning congressional support for bilateral free 
trade pacts with Colombia, Panama, Peru, and South Korea, and 
on bringing the Doha Development Round of WTO negotiations 
to a successful close.
In dealing with Congress, Schwab had excellent preparation. 
During the 1980s as a trade policy staffer working for Senator 
Jack Danforth of Missouri, who chaired the international trade 
subcommittee of Senate Finance, she gained experience drafting 
trade legislation and working with congressional leaders. During 
the presidency of George H. W. Bush, she held a senior position 
in the Commerce Department as head of the United States and 
Foreign Commercial Service. Later, she served as dean of the Uni-
versity of Maryland School of Public Policy before joining USTR 

Biographical Sketches 179
as a deputy to USTR Rob Portman. As a child, Schwab grew up in 
Africa, Europe, and Asia, where her father, a German immigrant, 
served with the foreign service.
A policy expert with extensive experience in government, 
business, and academics, Schwab had not been active in Republi-
can politics. But she knew the trade-policy process and she worked 
in Congress at a time of bipartisan cooperation. Although the chief 
trade advocate for a president renowned for his free-trade enthu-
siasm, Schwab knew the other side of the argument equally well. 
As an aide to Danforth, she occasionally urged protectionist so-
lutions on trade administrators responsible for deciding delicate 
import-remedy cases involving Danforth’s constituents. Despite 
her superior knowledge of trade politics, Schwab was unable to 
win congressional approval of Bush’s FTAs, or to conclude the 
Doha Round.
Further Reading
Clark, Evan. 2006, July 21. “Bush Trade Chief Schwab: Persistent, 
Persuasive and Pragmatic.” WWD.
Schwab, Susan C. 1994. Trade-offs: Negotiating the Omnibus Trade and 
Competitiveness Act Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Adam Smith (1723 –1790)
This world famous economic theorist, born in Kirkcaldy, Scot-
land, initially gained recognition as a professor of logic and moral 
philosophy at the University of Glasgow (1751–64), where he lec-
tured on ethics and jurisprudence, before turning his attention 
to economics. For two years in 1764 – 66, he traveled in France 
and Switzerland, meeting prominent intellectuals like Voltaire 
and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, while he tutored the young duke of 
Buccleuch.
Smith’s most famous book, The Wealth of Nations (1776), the 
foundation for modern economic thought, is both a critique of 
mercantilism and a guidebook to economic liberalism and free-
dom from government interference. International economists 
often credit Smith with the origins of the theory of free trade. He 
wrote that if a foreign country can supply a commodity cheaper 
than our nation can produce it, it is advantageous to obtain the 
import with some of the product of domestic industry. Some 
economists long claimed that Smith based his case for trade on 

180 Biographical Sketches
static absolute advantage and on the exchange of surpluses. More 
recently, scholars have expressed greater respect for Smith. They 
note his argument for commercial openness and economic growth 
rests on dynamic assumptions, and offers a foundation for mod-
ern economic development thought.
Adam Smith was more than an academic theorist. He advised 
the Chancellor of the Exchequer on tax policy, and spent 12 years 
as a commissioner of Scottish customs in Edinburgh. Ironically, 
the individual most identified with the origins of free-trade theory 
earned a living regulating the mercantile system. He administered 
customs duties that raised money for government and education. 
As a bureaucrat, Smith was no zealous deregulatory reformer. 
Rather, he sought to crack down on unlawful free-trade, other-
wise known as smuggling. Smith’s record as a customs commis-
sioner indicates that the great economist had a pragmatic streak 
as well as an academic enthusiasm for free-trade principles.
Further Reading
Anderson, Gary M., William F. Shughart II, and Robert D. Tollison. 
1985. “Adam Smith in the Customhouse,” Journal of Political Economy 
93:4, 740 – 59.
Blecker, Robert A. 1997, August. “The ‘Unnatural and Retrograde 
Order’: Adam Smith’s Theories of Trade and Development 
Reconsidered.” Economica, New Series, 64:255, 527– 37.
Brinkman, Richard. 2004. “Free Trade: Static Comparative Advantage,” 
in William Lovett, Alfred Eckes, and Richard Brinkman, U.S. Trade 
Policy: History, Theory, and the WTO. 2nd ed., Armonk, NY, M.E. 
Sharpe, 93 –110.
Razeen, Sally. 1998. Classical Liberalism and International Economic Order: 
Studies in Theory and Intellectual History. London, England: Routledge.
Ross, Ian Simpson. The Life of Adam Smith (Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon 
Press, 1995).
Smith, Adam. The Wealth of Nations (New York: Modern Library, 1937).
Winch, Donald. 2004 – 2008. “Adam Smith.” Oxford Dictionary of National 
Biography. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Reed Smoot (1862 –1941)
As coauthor of the Tariff Act of 1930, commonly called the Smoot-
Hawley Tariff, Senator Reed Smoot, Republican from Idaho, is 

Biographical Sketches 181
one of the 20th-century legislators most often associated with pro-
tectionism. Indeed, Smoot wore the protectionist label proudly, as 
did most Republicans of his era.
A Mormon, Smoot was born in Salt Lake City, Utah, and at-
tended Brigham Young University. He was a successful business-
man, and leader of the Mormon Church. Indeed, during his Senate 
years he was one of the Council of Twelve Apostles, responsible 
for the affairs of the church.
Intelligent and articulate, Smoot rose to leadership in the Sen-
ate, chairing the Committee on Finance, responsible for tax and 
tariff legislation. He was renowned for his hard work and mas-
tery of legislative details. During the sweeping revision of 1930, 
he took personal charge of the legislation, determined to carry out 
the Republican pledge of tariff reform to protect industry. Smoot 
was especially sensitive to the need for protecting beet sugar pro-
ducers and processors, important to his constituents in Utah and 
the Mormon Church, which had investments. But he also sought 
to achieve President Hoover’s goal of a flexible-tariff provision 
whereby a reorganized and independent Tariff Commission could 
review individual tariff rates and propose changes subject to the 
president’s approval.
Ironically, Smoot was defeated in the Roosevelt landslide of 
1932, but his defeat was not directly attributable to dissatisfac-
tion with the tariff. His Democratic opponent also ran on a pro-
tectionist platform. As a senator, Smoot was pragmatic and highly 
competent. After his defeat, the free-trade oriented New York Times 
called Smoot’s defeat “a loss to the Senate and the country” and 
lauded his industry, integrity, and ability.
Further Reading
Eckes, Alfred E., Jr. 1995. Opening America’s Market: U.S. Foreign Trade 
Policy since 1776. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 100 –139.
Merrill, Milton R. 1990. Reed Smoot, Apostle in Politics. Logan: Utah State 
University, 1990.
“Old Familiar Faces.” 1932, November 10. New York Times, 20.
Robert S. Strauss (1918 –)
During the Tokyo Round of GATT negotiations, Robert S. Strauss, 
an experienced lawyer and political operative, served as U.S. Trade 
Representative, and brought negotiations to a successful close.

182 Biographical Sketches
A native of Texas, Strauss cut his political teeth in state politics, 
and became a prodigious fundraiser. A close friend of Texas Gov-
ernor John Connally, and through him President Lyndon Johnson, 
Strauss headed the Democratic Party after the 1972 election disas-
ter. He rebuilt the party, and helped manage Jimmy Carter’s elec-
tion. A grateful Carter appointed him U.S. Trade Representative.
Strauss had little knowledge of trade details, but he under-
stood people, negotiations, and the need to be flexible. When 
he arrived at USTR, the Tokyo Round negotiations were dead in 
the water. The United States and the European Community were 
deadlocked over agricultural trade, with the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture pushing hard to destroy Europe’s Common Agricul-
tural Policy (CAP). To salvage the talks, Strauss visited Brussels 
and indicated that the United States did not want to eliminate the 
CAP, and that opened the way for joint leadership to conclude the 
Tokyo Round. To reduce domestic opposition, he and his aides 
exempted certain import-sensitive industries, such as steel and 
textiles, from the negotiations.
In dealing with Congress, Strauss also displayed his deal-
making skills. Key members of Congress and staff were invited to 
observe the negotiations, and USTR sought the advice of lobbyists 
for industry, labor, and agriculture. Strauss also stressed bipar-
tisan cooperation with the minority Republicans, and involved 
the lobbyists in efforts to win the votes of individual members 
of Congress. Unlike the results of the Kennedy Round, or later 
negotiations involving NAFTA, CAFTA, and China, implement-
ing legislation for the Tokyo Round sailed through Congress with 
virtually no opposition. It passed the House of Representatives 
395 to 7, and the Senate 90 to 4.
After the Carter administration, Strauss remained active in 
Washington as a lawyer and lobbyist. He would serve as Ambas-
sador to the Soviet Union under President George H. W. Bush.
Further Reading
Dryden, Steve. 1995. Trade Warriors: USTR and the American Crusade for 
Free Trade. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Eckes, Alfred E., Jr., ed. 2000. Revisiting U.S. Trade Policy. Athens: Ohio 
University Press.
Twiggs, Joan E. 1987. The Tokyo Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations: 
A Case Study in Building Domestic Support for Diplomacy. Lanham, MD: 
University Press of America, 1987.

Biographical Sketches 183
Winham, Gilbert R. 1986. International Trade and the Tokyo Round 
Negotiation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lori Wallach (1964 –)
Renowned as the chief strategist of the fair-trade movement, Lori 
Wallach of Citizen Trade Watch (CTW), organized the Seattle 
protests against the World Trade Organization in 1999. Since the 
founding in 1995 of CTW, an affiliate of Ralph Nader’s Public Citi-
zen, she has put together a large network of grassroots activists 
in the United States and other countries to oppose the WTO and 
various free-trade initiatives.
A classmate of President Barack Obama at Harvard Law 
School, Wallach grew up in northern Wisconsin and attended 
Wellesley College. Described by a reporter as Ralph Nader with 
a sense of humor, Wallach is a progressive activist who seeks to 
make a difference (Davis 1998). Her focus is the proglobalization 
agenda of large multinational corporations. When governments 
sought to secretly negotiate the Multilateral Agreement on Invest-
ments, Wallach obtained a copy and published it on the Inter-
net, effectively torpedoing the initiative. Calling it a “coup d’etat 
against democratic governance,” she argued the pact would allow 
transnational corporations to trump national labor, health, and 
environmental rules (Wallach 2005).
From offices near the Capitol, Wallach and her gang of ac-
tivists have proven a formidable match for highly-paid corporate 
lobbyists for free trade. She testifies regularly before Congress, 
appears regularly on television shows such as Lou Dobbs Tonight, 
and travels to far corners of the world to communicate with like-
minded activists.
Further Reading
Davis, Bob. 1998, April 6. “Free-Trade Foe, Stymied on IMF, Shifts to 
Other Fights.” The Wall Street Journal, A26.
Magnusson, Paul. 2000, March 20. “Meet Free Traders’ Worst 
Nightmare,” Business Week, 113.
Naim, Moises. 2000, March 22. “Lori’s War,” Foreign Policy.
Wallach, Lori. 2005, January/February. “Slow Motion Coup d’Etat.” 
Multinational Monitor, 26.

184 Biographical Sketches
Sir Eric Wyndham White 
(1913 –1980)
The first leader of GATT, Eric Wyndham White presided over that 
organization for 20 years from 1948 to 1968. His tenure included 
six rounds of multilateral negotiations —including the Kennedy 
Round —which cut tariffs on industrial goods sharply. During 
the 1960s, he encouraged GATT to expand and include many 
newly independent nations. Those who worked with him say that 
Wyndham White had vision, extraordinary negotiating skills, and 
diplomatic finesse.
His most controversial action at GATT involved doubling 
GATT’s membership during the 1960s with the addition of many 
newly-independent countries. To undercut the appeal of UNCTAD, 
he permitted the new members to join without binding or liber-
alizing their tariffs, in effect creating asymmetries that would 
plague the GATT system for years afterward.
A native of the United Kingdom, Wyndham White graduated 
from the London School of Economics and then became a law-
yer. During World War II he worked in the British government, 
first in the Ministry of Economic Warfare, and then in the diplo-
matic service with appointments in Washington, D.C., and Paris. 
He established the secretariat for the proposed International Trade 
Organization, and when GATT was established became its first 
 executive-secretary and later its director-general. For his service to 
international trade, Wyndham White was appointed KCMG in 1968, 
an honor to individuals who have served the British government.
After the Kennedy Round, he resigned from GATT to take 
a position with Bernard Cornfeld’s Investors Overseas Service. 
Cornfeld sold mutual fund shares to small-time investors, espe-
cially U.S. expatriates and servicemen, and promised riches. His 
pyramid scheme collapsed when stock markets declined. In 1970, 
Cornfeld resigned and was charged with fraud. Wyndham White 
took over the company and supervised its liquidation and sale 
to another swindler, Robert Vesco. Association with Cornfeld tar-
nished Wyndham White’s otherwise outstanding public career.
Further Reading
Eckes, Alfred. 2000, October. “In Globalization, People Matter: Eight 
Who Shaped the World Trading System.” Global Economy Journal 
1(4): 309.

Biographical Sketches 185
“Obituary: Sir Eric Wyndham White —Notable Role in World 
Commerce.” 1980, January 29. The Times, 14.
Robert Zoellick (1953 –)
President George W. Bush’s first U.S. Trade Representative, Rob-
ert Zoellick was the architect of the competitive liberalization 
strategy that led the United States to conduct multilateral, re-
gional, and bilateral trade negotiations simultaneously. During 
his tenure at USTR (2001–2005), Zoellick succeeded in gaining 
renewed fast-track trade negotiating authority, and in helping to 
launch the Doha Development Round of WTO multilateral ne-
gotiations. He completed negotiations to bring China and Tai-
wan into the WTO. He also aggressively pursued bilateral and 
regional agreements — including those with Jordan, Chile, Singa-
pore, Morocco, Bahrain, Australia, and the Central American Free 
Trade Agreement.
Despite his substantive accomplishments, Zoellick at first re-
ceived little respect. He was described as the Rodney Dangerfield 
of the Bush Cabinet. Hard-driving and focused on the president’s 
goal of negotiating free-trade pacts, Zoellick did not enjoy warm 
relationships with members of Congress. A bright policy profes-
sional, familiar with details, some on Capitol Hill thought him ar-
rogant and manipulative.
Zoellick later defended his negotiating strategy from multi-
lateral critics like Jagdish Bhagwati as offering leverage and in-
centives to build coalitions in the multilateral negotiations.
Zoellick left USTR during Bush’s second term to become 
Deputy Secretary of State under Condoleezza Rice. He departed 
State after one year to join Goldman Sachs, the Wall Street invest-
ment banking firm as vice chairman international, but returned 
to government in 2007. President Bush nominated him to succeed 
Paul Wolfowitz as president of the World Bank. At that time, the 
press described him as able, experienced, and widely respected in 
many countries where he has negotiated.
A native of Naperville, Illinois, Zoellick attended Swarth-
more College and Harvard Law School. He served in the admin-
istration of President George H. W. Bush as an undersecretary of 
state and as deputy White House chief of staff.
As president of the World Bank, he has used his position 
to promote the liberalization of world agriculture as part of a 

186 Biographical Sketches
 package to conclude the Doha Development Round of WTO ne-
gotiations.
Further Reading
“A Clean Start at the World Bank.” 2007, May 31. New York Times, 18.
Hitt, Greg. 2007, May 30. “Zoellick Could Close Divide at World Bank,” 
The Wall Street Journal, A2.
Kahn, Joseph. 2001, January 12. “Man in the News; A Washington 
Veteran for Labor; a Tested Negotiator for Trade,” New York Times, A 17.
Pearlstein, Steven. 2001, January 13. “Bush Selection Zoellick Is a Free-
Trader on a Mission,” The Washington Post, A2.
“U.S. Trade Representative: A Strong Performance, but Only a Little 
Respect.” 2003, January 25. National Journal 35 (4).
Zoellick, Robert. 2007, April 12. “Free Trade Deals Strengthen US 
International Ties and Political Capital,” The Wall Street Journal.

187
6
Data and Documents
R
eaders interested in data and statistics relating to trade policy 
issues can access a wealth of free information from online 
sources. The U.S. government and certain private groups col-
lect, process, analyze, and disseminate data relating to flows of 
goods, services, money, and information. Among the best Web 
sites are several in the U.S. Department of Commerce. Its Bureau 
of the Census (http://www.census.gov/) tabulates customs data 
and reports monthly on merchandise trade and services. Another 
unit of the Department of Commerce, the Bureau of Economic 
Analysis (http://www.bea.gov/), provides estimates for balance 
of payments, investments, trade in goods and services, and on 
the operations of multinational corporations. The Department of 
Commerce’s International Trade Administration also provides an 
important gateway to a variety of trade and industry information 
(http://ita.doc.gov/td/industry/otea/ref-room.html).
Other U.S. government agencies post relevant data on Web 
sites. The U.S. Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics 
collects, analyzes, and publishes data about international labor 
issues (http://www.bls.gov/). For financial data relating to in-
vestment holdings and exchange rates, readers should access 
the U.S. Treasury’s Web site at http://www.treasury.gov/). The 
U.S. Department of Agriculture reports on food and commodi-
ties (http://www.usda.gov/); and the U.S. Department of En-
ergy on petroleum and natural gas (http://www.doe.gov/). An 
independent government agency, the U.S. International Trade 
Commission offers an interactive tariff and trade dataweb that 
permits users to integrate trade statistics with tariff and customs 
treatment issues (http://www.usitc.gov/). Its research units—the 

188 Data and Documents
Office of Economics and the Office of Industries—prepare stud-
ies for Congress and the executive, most of them available to the 
public. Especially valuable are annual reports on The Year in Trade: 
Operations of the Trade Agreements Program, and Recent Trends in 
U.S. Services Trade.
There are two popular compendia of general statistics: the 
Statistical Abstract of the United States, prepared by the U.S. Bureau 
of the Census, and the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency’s The World 
Factbook. The annual Statistical Abstract of the United States offers 
statistics on social and economic conditions in the United States 
(http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/). It contains a sec-
tion with international statistics, and offers some comparisons to 
the United States. The World Factbook has been published in un-
classified form since 1971. It provides information on land, water, 
people, government, economy, communications, and defenses 
forces of other countries. It also contains a number of lists rank-
ing countries by various measures—such as trade, investments, 
currency reserves, energy reserves, and so forth. (http://www.cia.
gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/)
Interest groups and consultants with a stake in the trade pol-
icy debate frequently analyze and publish official date or private 
information sources. Some of the best are the Economic Policy 
Institute (http://www.epi.org/), the American Manufacturing 
Trade Action Coalition (http://www.amtacdc.org/), economist 
Charles McMillion’s Web site http://www.mbginfosvcs.com/, 
the Federation of International Trade Associations (http://fita.
org/), which provides links to statistics from most non-U.S. gov-
ernments; the National Association of Manufacturers (http://
www.nam.org/) and the US-China Business Council (http://
www.uschina.org/).
Some of the best Web sites for trade data are those of interna-
tional organizations, like the United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development (http://www.unctad.org/), the World Bank 
(http://www.worldbank.org/), and, of course, the World Trade 
Organization (http://www.wto.org/). Other international orga-
nizations collect and disseminate a broad range of economic and 
financial data, much of it relevant to trade debates. These include 
the Bank for International Settlements (http://www.bis.org/), 
the International Monetary Fund (http://www.imf.org/), Orga-
nization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
(http://www.oecd.org/), the UN Food and Agricultural Orga-
nization (http://www.fao.org/), the International Energy Agency 

International Comparisons 189
(http://www.iea.org/), and various regional development banks. 
Among these are the African Development Bank (http://www.
afdb.org/), the Asian Development Bank (http://www.adb.org/), 
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (http://
www.ebrd.org/), and the Inter-American Development Bank 
Group (http://www.iadb.org/).
It is worth remembering that international agencies typically 
rely on member governments for data collection, and the quality 
of national data collection efforts vary widely. In poor countries, 
for example, national statistical offices often have high staff turn-
over and inadequate funding. The data produced is frequently 
unreliable and lacking in timeliness.
Merchandise trade statistics tend to be a fairly reliable indica-
tor of trade trends, because the goods move physically through a 
limited number of ports where customs officials collection data. 
But there is always the problem of smuggling, nonreporting, and 
fluctuating exchange rates. Detailed statistics are not available for 
trade in services, and some of these data are only estimates based 
on sampling techniques. For information on infrastructure ser-
vices, such as telecommunications, transportation, finance, and 
insurance, see the World Trade Organization’s service profiles at 
http://stat.wto.org/ServiceProfile/WSDBServicePFHome.aspx?
Language=E.
International Comparisons
To understand America’s place in the trading world, it is use-
ful to begin with a comparison of the world’s 20 most populous 
countries or economic units. Except for the 27-member European 
Union, Japan, and the United States, the others are all relatively 
underdeveloped and account for a small share of world trade. 
Table 6.1 shows that the European Union, Japan, and the United 
States account for more than half of the world’s merchandise ex-
ports (including intra-European trade), while the other most pop-
ulous countries have a little more than 20 percent. It is evident 
that the rich industrial countries have the greatest stake in world 
trade, although emerging powers such as Brazil, China, and India 
have a growing interest. But many poor countries—such as the 
Congo, Ethiopia, and Pakistan—have very little stake in the inter-
national trading system, and little prospect for becoming active in 
the next decade.

190 Data and Documents
TABLE 6.1
The 20 Most Populous Countries Compared
Rank
Country
Population
GDP 
(Billion$)
Per capita GDP 
(Dollars)
Share of 
World 
Exports
 1
China
1,330 million
7,800
6,100
 8.8
 2
India
1,148 
3,319
2,900
1.1
 3
European Union
491 
14,960
33,800
38.2
 4
United States
304 
14,580
48,000
8.4
 5
Indonesia
238 
932
3,900
0.9
 6
Brazil
196
2,030
10,300
1.2
 7
Pakistan
173
454
2,600
0.1
 8
Bangladesh
154
228
1,500
0.1
 9
Nigeria
146
328
2,200
0.3
10
Russia
141
2,225
15,800
2.6
11
Japan
127
4,487
35,300
5.1
12
Mexico
110
1,578
14,400
2.0
13
Philippines
 96
327
3,400
0.4
14
Vietnam
 86
247
2,900
0.3
15
Ethiopia
 83
63
800
0.0
16
Egypt
 82
453
5,500
0.1
17
Turkey
 72
931
12,900
0.8
18
Congo, Democratic
 Republic of
 67
21
300
0.0
19
Iran
 66
860
13,100
0.6
20
Thailand
 65
570
8,700
1.1
GDP in column 4 calculated on purchasing-power-parity basis.
Sources: Central Intelligence Agency. “The World Factbook,” http://www.cia.gov/library/
publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2119rank.html; http://www.cia.gov/library/
publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2001rank.html; http://www.cia.gov/library/
publications/the-world-factbook/rankorder/2004rank.html; (accessed May 2009). Trade 
percentages from United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, “Handbook of 
Statistics 2008,” http://stats.unctad.org; (accessed May 2009).
Another useful way to look at world trade patterns is to 
examine shifts in shares of world exports and imports over an 
extended period. Tables 6.2 and 6.3 show changing export and 
import trends since 1950. Among the key points, the U.S. share 
of world exports has fallen sharply, while its share of world im-
ports has remained relatively constant. The developed countries 
of Europe continue to hold about 40 percent of world exports and 
imports. It is important to remember that while Europe is a lead-
ing exporter of goods, about half of this trade is intra-bloc trade 

International Comparisons 191
with other European nations. Much of the real growth in world 
trade has come from the emerging countries of Asia. Developing 
countries in Asia have doubled their shares of world exports and 
imports, much of this the result of China’s phenomenal growth 
and integration into the world economy. In Africa and the Ameri-
cas, while individual countries such as Brazil and Mexico have 
prospered, many countries have lost export share, and some have 
suffered falling per capita incomes as a result of adverse internal 
and external circumstances. Oil exporting countries such as Saudi 
Arabia have succeeded in boosting their share of world trade, 
but many low-income exporters of traditional commodities have 
done poorly. The developing countries of Africa and the Americas 
as a group have experienced declining shares of world exports 
and imports.
TABLE 6.2
Shares of World Exports of Merchandise (%)
Countries
1950
1970
2000
2007
United States
16.2
13.6
12.1
8.4
Canada
4.9
5.3
4.3
3.0
Japan
1.3
6.1
7.4
5.1
Developed Europe
36.8
47.9
40.0
40.5
France
5.1
5.7
5.1
4.0
Germany
3.9
11.2
8.6
9.5
Netherlands
2.6
4.2
3.6
4.0
United Kingdom
10.2
6.1
4.4
3.1
Developing Economies excluding 
 China
33.1
18.4
28.0
28.7
India
—
—
0.7
1.1
Brazil
2.2
0.9
0.9
1.2
South Africa
1.9
1.1
0.5
0.5
Mexico
0.9
0.4
2.6
2.0
Saudi Arabia
0.5
0.8
1.2
1.8
China
0.9
0.7
3.9
8.8
Hong Kong
1.1
0.8
3.1
2.5
Taiwan
0.1
0.5
2.3
1.8
Russia (formerly USSR)
2.9
4.0
1.6
2.6
Developing Countries—Africa
7.2
5.0
2.4
2.9
Developing Countries—Asia
15.2
8.5
23.8
29.1
Developing Countries—Americas
11.6
5.5
4.1
5.5
Source: United Nations Commission on Trade and Development. Handbook of Statistics 2008, http://stats.
unctad.org/Handbook/ (accessed May 2009).

192 Data and Documents
Trade and finance are intimately related. When U.S. investors 
build a factory in a developing country, there is likely to be a short-
term boost in U.S. exports, as machinery and equipment are ex-
ported to the new facility. Over a longer period of time, if the plant 
makes goods for the American market, the result may be higher 
U.S. imports. Tables 6.4 and 6.5 show world direct investment 
patterns—using the accumulated stock of investments. Until the 
1980s, private foreign investment remained relatively small, but 
subsequently it grew fast as governments reduced regulatory bar-
riers and developing countries became more receptive to private 
capital. Generally, developed countries are the principal sources 
of investment capital—with more than half coming from mem-
bers of the European Union. The U.S. share of outbound world 
TABLE 6.3
Shares of World Imports of Merchandise (%)
Country
1950
1970
2000
2007
United States
15.0
12.9
18.9
14.4
Japan
1.5
5.7
5.7
4.4
Developed Europe
42.7
50.3
39.3
40.4
France
4.9
6.0
5.1
4.3
Germany
4.2
9.1
7.5
7.5
Netherlands
3.8
4.8
3.3
3.5
United Kingdom
11.4
6.6
5.2
4.4
Developing Economies 
 excluding China
28.7
17.9
25.4
26.2
India
—
—
0.8
1.5
Brazil
1.7
0.9
0.9
0.9
South Africa
1.4
1.2
0.4
0.6
Mexico
0.9
0.7
2.7
2.1
Saudi Arabia
0.2
0.2
0.5
0.6
China
0.9
0.7
3.4
6.8
Hong Kong
1.0
0.9
3.1
2.6
Taiwan
0.2
0.5
2.1
1.6
Russia
—
—
0.7
1.7
Developing Countries—Africa
7.1
4.4
2.0
2.4
Developing Countries—Asia
12.5
8.4
20.8
25.1
Developing Countries—
 Latin America
9.9
5.5
5.9
5.3
Source: United Nations Commission on Trade and Development. Handbook of Statistics 2008, http://
stats.unctad.org /Handbook/ (accessed May 2009).

TABLE 6.4
Shares of World Foreign Direct Investment Outward FDI Stock (in %)
Country
1980
1990
2000
2007
Developed
87.0
91.9
85.6
83.6
Developing
13.0
8.1
14.0
14.7
Canada
4.3
4.8
3.9
3.3
China
0
0.3
0.5
0.6
Hong Kong
0
0.7
6.3
6.6
Europe
38.9
49.7
54.5
58.1
France
5.0
6.3
7.2
9.0
Germany
7.9
8.5
8.8
8.0
Netherlands
7.6
6.0
5.0
5.5
United Kingdom
14.7
12.8
14.6
10.9
Japan
3.6
11.3
4.5
3.6
Russia
0
0
0.3
1.4
United States
39.3
24.1
21.4
21.1
Source: United Nations Commission on Trade and Development. “FDISTAT,” http://stats.unctad.
org /FDI/ (accessed May 2009).
TABLE 6.5
Shares of World Foreign Direct Investment Inward FDI Stock
Country
1980
1990
2000
2007
Developed
57.3
72.7
68.9
68.8
Developing
43
27.2
30.0
27.9
Canada
7.7
5.8
3.7
3.4
China
0.2
1.1
3.3
2.2
Hong Kong
3.8
2.5
7.8
7.8
European Union
31.8
39.2
37.9
45.2
France
4.5
5.0
4.5
6.7
Germany
5.2
5.7
4.7
4.1
Netherlands
2.7
3.5
4.2
4.4
United Kingdom
8.9
10.5
7.6
8.7
Japan
0.5
0.5
0.9
0.9
Russia
0
0
0.6
2.1
United States
11.8
20.3
21.7
13.8
Source: United Nations Commission on Trade and Development. “FDISTAT,” http://stats.
unctad.org/FDI/ (accessed May 2009).

194 Data and Documents
direct investments has fallen sharply over the last 25 years, but 
the United States has remained an attractive destination for for-
eign investments. The share of direct investment going to devel-
oping countries has not changed much over the period—although 
individual countries such as Brazil, China, India, and Russia have 
become more attractive to investors. Indeed, these four countries 
and others have become significant overseas investors with major 
acquisitions in developed countries like the United States.
As a result of inflows of foreign investment and net earnings 
on trade and services, some countries have accumulated large re-
serves of foreign currencies and gold. In the 18th century, nations 
that accumulated gold and bullion were said to practice mercan-
tilism. Mercantilist nations sought to manage trade so that ex-
ports exceeded imports. The resulting trade surplus generated an 
inflow of gold and hard currencies, thus augmenting the power 
of the state. In the 21st century, mercantilism is sometimes used 
to describe Japanese and Chinese policies. Japan has had a cur-
rent account surplus every year since 1981 and China since 1994 
(IMF 2008). The United States, on the other hand, has run current 
account deficits in every year since 1982, except for 1991 when 
foreign payments for the Persian Gulf War produced a surplus 
(IMF 2008). As Table 6.6 shows, the United States has relatively 
small holdings of foreign currencies and gold. The U.S. dollar, 
the world’s leading reserve currency, is widely accepted by other 
countries. If declining confidence in the dollar were to erode the 
U.S. dollar’s international appeal, U.S. reserves of foreign curren-
cies might prove inadequate for sustaining the U.S. position in 
global finance. When smaller countries have inadequate reserves, 
they sometimes face the unpleasant choice of devaluing their 
currency and borrowing from the International Monetary Fund 
under austere conditions.
Another measure of a country’s overall economic health 
relative to its international competitors is its current account sur-
plus, or deficit. The current account measures the flows of goods, 
services, payments, and transfers between one country and all 
other nations. A country with a current account deficit, such as 
the United States, must import capital from other countries to 
finance the current account deficit. Some economists say that 
accumulating a large foreign debt to pay for a current account 
deficit is dangerous to the nation, because it leads to the sale of 
assets (such as real estate, factories, and ownership of plants and 
facilities), and reduces the freedom of action of the borrowing 

International Comparisons 195
country. Table 6.7 shows the current account position of lead-
ing trading nations and presents it as a share of gross domestic 
product. In 2007, the United States had to borrow over $2 billion 
per day to finance its $738.7 billion current account deficit, which 
exceeded 5 percent of gross domestic product. In 2008, a reces-
sion year, the U.S. deficit declined to $673.3 billion, or 4.7 percent 
of gross domestic product. Because the United States has expe-
rienced chronic current account deficits in 26 of the last 27 years 
(a small surplus in 1991 when it received payments from foreign 
governments for its participation in the Persian Gulf War), it is 
not surprising that the United States has become the world’s larg-
est debtor. Table 6.8 ranks the world’s leading trading nations 
according to their external debts.
TABLE 6.6
Reserves of Foreign Exchange and Gold
Rank
Country
Reserves of Foreign 
Exchange and Gold
Date of Information
 1
China
$2,033,000,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
 2
Japan
954,100,000,000
Dec. 31, 2007 est.
 3
Russia
435,400,000,000
Dec. 12, 2008 
 4
Taiwan
296,400,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 
 5
India
250,000,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
 6
France
204,400,000,000
2008
 7
S. Korea
201,200,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
 8
Brazil
197,400,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
 9
Singapore
168,800,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
10
Hong Kong
165,900,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
11
Algeria
150,500,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
12
Germany
136,200,000,000
Dec. 31, 2007 est.
13
Thailand
106,300,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
14
Malaysia
104,400,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
15
Italy
104,000,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
16
Libya
99,450,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
17
Iran
96,560,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
18
Mexico
91,990,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
19
Poland
84,480,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
20
Turkey
82,820,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
21
Switzerland
75,370,000,000
2008 est.
22
Nigeria
72,040,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
23
United States
70,570,000,000
Dec. 31, 2007 est.
Source: Central Intelligence Agency. “The World Factbook,” http://www.cia.gov/ library/publications/the-world-
factbook /rankorder/2188.rank.html (accessed May 2009).

196 Data and Documents
TABLE 6.7
Current Account Deficits and Surpluses (in U.S. Dollars)
Country
Subject
1990
2000
2005
2008
Brazil
Current Account $
−3.79 billion
−24.2 billion
14 billion
−28.3 billion
% of GDP
−0.7%
−3.8%
1.6%
−1.8%
Canada
Current Account $
−19.8 billion
19.7 billion
21.8 billion
9.7 billion
% of GDP
−3.4%
2.7%
1.9%
0.6%
China
Current Account $
12.0 billion
20.5 billion
160.8 billion
440 billion
% of GDP
3.1%
1.7%
7.2%
10%
France
Current Account $
−9.9 billion
22 billion
−13.6 billion
−45.3 billion
% of GDP
−0.8%
1.6%
−0.6%
−1.6%
Germany
Current Account $
45.3 billion
−32.6 billion
143.8 billion
235.3 billion
% of GDP
2.9%
−1.7%
5.1%
6.4%
India
Current Account $
−7.9 billion
−4.6 billion
−10.3 billion
−33.3 billion
% of GDP
−2.5%
−1.0%
−1.3%
−2.8%
Japan
Current Account $
43.9 billion
119.6 billion
165.7 billion
157.1 billion
% of GDP
1.4%
2.6%
3.6%
3.2%
Mexico
Current Account $
−7.45 billion
−18.7 billion
−4.4 billion
−15.5 billion
% of GDP
−2.8%
−3.0%
−0.5%
−1.4%
Russia
Current Account $
n/a
46.8 billion
84.4 billion
102.3 billion
% of GDP
n/a
18.0%
11%
6.1%
Switzerland
Current Account $
8.7 billion
30.7 billion
50.7 billion
44.8 billion
% of GDP
3.6%
12.3%
13.6%
9.1%
United Kingdom
Current Account $
−38.5 billion
−39.1 billion
−59.5 billion
−45.4 billion
% of GDP
−3.8%
−2.6%
−2.6%
−1.7%
United States
Current Account $
−79.0 billion
−417.4 billion
−729 billion
−673.3 billion
% of GDP
−1.4%
−4.3%
−5.9%
−4.7%
Source: International Monetary Fund. “World Economic Outlook Database,” http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/
weo/2008/02/weodata/index.aspx (accessed May 2009).
Another factor impacting international trade is the depen-
dence of most major trading nations on foreign energy supplies, 
especially oil and gas. Table 6.9 shows the largest consumers of oil. 
The United States consumes more than 25 percent of the world’s 
oil, followed by the European Union, China, and Japan. With au-
tomobile ownership expanding rapidly in China and India, those 
two emerging economic giants are competing actively for world 
oil supplies. Table 6.10 presents the world’s proved oil reserves. 
Eight of the top ten nations are developing countries. Most have 
authoritarian governments and are located in Asia, the Middle 
East, and Africa. Because of its vast supplies of high-cost oil sands, 
Canada is now ranked second to Saudi Arabia. Table 6.11 presents 
data on world oil production. The United States, which ranks 12th 

International Comparisons 197
TABLE 6.8
Country Comparisons: External Debt
Rank
Country
Debt—External
Date of Information
World
$52,150,000,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
 1
United States
12,250,000,000,000
June 30, 2007
 2
United Kingdom
10,450,000,000,000
June 30, 2007
 3
Germany
4,489,000,000,000
June 30, 2007
 4
France
4,396,000,000,000
June 30, 2007
 5
Netherlands
2,277,000,000,000
June 30, 2007
 6
Ireland
1,841,000,000,000
June 30, 2007
 7
Japan
1,492,000,000,000
June 30, 2007
 8
Switzerland
1,340,000,000,000
June 30, 2007 
 9
Belgium
1,313,000,000,000
June 30, 2007
10
Spain
1,084,000,000,000
June 30, 2007 est.
11
Italy
1,060,000,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
12
Australia
1,032,000,000,000
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
13
Canada
758,600,000,000
June 30, 2007
14
Austria
752,500,000,000
June 30, 2007
15
Sweden
598,200,000,000
June 30, 2006
16
Russia
527,100,000,000
June 2008 est.
17
Denmark
492,600,000,000
June 30, 2007
18
Norway
469,100,000,000
June 30, 2007
19
Portugal
461,200,000,000
Dec. 31, 2007
20
China
420,800,000,000 
Dec. 31, 2008 est.
Source: Central Intelligence Agency. “The World Factbook,” http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/rankorder/2079rank.html (accessed January 2009).
in terms of total proved reserves, places third behind Russia and 
Saudi Arabia as an oil producer.
Finally, the international comparisons section of this chap-
ter presents comparative data on another key trade factor—labor 
costs. Table 6.12 compares hourly compensation costs for pro-
duction workers. While transportation costs (reflecting higher 
oil prices) are a factor in decisions about where to manufacture 
products, one of the most important is the price of labor. The 
table shows that high-income countries tend to have high labor 
costs. Labor in Western Europe is generally more expensive than 
in North America, helping to explain why European automobile 
makers are assembling cars in the United States. Mexico, with 
compensation costs of $2.92 per hour, has succeeded in luring 
many manufacturing plants from the United States, but China 
and other areas of East and Southeast Asia are even cheaper with 

TABLE 6.9
World Oil Consumption (Barrels per Day)
Rank
Country
Oil—Consumption
Percent of Total 
(%)
Date of Information
World
85,220,000
100
2007 estimate
 1
United States
20,680,000
24.3
2007 estimate
 2
European Union
14,390,000
16.9
2007 estimate
 3
China
7,880,000
9.2
2007 estimate
 4
Japan
5,007,000
5.9
2007 estimate
 5
Russia
2,858,000
3.4
2007 estimate
 6
India
2,722,000
3.2
2007 estimate
 7
Germany
2,456,000
2.9
2007 estimate
 8
Brazil
2,372,000
2.8
2007 estimate
 9
Canada
2,371,000
2.8
2007 estimate
10
Saudi Arabia
2,311,000
2.7
2007 estimate
11
S. Korea
2,214,000
2.6
2007 estimate
12
Mexico
2,119,000
2.5
2007 estimate
13
France
1,950,000
2.3
2007 estimate
14
United Kingdom
1,763,000
2.1
2007 estimate
15
Italy
1,702,000
2.0
2007 estimate
Source: Central Intelligence Agency. “The World Factbook,” http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/rankorder/2174/rank.html (accessed January 2009).
TABLE 6.10
World Oil Proved Reserves
Rank
Country
Oil—Proved Reserves 
(Barrels)
Share of Total 
(%)
Date of  Information
World
1,332,000,000,000
100
2008 estimate
 1
Saudi Arabia
266,800,000,000
20
2008 estimate
 2
Canada
178,600,000,000
13.4
2008 estimate
 3
Iran
138,400,000,000
10.4
2008 estimate
 4
Iraq
115,000,000,000
8.6 
2008 estimate
 5
Kuwait
104,000,000,000
7.8
2008 estimate
 6
United Arab
Emirates
97,800,000,000
7.3
2008 estimate
 7
Venezuela
87,040,000,000
6.5
2008 estimate
 8
Russia
79,000,000,000
5.9
2008 estimate
 9
Libya
41,460,000,000
3.1
2008 estimate
10
Nigeria
36,220,000,000
2.7
2008 estimate
11
Kazakhstan
30,000,000,000
2.3
2008 estimate
12
United States
20,970,000,000
1.6
2008 estimate
13
China
16,000,000,000
1.2
2008 estimate
14
Qatar
15,210,000,000
1.1
2008 estimate
15
Algeria
12,200,000,000
0.9
2008 estimate
Source: Central Intelligence Agency. “The World Factbook,” http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/rankorder/2178/rank.html (accessed January 2009).

TABLE 6.11
World Oil Production (Barrels per Day)
Rank
Country
Oil—Production
Share of 
Total
Date of
Information
World
85,540,000
100
2007 estimate
 1
Russia
9,980,000
11.7
2007 estimate
 2
Saudi Arabia
9,200,000
10.8
2008 estimate
 3
United States
8,457,000
9.9
2007 estimate
 4
Iran
4,700,000
5.5
2007 estimate
 5
China
3,725,000
4.4
2008 estimate
 6
Mexico
3,501,000
4.1
2007 estimate
 7
Canada
3,425,000
4.0
2007 estimate
 8
United Arab Emirates
2,948,000
3.5
2007 estimate
 9
European Union
2,676,000
3.1
2007 estimate
10
Venezuela
2,667,000
3.1
2007 estimate
11
Kuwait
2,613,000
3.1
2007 estimate
12
Norway
2,565,000
3.0
2007 estimate
13
Iraq
2,420,000
2.8
2008 estimate
14
Nigeria
2,352,000
2.7
2007 estimate
15
Brazil
2,277,000
2.7
2007 estimate
Source: Central Intelligence Agency. “The World Factbook,” http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/rankorder/2174/rank.html (accessed May 2009).
TABLE 6.12
Hourly Compensation Costs for Production Workers: In U.S. Dollars
Country
1975
2000
2007
United States
6.24
19.88
24.59
Brazil
—
3.50
5.96
Canada
6.40
16.78
28.91
Mexico
1.43
2.07
2.92
Hong Kong
0.75
5.45
5.78
Japan
2.95
21.69
19.75
Korea
0.31
8.08
16.02
Philippines
—
0.73
1.10
Taiwan
0.39
6.19
6.58
Europe
5.11
17.83
32.12
France
5.61
15.98
28.57
Germany
—
22.66
37.66
Hungary
—
2.78
7.91
Poland
—
2.81
6.17
Spain
2.47
10.46
20.98
United Kingdom
3.21
16.31
29.73
Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Production Workers: Hourly Compensation Costs in 
U.S. Dollars,” http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ichcc.t08.htm (accessed May 2009).

200 Data and Documents
costs running under $1 per hour in some countries. Comparable 
data from China and many other developing countries are not yet 
available.
U.S. Trade Indicators
The United States is a diversified exporter of agricultural prod-
ucts, manufactured goods, and services. But over the past quar-
ter century, the United States has become a net importer of raw 
materials (especially petroleum) and manufactured goods, as big 
business has increasingly moved factories and assembly facilities 
abroad to take advantage of less expensive labor. Table 6.13 of-
fers a perspective on U.S. trade in goods and services. The United 
States has been running strong surpluses on services, but trade 
in services is less than one-third of trade in goods, and thus does 
not offset the huge merchandise deficit growing out of imports of 
petroleum and consumer goods.
In services, the United States generates strong surpluses from 
its licensing of intellectual property and from “other” private ser-
vices, a broad category that includes business, professional, and 
technical services, including insurance and financial services. It 
also benefits from large numbers of foreign visitors traveling to 
the United States and from large numbers of foreign students 
enrolled in American colleges and universities. But, as Table 6.14 
shows, the United States is less competitive in shipping. The 
TABLE 6.13
U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services (in Billions of U.S. Dollars)
Year
Balance
Exports
Imports
Goods
Services
Goods
Services
Goods
Services
2008
–821.2
144.1
1,291.3
551.6
2,112.5
407.6
2007
–819.4
119.1
1,148.5
497.2
1,967.9
378.1
2000
–452.2
76.5
  772.2
293.5
1,224.4
217.0
1995
–173.4
68.4
  575.9
210.6
749.4
142.2
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census. “FT900: U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services,” http://www.census.
gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/2008pr/12/; (http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/2000pr/
Final_Revisions_2000/exh1.pdf; http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/2005/95_press_releases/
Final_Revisions_1995/exh1.fin (accessed February 2009).

TABLE 6.14
U.S. Trade in Services by Major Category (in Billions of U.S. Dollars)
Year
Total
Travel
Passenger 
Fares
Other 
Transport
Royalties & 
License Fees
Other 
Private Services
Transfers under 
Military Sales Contract
U.S. 
Gov’t Misc.
2008 Exports
$551.6
$111.5
$31.4
$60.2
$91.1
$241.0
$15.1
$1.2
2008 Imports
407.6
80.4
32.2
72.8
27.9
154.1
35.8
4.4
Surplus or Deficit
144.0
31.1
−0.8
−12.6
63.2
86.9
−20.7
−3.2
2000 Exports
293.5
82.0
20.7
30.2
38.0
107.6
14.1
0.86
2000 Imports
217.0
64.5
24.2
41.1
16.1
54.7
13.66
2.9
Surplus or Deficit
76.5
17.5
−3.5
−10.9
21.9
52.9
0.5
−2.04
1995 Exports
210.6
61.1
18.5
28.1
27.0
61.7
13.4
0.78
1995 Imports
142.2
45.9
14.3
29.2
6.3
34.0
9.8
2.8
Surplus or Deficit
68.4
15.2
4.2
−1.1
20.7
27.7
3.6
−2.02
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census. “FT900: U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services,” http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/2008pr/12/; http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-
Release/2000pr/Final_Revisions_2000/; http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/95_press_releases/Final_Revisions_1995 (accessed February 2009).

202 Data and Documents
international activities of the U.S. government, including the over-
seas projection of military power, also reduces the positive bal-
ance in services. For further information on trade in services, see 
the October issue of the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Survey of 
Current Business. http://www.bea.gov/scb/date_guide.asp.
Until the last quarter of the 20th century, the bulk of U.S. 
trade was with nations adjoining the Atlantic Ocean. But, with 
the phenomenal growth of East Asia, especially China and Japan, 
Asia has grown markedly in significance. China has surpassed 
Mexico and Japan, and become the United States’ second leading 
trading partner. Table 6.15 ranks America’s fifteen leading trading 
partners, and shows the United States running merchandise defi-
cits with all but three: Belgium, Brazil, and the Netherlands.
Tables 6.16 and 6.17 rank the 10 countries with which the 
United States had its leading trade surpluses and deficits in goods. 
The deficits far exceed the surpluses, and are with each of the 10 
leading trading partners.
One reason for the persistent merchandise trade deficit is 
America’s appetite for foreign oil. Table 6.18 shows that America’s 
TABLE 6.15
Top 15 Trading Partners of U.S., 2008 in Billions of U.S. Dollars (Goods)
Rank
Country
Exports
Imports
Total Trade
Total All Countries
1,300.5
2,100.4
3,400.9 (100%)
Total, Top15
891.5
1,524.4
2,415.8 (71%)
 1
Canada
261.4
335.6
596.9 (17.6%)
 2
China
71.5
337.8
409.2 (12.0%)
 3
Mexico
151.5
215.9
367.5 (10.8%)
 4
Japan
66.6
139.2
205.8 (6.1%)
 5
Germany
54.7
97.6
152.3 (4.5%)
 6
United Kingdom
53.8
58.6
112.4 (3.3%)
 7
South Korea
34.8
48.1
82.9 (2.4%)
 8
France
29.2
44.0
73.2 (2.2%)
 9
Saudi Arabia
12.5
54.8
67.3 (2.0%)
10
Venezuela
12.6
51.4
64.0 (1.9%)
11
Brazil
32.9
30.5
63.4 (1.9%)
12
Taiwan
25.3
36.3
61.6 (1.8%)
13
Netherlands
40.2
21.1
61.4 (1.8%)
14
Italy
15.5
36.1
51.6 (1.5%)
15
Belgium
29.0
17.4
46.4 (1.4%)
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census. “Top Trading Partners–Total Trade, Exports, Imports,” http://www.census.gov/
foreign-trade/statistics/highlights/top/top0812yr.html (accessed February 2009).

U.S. Trade Indicators 203
TABLE 6.16
Top 10 Countries with Which the U.S. Had a Trade Surplus 
in Goods, 2008
Rank
Country
Surplus in Millions of U.S. $
 1
Netherlands
19,083
 2
Hong Kong
15,149
 3
United Arab Emirates
14,455
 4
Singapore
12,925
 5
Australia
11,874
 6
Belgium
11,666
 7
Turkey
5,798
 8
Switzerland
4,237
 9
Chile
3,905
10
Egypt
3,660
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census. “FT900: U.S. International Trade in Goods 
and Services, December 2008), http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-
Release/2008pr/12/exh14.pdf (accessed February 2009).
TABLE 6.17
Top 10 Countries with Which the U.S. Had a Trade Deficit 
in Goods, 2008
Rank
Country
Deficit in Millions of U.S. $
1
China
−266,333
2
Canada
−74,174
3
Japan
−72,669
4
Mexico
−64,376
5
Germany
−42,821
6
Saudi Arabia
−42,308
7
Venezuela
−38,790
8
Nigeria
−33,966
9
Ireland
−22,915
10
Italy
−20,665
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census. “Exports, Imports, and Balance of Goods 
By Selected Countries and Areas—2008,” http://www.census.gov/foreign-
trade/Press-Release/2008pr/12/exh14.pdf (accessed February 2009).
net imports of oil on a daily basis have more than doubled from 
levels reached in the mid-1970s. Until the mid-1990s, the United 
States obtained a majority of its imported oil from members of the 
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), of which 

204 Data and Documents
TABLE 6.18
U.S. Crude Oil and Petroleum Products Net Imports (Thousands of Barrels per Day)
Decade
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
Year-0
6,365
7,161
10,419
Year-1
5,401
6,626
10,900
Year-2
4,298
6,938
10,546
Year-3
6,025
4,312
7,618
11,238
Year-4
5,892
4,715
8,054
12,097
Year-5 
5,846
4,286
7,886
12,549
Year-6
7,090
5,439
8,498
12,390
Year-7
8,565
5,914
9,158
12,036
Year-8
8,002
6,587
9,764
Year-9
7,985
7,202
9,912
Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration. “U.S. Crude Oil and Petroleum Products Net Imports,” http:/
tonto.eia.doe/gov/dnav/pet/hist/mttntus2a.htm (accessed February 2009).
TABLE 6.19
U.S. Crude Oil and Petroleum Products Imports by Leading Suppliers 
(Thousands of Barrels per Day)
Year
OPEC
Non-OPEC
Canada
Mexico
Saudi Arabia
Venezuela
1975
3,601
2,454
846
71
715
702
1980
4,300
2,609
455
533
1,261
481
1985
1,830
3,237
770
816
168
605
1990
4,296
3,721
934
755
1,339
1,025
1995
4,002
4,833
1,332
1,068
1,344
1,480
2000
5,203
6,257
1,807
1,373
1,572
1,546
2005
5,587
8,127
2,181
1,662
1,537
1,529
2006
5,517
8,190
2,353
1,705
1,463
1,419
2007
5,980
7,489
2,455
1,532
1,485
1,361
2008
5,958
6,914
2,544
1,430
1,532
1,191
Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2009, April. Monthly Energy Review, pp. 44–45.
Saudi Arabia is the most important supplier. By the beginning of 
the 21st century, as Table 6.19 indicates, Canada, not a member of 
OPEC, had become the largest oil exporter to the United States. 
Another NAFTA partner, Mexico, was the third largest supplier.
Table 6.20 shows how America’s huge appetite for imported 
oil impacts the trade balance. In 2008, the petroleum deficit 
amounted to 48 percent of the total merchandise trade deficit up 
from 25 percent in 2000, but lower than the 54 percent in 1990.

U.S. Trade Indicators 205
Over half of the U.S. merchandise trade deficit stems from 
the American consumer’s desire for foreign-made automobiles, 
electronics, and other manufactures. Table 6.21 shows while the 
United States is a net exporter of food and agricultural products, 
it is highly dependent on foreign suppliers for raw materials (es-
pecially oil) and a wide range of consumer goods. Nonetheless, 
large American manufacturers like Boeing and Caterpillar remain 
highly competitive in world markets, but increasingly these ex-
ports contain significant quantities of imported components.
While international trade involves transactions among na-
tions, individual states and municipalities are actively involved 
in export promotion activities. Table 6.22 shows that the most suc-
cessful exporting states are Texas, California, New York, Illinois, 
and Michigan. They are all populous states with major manufac-
turing and service providers, as well as agriculture.
Tables 6.23 and 6.24 address the issue of wage stagnation and 
manufacturing job losses. Table 6.23 shows that real (adjusted for 
inflation) average weekly earnings for production workers rose 
steadily from 1950 to the mid-1970s, and then began to stagnate. 
Real average weekly earnings rose sharply in the 30-year period 
from 1945 to 1975 before import competition became a significant 
factor in most manufacturing-product markets. During the next 
30 years, however, weekly earnings for production workers de-
clined slightly when adjusted for inflation.
Table 6.24 focuses on the U.S. job market. Critics of trade 
agreements note that the United States has lost more than 3 million 
TABLE 6.20
Petroleum as a Share of Merchandise Trade Deficit (in Millions of Dollars)
Petroleum Balance
Non-Petroleum Balance
2008
 −386,313
−413,621
2005
−229,191
−538,286
2000
−108,266
−327,839
1995
−46,982
−111,721
1990
−54,513
−47,205
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Report FT900. Accessed 02/2009 at http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-
Release/2008pr/12/exh9.pdf; http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/2005pr/final_revisions/exh8.
pdf; http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/2000pr/Final_Revisions_2000/exh8.pdf; http://www.
census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/95_press_releases/Final_Revisions_1995/exh8.fin; http://www.census.gov/
foreign-trade/Press-Release/91_press_releases/Final_Revisions_1991/ft900_91.txt.

TABLE 6.21
U.S. Exports and Imports on a Principal End-Use Basis (in Billions of U.S. Dollars) (Not Seasonally Adjusted)
Year
Total
Food, Feed & Beverage
Industrial Supplies
Capital Goods
Automotive & Parts
Consumer Goods
Other
2008 Exports
1,300.5
108.4
387.3
469.5
120.9
161.2
53.2
2008 Imports
2,100.4
89.0
775.5
453.8
233.6
482.5
66.0
Surplus or Deficit
–799.5
19.4
–388.2
15.7
–112.7
–321.3
–12.8
2000 Exports
781.9
47.5
171.9
357.0
80.2
90.6
34.8
2000 Imports
1,218.0
46.0
299.8
346.7
195.9
281.4
48.3
Surplus or Deficit
–436.1
1.5
–127.9
10.3
–115.7
–190.8
–13.5
1995 Exports
584.7
50.5
146.3
233.0
61.8
64.4
28.7
1995 Imports
743.4
33.2
180.7
221.4
124.8
160.0
23.4
Surplus or Deficit
–158.7
17.3
–34.4
11.6
–63.0
–95.6
5.3
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Report FT 900, http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/2008pr/12/exh13.pdf; http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/2000pr/Final_
Revisions_2000/exh12.pdf http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/2000pr/Final_Revisions_2000/exh12a.pdf http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/PressRelease/95_press_releases/
Final_Revisions_1995/exh12.fin (accessed February 2009).

TABLE 6.22
State Merchandise Exports to the World, 2008
(in Millions of U.S. Dollars)
Ranking
State
Total Exports
 1
Texas
153,002
 2
California
152,295
 3
New York
85,393
 4
Illinois
72,668
 5
Michigan
64,430
 6
Washington
56,878
 7
Florida
51,773
 8
Ohio
48,342
 9
New Jersey
42,637
10
Pennsylvania
40,334
11
Minnesota
31,053
12
Massachusetts
29,856
13
Georgia
25,357
14
Indiana
24,227
15
North Carolina
24,080
16
Tennessee
23,299
17
Louisiana
22,409
18
Wisconsin
21,986
19
Connecticut
21,170
20
Oregon
19,754
21
Kentucky
19,668
22
South Carolina
19,096
23
Arizona
17,771
24
Missouri
17,416
25
Virginia
17,209
26
Alabama
13,779
27
Kansas
13,322
28
Utah
11,507
29
Colorado
9,866
30
Maryland
8,846
31
Iowa
7,950
32
Mississippi
6,209
33
Oklahoma
5,630
34
Nebraska
4,926
35
Arkansas
4,831
36
Delaware
4,749
37
Idaho
4,704
38
Nevada
4,693
39
New Hampshire
4,167
40
West Virginia
3,949
41
Vermont
3,472
42
Maine
2,511
43
North Dakota
2,137
44
Alaska
1,874
45
Rhode Island
1,828
46
South Dakota
1,590
(continued )

208 Data and Documents
TABLE 6.23
Weekly Earnings of Production Workers, 1945–2008
Year
Average Weekly Earnings
($)
Average Weekly Earnings 
(2008 U.S. $)
1945
39.24
463.09
1950
53.59
472.36
1955
70.99
562.69
1960
85.57
614.09
1965
102.59
691.83
1970
128.55
703.79
1975
186.05
734.60
1980
283.86
731.78
1985
380.70
751.58
1990
436.16
708.89
1995
509.26
709.84
2000
590.77
728.77
2005
673.30
732.34
2008
724.23
724.23
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Current Employment Statistics. (Data Retrieval: Employment, Hours, and 
Earnings from the Current Employment Statistics Survey (Not Seasonally Adjusted), http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/serlet/
SurveyOutputServlet (accessed March 2009). Adjusted for inflation using CPI calculator, http://www.bls.gov/data/
inflation_calculator.htm.
manufacturing jobs, which they attribute to competition from 
China and flawed trade agreements. According to statistics from 
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, the United States lost 2.8 mil-
lion manufacturing production jobs from 2000 to 2008. These jobs 
paid in 2008 an average weekly wage of $724. During that period 
of time, the United States created 6.8 million production-type jobs 
in services that paid an average weekly wage of $574. This may 
Ranking
State
Total Exports
47
New Mexico
1,460
48
Montana
1,387
49
Hawaii
614
50
Wyoming
360
Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census. FT900: U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services (December 2008), Exhibit 2, 
http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/statistics/state/zip/2008/12/zipstate.pdf (accessed February 2009).
TABLE 6.22
State Merchandise Exports to the World, 2008
(in Millions of U.S. Dollars) (continued  )

National Labor Committee Testimony on “Sweatshop” Practices 209
suggest that the United States economy is shedding high-paying 
manufacturing jobs for lower-paying service jobs. Of course, ser-
vice workers typically work shorter work weeks, averaging 32.3 
hours in 2008 compared to 40.8 hours for manufacturing workers. 
Many service workers hold multiple jobs and lack health care and 
retirement benefits.
National Labor Committee Testimony 
on “Sweatshop” Practices
Many of the goods imported into the U.S. from developing countries are 
produced, or assembled, in conditions that labor activists consider unfair 
working conditions. Charles Kernaghan of the National Labor Commit-
tee has conducted a series of campaigns to expose “sweatshop” practices. 
His targets have been some of the biggest corporate targets—Nike, Liz 
Claiborne, Disney, the Gap, and Kathie Lee Gifford. In congressional 
testimony, excerpted below, he focuses on Chinese toymakers.
I want to thank you for holding this very important hearing inves-
tigating illegal sweatshop conditions under which our children’s toys 
are made. In 2006, the American people spent $22.3 billion purchasing 
TABLE 6.24
Employment and Earnings in U.S.
Year
Total Private
Manufacturing 
Production
Average Weekly 
Wages
Services 
(Private)
Average Weekly 
Wages
1964
48,680,000
12,298,000
$98.33
28,947,000
 $94.88
1970
58,318,000
13,490,000
$128.55
36,139,000
$118.57
1975
62,250,000
12,576,000
$186.05
40,932,000
$156.98
1980
74,154,000
13,667,000
$283.86
49,891,000
$214.76
1985
80,978,000
12,648,000
$380.70
57,393,000
$269.94
1990
91,072,000
12,669,000
$436.16
67,349,000
$316.03
1995
97,865,000
12,567,000
$509.26
74,710,000
$364.80
2000
110,995,000
12,428,000
$590.77
86,346,000
$445.74
2005
111,899,000
10,060,000
$673.30
89,709,000
$509.58
2007
115,380,000
9,977,000
$711.56
93,147,000
$554.89
2008
114,566,000
9,649,000
$724.23
93,146,000
$574.31
Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. “Current Employment Statistics.” (Data Retrieval: Employment, Hours, and 
Earnings from the Current Employment Statistics Survey (Not Seasonally Adjusted), http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/serlet/
SurveyOutputServlet (accessed March 2009).

210 Data and Documents
over three billion toys and sporting goods. Last year, China accounted 
for over 86 percent of all toy imports into the U.S., and today in 2007, 
China’s toy imports have surged another 16 percent. The timing of 
your hearings could not have been more appropriate, as the last three 
months of the year typically account for almost 80 percent of all toy 
sales. Last year, holiday sales in the U.S. reached a total of $457.4 bil-
lion. This year, each consumer is expected to spend $791 on holiday 
purchases, including toys and sporting goods.
Many parents in America would be shocked and disturbed if they 
knew of the abusive sweatshop conditions under which their children’s 
toys are being made in China. Parents, however, have no way of know-
ing, as toy companies like Mattel (which is the largest in the world) hide 
their 40 or so contract plants in China, refusing to provide the American 
people with even the names and addresses of their plants.
Mattel’s Barbie toys, along with Thomas & Friends toys for the RC2 
Corporation and Wal-Mart are made at the large Xin Yi factory in Shen-
zhen. The 5,000 workers there are stripped of their rights, forced to sign 
mostly-blank temporary contracts lasting anywhere from just 10 days to 
a maximum of three months. At management’s discretion, “new” tem-
porary contracts can be renewed every two to three months. Workers can 
be employed full time for a year or more, but always remain temporary 
workers with no legal rights. Temporary workers can be easily fired for 
being “inattentive” at work, or for “speaking during working hours.” 
Temporary workers have no right to participate in the mandatory na-
tional Social Security program which provides health care, no right to 
paid holidays, vacation, sick days, maternity leave, or severance pay.
The routine shift is 141/2 hours a day, from 7:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., 
six days a week. Workers are typically at the factory 87 hours a week, 
while toiling 70 hours, including 30 hours of forced overtime, which ex-
ceeds China’s legal limit by 260 percent!
In 2006, it was even worse, as the young toy workers were routinely 
kept at the factory 15 hours a day, from 7:30 a.m. to 10:30 p.m., seven days 
a week, going for months without a single day off. The workers were 
typically at the factory 105 hours a week, while forced to work 50 over-
time hours a week, which exceeds China’s legal limit by 530 percent!
The factory is excessively hot and everyone is drenched in their 
own sweat. Workers are prohibited from standing up during working 
hours, and cannot leave their hard wooden benches, which do not have 
back rests. The workers say that after several hours, their legs become 
numb. It is routine for the supervisors to yell and curse at the work-
ers and every day, the workers say, you can see young women crying. 
Workers have but two choices: to bow their heads and remain silent de-
spite the humiliation, or speak up and be immediately fired without re-
ceiving their back wages. Independent unions are, of course, prohibited 
in China, leaving the workers with no voice. Workers who fall behind in 
their assigned production goal are docked five hour’s wages.

National Labor Committee Testimony on “Sweatshop” Practices 211
The base wage in Shenzhen is just 53 cents an hour, $4.27 a day, and 
$21.34 a week. Despite being forced to work a 70-hour week, workers 
report being routinely cheated of nearly 20 percent ($8.31) in overtime 
wages legally due them each week. This is the equivalent of being 
cheated out of two day’s wages each week. For working 70 hours, the 
workers earn just $39.79 while they should have been paid $48.60. In 
2006, this too was even worse, since the Xin Yi factory illegally paid no 
overtime premium at all, robbing the workers of 40 percent of the wages 
legally due them!
Workers are housed in primitive dorms, 12 people crowded into 
each room, sleeping on double-level metal bunk beds and fed company 
food the workers describe as “awful.” Every morning workers have to 
cue up to wait their turn to brush their teeth and use the toilet. After de-
ductions for room and board, the workers’ take-home pay drops to just 
46 cents an hour.
It does not have to be this way! As an example, Mattel’s “Barbie 
Hug ‘N Heal Pet Doctor” set costs just $9.00 to make in China, yet—
even on sale—it retails for $29.99 in the United States This means that 
the price of the Mattel toy is being marked up an astonishing $20.99—or 
233 percent.
So there is clearly sufficient money around both to make safe toys 
and to treat the toy workers as human beings, respecting their most 
basic legal rights.
Mattel spent nearly $2 billion in advertising over the last three 
years, which amounts to 111/2 percent of its revenues. This means that 
Mattel spent $3.45 to advertise the Barbie Pet Doctor toy—more than 
18 times the 19 cents they paid the workers in China to make it!
There is absolutely no need for toxic and hazardous toys, as one 
industry estimate puts the price of thoroughly screening toys at just 
10 cents per toy. Further, with a 233 percent ($20.99) markup on each 
toy, it is clear that Mattel could afford to assure respect for worker rights 
in China and pay the workers a fair wage so they could climb out of 
misery and at least into poverty. After all, Mattel’s CEO paid himself 
$7.3 million last year, 6,533 times more than he paid his toy workers 
in China.
It is important to note that while Mattel’s Barbie brand is fiercely 
protected by all sorts of enforceable laws backed up by sanctions—
(Mattel sues an average of once a month to protect Barbie and its other 
toys)—there are no similar laws to prevent toxic toys from reaching our 
children, and certainly no laws to protect the fundamental human and 
worker rights of the young toy worker who makes Barbie. To legally 
protect the rights of the human being—according to Mattel and the 
other corporations—would be “an impediment to free trade.” So Barbie 
is fiercely protected, but not the human being who made Barbie.
Like many Americans, I was embarrassed and angered when Mat-
tel’s vice president apologized to a Chinese government official for the 

212 Data and Documents
massive toxic toy recalls. Mattel apologized after the official pointed out 
that Mattel makes a large proportion of its profits from its Chinese man-
ufacturers and that Mattel ought to appreciate China’s “cooperation.”
This is the sort of cooperation they meant: As late as 2005, Mattel 
sought and won special “waivers” so they could pay their workers less 
than the already-below-subsistence legal minimum wage. And to this 
day, Mattel has additional special “waivers” allowing its toy workers to 
toil 77 hours a week—including 
32 hours of forced overtime—which just happens to exceed China’s 
legal limit by 295 percent!
Corporations say there is no need for laws to protect our chil-
dren against toxic or sweatshop toys, as they can regulate themselves 
through voluntary codes of conduct and private monitoring schemes. 
However, this summer’s massive recall of toxic and hazardous toys—
made under abusive sweatshop conditions in China—clearly demon-
strates that corporate self-regulation is not enough. Toxic and sweatshop 
toys are two sides of the same coin, and need to be regulated by 
enforceable laws.
Charles Kernaghan, Director, National Labor Committee. Testimony 
before the U.S. Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science & Transpor-
tation, October 25, 2007. http://commerce.senate.gov/public/_files/
CharlesKernaghanTestimony_SenateTestimony071025ChinaToys.pdf 
(accessed October 2008):
U.S.– China Economic and Security 
Review Commission Report
Established in 2000, the twelve-member U.S.– China Economic and Se-
curity Review Commission conducts hearings and reports its findings 
annually to Congress. In its annual report, the bi-partisan commission, 
appointed by leaders of Congress, offers a hard-nosed assessment of the 
bilateral trading relationship. This report criticizes China for manipulat-
ing its currency and using subsidies to run up large surpluses in trade 
with the U.S. In a case study involving seafood imports from China, the 
commission also found that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
lacked personnel and authority to protect U.S. consumers from contami-
nated seafood imports.
The U.S.–China Trade and Economic Relationship
China held to its hybrid model of a state-directed economic system 
throughout 2008 as it consolidated its position as one of the world’s 

U.S.–China Economic and Security Review Commission Report 213
fastest-growing countries. Alone among the world’s major economies, 
China refuses to allow the renminbi (RMB), its currency, to respond 
to free market movements. China’s leaders instead keep the currency 
trading at an artificially low level in order to suppress export prices—a 
deliberate violation of the rules of the International Monetary Fund, of 
which it is a member. As a result of this and other factors, China’s cur-
rent account surplus with the United States and the rest of the world 
soared and added to China’s record foreign exchange reserves of nearly 
$2 trillion when this Report was completed, up from $1.43 trillion at 
the publication of the Commission’s Report a year ago. China began 
employing this foreign exchange in new ways. Rather than using it to 
improve the standard of living for the Chinese people through edu-
cation, health care, or pension systems, China began investing the 
money through new overseas investment vehicles, including an official 
sovereign wealth fund, the China Investment Corporation. Despite 
statements by Chinese leaders that they seek only financial gain from 
diversifying their investments into equity stakes in western companies, 
there are increasing suspicions that China intends to use its cash to gain 
political advantage globally and to lock up supplies of scarce resources 
around the world.
Other Chinese government economic policies harmed the United 
States, China’s trading partners, and its own citizens. China made 
scant progress in reining in the rampant counterfeiting and piracy 
that deprive legitimate foreign businesses operating in China of their 
intellectual  property, while they provide an effective subsidy to Chi-
nese companies that make use of stolen software and other advanced 
technology. Chinese regulators failed to prevent the domestic sale and 
export of consumer goods tainted with industrial chemicals and fraudu-
lent ingredients. In one case examined by the Commission, China’s lax 
controls on the production and handling of its seafood exports led to a 
partial U.S. ban for health reasons on imported Chinese seafood. Yet, 
thanks to artificially low prices partly resulting from an array of sub-
sidies to its seafood  industry, China has become the largest exporter of 
seafood to the United States.
Conclusions
The U.S.–China Trade and Economic Relationship’s Current Sta-
tus and Significant Changes During 2008
China’s trade surplus with the United States remains 
• 
large, despite the global economic slowdown. The U.S. 
trade deficit in goods with China through August 2008 
was $167.7 billion, which represents an increase of 

214 Data and Documents
2.4 percent over the same period in 2007. Since 
China joined the WTO in 2001, the United States has 
accumulated a $1.16 trillion goods deficit with China 
and, as a result of the persistent trade imbalance, by 
August 2008 China had accumulated nearly $2 trillion in 
foreign currency reserves. China’s trade relationship with 
the United States continues to be severely unbalanced.
The U.S. current account deficit causes considerable 
• 
anxiety among both economists and foreign investors 
who worry that future taxpayers will find it increasingly 
difficult to meet both principal and interest payments 
on such a large debt. The total debt burden already is 
having a significant impact on economic growth, which 
will only increase in severity.
China’s currency has strengthened against the U.S. 
• 
dollar by more than 18.5 percent since the government 
announced in July 2005 it was transitioning from a hard 
peg to the dollar to a “managed float.” Starting in July 
2008, however, the rate of the RMB’s appreciation has 
slowed, and there are some indications this may be due 
to the Chinese government’s fear that a strong RMB 
will damage China’s exports. China’s RMB remains 
significantly undervalued.
China continues to violate its WTO commitments to 
• 
avoid trade distorting measures. Among the trade-
related situations in China that are counter to those 
commitments are restricted market access for foreign 
financial news services, books, films, and other media; 
weak intellectual property protection; sustained use 
of domestic and export subsidies; lack of transparency 
in regulatory processes; continued emphasis on 
implementing policies that protect and promote 
domestic industries to the disadvantage of foreign 
competition; import barriers and export preferences; and 
limitations on foreign investment or ownership in certain 
sectors of the economy.
Over the past year, China has adopted a battery of 
• 
new laws and policies that may restrict foreign access 
to China’s markets and protect and assist domestic 
producers. These measures include new antimonopoly 
and patent laws, and increased tax rebates to textile 
manufacturers. The full impact of these laws is not yet 

U.S.–China Economic and Security Review Commission Report 215
known, particularly whether they will help or hinder fair 
trade and investment.
In 2008, China emerged as a stronger power within the 
• 
WTO as it took a more assertive role in the Doha Round 
of multilateral trade talks, working with India and 
other less-developed nations to insist on protection for 
subsistence farmers.
Research and Development, Technological Advances in Some 
Key Industries, and Changing Trade Flows with China.
Foreign technology companies, such as U.S. and European 
computer, aerospace, and automotive firms, have invested heavily 
in research and development and production facilities in China, 
sharing or losing technology and other know-how. Chinese man-
ufacturers have benefited from this investment.
The U.S. government has not established any effective 
• 
policies or mechanisms at the federal level to retain 
research and development facilities within its borders.
China’s trade surplus in advanced technology products 
• 
is growing rapidly, while the United States is running 
an ever-larger deficit in technology trade. China also is 
pursuing a strategy of creating an integrated technology 
sector to reduce its dependence on manufacturing inputs.
China seeks to become a global power in aerospace and 
• 
join the United States and Europe in producing large 
passenger aircraft.
China also seeks to join the United States, Germany, and Japan 
as major global automobile producers. So far as China competes 
fairly with other nations, this need not be a concern. But China’s 
penchant for using currency manipulation, industrial subsidies, 
and intellectual property theft to gain an advantage violates in-
ternational norms.
A Case Study of the Local Impact of Trade with China: Seafood 
Imports from China into Louisiana and the U.S. Gulf Coast, and Related 
Safety Issues
Many fish imports from Chinese aquaculture pose a 
• 
health risk because of the unsanitary conditions of 
some Chinese fish farms, including water polluted by 

216 Data and Documents
untreated sewage; fish contaminated by bacteria, viruses, 
and parasites; and fish treated with antibiotics and other 
veterinary medicines that are banned in the United 
States as dangerous to human health.
Since 2001, China has become the world’s dominant 
• 
seafood exporter, due in large part to the government’s 
promotion of industrial fish farming and the application 
of extensive government subsidies to the industry, 
including cheap fuel, outright construction grants, and 
free use of reservoirs and rivers.
China is building an industrialized aquaculture sector 
• 
through the use of extensive subsidies. In addition 
to producing food for domestic consumption, China 
has succeeded in creating a large aquaculture export 
industry as part of the government’s overall industrial 
policy. As a result, China now is the largest volume 
exporter of fish to the United States, shipping more than 
one billion pounds annually, or one in five pounds of 
seafood eaten by Americans.
Import-sensitive seafood product lines in the Gulf of 
• 
Mexico region of the United States, such as shrimp, 
crawfish, and catfish, have suffered significant declines 
as a result of Chinese imports. Predicted long-term 
trends for the Gulf seafood industry are for flat or 
lower sales.
Antidumping penalties imposed by the United States 
• 
on Chinese shrimp and crawfish exports sold at below 
market value accomplished little of their intended effect. 
This appears to be due in part to transshipment by China 
through ports of other Asian nations in order to avoid 
the penalty tariffs and in part to the failure to collect the 
penalty tariffs.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), with 
• 
responsibility for monitoring imports of fish, does 
not yet have the authority or the personnel to inspect 
fish farms or processors in China nor to require and 
enforce regulation of Chinese aquaculture by the 
Chinese government equivalent to U.S. Department of 
Agriculture requirements for foreign meat and poultry 
producers. The European Union, Japan, Canada, and 
even Hong Kong have more rigorous inspection regimes.

U.S.–China Economic and Security Review Commission Report 217
The FDA lacks the authority to seize and destroy seafood 
• 
shipments it has rejected for import into the United 
States. In some cases, the FDA must relinquish the fish 
to the shipper, which has led to a practice known as 
“port shopping” in which importers try to bring seafood 
rejected at one U.S. port through another one. The 
situation is exacerbated by the fact that it takes the FDA, 
on average, a year to notify U.S. ports of the potential for 
a banned shipment to attempt to enter at another port. 
The FDA also lacks the authority to order a mandatory 
recall of seafood or even to block imports of Chinese 
seafood at the request of Chinese officials.
In an effort to forestall epidemic diseases due to 
• 
overcrowding and to compensate for the use of water 
polluted by agricultural fertilizers, industrial wastes, 
and partially treated sewage, Chinese fish farmers, 
acting on unscientific advice, often add chemicals and 
pharmaceuticals to the water of their farms.
The challenge of assuring that Chinese-produced 
• 
seafood meets minimal quality standards is 
exacerbated by the fact that there is little traceability 
or accountability of the products of China’s 4.5 million 
fish farms and one million processors, most of them 
small operations whose products are aggregated by 
wholesalers and processors.
The current form of a memorandum of agreement 
• 
addressing seafood safety and related procedures 
that is being negotiated by the United States and the 
People’s Republic of China governments would allow 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to monitor the 
performance of various Chinese government agencies in 
ensuring the safety of China’s seafood exports but would 
not provide the FDA with the authority to conduct its 
own inspections in China.
The current Country of Origin Label regulations 
• 
pertaining to imported fish are ineffective because of the 
many exemptions the law provides.
U.S.–China Economic and Security Review Commission. 2008, Octo-
ber 27. Annual Report 2008, pp. 2–6, http://www.uscc.gov/annual_
report/2008/EXECUTIVE%20SUMMARY.pdf (accessed March 2009):

218 Data and Documents
Ambassador Carla Hills on the Future 
of U.S. Trade Policy
Ambassador Carla Hills handled trade policy for President George H. W. 
Bush, a Republican. In that role she was actively involved in NAFTA 
and the Uruguay Round/WTO negotiations. In this testimony, she sug-
gests ways to restore the bipartisan consensus that shaped U.S. trade 
policy and supported open markets for much of the post-World War II 
period.
For more than 60 years, under both Democratic and Republi-
can administrations, the United States has led the world in opening 
global markets. The results to date have been spectacular. World 
trade has exploded and standards of living have soared at home and 
abroad.
Economist Dr. Gary Hufbauer in a comprehensive study published 
in 2005 by the Institute for International Economics, now the Peterson 
Institute for International Economics, calculated that the opening of 
markets since World War II has increased our nation’s GDP by roughly 
$1 trillion per year, thus raising the average American household yearly 
income by $9,500. Trade and investment with partners in every region 
of the world have contributed to this very positive result. For example 
Canada and Mexico, our partners in the North American Free Trade 
Agreement, account for 25 percent of the gain; 15 members of the Eu-
rope Union for about 31 percent; Japan and China for about 8 percent 
each. . . .
Erosion of the Bipartisan Consensus 
Supporting Open Trade
Notwithstanding the proven benefits that our trade agreements 
deliver, in recent years we have seen a sharp reversal of the bipartisan 
consensus favoring the free flow of goods, services, capital, and ideas 
that has guided our nation for the past 60 years, and the election debates 
have polarized the trade debate even more.
It is hard to believe that just over a decade ago the United States, 
led by a Democratic administration, was celebrating the passage of the 
North American Free Trade Agreement, pledging with 33 other demo-
cratically elected leaders of the Western Hemisphere to negotiate a 
Free Trade Area of the Americas, and endorsing an agreement reached 
among the 21 economies of the Asia Pacific region to liberalize trade 
throughout that region.

Ambassador Carla Hills on the Future of U.S. Trade Policy 219
Since then we have been drifting toward what Robert Samuelson 
calls “a new mercantilism,” which he defines as “policy intended to 
advance [one country’s] own economic and political interest at other 
countries expense.” Mercantilism is in stark contrast to David Ricardo’s 
theory of comparative advantage that argues that all countries benefit 
if global markets are kept open and each country sells what it produces 
best. That theory has successfully guided our bipartisan trade policy for 
more than six decades.
Yet the polls of today reflect that a majority of Americans of both 
political parties are skeptical about the value of trade agreements.
In order to maintain an open trade policy that is proven to advance 
very significant national interests, we need to understand and respond 
to what is causing the disconnect between its documented benefits and 
the declining support it receives from the American public. I believe 
there are two basic causes. One is lack of information, and the other is 
economic anxiety.
Making the Case for Trade
One factor contributing to the decline in public support for trade 
is that Americans are uninformed about the economic, humanitarian, 
and security benefits that our nation derives from our agreements that 
open foreign markets to trade and investment. Most Americans have not 
thought about what would happen to our economy if we did not have 
access to global markets. With less than 5 percent of the world’s popula-
tion, our nation produces roughly 20 percent of the world’s output, we 
need customers beyond our borders to buy our computers, machine 
tools, aircraft, soybeans, construction equipment, flat glass, and so 
much more.
Few know that international trade has made the average American 
household richer by $9,500 per year or that an agreement in the Doha 
Round that reduced trade barriers by just one-third would increase the 
average American’s annual income by $2,000. They are unaware that the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics has documented that trade has helped Ameri-
cans of modest means lower their costs for what they must spend for 
the necessities of food and clothes from 27 cents of every dollar in 1973 
to less than 17 cents today.
They hear repeatedly that the North American Free Trade Agree-
ment (NAFTA) has cost our nation “millions of jobs.” They do not know 
that studies by the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service docu-
ment that NAFTA has resulted in “little or no impact” on aggregate 
employment in the United States; instead according to careful economic 
analysis by Dr. Hufbauer at the Peterson Institute for International Eco-
nomics the payoff to the average American household from the NAFTA 
is roughly $600.

220 Data and Documents
Most Americans are unaware that jobs connected to international 
activity earn on average 13 to 18 percent more than jobs in the overall 
economy. They hear that imports costs jobs, when in fact studies show 
that there is a high correlation between an increase in imports and job cre-
ation. (See for example Karmin, Doug, The Facts on Trade Deficits and Jobs, 
Progressive Policy Institute, Policy Report.) They do not know that 97 per-
cent of our exporters are small and medium size businesses that account 
for one-third of our sales abroad and need foreign markets to prosper so 
that they can continue to be the backbone of job creation in this country.
They are unaware that the bulk of the foreign investment by U.S. 
multinationals is to secure market access not to secure lower wages. A 
full 80 percent of the overseas production by our manufacturing affili-
ates occurs in high-wage countries. Nor do they know that investments 
by foreign companies in the United States create over 5 million high-
paying jobs.
Very few Americans know that opening of global markets and ex-
panding trade opportunities help to alleviate the poverty that puts weak 
states at risk. They are unaware that wealthy governments, including 
our own, pay their farmers huge subsidies that force more efficient 
farmers in poor countries out of the market or that 80 percent of the 
subsidies we pay go to large agribusinesses not to small family farmers. 
They would be surprised to learn that the United States, Europe, and 
Japan spend over $7 billion each year to subsidize their less competitive 
sugar farmers, which is a sum greater than the total exports of more ef-
ficient sugar producers in very poor countries in Africa.
Political leaders should make it a priority to educate Americans 
about such facts so that our citizens understand why open trade and in-
vestment are among the most effective tools our government has to gen-
erate economic growth, alleviate poverty, and encourage global stability. 
They could encourage universities, think-tanks, business, and the media 
to better inform Americans about what they gain from opening world 
markets. All these groups could do more. Universities could offer more 
classes on international economics and trade, and think-tanks could 
publish more articles on those subjects.
And businesses could do more. It would make a huge difference if 
the CEO of every U.S. business with any international activity would 
tell his/her employees, whether they number five or 5,000, the percent-
age of revenues the company derives from its foreign trade and invest-
ment and the percentage of the employee’s paycheck that can be traced 
to the company’s international activities. Depending on their size, com-
panies could inform their employees about how foreign trade and in-
vestment boost America’s prosperity, alleviate grinding global poverty, 
and strengthen our nation’s security in a variety of ways—-from posting 
relevant facts on wall posters, blackboards, closed-circuit TVs, websites, 
and company newsletters, to enclosing information with the W-2 forms 
and in pay envelops.

Ambassador Carla Hills on the Future of U.S. Trade Policy 221
Reducing Job Anxiety
While educating Americans about the benefits of open trade is 
necessary, it will not be sufficient to turn the political tide. Making the 
case that the opening of markets expands choice, lowers costs, and 
creates opportunity will not persuade the textile worker in South Caro-
lina who has lost his job and blames Chinese imports or the telephone 
operator in Ohio who learns that her job has been shipped to a call cen-
ter in India.
And we will not win support for trade from a laid-off manufactur-
ing worker by pointing out that the United States is still the world’s 
largest producer of manufacturing goods and that technology, not 
trade, has transformed the manufacturing sector over the past decade, 
enabling us to produce 30 percent more goods with 20 percent fewer 
workers. To be credible, we must admit that the gains from trade do 
not make every citizen a winner. To preserve the benefits we gain from 
open global markets, we need to do a better job of helping those who 
are displaced by the rapid changes driven by technology and globaliza-
tion. We can do this—not by closing down trade—but rather by allocating 
some of the very substantial yearly gains we derive from trade to fund 
programs to help those who are adversely affected get back on their 
feet. Polls show that workers’ anxiety is substantially reduced when 
they are told that free trade is accompanied by programs that help dis-
placed workers.
Increasingly, policy analysts are looking at wage insurance, a pro-
gram that supplements the income of a displaced worker who takes an 
entry-level job in a new sector at lower pay. Reducing the income gap 
encourages the worker to stay in the workforce, and importantly secures 
for that worker the most effective training there is, which is training 
connected to an actual job.
The Alternative Trade Adjustment Act (ATAA) adopted by Con-
gress in 2002 was a step in the right direction, but it is quite limited: it 
applies only to manufacturing workers who are 50 years of age or older 
earning less than $50,000, and covers only half the pay gap between the 
old and new job, in an amount not to exceed $10,000 over a two-year 
period. These limits on age, earnings, and insurance coverage coupled 
with the exclusion of service workers who currently constitute eight out 
of ten of those in our workforce, make the program inadequate. There 
are a number of thoughtful studies suggesting constructive changes 
in the program. (See for example Howard F. Rosen, Strengthening 
Trade Assistance, Policy Brief 08–2, Peterson Institute for International 
Economics (2008).
Polls also show that making health care benefits portable and pro-
viding a tax credit to help fund health premiums during the period of 
unemployment help to reduce worker anxiety. Although the Health 
Coverage Tax Credit included in the Trade Act of 2002 was another step 

222 Data and Documents
in the right direction, the Government Accountability Office recently 
found that the tax credit at its current 65 percent level is insufficient to 
offset the high cost of maintaining health insurance during unemploy-
ment. As a result, usage has been extremely low.
It is important to consider the costs of such programs. Signifi-
cantly, the same studies that calculate the U.S. economic gain from 
foreign trade to be $1 trillion per year, calculate that the annual costs of 
funding wage insurance and transitional health care assistance for all 
dislocated workers, regardless of whether trade is the cause of the job 
loss, to be about $12 to $15 billion annually. Our government currently 
spends less than $3 billion on programs to help displaced workers 
adjust. To rebuild public confidence in open markets, we need to do 
more. . .
Growing income inequality is another factor contributing to Ameri-
cans’ anxiety. They are worried that the shift in earnings away from un-
skilled workers in favor of higher skilled workers will enable countries 
with large pools of unskilled workers to destroy the American dream. 
It is true that the pay gap is widening between those who are educated 
and those who are not. As Nobel Prize winning economist Dr. Gary 
Becker has pointed out, the earnings differential of those with a college 
degree over those with a high school diploma has jumped from 30 per-
cent in 1980 to 70 percent today, while the premium over that for gradu-
ate degrees is up from 50 percent to well over 100 percent.
If the United States is to remain super-competitive in the 21st cen-
tury, we will need a workforce that is the best trained and most produc-
tive in the world. That will require us to improve education at the K 
through 12 levels.
We Must Learn from History
As Norman Cousins once said: “History is a vast early warning sys-
tem.” There are some eerie similarities between circumstances that pre-
vailed last century and those that currently exist. Remember that from 
1860 to 1914 we enjoyed a remarkable period of global growth that was 
cut off by World War I. This earlier period was characterized by rela-
tively open trade, limited capital regulation, tremendous technological 
innovation with the introduction of the radio, telephone, and internal 
combustion engine, and a robust global economy where America was 
the largest contributor.
After World War I, we failed to muster the political will to reopen 
the global economy. The decade that followed the end of hostilities saw 
tensions grow among the great powers, an unstable alliance system, and 
the spreading influence of the Bolsheviks, who were hostile to capital-
ism and dedicated to using violence to change the world in accordance 
with their ideology.

Ambassador Carla Hills on the Future of U.S. Trade Policy 223
In the face of a slowing economy, candidate Herbert Hoover 
pledged in the 1928 Presidential campaign to help American farmers by 
raising tariffs on agricultural goods. Domestic anxieties soared with the 
1929 banking crisis, and on June 17, 1930, Congress sent to the President 
the Smoot-Hawley Act, raising tariffs to record highs on over 20,000 
imported goods. President Hoover said he disapproved of the Act, but 
signed it notwithstanding a petition sent to him by 1,008 economists 
urging him to veto. Before the ink dried on his signature, our trading 
partners began the retaliation that helped to bring the global economy 
and our own to a standstill, contributing to the frictions that once again 
brought the world to war.
Today, by comparison, after six decades of stunning growth and 
truly extraordinary technological achievement, tensions are increasing 
as the world seeks to adjust to the rise of China and India. Alliances at 
the Security Council and NATO have weakened. Al Qaeda and other Ji-
hadist groups hostile to Western values seek through violence to change 
the world according to their ideology, our financial institutions are 
again under stress, and high energy costs and the credit squeeze have 
slowed our economy, causing steady lay-offs.
Against this backdrop, elected representatives are claiming that 
open trade is costing our nation millions of jobs, and are pledging to 
vote against trade agreements already negotiated and to pull out of 
others. Restrictive legislation has been introduced in the 110th Congress 
ranging from penalizing outsourcing to curtailing Chinese imports, and 
members have passed a farm bill that has increased subsidies in the face 
of record commodity prices.
Efforts to limit trade as well as inward and outward investment be-
cause of a fear of foreign competition risk repeating the policy mistakes 
that have cost us so dearly in the past. And failure to integrate develop-
ing nations into the global trading system will not only limit our own 
future economic opportunities, but risks alienating large numbers of the 
excluded populations, encouraging them to side with those who would 
do us harm.
Looking forward, our great country must marshal the political 
will to lead the world in lowering global trade barriers to create new 
economic opportunity for all nations, including our own. That will re-
quire our public and private sectors to work hard to rebuild a domestic 
constituency that understands what is at stake and to take the steps nec-
essary to ensure that our nation can and will compete vigorously and 
effectively in the 21st century.
Carla A. Hills, Chair and CEO of Hills & Company, International 
Consultants, U.S. Trade Representative 1989–1993. Statement before 
the U.S. Senate, Committee on Finance concerning “The Future of 
U.S. Trade Policy,” July 29, 2008. http://finance.senate.gov/hearings/
testimony/2008test/072908chtest.pdf (accessed August 2008):

224 Data and Documents
Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky on 
the Future of U.S. Trade Policy
Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky supervised trade policy during Presi-
dent Bill Clinton’s second term. In this testimony, she suggests ways to 
update U.S. policies for the new challenges of globalization. She says the 
“comprehensive round” WTO negotiating process and fast-track trade 
negotiating authority may have outlived their usefulness.
The Trade Agenda
What then should be the aim of trade policy? We can begin with 
first principles:
It should create economic opportunities by opening 
• 
markets and establishing fair rules in the major overseas 
economies and industry sectors which are likely to grow 
fastest in the coming years.
It should support national security in the areas where 
• 
economics and foreign policy intersect—strengthening 
our strategic alliances, smoothing great-power 
relationships where we do not have alliances, and 
promoting the growth and development that ease 
political challenges in troubled regions.
It should create an efficient, innovative domestic 
• 
economy and boost living standards by maintaining 
open U.S. markets, while also providing the public with 
confidence that agreements are enforced and make sure 
competitors play by the rules.
And it should mesh rather than clash with policy in 
• 
other major areas, in particular poverty reduction, 
worker rights, response to climate change, preserving 
free flows of information.
The basic tools of trade policy remains appropriate for these goals. 
Since the Committee considered the first Reciprocal Trade Agreements 
Act in 1934, American presidents of both parties have used a combina-
tion of international trade agreements that lower barriers to trade, in-
vestment, and information flows; enforcement at the WTO and through 
domestic law; tariff preferences for low-income regions; trade remedies; 
and consumer protection policies. This approach has been fundamen-
tally consistent across 12 multilateral trade agreements at the GATT and 

Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky on the Future of U.S. Trade Policy 225
WTO between 1947 and 1998; the “accession” agreements of 130 coun-
tries to the trading system, led in recent years by China, Taiwan, Viet-
nam, Saudi Arabia and Ukraine, and more recently a spate of bilateral 
agreements and preference programs. It has adapted to address changes 
in geopolitics, and to take on new issues as economic structure and tech-
nology change. And now it is time to adapt again.
I would urge the Committee to adopt a trade policy that addresses 
the genuinely major challenges. These can be divided roughly into three 
baskets, two dealing with trade policy issues and the third looking at 
institutional arrangements.
Economic expansion: The economic integration 
• 
and phenomenal growth of Asia; the secondary but 
still major development of the European Union; 
the technology-driven rise of new industries and 
acceleration of global integration;
Security and development: The marginalization of many 
• 
of the world’s large Muslim countries, especially in and 
around the Middle East; the tilt of trade regimes in the 
United States and elsewhere against the poor; and the 
drift towards authoritarian populism in Latin America.
21st-Century Bretton Woods: The need for a renewal 
• 
and modernization of the international institutional 
arrangements launched at the Bretton Woods Conference 
in 1945, with particular focus on the fading of the 
international financial institutions; the absence or 
inadequacy of environmental institutions; and the 
challenge a climate-change agreement will pose in its 
own right and for trade policies in particular.
Economic expansion: Fundamentally, trade policy should turn from 
bilateral agreements with relatively small partners toward the fast-
growing industries and major economies that we can tap for growth. 
Among these industries are services generally, energy and environmen-
tal technologies, infrastructure-linked industries where Asian countries 
in particular are large buyers, and medical and health industries. Our 
goal should be to ensure that American-based service providers and 
manufacturers can supply the goods and services where demand is 
greatest. Major targets should include the EU and Japan, China, India, 
Brazil, ASEAN, the Persian Gulf, and similar large developing-country 
markets.
A quick conclusion of the Doha Round would be a good start 
here, though not at all sufficient. Whether Doha succeeds or fails, we 
should move quickly to a new approach, based on the negotiation of 

226 Data and Documents
plurilateral sectoral agreements among the main economies. These 
would seek broad liberalization of large and rapidly growing indus-
tries: energy and environmental industries perhaps first, also selected 
medical and health industries, based on agreement among the major 
players rather than requiring participation of each one of the WTO’s 
153 members. The model would be the Information Technology Agree-
ment of 1996, and the WTO’s later agreements on financial services and 
basic telecommunications. Here is where we will tap rapidly-growing 
markets, and ensure that America remains a leading player in the indus-
tries that will lead the 2010s and 2020s. These agreements have the fur-
ther advantage of being sectoral in nature, not country-specific, and are 
therefore based upon MFN policies that work with rather than against 
supply chains and other business trends.
Joined with this we should take up two large regional initiatives. 
One would be an effort toward regulatory policy coordination with Eu-
rope and Japan. This should not aim principally at revising current reg-
ulatory policies, but at averting conflicts in new regulatory fields. Our 
experience with regulatory dialogues like the Transatlantic Economic 
Partnership and various US-Japan initiatives shows that dealing with 
current regulations is exceptionally difficult, successful only in very nar-
row fields, and ought to be limited to areas of genuine dispute. A better 
approach would be to seek early consensus on regulation of rapidly 
emerging technologies like nanotechnology, energy and environmental 
technology, IT, and some medical industries. These are fields which are 
likely to grow extremely rapidly in the future, and where regulatory co-
ordination among the developed countries will probably set the pattern 
for the world.
The other would be a restoration of the U.S.’ place in East Asian 
trade and financial arrangements. This is the fastest- growing part of the 
world, and one in which the US is at risk of marginalization. It is natural 
that a revival of India and China will reshape Asian trade patterns, and 
that in some relative sense our share of Asian imports and exports will 
fall. But it is not natural or inevitable that initiatives like the East Asian 
Summits, free trade areas linking India, China, and Japan with South-
east Asia, and financial coordination accelerate while the United States 
remains outside. Should this continue, we will lose opportunities in 
fast-growing markets and in industries crucial to our technological and 
economic leadership.
Here we should begin by passing the Korea-US free trade agree-
ment. We need to significantly raise our level of dialogue, including 
agreements, with ASEAN and with India, which is rising very rapidly 
as a manufacturing-trade partner as well as a services trade partner. 
But two-thirds of our Asian trade is with China and Japan, and most 
immediately, direct engagement with both—not skirmishing and po-
sitioning in smaller markets—needs to be the heart of Asian policy. 
With Japan we should consider a comprehensive agreement similar to 

Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky on the Future of U.S. Trade Policy 227
KORUS [Korea-United States Free Trade Agreement], or at minimum a 
comprehensive services agreement. And we need a well-honed agenda 
with China. The focus of U.S.–China trade talks should initially center 
on the negotiation of a bilateral investment treaty and accelerated WTO 
government procurement agreement, in addition to further trade liber-
alization and compliance. The broader economic agenda should revolve 
around macroeconomic policy and climate change. Strategically, China 
must also come to accept a larger role on a range of issues, in helping 
manage global finance, macroeconomics, and currency policies; contrib-
uting to the effort to slow climate change and develop a more energy-
efficient global economy; managing the trading system; and other issues 
as well.
Security and Development: Here we need to think about reform of 
our own trade regime, to make it less punitive toward the poor at home 
and abroad and more likely to support rather than clash with our goals 
in the Muslim world.
The acceleration of globalization has left much of our trade regime 
antiquated. Light-industry tariffs in particular are exceptionally high 
and obsolete, and in need of unilateral reform. Tariffs on clothes, shoes, 
household linens, luggage, watches, silverware, and a few other light 
goods raise half of our $26 billion in tariff revenue, on about five per-
cent of imports. They protect few if any jobs, but do noticeable damage 
to hopes for poverty reduction in the United States and overseas. And 
they tilt noticeably not only against very poor Asian states, but against 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Turkey, and a number of other large 
majority-Muslim countries central to the campaign against radicalism 
and fundamentalism.
The greater Middle East is probably the trading system’s major 
failure. Its countries, roughly spanning the Maghreb through the Middle 
East per se to Central Asia, participate less than those of any other re-
gion in the global trading system. In contrast to Southeast Asia or Latin 
America, they have been unable to integrate with the world economy; 
instead, their share of trade and investment has rapidly declined, with 
bouts of excessive oil wealth only serving to camouflage a deteriorating 
economic position. Though Egypt and Pakistan have shown some en-
couraging trade and investment growth in the last two years, as a whole 
the region remains dependent on resource trade, and lags far behind 
others in both regional integration and participation in manufacturing 
and services trade. Weak domestic economic policies and education 
join a dysfunctional trade environment to give the greater Middle East 
region the world’s highest unemployment, the lowest level of regional 
trade, and the largest disparities of wealth—and the most serious secu-
rity challenge.
Economic reform and recovery is not a solution per se to the politi-
cal and security issues we confront in this region. But it is a step that can 
help lower the political temperature, reduce the appeal of radicalism, 

228 Data and Documents
and ease the tasks of peacemaking and democratic reform. A major ef-
fort to integrate this region into the world economy, as was done with 
Japan and Germany post-World War II, Southeast Asia in the 1970s and 
1980s, and Central America in the 1980s and 1990s, should be a top pri-
ority for the next administration. Its foundation should be a broad tariff 
exemption that makes the GSP system permanent, and grants 100 per-
cent duty-free treatment based on simple and easy rules of origin to the 
least-developed countries and to other low-income states—Pakistan, Sri 
Lanka, Iraq, Lebanon—with high national-security significance. Ideally, 
this would be part of a larger international effort done in concert with 
Europe, Japan, China and India, designed to exempt all least-developed 
countries from tariffs and quotas, including sub-Sahara Africa, and to 
make a special priority of promoting growth and economic diversifica-
tion in the Muslim Middle East and Muslim South Asia. Accompanying 
this should be a sustained and targeted foreign aid commitment, de-
signed to help improve education and governance in large and strategi-
cally crucial countries such as Pakistan, Afghanistan, Egypt, and others.
Africa policy can be developed in perhaps four ways, building upon 
the work initiated by the African Growth and Opportunity Act. One would 
be to open entirely AGOA’s product eligibility, and a second would be a 
much more ambitious technical assistance program, focused in particular 
on training African farmers to meet American sanitary and phytosanitary 
rules. Together with this, we should continue to broaden our foreign-aid 
programs, in particular for the countries hit hardest by the HIV/AIDS 
pandemic. We should also begin a dialogue, joined by Europe and perhaps 
China, on the use of natural-resource wealth, where the surge in energy 
and metals prices has provided a sudden and very large source of income, 
and consequently an historic opportunity for Africa to reshape its infra-
structure and become fundamentally more competitive than it is today.
Also under the security category, we need a fresh start with Latin 
America. In South America, and not only in Venezuela, we are at great 
risk of a drift toward authoritarian, anti-American populism backed 
by resource money. Meanwhile, American policy has fragmented since 
the abandonment of the FTAA several years ago, with the free-trade 
agreement program increasingly controversial and lacking obvious new 
partners. Looking ahead, I do think we should begin by passing the 
Colombia and Panama agreements. We should, I believe, shift toward a 
policy of dialogue and engagement rather than isolation with Cuba and 
Venezuela. This should include steps toward eliminating the embargo 
on Cuba, which does more to undermine than to enhance our ability to 
influence events there and promote our broader hemispheric interests. 
But in the next years, the centerpiece of policy needs to be an integration 
of our existing trade agreements, and a path toward meshing them with 
Mercosur. Here the key is closer and deeper work with Brazil, which is 
the largest western hemisphere economy.

Ambassador Charlene Barshefsky on the Future of U.S. Trade Policy 229
Procedures: “Comprehensive Rounds” 
and Fast-Track
Finally, procedure. Here I think the frequent error of administra-
tions is to put procedure before substance. Our main goal should be 
to create an agenda that is broadly viewed by Congress as meeting 
America’s economic, security, and other interests. If we do so, we will 
be able to find the policies best suited to negotiating and implementing 
it. Having said this, it is my personal view that two traditional proce-
dural devices—the “comprehensive round” concept used at the WTO, 
and the “fast-track” procedure used to pass agreements here between 
1974 and 2005—have outlived their time and are now more obstacle 
than aid.
Rounds
The “comprehensive round” is essentially a protracted negotiation 
involving all major issues and requiring assent by all WTO members. 
It worked reasonably well for the Kennedy Round in the 1960s and the 
Tokyo Round in the 1970s, spottily for the Uruguay Round in the 1980s 
and 1990s, and is now a hindrance.
The fast-growing future markets are fields like energy and envi-
ronmental goods and services, medical and scientific technologies, and 
so on. Here, the political obstacles to liberalization are in relative terms 
small. In the late 1990s, we were able to quite rapidly conclude very 
large agreements, with little domestic or international controversy, on 
information technology goods, financial services, basic telecommunica-
tions, and duty-free cyberspace. These remain to this day the only mul-
tilateral agreements concluded since 1994. By contrast, a comprehensive 
round such as Doha, even when relatively limited compared to the 
Uruguay Round, covers difficult matters such as agricultural reform, 
movement of natural persons, trade remedies, and other conflicted top-
ics. Making very large potential agreements in fast-growing industries 
depend upon resolving these issues has been a recipe for slowing trade 
policy, and ultimately risks making the WTO irrelevant at least as a ve-
hicle for new policy.
Thus, if the Doha Round is completed—or in the regrettable event 
that it is abandoned—the WTO should drop the comprehensive-round 
concept. Its future is in integrated sectoral agreements in fast-growing 
industries, under WTO auspices, joining manufactured goods and ser-
vices, which can be concluded among “critical masses” of countries that 
cover most of the relevant trade depending on the sector involved. In 
the case of the ITA, this included 11 countries, expanding over time to 
a threshold level for the agreement to become effective. That number of 
countries would depend upon the aggregate percent of trade volume 

230 Data and Documents
covered in the particular sector. Over time, as with the ITA, Financial 
Services and Basic Telecom, the number of participants expands rapidly, 
and each is now a condition of WTO entry.
Fast-Track
At home, I believe the focus on the fast-track procedure as the key 
to trade policy is likewise misplaced. The important thing is to get the 
agenda right—that is, identifying the key economic and strategically 
important countries, and the purpose of an agreement with each—and 
build a congressional consensus for it. If that exists, procedures to pass 
it will follow. If not, procedures will be no substitute. As the recent 
case of Colombia shows, Congress can remove fast-track rules from an 
agreement where consensus has not yet emerged; as the Doha experi-
ence in 2005 proved, the value of fast-track for negotiators can be over-
stated. No country refused to negotiate . . . [in the Doha Round] because 
fast-track is not in force; nor did any country rush to close the Round 
three years ago in Hong Kong and Potsdam when fast-track neared 
expiration.
More recently, trade debates have consistently seen actual agree-
ments get more support than the fast-track or TPA procedure itself. This 
indicates that a measure designed to ease consensus on and passage of 
trade agreements has become more of an obstacle to them—just as the 
Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act of the 1930s ran out its lifetime by the 
late 1960s. So my conclusion is that the procedure has become more of 
an obstacle to successful policy rather than a facilitator. The next admin-
istration and Congress should find a different approach. . . .
Charlene Barshefsky, U.S. Trade Representative (1997–2001). Statement 
before the U.S. Senate, Committee on Finance concerning “The Future 
of U.S. Trade Policy,” July 29, 2008. http://finance.senate.gov/hearings/
testimony/2008test/072908cbtest.pdf (accessed August 2008):
U.S. House of Representatives Joint 
Letter to President Obama
Fifty-four members of the U.S. House of Representatives sent a joint 
letter to President Obama on February 26, 2009, proposing reforms to 
current trade policy. Rep. Mike Michaud (D-Me) drafted the letter. The 
signers included 53 Democrats and one Republican. They represented 
a diversity of urban and rural districts in 24 states. http://www.
michaud.house.gov/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&
id=575&itemid=76 (accessed March 2009):

U.S. House of Representatives Joint Letter to President Obama 231
Dear President Obama:
Your election and inauguration has inspired Americans of every 
region, race, and creed to hope for a better future for their families and 
our nation. We look forward to working with you to deliver on the 
promise of change realized in the recent election.
Among the great challenges our nation faces is creating new trade 
and globalization policies that serve America’s workers, consumers, 
farmers, and firms. We believe that a unique opportunity exists for the 
legislative and executive branches to work in partnership to reform U.S. 
trade policies; to ensure that Americans enjoy the benefits of expanded 
trade; and to remedy the negative consequences on the American econ-
omy, environment, and public health and safety that have resulted from 
aspects of the current trade and globalization model.
We heartily agree with your conclusion that trade policies “are not 
sustainable if they favor the few rather than the many.” Rebalancing 
our trade and globalization policies so that they create and retain good 
jobs in the United States, foster sustainable and equitable development 
worldwide, and provide government with the policy space necessary to 
solve pressing economic, climate, and other challenges is critical to pros-
perity and security at home and around the world.
The dramatic economic downturn—caused in part by the lack of 
prudent global regulation of commerce and massive trade and finan-
cial imbalances—has fueled the relentless demand from the American 
public for trade reform. Across the country, successful candidates in 
2008 ran against the failed trade policy status quo and pledged a new 
approach. In the 2006 and 2008 elections, America elected a total of 
72 new fair-trade reformers to the House and Senate to replace sup-
porters of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the 
Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), the World Trade 
Organization (WTO), and our current China trade policies. The unprec-
edented U.S. election focus on trade and globalization reform reflects 
the public opinion that America’s trade and globalization model needs 
a major overhaul.
It will be challenging to remedy the considerable damage that 
our past trade and globalization policies have wrought. However, we 
are confident that, working together, we can replace the failed policies 
of the past with those that deliver broadly shared benefits. We look 
forward to working with you to seize this exciting opportunity to cre-
ate a more just American trade policy, in the areas outlined below and 
beyond.
Remedying the Failed U.S.–China Trade Relationship: We are eager 
to work with you to resolve the pervasive China currency manipulation 
problem. Our immense trade imbalance with China is gutting the U.S. 
manufacturing base and has serious economic and security implica-
tions. We urge you to remedy a broken U.S.–China trade relationship by 

232 Data and Documents
engaging the Chinese government at the highest level, utilizing firm tar-
gets and deadlines. Further, we urge you to halt negotiations launched 
by former President Bush to establish a new U.S-China Bilateral Invest-
ment Treaty (BIT). While many in Congress have echoed your call for 
an end to existing loopholes that promote offshoring, BITs provide 
new protections to assist U.S. firms’ relocation of investment and jobs 
offshore. A China BIT would also empower Chinese firms, including 
state-owned firms, to purchase even more U.S. assets under preferential 
terms. Moreover, a BIT based on the existing U.S. model would allow 
these Chinese firms to skirt U.S. courts and use foreign tribunals to chal-
lenge U.S. regulation of Chinese firms operating here, extending the 
investor-state system you so rightly criticized during the campaign, and 
which we address in more detail below.
Improving Import Safety: We are also eager to work with you to 
deliver on your campaign pledge to create new import-safety policies to 
ensure that food and goods coming from China and all countries meet 
U.S. safety and inspection requirements as a condition of entering our 
market and homes. Ensuring that Americans are not exposed to serious 
and unnecessary risks from imported goods will require improvements 
to our existing trade agreements, which limit the safety standards and 
inspection rates applied to imports, and to our domestic imported prod-
uct and food safety regimes and their funding.
Renegotiating NAFTA and CAFTA: During the campaign, you de-
scribed needed changes to NAFTA and the NAFTA-model FTAs, such as 
CAFTA. We pledge our support for an inclusive process to review and 
renegotiate these pacts. The issues that you raised regarding the NAFTA 
model are those that have been the basis of congressional opposition to 
NAFTA-style pacts: excessive foreign-investor privileges and private 
enforcement systems; limits on domestic procurement policy and food-
safety protections; and more. Your call to renegotiate NAFTA, CAFTA, 
and other pacts, combined with the longstanding interest by many in 
Congress to improve the U.S. trade-agreement model, provide a long-
overdue opportunity for a much-needed debate about U.S. trade pacts, 
and what policies they must and must not include. We are eager to work 
with you to build consensus around a new model before considering fu-
ture agreements. To this end, we ask you to reverse the Bush administra-
tion’s unilateral September 2008 declaration that the United States will 
join in negotiations for a Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership 
(with Australia, Brunei, Chile, New Zealand, Singapore and Vietnam.)
The Bush Administration Free Trade Agreements (FTAs): We op-
pose the FTAs with Colombia, Panama, and [South] Korea, which rep-
resent the “more-of-the-same” trade-agreement model promoted by the 
previous administration.
Colombia FTA: We would oppose any trade agreement with 
Colombia until we have witnessed a sustained period during which 

U.S. House of Representatives Joint Letter to President Obama 233
the current extreme human-rights violations against unionists, 
 Afro-Colombians, and indigenous people have ceased. More than 460 
unionists have been murdered in Colombia since President Alvaro 
Uribe took office in August 2002, including 49 in 2008 alone. This is a 
twenty-five percent increase from 2007, even as Colombia faced high 
levels of scrutiny related to the FTA. Additionally, there are growing 
revelations about the Uribe Administration’s links to right-wing para-
militaries responsible for assassination of unionists and other civilians. 
It is critical to send a signal to the world that the United States will 
not tolerate the assassination of people seeking to exercise their basic 
human rights.
Panama FTA: We also believe that Panama is not an appropriate 
U.S. FTA partner. A Government Accountability Office study identi-
fied Panama as one of only eight countries—and the only current or 
prospective FTA partner—that was listed on all of the major tax-haven 
watchdog lists. Panama has long been a key target of both the Organiza-
tion for Economic Co-operation and Development and other tax trans-
parency entities for its resistance to international norms in combating 
tax evasion and money laundering. Indeed, Panama is one of few coun-
tries that has refused to sign any tax information exchange treaties. . .
Korea FTA: In addition to its lopsided auto provisions, the Korea 
FTA includes major financial service-sector deregulation and liberaliza-
tion provisions that contradict global and domestic congressional efforts 
to re-regulate this volatile sector.
We are eager to work with you to build support for the new trade 
agreement model we create together and for pacts with countries that 
respect the rule of law and human rights and that provide economic op-
portunities for American workers, farmers, and firms. While the Bush 
FTAs with Colombia, Panama, and Korea contain some improvements 
regarding labor and environmental standards relative to NAFTA, more 
work is needed on these and other provisions. Many of the most seri-
ous problems with the previous trade-agreement model are replicated 
in these FTAs. They must be renegotiated to ensure that these pacts at a 
minimum pass the most conservative “do no further harm” test.
This includes the FTAs’ investment chapters, which afford foreign 
investors with greater rights than those enjoyed by U.S. investors. These 
three pacts’ foreign-investor chapters contain the same provisions in 
CAFTA that led many Democrats to oppose that pact, and that you 
cited as problematic during your campaign. Such provisions promote 
offshoring and subject our domestic environmental, zoning, health, and 
other public-interest policies to challenge by foreign investors in foreign 
tribunals.
The Bush FTAs also still contain language that limits import inspec-
tion and requires the United States to accept imported food that does 
not meet our domestic safety standards. Further, the Bush FTAs contain 

234 Data and Documents
procurement rules which forbid anti-offshoring and many Buy America 
policies and subject to challenge many common federal and state pro-
curement policies regarding renewable-energy, recycled-content, and 
other important standards. These terms must be changed to provide the 
policy space for many of your exciting “Green Economy” proposals, 
which we also support.
The Bush FTAs also contain the NAFTA-style agriculture trade 
rules which have simultaneously undermined U.S. producers’ ability to 
earn a fair price for their crops at home and in the global marketplace. 
Multinational grain-trading and food-processing companies have made 
enormous profits, while farmers on both ends have been hurt. As you 
noted in the campaign, one result of NAFTA-style agricultural rules 
has been the displacement of millions of farmers in developing-country 
FTA partners, with corresponding increases in illegal immigration to the 
United States.
Finally, while the most egregious CAFTA-based terms limiting ac-
cess to affordable medicines have been removed from the Bush FTAs, 
the texts still include NAFTA-style terms that undermine the right to 
affordable medicines that were contained in the WTO’s 2001 Doha Dec-
laration on Access to Medicines.
Transforming the WTO Doha Round Agenda: We are excited to 
work with you to create a new agenda for future global trade talks that 
address the existing problems in current WTO rules. Replacing the 
now-outdated and long-beleaguered “Doha Round” agenda provides 
a unique opportunity to reestablish the United States as a global advo-
cate for economic fairness. In contrast, the Doha Round, if concluded, 
would expand the damage the WTO has already wrought both here and 
abroad. Since establishment of the WTO and NAFTA, the U.S. trade def-
icit jumped exponentially from under $100 billion to over $700 billion—
over 5 percent of national income. At the same time, U.S. real median 
wage growth has flattened, despite impressive productivity gains. 
Meanwhile, the developing countries that have most faithfully adopted 
WTO rules have seen significant declines in their growth rates, and a 
global food crisis has caused growing hunger in many poor nations.
While your goal of adding labor rights to the WTO is not even on 
the Doha Round agenda, many troubling proposals are. Among the con-
cessions demanded of the United States under the current talks are the 
unacceptable weakening of existing U.S. domestic trade laws, and the 
WTO-binding of increased numbers of guaranteed U.S. visas for foreign 
workers seeking employment here. Moreover, a key element of the Doha 
Round agenda is further service-sector deregulation and liberalization—
including financial services and energy. Congress and the world at large 
are struggling to re-regulate financial services and create new energy 
policies to ensure our shared future; it is extremely counterproductive 
to permit imposition of new WTO limits on the domestic policy space 
needed in these critical areas. Indeed, a new WTO negotiating agenda 

President Obama’s Trade Agenda 235
must focus on creating the flexibilities needed to address the critical is-
sues of our time, including policies to counter global climate change.
We are all eager to work with you to create American trade and 
globalization policies that promote our shared goals of economic jus-
tice, poverty alleviation, healthy communities, human rights, and a 
sound environment. Correcting our past trade and globalization policy 
mistakes and moving forward on a new path can help our nation 
face our considerable economic challenges. We look forward to work-
ing with you to create new American trade policies that enjoy broad 
support.
President Obama’s Trade Agenda
In this report to Congress (February 27, 2009), the Obama administra-
tion offered the first detailed discussion of its trade priorities. It reiterates 
support for the WTO system of multilateral rules and dispute settle-
ment, and proposes to build on existing free trade agreements so as to 
make trade policy a major contributor to global economic revival. The 
statement also calls for greater social accountability and political trans-
parency in trade policy, and for using trade policy to advance national 
energy and environmental goals.
President Obama has charted a course for economic recovery that 
will restore growth and promote broad-based prosperity. It will empha-
size improvements in the living standards of American families while 
reorienting our economy to meet today’s challenges—energy, the envi-
ronment, and global competitiveness.
The President’s trade agenda will contribute to achieving these 
objectives. It will reflect our respect for entrepreneurship and market 
competition, our environment, opportunity for all, and the rights of 
workers. We seek to benefit Americans and the world by pursuing trade 
policies that embody these values. We particularly recognize the need 
to pay special attention to how our policies influence the well being 
of people struggling both at home and in the poorest regions of the 
world. Fundamentally, our trade policy needs a keen appreciation of its 
economic consequences for our workers, their families, and their com-
munities, a fact recognized in the progress our Congress is making to 
upgrade our existing adjustment assistance programs for workers.
Eliminating barriers to trade in the face of serious turmoil in our 
economy and financial markets will be a challenge. In enacting the 
Economic Recovery Act, the Congress affirmed our commitment to 
comply with the rules that govern international commerce and reached 
agreement to improve our trade adjustment assistance programs. 
These acts recognize the importance of trade to our economy and our 

236 Data and Documents
responsibilities to those who face the highest hurdles in adjusting to 
changing trade patterns.
The President will use all available tools to address this economic 
crisis including achieving access to new markets for American busi-
nesses large and small. One of these tools is the authority Congress can 
grant the Executive to negotiate trade agreements and bring them to the 
legislature for an up or down vote. We will only ask for renewed trade 
negotiating authority after engaging in extensive consultation with Con-
gress to establish the proper constraints on that authority and after we 
have assessed our priorities and made clear to this body and the Ameri-
can people what we intend to do with it.
Trade is a significant and increasingly important factor in contribut-
ing to the U.S. and global economies. In 2008, U.S. goods and services 
trade (exports plus imports) were equal to 30.8 percent of U.S. Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP), and exports alone accounted for 13.1 percent 
of the U.S. economy. World goods and services trade accounted for an 
estimated 33.5 percent of global GDP in 2008 (about $20.8 trillion dol-
lars). In other words, trade is a large and growing part of our everyday 
commerce, and the jobs produced by these transactions are significant 
and well-paying.
Yet, there are signs that trade, which has grown consistently in 
recent years, is slowing markedly. For the first time since 1982, global 
trade flows are projected to decline in 2009 by 2.1 percent to 2.8 percent. 
U.S. trade in goods and services already dropped by 14 percent between 
the 3rd and 4th quarters of 2008.
Pressing economic conditions require the discipline to respond to 
immediate problems while staying true to our long-term goals. The 
President’s approach will be to promote adherence to the rules-based in-
ternational trading system in order to promote economic stability, while 
introducing new concepts—including increasing transparency and pro-
moting broader participation in the debate—to help revitalize economic 
growth and promote higher living standards at home and abroad. We 
are in the process of developing a plan of action to address the pend-
ing trade agreements in consultation with Congress. We hope to move 
on the Panama Free Trade Agreement (FTA) relatively quickly. And we 
plan to establish benchmarks for progress on the Colombian and South 
Korean FTAs.
The President’s agenda will take account of the changing contours 
of the world economy by underscoring the importance of continuing 
education and the mastery of new skills to ensure we continuously 
strengthen our competitiveness. The President’s agenda will also stress 
the importance of harnessing new technologies to help our citizens 
learn, conduct business, and compete. It recognizes the impact of trans-
portation and energy infrastructure on the location and productivity of 
economic activity. The President’s agenda also recognizes the necessity 

President Obama’s Trade Agenda 237
of pursuing energy and environmental policies that ensure a sustainable 
and prosperous future for our planet. These changes will make environ-
mental dynamics more central to the direction of the world economy.
We also want to expand the universe of those who benefit from 
trade and fully address the costs it creates. For example, trade and com-
mercial policies should help small and medium-sized firms become 
more integrated as effective competitors in the global marketplace. Our 
goal should not only be to help them respond to competitive imports, 
it also should be to create conditions that help them become effective 
exporters.
Open world markets can incentivize people and capital to move 
from less productive to more productive jobs and uses. This process ul-
timately stimulates higher wages and innovation while lowering prices 
for consumers. But trade outcomes do not lift everyone up in the short 
run, and cause painful adjustments for some. It is the responsibility of 
government to ensure that people receive the assistance they need to 
make those adjustments. Our trade policy needs a keener appreciation 
of the consequences of trade for our workers, their families, and their 
communities. The Congress has already made meaningful progress on 
this front by upgrading our existing adjustment assistance programs for 
workers.
To make support for global markets sustainable, our consideration 
of the effects of trade cannot stop at the edge of our borders. Trade is 
more beneficial for the world, and fairer for everyone, if it respects the 
basic rights of workers. Our trade policies should build on the success-
ful examples of labor provisions in some of our existing agreements.
Also, as we tackle the issues of equity, we need to ask how trade 
policy can respond to mounting global environmental challenges. These 
range from climate change to dangerously depleted resources such as 
fisheries. We should aim to make trade a part of the tool kit of solutions 
for addressing international environmental challenges.
The clear implication of these global challenges is that simply 
lowering tariffs and eliminating tariffs will not produce a successful 
trade policy. Managing our nation’s trade policy and engagement in the 
world economy has become an ever more complex challenge. Therefore, 
we must bring the same vigor and innovation to making trade policies 
more transparent and accountable that we are now applying to the pro-
cess of developing and implementing our domestic economic policies.
President Obama’s Policy Priorities
Support a Rules-Based Trading System
This Administration reaffirms America’s commitment to a rules-
based trading system that advances the well being of the citizens of 

238 Data and Documents
the United States and our trading partners. We all win from build-
ing on the foundations for peaceful commercial exchange created 
since 1945.
We shall continue this country’s commitment to the World Trade 
Organization’s (WTO) system of multilateral trading rules and dispute 
settlement. The WTO is both a venue for multilateral liberalization 
through negotiation and a defense against protectionism. We will ag-
gressively defend our rights and benefits under the rules-based trading 
system. This is in the interest of all Americans.
A strong, market-opening agreement for both goods and services 
in the WTO’s Doha Round negotiations would be an important contri-
bution to addressing the global economic crisis, as part of the effort to 
restore trade’s role in leading economic growth and development. The 
Administration is committed to working with our trading partners for 
such an outcome. However, it will be necessary to correct the imbal-
ance in the current negotiations in which the value of what the United 
States would be expected to give is well-known and easily calculable, 
whereas the broad flexibilities available to others leaves unclear the 
value of new opportunities for our workers, farmers, ranchers, and 
businesses.
Advance the Social Accountability 
and Political Transparency of Trade Policy
As the scope of trade policy expands to address nontariff and other 
barriers to trade, we need trade policy to meet strong standards of social 
accountability and political transparency.
Social accountability includes tackling adjustment issues for the 
work force that are created by changes in global trade. In the stimulus, 
the Congress expanded eligibility for Trade Adjustment Assistance 
(TAA) by adjusting the criteria for receiving benefits and broadening the 
sectors of the workforce (e.g., services workers) eligible for TAA.
Social accountability also means working with our trading partners 
to improve the status, conditions, and protections of workers. We need 
to ensure that expanded trade is not at the expense of workers’ welfare 
and that competitiveness is not based on the exploitation of workers. 
Building on the provisions concerning labor in some of our FTAs is a 
way forward in this regard.
In addition to promoting social accountability, U.S. trade policy 
development needs to become more transparent. Many stakeholders 
are frustrated with the lack of consultation involved in the development 
and implementation of trade policy, but we can and should expand 
public participation in advising U.S. trade negotiators. The methods for 
doing so will have to evolve but improved websites for the trade policy 
agencies and more public consultation venues outside the established 
advisory groups are important steps toward this goal.

President Obama’s Trade Agenda 239
Make Trade an Important Policy Tool for 
Achieving Progress on National Energy 
and Environmental Goals
The President has called for new policies to advance a cleaner 
environment, a stronger response to the challenge of climate change, 
and more sustainable natural resources and energy supplies. Trade 
policy makers will be working to examine how trade can advance 
these goals.
We should build on the environmental goods and services negotia-
tions begun in the Doha Round, whether at the WTO or in other nego-
tiating arenas. We should assure that the frameworks for trade policy 
and for tackling global climate complement each other so as to reinforce 
sustainable economic growth. We should ensure that climate policies are 
consistent with our trade obligations, but we also should be creative and 
firm in assuring that trade rules do not block us from tackling this critical 
environmental task.
Make Sure That Trade Agreements Are Addressing 
the Major Unresolved Issues That Are 
Responsible for Trade Frictions
As tariff levels have declined, other impediments to world trade 
have become more significant. American firms increasingly focus on 
“behind the border” measures and other nontariff barriers (NTBs) as 
major impediments to their access to other national markets. We will 
negotiate for improved transparency and due process in our partners’ 
trade practices and policies, including government procurement and 
the crafting of market regulations. We will seek to open markets and 
secure fair treatment for American services, which are an increasingly 
important element of our trading profile. We will protect American 
innovations and creativity by negotiating and enforcing strong and 
effective intellectual property protections. We will pursue advances in 
trade facilitation and consumer product safety, through plurilateral ne-
gotiations if appropriate. And we will work with our trading partners 
to develop and implement policies that address the heightened secu-
rity threats associated with trade in the least trade-impeding manner 
possible.
Build on Existing Free Trade Agreements and Bilateral 
Investment Treaties in a Responsible and 
Transparent Manner
The Bush administration has left a legacy of numerous pending 
agreements and negotiations. We will conduct extensive outreach and 

240 Data and Documents
discourse with the public on whether these agreements appropriately 
advance the interests of the United States and our trading partners. 
In particular, we will promptly, but responsibly, address the issues 
surrounding the Colombia, [South] Korea, and Panama Free Trade 
Agreements. We shall also review the implementation of our FTAs and 
bilateral investment treaties (BITs) to ensure that they advance the pub-
lic interest.
We will also work with Canada and Mexico to identify ways in 
which NAFTA could be improved without having an adverse effect on 
trade. We will do this in a collaborative spirit and emphasize ways in 
which this process can benefit the citizens of all three countries. And, we 
will consider proposals for new bilateral and regional agreements when 
they promise to deliver significant benefits consistent with our national 
economic policies. If new negotiating authority is required, we will seek 
that from Congress.
Uphold Our Commitment to Be a Strong Partner 
to Developing Countries, Especially the 
Poorest Developing Countries
Expanded trade can make an important contribution to boosting 
growth in developing countries and lift their national income levels. 
Economic growth in these countries benefits the American economy 
by expanding markets for American exporters. We shall promote 
trade policies, including technical assistance for capacity building, 
that will help these countries engage successfully with the world 
economy.
Trade preference programs help entrepreneurs in developing 
countries compete effectively in the world trading system. Many of our 
nation’s trade preference programs are coming due for legislative re-
view. We will work with the Congress and public stakeholders on their 
renewal and reform. We will give careful consideration to proposals to 
concentrate benefits more effectively on the poorest countries and those 
that need the margin of preference to compete.
In addition to preferences, building trade capacity in developing 
countries will help them to reap the benefits of the global economy. 
The United States is already the largest bilateral provider of trade 
capacity building assistance, and we will continue to support these 
efforts.
Finally, especially in this time of an international financial crisis, 
credit for trade financing is critical. We will work with international 
financial institutions and export credit facilities to ensure that there is 
adequate trade financing available, especially for small and medium-
sized exporters.

References 241
Conclusion
This agenda addresses the underlying goals and priorities for this 
Administration’s trade policy within the context of a financial crisis 
and rapidly changing economies. A reading of the last Administration’s 
trade policy record that follows in this volume makes clear that there 
are many strategic and programmatic choices that must be made to 
advance the President’s agenda. These choices will be the work of 2009. 
Our agenda is to combine the best elements of previous trade policies, 
especially a rules-based system of global trade, with a determination 
to make trade policy a powerful contributor to the President’s national 
economic agenda for revival of the global economy and renewal of 
growth that benefits all people. If we work together, free and fair trade 
with a proper regard for social and environmental goals and appropri-
ate political accountability will be a powerful contributor to the national 
and global well being.
U.S. Trade Representative. 2009, February 27. “The President’s Trade 
Agenda: Making Trade Work for American Families.” 2009 Trade Policy 
Agenda and 2008 Annual Report of the President of the United States on the 
Trade Agreements Program (accessed February 2009 at http://ustr.gov/ 
assets/Document_Library/Reports_Publications/2009/2009_Trade_ 
Policy_Agenda/asset_upload_file86_15410.pdf):
References
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2008, April. World Economic 
Outlook Database. Accessed August 2008 at http://www.imf.org/
external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/01/weodata/index.aspx.

This page intentionally left blank

243
7
Directory of Organizations
M
any government and private organizations have an interest 
in U.S. trade policy. Some simply collect and publish statis-
tical data— such as the Census Bureau and the Bureau of 
Labor Statistics. Others have policy responsibilities  negotiating 
trade agreements (such as the U.S. Trade  Representative), en-
forcing existing laws (such as the U.S. Department of Commerce’s 
International Trade Administration), or providing support to 
policymakers in the executive branch and Congress. The U.S. 
 International Trade Commission is an independent agency that 
supports policymakers, but also has enforcement responsibili-
ties. The World Trade Organization is an international insti-
tution responsible to its member governments. It collects and 
publishes statistical information obtained from member govern-
ments, serves as a negotiating forum, and has dispute resolution 
responsibilities.
The United States is home to hundreds of nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) that seek to influence trade policy. Some 
represent interest groups with a stake in expanding trade — such 
as transnational and export-oriented industries, service provid-
ers, and farmers. Others represent businesses, or workers, that 
compete with imports — such as labor unions, or import-sensitive 
industries like textiles and steel, or family farmers. Still other 
groups claim to speak for consumers, environmental interests, or 
other parties without official standing in trade negotiations. Some 
of the most influential are ideological groups, such as the Cato 
Institute, which promotes free trade and open markets.
This chapter cannot cover all groups, but it can offer a represen-
tative sample of the most important. In each case, we will discuss 

244 Directory of Organizations
the group and its mission and provide contact information, as well 
as a brief introduction to its major publications.
Alliance for American Manufacturing (AAM)
727 Fifteenth St NW, Suite 700
Washington, D.C. 20005
(202) 393 – 3430
Fax: (202) 628 – 1864
http://www.americanmanufacturing.org/.
The Alliance for American Manufacturing is a nonpartisan part-
nership between some manufacturers and the United Steelwork-
ers to make America the world leader in manufacturing. The 
members include various steel producers and the United Steel-
workers. Scott Paul, a former lobbyist for organized labor, is the 
group’s executive director.
In recent years the group says America has lost more than 
three million manufacturing jobs to imports. This decline has had 
severe consequences for the families of laid-off workers and their 
communities. AAM seeks to promote creative solutions through 
research, public education, advocacy, and communications. On 
trade issues, the group holds China accountable for currency 
manipulation and urges vigorous U.S. administration of trade 
remedy laws. It strongly favors “Buy-American” provisions to 
strengthen the U.S. economy and employment.
Publications: The AAM Web site offers press releases, news-
paper opinion pieces, and testimonies before Congress. There are 
also issue briefs.
American Farm Bureau (AFB)
600 Maryland Avenue, SW, Suite 1000W
Washington, D.C. 20024
(202) 406 – 3600
Fax: (202) 406 – 3602
www.fb.org.
The American Farm Bureau, founded in 1919, is the voice of agri-
culture at the national level. One of its priorities is expanding 
 international markets for the products of U.S. farms and ranches. 
The AFB supports the Doha Round of WTO negotiations to create 
a level playing field for farm exports. It seeks a negotiated out-
come that eliminates export subsidies, brings about substantial 

Directory of Organizations 245
reductions in tariffs, and eliminates nontariff barriers, such as 
quotas.
Publications: The AFB’s Web site highlights press releases, 
speeches, and congressional testimonies, as well as issue briefs. 
Because it is an umbrella organization, representing farmers and 
ranchers with differing interests, there are 24 other associations 
serving the interests of such groups as soybean producers, corn 
growers, meat exporters, rose producers, agricultural retailers, 
and so forth. The farm bureau Web site provides links to these as-
sociations as well as to international agricultural associations.
American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial 
Organizations (AFL-CIO)
815 16th Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20006
(202) 637 – 5000
Fax: (202) 637 – 5323
http://www.aflcio.org.
The AFL-CIO, a federation of 56 national and international labor 
unions, represents 10.5 million workers. The members are a di-
verse group, including actors, airline pilots, fire fighters, govern-
ment workers, longshoremen, grocery workers and retail clerks, 
letter carriers, musicians, nurses, police and writers, as well as 
industrial workers — autoworkers, machinists, electrical workers, 
miners, and steelworkers among other. On trade issues, union 
members sometimes have divergent economic interests. Some 
benefit from trade, others compete with trade, and still others 
have little direct stake.
The AFL-CIO, headed by John J. Sweeney, the former head 
of the Service Employees International Union, takes a strong 
stand against trade expansion and free-trade agreements. While 
the AFL-CIO usually supports Democrats in national elections, 
it battled President Bill Clinton on NAFTA and fast-track trade 
negotiating authority. More recently, organized labor fought the 
Bush administration on bilateral and regional trade agreements, 
such as CAFTA. The AFL-CIO takes the view that all trade agree-
ments should include core human rights and workers’ rights, es-
tablished by the International Labor Organization. In solidarity 
with labor unions in other countries, the AFL-CIO has sought to 
educate workers around the world about their basic rights, and 
it has battled against child labor and sweatshops. It favors “Buy-
American” purchasing provisions in government contracts.

246 Directory of Organizations
Publications: The AFL-CIO Web site contains issue briefs 
on pending matters, congressional testimonies, and speeches of 
union leaders, and various press statements and links to a num-
ber of international labor organizations, global union federations, 
labor support organizations, and research groups. There is con-
siderable material on the unions’ antisweatshop campaign and on 
their efforts to promote workers’ rights around the world.
American Manufacturing Trade Action Coalition (AMTAC)
910 16th Street, NW, Suite 760
Washington, D.C. 20006
(202) 452 – 0866
Fax: (202) 452 – 0739
http://www.amtacdc.org/Pages/Home.aspx.
AMTAC defines its mission as preserving and creating American 
manufacturing jobs through the establishment of trade policy en-
abling domestic manufacturing to stabilize and grow. It blames 
the loss of millions of jobs, and the hollowing out of American 
manufacturing, on flawed trade deals such as NAFTA and the 
WTO-Uruguay Round in which negotiators used access to the 
American market for foreign manufactures as a bargaining chip 
to settle nontrade issues. AMTAC seeks to block trade legislation 
harmful to U.S. manufacturing and investment, and to insist on 
vigorous enforcement of existing U.S. trade laws.
AMTAC’s executive director is August Tantillo, a former tex-
tile trade official in the Reagan administration. The association 
represents textile and apparel firms impacted by rising imports.
Publications: The Web site offers press releases, testimonies, 
issue briefs, information on congressional votes and legislation, 
and statistics supportive of AMTAC’s mission.
Business Roundtable (BR)
1717 Rhodes Island Avenue, N.W., Suite 800
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 872 – 1260
Fax: (202) 466 – 3509
http://www.businessroundtable.org/.
An influential association of corporate chief executive officers 
founded in 1972, the Business Roundtable seeks to analyze public 
policy issues affecting business and the economy, and to present 
government officials with practical proposals for action. Its 150 

Directory of Organizations 247
members actively lobby government and speak out on public pol-
icy issues. BR’s powerful voice reflects the fact that its members 
have $4.5 trillion in annual revenues, employ 10 million work-
ers, and account for nearly half of total research and development 
spending in the United States. Many of the members have sub-
stantial operations outside the United States as well.
On trade issues, BR is pro-free trade and strongly supportive 
of agreements that open and de-regulate markets, promote invest-
ment opportunities, and provide for timely and effective dispute 
settlement. It works with CEO groups in other countries to pro-
mote these objectives, and it coordinates a grassroots pro-trade 
campaign. It strongly opposes “Buy-American” provisions.
Publications: BR releases a steady stream of press statements, 
issue ads, speeches, and testimonies from its members sup-
porting free-trade agreements. It also publishes economic stud-
ies supporting its policy positions: that trade is beneficial to the 
U.S. economy and workers, and that outsourcing of jobs benefits 
U.S. corporations, consumers, and the general economy. BR has 
been a vocal advocate for increased economic ties with China, 
and it coordinates the American Business Coalition for the Doha 
WTO Round.
Business Software Alliance (BSA)
1150 18th Street, NW, Suite 700
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 872 – 5500
Fax: (202)-872 – 5501
http://www.bsa.org/country.aspx?sc_lang=en.
Business Software Alliance is the voice of the world’s commercial 
software industry and its hardware partners. Its members include 
Adobe, Apple, Cisco, Corel, Dell, HP, IBM, McAfee, and Microsoft. 
BSA advocates stronger intellectual property protection, cyber se-
curity, and reduction of trade barriers. One of BSA’s top priorities 
is its campaign against software piracy—individuals and organi-
zations that make unauthorized copies of software. BSA operates 
an international enforcement program intended to identify and 
prosecute cases of unauthorized software use.
Publications: BSA’s Web site provides press releases, news, 
and reports on piracy around the world. Its antipiracy portal pro-
vides extensive information and statistics about BSA’s efforts to 
prosecute software criminals and secure compliance with copy-
right laws.

248 Directory of Organizations
CATO Institute
1000 Massachusetts Ave., NW
Washington, D.C. 20001 – 5403
(202) 842 – 0200
Fax: (202) 842 – 3490
http://www.cato.org.
CATO Institute, founded in 1977, says its mission is to broaden 
public policy debates to include consideration of traditional 
American principles of limited government, individual liberty, 
free markets, and peace. CATO’s guiding philosophy is libertari-
anism or market liberalism. CATO has a budget of over $22 mil-
lion and approximately 95 full-time employees.
On trade policy, CATO is an enthusiastic exponent of free 
trade. Its Center for Trade Policy Studies, directed by Daniel Gris-
wold, touts the blessing of globalization, criticizes adjustment 
assistance for workers, attacks subsidies for industry and farm-
ers, and defends protections for intellectual property. While sup-
portive of intellectual property protections, CATO would rely on 
the rule of law, not trade sanctions, to secure enforcement. CATO 
warns that using sanctions against China would cost U.S. con-
sumers billions of dollars.
Publications: CATO’s trade publications. Available at: http://
www.freetrade.org/index.php. In 2008, CATO introduced an in-
teractive Web feature allowing users to access and analyze the 
trade voting record of any member of Congress over more than 
a decade. The publications, accessible online, include speeches, 
testimonies, issue briefs, topical briefs, and “free trade bulletins.”
Center for Economic Policy and Research (CEPR)
1611 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 400
Washington, D.C. 20009
(202) 293 – 5380
Fax (202)-588 – 1356
http://www.cepr.net/.
Established in 1999, the Center for Economic Policy and Research 
seeks to promote debate on economic and social issues. Its co-
founders, economists Dean Baker and Mark Weisbrot, hold Ph.D.’s 
from the University of Michigan, and they strive to communicate 
to policymakers and the general public through a variety of publi-
cations, including columns and blogs. One of the most popular is 

Directory of Organizations 249
Baker’s “Beat the Press,” accessible on the Web site of the Ameri-
can Prospect. It critiques media coverage of economic issues.
Baker and Weisbrot offer a left-of-center analysis of trade pol-
icy issues, including the Doha negotiations. Baker, for example, is 
critical of so-called free trade agreements, viewing them primarily 
as investment agreements to lure manufacturers abroad to utilize 
low-cost labor in competition with U.S. workers. CEPR strives 
to address a variety economic topics, and its advisory board in-
cludes Robert Solow and Joseph Stiglitz, two Nobel-prize win-
ning economists.
Publications: For literature related to trade and globalization, 
see CEPR’s Web site.
Chamber of Commerce of the United States (COC)
1615 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20062
(202) 659 – 6000
Fax: (202) 463 – 5327
http://www.uschamber.com/.
The U.S. Chamber says it is the world’s largest business federa-
tion, representing three million businesses of all sizes, sectors, 
and regions, as well as 100 American Chambers of Commerce in 
91 countries. COC claims 95 percent of its members come from 
businesses with fewer than 100 employees. Its president, Thomas J. 
Donohue, is one of the most visible and vocal corporate advocates 
for free trade and presidential trade negotiating authority, fre-
quently leading delegations of its members to lobby Congress 
on pending trade issues. While encouraging efforts to knock 
down foreign trade barriers and promote market access abroad, 
the U.S. Chamber also recognizes the importance of maintaining 
U.S. trade remedy laws intended to offset unfair foreign trade 
practices, such as dumping, subsidies, and infringement of in-
tellectual property. As part of its Anti-Counterfeiting and Piracy 
Initiative, COC seeks to build an alliance in countries around the 
world in support of intellectual property protection. The cham-
ber opposes “Buy-American” provisions in economic stimulus 
legislation.
Publications: The Chamber’s Web site contains a variety of 
issue briefs, letters to Congress, speeches and testimonies, and press 
releases on the federation’s efforts to promote its trade agenda.

250 Directory of Organizations
Citizens Trade Campaign (CTC)
1150 17th Street, NW— Suite 300
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202) 778 – 3320
Fax: (202) 293 – 5308
http://www.citizenstrade.org/.
Citizens Trade Campaign, founded in 1992 to oppose NAFTA, 
claims it is a national coalition united in the belief that trade agree-
ments must reflect the interest of the majority of the world’s peo-
ples rather than the agenda of multinational corporations. CTC 
member organizations include consumer, environmental, family, 
faith, and labor groups.
Publications: CTC’s Web site provides a variety of informa-
tion for activists about lobbying government, influencing elec-
tions, and understanding various trade issues. Its perspective is 
generally critical of free-trade policies and the WTO.
Coalition of Service Industries (CSI)
1090 Vermont Avenue, NW— Suite 420
Washington, D.C. 20005
(202) 289 – 7460
Fax: 202 – 775 – 1726
http://www.uscsi.org/.
The Coalition of Service Industries is an advocacy organization 
promoting the reduction of barriers to U.S. service exports and 
domestic policies that enhance the global competitiveness of its 
members. Founded in 1982, CSI initially sought to ensure that 
trade in services became a central part of trade liberalization ini-
tiatives in the Uruguay Round of GATT negotiations. On its Web 
site, CSI boasts that its ability to use service trade negotiations 
to advance the interests of its members is unmatched. Its board 
of directors includes representatives of AIG, Microsoft, UPS, and 
Verizon among others. J. Robert Vastine, a former congressio-
nal staffer and Treasury Department official, has been president 
since 1996.
CSI uses trade agreements to promote transparency, or open-
ness, in government regulatory policies. It envisages greater WTO 
commitment to the issue, because services account for over half of 
GDP in developing countries and over 75 percent in developed 
countries. CSI has also been supportive of the Doha Round and 
bilateral negotiations to improve access for service providers.

Directory of Organizations 251
Publications: The Web site provides analysis of service- related 
trade issues, press releases, and statistics on cross-border service 
trade by major categories and countries.
Consumer Electronics Association (CEA)
1919 S. Eads Street
Arlington, VA 22202
(703) 907 – 7650
Fax: (703) 907 – 7690
http://www.ce.org/.
The Consumer Electronics Association represents 2,200 compa-
nies with sales of $161 billion within the consumer technology 
industry. Many of them import from overseas suppliers, or are 
foreign-owned firms. But CEA members are also large exporters. 
CEA provides market information, a large consumer technology 
trade show, and representation before government organizations. 
CEA’s international department prepares reports for members on 
international trade opportunities. Gary Shapiro, CEA’s President, 
has been a visible proponent of free trade, even appearing on tele-
vision to debate CNN’s Lou Dobbs. CEA advocates multilateral 
and bilateral FTAs. It particularly wants to enforce WTO’s Infor-
mation Technology Agreement, which covers 97 percent of trade 
in information technology products and provides for elimination 
of duties on those products.
Publications: Visitors to the Web site may access press mate-
rials, executive speeches. and some research materials. They can 
also access some of CEA’s publications, including white papers 
in its International Insider Series and Washington Insider Series. 
Members enjoy access to much more.
Economic Policy Institute (EPI)
1333 H Street, NW, Suite 300 East Tower
Washington, D.C. 20005 – 4707
(202) 775 – 8810
Fax: (202) 775 – 0819
http://www.epi.org/.
A think-tank affiliated with organized labor, EPI was founded in 
1986 by Jeff Faux, and a group of liberal economists, to look at eco-
nomic issues through the lenses of the average working person. 
EPI seeks to broaden policy discussions to include the interests of 
low- and middle-income workers. EPI has a small staff of Ph.D. 

252 Directory of Organizations
economists, as well as a network of academic associates, who turn 
out reports and analyses focusing on living standards, globaliza-
tion and trade, and related issues.
Staff economists Robert Scott and Josh Bivens deal regularly 
with issues of trade and globalization. They write about the trade 
deficit, free-trade agreements, and the impact of trade on domes-
tic employment and living standards. They also testify regularly 
before Congress and administrative agencies like the U.S. Interna-
tional Trade Commission.
Publications: The EPI Web site contains much data and eco-
nomic information related to the impact of the global economy on 
working people and their families. It also provides issue guides, 
speeches, testimonies and, publications. EPI’s flagship publication 
is a biennial volume, The State of Working America, that presents a 
wide variety of data relating to living standards of the American 
people.
Emergency Committee for American Trade (ECAT)
900 17th Street, NW, Suite 1150
Washington, D.C. 20006
(202) 659 – 5147
Fax (202) 659 – 1347
http://www.ecattrade.com.
Founded in 1967 to support the results of the Kennedy Round 
of GATT negotiations, ECAT is an organization focused on 
promoting growth through the expansion of trade and inter-
national investments. Its membership includes a number U.S. 
international business enterprises (such as Abbott Laboratories, 
Cargill, Caterpillar, and McGraw Hill) representing all major 
sectors of the American economy. ECAT members have annual 
worldwide sales exceeding $1.5 trillion. They employ more than 
four million people. Calman Cohen, its president and a former 
congressional liaison for USTR and aide to Senator Robert Byrd 
(D-WV), has lobbied on these issues in Washington for more 
than a quarter of a century. In 2009, they helped lead the cor-
porate battle against “Buy-American” provisions in economic 
stimulus legislation.
Publications: ECAT’s Web site provides links to government 
agencies, foreign governments, and international organizations, as 
well as its own trade statistics, press releases, and news articles.

Directory of Organizations 253
European-American Business Council (EABC)
919 18th Street NW #220
Washington, D.C. 20006
(202) 828 – 9104
Fax: (202) 828 – 9106
http://www.eabc.org.
This association bills itself as a trans-Atlantic alliance of large 
European and American businesses. It is a single council repre-
senting two continents and having a single agenda. EABC pro-
motes free and fair trade; market access and national treatment; 
and the legal, balanced protection of intellectual property. It pro-
motes transparent and friction-free regulatory regimes, based on 
government-to-government and business-to-government consul-
tations. EABC also assigns priority to trans-Atlantic cooperation 
in antitrust and competition policies. Its members network with 
senior government officials and company executives, gain access 
to strategic information, and offer leadership to the trans-Atlantic 
economy. EABC’s chief executive officer is Michael Maibach, a 
former lobbyist for Caterpillar and Intel.
Publications: The Web site emphasizes commercial linkages 
between American states and European countries. It offers read-
ers a variety of policy papers, opinion pieces, and press releases.
Focus on the Global South (Focus)
CUSRI, Chulalongkorn University
Wisit Prachuabmoh Building
Bangkok-10330, Thailand
(66) 2 – 2187363 – 65
Fax: 66 – 2-2559976
http://www.focusweb.org/.
This group of anti-WTO activists is based in Bangkok, Thailand, 
and has satellite offices in the Philippines and India. Walden 
Bello, a sociology professor at the University of the Philippines, 
is executive director and the organization’s most visible personal-
ity. Focus mounts a global campaign against the WTO and claims 
success in derailing the WTO ministerial in Cancun, Mexico, in 
2005. It also campaigns against other neo-liberal policies such as 
regional free-trade arrangements in the Americas (FTAA) and 
Southeast Asia (AFTA).

254 Directory of Organizations
Publications: The Web site offers many downloads, including 
annual reports, special reports, occasional papers, books, videos 
and even a Derailers Guide to the WTO. There are links to other 
sites for activist groups around the world.
Friends of the Earth (FOE)
1717 Massachusetts Avenue, Suite 600
Washington, D.C. 20036
(202)-783 – 7400
Fax: (202)-783 – 0444
http://www.foe.org/.
Friends of the Earth, organized in 1969 in San Francisco, now has 
an international network of activist groups in 70 countries to pro-
tect, preserve, and restore the Earth. While much of its attention is 
directed to climate change, clean energy solutions, and pollution 
issues, it engages the globalization of trade and investments. It 
seeks to ensure that investments and consumption are consistent 
with environmental protection and poverty alleviation.
Brent Blackwelder, the president of FOE, is Washington’s lon-
gest serving environmental lobbyist. He was active at the 1999 
WTO summit in Seattle. FOE believes that WTO is not the ap-
propriate body to resolve conflicts between trade rules and envi-
ronmental issues. It, and the Sierra Club, opposed the Colombia 
Free Trade Agreement on the grounds that the pact adhered to a 
flawed NAFTA model encouraging industries to relocate in their 
quest for the least stringent environmental and social standards.
Publications: FOE’s Web site contains a few studies relevant 
to trade issues, including one showing increased numbers of peo-
ple dying from heart and lung disease as a result of increases in 
global shipping traffic.
Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy (IATP)
2105 First Avenue South
Minneapolis MN 55404
(612) 870 – 0453
Fax: (612) 870 – 4846
http://www.iatp.org/.
The Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy was formed in 1987 
with the mission of fostering sustainable rural communities and 
regions in the face of trade-led globalization. Led initially by Mark 
Ritchie, now Minnesota’s Secretary of State, IATP has assumed 

Directory of Organizations 255
a unique role of analyzing international trade agreements and 
assessing the ramifications for local communities in the United 
States and abroad. It has sought to work with overseas partners to 
promote alternatives to agricultural and trade policies that it con-
siders economically, socially, and environmentally destructive. Its 
trade and global governance program seeks to strengthen the voice 
of civil society around the world so as to democratize the mul-
tilateral system of policymaking. IATP has an office in Geneva, 
Switzerland.
Publications: IATP publications are available free online. 
They include Trade Observatory, an electronic journal documenting 
the activities of the WTO, NAFTA, FTAA, and other international 
agreements. It also posts the work of activist groups promoting 
fair trade systems and alternatives to globalization. See http://
www.tradeobservatory.org/.
International Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA)
2101 L Street, NW Suite 1000
Washington, D.C. 20037
(202) 833 – 4198
Fax: 202 – 331 – 3101
http://www.iipa.com.
This private-sector coalition represents U.S. copyright-based in-
dustries in trade negotiations to improve international protection 
of copyrighted materials. Its seven members are trade associa-
tions each with a significant segment of the copyright community. 
They are: Association of American Publishers; Business Software 
Alliance; Entertainment Software Association; Independent Film 
and Television Alliance; Motion Picture Association of America; 
National Music Publishers Association; and Recording Industry 
Association of America.
IIPA claims that losses due to piracy of U.S. copyrighted ma-
terials around the world are estimated at $30 – 35 billion annually. 
IIPA and its member associations track copyright legislation and 
enforcement in 80 countries. They work with representatives of 
U.S. and foreign governments, as well as the private sector, to pro-
mote effective enforcement.
Publications: Along with press releases, readers can find 
statistics and IIPA’s annual Special 301 Report to the U.S. Trade 
Representative on copyright protection and enforcement around 
the world.

256 Directory of Organizations
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
38 cours Albert 1er
75008 Paris, France
33 – 1-49 – 53 – 28 – 28
(Fax) 33 – 1-49 – 53 – 28 – 59
http://www.iccwbo.org/.
The International Chamber of Commerce describes itself as the 
voice of world business championing the global economy as a 
force for economic growth, job creation, and prosperity. Its funda-
mental mission is promoting trade and investment across frontiers 
and helping business to meet the challenges of globalization.
ICC describes itself as the equivalent of a general assembly 
of an intergovernmental organization but with business execu-
tives as representatives. Founded in 1919, the ICC has thousands 
of member companies in 130 countries. Through a network of na-
tional committees, it has direct access to national government all 
over the world through its local affiliates. The U.S affiliate is the 
U.S. Council for International Business (USCIB).
ICC promotes arbitration and dispute settlement mecha-
nisms, open multilateral trade and the market system, and busi-
ness self-regulation. In effect, it seeks to write the rules for global 
business, working through international and national authori-
ties. ICC provides business recommendations to the WTO, and 
its leaders reinforce ICC positions with signed articles and inter-
views in the world press. The ICC has long backed multilateral 
trade liberalization as the best way for all countries to strengthen 
economies and standards of living.
Publications: A variety of its publications, policy statements, 
and recommendations are available online.
Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA)
1600 Eye Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20006
(202) 293 – 1966
Fax: (202) 296 – 7410
http://www.mpaa.org/.
MPAA and its international counterpart, the Motion Picture As-
sociation (MPA), serve as the voices and advocates of the Ameri-
can motion picture industry. A major focus of these associations 
is movie piracy. It comes in several forms: Internet piracy, DVD 

Directory of Organizations 257
copying, illegal sales, and theatrical camcording. MPA estimates 
that its six international members lose $6.1 billion annually in po-
tential revenue to piracy. As a result, MPA directs a comprehensive 
worldwide antipiracy program. During 2007, MPA investigated 
36,200 cases of piracy in the Asia-Pacific region and assisted law 
enforcement agencies in conducting nearly 13,000 raids. The re-
sult was seizure of 31 million illegal optical discs, 40 factory opti-
cal disc production lines, and 6,400 optical disc burners.
Publications: The Web site offers press releases, news stories, 
research and statistics, and considerable information about movie 
piracy.
National Association of Manufacturers (NAM)
1331 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20004 – 1790
(202) 637 – 3000
Fax: (202) 637 – 3182
http://www.nam.org/.
Established in 1895, the NAM has long sought to promote American 
manufacturing exports. In its early years, the NAM also espoused 
protective tariffs on U.S. imports of manufactured goods. The 
contemporary NAM with 11,000 members seeks to promote man-
ufacturing in the United States. Its executive committee includes 
representation of some of this country’s largest manufacturers: 
DuPont, Exxon, Intel, and Xerox. Some of these manufactur-
ers, like Sony and Shell Oil, have foreign ownership, thus it is 
no surprise that NAM espouses policies that encourage foreign 
investment in the United States and U.S. investment abroad. On 
trade policy, it generally favors free and open markets. But many 
of NAM’s smaller members are unable to compete in the United 
States against low-cost Asian imports. NAM favors effective en-
forcement of U.S. trade remedy laws to counteract unfair foreign 
trade practices. These include injurious dumping and subsidies, 
as well as theft of intellectual property. NAM strongly backs the 
WTO’s dispute settlement process, saying that it is the key en-
forcement mechanism for multilateral trade agreements.
John Engler, the former Republican governor of Michigan, 
was a close ally of President George W. Bush. Under his leader-
ship, NAM has often backed Bush-administration policies.
Publication: The NAM Web site provides links to relevant 
trade data, information on the organization’s policy positions, and a 

258 Directory of Organizations
useful communications and media section with press releases, tran-
scripts and speeches, newsletters, and other studies and reports.
National Foreign Trade Council (NFTC)
1625 K Street, NW, Suite 200
Washington, D.C. 20006
(202)-887 – 0278
Fax: (202)-452 – 8160
http://www.nftc.org/.
Founded in 1914 by American companies involved in international 
trade, the National Foreign Trade Council is a national organiza-
tion that advocates the international and public policy priorities of 
its members. Under Bill Reinsch, a veteran Senate staff and former 
under-secretary of Commerce, NFTC has become another power-
ful voice for large transnational firms in the nation’s capital. On its 
board of directors are representatives of the largest firms engaged 
in the trade of goods, service, and finance —including American 
International Group, Boeing, Caterpillar, DHL, DuPont, Exxon, 
Ford, General Motors, Halliburton, Johnson & Johnson, Microsoft, 
Pfizer, and Wal-Mart, among others. The membership includes 
foreign-owned firms who share a common interest in promoting 
an open international trade and investment regime. Its agenda 
includes supporting a successful conclusion to the Doha Round, 
working for congressional approval of FTAs, and taking a leader-
ship role on trade policy developments with the Middle East. 
NFTC has battled against legislative initiatives in some states to 
end pension-fund investments in companies doing business with 
Iran. Its affiliate USA Engage wants the Obama administration to 
remove bans on travel and trade with Cuba.
Publications: NFTC’s Web site contains policy papers, press 
advisories, and a monthly column by Reinsch about develop-
ments in Washington.
National Labor Committee (NLC)
75 Varick Street, Suite 1500
New York, NY 10013
(212)-242 – 3002
Fax: (212)-242 – 3821
http://www.nlcnet.org/.
The National Labor Committee, an affiliate of organized labor, 
seeks to put a human face on the global economy. Its mission is to 

Directory of Organizations 259
defend the rights of workers in the global economy. To that end, 
NLC investigates and exposes sweatshop conditions —low wages, 
unsafe working conditions, child labor —involving U.S. corpora-
tions. With a large database, NLC serves as an information center, 
distributing literature and videos, helping to bring attention to 
worker and human rights issues.
Publications: Its “Newsroom” contains articles, press  releases, 
and other media-related activities focusing on sweatshops. It is 
searchable by companies and countries.
Oxfam America
Policy & Advocacy Office
1100 15th Street, NW, Suite 600
Washington, D.C. 20005
(202) 496 – 1169
Fax: (202)-496 – 1190
http://www.oxfamamerica.org.
The American affiliate of Oxfam (begun in 1942 as the Oxford 
Committee for Famine Relief), is a nonprofit international devel-
opment and relief agency. Since 1995 it has taken a strong advo-
cacy role on trade issues. It opposes pro-trade policies, advanced 
by governments and transnational corporations, and supports fair 
trade policies that Oxfam says will help poor people benefit from 
international trade. It seeks to promote a global citizen movement 
to promote change in world trade. It has a number of trade-related 
campaigns, including those to make trade fair, oppose free-trade 
agreements, and promote workers’ rights.
Publications: Oxfam’s Web site provides access to press re-
leases, campaign materials, discussion papers, and research re-
ports intended to support Oxfam’s campaigns.
Peterson Institute for International Economics (PIIE)
1750 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20036 – 1903
(202) 328 9000
Fax: (202) 659 3225
http://www.iie.com.
Founded by international economist C. Fred Bergsten, a Trea-
sury official in the Carter administration, PIIE is a nonpartisan 
think-tank for study of international economic policy with two-
dozen researchers (most of them economists) studying global 

260 Directory of Organizations
macroeconomic topics, international money and finance, trade 
and related issues. Founded by the German Marshall Fund, and 
supported by major corporate and international donors, PIIE claims 
to have provided the intellectual foundation for many major 
 financial and trade initiatives.
Publications: The Web site provides many issue briefs, tes-
timonies, op-eds, and related publications. Generally, the policy 
recommendations are pro-globalization, and pro-free trade. Elec-
tronic versions of many publications are available online.
Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch (GTW)
215 Pennsylvania Avenue, SE
Washington, D.C. 20003
(202) 546 – 4996
Fax: (202) 588 – 7798
http://www.citizen.org/trade/.
Activist Lori Wallach heads the GTW division of consumer-
 advocate Ralph Nader’s Public Citizen nonprofit organization. 
Wallach first gained attention in 1993 when she helped organize 
grass-roots opposition to NAFTA. Two years later she helped 
form Global Trade Watch with the Nader organization, and in 
1999 Wallach and her network of activists organized massive pro-
tests against the World Trade Organization in Seattle.
GTW has opposed the Bush trade agenda, and worked with 
like-minded elected officials in Congress, such as Sen. Sherrod 
Brown of Ohio, to develop a new trade policy model. Wallach 
wants a more democratic policy, responsive to the concerns of 
everyday consumers, workers, environmentalists, family farm, 
and faith groups. She says that corporate interests have hijacked 
past trade deals to jack up drug prices with patent extensions, to 
 obtain subsidies for offshoring production, and the like.
Publications: The GTW Web site offers a large number of 
publications critical of current trade policies —including bilateral, 
regional, and multilateral agreements, NAFTA and CAFTA. It 
prepares and circulates information on a number of globalization-
 related economic issues — such as offshoring, imported food- product 
safety, immigration, state and local governance, harmonization of 
regulation, and other issues. Web site viewers can access congres-
sional voting records on trade issues, as well as blogs, and other 
pertinent information.

Directory of Organizations 261
Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA)
1025 F Street NW, 10th Floor
Washington D.C. 20004
(202) 775 – 0101
http://www.riaa.com/.
RIAA represents the United States recording industry. Its mem-
bers create, manufacture, and distribute about 90 percent of legiti-
mate sound recordings produced and sold in the United States. 
RIAA seeks to protect its members’ intellectual property rights 
worldwide. The association says that global music piracy causes 
$12.5 billion in economic losses each year, and is accountable for 
71,060 lost jobs in the United States.
Publications: The Web site provides considerable information 
about RIAA’s efforts to address music piracy, especially illegal up-
loads and downloads, and to prosecute criminals who manufac-
ture counterfeit CDs for sale.
Sierra Club
Legislative Office
408 C Street, NE
Washington, D.C., 20002
(202)-547 – 1141
Fax: (202)-547 – 6009
http://www.sierraclub.org/trade/.
America’s oldest (founded in 1892) and largest environmental 
group with 1.3 million members, the Sierra Club takes an interest 
in trade issues. Arguing that trade is integrally linked to traditional 
environmental issues, the Sierra Club says it wants trade that is 
green, clean, and fair. It argues that the current free-trade model 
has the potential to cause devastating climate changes. The Sierra 
Club advocates a fair trade bill of rights, one that supports envi-
ronmental and labor standards.
According to the Sierra Club, the WTO has had a negative 
impact on environmental health and safety. The Sierra Club also 
has been critical of fast-tracking negotiating authority, claiming it 
places Congress in the back seat. It says large corporations have 
used dispute settlement provisions such as Chapter 11 of NAFTA 
to circumvent environmental safety.
Publications: The Web site offers some fact sheets explaining 
how trade agreements affect the environment and impact food, 
public health, and safety.

262 Directory of Organizations
Third World Network (TWN)
131, Jalan Macalister,
10400, Penang, Malaysia
(60) 4 2266728
Fax: (60) 4 2264505
http://www.twnside.org.sg/.
This nonprofit network of organizations and individuals involved 
in development-related issues is based in Penang, Malaysia. It is 
critical of free trade and the WTO. TWN has offices and affiliates 
in a number of third-world countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin 
America. On trade policy issues, one of the most active analysts 
is Martin Khor, a Malaysian economist and journalist, who is 
the director of the Third World Network and has been its leader 
since 1984.
Publications: The TWN Web site offers policy statements, 
speeches, and issue briefs on a wide range of topics, including 
global warming biotechnology, and human rights. The network 
produces features for journalists each week, and a monthly maga-
zine Third World Resurgence, which strives to give a third-world 
perspective to issues.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD)
Palais des Nations
8 – 14, Avenue De la Paix
1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland
(41) 22 917 5809
Fax: (41) 22 917 0051
http://www.unctad.org.
UNCTAD, founded in 1964, says it promotes development-friendly 
integration of developing countries into the world economy. Once 
largely a forum for the world’s poorest countries to voice griev-
ances, UNCTAD in recent years has evolved into a knowledge-
based institution whose work and research helps shape current 
policy debates and thinking about development. As noted in the 
biographical section, UNCTAD’s first secretary-general was Ar-
gentine economist Raul Prebisch, a sharp critic of the multilateral 
trading system. Its current secretary-general is Thailand’s Supa-
chai Panitchpakdi, who served previously as the WTO’s Director-
General. In that role, he emphasized the critical importance of 
multilateral trade negotiations for developing countries.

Directory of Organizations 263
Publications: UNCTAD’s Internet page is an important gate-
way to information and analysis of the global economy. Espe-
cially valuable are its interactive statistical databases, including 
the UNCTAD Handbook of Statistics. Some of its most useful annual 
publications are Review of Maritime Transit, Trade and Environment 
Review, Trade and Development Report, and World Investment Report. 
There are also many discussion papers and staff papers on a great 
variety of topics. This is one of the best Web sites for trade-related 
information.
U.S. Business and Industrial Council Educational Foundation
910 16th Street NW Suite 300
Washington, D.C. 20006
(202)-728 – 1990
Fax: (202)-728 – 1981
http://www.americaneconomicalert.org.
This is the research arm of the U.S. Business and Industry Council, 
a national organization of small and medium-sized business, many 
of them family-owned or privately-held firms. They are rooted in 
their communities, and committed to the nation, unlike many of 
the large corporations with global agendas and mixed loyalties.
USBIC’s affiliate publishes AmericanEconomicAlert, a Web 
site critical of globalization and free trade from a business point 
of view. Urging a more nationalistic approach, it suggests ways 
to reduce the trade deficit, safeguard the U.S. industrial base, and 
protect national sovereignty. Researchers Alan Tonelson and Wil-
liam Hawkins write most of the articles.
Publications: AmericanEconomicAlert offers an annotated 
listing of links to trade associations, unions, think-tanks, and lob-
bying groups, many of them with similar points of view. Tonel-
son’s “Globalization Follies” pokes fun at the statements of 
pro- globalization leaders.
US-China Business Council (USBC)
1818 N Street, NW, Suite 200
Washington, D.C. 20036 – 2470
(202)-429 – 0340
Fax: (202)-775 – 2476
http://www.uschina.org/.
Founded in 1973, the USCBC is an organization of more than 
250 American corporations that conduct business in China. The 

264 Directory of Organizations
membership includes Boeing, Caterpillar, Coca-Cola, Dell, Dow 
Chemical, Exxon, Ford, J&J, Procter & Gamble, Wal-Mart, and 
others. USCBC describes its mission as being to expand the com-
mercial relationship with China for the benefit of its members and 
the U.S. economy. It seeks to expand business opportunities and to 
remove trade barriers. Critics, such as William R. Hawkins of the 
U.S. Business and Industry Council, note that USCBC members 
often appear to be cheerleaders for the business relationship, 
while ignoring national security differences.
Publications: The Web site includes articles, analysis, press 
releases, speeches, congressional testimonies, and links to various 
external sources. There are links to trade statistics and investment 
information, and survey results. A China Briefing Book provides 
information for travelers to China. Members of the organization 
have access to a variety of newsletters and publications. See “Will 
Congress Sell Out the American People at ‘U.S.’ Multinational 
CEOs’ Request?” November 20, 2007. American Economic Alert. 
Accessed February 2008 at http://www.americaneconomicalert.
org/view_art.asp?Prod_ID=2889.
U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee 
on Ways and Means
1102 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, D.C. 20515
(202) 225 – 3625
Fax: (202) 225 – 2610
http://waysandmeans.house.gov/.
The Ways and Means Committee, established in 1795, is the stand-
ing committee with responsibility for all aspects of U.S. govern-
ment financial policy. Since the tariff was once the chief source 
of government revenue, this committee has long been actively 
involved in trade policy. Rep. Charles Rangel (D-NY) chairs the 
committee, and Rep. Sander Levin (D-MI) chairs the subcommit-
tee on trade.
Publications: On its Web site, readers can find publications 
describing committee missions to foreign countries, its compila-
tion of U.S. trade statutes, and hearings on a variety of trade leg-
islation in different sessions of Congress. Witnesses, representing 
trade impacted industries and workers, regularly testify to Ways 
and Means.

Directory of Organizations 265
U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Finance
219 Dirksen Senate Office Building
Washington, D.C. 20510 – 6200
(202) 224 – 4515
Fax: (202) 228 – 0554
http://finance.senate.gov/.
The Committee on Finance, chaired by Senator Max Baucus 
(D-MT), is the Senate counterpart of the House Ways and Means 
Committee. It has jurisdiction over all matters relating to govern-
ment finances. All trade legislation passes through the committee. 
Established in 1815, the committee is one of the most powerful 
and prestigious in the Senate. Over nearly two centuries, the com-
mittee has had a number of legendary chairmen, including Jus-
tin Morrill (R-VT), John Sherman (R-OH), Boies Penrose (R-PA), 
Reed Smoot (R-UT), Walter George (D-GA), Harry Byrd (D-VA), 
Russell Long (D-LA), and Bob Dole (R-KS). Blanche Lincoln 
(D-AR) chairs the subcommittee on international trade and global 
competitiveness.
Publications: The committee’s Web site contains a History 
of the Committee on Finance United States Senate, press releases 
of Chairman Baucus and ranking Republican Charles Grassley 
(R-IA), as well as legislation and hearings.
U.S. Council for International Business (USCIB)
1212 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10036
(212) 354 – 4480
Fax: (212) 575 – 0327
http://www.uscib.org/.
Organized in 1945 to promote multilateral trade liberalization, 
USCIB seeks to communicate American business ideas, values, 
and solutions to U.S. and international decision-makers. USCIB, 
the U.S. affiliate of the International Chamber of Commerce, strives 
to promote world business consensus on critical international is-
sues. Its members are the larger global companies —including 
major law, accounting, and consulting firms — that strongly favor 
a rules-based, transparent multilateral trading system centered on 
the WTO.
Publications: Its free publications include regular newslet-
ters on the WTO, the OECD, the International Organization of 

266 Directory of Organizations
Employers, and other groups. The Web site also contains an as-
sortment of testimonies, editorials, and other policy statements.
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)
1400 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington, D.C. 20250
(202) 720 – 3631
Fax: (202) 720 – 2166
http://www.usda.gov/.
The Department of Agriculture has broad responsibilities for 
food, agriculture, and some natural resources. In the trade area, 
it strives to expand markets for agricultural products abroad, and 
its specialists are involved in all trade negotiations involving agri-
cultural products. It also seeks to reduce sanitary and phytosani-
tary restrictions and other technical barriers to trade placed on 
U.S. exports, as well as foreign barriers to U.S. beef. Responsible 
for safeguarding domestic animal and plant resources from pests 
and disease, as well as protecting the integrity of the supply chain 
for meat, poultry, and egg products, USDA has the authority to 
inspect all food, fibers, and plants entering the United States.
Publications: USDA collects and publishes a large volume 
of trade-related data and information. These include reports on 
agricultural policies and production of other countries from agri-
cultural attaches assigned to U.S. embassies abroad, and on 
agricultural trade negotiations. In this regard, see http://www.
fas.usda.gov/ustrade.asp. For information on food safety and 
inspection, as well as the Codex Alimentarius, a collection of 
 internationally-adopted food standards and codes, see http://
www.fsis.usda.gov/.
U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC)
1401 Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20230
(202) 482 – 2112
Fax: (202) 482 – 2741
http://www.commerce.gov/.
The Department of Commerce is one of the principal Cabinet 
agencies involved with trade issues. Created in 1903 as the De-
partment of Commerce and Labor, DOC had 40,382 employees 
in 2008, and budget outlays of $8.2 billion. It has broad responsi-
bilities for promoting economic growth. In this regard, its trade 

Directory of Organizations 267
functions include opening new markets for U.S. exporters, pro-
tecting intellectual property rights, obtaining compliance with 
trade agreements, and enforcing unfair trade laws. DOC also col-
lects, analyzes, and publishes trade-related statistics. The voice 
of business in the federal government, DOC is one of the most 
important agencies on trade-related issues.
Publications: Along with its statistical publications, described 
in subsequent sections, DOC publishes a great variety of informa-
tion intended to benefit business and manufacturing, promote 
exports, protect intellectual property, forecast the weather, stim-
ulate economic growth, and similar activities. At http://www.
commerce.gov/About_Us/index.htm, readers can find a basic di-
rectory of commerce agencies and portals for information. Read-
ers should remember that Commerce as an executive agency has a 
duty to champion executive-branch policies and its publications—
aside from basic statistics —need to be read in this light.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census
4700 Silver Hill Road, #2049 – 3
Suitland, MD 20746
(301) 763 – 2135
Fax: (301)-457 – 3761
http://www.census.gov/.
The Census Bureau provides current measures of U.S. population, 
economy, and government. Its work began with the first decen-
nial census of 1790. In 1903, the Census Bureau was created in the 
Department of Commerce and Labor; previously a Census Office 
had existed in the Department of Interior. The Census Bureau col-
lects, tabulates, analyzes, and disseminates a great deal of eco-
nomic data. It has conducted periodic censuses of manufactures 
and other sectors since early in the 20th century. In 2008, it had an 
estimated 10,670 employees, making it one of the largest units of 
Commerce.
Publications: The Census Bureau’s online data provides ac-
cess to a great deal of domestic economic data. The site also pro-
vides historical foreign trade data from 1960 to 2005.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic 
Analysis (BEA)
1441 L Street NW, #6006
Washington, D.C. 20230

268 Directory of Organizations
(202) 606 – 9600
Fax: (202) 606 – 5311
http://www.bea.gov/.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis is one of the U.S. government’s 
most important statistical agencies. It collects and analyzes data, 
and conveys statistics to the general public. Its international eco-
nomic statistics, including balance of payments data, provides 
information on trade in goods and services, and investment infor-
mation on the operations of multinational corporations.
Publications: One of the most useful publications is BEA’s 
Survey of Current Business, a monthly presenting the latest  national, 
international, regional, and industrial estimates.
U.S. Department of Commerce, International Trade 
Administration (ITA)
1401 Constitution Avenue NW, #3850
Washington, D.C. 20230
(202) 482 – 2867
Fax: (202) 482 – 4821
http://trade.gov/index.asp
International Trade Administration is the unit of Commerce re-
sponsible for trade and investment promotion. It helps U.S. com-
panies export, and its U.S. Commercial Service has a network 
of officials around the world covering 96 percent of U.S. export 
markets. ITA has a market access and compliance unit working 
with business to see that they receive the benefits of more than 270 
trade agreements. Another unit of ITA enforces unfair trade laws 
relating to dumping and subsidies. ITA also administers a pro-
gram of foreign trade zones, and sector-specific programs relating 
to textiles and steel. ITA has about 2,000 employees.
Publications: Readers accessing the link above can find an enor-
mous wealth of publications —including press  releases, speeches 
and testimonies —by looking at the Web site of ITA units: U.S. 
Commerce Service, Manufacturing and Services, Market Access 
and Compliance, and Import Administration. ITA has a strong ad-
vocacy role, and readers may wish to consult other sources listed 
in this chapter for different perspectives.
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)
1000 Independence Avenue, SW #7B252
Washington, D.C. 20585

Directory of Organizations 269
(202) 586 – 5500
Fax: (202) 586 – 7210
http://www.doe.gov/.
The Department of Energy believes its mission is to advance the 
national, economic, and energy security of the United States to 
promote scientific and technological innovations in support of 
that mission, and to ensure environmental cleanup of the national 
nuclear weapons complex. The Assistant Secretary for Policy and 
International Affairs has primary responsibility for DOE’s inter-
national energy activities, including negotiations and dialogues 
with other governments. Specific initiatives relate to carbon se-
questration, reporting of greenhouse gases, and clean energy. The 
Web site also features useful links to other government agencies, 
foreign governments, and data sources.
Publications: DOE publishes a great variety of data. Of spe-
cial importance is its Annual Energy Review available at http://eia.
doe/gov/emeu/aer/contents.html.
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA)
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
(301) 827 – 2410
Fax: (301) 443 – 3100
http://www.fda.gov/.
FDA is responsible for protecting the public health by assuring the 
safety, efficacy, and security of human and veterinary drugs, bio-
logical products, medical devices, the nation’s food supply, cos-
metics, and products that emit radiation. To achieve these goals, it 
has a budget of over $2 billion and more than 10,000 employees. 
The Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN) ad-
ministers the FDA Foods Program. It regulates $417 billion worth 
of domestic food, $49 billion of imported food, and $62 billion of 
cosmetics. The Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA) conducts in-
spections of domestic and foreign food establishments, and is the 
enforcement arm of the FDA.
Publications: The FDA Web site provides much information 
for consumers and those the agency regulates. A good place to 
begin is with the “newsroom”, where readers can find FDA press 
releases, public notices, speeches and testimonies, annual reports 
and statistics, media transcripts, and information about regulatory 

270 Directory of Organizations
actions. There is information about import refusals, recalls, sei-
zures, and warning letters among other enforcement actions.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Customs and Border 
Protection (CBP)
1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, #4.4A
Washington, D.C. 20229
(202) 344 – 2001
Fax: (202) 344 – 1380
http://www.cbp.gov/.
Customs and Border Protection, a division of the new Depart-
ment of Homeland Security, has responsibility for enforcement of 
many trade laws. It inspects cargoes and assesses duties on appli-
cable imports. It seeks to prevent unsafe products from entering 
the United States, and it combats trade in counterfeit and pirated 
goods. CBP inspects agricultural imports for possible bio or agro-
terrorist contamination. Another priority area is to protect against 
terrorists using shipping containers to smuggle weapons, or other 
items. CBP has developed an automated commercial trade pro-
cessing system connecting CBP and the trade community. Truck-
ers can file electronic cargo manifests, enabling CBP to prescreen 
trucks and shipments to help ensure the safety and health of ar-
riving cargoes.
Publications: The Web site “newsroom” provides fact sheets, 
publications, speeches and statements of CBP officials, and con-
gressional testimonies.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
Postal Square Building
2 Massachusetts Avenue, NE
Washington, D.C. 20212 – 0001
(202) 691 – 7800
Fax: (202) 691 – 7797
http://www.bls.gov/.
BLS is the government’s principal fact-finding agency for labor 
and economic statistics. It collects, processes, analyzes, and distrib-
utes statistical data to the American public and to other govern-
ment organizations. BEA data provide international comparisons 
of hourly compensation costs, productivity and labor costs, as 
well as other data. Most of the comparisons relate to other major 
industrial countries.

Directory of Organizations 271
Publications: Along with a great variety of data available on-
line, BLS publishes the Monthly Labor Review and an important 
Occupational Outlook Handbook.
U.S. Department of State (DOS)
2201 C Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20520
(202) 647 – 5291
Fax: (202) 647 – 6434
http://www.state.gov/.
Until the 1960s, the State Department was the agency  responsible 
for trade policy, and the foreign policy perspective shaped trade 
 agreements. In the contemporary era, State continues to influ-
ence policy directly and indirectly. State participates in all negoti-
ations with foreign governments, and has officers who focus on 
relations with the WTO, intellectual property enforcement,  bilateral 
affairs, as well as agriculture, biotechnology, and textile trade af-
fairs. Professionals with DOS experience frequently move to USTR 
where they supervise negotiations. For example, Robert Zoellick, 
who served President George W. Bush as trade representative, 
served at the State Department during the term of President 
George H. W. Bush. Appointed USTR in 2001, he returned to State 
in 2005 as deputy secretary. At lower levels of the federal bureau-
cracy, there are many similar examples of transfers among agencies, 
ensuring that the foreign affairs perspective is taken into account. 
Publications: The DOS Web site offers a wide variety of information 
for Americans traveling abroad—including passport and visa in-
formation, travel tips and warnings, and currency exchange rates.
U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT)
400 7th Street, SW, #10200
Washington, D.C. 20590 – 0003
(202) 366 – 2222
(202) 366 – 7202
http://www.transportation.gov/.
The Department of Transportation regulates motor carriers, rail-
roads, aviation, pipelines and hazardous materials, and shipping, 
thus having a role in aspects of trade policy that relate to transpor-
tation matters. It has a budget of about $68 billion and more than 
55,000 employees, of which nearly 46,000 work for the Federal 
Aviation Administration.

272 Directory of Organizations
Because increasing foreign trade requires a transportation 
system connecting producers to their consumers, DOT has an im-
portant facilitating role. DOT’s strategy hinges on opening more 
international transportation markets and in improving intermodal 
transportation linkages.
Publications: The Web site provides a great variety of infor-
mation, including testimonies and speeches, press releases, and 
statistics. Users will want to browse the subsites of subordinate 
agencies —like the Federal Aviation Administration, the Maritime 
Administration, and the Federal Highway Administration. For in-
ternational transportation policy issues, see in particular the Office 
of the Assistant Secretary for Aviation and International Affairs 
at http://ostpxweb.dot.gov/aviation/index.htm.
U.S. Department of Treasury
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, #3330
Washington, D.C. 20220
(202) 622 – 1100
Fax: (202) 622 – 0073
http://www.treasury.gov/.
Treasury is one of the oldest and most powerful cabinet-level 
agencies. It has responsibility for managing the government’s 
finances, collecting taxes, disbursing payments, and borrowing 
funds to run the government. It also supports the dollar, works 
with other financial agencies like foreign governments and inter-
national institutions, regulates banks, and enforces finance and 
tax laws. Finally, Treasury promotes international investment 
flows, and it seeks to protect the financial system against terror-
ists and money launderers.
Trade and investment policy issues are handled in the office 
of the Under Secretary for International Affairs. He has responsi-
bility for Treasury’s international capital monitoring system, and 
chairs the Committee on Foreign Investments in the United States 
(CFIUS). This inter-agency group reviews proposed  foreign 
 investment activities for their national security implications. 
Treasury’s office of international trade participates in trade nego-
tiations led by USTR and represents Treasury’s interests, such as 
promoting more open financial markets.
Publications: The department’s online press room provides 
speeches and testimonies, reports on international reserves, in-
vestments, exchange rate policy, occasional staff papers, and 

Directory of Organizations 273
related matters. A quarterly publication, Treasury Bulletin, is avail-
able at http://www.fms.treas.gov/bulletin/index.html and offers 
a summary of key statistics.
U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC)
500 E. Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20436
(202) 205 – 2000
Fax: (202) 205 – 1819
http://www.usitc.gov.
The U.S. International Trade Commission, once called the Tariff 
Commission, is an independent, quasi-judicial agency with six 
commissioners. It has broad authority to investigate all aspects of 
U.S. international trade. In pursuit of this mission, it holds hear-
ings and prepares research reports for the benefit of Congress and 
the executive branch. The commission also does import injury 
investigations in which it determines whether imports of a prod-
uct have injured domestic industries. In antidumping and coun-
tervailing duty investigations, affirmative determinations by the 
commission and the U.S. Department of Commerce, which deter-
mines dumping and subsidy margins, lead to duties offsetting the 
amount of unfairness. In so-called escape clause investigations, 
the commission examines whether imports have been a substan-
tial cause of serious injury to domestic industries, and if so, it rec-
ommends relief to the president.
Publications: On the commission’s Web site readers can find an-
nual reports, press releases, working papers and staff research, and 
reports to Congress and the executive on USITC investigations.
U.S. Trade and Development Agency (USTDA)
1000 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 1600
Arlington, VA 22209
(703) 875 – 4357
Fax: (703) 875 – 4009
http://www.ustda.gov/.
This is a tiny federal aid agency that seeks to promote public-
 private partnerships in order to boost U.S. exports and benefit low 
and middle-income countries. The agency claims it funds vari-
ous forms of technical assistance, training, and business work-
shops supporting the development of modern infrastructure and 
a fair and open trading environment. Many of its projects involve 

274 Directory of Organizations
transportation, or energy and power. USTDA has no trade policy 
responsibilities. In 2007, it had a budget of about $50 million and 
was involved in 205 projects in 65 countries.
Publications: The principal publications available on its Web 
site are annual reports, as well as press releases, speeches, and 
congressional testimonies.
U.S. Trade Representative (USTR)
600 17th Street NW, #209
Washington, D.C. 20508
(202) 395 – 6890
Fax: (202) 395 – 4549
http://www.ustr.gov/.
The Office of the U.S. Trade Representative is a small agency with 
about 200 staff, responsible to the president and Congress, for 
developing and coordinating U.S. international trade, commodi-
ties, and direct investment policy. The U.S. Trade Representative 
is a member of the president’s Cabinet who also reports directly 
to Congress. The USTR oversees trade negotiations and resolves 
disputes. This activity takes place bilaterally (between govern-
ments), regionally (such as with the European Union or NAFTA), 
and multilaterally (through the WTO). Because USTR is a small 
agency, with overseas offices only in Brussels and Geneva, it works 
closely with other trade agencies who help staff the negotiations. 
USTR is most closely involved with State, Treasury, Commerce, 
and Agriculture, as well as the U.S. International Trade Commis-
sion, an independent support agency.
Publications: On USTR’s Web site readers can find the text of 
trade agreements and comments of advisory committees involving 
business sectors, labor, and public-interest groups. There is a vast 
quantity of information, including many advocacy documents—
presenting facts supporting the administration’s trade policy.
World Customs Organization (WCO)
Rule du Marche, 30
B-1210 Brussels
Belgium
(32 – 02) 209 94 42
Fax: (32 – 02) 209 94 96
http://www.wcoomd.org/.
This intergovernmental organization with 172 members fo-
cuses narrowly on Customs matters. It works to develop global 

Directory of Organizations 275
standards, to simplify and harmonize procedures, and to facilitate 
enforcement. WCO is also involved with issues of supply chain 
security, and anticounterfeiting and piracy.
Publications: Many publications are restricted to member 
governments. The public can access news releases, and some gen-
eral publications.
World Economic Forum (WEF)
91 – 93 route de la Capite
CH—1223 Cologny
Geneva, Switzerland
41 – 0-22 – 869 – 1212
Fax: 41 – 0-22 – 786 – 2744
http://www.weforum.org/.
The World Economic Forum says it is the foremost global com-
munity of business, political, intellectual, and other leaders of so-
ciety who are committed to improving the world. In 1971, Klaus 
Schwab, a professor of business administration at the University 
of Geneva, invited European business leaders to Davos, Switzer-
land, for discussion of global issues. In 1987, this group evolved 
into the World Economic Forum with attendees from around the 
world. Each January, the WEF convenes in Davos, a Swiss ski vil-
lage, so that top business and political leaders can discuss issues 
of interest. WEF has a number of continuing initiatives, including 
business efforts to address global hunger, climate change, poverty, 
governance, health, humanitarian relief, and similar issues.
Activist groups consider the WEF a private club for the rich 
and the powerful. As a result, the winter meetings in Davos often 
attract demonstrators eager to gain media attention for their cause.
Publications: The WEF Web site offers information about its 
initiatives and public relations material about its meetings, in-
cluding webcasts, videos, photos, press releases, and transcripts.
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
PO Box 18
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
(41 – 22) 338 9111
Fax: (41 – 22) 733 54 28
http://www.wipo.int/.
The World Intellectual Property Organization is a specialized in-
tergovernmental organization, founded in 1967, responsible for 

276 Directory of Organizations
promoting the protection of intellectual property (IP) throughout 
the world. It provides members with a forum to debate these is-
sues, it administers 24 international treaties and promotes the de-
velopment and harmonization of national IP legislation. It also 
provides services to individual owners and users of IP, including 
multiple filings with a single application.
Publications: The WIPO Web site provides statistics, includ-
ing the annual World Patent Report, an IP digital library, and other 
reports and documents.
World Trade Organization (WTO)
Centre William Rappard
Rue de Lausanne 154
CH-1211 Geneva 21
Switzerland
(41 – 22) 739 51 11
Fax: (41 – 22) 731 42 06
http://www.wto.org/.
The successor to GATT, the WTO is a forum for trade negotiations 
and an international institution responsible for administering 
multilateral agreements. The WTO also has the authority to settle 
trade disputes, review national trade policies, assist developing 
countries in complying with their rights and obligations, and to 
cooperate with other international organizations. The WTO has 
152 members, and a budget in 2007 of about $150 million. It admin-
isters rules negotiated under GATT and extended in the Uruguay 
Round to services, intellectual property, and dispute settlement 
on the principal of nondiscrimination with each country having 
both rights and obligations. The WTO operates by consensus 
with decisions made by the entire membership. Disagreements 
are resolved under the WTO’s dispute settlement procedures. The 
WTO secretariat, based in Geneva, has about 637 staff members. 
It is headed by a director-general who serves a four-year renew-
able term. The current director-general is Pascal Lamy, a talented 
French bureaucrat. Traditionally, the head of GATT/WTO has 
been a European, although there have been two exceptions: Mike 
Moore of New Zealand and Supachai Panitchpakdi of Thailand, 
who shared a single term.
Publications: The WTO Web site provides a great quantity of 
 information for various audiences: students, journalists, NGOs, and 
member governments. Readers can access the legal texts and 

Directory of Organizations 277
 official documents, testimonies and speeches, and information 
about a variety of trade topics —including multilateral nego-
tiations, regional agreements, civil aircraft, competition policy, 
electronic commerce, and the environment. Annual publications 
include the WTO Annual Report, World Trade Report, International 
Trade Statistics, World Tariff Profiles, and Trade Profiles. There is also 
an interactive trade statistics database.

This page intentionally left blank

279
8
Resources
T
 his chapter presents a selective, annotated list of print and 
nonprint sources on U.S. trade policy. The first section offers 
a general list of standard monographs and reference works 
written by historians, economists, political scientists, and legal 
scholars. The next section identifies key government reports from 
national and intergovernmental organizations. Another discusses 
journals and newsletters. Then comes a short section considering 
visual materials (films, DVDs, etc). Finally, we discuss Web sites 
for governmental and nongovernmental organizations. Our list-
ings include departments of foreign governments involved with 
trade matters, as well as private business, labor, and advocacy 
groups. Embassies in the United States often have Web sites dis-
cussing how to do business with their country. Frequently, these 
provide information about trade agreements and trade policy 
initiatives.
Books
Aaronson, Susan Ariel. 2001. Taking Trade to the Streets: The Lost 
History of Public Efforts to Shape Globalization. Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press. 264 pp.
Written in the aftermath of the 1999 protests against the WTO in 
Seattle, business historian Aaronson seeks to explain the opposi-
tion. She notes that the trade critics were not traditional protec-
tionists concerned about specific industries, but political activists 
eager to protect consumers, workers, and the environment through 

280 Resources
national regulation. They used the new technologies of the Inter-
net and cell phones to educate and mobilize their supporters.
Aaronson, Susan Ariel, and Jamie M. Zimmerman. 2008. Trade 
Imbalance: The Struggle to Weigh Human Rights Concerns in Trade 
Policymaking. New York: Cambridge University Press. 337 pp.
The authors explore the relationship between human rights and 
trade, providing readers with an overview of the WTO system 
and research on the subject. In four case studies, they also show 
how South Africa, Brazil, the European Union, and the United 
States try to resolve conflicts between human rights and trade 
 objectives.
Aldcroft, Derek H. 2001. The European Economy 1914 –2000. New 
York: Routledge. 336 pp.
The text covers the major economic changes of the 20th century, 
including the breakdown of the old order in World War I, instabil-
ity in the 1920s, the economic crisis of the 1930s, World War II and 
reconstruction, Western Europe’s sustained expansion, and the 
socialist economies of Eastern Europe. The latest edition of this 
succinct economic history contains new chapters on the economic 
transition of Eastern Europe and on the integration of Europe.
Arup, Christopher. 2000. The New World Trade Organization 
Agreements: Globalizing Law Through Services and Intellectual 
Property. New York: Cambridge University Press. 340 pp.
Arup, an Australian legal scholar, examines the General Agreement 
on Trade in Services (GATS) and the Agreement on Trade-Related 
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The author shows 
how these agreements extend multilateral trade agreements be-
yond the border to include personal services and intellectual 
 endeavors.
Barfield, Claude E. 2001. Free Trade, Sovereignty, Democracy: the 
Future of the World Trade Organization. 253 pp.
This volume focuses on the WTO’s controversial dispute settle-
ment mechanism. After describing the history and evolution of 
the GATT/WTO system, it analyzes the new dispute settlement 
system, examines a variety of criticisms, and offers recommenda-
tions for returning to a less formal and rigid system of resolving 

Books 281
disputes. The author is a resident scholar at the American Enterprise 
Institute, a conservative think-tank supporting free enterprise.
Barton, John H., Judith L. Goldstein, Timothy E. Josling, and 
Richard H. Steinberg. 2006. The Evolution of the Trade Regime: 
Politics, Law, and Economics of the GATT and the WTO. Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 256 pp.
The authors, four California academics with backgrounds in law, 
political science, and economics, wrote this book after the 1999 
 Seattle riots disrupted the WTO ministerial summit. Their endeavor 
became a broader attempt to explain the workings of the WTO 
system, and the challenges it faces. They emphasize how political 
power shaped the trading system. Their account discusses how 
trade rules were extended to cover behind-the-border issues, such 
as health, intellectual property, and industrial standards. It high-
lights the growing involvement of nonstate actors and the prolif-
eration of regional groupings in response. The authors question 
whether the WTO can enjoy legitimacy as a rules-oriented institu-
tion and as a development-oriented institution.
Ben-Atar, Doron S. 2004. Trade Secrets: Intellectual Piracy and 
the Origins of the American Industrial Power. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press. 281 pp.
Ben-Atar, a historian at Fordham University, explores the efforts 
of U.S. leaders to smuggle and acquire European technology from 
the colonial period to the age of Andrew Jackson. Like many de-
veloping countries in the 21st century, the United States once in-
dulged in the theft of intellectual property to promote economic 
development.
Berend, Ivan T. 2006. An Economic History of Twentieth-Century 
Europe: Economic Regimes from Laissez-Faire to Globalization. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 372 pp.
The author, an academic specialist in the economic and social his-
tory of Central and Eastern Europe, surveys recent European eco-
nomic history. He organizes the book around the rise and fall of 
laissez-faire, economic dirigisme, the centrally planned economic 
system, and the mixed economy with its welfare state. The final 
chapter assesses the impact of globalization on Europe.

282 Resources
Bethlehem, Daniel, Donald McRae, Rodney Neufeld, and Isa-
belle Van Damme, eds. 2009. The Oxford Handbook of Interna-
tional Trade Law. New York: Oxford University Press. 801 pp.
This handbook offers a broad context for the WTO’s international 
trade law regime and examines how its fits with, and is modified 
by, existing systems. Chapters explore links with civil society, de-
velopment, the environment, health, human rights, investment, 
and labor among other topics.
Bhagwati, Jagdish. 2008. Termites in the Trading System: How 
Preferential Agreements Undermine Free Trade. New York:  Oxford 
University Press. 160 pp.
Bhagwati, a prominent international economist and former adviser 
to the GATT, criticizes the trend to bilateral and regional FTAs for 
undermining the principle of nondiscrimination at the core of the 
multilateral system. He views these preferential agreements as 
stumbling blocs to the attainment of multilateral free trade.
Bronfenbrenner, Kate. 2007. Global Unions: Challenging Trans-
national Capital through Cross-Border Campaigns. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press. 261 pp.
The author, director of labor education research at Cornell Uni-
versity, has edited a volume directed to the issue of how labor 
unions can confront globalization and the shifting of production 
to developing countries. Individual case studies focus on generat-
ing cross-border union campaigns.
Chanda, Nayan. 2007. Bound Together: How Traders, Preachers, 
Adventurers, and Warriors Shaped Globalization. New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 391 pp.
The author, an economist journalist, links solitary traders and other 
travelers to the globalization process that transformed the world, 
connecting peoples and countries. He pursues the story from Afri-
can beginnings in the Ice Age to contemporary times, concluding 
that the trend toward globalization will be hard to stop.
Chang, Ha-joon. 2002. Kicking Away the Ladder: Development Strat-
egy in Historical Perspective. London, UK: Anthem Press. 187 pp.
In this award-winning historical study, Chang, a Cambridge Uni-
versity development economist, shows that today’s rich countries 

Books 283
developed behind protective barriers, not the free-trade and 
open-market policies they recommend for developing economies. 
He accuses the United Kingdom and the United States of “kicking 
away the ladder” (a phrase employed by 19th century German 
economist Friedrich List) so that others could not follow their 
path to economic success.
Choate, Pat. 2005. Hot Property: The Stealing of Ideas in an Age 
of Globalization. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 352 pp.
Economist Pat Choate depicts the piracy of intellectual property 
as the great economic crime of the 21st century, costing the United 
States $200 billion per year. In addition to the economic losses, 
counterfeit medicines, auto and aircraft parts, and baby formula 
pose threats to health. After exploring the history of intellectual 
property conflicts, Choate focuses on problems of enforcement in 
the global economy.
Choate, Pat. 2008. Dangerous Business: The Risks of Globaliza-
tion for America. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 278 pp.
Choate, an economist and Ross Perot’s vice presidential running 
mate in 1996, warns that the downside of global economic inte-
gration involves growing dependence, risks to national security, 
and social costs. He criticizes corporatism, elitism, and a political 
system driven by money and special interests for the loss of de-
mocracy and sovereignty.
Chorev, Nitsan. 2007. Remaking  U.S. Trade Policy: From Protection-
ism to Globalization. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 242 pp.
Chorev, a Brown University sociologist, focuses on trade liberal-
ization from the 1930s to the present and seeks to explain why 
the U.S. government came to champion free-trade principles. She 
concludes that internationalist business succeeded in transferring 
trade-policy authority from a protectionist-oriented Congress to 
the executive branch and the World Trade Organization.
Cohen, Stephen D., Robert A. Blecker, and Peter D. Whitney. 2003. 
Fundamentals of U.S. Foreign Trade Policy: Economics, Politics, 
Laws, and Issues. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 2nd ed., 360 pp.
An American University professor of international relations and 
two economist colleagues combine to write this text explaining 

284 Resources
trade policy in a political, economic, and legal context. Chapters 
offer a historical survey, a discussion of relevant economic theo-
ries, considerations of executive and legislative decision-making, 
and the WTO. Other chapters discuss trade sanctions, trade rela-
tions with Japan and China, the European Union, regional agree-
ments, and the antiglobalization backlash.
Crump, Larry, and S. Javed Maswood. 2007. Developing Coun-
tries and Global Trade Negotiations. London: Routledge.
The authors, two Australian international business scholars, ana-
lyze the evolution of Doha Round of WTO negotiations, especially 
the controversial issues separating developed and developing 
countries. The book gives attention to agricultural, industrial, in-
tellectual property, and service issues. The authors note that the 
negotiating impasse gave the impetus to bilateral and regional 
trade negotiations.
Cudahy, Brian J. 2006. Box Boats: How Container Ships Changed 
the World. New York: Fordham University Press. 338 pp.
Cudahy, a transportation writer, offers a colorful history of con-
tainer shipping from Malcolm McLean’s experiments in the mid-
1950s to the 21st century. McLean’s line gradually grew into 
container giant Sea-Land, which was acquired by Maersk of 
 Denmark.
Deese, David A. 2008. World Trade Politics: Power, Principles, 
and Leadership. New York: Routledge. 224 pp.
Deese, a political scientist, relies on extensive interviews and a 
careful survey of the secondary literature in writing this stimulat-
ing text on the development of the global trading system since 
World War II. He focuses on the leadership role of the United 
States and European negotiators in establishing the GATT/WTO 
system, and on Brazilian and Indian leadership of developing 
countries during the Doha Round.
Destler, Irving McArthur. 2005. American Trade Politics: System 
under Stress. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Eco-
nomics. 4th ed. 390 pp.
Destler, a professor of public administration at the University of 
Maryland and a long-time fellow at the internationalist  Peterson 

Books 285
Institute for International Economics, has written a well-received 
interpretation of trade-policy making in the post-World War II pe-
riod. The fourth edition stresses the decline of traditional business-
 backed protectionism, the breakdown of bipartisan support for 
trade liberalization, emerging conflicts with China, and a grass-
roots backlash against globalization.
Dobbs, Lou. 2004. Exporting America—Why Corporate Greed is 
Shipping American Jobs Overseas. New York: Warner Business 
Books. 208 pp.
CNN commentator Lou Dobbs rails at big business for outsourc-
ing middle-class American jobs to low-wage countries. Dobbs 
also criticizes free-trade agreements for aiding and abetting the 
outsourcing process.
Dobson, John M. 1976. Two Centuries of Tariffs: The Background 
and Emergence of the U.S. International Trade Commission. 
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. 144 pp.
This brief history of U.S. tariff acts, controversies, and the U.S. 
Tariff Commission (forerunner of the U.S. International Trade 
Commission (USITC)) was commissioned as a bicentennial proj-
ect. The author, a historian at Iowa State University, focuses on the 
commission’s traditional fact-finding investigations, and the un-
successful effort of Progressives to take politics out of tariff mak-
ing. In the 1970s, the USITC would gain enhanced responsibilities 
administering U.S. trade remedy laws, including antidumping 
and countervailing duties, and emerge as a quasi-judicial agency.
Dryden, Steve. 1995. Trade Warriors: USTR and the American Cru-
sade for Free Trade. New York: Oxford University Press. 452 pp.
Dryden, an economic journalist, presents a readable history of the 
Office of the U.S. Trade Representative from the Kennedy to the 
Clinton administrations. It focuses on key trade officials, includ-
ing USTR’s Christian Herter, Robert Strauss, Bill Brock, Clayton 
Yeutter, Carla Hills, Mickey Kantor, and their subordinates. The 
author makes extensive use of interviews and declassified gov-
ernment documents.
Eckes, Alfred E., Jr. 1995. Opening America’s Market: U.S. For-
eign Trade Policy since 1776. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press. 402 pp.

286 Resources
The author, a historian and former U.S. trade official, offers a bold 
critique of U.S. trade policies, placing them in a broad historical 
perspective. Using government documents and archival sources, 
the book shows how U.S. officials opened the domestic market to 
imports while tolerating discrimination against American exports.
Eckes, Alfred E., Jr., ed. 2000. Revisiting U.S. Trade Policy: Deci-
sions in Perspective. Athens: Ohio University Press. 184 pp.
Based on the oral histories of 35 former U.S. trade policymakers, 
this book offers a unique retrospective on some of the most im-
portant events in America’s post-World War II trade liberalization 
program. It emphasizes the Kennedy Round, the Tokyo Round, 
and the development of the GATT/WTO system.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2007. The European Economy since 1945. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 495 pp.
Eichengreen shows how Europe’s postwar economic growth was 
facilitated by governments, trade unions, and employers’ associa-
tions. Students of trade policy will be interested in his chapters 
on Western European integration and the collapse of the Bretton 
Woods structure. There is little on external trade or the multilat-
eral trading system.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2008. Globalizing Capital: A History of the 
International Monetary System. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press. 2nd ed. 276 pp.
The author, a prominent economic historian, has updated his suc-
cinct history of the international monetary system since 1850 to in-
clude the euro, sovereign wealth funds, and contemporary current 
account imbalances. This book is intended for general readers.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2008. Globalizing Capital: A History of the 
International Monetary System. 2nd ed., Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press. 265 pp.
The author, an economic historian at the University of California 
Berkeley, presents a succinct history of the international monetary 
system. The book is written for a general audience. The second 
edition offers a lucid discussion of global imbalances, involving 
China, Europe, and Japan.

Books 287
Findlay, Ronald, and Kevin O’Rourke. 2007. Power and Plenty: 
Trade, War, and the World Economy in the Second Millennium. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 645 pp.
Economists Findlay and O’Rourke offer a comprehensive and inte-
grated economic history of international trade during the last 
 millennium. They emphasize how the expansion of trade de-
pended on war and peace, not the workings of an economic model. 
Written for scholars and graduate students, this important book 
contains much useful data and an excellent bibliography of con-
temporary writings.
Foreman-Peck, James. 1995. A History of the World Economy: In-
ternational Economic Relations Since 1850. New York: Prentice-
Hall. 2nd ed., 404 pp.
A standard history of the world economy, written by a British 
economic historian, this volume’s coverage concludes in the mid-
1980s. A central theme is how trade, ideas, and the migration of 
people bound together nations in a world economy.
Gomory, Ralph, and William Baumol. 2000. Global Trade and Con-
flicting National Interests. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 199 pp. 
This important book, by a mathematician and an economist, 
reexamines classical trade models and shows that in a modern 
environment, free trade is not always mutually beneficial. They 
conclude that limited government intervention to retain strategic 
industries may be in the national interest.
Hira, Ron, and Anil Hira. 2005. Outsourcing America. New York: 
Amacom Books. 236 pp.
This book, written for the layperson, is a biting critique of out-
sourcing. The authors, who teach public policy and political sci ence, 
blame shortsighted U.S. policymakers, free-trade ideologues, and 
big business’s penchant for trading domestic jobs for competitive 
advantage. They are also critical of companies that bring in cheap 
foreign labor on temporary visas.
Hoekman, Bernard M., and Michel M. Kostecki. 2001. The Poli-
tical Economy of the world Trading System: The WTO and  Beyond. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 2nd ed. 570 pp.

288 Resources
Hoekman, an official of the World Bank, and Kostecki, a Swiss 
business economist, have written a comprehensive text on the eco-
nomics, politics, and institutional mechanics of the world trading 
system. Using a political economy approach, they seek to explain 
how the WTO functions and why it has been difficult to expand 
the multilateral system into new areas that impact civil society.
Hugill, Peter J. 1993. World Trade since 1431: Geography, Tech-
nology, and Capitalism. 400 pp.
Hugill, a geographer, shows how the interplay of technology and 
geography has guided the development of the contemporary 
world economy over 550 years. Individual chapters focus on ship-
ping; overland transportation, including canals and railroads, and 
motor vehicles; and aviation.
Irwin, Douglas A. 2002. Free Trade under Fire. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 257 pp.
This book, written by a Dartmouth University economist, strives 
to defend free trade and the WTO against its critics —nationalists, 
protectionists, and social interventionists —in the aftermath of the 
Seattle protests. The author is a passionate proponent of free trade 
and open markets.
James, Harold. 2001. The  End of  Globalization: Lessons from the Great 
Depression. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 260 pp.
The author, a Princeton University economic historian, shows how 
unexpected events involving trade, finance, and immigration led 
to the collapse of economic and financial globalization. He shows 
that flaws in the prosperous and integrated international econ-
omy, and its institutions, contributed to the disintegration.
Kennon, Donald, and Rebecca Rogers. 1989. The Committee on 
Ways and Means, 1789 –1989: A Bicentennial History. Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office. 535 pp. Accessed Janu-
ary 2008 at http://www.gpoaccess.gov/serialset/cdocuments/100–
 244/browse.html.
This official history of the Ways and Means Committee contains 
much useful information about the key committee in the House 
of Representatives responsible for trade and tax legislation. The 
history also contains biographical information about the commit-
tee members.

Books 289
Kindleberger, Charles P. 1986. The World in Depression 1929–
1939. Revised and enlarged ed., Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press. 355 pp.
This classic, by a renowned economic historian, concludes that the 
Great Depression had international origins involving commod-
ity prices and exchange rates. He says the depression endured so 
long because there was no international lender of last resort.
Levinson, Marc. 2006. The Box: How the Shipping Container 
Made the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger. Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 376 pp.
The author, an economic journalist, shows how the container rev-
olution reduced shipping costs and enabled business to supply 
customers from Asian factories.
Lovett, William A., Alfred E. Eckes, Jr., and Richard L. Brink-
man. 2004. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe. 2nd ed. 236 pp.
The authors, a legal scholar, a historian, and an economist, pro-
vide a critical review of recent U.S. trade policy and its theoretical 
underpinnings. They call for a renewed emphasis on balance and 
reciprocity, and on responsible national government policies.
Low, Patrick. 1993. Trading Free: The GATT and U.S. Trade Policy. 
New York: Twentieth-Century Fund Press. 299 pp.
Low, who has served as the WTO’s chief economist, wrote this 
book at a time when the Uruguay Round seemed stalled. Focus-
ing on the period from the early 1980s, Low makes the case for 
multilateralism and for extending the system to cover trade in ser-
vices, rules on investment, and intellectual property. He criticizes 
U.S. trade policymaking, particularly growing congressional in-
volvement, for fostering unilateralism and hidden protectionism.
Lowenfeld, Andreas F. 2006. International Economic Law. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 2nd ed. 1016 pp.
This text, written by a distinguished legal scholar, covers the 
GATT/WTO system, dispute resolution, the rules of international 
trade including subsidies and dumping, environmental issues, 
and competition law. It also contains sections on international 
investment issues, the international monetary system, and eco-
nomic sanctions.

290 Resources
MacArthur, John R. 2000. The Selling of “Free Trade”: NAFTA, 
Washington, and the Subversion of American Democracy. New 
York: Hill & Wang. 388 pp.
The author, a journalist and publisher of Harper’s, interprets the 
passage of NAFTA through the U.S. Congress as an example of 
how business oligarchs dominate trade politics and disregard 
workers’ and environmentalists’ concerns. MacArthur claims that 
NAFTA, sold to the public as a free-trade agreement, subverted 
democracy.
Maddison, Angus. 2007. The World Economy: A Millennial Per-
spective/Historical Statistics (Development Centre Series). Paris: 
OECD. 653 pp.
This volume contains two reference works by Maddison, an 
OECD researcher. The first attempts to quantify the economic 
performance of nations since the year 1000. The second uses his-
torical statistics to explore the divergence in the rate of economic 
advance in different regions of the world. A monumental achieve-
ment, this book is an essential reference for those conducting re-
search on the global economy.
Matsushita, Mitsuo; Thomas J. Schoenbaum, and Petros C. 
 Mavroidis. 2006. The World Trade Organization: Law, Practice, 
and Policy. New York: Oxford University Press. 2nd ed., 1104 pp.
Three legal scholars from Japan, the United States, and Switzer-
land authored this text. It examines the WTO in a topical way, 
covering standard issues such as the most-favored-nation princi-
ple, national treatment, and safeguards, and emerging issues such 
as environmental protection, regional trade agreements, develop-
ing countries, intellectual property, trade and health, competition 
policy, and future challenges.
Michalos, Alex C. 2008. Trade Barriers to the Public Good: Free 
Trade and Environmental Protection. Montreal, Canada: McGill-
Queen’s University Press. 419 pp.
Michalos, a Canadian political scientist, examines the workings 
of NAFTA’s Chapter 11 in the context of a complicated case in-
volved a gasoline fuel additive. He concludes that international 
trade deals such as NAFTA undermine constitutionally-protected 
democratic rights.

Books 291
Narlikar, Amrita. 2005. The World Trade Organization: A Very 
Short Introduction. New York: Oxford University Press. 168 pp.
The author, a Cambridge University lecturer in international rela-
tions, seeks to provide a concise explanation of what the WTO is, 
what it does, and how it operates. Chapters consider the back-
ground and formation of the WTO, its decision-making and man-
date, dispute settlement, the Doha development agenda, and the 
burden of governance.
Northrop, Cynthia Clark, ed. 2005. Encyclopedia of World Trade: 
From Ancient Times to the Present. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe. 4 
vols. 1,212 pp.
This general reference set contains 450 biographical and topical es-
says. There are maps, pictures, bibliographical entries, documents, 
a glossary and a chronology, but little data. These volumes seem 
best suited for high school students and beginning undergradu-
ates, not specialists in post-World War II foreign trade policy.
Odell, John S., ed. 2006. Negotiating Trade: Developing Countries 
in the WTO and the NAFTA. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 310 pp.
Odell, a political scientist, edits this series of essays about the pro-
cess of trade negotiations involving developing countries. With 
the establishment of the WTO in 1995, he notes, developing coun-
tries became increasingly involved in the multilateral process, 
both in trade negotiations and in dispute resolution proceedings. 
Also, with the explosion of bilateral and regional agreements, de-
veloping countries have been more engaged in a variety of re-
gional and sub-regional agreements.
Ostry, Sylvia. 1997. The Post-Cold War Trading System: Who’s on 
First? Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 309 pp.
The author, a former Canadian trade negotiator during the Uru-
guay Round, argues for deepening trade integration and strength-
ening the WTO as the foundation of a rules-based global system.
Prestowitz, Clyde, Jr. 1988. Trading Places: How We Allowed 
Japan to Take the Lead. New York: Basic Books. 365 pp.
Written by a Reagan-administration trade negotiator, this inside 
account seeks to explain why the United States had limited success 

292 Resources
in opening the Japanese market to outside competition. Prestow-
itz shows that U.S. and Japanese negotiators played by different 
rules, and faults American policymakers for not comprehending 
Japan’s approach to industrial policy.
Rivoli, Pietra. 2005. The Travels of a T-Shirt in the Global Econ-
omy. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley. 271 pp.
The economist author follows a bale of cotton from its production 
in Texas to China where it is upgraded and sewn into a T-shirt 
for the American market. Through the T-shirt she tells a compli-
cated story about global sourcing and the factors that shape trade 
policy.
Robert, Maryse. 2000. Negotiating NAFTA: Explaining the Out-
come in Culture, Textiles, Autos, and Pharmaceuticals. Toronto, 
Canada: University of Toronto Press. 298 pp.
This book, a revised doctoral dissertation submitted at the Fletcher 
School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University, gives attention to 
Canada’s performance in the NAFTA negotiations. She focuses on 
four sectors: automobiles, pharmaceuticals, textiles, and cultural 
issues.
Rodrik, Dani. 2007. One Economics Many Recipes: Globaliza-
tion, Institutions, and Economic Growth. Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press. 277 pp.
Rodrik, a prominent international economist, questions the pre-
vailing wisdom that expanding trade is essential to economic 
development. He argues that different nations have used differ-
ent development strategies, and opening the economy to trade 
is seldom a key factor at the onset of the development process. 
He urges the WTO to be more tolerant of diverse institutions and 
standards in the development process, and allow developing na-
tions to suspend their obligations.
Schwab, Susan C. 1994. Trade-Offs: Negotiating the Omnibus 
Trade and Competitiveness Act. Boston, MA: Harvard Business 
School Press. 275 pp.
This insider account of the 1988 Omnibus Trade Act discusses the 
political, economic, and institutional forces that influenced the 
legislation. The author notes that this bill was drafted primarily in 

Books 293
Congress and opened the way for a policy environment more vul-
nerable to interest-group manipulation. Schwab, an aide to then 
Sen. Jack Danforth (R-Mo.), would become U.S. Trade Representa-
tive under President George W. Bush.
Tonelson, Alan. 2000. The Race to the Bottom: Why a Worldwide 
Worker Surplus and Uncontrolled Free Trade Are Sinking Ameri-
can Living Standards. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 222 pp.
The author, a research fellow with the U.S. Business and Industry 
Council, argues that cheap-labor countries, such as China, with 
weak safety standards, low taxes, and barriers to unions, are the 
driving force behind job losses in U.S. manufacturing. In an open 
global economy, expensive labor in the United States and Western 
Europe is in a race to the bottom with competition from the global 
workforce.
Toye, John, and Richard Toye. 2004. The UN and Global Politi-
cal Economy: Trade, Finance and Development (United Nations 
Intellectual History Project Series). Bloomington: Indiana Uni-
versity Press. 411 pp.
The Toyes, father and son, have written an intellectual history 
of UN economic development thought. They show that be-
tween 1945 and 1964 a small group of economists within the UN 
 Secretariat — among them Hans Singer and Raul Prebisch— 
challenged the reigning free-trade orthodoxy and offered neo-
protectionist alternatives.
Trebilcock, Michael J., and Robert Howse. 2005. The Regulation 
of International Trade. New York: Routledge. 3rd ed., 784 pp.
The authors, two legal scholars with ties to the University of To-
ronto, examine the institutions and rules that govern international 
trade, giving attention to the WTO, NAFTA, and the European 
Union. Their lengthy text, best suited for law students, includes 
chapters on dispute settlement, regional trading arrangements, 
trade policy and domestic health and safety regulation, and en-
vironmental issues.
Van den Bossche, Peter. 2008. The Law and Policy of the World 
Trade Organization: Texts, Cases and Materials. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press. 2d ed., 917 pp.

294 Resources
This excellent textbook provides a clear introduction to the WTO, 
its rules and procedures, and institutional structure. The author, 
a Dutch legal scholar, served as counselor to the Appellate Body 
of the WTO.
Wallach, Lori, and Patrick Woodall. 2004. WTO: Whose Trade 
Organization? New York: New Press. 404 pp.
Wallach, the lead author, is a fearless critic of corporate-led glo-
balization. In this book, she and her colleague portray the WTO as 
a Trojan Horse institution with a nontrade agenda harmful to do-
mestic sovereignty, democratic governance, and public health and 
safety. According to the authors, the WTO operates in secrecy and 
in its decision-making commerce takes precedence to the environ-
ment, food safety, public health, democracy, equity and access to 
essential services.
Weinstein, Michael, ed. 2005. Globalization: What’s New? New 
York: Columbia University Press. 288 pp.
This fine collection of essays intended for lay readers surveys 
what’s new in international economic relationships —including 
trade, capital flows, and immigration. The contributors include 
economists Jeffrey Frankel, William Easterly, Dani Rodrik, Jeffrey 
Sachs, and Joseph Stiglitz among others.
Winham, Gilbert R. 1986. International Trade and the Tokyo Round 
Negotiation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 449 pp.
The author, a Canadian political scientist, offers a detailed ac-
count of the Tokyo Round GATT negotiations. His research rests 
on extensive interviews with participants, as well as secondary 
accounts and government documents.
Zeiler, Thomas W. 1992. American Trade & Power in the 1960s. 
New York: Columbia University Press. 371 pp.
This account, by a diplomatic historian, examines U.S. trade policy 
under Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson. Zeiler 
concludes European integration and Gaullist obstructionism 
thwarted the Kennedy-Johnson leadership and presaged  America’s 
economic decline.
Zeiler, Thomas W. 1999. Free Trade Free World: The Advent of 
GATT. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 267 pp.

Government Documents 295
Based on extensive archival research in several countries, Zeiler’s 
history of the beginnings of the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade (GATT) emphasizes how America’s free-trade ideology and 
its Cold-War security concerns shaped the new international insti-
tution during the Truman administration.
Government Documents
U.S. Government
U.S. Congress. House of Representatives. Committee on Ways and 
Means. 2005. Overview and Compilation of U.S. Trade Statutes. 
109th Congress, 1st session, WMCP 109 – 4 and 109 – 5. 1523 pp.
A valuable overview and compilation in two volumes intended for 
use by the Committee Members and interested parties in the in-
ternational trade community. Available at: http://waysandmeans. 
house.gov/Documents.asp?section=9.
U.S. Congress. Senate. Committee on Finance. 1981. History of the 
Committee on Finance. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing 
Office. 180 pp. Available at: http://finance.senate.gov/history.pdf.
U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of Economic Analysis 
(BEA). Monthly. Survey of Current Business.
This monthly survey and analysis of BEA data presents the latest 
national, international, regional, and industry estimates. Individ-
ual issues contain tables and charts.
U.S. Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 
Monthly Labor Review. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office.
From 1915 to 2007, this journal of analysis and research from BLS 
was published in print form. It covers the labor force, the econ-
omy, employment, inflation, productivity, occupational injuries, 
wages, prices, and other information. The authors include BLS 
staff as well as private sector professionals. Available at: http://
www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/.
U.S. International Trade Commission. Annual since 1949. The 
Year in Trade: Operations of the Trade Agreements Program. Wash-
ington, D.C.: USITC.

296 Resources
More than 60 reports extend back to the end of World War II. 
They seek to summarize major international trade-related activi-
ties and include information on U.S. trade laws, preferential pro-
grams, participation in GATT/WTO, and free-trade agreements. 
The ITC intends its annual reports to be the objective reports of an 
independent agency. Available at: http://www.usitc.gov/publi
cations/index.htm.
U.S. International Trade Commission. Annual since 1993. Re-
cent Trends in U.S. Services Trade. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Inter-
national Trade Commission.
These reports cover accounting and management consulting ser-
vices, advertising, air transportation, architectural, engineering, 
and construction, audiovisual, banking and securities, computer 
and data processing, education, energy, environmental services, 
health care, insurance, intellectual property rights, legal, mari-
time, retail, telecommunications, travel and tourism, and whole-
sale. The annual reports also discuss services trade negotiations in 
the WTO and provide substantial data primarily from the Depart-
ment of Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analysis. Available at: 
http://www.usitc.gov/publications/index.htm.
U.S. International Trade Commission. Annual since 1994. Shifts 
in U.S. Merchandise Trade.
The Commission report covers 10 merchandise sectors: agricul-
tural products, forest products, chemicals, energy, textiles, apparel 
and footwear, minerals and metals, machinery, transportation 
equipment, electronic products, and miscellaneous manufactures. 
Available at: http://www.usitc.gov/publications/index.htm.
U.S. International Trade Commission. Annual since 1917. Year in 
Review. (USITC annual report). Available at: http://www.usitc.
gov/publications/index.htm.
U.S. Trade Representative. Annual. National Trade Estimate Re-
port on Foreign Trade Barriers. Washington, D.C.: USTR.
The Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 requires 
that USTR prepare an annual report documenting foreign trade 
and investment barriers. The report also includes a discussion 
of U.S. efforts to eliminate those barriers. Organized alphabeti-
cally by country, these reports may extend more than 700 pages. 

Government Documents 297
Available  at: http://www.ustr.gov/Document_Library/Reports_
Publications/Section_Index.html.
U.S. Trade Representative. Annual. Special 301 Report. Wash-
ington, D.C.: USTR.
This is an annual report on the state of intellectual property rights 
protection and enforcement around the world. USTR prepares the 
report in accordance with Special 301 provisions of the 1974 Trade 
Act. The report indicates countries placed on a “Priority Watch 
List” and a regular “Watch List” for attention in bilateral discus-
sions. Available at: http://www.ustr.gov/Document_Library/
Reports_ Publications/Section_Index.html.
U.S. Trade Representative. Annual. Trade Policy Agenda and 
Annual Report. Washington, D.C.: USTR.
The Trade Act of 1974 requires that the president submit to Con-
gress not later than March 1 of each year an annual report on the 
trade agreements program during the past year and the national 
trade policy agenda for the year ahead. These reports typically 
have more than 400 pages of detail, including detail on WTO ac-
tivities, bilateral, and regional negotiations. The reports reflect 
the incumbent administration’s assessment of its performance 
and prospects. Available at: http://www.ustr.gov/Document_ 
Library/Reports_Publications/Section_Index.html.
Other Governments
Canada. Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade. 
Annual. Canada’s International Market Access Report. Ottawa: 
Foreign Affairs and International Trade. 72 pp.
Canada prepares this annual report outlining market access is-
sues, including investments, innovation, science and technology. 
Available at: http://www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca/international/index.
aspx.
European Commission. Annual. United States Barriers to Trade 
and Investment. Brussels: European Commission.
Europe’s response to the USTR annual report on foreign trade bar-
riers, the succinct EU documents identify U.S. tariff and nontariff 
barriers, investment-related measures, intellectual property right 

298 Resources
barriers, and obstacles to trade in services. The report for 2008 has 
68 pages. Available at: http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/.
European Union. Market Access Database. Available at: http://
madb.europa.eu.
The EU’s Market Access Database, which describes itself as “Your 
Guide to Cracking World Markets,” provides much practical in-
formation for exports and scholars, including statistical data, 
information on trade barriers, a guide for exporter’s, and other 
information.
Japan. Ministry of Economics, Trade and Industry (METI). An-
nual. Report on Compliance by Major Trading Partners with 
Trade Agreements –WTO, FTA/EPA, BIT.
The 2008 Japanese report contains 31 pages on ASEAN, 86 pages 
on China, 18 pages on the European Union, and 68 pages on the 
United States. Available at: http://www.meti.go.jp/english/ 
report/downloadfiles/2008WTO/1– 3ASEAN.pdf.
Intergovernmental Agencies
International Monetary Fund (IMF). Semi-annual. World Eco-
nomic Outlook. Washington, D.C.: IMF.
The World Economic Outlook, released in April and October, of-
fers the IMF staff economists’ assessments of world economic de-
velopments with an emphasis on the major economies. The data 
base for this exercise is available online, as well as the report. 
Available at: http://www.imf.org/external/ns/cs.aspx?id=29.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD). Annual. OECD Factbook: Economic, Environmental and 
Social Statistics. Paris: OECD.
The OECD collects, analyzes, and publishes a variety of data, in-
cluding international trade, pertaining to its members and major 
nonmembers. Available at: http://www.oecd.org.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD). Annual. Handbook of Statistics. Geneva, Switzer-
land: UNCTAD.

Government Documents 299
This report provides essential data for analyzing world trade, 
investment, international financial flows, and development. The 
tables represent analytical summaries of data accessible on the 
UNCTAD Web site via the statistics portal. Available at: http://
www.unctad.org/Templates/Page.asp?intItemID=171&lang=1
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD). Annual since 1996. Trade and Development Report. 
Geneva, Switzerland: UNCTAD.
Each report analyzes current economic trends and major policy 
issues of international concern.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD). Annual since 1991. World Investment Report.  Geneva, 
Switzerland: UNCTAD.
Each annual report covers latest trends in global direct foreign 
investment and development. Available at: http://www.unctad.
org/Templates/Page.asp?intItemID==1485&lang=1
World Bank. Annual. World Development Indicators. Washing-
ton, D.C.: World Bank Group. Selected data are available online 
at http://www.worldbank.org.
World Bank. Annual since 1978. World Development Report. 
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
This report is described as a guide to the economic, social, and 
environmental state of the world. Available at: http://www.world
bank.org.
World Trade Organization (WTO). Annual since 1998. Interna-
tional Trade Statistics. Geneva, Switzerland: WTO.
The WTO says this report provides comprehensive and up-to-
date statistics on trade in merchandise and commercial services 
permitting an assessment of world trade flows by country, region 
and main product groups or services by category. Available at: 
http://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e.htm.
World Trade Organization (WTO). Annual since 1998. WTO An-
nual Report. Geneva, Switzerland: WTO.

300 Resources
This is the WTO’s report to members and the public on institu-
tional matters, including its activities, staff, and budget. Available 
at: http://wto.org/english/res_e/reser_e/annual_report_e.htm.
World Trade Organization (WTO). Annual since 2003. World 
Trade Report. Geneva, Switzerland: WTO.
Prepared by the WTO’s Secretariat, this report (the 2007 report 
contained 436 pages) surveys recent developments and selected 
trends in trade. It includes many tables of data. Available at: 
http://www.wto.org/english/res_e/wtr_arc_e.htm.
Periodicals, Journals, and Newsletters
Boston University International Law Journal
William S. Hein & Co., Inc.
1285 Main Street
Buffalo, NY 14209 –1987
ISSN: 0737– 8947
Published biannually, the journal publishes articles by profes-
sional authors and practitioners, and notes and case comments 
written by student authors.
Georgetown Journal of International Law
Georgetown University Law Center
Office of Journal Administration
600 New Jersey Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20001
Formerly Law and Policy in International Business, the journal pub-
lishes four issues a year. It has a special interest in international 
trade law. An annual issue provides a critique and analysis of the 
work of the U.S. Court of International Trade.
Global Economy Journal (GEJ)
Bepress
2809 Telegraph Avenue, Suite 202
Berkeley, CA 94705
ISSN: 1524 – 5861
The official journal of the International Trade and Finance Asso-
ciation, an association of academics and professionals interested 

Periodicals, Journals, and Newsletters 301
in all aspects of the global economy. This peer-reviewed electronic 
journal publishes four issues each year containing scholarly re-
search relating to international trade and finance issues. The GEJ 
also publishes important research that falls outside the scope of 
traditional economics, including international law, information 
technology and intellectual property, global marketing, immi-
gration, and the social impact of globalization. Available at: http://
www.bepress.com/gej/.
INSIDE U.S. TRADE
Inside Washington Publishers
1919 South Eads St., Suite 201
Arlington, VA 22202
This is a valuable weekly newsletter on all aspects of trade policy. 
It is available to readers who have access to LexisNexis Academic.  
See http://www.lexisnexis.com/us/Inacademic/.
International Trade Journal
Taylor and Francis, Inc.
325 Chestnut Street, Suite 800
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Print ISSN: 0885 – 3908
This is a refereed academic journal with a broad scope, includ-
ing trade, finance, globalization, emerging markets and regional 
studies.
International Trade Reporter
Bureau of National Affairs
9435 Key West Avenue
Rockville, MD 20850
This biweekly newsletter reviews news pertaining to U.S. trade 
policy, including regulatory, legislative, and judicial develop-
ments. It also monitors trade negotiations.
Journal of International Economic Law
Journals Customer Service Department
Oxford University Press
2001 Evans Road
Cary, NC 27513
Print ISSN 1369 – 3034

302 Resources
This prestigious international law journal publishes four issues 
each year. It has an international board of editors and solicits 
manuscripts from scholars, government officials, and legal pro-
fessionals on fundamental, long-term, systemic problems and 
possible solutions. The editors hope the journal’s contents will in-
fluence real events and provide critiques of policies, negotiations, 
or course cases.
New Global Studies
Bepress
2809 Telegraph Avenue, Suite 202
Berkeley, CA 94705
ISSN: 1940 – 0004
Available at: http://www.bepress.com/ngs/.
New Global Studies is an electronic journal published by Berkeley 
Electronic, devoted to globalization in the 20th and 21st centuries. 
It reaches across disciplinary lines, drawing from history, sociol-
ogy, anthropology, political science, and international relations to 
study the past and present of today’s globalizing process.
North Carolina Journal of International Law 
and Commercial Regulation
UNC School of Law, CB# 3380
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 – 3380
This international law journal, begun in 1976, publishes three is-
sues each year, containing articles by scholars, practitioners, and 
ILJ members
The World Economy
Blackwell Publishing
350 Main Street
Malden, MA 02148
Print ISSN: 0378 – 5920
Directed at researchers, analysts, and policy advisers, this jour-
nal’s scope includes international trade and the environment, 
finance, development, global and regional institutions. Articles 
from back issues are available online. Available at: http://www.
blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=0378 – 5920.

Films and Video Recordings 303
World Trade Review
Cambridge University Press
32 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10013-2473
Print ISSN: 1474-7456
Established at the initiative of the WTO, this interdisciplinary jour-
nal seeks to publish articles of relevance to the world trading sys-
tem. While the journal appears to have an independent board 
of scholarly editors, critics of the WTO may find the perspective 
overly supportive of the international trade organization and its 
mission.
Films and Video Recordings
Book
Zaniello, Tom. 2007. The Cinema of Globalization: A Guide to 
Films about the New Economic Order. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press. 202 pp.
This book covers 213 films relating to globalization. Of these, 143 
are from English-language film industries. The author, an adjunct 
professor at the National Labor College, offers extensive discus-
sion of each film and recommends supplementary readings. This 
is a first-rate guide to the films pertaining to globalization —many 
of them intersecting trade-policy issues.
Films and Video Recordings
American Jobs
http://www.americanjobsfilm.com
2005, 60 minutes
This documentary by filmmaker Gregg Spotts blames 
globalization and free-trade agreements for the loss of 
manufacturing jobs in textiles, computer programming, and 
aircraft manufacturing.
Commanding Heights: the Battle for the World Economy
PBS Item No. CHTS400
2002, 360 minutes on 3 Discs

304 Resources
This series, based on the best-selling book by Daniel Yergin and 
Joseph Stanislas, presents a positive view of the new global 
economy and its impact on people around the world. Global 
corporations occupy the “commanding heights” and spread 
free-market capitalism, which triumphs over Soviet-style central 
planning. Yergin interviews a number of prominent individuals, 
including former President Bill Clinton, former Vice-President 
Dick Cheney, and former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev, 
among others.
Frontline: Is Wal-Mart Good for America?
PBS Item No. FRL62304
2004, 60 minutes
Hedrick Smith, Pulitzer-prize winning former New York Times 
correspondent, shows how Wal-Mart shoppers are connected to 
China and the global economy. With Wal-Mart demanding lower 
prices from its suppliers to satisfy consumers, U.S. factories, 
like an RCA television plant in Circleville, Ohio, closed up and 
outsourced production to China. There Smith found Wal-Mart 
suppliers reliant on cheap Chinese labor competing for contracts 
on their ability to cut costs.
The New Rulers of the World
Bullfrog Films
2001, 54 minutes
Australian investigative journalist John Pilger presents 
Indonesia as a case study in the costs of globalization. He claims 
big business teamed up with the CIA to overturn a popular 
government in 1964 and turned Indonesia into a client of the 
West. Pilger reports on sweatshops and does an attack interview 
with one of the new rulers of the globalized world— IMF Vice 
President Stanley Fischer. Pilger’s solutions include debt-relief 
for developing countries, stronger labor unions, and more 
transparent decision-making in the global economy.
Databases and Internet Resources
AFL-CIO
http://www.aflcio.org.

Databases and Internet Resources 305
This Web site offers press advisories, blogs, issue briefs, and data 
from the Department of Labor. The AFL-CIO is generally critical 
of agreements that open U.S. markets to greater competition 
from cheap labor countries.
African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA)
http://www.agoa.info/.
This Web site provides detailed information on the AGOA 
program of the U.S. government. It enhances market access to 
the United States for 39 Sub-Saharan African countries. The Web 
site provides trade profiles, statistics, technical information, and 
downloads of legal documents, reports and research papers. 
The site is maintained by the Trade Law Center for Southern 
Africa.
Alliance for American Manufacturing
http://www.americanmanufacturing.org.
This Web site contains blogs, issue briefs, press advisories, 
publications, and testimonies. It is one of the better Internet 
sources for information supporting domestic-based 
manufacturing in its battle with imports from China and 
other low labor-cost countries.
American Farm Bureau
http://www.fb.org.
This Web site provides press advisories and issue briefs plus 
links to other farm organizations. The American Farm Bureau 
tends to be pro-free trade and supportive of agreements to open 
foreign markets.
American Manufacturing Trade Action Coalition
http://www.amtacdc.org/.
This Web site contains press materials, issue briefs, 
testimonies, statistics, and information on key congressional 
legislation and votes. It is one of the better sources for 
information about the domestic textile industry and its import-
related problems.

306 Resources
American Sugarbeet Growers Association
http://www.americansugarbeet.org.
Sugarbeet growers wish to maintain tariff rate quotas on 
imports, and generally oppose increased imports of sugar. This 
Web site provides press releases, statistics, testimonies, and 
publications supporting their position.
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
http://www.apec.org.
The 21 members of APEC seek to promote free and open 
trade and investment in the Asia-Pacific region by 2010 
for developed economies and by 2020 for developing 
economies. This useful Web site provides annual statements 
and declarations, data about the member economies, and 
downloadable publications.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
http://www.asean.org.
This comprehensive Web site provides many links to useful 
sites in member nations, as well as press releases, documents, 
research, and publications. Readers can obtain statistics, 
including the ASEAN Statistical Yearbook.
Australian Government, Department of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade
http://www.dfat.gov.au/trade/.
This official Web site is a place to begin research on issues 
pertaining to Australia’s trade and trade policy.
Bilaterals.org
http://www.bilaterals.org.
This open Web site, intended by activists to stimulate 
cooperation against bilateral trade and investment agreements, 
allows anyone to post materials. The site contains a great many 
articles in six languages: Dutch, English, French, German, 
Portuguese, and Spanish.

Databases and Internet Resources 307
Brazil, Ministry of External Relations
http://www.mre.gov.br/.
For trade and trade policy issues involving Brazil, check out 
this Web site. It has a BrazilTradeNet intended to stimulate 
Brazilian exports and to attract foreign direct investment to 
Brazil.
Business Roundtable
http://www.businessroundtable.org/.
This Web site, representing the CEOs of big business, 
contains issue briefs, press releases, speeches, congressional 
communications, and testimonies. The Business Roundtable is 
an enthusiastic backer of free-trade agreements, outsourcing, and 
transnational business activities.
Business Software Alliance
http://www.bsa.org.
This Web site, representing the interests of the commercial 
software industry, contains issue briefs, press statements, 
statistics, and testimonies pertaining to piracy of intellectual 
property.
Canada, Department of Foreign Affairs 
and International Trade
http://dfait-maeci.gc.ca/.
For information pertaining to Canada’s trade policy and trade 
administration, see this Web site. It contains links to other related 
Canadian sites.
CATO Institute
http://www.cato.org.
The CATO Institute offers a libertarian, pro-free trade 
perspective on public policy issues. Its Web site contains 
publications and presentations of its Center for Trade Policy 
Studies.
Centre for Trade Policy and Law
http://www.carleton.ca/ctpl/.

308 Resources
This Canadian think-tank, based in Ottawa, focuses on building 
greater public understanding for trade and investment policy, 
and encouraging research on these issues. The Web site contains 
a number of papers and studies on trade policy, written by 
Canadian specialists.
Chamber of Commerce of the United States
http://www.uschamber.com.
This Web site of America’s largest business trade association 
contains press releases, issue briefs, testimonies, and Web links. 
The U.S. Chamber is a vigorous proponent of free trade.
China, Ministry of Commerce
http://english.mofcom.gov.cn/.
For trade policy issues and statistics pertaining to China, this 
Web site is an important source.
Citizens Trade Campaign
http://www.citizenstrade.org/.
This coalition of activists, representing consumer, environmental, 
farm, labor, religious, and other groups, wants trade policy 
to serve the majority of the world’s people, not simply large 
corporations. The Web site contains issue briefs, press releases, 
and other information of interest to those critical of current 
policies.
Coalition of Service Industries
http://www.uscsi.org/.
This association is a vigorous booster of trade agreements to 
open trade for service industries. The Web site contains data on 
service-related trade and discussion of bilateral, regional, and 
WTO trade negotiations.
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa 
(COMESA)
http://www.comesa.int/.
This Web site is the official site for this 19-member African 
common market. The Web site includes information on the 

Databases and Internet Resources 309
institution, agreements, and member countries, as well as a 
statistical database.
Consumer Electronics Association
http://www.ce.org.
This association is a strong supporter of free-trade 
agreements. The site contains free trade blogs, multimedia, 
downloads, white papers, press releases, and congressional 
testimonies.
Consumers for World Trade
http://www.cwt.org/.
This organization presents a pro-free trade consumer perspective 
in Washington, D.C., and seeks to mobilize consumers on trade 
issues that impact their purchasing power. The Web site contains 
some press releases and blogs.
Economic Policy Institute
http://www.epinet.org.
Affiliated with organized labor, EPI’s Web site contains data, 
economic indicators, multimedia downloads, and publications. 
This is one of the best sites for information relating to trade 
and economic globalization. It tends to be critical of free-trade 
agreements.
Emergency Committee for American Trade
http://www.ecattrade.com.
ECAT is a strong supporter of trade liberalization and 
multinational business. Its Web site provides trade statistics, 
news articles, press releases, and valuable links to foreign 
governments, U.S. government agencies, and international 
organizations.
European-American Business Council
http://www.eabc.org.
This Web site provides press releases and articles, policy papers, 
and trans-Atlantic data showing commercial linkages between 
American states and European countries.

310 Resources
European Commission—External Trade
http://ec.europa.eu/trade/.
This European Commission Web site contains trade statistics, 
information on negotiations, as well as press statements, 
documents, publications, and downloads. It is the place to begin 
research on the European Union’s approach to trade negotiations 
and policy.
European Free Trade Association
http://www.efta.int/.
This is the official site of EFTA, a free-trade association for the 
benefit of Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, and Switzerland. The 
Web site contains statistics, documents, legal texts, and various 
publications, including annual reports.
Focus on the Global South
http://www.focusweb.org/.
This group opposes the WTO and other free-trade agreements. 
Its Web site provides papers, videos, and links to other activist 
groups around the world. This is one of the best sites for anti-
WTO activists.
Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA)
http://www.ftaa-alca.org/alca_e.asp.
This is the official Web site of the FTAA. At the Summit of 
the Americas, held in Miami, Florida, in December 1994, 34 
governments in the Western hemisphere agreed to complete 
negotiations by 2005. The site contains detailed information 
about the negotiations, as well as trade and tariff data compiled 
by the Inter-American Development Bank. The participants failed 
to reach agreement in 2005, and no further negotiations were 
planned as this book went to press.
Friends of the Earth
http://www.foe.org.
The Web site contains some trade-related items relating to the 
WTO and free-trade agreements, written from an environmental 
point of view.

Databases and Internet Resources 311
Hong Kong, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
India, Ministry of Commerce and Industry
http://commerce.nic.in/.
This Web site is the place to begin for trade policy and 
administration issues involving India. There is also trade data.
Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy
http://www.iatp.org/.
This Web site, sympathetic to small farmers, carries reports and 
publications critical of the WTO. It is one of the better activist 
sites with links to other groups promoting fair trade and 
alternatives to globalization.
Institute for International Business, Economics & Law
http://www.iit.adelaide.edu.au/.
This institute at the University of Adelaide in Australia provides 
a variety of advisories and publications on trade from an 
Australian point of view.
International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development
http://ictsd.net/.
Based in Geneva, Switzerland, this international group 
evaluates trade negotiations from a sustainable development 
perspective.
International Chamber of Commerce
http://www.iccwbo.org.
The Web site of this prestigious international business 
association provides a variety of materials supportive of 
multilateral trade negotiations.
International Intellectual Property Alliance
http://www.iipa.com.
This Web site contains the alliance’s annual report to U.S. Trade 
Representative on copyright protection and enforcement around 
the world.

312 Resources
International Monetary Fund
http://www.imf.org.
Researchers can use the search tool to find IMF research studies 
dealing with international trade issues. The IMF also publishes 
various international financial statistics, and direction of trade 
statistics. It also maintains an interactive world economic 
outlook database containing selected macroeconomic data 
series.
Israel, Ministry of Industry, Trade & Labor
http://www.moital.gov.il/NR/exeres/B0B48981– 357D-446F-
AFAC-91A358E93C87.htm.
This official Web site offers information on Israel’s trade 
agreements, its industry and workers, and a list of Israel’s 
economic and trade representatives abroad. There are also other 
useful links.
Japan, Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry
http://www.meti.go.jp/english/.
This Web site is a good place to begin research on trade policy 
issues involving Japan. There are statistics, papers and reports, 
press releases, and speeches.
Jordan, Ministry of Industry & Trade
http://www.mit.gov.jo/tabid/36/default.aspx/.
This Web site provides information about Jordan’s trade 
relations with other Arab countries, the WTO, and its free-
trade agreements with Europe and the United States among 
others.
Malaysia, Ministry of International Trade and Industry
http://www.miti.gov/my/ekpweb.
This official portal offers a great variety of statistics and practical 
trade information, including Malaysia’s involvement in WTO 
negotiations.
Mercosur
http://www.mercosur.int/msweb/.

Databases and Internet Resources 313
The official Web site of Mercosur, the South American regional 
trade agreement involving Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and 
Uruguay. Readers must access information in Portuguese or 
Spanish. Information available includes official directives, 
technical documents, and data bases.
Mexico, Ministry of the Economy
http://www.economia.gov.mx/?NLanguage=en&P=2.
The Web site of the Ministry of the Economy contains 
information about trade negotiations, maquila plants, and 
competitiveness initiatives. There are also official speeches and 
press releases.
Motion Picture Association of America
http://www.mpaa.org.
This Web site is the best online source regarding movie piracy, 
including statistics.
National Association of Manufacturers
http://www.nam.org.
The NAM is the largest U.S. association of manufacturers. Its 
Web site contains relevant trade data, press releases, transcripts 
and speeches, and other studies and reports on trade-related 
issues, one of the NAM’s principal concerns.
National Foreign Trade Council
http://www.nftc.org.
One of the most influential associations involved in trade-policy 
issues, the NFTC represents large U.S. and foreign firms engaged 
in international trade. It is supportive of the WTO process. 
This important site offers press releases, issue briefs, data, 
and a regular commentary on developments in Washington, 
D.C. It sponsors USA Engage, a coalition concerned with the 
proliferation of unilateral sanctions.
National Labor Committee
http://www.nlcnet.org/.

314 Resources
This Web site focuses on global working conditions, 
particularly sweatshops, unsafe working conditions, 
and child labor. There are photos and reports on specific 
companies.
National Pork Producers Council
http://www.nppc.org.
This Web site contains press releases, issue briefs, statistics, and 
pork recipes. The organization is a vigorous booster of trade 
agreements to expand pork exports.
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
http://www.mfat.gov.nz/.
For research on issues relating to New Zealand’s trade or trade 
policy, this Web site is a place to begin.
North American Free Trade Agreement Secretariat 
(NAFTA)
http://www.nafta-sec-alena.org.
The NAFTA secretariat, which administers the trade dispute 
mechanisms, has three sections, one in Ottawa, Canada; one in 
Mexico City, Mexico; and one in Washington, D.C. The NAFTA 
site has links to the separate sections, as well as legal texts, and 
information on dispute panel decisions.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD)
http://www.oecd.org/.
The 30-member OECD is one of the most reliable sources of 
statistics and comparative data. For its statistics, go to http://
www.oecd.org/std/its.
Organization for International Investment
http://www.ofii.org/.
This organization represents in Washington, D.C., the 
subsidiaries of foreign companies. It works to educate 
policymakers on the positive role U.S. subsidiaries play in the 

Databases and Internet Resources 315
American economy and seeks to ensure that foreign-owned 
firms are not discriminated against in state or federal law. The 
site contains press materials and data showing the number of 
jobs in each state supported by subsidiaries.
Organization of American States, Foreign Trade Information 
System
http://www.sice.oas.org.
This Web site offers information on trade agreements, statistics, 
and trade policy developments in the Western hemisphere. 
There are links to national trade policy organizations and 
statistics.
Oxfam American
http://www.oxfamamerica.org.
Oxfam takes a strong advocacy role on trade issues, and its 
Web site provides materials to support these campaigns—
including press releases, discussion papers, and research 
reports.
Peterson Institute for International Economics
http://www.iie.com/.
This Web site contains a variety of press releases, reports, and 
publications on a variety of global economic issues. The institute 
is strongly internationalist, and many of its publications, policy 
briefs, working papers, speeches and testimonies, and news 
releases are available online.
Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch
http://www.citizen.org/trade/.
One of the most important Web sites for critics of the WTO 
and free-trade agreements, GTW provides information on 
congressional voting records, and information on various 
trade negotiations and agreements. GTW prepares analysis 
of major globalization-related issues, including offshoring, 
food safety, immigration, and the harmonization of regulatory 
approaches.

316 Resources
Recording Industry Association of America
http://www.riaa.com
This Web site provides information on the association’s efforts 
to cope with music piracy, especially illegal uploads and 
downloads, and the criminals who manufacture counterfeit CDs 
for sale.
Russia
http://www.russiaexport.net/.
This private site, maintained by a British company and a Russian 
agency, provides a great deal of information for those wishing to 
trade or invest with Russia.
Sierra Club
http://www.sierraclub.org/trade/.
The oldest and largest environmental group in the United 
States, the Sierra Club’s Web site provides information 
showing how trade agreements impact the environment, 
public health, and safety. The club favors trade that is 
green, clean, and fair. It is critical of the neo-liberal free-
trade model.
Singapore, Ministry of Trade and Industry
http://app.mti.gov.sg.
This Web site is the place to begin research on trade policy issues 
involving Singapore.
South Africa, Department of Trade and Industry
http://www.thedti.gov.za/.
This Web site provides statistics and information about trading 
with South Africa.
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
http://www.saarc-sec.org/main.php?t=2.1.6.
This site provides information on the South Asian Free Trade 
Area, involving Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and 
several other countries.

Databases and Internet Resources 317
South Korea, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
http://www.mofat.go.kr/english/.
For information on the South Korean government’s approach to 
trade policy issues, this Web site is the place to begin.
Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
http://www.sacu.int/.
The official site of this customs union provides press 
information, speeches, and information about trade facilitation 
and negotiations.
Taiwan, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Republic of China
http://w2kdmz1.moea.gov.tw/english/index.asp.
This official Web site provides trade data, information for 
exporters and importers, and information about Taiwan’s foreign 
trade policies.
The Philippines, Permanent Mission to the WTO
http://philippineswto.org.
For issues involving the Philippines and the WTO, this Web site 
is a place to begin.
Third World Network
http://www.twnside.org.sg/.
This important site strives to present a third-world 
perspective on trade and development issues. It provides 
features for journalists, and produces a monthly magazine, 
Third World Resurgence. The Web site contains a great variety 
of papers and reports, statements and speeches, and briefing 
papers. It also includes detailed reporting on the WTO 
negotiations.
Trade Law Centre for Southern Africa
http://www.givengain.com/cgi-bin/giga.cgi?c=1694.
This institute, established in 2002, with support from the Swiss 
Department of Economic Development, seeks to build trade-law 

318 Resources
capacity in southern Africa. The goal is to help African countries 
participate effectively in the global economy and to negotiate 
trade agreements that will support development objectives. The 
site contains legal texts, publications, discussions, and other 
resources.
Trade Observatory
http://www.tradeobservatory.org/.
The Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy based in 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, manages this Web site, which is critical 
of the WTO and multinational corporations. The site contains 
reports from WTO negotiations in Geneva, as well as press 
materials, research, and blogs.
Transnational Institute
http://www.tni.org/.
Based in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, this organization of 
scholar-activists opposes the WTO, and seeks to steer the world 
in a democratic, equitable, and environmentally sustainable 
direction. The site contains publications from as far back 
as 1973.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
http://www.unctad.org.
UNCTAD’s Web site is one of the most important 
intergovernmental portals to statistics and analysis of the 
global economy. The interactive statistical data bases, including 
the UNCTAD Handbook of Statistics, are valuable, as are the 
annual Trade and Development Report and the World Investment 
Report.
U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
http://www.federalreserve.gov.
The Web site offers a greater deal of statistical data, including 
U.S. reserve assets and foreign official assets, and country 
exposure lending. There are also speeches and testimonies of the 
governors. Readers can access The Federal Reserve Bulletin and The 
International Journal of Central Banking.

Databases and Internet Resources 319
U.S. Business and Industrial Council Educational 
Foundation
http://www.americaneconomicalert.org.
This Web site offers a nationalistic, probusiness perspective, 
critical of globalization, free-trade agreements, and 
transnational corporations. It is one of the better sites 
representing the views of family-owned and privately-held 
firms in the United States experiencing difficulty competing 
with low Chinese prices.
U.S.–China Business Council
http://www.uschina.org.
This Web site represents the view of large transnational 
corporations (more than 250) that conduct business with China. 
The site offers press release, speeches, congressional testimonies, 
and links to other external sources. It provides information 
about the Chinese government structure and tips for getting 
around China.
U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Ways 
and Means
http://waysandmeans.house.gov.
This Web site provides texts of testimonies before the committee, 
reports on committee missions to foreign countries, and 
an important compilation of U.S. trade statutes useful to 
researchers.
U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Finance
http://finance.senate.gov/.
The committee’s Web site contains hearings, testimonies, and a 
History of the Committee on Finance.
U.S. Council for International Business
http://www.uscib.org.
This council, the U.S. affiliate of the International Chamber 
of Commerce, provides regular newsletters on the WTO, the 
OECD, and the International Organization of Employers. There 

320 Resources
is an ample assortment of press releases, policy statements, 
testimonies, and the like.
U.S. Department of Agriculture
http://www.usda.gov/ustrade.asp.
This Web site contains a variety of information about agricultural 
trade and negotiations, including reports of agricultural 
attaches stationed abroad. For information on food safety and 
inspections, see http://www.fsis.usda.gov.
U.S. Department of Commerce
http://www.commerce.gov/.
This Web site is a portal to information on Commerce’s diverse 
functions —including business and manufacturing, export 
promotion, intellectual property protection, weather forecasts, 
and stimulation of economic growth.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census
http://www.census.gov.
The Census Bureau’s site allows readers to access an enormous 
variety of economic and social data, including foreign trade 
statistics. The site also provides historical foreign trade data from 
1960 to 2005.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis
http://www.bea.gov.
This Web site allows readers to access BEA’s Survey of Current 
Business as well as balance of payments data, information on 
trade in goods and services, and data on the operations of 
multinational corporations.
U.S. Department of Commerce, International Trade 
Administration
http://trade.gov/index.asp.
Commerce’s International Trade Administration Web site 
provides access to press statements and publications, speeches, 
and testimonies. Readers interested in exporting can find 

Databases and Internet Resources 321
detailed information at http://www.export.gov. Those keen 
on industry-specific information can go to http://trade.gov/
mas/index.asp. For information on gaining access to foreign 
markets, see http://trade.gov/mac/index.asp. On unfair 
foreign trade practices and imports, see http://trade.gov/ia/
index.asp.
U.S. Department of Energy
http://www.doe.gov.
This Web site provides access to a variety of energy-related data.
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Food and Drug 
Administration
http://www.fda.gov.
This Web site provides information for consumers and those 
interested in the agency’s regulations. There is information about 
import refusals, recalls, seizures, and warning letters among 
other enforcement actions.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Customs and Border 
Protection
http://www.cbp.gov.
This Web site provides fact sheets, press releases, publications, 
speeches, and the testimonies of officials. Customs and Border 
Protection has the responsibility of enforcing many trade-
related laws. It inspects cargoes, and assesses duties on dutiable 
imports. CBP looks for unsafe products, contaminated imports, 
and terrorist shipments.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics
http://www.bls.gov.
Through this Web site, readers can access data on comparative 
international labor statistics. Also available online is the 
department’s Monthly Labor Review and its Occupational Outlook 
Handbook.
U.S. Department of State
http://www.state.gov/.

322 Resources
The department’s Web site provides a variety of information 
intended for Americans traveling abroad—including passport 
and visa information, travel tips and warnings, currency 
exchange, and per diem rates.
U.S. Department of Transportation
http://www.transportation.gov.
The Web site contains press releases, statistics, speeches, and 
testimonies. Users can browse subsites for subordinate agencies 
with trade-related interests, including the Federal Aviation 
Administration, the Maritime Administration, and the Federal 
Highway Administration.
U.S. Department of Treasury
http://www.treasury.gov.
The Web site provides press releases, official speeches, 
and testimonies, reports on international investments, and 
exchange rate policy. The Treasury Bulletin offers a summary of 
key statistics. See http://www.fms.treas.gov/bulletin/index.
html.
U.S. Federal Reserve Bank of New York
http://www.ny.frb.org/.
The New York Federal Reserve Bank is the federal reserve bank 
most involved with international operations, such as intervention 
in foreign exchange markets. The Web site offers staff analysis of 
banking globalization and U.S. balance of payments, and foreign 
exchange operations. The bank also provides global economic 
indicators for key countries.
U.S. International Trade Commission
http://www.usitc.gov.
On the ITC’s Web site readers can find annual reports, press 
releases, reports of investigations, working papers and 
staff research, and reports to Congress and the executive on 
investigations. There is an interactive tariff and trade data 

Databases and Internet Resources 323
link that allows readers to access data from 1989 to the 
present.
U.S. Trade and Development Agency
http://www.ustda.gov/.
The agency’s reports are available on this Web site.
U.S. Trade Representative
http://www.ustr.gov.
USTR’s Web site provides texts of trade agreements and 
comments of advisory committees involving business, labor, 
and public-interest groups. There are also press releases, 
official speeches, and testimonies. Users can find annual 
reports on the trade agreements program and on foreign trade 
barriers.
USA *Engage
http://www.usaengage.org/.
U.S.A. Engage is a coalition of business, agriculture and trade 
associations, formed in 1997, to promote U.S. engagement with 
the world and concerned about the harmful effects of unilateral 
U.S. sanctions. The Web site contains press releases, studies, and a 
report card on Congress.
Vietnam. American Chamber of Commerce in Vietnam.
http://www.amchamvietnam.com/399.
This Web site provides news, answers to FAQs, and lists of 
contacts for those doing business in Vietnam.
Vietnam, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
http://www.mofa.gov.vn/en/.
This general Web site contains information on Vietnam’s efforts 
to integrate into the global economy.
Washington International Trade Association
http://www.wita.org.

324 Resources
This trade forum, founded in 1982, holds regular discussions 
of trade policy and related issues. The site contains resources, 
including a vast number of links to trade-related groups in the 
United States and abroad.
World Bank Group
http://go.worldbank.org/SD2AZHQUM0.
This site provides a way to access World Bank data and research 
related to international trade, trade policy, and related subjects. 
Readers can also access certain online databases at http://
go.worldbank.org/6HAYAHG8H0.
World Customs Organization
http://www.wcoomd.org/.
Those interested in technical tariff issues, such as nomenclature, 
valuation, rules of origin, and the harmonized system, should 
consult this site.
World Economic Forum
http://www.weforum.org.
Each January, 1,500 top business leaders join with 
government leaders and scholars to discuss global issues 
in Davos, Switzerland. This Web site showcases their 
deliberations and provides videos and summaries of their 
discussions.
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
http://www.wipo.int.
This Web site includes statistics and digital library of intellectual 
property.
World Trade Law Net
http://www.worldtradelaw.net.
This Web site, run by two international trade lawyers 
based in Florida, is a portal for web sources relating to 
international trade law. The free version provides access to 
trade law articles, external links and reports of the WTO and 

Databases and Internet Resources 325
GATT. There is also information about the history of WTO 
negotiations.
World Trade Organization
http://www.wto.org/.
This official site provides press materials, speeches, documents, 
research reports, and legal texts dealing with all aspects of the 
WTO. There are links to guide students and researchers to basic 
or detailed information about the WTO and the international 
trading system. This Web site is an essential stop for those 
working on trade-policy issues.

This page intentionally left blank

327
Glossary
Absolute advantage Adam Smith’s case for free trade in The Wealth of 
Nations was based on absolute advantage. In a two-country model, with 
capital not moving between countries, each country could benefit by 
specializing in the product it produced more efficiently, and engaging in 
trade with the other country. This remains the rationale for most inter-
national trade.
Ad valorem tariff A tariff based on a percentage of the value of the 
good. Example: the U.S. duty on finished automobiles is 2.5 percent ad 
valorem.
Adjustment assistance Government programs for providing training 
and income support to workers who lose their jobs because of imports or 
whose jobs are shifted to other countries. The assistance may include job 
search and relocation allowances, wage insurance for older workers, and 
a tax credit for health insurance coverage.
Antidumping duty Duty placed on low-priced imports to offset the 
margin of dumping—that is, selling goods in one market at less than the 
home market. The WTO, with which U.S. law conforms, allows import-
ing countries to impose antidumping duties only if dumping is found to 
cause material injury, or threat of material injury, to a domestic industry.
Buy-American clause A provision in law that stipulates that govern-
ment agencies shall discriminate in purchasing decisions in favor of 
domestic producers of goods and services. The WTO’s Agreement on 
Government Procurement, a plurilateral agreement binding only its 39 sig-
natories, seeks to promote transparent purchasing and to ensure that 
such decisions do not discriminate against foreign suppliers. Major de-
veloping countries, such as Brazil, China, and India, are not parties to the 
agreement, and thus are not eligible for nondiscriminatory treatment.
Comparative advantage David Ricardo’s case for free trade rested on 
comparative advantage, not absolute advantage. In a two-product, two-
country model, with capital immobile between countries, one country 
was more efficient in the production of both products, but, contrary to 

328 Glossary
intuition, trade could still be advantageous to both countries. If the first 
country is relatively more efficient in the production of one good than 
another, both countries can specialize and benefit from trade. However, 
in a world where investments move easily from one country to another, 
it is arguable that the conditions for comparative advantage do not hold 
and both countries may not benefit.
Countervailing duty Duty placed on imports to offset a subsidy found 
to cause material injury to a domestic industry. As permitted under the 
WTO’s agreement on subsidies and countervailing measures, the United 
States employs a bifurcated process in which the Department of Com-
merce determines whether unfair subsidies exist, and the U.S. Inter-
national Trade Commission determines whether the subsidized imports 
cause material injury to the domestic industry.
Currency manipulation The practice of certain governments, working 
through their central banks, to set exchange rates artificially in order to 
gain an advantage. It is alleged that China and Japan, among major trad-
ing countries, manipulate their currencies in order to stimulate exports 
and discourage imports.
Current account The difference between a country’s exports of goods 
and services, its factor income (interest and dividends), and transfer pay-
ments (remittances of overseas workers, foreign aid), and its imports of 
the same items. The current-account surplus, or deficit, is considered the 
best measure of a nation’s economic relations with the world.
Escape clause A provision in a trade agreement permitting parties to 
suspend portions of the agreement for a limited period of time under 
specified conditions. See Safeguards.
Exchange rate The rate at which one currency trades for another. In the 
contemporary world, major currencies trade freely in the market place in 
response to supply and demand conditions. Occasionally, governments 
intervene in order to influence market forces. Many smaller countries peg 
their currency to one of the large international currencies—such as the 
United States dollar or the European euro.
Fair trade This term has multiple definitions. In the context of the 2008 
U.S. elections, the term was adopted by some candidates who favored 
renegotiating or replacing NAFTA and the WTO, and revising trade 
policy to give greater emphasis to the interests of workers, consum-
ers, and the environment. Other candidates, identified with fair trade, 
voiced concerns about offshoring of jobs, corporate power, and the trade 
deficit.
For some activist groups, fair trade also involves promoting more eq-
uitable trading relationships for workers in developing countries by 

Glossary 329
certifying the products of producers who agreed to produce and trade 
goods in conformance with international labor standards.
To international trade lawyers and government officials, the term fair 
trade is sometimes used for international trade conducted in accordance 
with trade agreements and WTO obligations.
Fast-track negotiating authority An agreement between Congress and 
the U.S. president authorizing the executive branch to negotiate a trade 
agreement. In return for trade negotiating authority and regular consul-
tations, Congress agrees to approve or disapprove any agreement within 
90 days of submission without amendments. This is also known as Trade-
Promotion Authority (TPA).
Foreign investment There are two types of foreign investments. When 
a business from one country purchases the assets of an existing company 
or builds a new plant, direct investment occurs if the investor has control. 
When the foreign firm merely buys stock or bonds without taking con-
trol, it is portfolio investment.
Free trade This is a theory in which goods and services flow from one 
country to another without the impediment of government barriers. Pro-
ponents of free trade show that it improves efficiency, stimulates growth, 
enhances consumer choice, and increases incomes.
Free Trade Agreement (FTA) Contemporary free trade agreements 
cover far more than trade in goods and raw materials. They may also in-
clude services (everything from shipping and tourism to banking, insur-
ance, telecommunications, and intellectual property), competition policy, 
labor, and environmental standards. Most so-called free trade agreements 
involve a substantial amount of government management in which export-
 competing industries and service providers gain improved access to for-
eign markets, often at the expense of import-competing industries.
Intellectual property This term refers to creations of the mind, such as 
inventions, books, plays, musical works, recordings, movies, and designs.
Managed trade When governments restrict flows of goods and services 
across borders, they manage trade. Many so-called free trade agreements 
are in fact managed trade agreements because they contain provisions limit-
ing market access. It is arguable that regional agreements like NAFTA and 
CAFTA, and bilateral FTAs, are actually managed trade agreements.
Mercantilism During the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries, the major Euro-
pean nation states practiced an economic policy of mercantilism. That is, 
they used the power of the government to promote exports of manufac-
tures and to discourage imports, while accumulating monetary reserves 
in the form of gold. In this scheme, colonies existed to serve the mother 

330 Glossary
country with raw materials and to consume its manufactured exports. 
In the contemporary world, China and Japan are sometimes accused of 
practicing mercantilism and they generate huge trade surpluses while 
amassing monetary reserves.
Most-favored-nation principle See Nondiscrimination
Multilateralism In trade policy, multilateralism refers to negotiations 
under the auspices of the WTO, the successor to GATT, where each 
 nation—no matter what its population or share of world trade—is treated 
equally.
Multinational corporation A multinational, or transnational, corpora-
tion manages business units in at least two countries. The two terms—
multinational and transnational—are generally used interchangeably.
National treatment One of the fundamental principles of the GATT/
WTO system is that once goods have entered a country and cleared cus-
toms, they are treated like domestically produced goods. Otherwise, reg-
ulations might be used to protect domestic producers and to nullify the 
benefits of trade negotiations.
Neoliberalism In trade and economic policy, neoliberalism represents 
a new form of liberalism that hearkens back to the laissez-faire policies of 
Adam Smith and David Ricardo. Neoliberals embrace free trade and de-
regulation of the economy. They celebrate privatization, the free market, 
and the accumulation of wealth.
Net international investment position For a country, this is the differ-
ence between the amount of foreign assets (debt and equity) its residents 
and governments own and the amount of domestic assets that foreign 
residents and governments own. A creditor nation is one with a surplus, 
a debtor nation is one with a deficit. The United States currently is the 
world’s largest debtor nation.
Nondiscrimination The principle of nondiscrimination is the corner-
stone of the GATT/WTO international trading system. Often described 
as the most-favored-nation principle, it is a legal obligation to provide equal 
treatment to all nations who are party to the agreement. When nondis-
crimination is unconditional (unconditional most-favored nation policy) as 
under the WTO, nations are treated alike whether or not they make re-
ciprocal concessions. In the past, this has benefited free riders, nations that 
seek to benefit from the concessions of others while making few of their 
own. When nondiscrimination is conditional, benefits are accorded only 
to the members who provide reciprocity. The principle of nondiscrimi-
nation has two fundamental exceptions: one involves regional trading 
groups, such as the European Union and NAFTA, and the other involves 
preferences for developing countries.
Nontariff barrier These are barriers to trade, such as quotas, and health, 
safety, and sanitation restrictions.

Glossary 331
Offshoring Offshoring involves shifting business activities from one 
country to another, frequently to reduce labor costs. If a firm shifts the 
activity abroad to another company, it is offshore outsourcing.
Outsourcing This involves transferring a business activity to a subcon-
tractor. If the subcontractor is abroad, this is offshore outsourcing. If the 
subcontractor conducts performs the task domestically, it is onshore out-
sourcing.
Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) This term refers to the U.S. 
obligation to provide most-favored-nation treatment to other members of 
the GATT/WTO system. To qualify for PNTR, a foreign nation must not 
discriminate against the rights of its citizens to emigrate (Jackson-Vanik) 
and it must negotiate a bilateral accession agreement with the United 
States.
Protectionism Those who wish to shelter domestic firms and workers 
from foreign competition are called protectionists. While economic self-
interest is often a motivating factor, some protectionists take this position 
to preserve traditional ways of life (such as farming), others have political 
goals such as preserving sovereignty, local autonomy, or national security.
Quota A quota is a quantitative limit on the amount of a good that may 
be imported or exported.
Reciprocity The negotiating objective of gaining concessions from trad-
ing partners equal to the concessions given up.
Safeguards The GATT/WTO regime allows nations to impose tem-
porary trade restrictions to protect industries injured from increased 
 imports.
Specific duty A tariff imposed on the quantity of a good, such as 5 cents 
a pound.
Supply chain A system for transforming raw materials and components 
into finished goods for customers. In the contemporary world, large cor-
porations search the world for raw materials where they are cheapest, 
transport them to locations where labor is least expensive for assembly 
into finished products, and then transport the final product to retailers 
and consumers.
Tariff A tax imposed on imports, or on occasion exports. A revenue tar-
iff is one primarily intended to generate revenue for the government, 
whereas a protective tariff is one intended to shelter domestic industry 
from foreign competition. A bound tariff is one that a country has commit-
ted not to raise beyond a specified point.
Trade balance The merchandise trade balance of a nation is the differ-
ence between its exports and imports. The current account balance is a 
broader measure that also takes into account trade in services, interest 
and dividends, and unilateral transfers.

332 Glossary
Trade liberalization This involves reducing barriers to trade.
Trade-promotion authority (TPA) See Fast-track negotiating authority.
Transnational corporation See Multinational corporation.
Unconditional most-favored nation policy See Nondiscrimination.

333
Index
Adams, John, 8
African Development Bank, 189
Alliance for American 
Manufacturing (AAM), 44 – 45, 
60, 244
Alternative Trade Adjustment Act 
(ATAA), 221
Amalgamated Clothing and 
Textile Workers Union, 25
American Farm Bureau (AFB), 53, 
62, 244 – 245
American Federation of Labor-
Congress of Industrial 
Organizations (AFL-CIO), 
245 – 246
American Manufacturing Trade 
Action Coalition (AMTAC), 44, 
188, 246
Argentina, 7, 92
Association of South East Asian 
Nations (ASEAN), 92, 118, 119, 
145
Australia, 104; China’s role 
in, 121; contemporary trade 
patterns of, 93; foreign policy 
in, 30; Japan’s trade with, 104; 
multilateral trade liberalization 
in, 15; protectionism in, 5; 
World Trade Organization’s 
role in, 112
Automotive Products Trade 
Agreement (APTA), 21
Ball, George, 17
Bank for International 
Settlements, 95, 188
Banking liquidity crisis, 7, 96
Barshefsky, Charlene, 48, 144, 
224 –228
Battle of Seattle, 26 –27
Baucus, Max, 51, 53, 155 –156
Baumol, William, 4
Beef imports, 51–52
Bello, Judith, 26
Bergsten, C. Fred, 61
Bhagwati, Jagdish, 56, 64, 66, 122, 
185
Bhatia, Karan, 57
Bilateralism, 20, 116 –122
Blinder, Alan, 38
Boeing, 27, 51, 60, 169, 205
Bolivia, 29, 30
Brady, Kevin, 156 –157
Brazil, 103 –104; China’s role in, 99; 
environmental trade in, 68; Free 
Trade Area for America’s role 
in, 29; free trade fault line in, 
41; Group of Twenty’s role in, 
114; human rights and trade 
in, 86; South Africa’s role in, 
106; trade patterns in, 8; trade 
strategies in, alternative, 121–122; 
World Trade Organization, 
negotiations with, 52
Brock, Bill, 20, 24, 139

334 Index
Brown, Sherrod C., 47, 55, 157–158
Buis, Tom, 53
Bureau of Economic Analysis, 187
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 
38, 187, 270 –271
Bureau of the Census, 187, 267
Bush, George W., 11, 21, 28, 
30 –31, 37, 40, 46, 172
Business Roundtable (BR), 9, 25, 
40, 246 –247
Business Software Alliance (BSA), 
247
CAFTA-Dominican Republic 
(CAFTA), 30 –31, 37, 55, 149
Cairns Group, 101, 104, 113 –114
California, 47
Camp, Dave, 158 –159
Canada, 100 –101; China’s role 
in, 58; economic recovery in, 
78; free-trade initiatives in, 20; 
high tariffs in, 12–13; Japan’s 
trade with, 101; trade patterns 
in, 8; trade strategies in, 
alternative, 120
Carter, Jimmy, 19, 139, 182
Cassidy, Robert, 28, 56, 59
Castro, Fidel, 62, 65
Caterpillar, 9, 27, 50, 60, 205, 252
CATO Institute, 248
Center for Economic Policy and 
Research (CEPR), 248 –249
Center for Public Integrity, 10
Chamber of Commerce of the 
United States (COC), 9, 249
Chang, Ha-joon, 5
Chavez, Hugo, 29, 48, 50
Chevron, 51
China, 99–100; Australia’s role 
in, 121; Brazil’s role in, 99; 
Canada’s role in, 58; deficit in, 
6; European Union’s trade with, 
6, 99; high tariffs in, 12; India’s 
role in, 77; Japan’s trade with, 
99; merchandise trade surplus 
in, 6; trade debate, responding 
to, 58 – 62; trade liberalization 
in, 43; trade strategies in, 
alternative, 120 –121; and 
U.S. deficit, 6; World Trade 
Organization admission, 27–28
China Currency Coalition, 59, 61
Citigroup, 50, 51
Citizen’s Global Trade Watch 
(GTW), 23, 63, 260
Citizens Trade Campaign (CTC), 
44, 250
Citizen Trade Watch, 26, 31, 57, 
69, 145, 183
Civil War, 12, 131, 170
Clay, Henry, 12
Climate strategy, 69–70
Clinton, Bill, 23, 25, 29, 37, 40, 46, 
142
Clinton, Hillary, 39, 153
Club for Growth, 59– 60
Coalition of Service Industries 
(CSI), 250 –251
Cobden, Richard, 12, 130 –131
Cobdenites, 12
Cold War, 1, 16, 28, 91–92
Colombia, 39, 48
Columbia University, 49–50
Committee on Finance, 155, 181, 
269
Common Agricultural Policy 
(CAP), 97–99, 136, 182
Communist Party, 27, 58
Consumer Electronics Association 
(CEA), 54, 251
Consumer goods, 8, 38, 43, 200, 
205
Corn laws, 12, 130
Cuba, 13, 15, 30, 62, 65, 176
Cuban trade, 62– 63
Customs and Border Protection 
(CBP), 270
Dairy importation, 73, 77, 111
Deficit, 6 – 8, 194

Index 335
De Gotari, Carlos Salinas, 21
Dingley Tariff (1897), 13, 132
Dispute settlement, 24, 115 –116
Dobbs, Lou, 38, 159– 60
Doha Development Round, 30, 
52, 54, 57, 112–113, 116, 178, 185
Dorgan, Byron, 47, 55 –56
Drugs, 73
Economic partnership 
agreements (EPA), 117, 119
Economic Policy Institute (EPI), 
43, 57, 188, 251–252
Economic recovery, 77–78
Emergency Committee for 
American Trade (ECAT), 40, 
252
Engler, John, 51
Environmental trade, 67–70
European-American Business 
Council (EABC), 253
European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development, 189
European Common Market, 17, 
92, 122
European Community, 24, 109, 
182
European Economic Community 
(EEC), 17, 136
European Union (EU), 30, 97–99, 
117–119; Cairns Group’s role in, 
113; China’s trade with, 6, 99; 
dairy importation in, 77; Group 
of Thirty-Three’s role in, 115; 
Group of Twenty’s role in, 114; 
India’s trade with, 105; Internet 
gambling in, 71; Japan’s trade 
with, 100; merchandise trade 
surplus in, 6; Mexico’s trade 
with, 101–102; Russia’s trade 
with, 102; seafood importation 
in, 73; South Africa’s trade 
with, 106; World Trade 
Organization negotiations, 52
Export-competing companies, 9
Fair-trade, 5
Fast-track, 45 – 46
Federal Reserve, 7– 8
Federalism, 47
Federation of International Trade 
Associations, 188
Focus on the Global South 
(Focus), 253 –254
Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), 73, 269–270
Fordney-McCumber Act of 
1922, 13
Foreign energy supplies, 196
Foreign investment, 194
Foreign markets, 41
Foreign policy, 30
Fortune magazine, 38
Franklin, Benjamin, 9
Free trade, 2– 4; defined, 2; 
regional and bilateral, 28 –31; 
shortcomings of, 3 – 4
Free trade agreement (FTA), 37; 
Canadian, 20; U.S.–Colombia, 
49–50; U.S.–Panama, 50; U.S.–
South Korea, 50 –52
Free Trade Area for the Americas 
(FTAA), 29, 30
Free trade fault line, 40 – 45
Free-trade initiatives, 19–21
Friedman, Milton, 3
Friends of the Earth (FOE), 69, 
254
Geithner, Timothy, 160 –161
General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade (GATT), 15 –16, 91
Generalized System of 
Preferences (GSP), 109
Gingrich, Newt, 46
Global recession, 7, 59
Global Trade Watch, 43
Globalization, 38, 39, 93
Gomory, Ralph, 4
Grassley, Charles (Chuck), 
53, 161–162

336 Index
Great Britain, 14
Great Depression, 11, 12, 13, 
42, 45
Griswold, Daniel, 56
Gross domestic product (GDP), 93
Group of Thirty-three (G-33), 
114 –115
Group of Twenty (G-20), 114
Gulf Corporation Council (GCC), 
120
Hale, David, 96
Hamilton, Alexander, 11, 162–163
Harding, Warren, 13
Harrison, Benjamin, 11
Hartquist, Skip, 61
Hastert, Dennis, 30 –31
Hawkins, William, 99–100
Hawley, Willis, 13
High tariffs, 4 –5, 12–13
Hills, Carla A., 21, 24, 218
Hoover, Herbert, 77
House of Representatives, 19, 29
House Ways, 13
Hufbauer, Gary, 218
Hull, Cordell, 11, 14, 45, 163 –164
Human rights, 64 – 67, 86
Import restrictions, 10
Import-competing companies, 9
Import-sensitive manufacturers, 44
Importation, 72–73
India, 105 –106, 121; China’s role 
in, 77; Doha Round’s role in, 
52, 54; European Union’s trade 
with, 105; globalization in, 93; 
World Trade Organization’s 
role in, 112
Industrial piracy, 8
Institute for Agriculture and 
Trade Policy (IATP), 254 –255
Inter-American Development 
Bank Group, 189
International Chamber of 
Commerce (ICC), 42, 256
International Energy Agency, 188
International Intellectual Property 
Alliance (IIPA), 255
International Labor Organization, 
49, 66
International Monetary Fund, 5, 7, 
15, 26, 188
International trade, 8
International trade law, 75
Internet gambling, 71
Isolationism, 42
Israel, 15, 20, 57
Japan, 30, 100, 119–120; Australia’s 
trade with, 104; Canada’s 
trade with, 101; China’s trade 
with, 99; deficit in, 7; European 
Union’s trade with, 100; free 
trade in, 4; high tariffs in, 
12; Mexico’s trade with, 102; 
multilateral trade liberalization 
in, 15 –16; protectionism in, 
5; South Africa’s trade with, 
106; trade patterns in, 8; World 
Trade Organization’s role in, 52
Jefferson, Thomas, 8, 11
Job losses, 38
Kantor, Mickey, 24, 40, 70
Kearns, Kevin, 44
Kennedy, John F., 17
Kennedy Round, 17–18
Kennedy Round Congress, 45
Kentucky Whig, 12
Kernaghan, Charles, 209
Kirk, Ron, 40, 165
Krueger, Anne, 5
Krugman, Paul, 4
Labor costs, 197
Labor unions, 47
Lamy, Pascal, 45, 166
Latin America, 30
Latin American Trade Coalition, 50
Lee, Thea, 44

Index 337
Levin, Sander (Sandy), 166 –167
Liberalization, 29, 38, 43
Lighthizer, Robert, 76
List, Friedrich, 5, 167–168
Locke, Gary, 169–170
London Economic Conference 
(1933), 13
Long, Russell, 17
Madoff, Bernie, 44
Manufacturing job losses, 38, 205
McKinley, William, 11, 131, 170 –171
McMillion, Charles, 58
Means Committee, 13
Merchandise trade, 94
Merchandise trade deficit, 6, 153, 
202, 205
Merchandise trade surplus, 6
Mercosur, 92
Methanex, 47
Mexico, 101–102; European 
Union’s trade with, 101–102; 
Group of Thirty-Three’s role 
in, 114; Japan’s trade with, 102; 
North American Free Trade 
Agreement’s role in, 21–22; 
trade patterns in, 8; World Trade 
Organization’s role in, 115
Middle East, 30
Middle East Free Trade Initiative 
(MEFTA), 30
Ministry of International Trade 
( Japan), 16
Mishel, Lawrence, 43
Moore, Mike, 112
Morrill, Justin Smith, 12, 131, 
171–72
Motion Picture Association of 
America (MPAA), 54, 256 –257
Mulroney, Brian, 22
Multilateral trade 
liberalization, 15 –17
Multinational corporations, 43
Myrdal, Gunnar, 5
Myung-bak, Lee, 51
Nader, Ralph, 26
Napoleonic Wars, 12
National Association of 
Manufacturers (NAM), 9, 40, 
188, 257–258
National currency, 7
National Family Farm Coalition 
(NFFC), 53
National Farmers Union (NFU), 53
National Foreign Trade Council 
(NFTC), 40, 52, 258
National Labor Committee (NLC), 
66, 209–212, 258 –259
National Labor Committee for 
Worker and Human Rights, 66
National Trade Estimate Report on 
Foreign Trade Barriers 
(report), 59
Net earnings, 194
New York Times (magazine), 4, 74
Nixon, Richard, 45
Nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs), 69
North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA), 21–23, 46
Obama, Barack, 39– 40, 44, 45, 
64, 78
Offshoring, 38
Oil exportation, 191
Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development 
(OECD), 188
Organization of the Petroleum 
Exporting Countries 
(OPEC), 92
Organized labor, 43 – 44, 48, 53
Otabe, K., 16
Ottawa, 21
Outsourcing, 38
Oversea investment earnings, 6
Oxfam America, 259
Panama, 50
Panitchpakdi, Supachai, 112

338 Index
Paris Convention for the 
Protection of Industrial 
Property, 9
Patents, 9
Paul, Ron, 71
Paulson, Henry (Hank), 172–173
Pelosi, Nancy, 48, 173 –174
Pending agreements, 48 –56
Pentagon, 58
People’s Republic of China, 58
Permanent Normal Trade 
Relations (PNTR), 27
Peterson Institute for International 
Economics (PIIE), 259–260
Petroleum, 8
Pew Research Center, 10
Pharmaceutical patents, 10
Philippines, 13
Pierce, Franklin, 12
Pirating, 102–103
Prebisch, Raul, 175 –176
Private finance, 95
Private investment, 95 –96
Protectionism, 4 – 6
Public opinion, 10
Quebec, 21, 27
Rangel, Charles, 176 –177
Ratzenberger, John, 45
Raw materials, 8
Reagan, Ronald, 28
Reciprocal trade, 13 –15
Recording Industry Association 
of America (RIAA), 54, 261
Regionalism, 116 –122
Reinsch, Bill, 52
Ricardo, David, 2, 177–178
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 13 –14, 77
Rosen, Howard E., 221
Russia, 102–103; banking liquidity 
crisis in, 96; European Union’s 
trade with, 102; free trade fault 
line in, 41; importation in, 77; 
multilateral trade liberalization 
in, 15
Safety, 71–74
Samuelson, Paul, 4
Schwab, Susan, 11, 178 –179
Seafood importation, 73
Seattle Convention Center, 26
Senate, 19
Senate Finance Committee, 12, 
17, 19
Separation of powers, 10 –11
Service trade, 6
Sheinkman, Jack, 25
Sierra Club, 265
Smith, Adam, 2, 179–180
Smoot, Reed, 13, 180 –181
Smoot-Hawley Tariff (1930), 13, 42
South Africa, 106 –107; Brazil’s 
trade with, 106; Cairns Group’s 
role in, 113; European Union’s 
trade with, 106; Group of 
Twenty’s role in, 114; Japan’s 
trade with, 106; World Trade 
Organization’s role in, 112
South American Mercosur, 29
South Korea, 50 –52
Sovereignty, 70 –71
Soviet Union, 15
Special trade representative 
(STR), 17
State Department, 14, 15
Stiglitz, Joseph, 26
Strauss, Robert S., 19, 181–182
Strengthening Trade Assistance 
(Rosen), 221
Switzerland, 30
Taft, William Howard, 13
Tantillo, Auggie, 44, 47
Tariff Act (1930), 13, 65
Tariff reductions, 14
Terrorism, 71–72
Thailand, 7
Third World Network (TWN), 262
Tokyo Round, 18 –19, 108 –109
Trade: debating gains and 
losses from, 56 –58; and 
economic recovery, 77–78; 

Index 339
and environment, 67–70; and 
human rights, 64 – 67; and safety, 
71–74; and sovereignty, 70 –71
Trade Act of 1974, 18
Trade Act of 2002, 69
Trade adjustment assistance 
(TAA), 63
Trade Agreement Act (1979), 19
Trade debate. See also Trade: 
background on, 37–39; in China, 
58 – 62; factors shaping, 2–31; 
historical overview of, 11–31; 
pending agreements on, 48 –56
Trade debate, factors shaping, 
2–31; deficits, 6 – 8; fair 
trade, 4 – 6; free trade, 2– 4; 
protectionism, 4 – 6; trade 
patterns, 8 –9; trade politics, 
9–11; trade surpluses, 6 – 8
Trade debate, historical overview 
of, 11–31; Battle of Seattle, 
26 –27; China’s admission to 
World Trade Organization, 
27–28; fast track, 18 –19; free 
trade, 19–21, 28 –31; high 
tariffs, 12–13; Kennedy 
Round, 17–18; multilateral 
trade liberalization, 15 –17; 
North American Free Trade 
Agreement, 21–23; reciprocal 
trade, 13 –15; Tokyo Round, 
18 –19; Uruguay Round, 24 –26
Trade dislocated workers, 63 – 64
Trade Expansion Act (TEA), 17
Trade liberalization, 8, 43, 57
Trademarks, 9
Trade negotiations, 45 – 48, 68
Trade partners, leading, 97–107; 
Australia, 104; Brazil, 103 –104; 
Canada, 100 –101; China, 
99–100; European Union, 
97–99; India, 105 – 6; Japan, 100; 
Mexico, 101–102; Russia, 
102–103; South Africa, 106 –107
Trade patterns, 8 –9; 
contemporary, 91–97
Trade politics, 9–11
Trade priorities, 39– 40
Trade-promotion authority (TPA), 
45 – 47
Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights 
(TRIPS), 102
Trade-related investment 
measures (TRIMs), 110
Trade strategies, alternative, 
116 –122; in Brazil, 121–122; in 
Canada, 120; in China, 120 –121; 
in European Union, 117–119; in 
India, 121; in Japan, 119–120
Trade surpluses, 6 – 8
Transitional corporations, 41– 42
Transnational business, 96
Treaty of Rome (1957), 98
Trowbridge, Alexander, 18
Tyler, John, 11
Unilateral transfers, 6
United Nations Conference 
on Trade and Development 
(UNCTAD), 109, 188, 262–263
UN Food and Agricultural 
Organization, 188
United Parcel Service (UPS), 51
U.S. Business and Industrial 
Council Educational 
Foundation, 263
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 
42, 50
US-China Business Council 
(USBC), 188, 263 –264
U.S.–China Economic 
and Security Review 
Commission, 212–213
U.S.–Colombia, 49–50
U.S.–Colombia FTA, 49–50
U.S. Constitution, 26
U.S. Consumer Product Safety 
Commission, 74
U.S. Council for International 
Business (USCIB), 40, 42, 
265 –266

340 Index
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA), 73, 266
U.S. Department of Commerce: 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, 
267–268; Bureau of the Census, 
267; International Trade 
Administration, 268
U.S. Department of Commerce 
(DOC), 76, 268
U.S. Department of Energy 
(DOE), 268 –269
U.S. Department of State (DOS), 
271
U.S. Department of 
Transportation (DOT), 271–272
U.S. Department of Treasury, 
272–273
U.S. International Trade 
Commission (USITC), 19, 
75 –76, 273
U.S.–Panama free trade 
agreement, 50
U.S.–South Korea free trade 
agreement, 50 –52
U.S. Trade and Development 
Agency (USTDA), 273 –274
U.S. Trade Deficit Review 
Commission, 6
U.S. trade issues: background and 
history of, 1–31; problems with, 
controversies and solutions to, 
37–78; worldwide perspective 
on, 91–123
U.S. trade laws, 74 –77
U.S. Trade Representative 
(USTR), 10, 11, 29, 274
U.S. Treasury, 7; bonds, 
8; International Bank 
for Reconstruction and 
Development, 15
United Steelworkers, 60
Uruguay Round, 24 –26, 109–112
Venezuela, 29
Vietnam War, 18
Wage stagnation, 205
Wal-Mart, 42, 50, 58
Wall Street, 40
Wallach, Lori, 26, 31, 47, 57, 70, 183
War of 1812, 12
Watergate scandal, 18
Ways and Means Committee, 264
Wealth of Nations, The (Smith), 2
White, Sir Eric Wyndham, 184
White collar workers, 38
Wilson, Woodrow, 13
World Bank, 26
World Customs Organization 
(WCO), 274 –275
World Economic Forum (WEF), 
275
World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO), 275 –276
World Trade Organization (WTO), 
25, 107–16, 276 –277; Australia’s 
role in, 112; Brazil’s negotiations 
with, 52; Cairns Group’s role 
in, 113 –114; China’s admission 
to, 27–28; dispute settlement, 
115 –116; European Union’s 
negotiations with, 52; Group of 
Thirty-Three’s role in, 114 –115; 
Group of Twenty’s role in, 114; 
India’s role in, 112; Japan’s role 
in, 52; leadership transition in, 
112–113; Mexico’s role in, 
115; South Africa’s role in, 112; 
and Tokyo Round, 108 –109; and 
Uruguay Round, 109–112
World War II, 14 –15
Yeutter, Clayton, 24
Zoellick, Robert, 29, 56, 185 –186

About the Author
Alfred E. Eckes, Jr., is Ohio Eminent Research Professor at Ohio 
University in Athens. He is a former chairman and commissioner 
of the U.S. International Trade Commission and the author of 
 several books on U.S. trade policy.

