www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
U.S. NATIONAL 
SECURITY 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Abortion in the United States, Dorothy E. McBride
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Capital Punishment, Michael Kronenwetter
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conﬂ icts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Euthanasia, Martha L. Gorman and Jennifer Fecio McDougall
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James 
Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, 
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series 
will ﬁ nd the information they need in order to have a better 
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and 
economic issues facing the world today.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
U.S. NATIONAL 
SECURITY
A Reference Handbook,
Second Edition
Cynthia A. Watson
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Copyright 2008 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Watson, Cynthia Ann.
 U.S. national security : a reference handbook / Cynthia A. Watson.
  p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-59884-041-4 (hard copy : alk. paper)— 
 ISBN 978-1-59884-042-1 (ebook) 
 1.  National security—United States. 2.  United States—Military 
 policy. 3.  World politics—1945– 4.  United States—Foreign 
 relations—1945–1989. 5.  United States—Foreign relations—1989–  
 I. Title. 
 UA23.W36397 2008
 355’.033073—dc22
13 12 11 10 09 08  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. Visit 
www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper ∞
Manufactured in the United States of America

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
To the most famous carpool (inaugurated in 1992) ever at the National 
War College, the members of which honored me with their teaching 
about national security and much else:
Colonel Jim “Jimmy” Dixon, USAR and the Defense Intelligence 
Agency (retired)
Colonel John “Cipster” Cipparone, USMC (retired)
Captain/Dr. Bud Cole, USN 
Vice Admiral Tom Kilcline, USN
Captain Bill “Wild Man” Tyson, USN (retired)
Colonel/Dr. Roy Stafford, USAF 
Captain George Murphy, USN (retired)
Colonel Mark Pizzo, USMC (retired)

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
ix
Contents
Preface, xv
 1 Background and History, 1
 
The Effects of Jihadists, 4
 
What Does National Security Mean?, 4
 
National Security Encompasses New Issues, 5
 
The U.S. Experience since the September 11 Attacks, 7
 
 
The Preemption versus Prevention Debate, 7
 
 
 Iran and Afghanistan: Superpowers Sometimes 
 Don’t Find It Easy, 8
 
 
 Will Crafting Countries as Democracies Protect 
 U.S. Security?, 10
 
The Changing National Security Community, 12
 
 
The Legislative Institutions, 13
 
 
Beyond Iraq: National Security across the Horizon, 14
 
 
A Dramatically Evolving Asian Scenario for Security, 17
 
 
Indonesia, 19
 
 
Nontraditional Threats, 20
 
Government, 23
 
 
Legislative Branch, 23
 
 
 Congressional Research Service and Government 
 Accountability Ofﬁ ce, 23
 
 
Executive Branch, 24
 
 
The Intelligence Community, 26
 
 
Department of Homeland Security, 27
 
 
Coast Guard, 28
 
 
Department of Justice, 28
 
 
The Judicial Role, 29
 
Summary, 29
 
References, 30

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
x Contents
2 
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 31
 
Questions on the Issue of National Security, 31
 
 
 Does Terrorism Represent the Same Type of Existential 
 Threat as the Cold War Did?, 31
 
 
What Is Included in National Security?, 32
 
 
 Is the United States More Secure After the Invasion 
 of Iraq?, 34
 
 
 Will Russia Become a National Security Threat to the 
 United States?, 35
 
 
 Can “Personalization” of National Security Adversely 
 Affect U.S. National Interests?, 38
 
 
 Is National Security the Concern of Politicians or the 
 Entire Society?, 40
 
 
 Is Global Warming Truly the Most Pressing Immediate 
 National Security Issue?, 41
 
 
 Does China’s Phenomenal Growth Pose a Threat 
 to the Nation’s Security?, 41
 
 
 Does U.S. Involvement in the “Long War” Threaten Its 
 Role as the World Leader?, 44
 
 
 Is U.S. National Security Threatened by the Nature 
 of Islamic Societies?, 47
 
 
 Does Challenging the President’s Decision-Making 
 Give Support to al Qaeda or Is it Part 
 of the Democratic Process?, 48
 
 
 How Does India, the Largest Democracy in the World, 
 Relate to the United States?, 49
 
 
 Did Questionable Interrogation Techniques for Prisoners 
 and Saddam Hussein’s Execution Undercut 
 the U.S. Global Position?, 51
 
 
 Does Funding for National Security Tools Affect 
 Which Tools Become Most Frequently Used?, 51
 
 
How Has “Globalization” Affected National Security?, 54
 
 
Is U.S. Debt a Major Threat to National Security?, 54
 
 
 Where Does National Security End and Homeland 
 Security Begin?, 55
 
 
 How Can the Nation Regain Its National Character 
 in the Face of the Terrorism Threat?, 56
 
 
 What Is the Proper Balance between Defending National 
 Security and Protecting Civil Rights and Liberties?, 57
 
 
 Should the Nation Return to a National Draft or Retain 
 a Voluntary Force?, 58

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Contents xi
 
 
 Should Those Seized During Conﬂ ict Be Treated 
 as Prisoners of War or as Nontraditional 
 Combatants?, 59
 
 
 How Much Is National Security Worth if Faced 
 with a Massive Budget Deﬁ cit?, 60
 
 
 How Does the Nation Balance National Security 
 in the Private and Public Sectors?, 60
 
 
 Should the Nation Be Preparing for Traditional Warfare 
 or for Counterinsurgency and Other Types 
 of Nontraditional Conﬂ ict?, 61
 
 
 Is the United States Safer by Creating Governance 
 in States around the World or by Allowing Others 
 to Determine Their Governments and Fates?, 63
 
 
 Is the United States More Susceptible to Threat 
 by Engaging in Conﬂ icts in Iraq and Afghanistan?, 64
 
 
 Is the United States Better Off Waging a “War of Choice” 
 than a “War of Necessity”?, 65
 
 
 Does the United States Still Recoil from Service 
 Personnel’s Deaths or Has the Nation Overcome 
 the “Vietnam Syndrome”?, 66
 
 
Is Traditional National Security No Longer Relevant?, 67
 
 
 Have Discoveries of Poor-Quality Veterans’ Care
 Standards Altered the Debate about National 
 Security?, 67
 
 
 Is the Whole Nation Sacriﬁ cing for This War 
 or Are Only Those in the Armed Forces Affected?, 68
 
 
 Are the Disagreements on National Security Priorities 
 between the President and Congress Threatening 
 Troops in the Field and the Nation’s Security?, 69
 
 
 Should the United States Be the Global Police, 
 Keeping the World in Line with U.S. Goals?, 70
 
 
 Should the United States Carry Burdens of 
 National Security Alone or Work with Greater 
 Numbers of Allies and Partners?, 72
 
References, 73
3 
Worldwide Perspective, 75
 
Geographic Imperative, 75
 
Economic Imperative, 77
 
 
 Spending on Defense versus Nonmilitary Tools 
 of Statecraft, 79

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
xii Contents
 
Unilateralism versus Multilateralism, 81
 
Sovereignty: The United States versus the World, 83
 
Unipolarity versus Multipolarity after Bipolarity, 84
 
The Balance-of-Power World, 85
 
 A Concrete Example of Differences: The United States 
 and Asia, 88
 
 
 China-Taiwan: Three Different Interpretations 
 of the Status Quo Ante, 88
 
 
The India-Pakistan Nuclear Standoff, 92
 
 
New Nuclear Players: Iran and North Korea, 93
 
 
What Do These Cases Mean?, 97
 
Conclusion, 97
 
References, 97
4 
Chronology, 99
5 
Biographical Sketches, 123
 
John Abizaid, 123
 
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, 124
 
Madeleine Korbel Albright, 124
 
Ali Husaini Sistani, Grand Ayatollah, 125
 
Koﬁ  Annan, 126
 
Osama bin Laden, 126
 
Anthony “Tony” Charles Lynton Blair, 127
 
L. Paul “Jerry” Bremer III, 129
 
George W. Bush, 130
 
George William Casey, Jr., 132
 
Fidel Castro, 133
 
Ahmed Chalabi, 135
 
Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías, 136
 
Chen Shui-Bian, 137
 
Richard “Dick” Bruce Cheney, 139
 
Hillary Rodham Clinton, 141
 
Karl Eikenberry, 142
 
Tommy Franks, 142
 
Peter W. Galbraith, 143
 
Jay Garner, 143
 
William “Bill” Henry Gates III, 144
 
Albert Gore, Jr., 145
 
Alan C. Greenspan, 146
 
Hu Jintao, 147
 
Hamid Karzai, 148

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Contents xiii
 
Zalmay Khalilzad, 148
 
Kim Jong Il, 148
 
William Kristol, 149
 
Robert Mugabe, 150
 
Peter Pace, 150
 
David H. Petreaus, 151
 
Colin Luther Powell, 151
 
Vladimir Putin, 152
 
Condoleezza Rice, 153
 
Donald Rumsfeld, 154
6 
Data and Documents, 157
 
 Taiwan Relations Act of 1979, Public Law 96-8, 
 96th Congress, 157
 
 George W. Bush’s State of the Union Address, 
 January 29, 2002, 159
 
 George W. Bush’s Graduation Speech at West Point, 
 June 1, 2002, 162
 
 George W. Bush’s Remarks at the United Nations 
 General Assembly, September 12, 2002, 168
 
 George W. Bush’s State of the Union Address, 
 January 28, 2003, 173
 
 Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Addresses 
 the UN Security Council, February 5, 2003, 179
 
 George W. Bush’s Address to the Nation about 
 the Iraq Invasion, March 19, 2003, 187
 
 George W. Bush Announces that Major Combat 
 Operations in Iraq Have Ended, May 1, 2003, 188
 
 Military Support for Stability, Security, Transition, 
 and Reconstruction Operations, November 28, 2005, 191
 
 George W. Bush’s State of the Union Address, 
 January 31, 2006, 193
 
 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review Report 
 of the United States, February 6, 2005, 196
 
 The National Security Strategy of the United States, 
 March 16, 2006, 197
 
 George W. Bush’s State of the Union Message, 
 January 23, 2007, 198
7 
Organizations, 203
 
Nongovernmental Sector, 204

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
xiv Contents
 
Federally Funded Research and Development Centers, 231
 
Federal Institutions, 232
8 
Resources, 241
 
Print Resources, 243
 
 
Articles and Special Issues of a Single Journal, 243
 
 
Books and Monographs, 247
 
Nonprint Resources, 256
 
 
Think-Tank Websites and Products, 256
 
 
Blogs, 258
 
 
Radio and Television, 259
 
 
DVD, Video, Film, and Other Visual Media, 265
 
 
Reading Lists, 266
Glossary, 269
Index, 275
About the Author, 283

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
xv
Preface
I 
greatly appreciate the opportunity to update the 2001 edition 
of this book. Encouraging public debate about national security 
because it is our security is my goal because I would like to see 
people understand what their government is asking them to do if 
they send daughters and sons overseas to ﬁ ght for us. I have been 
lucky enough to be a student of national security for most of my 
life, looking at the ﬁ eld from various angles. I readily acknowl-
edge that I do not have all of the right answers; I don’t think in 
terms of “right” or “wrong” answers. But I desperately want my 
fellow citizens to understand that each answer has consequences 
(some intended, others completely unintended) with which all of 
us will live. I write about national security because I want people 
to think about whether they are willing to bear the burden or pay 
the price of those consequences. While I believe I have the most 
interesting job in the world, no one should ever confuse enthusi-
asm on the part of those involved in national security to grasp our 
work with a desire to go to war; they are not the same thing. No 
one understands the costs of war better than those who wage it; 
make no mistake. 
Mim Vasan has privileged me as my friend and editor for 
more than two decades. Dayle Dermatis is patient and gently 
encouraging. Both were exceedingly frustrated with my unortho-
dox approach to writing this volume, but I believe we have man-
aged to produce an excellent understanding of national security, 
keeping our eyes on the prize. Cami Cacciatore was a sensational 
editor. The staff at ABC-CLIO, no matter what role, is incredibly 
helpful. I thank each and every one of them.  
Bonnie and Scott Nordstrom are the two most patient, sup-
portive children in the world. In our few hours together weekly, 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
they ask wonderful questions and are tolerant of my disappear-
ances into the study to type. Thank you.
My colleagues at the National War College are simply the 
best, professionals and friends, past and present. Our new com-
mandant, Major General (Promotable) Robert Steel, USAF, shows 
enthusiasm about our work, which makes it a grand place to work. 
The commandant who served while I wrote most of this volume, 
Major General Marné Peterson, USAF (ret.), brought us a freshness 
and class that made one want to come in the doors of Roosevelt 
Hall daily. Susan Sherwood is a dear friend and valued colleague. 
Captain Steve Camacho, USN, has reminded me about priorities: 
I hope I continue to listen to his wise suggestions. I dread the day 
that Dr. Roy Stafford ﬁ nally retires because his counsel and his 
commitment to what we do have been so valuable over the past 
ﬁ fteen years. Additionally, Roy was generous to read this volume 
and offer substantive comments, which I hope to have adequately 
incorporated, as did Dr. Alan Gropman of our sister institution, the 
Industrial College of the Armed Forces. Dr. Paul Godwin invari-
ably ﬁ nds a way to ask a superb question that makes me rethink. 
Ms. Lisa Bronson’s enthusiasm and commitment to our curricu-
lum has reinvigorated me and others, while bringing a crispness 
to what we do. While that does not sound important to outsiders, 
the need to infuse new techniques and excitement into the teach-
ing of what can be deadly serious discussion is a key to keeping us 
going. Retired Colonel Mark Pizzo, USMC, does his best to make 
life so much easier. Dr. Bud Cole is my best friend and I cherish 
that. His support, encouragement, and gentle redirection at times 
keep me going.
The views expressed in this book are my own, not those of 
the U.S. government or the National War College. Any mistakes 
are mine alone.
xvi Preface

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
1
1
Background and History
T
he concept of national security changed dramatically for some 
analysts on the morning of September 11, 2001. Others believe 
the disaster that occurred that morning was a manifestation of 
the national security concerns that have faced the country for all 
of its history. Some saw September 11 as merely one more form 
of threat against the nation, while many others thought it was an 
existential threat to the fabric of the United States. These different 
viewpoints within the community of analysts and practitioners 
reﬂ ect the difﬁ culty of achieving consensus in how to approach 
the issue of national security. For the George W. Bush administra-
tion, there is no question that the events of that day were an end 
to complacency and the beginning of a sense of mission that out-
weighs all other priorities.
The purpose of this volume is to discuss the ﬁ eld of national 
security to help society consider its options. National security, 
although it is practiced by professional military men and women 
and ordered by civilian politicians, is in the end a public policy 
decision for the entire nation, not merely for the professional com-
munity. Increasingly, national security requires civilian profes-
sionals, the government, and the private sector to cooperate with, 
support, and often supplant the traditional military instrument of 
war in the United States. 
September 11 may be too close an event for us to take stock of 
its true nature because we were largely participants, albeit mostly 
from afar. But the power of the images and the magnitude of the 
shock may have paralyzed our ability to grasp the nature of the 
threat. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
2 Background and History
National security is a fundamental responsibility of any gov-
ernment. Without security, people cannot trust their government 
or their neighbors, nor can they focus on loftier goals because they 
are worried about their ability to provide for their families or to 
prepare adequately for the future. Without basic security, people 
operate in a highly volatile environment that does not support 
traditional functioning in a society and leads to severe mistrust 
of all institutions and individuals in a position of power. Many 
societies around the world confront this daily challenge in trying 
to provide the most fundamental elements of security in their citi-
zens’ lives daily; Iraq and Colombia come to mind immediately 
as states where the struggle goes on, while Somalia seems a place 
where everyone has given up. 
This basic reality of the desire for sanctuary proved true on 
September 11 when millions in the United States waited in con-
fusion for deﬁ nitive information on the number and locations of 
the attacks against the nation; it also proved true for hundreds 
of thousands living along the Gulf Coast in August 2005 where a 
natural element—water—terrorized them equally as they sought 
to understand why help did not appear on the horizon in a rela-
tively short time. An inability to provide the basic human sense 
of safety characterizes both examples and illustrates why national 
security is a difﬁ cult concept for many of us to agree upon today, 
indeed throughout the period since the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, 
heralding the end of the Cold War.
The United States has always literally had a unique position 
in the world because of the two massive oceans on the East and 
West coasts, along with two relatively benign neighbors in Canada 
and Mexico. Before World War II, U.S. interventions did occur, 
largely around the Caribbean Basin. The United States intervened 
ostensibly for national security reasons, but often in fact to pro-
mote the national expansion known as Manifest Destiny or the 
Monroe Doctrine.
World War I was a relatively novel experience for the nation—
deploying U.S. forces in a ground war far away from the nation’s 
heartland. The United States Navy had operated in far seas since 
the founding of the republic, but the nation had prided itself on 
not intervening overseas—just as President George Washington 
had advised at the end of the eighteenth century: “[S]o likewise, a 
passionate attachment of one nation for another produces a vari-
ety of evils . . . [T]he great rule of conduct for us, in regard to for-
eign nations, is, in extending our commercial relations, is to have 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
with them as little political connexion [sic] as possible” (Washing-
ton 1796). During World War II, there were some critics of the war 
effort, such as Jeannette Rankin of Wyoming (she voted against 
both world wars), but most citizens embraced the war effort after 
the shock of the Japanese attack at Pearl Harbor on December 7, 
1941. That “bolt from the blue” attack colored U.S. concerns from 
World War II to the Cold War that followed.
The U.S. response to the international community during the 
Cold War is arguably an aberration in U.S. history. The Soviet Union 
(as it was known) had the capability to physically end the United 
States and the United States had the capability to do the same to the 
Soviet Union. The armed forces were the buttress against that hap-
pening, but these men and women were playing a different role, in 
some ways, than ever before. For the overwhelming majority of the 
nation’s experience, the military had remained small and the gen-
eral population demilitarized. The exceptions were nation-building 
efforts in the West or when the navy was used to protect U.S. assets 
abroad, such as the shipping trade with Europe. In the Cold War era 
(1947–1989), however, the United States maintained a large stand-
ing military that was frequently deployed well beyond U.S. shores 
to help “contain” a Soviet threat against the world. Spending on 
defense and security was virtually unchallenged because the stakes 
were so high. While many debates remain about what actually led 
to the Soviet demise, the deployment of U.S. military forces abroad 
in signiﬁ cant numbers with high-technology armaments and the 
possibility of a nuclear conﬂ ict between the two states certainly pro-
vided some measure of a deterrent.
With the end of the Soviet empire, the United States seemed 
to be entering a period of ensured safety, thus considerably less 
ﬁ nancial commitment to national security would be required. 
Early in 1990, Congress and the executive branch debated the 
range of possible uses for the anticipated “peace dividend” that 
would result from the lack of a threat against the nation because 
national security would no longer be focused exclusively on the 
Soviet-based problem, which was in the process of disappearing. 
Instead, the August 1990 invasion of Kuwait by Iraqi dicta-
tor Saddam Hussein, and the subsequent buildup and use of a 
multinational coalition force in operations Desert Shield and Des-
ert Storm, indicated that peace might not be exactly at hand. The 
Iraq problem coincided with a greater series of requests by the 
United Nations, under Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, 
for international peacekeepers under the Agenda for Peace, a 
Background and History 3

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
4 Background and History
program to encourage preventive actions to keep conﬂ icts within 
states from becoming civil wars. The 1990s became a series of 
actions by the international community to end domestic traumas 
in Somalia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Liberia, and East 
Timor, althouh these did not represent the globalized thermo-
nuclear war many feared during the Cold War. At the dawn of 
the new millennium, many experts concluded that the post–Cold 
War era would be characterized by a series of smaller, manageable 
problems probably best handled not by traditional combat forces 
but by the nation builders who could help create institutions.
The Effects of Jihadists
The shock of the September 11 attacks was a wake-up call paral-
leled only by the Pearl Harbor attack. The nation had shared a 
history of relative peace and security with Mexico to the south 
and Canada to the north. Terrorism did not seem to happen here, 
although the April 1996 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal 
Building in Oklahoma City had partially washed away that belief. 
The attack by jihadists or al Qaeda or Osama bin Laden himself 
showed that the world was indeed more interconnected by tech-
nology and by hatred than had been understood before.
Along with a fear that we are no longer absolutely safe from 
terrorists on our shores or nature altering our safety, over the past 
several years the United States has found that superpower status 
is not a guarantee of any ability to rebuild the world in a manner 
that supports our view of how to provide national security. By any 
empirical measure, the United States had the military prowess to 
defeat the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and the brutal dictator-
ship of Saddam Hussein in Iraq. Yet the hard lesson that empirical 
might does not guarantee the ultimate, quick victory over a sys-
tem opposing our will has been and continues to be a painful one. 
As long as we believe the international system must align with 
our analysis of the requirements for a nonthreatening world, this 
frustrating state of affairs seems irreversible.
What Does National Security Mean?
How do we generally deﬁ ne national security? The nation has long 
had a national security strategy, developed by various parts of the 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
government security community. The most recent one appeared 
in March 2006 (U.S. GPO 2006). The introduction by President 
George W. Bush does not deﬁ ne the concept but notes that it relies 
on two pillars: “promoting freedom, justice, and human dignity” 
and “confronting the challenges of our time by leading a growing 
community of democracies.” 
Various organizations, many of which are discussed elsewhere 
in this book, have a focus on national security, even if that focus is 
not reﬂ ected in their titles. However, each group has a deﬁ nition of 
national security that is speciﬁ c to the group and its goals. 
Former Secretary of Defense Harold Brown’s deﬁ nition of 
national security seems most basic: “National security, then, is the 
ability to preserve the nation’s physical integrity and territory; to 
maintain its economic relations with the rest of the world on rea-
sonable terms; to protect its nature, institutions, and governance 
from disruption from outside; and to control its borders” (Brown 
1983, 4). 
National security today, in the George W. Bush period, is no 
longer concerned with defending national borders alone. National 
security includes protecting U.S. citizens abroad, guaranteeing 
access to the assets we need to maintain our standard of living, 
and protecting the type of government we ﬁ nd important to sus-
taining the nations with which we interact in the world. This is a 
dramatic shift from the views long held by many in the United 
States who might have preferred democratic governance but 
deferred to the will of the peoples of other states. If asked in an 
essay exam to deﬁ ne national security, the answers of President 
George W. Bush’s administration would be signiﬁ cantly different 
and broader in scope than those of the Coolidge or either of the 
Harrison administrations. This is not to say that President Bush 
is wrong, nor is he entirely unique; President Harry S. Truman’s 
decisions in the late 1940s similarly upset a number of citizens 
who believed national security required only protecting the prop-
erty and limb of citizens of the United States. But President Bush’s 
decision to enforce democratic governance is a shift from the self-
determination so long advocated by the United States.
National Security Encompasses New Issues
The number of issues and concepts included in national secu-
rity have increased. Since the Cold War ended, national security 
National Security Encompasses New Issues 5

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
6 Background and History
increasingly has an economic and environmental, even informa-
tional, component instead of merely deﬁ ning our borders. 
During the Cold War, the fear of a physical attack on the United 
States with nuclear weapons was overwhelming. In the 1980s, as 
reports began to circulate about parents beginning to doubt whether 
their children would have a better lifestyle than they had, questions 
of economic security began to surface. The petroleum embargo and 
attendant gas price increases of the 1970s were thought an aberra-
tion in our national security. The effects, until the twenty-ﬁ rst cen-
tury, appeared an anomaly on the screen and disappeared not long 
after they appeared. However, the ﬂ ight of steel and auto manufac-
turing jobs from the massive factories of the Midwest to Japan and 
Korea, the “Asian Tigers,” illustrated a vulnerability that had never 
been recognized before. In the 1990s, economic security assumed a 
position comparable to political and military security.
Similarly, environmental concerns arose in the 1990s and 
accelerated in the following decade. Worries had earlier focused 
on problems such as the desertiﬁ cation of northern Africa or the 
disappearance of the Aral Sea in central Asia, but those problems 
were “over there,” far away from the continental United States. 
Concern over the growth of environmental pollution in the north-
east United States was joined by concern over water shortages 
in the West, as year after year of drought in northern California 
or the Paciﬁ c Northwest seemed to spawn more damaging ﬁ res 
that got closer to expensive neighborhoods. The 2005 catastrophe 
resulting from Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans and the Gulf 
Coast region, however, proved that nature could still throw a 
major city into prolonged chaos—with profound national secu-
rity implications.
Fears of a growing plague or medical disaster also raised 
questions of security. In 2003, severe acute respiratory syndrome 
(SARS) caused no direct deaths in the United States but alerted 
the population to the real issues that a global pandemic would 
cause. National security concern revolved around the inevitabil-
ity of a global pandemic, possibly avian ﬂ u. Scenarios considered 
up to 62 million deaths worldwide and quarantine of the United 
States should it become necessary. This abstract medical concern 
adds a dramatically different view of national security than was 
true a decade or century ago.
These new fears raise interesting questions of whether inter-
national communications and transportation, that is, globaliza-
tion, caused the national security deﬁ nitions to change or whether 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
they are simply making us aware of a vulnerability that has always 
been there. One of the ways this globalization has occurred is 
through growing access to the Internet and the information the 
World Wide Web provides. Many of us simply take the access to 
information for granted, a necessity for commerce and a luxury 
for day-to-day activities, but others fear its inﬁ ltration by outsid-
ers, such as Chinese or Russian hackers, or its generalized use by 
Islamists seeking to galvanize international jihad. 
A mere generation ago, these additional deﬁ nitions of national 
security would have seemed ludicrous because the intensity of a 
single threat—Soviet nuclear-carrying missiles—overwhelmed 
the sense that anything else could overcome us.
The U.S. Experience since 
the September 11 Attacks
The Preemption versus Prevention Debate
The debate about the nature of the post-9/11 world includes more 
than merely a broader deﬁ nition of national security. Today, the 
president has deﬁ ned national security in a broader way that 
includes the responsibility to prevent attacks on the United States. 
While this has a certain common-sense appeal, the controversy 
surrounding the commander-in-chief’s 2002 speech enunciating 
this policy at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point still elic-
its comments and questions from our friends and foes abroad. 
President Bush’s argument that “For much of the last century, 
America’s defense relied on the Cold War doctrines of deterrence 
and containment. In some cases, those strategies still apply . . . If 
we wait for threats to fully materialize, we have waited too long” 
concerned many who feared the United States would engage in 
preemption and preventative war instead of traditional defen-
sive actions. As the most powerful military on the planet, the U.S. 
armed forces’ ability to exercise such preventative steps is worri-
some to many who fear it will be used too easily without adequate 
proof of a serious threat. Debate continues as to whether President 
Bush has expanded the deﬁ nition of what a defense of the nation 
would entail or whether, as many of his supporters believe, his 
policy is merely continuing the long-existent defense of the nation 
required by the U.S. Constitution.
The U.S. Experience since the September 11 Attacks 7

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
8 Background and History
Iraq and Afghanistan: Superpowers 
Sometimes Don’t Find it Easy
Within less than four weeks after the 2001 terrorist attacks, the 
United States launched a major attack against the Taliban-led gov-
ernment of Afghanistan, which Washington believed was provid-
ing safe haven to al Qaeda mastermind Osama bin Laden. The 
action was swift and decisive, and the Taliban ﬂ ed Kabul within a 
few weeks. The United States helped broker a government, which 
ultimately led to an Afghani named Hamid Karzai becoming 
interim president and later elected president of Afghanistan. Kar-
zai had been educated in the United States and was a long-time 
resident.
In late 2001 and early 2002, U.S. forces launched a massive 
attack on the southeastern mountains along the Pakistani bor-
der, known as the Tora Bora. Bin Laden successfully eluded the 
massive operation and remains at large as of 2007. Similarly, the 
Taliban melted into the mountains of Tora Bora and into north-
western Pakistan. Some six years later, the Taliban has proven not 
ﬁ nished.
President George W. Bush began contemplating the removal 
of Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein as early as 2001 in the days after 
the September 11 attacks. Many accounts indicate that some of the 
president’s top advisers feared that Saddam had to be linked to 
the attacks. A number of books, including Ron Suskind’s book on 
Paul O’Neill (2003), Michael Gordon and Bernard Trainor’s Cobra 
II (2006), and Tom Ricks’ Fiasco (2006), have discussed the doubts, 
fears, and concerns about this view. President Bush’s national 
security advisers largely argued, once the momentum developed 
for the attack to progress, that invading Iraq would not only be 
necessary to prevent a devastating attack with weapons of mass 
destruction upon the U.S. homeland but it would also be a rela-
tively easy task in which Iraqis would welcome the U.S. forces as 
liberators.
The invasion began on March 20, 2003, and by April 9, U.S. 
troops were helping the Iraqis topple Saddam’s statue. Indeed, 
the ground invasion proved relatively simple and moved with 
staggering speed as one would anticipate for a military super-
power engaging a repressed, broken armed force that had been 
deprived since the international community began a serious 
embargo against Saddam’s regime after the 1990–1991 Gulf War. 
On May 1, 2003, President George W. Bush made an appearance 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
on the ﬂ ight deck of the USS Abraham Lincoln, in front of a banner 
saying “Mission Accomplished,” to announce that “major com-
bat operations” were concluded. When the president made that 
speech, it did indeed appear that the United States and its allies 
had crushed Saddam’s government with only minimal effort and 
few casualties: 139 U.S. forces by that date. Five years later, the 
situation appears somewhat less rosy.
Instead, both Afghanistan and Iraq, weakened by divisions 
and isolation, have proven extremely difﬁ cult challenges for the 
United States because they have evolved into longer, less-decisive, 
or clear-cut conﬂ icts than originally believed. Conditions in Iraq 
have deteriorated dramatically since 2003, whether measured by 
political violence against the United States, common crime, sec-
tarian violence, provision of such basic needs as electricity, and 
myriad other possible measures of success. In Afghanistan, the 
initial gains stalled and appear to have reversed as the Taliban 
attempts to reinstitute its power over portions of the country. By 
the end of July 2007, the United States saw the deaths of its armed 
forces in operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom go 
beyond the 4,000 milestone and casualties from improvised explo-
sive devices detonated at roadsides have skyrocketed as medical 
care keeps people alive yet badly wounded. Iraqi casualties have 
been at least in the tens of thousands if not hundreds of thou-
sands. As the conditions have led President Bush to move toward 
deploying a higher number of troops in Iraq, conditions for those 
Iraqis outside the diplomatic “Green Zone” have become signiﬁ -
cantly less tenable. 
In Afghanistan, the apparent success of the 2001 invasion has 
also been called into question. In 2003, U.S. forces turned over 
the international security task in the mountainous country to the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and Afghanistan 
became its ﬁ rst “out of area” (non-European) mission. Gradually, 
Taliban attacks have picked up in a country where the regional 
tensions remain exceedingly high. Attacks on government ofﬁ -
cials outside the capital have increased, and many question 
whether President Karzai actually controls anything outside his 
palace. The United States quietly moved to reinforce its portion of 
the NATO force in 2006.
The question for the United States from both of these con-
ﬂ icts has been why the United States has been unable to tame 
both adversaries. Neither the insurgents nor sectarian groups in 
Iraq match the resources or power of the U.S. military. Neither the 
The U.S. Experience since the September 11 Attacks 9

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
10 Background and History
Afghani warlords nor al Qaeda has anywhere near the prowess of 
the United States or the NATO members seeking to help Afghani-
stan develop a democracy.
These situations illustrate that superpower status does 
not guarantee success in resolving conﬂ icts or achieving global 
transformation. Indeed, perhaps the most apparent effect of six 
years’ struggle in Afghanistan and ﬁ ve years’ struggle in Iraq is 
that military superiority does not guarantee rapid, strategic vic-
tory. Fundamental, systemic transformation requires a sustained 
commitment to changes at all levels of the society with a mind to 
including all elements of that population. 
Will Crafting Countries as Democracies 
Protect U.S. Security?
Over the months after Saddam Hussein’s removal from ofﬁ ce in 
Baghdad, U.S. goals there changed. The highly feared weapons 
of mass destruction that were thought to be in Iraqi hands never 
materialized. The devastation caused to Iraq by the more than ten 
years of sanctions imposed by the international community had 
left the country broken.
The U.S. concerns in Iraq and elsewhere around the world 
gradually began to address this phenomenon by pushing the 
quality of governance in all regimes. While the United States has 
always supported democracy as the most representative, equitable 
form of government, no administration in Washington has ever 
pushed for democracies as overtly and consciously as has that of 
President George W. Bush. This orientation often reminds many 
of the administration’s close ties with the “neoconservatives” who 
have been so supportive of his move to oust Saddam Hussein. 
Former Vice President Dan Quayle’s chief of staff, William Kristol, 
and Carnegie Endowment for International Peace scholar Robert 
Kagan have been aggressively arguing for the establishment of 
democratic governments around the world to promote the val-
ues so woven into the fabric of the U.S. political system. These 
analysts praise the unique qualities of the U.S. political system, 
arguing that these qualities allow the United States to promote 
democracy in a manner no other state could and with important 
effects for the world. 
Even more importantly to many, former Deputy Secretary of 
Defense Paul D. Wolfowitz, seen by many as the prime architect 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
of the war in Iraq, advocated rebuilding the states of the world 
in a democratic format, starting with Afghanistan and Iraq. Wol-
fowitz argued that people living under repressive regimes will 
welcome the opportunity to exercise their true desires in free soci-
eties. Wolfowitz illustrated his views when testifying before the 
Congress shortly before the ground invasion of Iraq: He scoffed at 
Army Chief of Staff Eric Shinseki’s opinion that his service would 
require “several hundred thousand” troops in Iraq after the ini-
tial invasion. Much as Vice President Dick Cheney did, Wolfowitz 
dismissed Shinseki’s estimates by arguing that Iraqis would wel-
come the U.S. forces. Yet virtually no one from the armed forces 
stood up to challenge the appraisals until well into the conﬂ ict, 
when a number of retired ofﬁ cers cast aspersions on the war effort 
in April 2006. In retrospect, strategists planning the war seemed to 
violate the ﬁ rst principle of good strategic analysis: question and 
requestion one’s assumptions about any set of circumstances.
Reconstructing a political system is a daunting task. There is 
little evidence of success in rebuilding and reorienting a country 
like Iraq, which has serious geographic/ethnic/sectarian divides, 
or Somalia or Afghanistan, which have divides based on tribal 
distinctions. Yet President Bush made clear, through his own 
speeches and those of his senior administration ofﬁ cials, the need 
to do just that. The United States began subtly and not so subtly 
nudging states in the Middle East, among other places, to take 
a much more democratic path, allowing citizens to reach their 
fundamental goals as citizens. In many cases, particularly in the 
Middle East, these admonitions were greeted with skepticism on 
the part of long-standing rulers who were there because of their 
ﬁ rm hands over the reins of power.
The United States also learned in Afghanistan and Iraq that 
institutionalizing democracy requires more than holding elec-
tions. Both of these societies in transition held elections, only to 
ﬁ nd that the citizenry either ignored the results or put more stock 
on tribal or religious connections than popularly voted support. 
In Iraq, the hopes that elections would lower or erase violence 
were dashed repeatedly when violence not only returned after 
brief respites but usually accelerated as if to signal a refusal on the 
part of whole sectors of the Iraqi polity to participate in this dem-
ocratic experiment. In the years since the Taliban was removed 
from power, the circle of democratic governments in Afghanistan 
seems to contract over time rather than resulting in the hoped-for 
expansion across the mountainous country.
The U.S. Experience since the September 11 Attacks 11

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
12 Background and History
Many around the world, including those in states already 
fully ensconced in the democratic camp, believe this brazen inter-
vention in states’ fully sovereign decision making is antithetical to 
all the United States has historically held dear. Additionally, states 
with a hypersensitivity to sovereignty, such as China, believe the 
interventions in Kosovo and then in Iraq over the past decade vio-
late the basic norms of statehood in the international system, har-
kening back to a period when the powerful states of the nineteenth 
century colonized and humiliated weaker states such as China.
While President Bush and his government talk less about 
this goal than they did for the ﬁ rst three years of the war in Iraq, 
it would appear the president’s ﬁ rm commitment to spreading 
democracy has not changed. The president’s March 2007 trip 
through Latin America, where he praised those regimes that have 
taken steps to address their community needs versus those such as 
Venezuela’s where popular dictates are ignored for the sake of the 
leadership, illustrates this point, as do trips by the secretaries of 
state and defense to allies and emerging states around the world.
The Changing National 
Security Community
Governments, like the populations they govern and represent, are 
dynamic and ever-changing organizations. Even without the horror 
of the September 11 attacks, the U.S. government evolves on a con-
tinuing basis. The experience of the 2001 attacks, however, has gen-
erated several blue-ribbon assessments and countless reappraisals 
within the government, including the Kean-Hamilton 9/11 Com-
mission, in which a plethora of former government ofﬁ cials held 
extensive hearings to consider what had gone wrong to allow the 
attacks. The 9/11 Commission, as it has largely become known, is 
still working to get its recommendations accepted by the whole U.S. 
government (Roemer 2007; National Commission 2004). When the 
congressinally mandated Iraq Study Group released its ﬁ ndings in 
late 2006 (Baker and Hamilton 2006), many of its recommendations 
incorporated ﬁ ndings of previous studies that had been rejected as 
unnecessary or unworkable. In the intervening months, the Bush 
administration, to its credit, has reached out to many of those it had 
previously rejected in looking for an improved strategy.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The Legislative Institutions
For those who lived through the ﬁ nal decade of the twentieth cen-
tury and ﬁ rst decade of the twenty-ﬁ rst, the memory of biparti-
sanship across the two houses of Congress in the hours and days 
immediately after the September 11 attacks was utterly remark-
able. Washington has been a highly politicized place throughout 
its history but especially in the years of the administrations of Bill 
Clinton and George W. Bush. Congressional leaders as diverse 
in their beliefs as Barbara Boxer or Nancy Pelosi, both Califor-
nia Democrats, singing patriotic songs with House Speaker Den-
nis Hastert, the Illinois Republican, and Republican Senator Orin 
Hatch of Utah was a sight few anticipated ever seeing after the 
passionate meltdown of the Clinton impeachment of 1998 or the 
rhetoric on tax relief in early 2001.
The bipartisanship did not endure, however, and both houses 
returned to their respective party balances soon after the Septem-
ber 11 attacks. Both the House of Representatives and the Sen-
ate supported the president in his efforts to raise the standards of 
protecting the country, but partisan divisions were clearly seen. In 
general, Congress not only sought to fund the president’s requests 
for national security projects but often increased the funding 
further. While the 106th through 109th congresses will carry a rep-
utation of signiﬁ cant pork barrel spending through history, most 
of the additional funding these congresses offered was to help the 
troops.
President Bush won reelection in 2004 with national security 
as his basic platform. He argued successfully that the Republican 
White House and Congress had shown their willingness to pro-
tect the nation better than the Democratic opposition since 9/11 
and would continue to do so in the future. The Republican-led 
Congress continued to support national security funding at high 
levels but grew increasingly concerned as war efforts ﬂ oundered 
in Iraq and Afghanistan between 2003 and 2006.
The same campaign strategy did not work in the 2006 mid-
term elections when the Republicans lost their majorities in both 
chambers. The Democratic politicians capitalized on growing 
apprehension across the nation that progress was not occurring, 
especially in Iraq, as the number of deaths in the conﬂ ict escalated 
and overall instability in Baghdad appeared daily on the television 
screens across the country. In particular, many people cited the 
The Changing National Security Community 13

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
14 Background and History
president’s seeming lack of understanding that the deteriorating 
conditions in Iraq that were shown on television directly contra-
dicted his optimism and constant proclamation that things were 
improving in Iraq. Similarly, public concerns about Secretary of 
Defense Donald Rumsfeld’s running of the war led many voters 
to believe the United States was blindly committing young men 
and women to die in a seemingly rudderless war.
The 110th Congress, which is under Democratic leadership, 
appears extremely likely to continue many oversight hearings. 
Immediately upon assuming their majority on January 4, 2007, 
Democratic House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority 
Leader Harry Reid sent a joint letter to President Bush strongly 
encouraging him to begin the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Iraq, 
condemning the widely anticipated announcement that the presi-
dent intended to send another 30,000 troops to the theater in an 
effort to “surge” forces to stabilize the violence of Baghdad itself 
(Baker and Wright 2007). Pelosi and Reid, along with Republican 
colleagues in both chambers, indicated serious concerns about the 
surge strategy yet, when asked whether Senator Reid anticipated 
that Congress would use its constitutional power of the purse, 
granted in Article 1, Section 8, to stop the U.S. involvement in 
Iraq, Reid responded that the U.S. Congress would never hurt the 
troops by cutting their funds but would like to send a message to 
the president about the limits on his authority.
Beyond Iraq: National Security 
across the Horizon
While a wry joke that appears regularly in Washington is that 
national security consists of three words today, “Iraq, Iraq, Iraq,” 
the national concerns of the United States are considerably broader 
than this Middle Eastern country. Iraq is an important state at the 
crossroads of an important region of the world. The impact of the 
“surge” in U.S. troops, begun in January 2007, remains open to 
interpretation with President Bush retaining optimism about its 
ultimate success. But the future of a Middle East state still appears 
daunting because of the sectarian divisions confronting the Iraqi 
people. The violence that the surge aimed to address has shifted 
to other parts of the country while analyses differ on whether the 
violence has declined; but the political problems confronting the 
Shiite government remain bitter and seemingly intractable. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The United States also worries about the stability of some of 
its closest allies: Pakistan, Egypt, and the Kingdom of Saudi Ara-
bia. In all three cases, although less-than-democratic regimes seek 
to retain power, they provide pro-Western stances that are cru-
cial to U.S. support in the region. In the case of Saudi Arabia, the 
connection to the al-Saud family matches the U.S. dependence, or 
overdependence in fact, on petroleum at a reasonable price that 
the Saudis facilitate.
In Pakistan, President and General Pervez Musharraf pro-
vides a pro-U.S. government in the face of mounting Islamic sup-
porters who appear willing to endorse the ways of Osama bin 
Laden and the Islamists who are seeking to hurt the United States 
and Western culture. Musharraf’s anti-democratic coup d’état 
in 1999, before the September 11 attacks, has not resulted in a 
return to democracy, but he does allow some cooperation with 
the United States in seeking to destroy pro–al Qaeda elements in 
the Waziristan frontier with southeast Afghanistan. How long the 
Pakistani military can keep the Islamists at bay is an open but cru-
cial question for U.S. efforts to stabilize Afghanistan as it is widely 
believed that the pro–al Qaeda Taliban get assistance there. 
All of Pakistan’s problems—which are many—are heightened 
by the reality of it being one of two known nuclear weapons states 
in south Asia, a prospect that was brought home to Washington 
in 2002 when it appeared Pakistan and India might wage nuclear 
war against each other. Whatever President Musharraf’s limita-
tions, national security strategists fear what would occur if he were 
forced from ofﬁ ce by nondemocratic means, which could allow one 
of a number of groups to get control over those nuclear weapons.
Finally, Egypt under President Hosni Mubarak has also 
proven less than democratic, more than a quarter-century after he 
succeeded the assassinated Anwar Sadat. Mubarak’s government 
has been repressive but without it the United States would likely 
see even greater problems for Israel, its strong ally in this region.
The Israeli-Palestinian problem remains an unresolved and 
thorny issue for the United States. As a democratic state of Jews 
in a region of growing Muslim populations seeking its end, Israel 
is vulnerable. While Washington has taken pro-Israeli positions, 
the Bush administration has been more strident in its support for 
Israel than any prior regimes. Early in his term, President Bush 
made clear his unwillingness to force Israel to move away from 
the Jewish state’s best interests for the sake of negotiation with the 
Palestinians. President Bush was uncomfortable with advocates 
The Changing National Security Community 15

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
16 Background and History
of negotiations with former Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat in 
November 2004. President Bush made clear his view that Israeli 
security, once guaranteed, would help the region and that other 
views were not likely to sway him.
Gradually, as the reality of the difﬁ culties with Iraq have 
become apparent, the administration has begun to view the 
 Palestinian-Israeli difﬁ culties in a manner somewhat more consis-
tent with that of many prior regimes. The recognition that much 
of the world is sympathetic to Palestinian demands for statehood 
and a better standard of living to deter attacks on Israel has ever 
so slowly begun to take root. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice 
has gradually begun to take a position of negotiating with the two 
parties, as did prior governments in Washington. The need for a 
resolution to this simmering, sixty-year-old problem is an impor-
tant issue for U.S. national security because it will demonstrate 
that the United States views all religions as equal and legitimate. 
The Hamas takeover of Gaza in June 2007 galvanized the 
Israeli government in Jerusalem to begin opening more channels 
to rival Fatah’s government in the West Bank in hoping to prop 
up its power with Palestinians. Hamas appears too radical and 
undesirable as a governing party to many around the world, mak-
ing Fatah less-than-perfect but preferable as a partner in efforts to 
reduce violence. 
Similarly, the Middle East plagues the United States in the 
form of Iran, as has been true for almost thirty years, and its 
nuclear potential. Since the Iranian Revolution of 1979, Wash-
ington has had limited contacts with the government in Teheran. 
Over the past ﬁ ve years, however, as the Iranian capacity to enrich 
uranium has grown, Washington’s fears about the potential for an 
Iranian nuclear weapon have also grown. Washington’s convic-
tion that Iran must understand that a nuclear weapons capability 
would not be tolerated is a key aspect to Washington’s message 
to this region. As Washington tries to convey this message to the 
leaders of the Iranian state, often with President Mahmoud Ahma-
dinejad brushing off the warnings, the United States tries to corral 
its allies in nonproliferation efforts in Western Europe, China, and 
Japan, all of whom may be seeking in better ties with Iran for their 
own reasons. At a time when Washington is stretched thin with 
commitments elsewhere, it hopes that others will help carry these 
messages of deterrence, but it is clear that all states pursue their 
national interests, not necessarily those espoused by the world’s 
remaining superpower.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
A Dramatically Evolving Asian 
Scenario for Security
The United States has also begun to examine security problems 
and reappraise its standing around the world. At the same time 
the United States had its eyes on the possibility of weapons of 
mass destruction in Iraq, for instance, U.S. intelligence agencies 
expressed their concerns about a North Korean nuclear weapons 
program. The Clinton administration had ostensibly wiped out 
that program in the 1990s with the “Agreed Framework” between 
the United States, South Korea, Japan, and the Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea (DPRK) only to ﬁ nd that intelligence estimates 
at the beginning of the Bush term indicated that the North Koreans 
were not abiding by their side of the agreement. At a time when 
North Korea was part of President Bush’s so-called “axis of evil” 
(Bush 2002), the North Koreans felt their regime was under siege. 
Between 2002 and early 2007, the United States, in conjunction with 
ﬁ ve other states, engaged in the Six-Party Talks to end the North 
Korean nuclear program. That agreement was signed in 2007, but 
the DPRK’s willingness to abide by the accord remains unclear.
Similarly, the United States had to recognize not a rising 
China but an emergent China. The People’s Republic of China 
(PRC) in the ﬁ rst decade of the new millennium was modernizing 
its military and economy at a sustained rate. Advocated as early 
as the 1970s as one of Four Modernizations, the PRC sought to 
have an economy that would raise the standard of living for its 
population while improving its military to stand as a respected 
international player on the world scene. The Communist Party 
of China seeks to retain its power by proving to the 1.3 billion 
citizens that it alone can continue to raise China’s prestige in the 
global system at the same time it dramatically improves their 
standard of living. The name China means “Middle Kingdom,” 
which reﬂ ects its people’s belief in the centrality of their culture to 
the world, so the idea that China might not be able to accomplish 
all of its goals with a weak military would not be acceptable. The 
ﬁ nancial wherewithal to do that modernization is now available 
as China continues touting its roughly 10 percent annual growth 
rates. For many in the United States, this evokes tremendous fears 
of a resurgent Communist power threatening the peace and sta-
bility of the world. For others, China’s emergence as an economi-
cally dynamic partner that will hopefully accept the norms of the 
world system is a thrilling prospect to be welcomed.
The Changing National Security Community 17

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
18 Background and History
Optimists and pessimists in the United States agree that the 
one cloud on the horizon in the Sino-U.S. relationship is Taiwan. 
The island, located a hundred miles off the Fujian coast, was a 
formal diplomatic ally of the United States between 1949 and 1979 
during the Cold War. Washington shifted recognition from Tai-
pei to Beijing in 1979, thus creating a peculiar vulnerability for 
Taiwan since it has formal diplomatic recognitions by no large 
states. While disappointment in that move shattered the close 
connections between Washington and Taipei almost thirty years 
ago, Taiwan still has a special place in the hearts of many in the 
United States because of its increasing democratic culture and 
its traditional “underdog” spirit. In 1979, Congress formalized 
the U.S. interest in Taiwan by passing the Taiwan Relations Act, 
which gave a hint of U.S. commitment to help the island with its 
defense if attacked. Like much congressional legislation, however, 
the speciﬁ cs for implementation are rather vague, and this has left 
the United States in a somewhat ambiguous position with Taiwan 
and the PRC. With democracy on the island, however, have come 
a number of difﬁ culties in the Sino-U.S.-Taiwan triangle. 
In 1996, to no avail, Beijing ﬁ red missiles off the north and south 
tips of Taiwan in an attempt to inﬂ uence domestic elections. But, 
Washington sent a strong signal to Beijing that it would not toler-
ate violence in trying to resolve the Taiwan “splittist” question, as 
the PRC refers to it. Four years later, a distinctly pro-independence 
leader, Chen Shui-bian, became the minority president in Taiwan, 
winning by a thin margin. His avowed position of formal indepen-
dence for Taiwan is highly controversial because Beijing has declared 
it will not tolerate this action but will respond with military force 
to maintain the integrity of the “homeland.” Oddly enough, rather 
than reinforcing its military capacity to make such an action more 
plausible, the Taiwan security community proved unable to approve 
budgets for needed military modernization to match that of the 
PRC military, known as the People’s Liberation Army (PLA). Thus, 
Washington watched nervously as the democratic government on 
the island seemed to take more provocative steps bound to irritate 
the mainland at a time when Washington hoped to bring the PRC 
into the circle of “responsible stakeholders” in the world commu-
nity. Statements by PLA ofﬁ cers in 2005 attracted much attention in 
the United States when it appeared that U.S. intervention on behalf 
of the island in a conﬂ ict could create a nuclear exchange between 
the U.S. and Chinese forces, not a happy prospect for anyone.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
A great deal of the frustration Taipei feels results from its vir-
tual lack of allies around the world. Only twenty-four states rec-
ognize Taiwan as a nation-state, but none of them is a particularly 
important player. The Taiwanese believe China is depriving them 
of “international space” and grasp at the most meager of pros-
pects that other states, such as Japan, will provide help in a crisis. 
This appears highly unlikely.
Japan’s generation-long demise in the international ﬁ nancial 
scene has also begun to slowly turn around, but Japan is still seek-
ing to understand its role in the world. A cautious, traditional soci-
ety by nature, Japan’s evolution appears glacial by most standards. 
Touted by the George W. Bush administration as the primary part-
ner in Asia, Japan found that Washington, regardless of its inten-
tions, had developed strong ties with China that were not easily 
supplanted by a return to Japanese economic growth. President 
Bush had superb relations with Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi 
during his tenure as head of the Democratic Liberal Party but the 
durability of these relations into the term of his successor, Shinzo 
Abe, is not as clear as July 2007 elections indicated that Japan’s 
political future is open to the public’s changing views.
Indonesia
Bombings between 2002 and 2005 indicated that Indonesia had 
taken on a new, somewhat menacing role for terrorism in Asia. 
The October 2002 attack at Bali, one of Asia’s most popular 
vacation sites, targeted Western, particularly Australian, tour-
ists, resulting in the death of more than 200. Two years later, the 
Indonesian capital, Jakarta, saw attacks at Western hotels. In 
October 2005, bombers returned to Bali with fewer deaths but a 
graphic, chilling reminder that militants recognized that Western-
ers patronized the island paradise and could be targets there. The 
largest Islamic nation in the world by population, Indonesia in 
the new millennium has a more strident Islamic orientation than 
had been previously true. Many critics argued that Washington’s 
desire to oust the Taliban and then Saddam Hussein as well as 
the widely held perception that the United States was waging 
war against Islam only exacerbated the feelings of those who 
feared the West was waging war on the peoples of Indonesia. 
The bombings illustrate that even peaceful states could have tre-
mendous tensions.
The Changing National Security Community 19

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
20 Background and History
Nontraditional Threats
A number of threats on the international scene that do not ﬁ t the 
traditional mold exist and are not uniformly accepted as threats by 
all. Nevertheless, they are part of the national security calculation 
upon which military, informational, economic, and diplomatic 
forces are constructed. These are also relatively more important 
to some parts of the world than others, depending on the peculiar 
nature of the threat.
Medical Security
The world has begun to recognize that there are known medical 
threats that may affect national security and probable new threats 
ahead. For instance, the international community has had to con-
front the scourge of acquired immunodeﬁ ciency syndrome (AIDS) 
for more than a quarter of a century. For places like Uganda or South 
Africa, AIDS is killing off a generation as infection rates are well into 
the double digits and no relief is available at an affordable price.
Fears of a new pandemic along the lines of the 1918 Span-
ish inﬂ uenza have also occupied the attention of the international 
medical world. Specialists believe that it is not a matter of “if” 
but “when” a similar ﬂ u develops and spreads, as these phenom-
ena are a natural course of events. The Spanish ﬂ u of 1918 killed 
roughly the same number as did World War I: 20 million people. 
But technology, transportation, and all the beneﬁ ts of the twenty-
ﬁ rst century would allow the disease to move much farther and 
faster so a modern pandemic would likely kill 40 to 105 million 
people worldwide.
Fears of a pandemic ﬁ rst arose in late 2002 and early 2003, 
when a strange form of pneumonia began to appear in southern 
China and Hong Kong. Gradually, it spread from those regions 
into central and northern China, Vietnam, Singapore, the Philip-
pines, Taiwan, Canada, and parts of Europe. SARS gripped the 
world with panic in the early months of 2003 as people tried to 
ﬁ gure out what it was and how it was transmitted. Airplanes to 
Asia were virtually empty because Asia was the home of the virus. 
Gradually, modern science diagnosed the problem and steps were 
taken to quarantine the problems. Fear abated but did not com-
pletely disappear.
Then at the dawn of the twenty-ﬁ rst century, the advent of 
the bird ﬂ u virus seemed to indicate a pandemic might be upon 
us. Outbreaks of this avian ﬂ u appeared in Vietnam, Indonesia, 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Thailand, and spread as far as Turkey. Birds were culled in Brit-
ain, Central Europe, and Russia to prevent its spread. The feared 
mutation of bird-to-bird contact into bird-to-human-human con-
tact has not developed to date, but the inevitable questions of how 
the nations of the world, including the United States, will cope 
with a pandemic remain.
Drugs
Drugs have been a long-term issue for the United States but the 
chaos in Afghanistan and Iraq will likely exacerbate the prob-
lem. Colombia, a major source of coca from Latin America after 
it was driven north by antidrug campaigns in Bolivia and Peru 
in the 1980s, still receives a surprisingly large portion of U.S. for-
eign assistance (it is the third largest recipient behind Israel and 
Egypt when Iraq and Afghanistan are taken out of the equation) 
to reduce the drug scourge. Increasingly, the Drug Enforcement 
Administration appears to follow Colombian-grown drugs as 
they transfer north into the Mexican drug cartels but Mexico is 
also growing its own indigenous crops.
Afghanistan is a major producer of opium poppies as is Paki-
stan’s northwestern frontier. Drugs tend to migrate to regions where 
government oversight is limited, thus Afghanistan has long been a 
problem area. With President Karzai’s government focused ﬁ rst on 
survival, and then in expanding its reach, pressing Afghan farmers 
to decrease their opium production has already been a lower pri-
ority than it was under the Taliban regime of the late 1990s. With 
globalization, the movement of these drugs is considerably easier 
and thus the consumption of heroin will likely expand. 
Myanmar remains a major source of opium poppies for simi-
lar reasons of government inattention, if not overt collaboration 
with the growers and trafﬁ ckers. Along with the northern prov-
inces of Thailand, Laos, and southwest China, the area known as 
the “Golden Triangle” remains an area where drug trafﬁ cking and 
associated criminal activity thrives.
Additionally, drugs have taken on new roles in the post-
9/11 environment. Partially because of globalization efforts and 
partially because of innovation, new drugs are now an issue in 
national security. Methamphetamines are produced in virtually all 
parts of the world but particularly the United States, and the effects 
have been devastating in rural populations. As the trafﬁ cking of 
the chemicals needed to produce methamphetamines increasingly 
crosses national boundaries, U.S. drug enforcement ofﬁ cials will 
The Changing National Security Community 21

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
22 Background and History
also have to contend with gun running, prostitution, and other 
illegal activities that seem to accompany the drug trade.
Drug trafﬁ cking also tends to be associated with political 
corruption, such as the corruption of the judiciary. This corrup-
tion undercuts efforts to curb immigration, can result indirectly 
in people trafﬁ cking as a form of payment, and undercuts the law 
in general terms, Corruption may also facilitate the practice of 
shipping substandard products in the international pharmaceuti-
cal trade, endangering not only intellectual property but human 
health. Massive press coverage in mid-2007 of tainted Chinese 
foodstuffs and animal products, among a long list of exports that 
cross oceans as a part of increased international trade, indicated 
the dangerous effects of corruption beyond pharmaceuticals. 
Immigration
Immigration is also an increasingly relevant national security con-
cern. The United States focuses on its long, exposed border with 
Mexico but that is hardly the only illegal migration concern. As 
tensions rise and fall with neighbors in the Caribbean Basin and 
Mexico, the immigration issue is likely to remain perpetually at 
the top of the list of national security concerns. The reality is that 
free trade has improved the lives of many in neighboring states 
but not to the point where the economic disparities in incomes 
of the United States and its neighbors have been eliminated. As 
Europeans are ﬁ nding, illegal immigration is becoming a much 
more global phenomenon than ever.
Trade
Finally, trade is a nontraditional issue in national security but 
arguably the one that has grown the most over the past decade. 
Trade and economic prosperity are viewed as absolutely crucial 
to national security as the government aims to preserve the high-
est possible standard of living. Trade problems, by extension, are 
a threat to the nation’s health. Concern about China or India not 
abiding by their obligations under a number of trade agreements, 
for example, has elevated the Ofﬁ ce of the Trade Representative 
to a high status.
Similarly, states around the world desire access to the U.S. mar-
ket. In the middle of this decade, the United States faces a number 
of interesting challenges that highlight the political options avail-
able to the security community. Colombia, as noted, is a major 
recipient of U.S. foreign assistance but, as a Latin American state, 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
has not seen the U.S. Congress sign and ratify a free trade pact as 
occurred with Chile (2003) and the North American Free Trade 
Agreement for Mexico and Canada (1994). President George W. 
Bush has negotiated a free trade agreement with Colombia, which 
President Álvaro Uribe Vélez desperately needs to cement many 
of the changes to his society that will undercut violence and open 
opportunities. Yet the U.S. Congress, under either party, appears 
unlikely to ratify such a pact for fear of undercutting U.S. pro-
ducers. The question remains, however, whether long-term trade 
access to the U.S. market isn’t much cheaper than other forms of 
assistance, but it is a highly complex, controversial topic.
Government
Although much of the informed discussion on the topic of national 
security takes place in the private sector through think tanks, uni-
versities, and other institutions, not to mention public opinion 
as demonstrated at the ballot box, it is important to understand 
the government’s role in national security. This section provides 
a brief discussion of arms of the government that are involved in 
national security.
Legislative Branch
While most people think of national security as an aspect of the 
executive branch, the Constitution begins with a discussion of 
the congressional role in national affairs, such as national secu-
rity. The two houses of the Congress hold both appropriation and 
oversight hearings regularly. Congress has the power to provide 
or withdraw funding for various national security policy options. 
Congress also requires the executive branch to provide reports on 
myriad issues ranging from human rights conditions in Tibet to 
updates on progress in Afghanistan to drug cooperation certiﬁ ca-
tion in Burma.
Congressional Research Service and 
Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce
Additionally, Congress has a small number, particularly com-
pared with the executive branch, of analytical support bodies. 
The two most prominent are the Congressional Research Service 
Government 23

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
24 Background and History
of the Library of Congress, which has a staff of experts who answer 
congressional requests with studies of pressing policy questions. 
These relatively brief reports are done on a rapid-ﬁ re basis but with 
superb quality and nonpartisan basis. Similarly, the Government 
Accountability Ofﬁ ce, founded in 1921, serves as the legislative 
branch’s auditors, evaluating the expenditure of federal funds and 
the associated policy reviews of various government programs.
Executive Branch
The primary driver for national security strategy and policy is the 
executive branch in its many manifestations. This chapter exam-
ines the most important of those bodies.
The tensions between bureaucratic entities are well known 
around the world. The conﬂ ict between the state and defense 
departments in the current Bush administration stands in stark 
contrast to that of President George H. W. Bush’s government 
between 1989 and 1993 and will remain the topic of considerable 
study for decades to come.
Within the executive branch reside the executive agencies, 
such as the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the 
Ofﬁ ce of the Trade Representative, the myriad branches of the 
intelligence community, and other smaller organizations. 
Department of State
For President George W. Bush’s ﬁ rst term, Secretary of State Colin 
L. Powell ran the Department of State. Uniquely popular as the 
former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Powell served for 
the period of the invasion of Iraq and the immediate aftermath. 
Under his tenure, the department fought for greater resources and 
sought to take an equal role to that of the Department of Defense. 
The State Department not only lacked money and forces on the 
ground but was simply too dispersed to ﬁ ght Secretary of Defense 
Donald Rumsfeld’s efforts to consolidate efforts in nation build-
ing, stability operations, and other activities. Under Powell, the 
State Department had developed its own views on various policy 
efforts and created the Future of Iraq Project to anticipate prob-
lems, but its role in the post-invasion conﬂ ict has proven virtually 
nonexistent. The lower visibility and lack of domestic consistency 
often dampens the power of the State Department to accomplish 
what it might otherwise do in national security affairs.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Secretary Powell’s departure in early 2005 signaled a return 
to the State Department’s logical power as representing foreign 
affairs to the presidential administration when National Secu-
rity Advisor Condoleezza Rice assumed the secretary’s position. 
With extraordinarily strong personal connections to the president 
himself, many believed Rice’s move to this position indicated 
that President Bush wanted a more aggressive reaction to threats 
around the world and a greater public persona for the depart-
ment. In Rice’s tenure, she has visited the broader Middle East 
and has continued to promote diplomatic solutions, but the strat-
egy has not proven a major success; conditions in Iraq are still bad 
and there is great frustration on the part of other traditional allies 
in the region, such as Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
Department of Defense
Easily the most expensive and largest arm of the U.S. government 
engaged in the nation’s security is the Defense Department. This 
behemoth consists of the four services that constitute the active-
duty force (the Marine Corps, Army, Navy, and Air Force) along 
with the National Guard, the Reserves for each service, and civil-
ians who work for the department. The department continues to 
play the central role in national security and has actually increased 
its role with greater intelligence functions under former Secretary 
of Defense Donald Rumsfeld.
The Department of Defense was formed with the 1947 Defense 
Reorganization Act, in which the Air Force took on a separate role 
from the Army, the War Department became the Defense Depart-
ment, and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) grew out of the 
wartime Ofﬁ ce of Special Services. The Defense Department has 
its own capabilities in intelligence, ﬁ rst the Defense Intelligence 
Agency of the Robert McNamara period of the 1960s and the posi-
tion of under secretary of defense for intelligence under Steven 
Cambone in the Rumsfeld period. The Defense Department also 
has its own criminal investigation services, public affairs, and an 
extensive list of activities.
During the post-9/11 period, the Pentagon has greatly 
increased its traditional position as it is at the center of recon-
struction efforts in President Bush’s project for promoting democ-
racy around the world. In particular, the Defense Department has 
been the central coordinating point for reconstruction efforts 
in Iraq. This is a signiﬁ cant shift away from the Department of 
Government 25

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
26 Background and History
State’s traditional role as coordinator for these activities because 
of its links to foreign governments. These activities have both 
highlighted as well as shown difﬁ culties with the Defense Depart-
ment’s role in activities beyond traditional war ﬁ ghting. While the 
U.S. forces are extraordinarily capable, the missions of traditional 
war ﬁ ghting and nation building differ substantially.
Similarly, in late 2005, the Defense Department issued DoD 
Directive 3000.5, expounding on the need to elevate security, sta-
bility, transition, and reconstruction efforts to the same position 
within the department’s priorities. While President George W. 
Bush came into ofﬁ ce criticizing his predecessor’s decisions in 
this direction, Bush and his administration have reversed their 
positions dramatically.
The Intelligence Community
Arguably the greatest post-9/11 reforms have been within the intel-
ligence community. The creation of the director of national intel-
ligence position, ﬁ rst headed by former ambassador to Iraq John 
Negroponte, was one move to prevent the problems that the post-
9/11 analyses pointed out in the overall intelligence community. 
Before the mid-2000s, the highest-ranking person within the 
intelligence community was the director of central intelligence, 
coincidentally the head of the CIA. That position, however, also 
meant head of intelligence within the U.S. government. By creat-
ing the new position of director of national intelligence, the intel-
ligence community has an oversight layer intended to assess the 
overall product of the ﬁ eld.
As many people feared, however, the intelligence agencies 
have used the confusion in responsibilities and overlapping juris-
dictions to slow down the overall strengthening of the commu-
nity by highlighting, for bureaucratic reasons, the work of their 
home agencies. To many, the funding for intelligence, while vast, 
did not appear to be adequate to make the reforms the commu-
nity required.
Part of the problem for the intelligence community is its 
relationship with the Department of Defense. While the intelli-
gence agencies often have somewhat more vague names such as 
the National Security Agency or CIA, the overwhelming major-
ity of intelligence funding within the U.S. government resides 
with the Department of Defense. During the Rumsfeld era (2001–
2007), that was not sufﬁ cient for the secretary to believe he was 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
getting an adequate product even thought the Defense Intel-
ligence Agency and the individual services all produced their 
own intelligence, at least partially to guarantee a redundancy 
that would not allow any threats to be missed. Under Rumsfeld, 
the Ofﬁ ce of the Secretary of Defense began its own independent 
collection and analysis of data for fear that the other intelligence 
agencies were skewing their intelligence away from threats 
of major importance (the two most frequently cited examples 
were Iraq before 2003 and China). This independent source of 
intelligence has been controversial and raises serious questions 
about the funding and breadth of reach of the entire intelligence 
community.
Additionally, questions arose about the intelligence commu-
nity’s activities in the interrogation procedures for national secu-
rity after scandals at Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad and at the 
Guantánamo Bay base in Cuba. Some people, thinking back to the 
murder of CIA agent Johnny Michael “Mike” Spann at the inter-
rogation facility in Mazar-e-sharif in Afghanistan, wonder if the 
interrogations have moved too far toward covert activities rather 
than gaining real-time intelligence.
Department of Homeland Security
In the late 1990s, discussions in the national security community 
began to include a concern about ﬁ rst homeland defense, then 
homeland security. This type of mission was being discussed in 
hypothetical manners should there be attacks on the U.S. main-
land as occurred at the World Trade Center in February 1993 and 
the Federal Building in Oklahoma City two years later. Those 
discussing the creation of a homeland security agency within the 
United States pointed to fears about bioterrorism, chemical ter-
rorism, and pandemic illness (naturally occurring or artiﬁ cially 
created).
The Bush administration had already started down this 
path when the 9/11 attacks occurred. One of the most immediate 
effects of the shock was to galvanize the U.S. government to cre-
ate the Ofﬁ ce of Homeland Security under former Pennsylvania 
Governor Tom Ridge. Within weeks of the attacks, the administra-
tion began discussing elevating homeland security from a White 
House ofﬁ ce to a cabinet department.
In creating the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the 
administration sought to shift control into a single, consolidated 
Government 27

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
28 Background and History
mega-department. The new DHS absorbed twenty federal agen-
cies into four vast directorates. While the shift has had its advan-
tages, the DHS has proven less successful than anticipated because 
of remaining overlapping jurisdictions, unclear organizational 
responsibilities, and associated questions. In 2005, New Orleans 
and the Gulf of Mexico coastal areas sustained a direct hit from 
the category-four Hurricane Katrina with disastrous results and 
inept government aid responses that highlighted problems within 
the DHS. One of the remaining concerns about DHS is that money 
has poured into the problem without a clear-cut prioritization of 
the needs. 
Coast Guard
The Coast Guard, long a ﬁ xture of the Transportation Depart-
ment, moved into the Department of Homeland Security where 
it has assumed a higher-proﬁ le position. The Coast Guard has 
the responsibility of monitoring U.S. ports and coastal areas but 
now plays a greater role in coordinating with other governments 
and proposing security initiatives such as monitoring interna-
tional container trafﬁ c to prevent covert attacks. The Coast Guard 
also increasingly plays a liaison role to protect against drug and 
human trafﬁ cking, weapons of mass destruction proliferation, 
and other activities requiring coordination between governments 
around the world.
Department of Justice
The Justice Department has played an important role in the 
nation’s history but never more so than now. The department has 
been heavily involved in decisions to tighten the nation’s bor-
ders to prevent entry by terrorists as occurred before 9/11, even 
though border control is administered by the Immigration and 
Naturalization Service of the DHS. 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is central to the 
nation’s efforts to track threats against national security. One of 
the concerns voiced by the Kean-Hamilton 9/11 Commission was 
that the FBI retained too great a concern about ﬁ nancial crime but 
not enough about international terrorism. There have long been 
jurisdictional differences between the FBI and the CIA, which 
also monitors national security concerns. Indeed, the 9/11 Com-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
mission pointed out that bureaucratic in-ﬁ ghting prevented the 
two agencies from adequately sharing intelligence, along with 
the third major intelligence agency, the National Security Agency, 
which monitors signals intelligence. The Bush administration has 
struggled to correct these deﬁ ciencies.
The Justice Department has been crucial in issuing the direc-
tives on how to interrogate suspects and what the applications 
of international law are for the global war on terrorism. Its legal 
guidance has been controversial at times but remains essential to 
the national security community today.
The Judicial Role
The courts have arguably the smallest but most enduring part 
in national security of the three branches of government. The 
courts only see cases after a controversy has arisen. Because of 
the doctrine of judicial review, which dates from the early nine-
teenth century, the courts may weigh in on the constitutional ﬁ t-
ness of various legislative and executive positions. In particular, 
the courts ﬁ nd themselves central to the questions of the detainee 
interrogation policies as well as the applicability of many execu-
tive branch directives on surveillance. The Supreme Court, along 
with federal appellate courts, has struck down what many see 
as expansion of presidential authority to grant interrogation 
rights, as shown in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld (June 29, 2006) and several 
other cases.
Eventually, under the Democratic Congress and the Republi-
can Bush presidency, the 1973 War Powers Act will probably come 
before the Supreme Court. Many analysts believe that, unlike the 
ﬁ rst century of the republic, today’s political environment domes-
tically draws the judicial branch into all major political debates in 
the republic.
Summary
This is a thumbnail sketch of the institutions and basics of national 
security. The remainder of this volume will discuss them from 
various perspectives such as further resources available, individ-
uals engaged in the decisions, the documents themselves, and the 
organizations exerting pressures on various concerns. 
Summary 29

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
30 Background and History
References
Baker, James A., and Lee Hamilton, The Iraq Study Group Report, 
December 2006, available online at www.usip.org/isg/iraq_study_
group_report/report/1206/iraq_study_group_report.html.
Baker, P., and R. Wright, “Pelosi, Reid Urge Bush to Begin Iraq Pullout,” 
Washington Post, January 6, 2007, www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/
content/article/2007/01/05/AR2007010501080_pf.html (accessed July 
31, 2007).
Brown, H. 1983. Thinking about National Security. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Bush, G. W. 2002. “President Delivers State of the Union Address.” 
www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2002/01/20020129–11.html 
(accessed July 1, 2007).
Gordon, M., and B. Trainor. 2006. Cobra II. New York: Knopf.
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks. 2004. The 9/11 Commission 
Report: Final Report on the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks on the 
United States. New York: W. W. Norton.
Ricks, T. 2006. Fiasco: The American Military Adventure in Iraq. New York: 
Penguin.
Roemer, T. J. 2007, January 5. Remarks on “All Things Considered,” 
available online at www.npr.org/templates/story/storyphp?storyID=
6730798.
Suskind, R. 2003. The Price of Loyalty: George W. Bush, the White House and 
the Education of Paul O’Neill. New York: Simon and Schuster.
U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁ ce (GPO). 2006. National Security Strategy 
of the United States. Washington DC: GPO. http://www.whitehouse
.gov/nsc/nss/2006/ (accessed July 9, 2007).
Washington, G. 1796. “Farewell Address.” http://www.yale.edu/
lawweb/avalon/washing.htm (accessed July 31, 2007).
Watson, C. A. 2002. National Security: A Reference Handbook. Santa 
Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
31
2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
T
he United States has had remarkable consensus on national 
security for much of the nation’s history. However, in the forty 
years since the Vietnam War divided the nation along politi-
cal lines, few aspects of public policy in the United States gener-
ate the heated discussion that national security does because the 
stakes are so high. 
Questions on the Issue 
of National Security
This chapter examines a number of the controversial issues the 
nation confronts in the realm of national security. Each of us as 
citizens might develop a different list, but this is a relatively wide-
ranging series of controversies.
Does Terrorism Represent the Same Type 
of Existential Threat as the Cold War Did?
Once the Soviet Union developed atomic weapons in 1949, the exis-
tence of major portions of the United States was threatened on a 
daily basis as long as the Soviet Union sought to end the United 
States as a competing ideology. A nuclear exchange, as worried citi-
zens learned in the mid-1980s, could have resulted in the deaths of 
tens of millions of citizens in less than thirty minutes’ time, seri-
ously undercutting the survival prospects of the United States.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
32 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Few analysts believe terrorists around the world have the 
capability to instigate a similar magnitude of threat through ter-
rorism, with the exception of bioterrorism. Terrorists do not appear 
to have delivery systems to bring nuclear or chemical weapons to 
these shores; the 2001 attacks were damaging but were relatively 
isolated. The more likely scenario is that terrorism will be used 
to sow fears and ongoing anxiety, but it is not, in most people’s 
minds, the same level of threat as the Cold War was.
What Is Included in National Security?
Traditionally, national security has focused on ensuring the physi-
cal security of the nation and protecting the population. This was 
the basic approach up to and through the Cold War, and it remains 
the basis of how the armed forces defends the nation by protect-
ing its physical security and territorial integrity. One reason this 
focus has remained is the view that the nation’s founding docu-
ments guarantee safety.
With the end of the Cold War, however, people began ques-
tioning whether national security should include a much broader 
array of concerns. In particular, many citizens asked what was 
included in the national interest. Did national interest mean more 
than physical security? Many citizens cited the Preamble to the 
Constitution, “to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, 
ensure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common Defense, 
promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty 
to ourselves and our Posterity,” as an example of why economic 
issues should be part of national security.
Further, some question why other issues confronting the 
nation should not be included in national security. For instance, is 
computer crime, including hacking, identity theft, or placing mali-
cious information on the web, part of national security? Should 
national security include health issues? The probability of a global 
pandemic would likely result in signiﬁ cant numbers of fatalities, 
undercutting the basic sense of security for anyone in the United 
States. Some advocate using military forces to keep out potential 
carriers of various epidemics, while others are uncomfortable 
with asking the armed forces to conduct this mission. Along the 
same lines, many people view human immunodeﬁ ciency virus/
acquired immunodeﬁ ciency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) as a national 
security threat because it is spread so easily between humans and 
has no cure.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
In May 2007, a peculiar event attracted attention regarding the 
dangers of both global travel and diagnosing disease. An Atlanta, 
Georgia, attorney who travels frequently to the lesser developed 
world became the subject of medical concern because of a diag-
nosis of highly drug-resistant tuberculosis, still a deadly disease 
in much of the world. The attorney had traveled to Greece for his 
wedding against medical advice that his drug-resistant diagno-
sis indicated he would be jeopardizing the health of people with 
whom he came into contact. The Immigration and Naturaliza-
tion Service alerted its agents to prevent his arrival because of the 
health dangers he carried, yet the attorney crossed back into the 
United States with little effort through a Canadian border crossing 
before medical ofﬁ cials quarantined him in a tuberculosis ward. 
Within two months’ quarantine, the medical community reversed 
its diagnosis that the tuberculosis strain was highly drug-resistant 
and the attorney returned to his civilian life after a drug treatment 
program.
The case raised many national security questions, includ-
ing, how was he diagnosed as having such a dangerous form of 
tuberculosis only to have that verdict reversed later? How was he 
able to travel initially after the ﬁ rst alarming concerns? What dan-
gers did he pose to those he ﬂ ew with to Greece, then back home 
through Canada? How did he return to the United States when 
border agents were watching for him? How easy would it be to 
carry a highly toxic medical agent that no one was anticipating? 
In 2006, former Vice President Al Gore’s documentary, An 
Inconvenient Truth, along with numerous reports of climate change, 
species extermination, and water pollution, raised the specter that 
environmental threats to national security could rival any other 
security concerns. When Gore won the Academy Award for his 
effort in 2007, it reignited the question of whether the environ-
ment is a political or national security issue.
Probably the most common controversy over the past decade 
has related to whether terrorism is a national security threat and 
how to respond to it. Few people dispute the reality of terrorism 
after the 9/11 attacks, but whether to confront it here, within U.S. 
boundaries, or at its source is an open controversy with little like-
lihood of resolution. 
Those who could be described as national security purists 
insist, however, that by asking the armed forces to defend situ-
ations well beyond the physical security of the nation, the mili-
tary is asked to do too much, which eventually weakens its ability 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 33

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
34 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
to do anything at all. Curiously, this was the position taken by 
George W. Bush during the 2000 presidential campaign when he 
gave a number of speeches claiming that the military had been 
overstretched into tasks that were bound to denigrate its core 
capabilities. President Bush, as have a number of his predecessors, 
has found that conditions confronting the nation made his need to 
ask more of the armed forces something absolutely unavoidable.
In particular, as a candidate the president seemed uncomfort-
able asking the military to engage in the types of nation-building 
activities that are now fundamental to the attempts to reconstruct 
Iraqi society. Many analysts have asked whether one option for 
settling this dispute over the deﬁ nition of national security con-
cerns would be to create special corps of personnel to engage in 
these specialized activities. An example would be to create a civil-
ian-military specialist category for nation-building activities, as 
this appears to be a likely national security tool for the twenty-
ﬁ rst century. General David Petraeus’s March 7, 2007, speech on 
the evolving security conditions in Baghdad spoke in this vein, as 
he noted that the armed services cannot engage in these activities 
alone, but need civilian assistance.
The debate about what is actually national security as the 
core issue for the nation is unlikely to cease, however, as it argu-
ably should not in a democratic society.
Is the United States More Secure 
After the Invasion of Iraq?
Support for President George W. Bush’s invasion of Iraq was sub-
stantial when he ﬁ rst moved U.S. forces against Saddam Hussein 
over concerns that the dictator had a weapons of mass destruc-
tion program. The debate within the United States ultimately led 
to congressional support for the use of U.S. military forces; the 
administration believed it had to defend national security, par-
ticularly to prevent another 9/11-type attack.
Saddam and his sons are dead. No nuclear weapons or weap-
ons development programs have been discovered. The feared 
links between Saddam’s Iraq and al Qaeda terrorists before 2003 
appear to have been exceptionally weak—if they existed at all.
The subsequent four years have seen a tremendous upheaval 
in Iraq and, more generally, in the world where Islamic adherents 
believe the United States has undermined their security. Many 
young Iraqi men have been unemployed for several years. Car 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
bombs, improvised explosive devices, kidnappings, and sectar-
ian violence—Sunni versus Shiite—characterize daily existence in 
Iraq. The Kurdish population remains somewhat separate from 
the remainder of the country. Electricity is sporadic, and health 
care and education are unpredictable. Life in Iraq, in short, is 
harder than it was before 2003.
Most alarming to many people is the idea that many in the 
population of Iraq have become radicalized to join terrorist groups 
around the world. In 2004, most specialists in the world did not 
believe ties existed between al Qaeda and the Baathist regime in 
Baghdad, but they now worry that Iraqis are turning to terrorism. 
Friendly regimes in the region, including Saudi Arabia and Egypt, 
have warned the United States that it is seeking to address the wrong 
problems: Instead of answering calls to resolve the  Palestinian-
Israeli conﬂ ict, the United States is pushing a democratic agenda. 
Similarly, the U.S. Army and Marine Corps are stretched and 
stressed, and budget expenditures continue to grow.
Regardless of whether Islamists are being bred by this war in 
Iraq, the sectarian violence of Iraq has made it difﬁ cult for many 
in the United States to believe that promoting democracy, some-
thing so core to the national ethos of the United States and a pre-
requisite for security in the eyes of many, is being advanced in this 
effort. President Bush and Secretary of State Rice, for example, 
have pushed as hard as they believe they can to promote the ide-
als of democracy in Iraq and the Middle East, only to see behavior 
to the contrary in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, and the Palestin-
ian territories. For some, that lack of consistency endorses the idea 
that democracy has made the world less safe than before. On bal-
ance, many wonder whether the United States is, in the grandest 
sense, safer than it was before.
Will Russia Become a National Security 
Threat to the United States?
When the leadership of the Soviet Union did not stop the East 
German public from beginning to dismantle the Berlin Wall on 
November 9, 1989, it was immediately obvious that something 
was changing in the Soviet Union. Just over two years later, the 
Soviet Union ended its seventy-four years of existence on Decem-
ber 31, 1991, when it dissolved into Russia and a series of inde-
pendent states from Armenia in the Caucasus region to Tajikistan 
in central Asia.
Questions on the Issue of National Security 35

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
36 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
The 1990s were a decade of selling off of Soviet assets into 
private hands and a relatively positive diplomatic relationship 
between Russian leader Boris Yeltsin and his U.S. counterparts. 
Issues of difference, such as the Russian discomfort with the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO) expansion into 
neighboring states of Eastern Europe, were downplayed by both 
sides, along with Russia’s objections to U.S. actions in Kosovo and 
other areas of traditional Slavic afﬁ liation with Mother Russia. 
When Yeltsin stepped down on December 31, 1999, his successor 
was a former KGB agent, Vladimir Putin, who was considerably 
younger than the deteriorating president. The overall view in the 
United States was that Russia was a state in decline, no longer 
nearly the threat it was during the Cold War between 1947 and 
1989 because it no longer had the ﬁ nancial capability or the will to 
challenge U.S. dominance around the world.
With the September 11 attacks, President Bush welcomed 
support in antiterrorist efforts from a wide array of leaders around 
the world, including Putin. In November 2001, Putin visited Bush 
at the latter’s Crawford, Texas, ranch where Bush praised the Rus-
sian leader as being so supportive of the pro-Western coalition 
rather than one of the former Communists that Washington had 
so long feared.
In the subsequent ﬁ ve years, Putin’s Russia has moved 
steadily and repeatedly away from the U.S. assessment that it was 
a partner for the future. Russia did not veto the U.S. requests for 
United Nations support in prosecuting a war with Iraq but neither 
did it support the action. Russia, virtually bankrupt ﬁ nancially 
in the 1990s, has enjoyed marked increases in national revenues 
from spiking energy prices, so it is far less cooperative on attempts 
to restrain energy prices. At the same time, the energy-producing 
companies of Russia became increasingly reconsolidated under 
state control, through imprisoning their civilian owners as cor-
rupt or through simply reinstituting state needs for protecting 
national assets. This neomercantilist behavior was of great concern 
but occurred gradually enough that people were too absorbed in 
the unfolding problems of Iraq to realize what was happening in 
Moscow.
More worrisome for many is the increased consolidation of 
power in the hands of Putin loyalists, many former intelligence 
agents with strong ties to authoritarian governance. Forces within 
Russia raised alarms about these antidemocratic moves, but many 
of these voices were silenced through murders or other mysteri-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
ous circumstances, most notably the poisoning of a former KGB 
operative in London in November 2006.
The controversy that is growing is whether this emerging 
authoritarian Russia poses a threat to the international community 
or whether Russia is merely pursuing its own path of develop-
ment and governance. Russia has retained a large nuclear arsenal, 
and there is little prospect for serious arms control debate because 
of strong nationalist sentiment that the United States does not 
respect Russia as an important nation. In addition, the Russian 
military has faced a number of high-proﬁ le failures, such as the 
2000 sinking of the Kursk and loss of the submarine’s crew; the 
botched rescue missions of hostages held by Chechnyan rebels 
at the Moscow Opera House in 2002 and at a school in Beslan 
in 2004, both of which resulted in heavy civilian deaths; and the 
overall military disaster of the campaign to subdue the succes-
sionist Chechnyans (1994–2001). Parents and recruits frequently 
charge Russian military ofﬁ cers with abusing young Army 
recruits, which has led to a signiﬁ cant number of people ignoring 
their military service, thus undercutting the military’s effective-
ness. In short, serious questions about the professionalism of the 
Russian armed forces lead to concerns that it would not behave 
predictably should a serious crisis arise between the Russian state 
and the rest of the world. When this unpredictability couples 
with a growing sense of Russian nationalist pride asserted with a 
clear sense that the international community, especially the Bush 
administration, has ignored Russia’s rightful role as a powerful 
state in the international community leads many to fear that an 
authoritarian regime in Moscow could take aggressive steps to 
undermine peace in the world.
The overall picture is one of Russia with power consolidated, 
directly and indirectly, in the hands of an intelligence agent who 
prefers operating in a nontransparent, authoritarian political sys-
tem while also fearing that the nation’s position as a major global 
player has been inappropriately dismissed by the world’s super-
power. This could be a combustible situation for national security 
in the future as Russia accumulates wealth from its vast energy 
assets, thus allowing it to rebuild its military capability to meet its 
self-image as a respected state. 
Additionally, Russia has increasingly made clear its intol-
erance for U.S. moves to promote pro-Western regimes along 
the fringes of the traditional Russian empire, such as slicing off 
Kosovo into its own non-Serbian state; promoting democratic 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 37

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
38 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
revolutionary governments in Kyrgystan, Ukraine, and other 
neighboring states; and positioning U.S. missile defense systems 
in states of the former Soviet sphere, such as the Czech Republic. 
In each and every one of these instances, Russia has threatened to 
ﬂ ex its muscle and, as Washington is increasingly mired in long-
term commitments elsewhere, it may become more menacing in 
getting its way than U.S. national security can allow.
Can “Personalization” of National 
Security Adversely Affect 
U.S. National Interests?
The United States has a long tradition of personalizing national 
security opportunities and threats in the character of an indi-
vidual. The most positive, recent example of this phenomenon 
is Colombian President Álvaro Uribe Vélez, who has been, and 
remains, the embodiment of perceived success in reforming a soci-
ety. Uribe has instituted a number of major changes to Colombian 
society. Colombia has struggled with insurgency for more than 
four decades, and has seen drug trafﬁ cking and overall criminal-
ity ebb and ﬂ ow tremendously since the 1980s. Some observers 
wonder about the likelihood of real institutionalization or per-
manence of the changes the president has made, but the United 
States, under the Clinton and George W. Bush adminstrations, has 
invested dramatically in Colombia’s future through foreign and 
military assistance. 
Similarly, Russian President Boris Yeltsin, who abandoned 
Communism in favor of a free market economy and sold off many 
state assets into private hands in the 1990s, was considered a pio-
neering ﬁ gure in opening Russia to the West and Western values 
in the years after the Soviet Union and the fear of global Com-
munism. In retrospect, the Yeltsin years appear less upbeat as the 
president’s personal behavior problems, heightened by alcohol 
abuse, allowed Russian society to deteriorate and contributed to 
a sense of humiliation that the subsequent Putin regime is trying 
to erase.
Conversely, U.S. presidents have also personalized national 
security threats by singling out certain individuals as the root of 
evil. President Bush’s charges against Saddam Hussein before the 
2003 invasion are one such example, as are the concerns about 
Osama bin Laden being the crux of the al Qaeda threat. In both 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
cases, the individuals targeted were important symbols but were 
not the whole problem. Evidence that Saddam Hussein’s death 
did not alter the fundamental problems in Iraq that have gener-
ated a strong insurgency has remained controversial, but the real-
ity is that the insurgency has continued three and a half years past 
the former dictator’s capture and months after his late December 
2006 hanging at the hands of the Maliki regime in Baghdad.
With Osama bin Laden, the role of personalizing him as the 
source of evil around the world is even more apparent. Doubts 
about whether the Saudi renegade remains alive abound but con-
cerns about al Qaeda have not diminished despite the possibility 
of bin Laden’s diminished role in its operations. New fears about 
al Qaeda resurgency appear regularly in the U.S. press.
The George W. Bush administration is far from the only one 
to adopt this focus on an individual as the root of national secu-
rity concerns. President George H. W. Bush also highlighted Sad-
dam Hussein’s evil in the Middle East during the 1990–1991 Gulf 
War. President Clinton personalized the evil of Serbian President 
Slobodan Miloˆsevica as the root of the problems in the former 
Yugoslavia in the 1990s. President Ronald Reagan had a strong, 
vocal antipathy for Libyan strongman Muammar Gadhaﬁ  in the 
mid-1980s as the root of terrorism, evil, and danger to the interna-
tional system, particularly as Reagan’s personal ties with Mikhail 
Gorbachev and the Soviet leadership improved. For the Carter 
administration in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the supreme 
religious leader of Iran, Ayatollah Khomeini, became the target 
of U.S. angst, despite the fact that the whole of the Iranian soci-
ety had welcomed back the long-exiled leader after the shah was 
deposed in 1979. For many in the United States, the aging Iranian 
cleric became the embodiment of the humiliation resulting from 
the November 1979–January 1981 hostage crisis where 44 U.S. 
diplomats and service personnel were held by Iranian radicals.
Currently, the Bush administration is also targeting Venezu-
elan President Hugo Chávez Frías and North Korean dictator Kim 
Jong Il, who they fear are challenging the international order the 
administration seeks to establish. Both leaders are highly critical 
of U.S. policies and its role around the world and consider Presi-
dent Bush to be the root of evil in the international system. Bin 
Laden has not disappeared as a symbol of evil, but the apparent 
difﬁ culty in equatng al Qaeda to Bin Laden is increasingly difﬁ cult 
to rationalize. One of the most frustrating lessons from the past 
six years since the 9/11 attacks has been the inability to reduce al 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 39

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
40 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Qaeda to a group under a sole individual’s control instead of the 
evolving menace it now appears to be.
The problem with this personalization is that it runs the risk 
of ignoring the systemic challenges in any society or state. This 
misunderstanding or simpliﬁ cation of conditions around the 
world set up the United States and the world public for frustra-
tion and disappointment when the individuals are removed from 
ofﬁ ce but the necessary ameliorations of societies do not occur or 
are less successful than anticipated. The disappointment of the 
failure to achieve the anticipated transformation of a society once 
a designated dictator disappears can breed further frustration, 
impatience, and cynicism that leads to less public participation 
and understanding in the world. This situation can be exceed-
ingly dangerous for democracy and the political process, and thus 
is dangerous for national security as a whole.
Is National Security the Concern 
of Politicians or the Entire Society?
The debate about who conducts national security policy is the 
most fundamental in the United States. For some, including many 
of the most intellectual and educated in the country, national secu-
rity is the prerogative of those in the armed services. For others, 
national security is the responsibility of each and every single citi-
zen. For still others, national security is handled by the executive 
branch alone, in the person of the president of the United States. 
For yet another segment of the nation, Congress, in conjunction 
with the executive branch and the citizenry as a whole, is the deci-
sion maker for national security.
This question has no set, easy answer. As is true with national 
security threats, the decision maker is in the eye of the beholder. 
For the executive branch ofﬁ cial, Congress is an annoyance to 
be ignored wherever possible because it slows the process and 
operates too loosely. For the legislative branch, national security 
cannot be held exclusively in the hands of the executive branch 
because this will not adequately represent the views of the 300 
million citizens of the nation. And citizens often feel they have 
inadequate preparation or knowledge to answer these pressing 
questions. Instead, it takes all of the groups to provide checks and 
balances, support, and amend the national security process and 
system.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Is Global Warming Truly the Most Pressing 
Immediate National Security Issue?
In early April 2007, a commission of the world’s most promi-
nent, respected climate scientists released a report arguing that 
the earth is heating up substantially and that this will result in 
dramatic effects on the climate within two decades’ time (LeTreut 
and Somerville 2007). This raises the question of whether global 
warming is the most pressing national security concern facing the 
nation, because these climate changes appear likely to alter the 
current lifestyle of many in the United States. Climate changes 
have been occasionally seen as important as the nation looked at 
speciﬁ c, smaller regions such as the Northeast, where acid rain 
has periodically been a concern or the 1930s dust bowl conditions 
that drove a signiﬁ cant portion of the poor population of the cen-
ter of the nation into California and the southwest United States.
Yet the potential global effects of the current climate dete-
rioration appear to be broader and harder to resolve in a manner 
that will allow the nation to ignore the problem. For some, this 
global environmental threat is far greater than the threat of terror-
ism or of any likely war scenarios. For others, such as President 
Bush, global warming remains only a peripheral issue that the 
free market will probably address if left to its own devices rather 
than being forced to react under regulation. The issue is far more 
broadly discussed outside the United States, especially in Western 
Europe, than it is here, but its role as a priority national security 
concern will only generate more debate as climate issues deterio-
rate in a world where energy and resource consumption contin-
ues to increase, especially in China, India, and the United States, 
to maintain growing economies and higher standards of living.
Does China’s Phenomenal Growth Pose a 
Threat to the Nation’s Security?
Thirty years ago, the People’s Republic of China (PRC) was still 
coming to grips with the horrors and excess of the Great Proletar-
iat Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) where Chairman Mao Zedong 
unleashed radicals within the Communist Party to eradicate oppo-
sition and keep society in a perpetual state of upheaval. Mao’s 
death in September 1976 opened the door to gradual stabilization 
of the Chinese nation under the Second Generation Leadership in 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 41

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
the person of Deng Xiaoping. Deng opened the door to reforms 
in China that redistributed economic power into the hands of the 
population and sparked the most amazing economic growth in a 
three-decade period that the world has ever seen, especially when 
cast against the reality of a population of more than a billion peo-
ple seeking to improve its standard of living in that short time. 
While far from all Chinese citizens have fat bank accounts or lush 
villas outside Shanghai or Beijing, the standard of living for most 
Chinese has improved greatly in the past three decades.
Along with these changes in economic status are marked 
steps to modernize the People’s Liberation Army (PLA), the col-
lective term for the military in China. The vast force that proved 
virtually impotent against Vietnam in 1979 has seen its weapons 
systems improve along with the education levels of its ofﬁ cers and 
enlisted personnel. Similarly, the PLA has taken steps to enhance 
its cooperation across its military branches, known as “increased 
jointness” in Western parlance, and to target its greatest national 
security goals in its modernization process rather than trying to 
meet U.S. military capability one-on-one.
Undoubtedly the greatest single security goal for China is to 
prevent Taiwan, the island of 23 million people located 100 miles 
off the southeast coast of Fujian province, from declaring indepen-
dence from the “motherland.” Taiwan’s split views on whether 
it wants to declare independence, reunite with the mainland, or 
continue in the ambiguous status it has held for generations do 
not comfort Beijing but the urgency and frantic behavior with 
which Beijing threatened Taiwan between 1996 (when it ﬁ red mis-
siles off the northern and southern coasts of the island to affect 
presidential elections) and 2003 (when it feared the incumbent in 
Taipei, Chen Shui-bian, would act upon his talk of rewriting the 
Guomingdong Constitution, which formally linked Taiwan to the 
Republic of China and, indirectly, the PRC itself) calmed dramati-
cally after 2004. Part of this is due to Beijing’s enhanced military 
capability (Taipei’s military has not commensurately improved) 
and part of this is due to ever-growing economic ties between the 
PRC and Taiwan businesses.
Many fear that the Communist government in Beijing is not 
interested simply in playing a peaceful role as a state in the inter-
national community, but seeks to oust the United States from its 
prominent position in east Asia and then dominate, if not subju-
gate, Asia to traditional Chinese hegemony. One look at a map 
indicates that most of east Asia is China, but many fear that it 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
has nefarious goals and could operate unchallenged, much as the 
Soviet Union did ﬁ fty years ago. People with this view of China’s 
threat point to its unwillingness to defer to the democratic wishes 
of the Taiwan population along with China’s utter intransigence 
on democratizing itself as major economic reforms occur.
Chinese responses to these sorts of concerns are often dismis-
sive but consistent. The Chinese government refuses to concede 
that Taiwan is anything other than an internal Chinese matter; 
under no circumstances will it surrender sovereignty on any and 
all issues regarding China’s development and politics to anyone 
other than the Communist Party leadership. Additionally, China 
notes that its military modernization only offers a balance to the 
dramatic imbalance existing in east Asia under U.S. military pres-
ence there. China’s leadership proclaims its purely “peaceful” 
desires to modernize and raise up its population from the dire 
conditions it faced in the twentieth century.
Some analysts take China at the leadership’s word, noting that 
it is still a rather poor society with half a billion people living on 
less than two dollars’ a day income. These analysts also note that 
Chinese military modernization appears aimed directly at prevent-
ing Taiwan’s independence. Others note that China views its role 
as the center of the world, or the “Middle Kingdom”; thus, it seeks 
a modern economy and military to achieve the status it envisions 
for itself and that it held for much of the past ﬁ ve millennia.
In September 2005, a senior U.S. diplomat challenged China 
to become a “responsible stakeholder” as it assumes an ever 
greater role in the international system (Zoellick 2005). Others in 
Washington, particularly in the defense community, fear that the 
Chinese Communist Party is incapable of modernizing only for a 
Taiwan scenario, noting that China’s goals must extend beyond 
that island to greater control over Asia. Still other analysts argue 
that China’s modernization has been measured and completely 
consistent with Deng Xiaoping’s placement of military modern-
ization as the fourth of the Four Modernizations announced in the 
1970s. The debate about China’s goals and aspirations is a ﬁ erce 
and growing one as China plays an increasingly important role in 
the global ﬁ nancial and diplomatic games.
Less clear but equally controversial is what options are 
available to address China. Some analysts argue that the United 
States needs to confront PLA modernization, but this position 
rarely includes a detailed discussion of how to operationalize that 
confrontation. Those fearing PLA modernization often discuss 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 43

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
enhancing Taiwan’s military prowess but the island’s political 
establishment, especially under the pro-independence Democratic 
Progressive Party, has proven utterly incompetent to increase 
ﬁ nancial commitment to military modernization, even in the face 
of obvious PLA enhancements. In the early years of this decade, 
President George W. Bush strengthened relations with two stalwart 
allies in east Asia, Australia and Japan, but neither of these states 
can afford to alienate Beijing for trade and geographic reasons. 
Japan, in particular, has a long, strained relationship with China, 
and any sense of military enhancement for the island democracy, 
such as acquiring nuclear weapons, would send China into a par-
oxysm of panic because of the World War II experience of a strong 
military power in Japan. Other friendly states in the region, such 
as Vietnam and Thailand, are as acutely aware of their geographic 
proximity as is Australia, not to mention the increasing need these 
states have to maintain growing access to the Chinese economy for 
their products.
Other options often mentioned in the United States include 
decreasing the trade that is making China so much stronger. 
China is rapidly modernizing its economy by producing a wide 
array of products with cheap labor abundantly available in the 
PRC. The United States, with its insatiable desire for consumer 
goods, buys many of these cheap exports. Additionally, China’s 
growing trade has allowed it to accumulate phenomenal amounts 
of foreign exchange that it is loaning to the United States to pay 
its debts. Some wonder why Washington is not trying to stem 
this behavior if it is seriously worried about Chinese threats to 
the United States. At present there is no easy solution as the rela-
tionship between the two states is increasingly complicated. Thus, 
the question of how to stop China’s modernization may be moot 
because of the real conditions evolving around the world.
Does U.S. Involvement in the “Long War” 
Threaten Its Role as the World Leader?
The United States entered Iraq with both mixed feelings and high 
hopes of a rapid overthrow of Saddam Hussein’s government and 
immediate withdrawal of ground forces in favor of Iraqi efforts to 
construct a democratic, post-authoritarian state. President Bush 
had made it clear eighteen months earlier that the war against 
terrorism would be a long-term commitment that would require 
prolonged dedication to a difﬁ cult cause. The image of U.S. troops 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
helping a crowd of cheering Iraqis overturn a statue of Saddam 
Hussein seemed to embody the initial view that the war would be 
over quickly, as did President Bush’s proud announcement that 
“major combat operations in Iraq have ended” when he appeared 
before a banner proclaiming “Mission Accomplished” on the 
ﬂ ight deck of the USS Abraham Lincoln on May 1, 2001 (Ofﬁ ce of 
the Press Secretary 2003). Within weeks, the apparent successes 
seemed to disappear against the specter of a growing insurgency.
The successful termination of war in Iraq has become the 
primary cause for President Bush. Obviously, the administration 
does worry about Afghanistan, Iran, Israel, and the global war 
on terrorism, but the overall issue of Iraq is of utmost importance 
to the national security leadership. Perhaps the nature of the 
criticism about the laser-like focus should be labeled the “Islamic 
world” instead of simply Iraq.
As Washington adjusts to changing conditions in Iraq while 
seeking to bring about a democratic, stable regime there, many 
supporters and critics of the administration agree that Washing-
ton is so absorbed in this issue that it is missing major changes on 
the global scene. An obvious concern is about whether the overall 
Middle East security balance is adversely affected by the growing 
power of Iran, even without the nuclear program that the inter-
national community fears will lead to a weapons program. Iran, 
as the primary Shiite state in the world, has become a much more 
powerful player in the region as Iraq has descended into virtual 
chaos since 2003. The primary U.S. allies in the region are pre-
dominantly Sunni states, which do not want to see a stronger Iran 
in the region yet view much of the U.S. activity within Iraq as 
helping, rather than hindering, Iran regardless of U.S. intentions.
Similarly, analysts point to increased Chinese prowess 
around the globe, illustrated by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff nominee Admiral Michael Mullen in the summer of 2007. 
In reports on his pending hearings before the Senate, Mullen’s 
concern, symbolic of many in the Navy, is for the U.S. role in the 
Paciﬁ c theater where Chinese power grows steadily as the nation 
of 1.3 billion strengthens its economy and its People’s Liberation 
Army forces. As China’s role in the Paciﬁ c grows, its conﬁ dence 
and willingness to act across the world also has expanded. This 
includes Chinese engagement in Latin America, traditionally an 
area of virtual exclusivity to the United States, along with utter 
frustration on the part of Latin Americans with Bush’s lack of 
attention until his March 2007 tour through Brazil, Uruguay, 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 45

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Colombia, Guatemala, and the Yucatán of Mexico. Similarly, many 
point to dramatic increases in Chinese involvement on the African 
continent as it searches for energy and other resources. Chinese-
European ties have also solidiﬁ ed but not as signiﬁ cantly as those 
between India and China since 2007, two states with tremendous 
populations available for economic exploitation. Finally, Washing-
ton seems dramatically slow in turning its attention to the region 
by trying to create better ties at a time when its role as the major 
partner for east Asia is being usurped by China’s trade relations 
with virtually all other states in the region, including Taiwan. 
Despite Taiwan’s dependence on its ties with Washington, the 
state has many businesses that are willing partners for the PRC. 
Washington’s concerns about Iraq seem to have made it less aware 
of the emergent Chinese involvement, particularly in trade issues, 
with the rest of the Asian sphere, leaving the United States less 
interesting as a partner as the states of Asia wonder if the United 
States would abandon Asia for interests elsewhere. The United 
States has been the great balancing power in Asia since 1945 but 
some question whether China’s growing role in international poli-
tics, trade, diplomacy, energy use, and other ﬁ elds may weaken 
Washington’s ability to provide that role as a balancing agent.
Fears that Washington is wearing blinders about the world 
go beyond Chinese involvement. These concerns relate to the 
increasingly authoritarian nature of Russia and the slowdown of 
democratic trends in many former Soviet republics. Others cite 
the aggressive expansion of European ties with Asia.
The question of U.S. strategic blinders relates not only to geo-
graphic regions but also to functional concerns. The Bush admin-
istration seemed to join the discussions about energy dependence 
far after most other governments around the world. Washing-
ton still argues that global warming is only a theory rather than 
the widely accepted danger cited by the rest of the world. The 
administration has proven itself determined to proceed on bal-
listic missile defense in the face of signiﬁ cant objections by many 
governments, such as China and Russia.
While the United States is clearly still the predominant mili-
tary power in the world, changes in world views are important and 
have consequences for strategic interests. These changing world 
views have led other states to move forward without the desired 
Washington endorsement as the role that the United States plays 
in many areas outside the Middle East is more of an afterthought 
than the required support it once was.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Is U.S. National Security Threatened 
by the Nature of Islamic Societies?
When President George W. Bush led the nation in mourning and 
reprisal against the horror of the September 11 attacks, he explicitly 
and carefully made clear that the target of retribution was evil indi-
viduals and regimes, not Islam itself as a religion. In subsequent 
steps, he reinforced this distinction by inviting Islamic scholars to 
the White House and reaching out to the Islamic community.
The wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have been waged in two 
areas where Islam is the absolutely dominant religion, although 
with two distinct sects engaging in sectarian warfare in the latter. 
The distinction between waging war against Islam versus waging 
war against the bad actions of individuals or groups was played 
down but still retained.
Over the past ﬁ ve years, however, as terrorist bombings 
have spread to Indonesia, an overwhelmingly Islamic society, 
states such as Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Lebanon, and Pakistan have 
adopted increasingly traditional anti-Western mores. Rare excep-
tions remain in nations such as the United Arab Emirates but 
the picture of the Islamic world is one that is moving away from 
Western, democratic values rather than toward them as the United 
States has staked its goals over the same time period.
A question arising from these divergent actions is whether 
Islam is incompatible with the West, and thus a threat to the 
national security of the United States. In the pluralist society that 
the United States so richly embodies, this question would almost 
have been unheard of before this decade. When respected Har-
vard University political scientist Samuel Huntington asked the 
question, in the mid-1990s, about a coming “clash of civilizations” 
between the Christian West and the other cultures of the world, he 
was accused of massive misunderstanding or simpliﬁ cation of the 
world, even though the article “Clash of Civilizations” was one of 
the more cited pieces of the decade (Huntington 1993). Today, a 
generation later, many in the Christian world are asking precisely 
these same things.
This point has no absolute, assuring answers as to whether 
Islam is incompatible with democracy or whether the problem 
is a series of fanaticals; instead, the response depends on one’s 
views of the world and relative priorities. Many in the Islamic 
world respond that they have adopted strong beliefs in their faith 
because they are frightened and discouraged by the unparalleled 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 47

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
strength and power of the United States. The United States has 
millions of Islamic citizens who work hard and have joined the 
center of national society with entirely peaceful goals, ideals, and 
hopes as have Methodists, Jews, Bahais, Catholics, Buddhists, 
Confuscianists, Baptists, Disciples of Christ, and many other reli-
gious adherents across the ﬁ fty states and around the globe.
The fundamental differences between Islam and the West are 
great as are those between most religions. Islam has its adherents 
of absolute doctrinal purity as does any other religion. It does 
appear to have less compatibility, at this point, with some West-
ern ideals than do other faiths but this is a snapshot in time. At 
the same time that many fear Islam’s threat to the national secu-
rity, some critics worry about the intransigence of many in the 
United States and their uncompromising commitment to faith as 
well. Still others fear the greatest danger to the United States is the 
increasingly secular nature of the society with no faith at all.
Does Challenging the President’s Decision- 
Making Give Support to al Qaeda or Is 
It Part of the Democratic Process?
Vice President Dick Cheney has repeated countless times over 
the past four years that critics of President Bush’s policies in Iraq 
and Afghanistan are validating al Qaeda’s strategy of threatening 
the United States. Critics, particularly after the Democratic take-
over of the Congress in 2007, have responded that this criticism 
of policy is inherent to the checks and balances of the U.S. politi-
cal system and is the responsibility of those who disagree with 
the policy. The debate raises questions about how members of the 
national security community, as well as the decision-making com-
munity in the United States, view their inﬂ uence on opponents (or 
equally peers) around the world.
The argument that challenging the president supports al 
Qaeda goals is a variation on a traditional concern in the United 
States. It essentially notes that “united the nation stands, while 
divided (on any issue) it falls.” This view relegates public debate 
and democratic practices to a backseat in favor of one branch of 
elected ofﬁ cials that is ostensibly more knowledgeable than the 
rest of society.
Countering this position is the view that any adversary of 
the United States will operate to achieve its goals regardless of 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
national debate or support for the U.S. leadership. On this side of 
the debate, the challenges to the executive branch will not have 
any affect on the ruthless behavior of those opposing U.S. national 
interests.
How Does India, the Largest Democracy 
in the World, Relate to the United States?
For most of its modern historic experience, India has been inﬂ u-
enced by British culture; thus, Washington has often ignored India 
and its half-century of thriving democracy. During the Cold War, 
New Delhi’s ﬂ irtations with the Non-Aligned Movement, illus-
trated by the 1955 Bandung gathering of “Third World” states 
in Indonesia, were important to the newly independent India’s 
assertion of its own development as a sovereign state. Viewed by 
Washington, the Non-Aligned Movement and New Delhi’s lead-
ership position were seen as a euphemism for pro-Soviet beliefs, 
making Washington even less interested in engaging strategically 
with the burgeoning population, the long-governing Congress 
Party, the increasing military prowess, and the overall developing 
state that India represented.
The end of the Cold War coincided with the decline of the 
Gandhi dynasty and the Congress Party. Prime Minister Indira 
Gandhi died at the hands of her Sikh bodyguards in October 1984, 
several months after a government attack on the Golden Temple 
in Amritsar, the most sacred spot for Sikhs. Her younger son, the 
heir apparent Sanjay, had died in a plane crash in 1980, but her 
actual heir Rajiv ruled as prime minister intermittently before he 
died in a suicide bombing in southern India in May 1991. The suc-
cessor governments in New Delhi loosened the Congress Party 
traditions of state-controlled economic policies and gradually 
began putting out feelers for India to join the broader interna-
tional community in many ways. 
At the same time, India was aware of deteriorating condi-
tions in western neighbor Pakistan, as a result of growing Islamist 
pressures, as well as military modernization and rapid economic 
growth in China to the north. India survived the international 
condemnation of its May 1998 nuclear tests conﬁ rming its mem-
bership in the nuclear weapons club. The clear evidence that India 
and Pakistan had nuclear weapons as of 1998 put one more concern 
into the national security mix for the United States since the two 
states have such a contentious and war-ravaged history, including 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 49

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
skirmishes after the 1947 Partition that created Pakistan and India 
and a 1971 war that created Bangladesh from the old East Pakistan/
West Pakistan formation that had existed for twenty-four years. 
The extra danger of nuclear weapons heightened concerns after an 
attack on the Indian Parliament in December 2001, which Indian 
ofﬁ cials believed had to be condoned by Pakistani leadership. 
Throughout the ﬁ rst half of 2002, the international community 
held its breath as Islamabad and New Delhi came perilously close 
to a war over concerns about the attack on the Parliament. Wash-
ington, needing a more peaceful international community where 
its attentions were not diverted from the pursuit of al Qaeda in 
the aftermath of the 2001 attacks in the United States, could not 
ignore the prospect of nuclear war in the subcontinent yet had 
other priorities it had to consider as well.
In the ﬁ nal year of the Clinton administration, the president 
made a wildly successful tour of India, where he was able to begin 
opening doors to better U.S.-Indian relations. When the Bush 
administration arrived, it chose to push even harder for better ties 
as a method of balancing Chinese power in Asia. In 2003, how-
ever, India—long a major critic of Beijing military modernization 
and fearful of the evolution underway—tentatively began to open 
better relations with the PRC, to include more military-to-military 
exchanges.
Washington has continued to try to capitalize on India’s 
evolving economic and diplomatic policies, which ﬁ nally appear 
to be “opening” the country to free market economics and a more 
pro-Western stance. Unlike China, the Indian regimes have not 
fully embraced free market economics but are moving far more 
cautiously toward a free market commitment. The question of 
whether the United States is better off embracing an India that is 
fairly unlikely to pursue extremely pro-U.S. policies versus keep-
ing a balanced relationship with Pakistan and India remains a 
crucial one. Many critics have never forgiven the U.S. administra-
tion for turning away from its own nonproliferation goals while 
advocating for a strict nonproliferation regime. India, never a sig-
natory of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1970, will 
never sign on to the NPT because of the conviction that the treaty 
violates Indian sovereignty, yet Washington is abandoning one of 
its core principles to embrace this relationship. The question of 
whether this relationship is helpful for U.S. interests in the long 
run is an important one.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Did Questionable Interrogation 
Techniques for Prisoners and 
Saddam Hussein’s Execution 
Undercut the U.S. Global Position?
Many around the world have long identiﬁ ed the United States with 
pushing a civilized standard of living, ethical behavior, and human 
values. Although not all agree, the United States has often been 
seen as protecting rights in a manner important to the world.
Thus, the photographic evidence of questionable and humili-
ating interrogation techniques at the Abu Ghraib prison in Bagh-
dad and at the Guantánamo Bay detention center undercut this 
position. Further, the widely held belief that the United States tac-
itly or more directly supported the taunting and sectarian nature 
of Saddam Hussein’s execution—a charge the Bush administra-
tion adamantly rejects—has led many to ask whether the U.S. 
stature around the world has been seriously undercut. And, if so, 
does this loss of stature hinder the United States’ credibility in 
condemning human rights abuses in states such as the PRC? The 
United States has long issued an annual human rights report on 
issues of concern in other countries around the world, but the Abu 
Ghraib situation resulted in states such as China issuing their own 
human rights reports on the United States.
Additionally, the standing of the United States has been in 
question for many who believe the U.S. behavior in interrogating 
prisoners has undercut the basic democratic ideal of equal treat-
ment under the law. The Bush administration argues forcefully and 
repeatedly that the traditional rules of law do not apply in these 
cases, but this has not silenced all critics, at home or abroad.
Does Funding for National Security 
Tools Affect Which Tools Become Most 
Frequently Used?
When people hear the term “national security,” some automati-
cally think of the military as the most important implementer in 
any scenario. Others think of economic power or diplomacy or 
information. These are known as the “tools of statecraft” and form 
the basic toolkit available to any leader. National security strategy 
is the appropriate use of the various tools in a concerted manner to 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 51

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
achieve the goals of the nation, allowing for various priorities and 
understanding that each and every action in the national secu-
rity realm will generate consequences—some known and others 
unforeseen until they occur.
In the past thirty years, funding for tools of statecraft to 
address national security has increasingly been dedicated to 
the military, to the exclusion of other tools. The need to rebuild 
the military after the Vietnam conﬂ ict (1960–1975), along with the 
funding required to move from a military draft to an all-volun-
teer military, meant a signiﬁ cant increase in military expenditure. 
With President Ronald Reagan’s advent to the White House in 
1981, defense spending increased dramatically because of fears 
that the Soviet threat was overwhelming the nation. Additionally, 
with the revival of the military as a proud arm of the national 
security, it became known as the most competent aspect of the 
government, and it probably reached its zenith with the comple-
tion of Operation Desert Storm in late February 1991. At that time, 
it appeared that the military could do anything, do it well, and do 
it with few casualties, as proven in the 96-hour ground campaign 
to oust Saddam Hussein’s forces from occupied Kuwait.
When defense expenditures rose, similar increases in funding 
did not occur for the State Department, foreign assistance pro-
grams, or other aspects of the government that controlled instru-
ments of statecraft essential for national security. During the 1980s 
and 1990s, as conservatives won the White House under Ronald 
Reagan and George H. W. Bush, and then the Congress under 
Newt Gingrich’s leadership in 1994, talk centered on the incompe-
tence and lackluster performance of the nonmilitary instruments. 
The State Department and the Agency for International Develop-
ment, in particular, were blamed for mismanaging scarce ﬁ nan-
cial assets, as if altering a situation outside the continental United 
States were an easy task completely under their control. The idea 
of the military being the most effective tool of national security 
found great credibility in the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 
1989 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union two years later. Both 
events were initially often viewed as consequences not of diplo-
macy but of brute military strength; the reality, however, was that 
it was the combination of factors known as “national security 
strategy” that contributed to the inherent weaknesses and contra-
dictions in the Soviet state.
When the Cold War ended in 1989, expectations were high 
that military spending would decrease dramatically, a concept 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
known as the “peace dividend.” Yet the ﬁ rst Gulf War (1990–1991) 
and subsequent peace operations around the world, in Somalia, 
the former Yugoslav republics, Haiti, and others, meant expendi-
tures for armed forces did not decrease but continued to increase. 
The United States was the sole superpower in the early 1990s, so 
the U.S. military was the shining example of national prowess 
around the world. It was an outstanding force when there was lit-
tle to challenge it, prompting Ambassador to the United Nations 
Madeleine K. Albright to ask the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff General Colin L. Powell what the point was to having such a 
magniﬁ cent military if it wasn’t going to be used, since there were 
few situations requiring its deployment for traditional reasons 
(Powell and Persico 1995).
As the 1990s progressed, the military remained an outstand-
ing instrument of statecraft while expenditures for other arms of 
the government did not receive similar funding. Some elements, 
such as U.S. Information Agency libraries, closed as a money-
saving effort during the severe budget-deﬁ cit crisis facing the 
Clinton administration. Foreign assistance continued to decline 
in absolute and relative terms as politicians could not justify aid 
abroad while cuts faced those at home. As a divided government 
prevented the Clinton administration from getting its diplomatic 
nominees conﬁ rmed by the Congress, military presence by the 
senior armed forces became the major U.S. presence in many 
places, Latin America for example, rather than a full complement 
of all elements of statecraft to show U.S. interests.
In the period after the terrorist attacks of 2001, this situa-
tion persisted, and the military continued to be the major and 
sometimes only tool upon which politicians relied to achieve 
national security. In the Iraq campaign and the subsequent 
rebuilding effort, the Pentagon leadership preferred to consoli-
date all national security functions under its wing, and the White 
House acquiesced. Once again, the United States appeared to be 
relying almost entirely on the military tool instead of the range of 
security instruments.
Many critics charge that the Bush administration would be 
better off increasing the power and funding of other governmen-
tal agencies and decreasing the emphasis on military involvement 
in achieving national security. This highly charged debate appears 
unlikely to end in the foreseeable future. In March 2007, the newly 
installed U.S. commander in Iraq, Army General David Petraeus, 
made it clear that his forces could not work alone to rebuild the 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 53

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Middle East but required the concerted efforts of all aspects of the 
national security team in the U.S. government.
How Has “Globalization” Affected 
National Security?
In the ﬁ rst decade of the twenty-ﬁ rst century, the immediacy 
of communication and global activities made globalization an 
unavoidable fact for many. Some believe the ability of interna-
tional telecommunication to show events in one area of the world 
almost instantaneously is a serious threat to global stability and 
this ability to inﬂ uence people so rapidly is a dangerous trend that 
undercuts the rationality of thinking people. Others, however, 
argue that globalization is nothing more than the logical progres-
sion of international change. 
The July 1997 Thai baht crisis is an example of how rapidly 
international capital ﬂ ows in today’s environment. The ﬁ ckle 
movement of capital is often viewed by non-U.S. citizens as a 
means by which the United States manipulates the system, thus 
undercutting the sovereignty of other states. While U.S. govern-
ment ofﬁ cials of both political parties view the nation’s involve-
ment as a bipartisan activity, other critics argue that the U.S. 
activities around the world are a manner by which the nation 
exerts itself in a less obvious manner to inﬂ uence others. This goal 
of creating an international environment that would beneﬁ t the 
United States, potentially at the expense of other states, is a con-
troversial position that globalization allows.
Is U.S. Debt a Major Threat 
to National Security?
In the era after the 2001 terrorist attacks, national security expenses 
have raised the U.S. budget deﬁ cit dramatically. The Republican 
Congress (1995–2007), long critics of proﬂ igate Democratic pork-
barrel politics, oversaw a tremendous growth in expenditures for 
all sorts of pet projects. The budget surplus welcoming the admin-
istration of George W. Bush in 2001 rapidly became a deﬁ cit as 
homeland security expenses skyrocketed.
Additionally, the United States has always been somewhat of 
an anomaly in its inability to encourage national savings. The steady 
increase in personal consumption by the citizenry, improved access 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
to cheaper goods imported under the World Trade Organization 
agreements, and the need to increase government borrowing for 
the expenses have led to a marked increase in foreign borrowing.
The United States saw much of its spending covered by for-
eigners purchasing U.S. ﬁ nancial instruments. In the 1980s and 
1990s, concerns grew about Japanese ﬁ nancing U.S. deﬁ cits, which 
contributed to severe anti-Japanese sentiment in the United States. 
As Japan’s ﬁ nancial conditions declined in the 1990s, concerns 
about Japan’s ability to overwhelm the United States subsided.
The current levels of foreign debt are a greater concern than 
they were in the 1990s for two reasons. One is that a growing con-
centration of the foreign funding for U.S. borrowing is in China. 
Second, China’s own economy is growing at a rapid-ﬁ re pace that 
has no clear-cut end in sight. As China’s military, economic, and 
social modernization grows, a signiﬁ cant corps of U.S. analysts 
worry that the reliance upon China’s “help” in paying U.S. bills is 
a major threat to the nation’s long-term security. Other economists 
and analysts view the relationship as interdependent, meaning 
China cannot operate without the United States as the market for 
its goods that are fueling the economic growth upon which the 
Chinese Communist Party bases its ability and right to continue 
governing the vast Chinese state. 
Where Does National Security End 
and Homeland Security Begin?
[Or are they really the same 
thing under different terms?]
Since 9/11, the nation has been unclear about precisely how to 
combat terrorism and enhance national security, partially because 
of bureaucratic differences between the goals. For many, national 
security is a broader topic than physical defense, so the need 
for greater economic opportunities, the need to enhance trade 
options, and perhaps the controversy of whether to allow more 
immigrants to do jobs in the United States are also issues playing 
into national security. Basic goals and premises of homeland secu-
rity include the need to raise border protection and slow down the 
ﬂ ow of people and goods across the boundaries to make certain 
they are not undercutting our security.
While there is general agreement between these goals for 
national security and homeland security, there are fundamental 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 55

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
conﬂ icts between the two. The redeﬁ nition of national security 
to include broader issues, largely outside of the nation’s physical 
territory, makes this task challenging. Additionally, the difﬁ culty, 
in a large, modern bureaucracy stressed by budget constraints 
and human limitations (for example, the armed forces that are 
engaged outside the nation in huge numbers), of determining 
which agency conducts which operations can be signiﬁ cant.
While the 2002 realignment of two dozen federal agencies 
into the Department of Homeland Security was intended to clar-
ify responsibilities, in 2005 the Hurricane Katrina debacle along 
the Gulf Coast unveiled the depths of the existing problems in 
this area. Calls to realign the agencies, particularly the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency, may result in change, but the 
massive size and exceptional competence of the National Guard 
and regular, active-duty forces make it likely that they will still be 
called on to engage in homeland operations at times.
For a vibrant democracy such as the United States, the home-
land security versus national security issue also raises questions 
about how traditional values bump against the new conditions. 
Many fear the United States is losing its core values by allowing 
the requirements to track terrorists to override such core values as 
privacy and executive-legislative branch relations. Time will tell 
how this balance comes out over the long run, but these calls of 
concern illustrate that not everyone believes homeland security 
is the same as national security, and those people prefer not to 
lose ideals that have been cherished in the four centuries of the 
national experience.
How Can the Nation Retain Its 
National Character in the Face 
of the Terrorism Threat?
One of the most fundamental arguments since 2001 has centered 
on whether the changes wrought by the terrorist attacks are funda-
mentally altering the nature of the United States. The decisions by 
President Bush and attorneys general John Ashcroft and Alberto 
Gonzalez to engage in domestic surveillance have led many on 
both sides of the aisle to question whether protecting national 
security requires the nation to ignore its basic tenets such “inno-
cent until proven guilty” and freedoms under the First Amend-
ment. The Bush administration, in response, has argued that the 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
need to preempt the new type of terrorism outweighs any fears of 
infringement on individual rights and liberties.
Many citizens also question the new approach of waging pre-
ventative wars as opposed to waiting until the United States has 
been attacked to launch massive military operations. President 
Bush, former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, and Secre-
tary of State Condoleezza Rice rebut this concern, noting that the 
Constitution requires the government to protect the population 
and that this policy of prevention merely tweaks long-existent U.S. 
doctrine. Critics charge that the change undercuts our traditional 
view that the United States is a peaceful nation that only takes 
military action to defend itself. As the Iraq campaign drags on, the 
debate is likely to persist. Once congressional control moved from 
the Republicans to the Democrats in the 2006 elections, the debate 
on this point became more vocal and more heated but it remains 
far from ended some six years into the war against terror.
What Is the Proper Balance between 
Defending National Security and 
Protecting Civil Rights and Liberties?
Fears that Bush-administration covert policies aimed at rooting 
out foreign threats to the United States are undercutting civil 
rights and liberties are immense. In late 2005, revelations that 
the government had been monitoring domestic phone calls, in 
direct contradiction of Watergate-era reforms to the intelligence 
community, led many people to question whether the loss of 
civil liberties in the United States was a victory by terrorists. 
The administration, trying to keep these actions out of the press, 
argued that the United States could only protect itself by not tell-
ing potential adversaries they were being monitored. Even telling 
the courts and Congress might expose these programs, thereby 
compromising both the programs and, by extension, national 
security. The United States, in short, could not operate as openly 
as it had in the past, and that openness was probably a reason for 
being attacked.
Civil libertarians, in contrast, rebut the administration’s 
actions and assert that they are the actions of a nondemocratic 
government that is not accountable to the public. Civil libertarians 
argue that the accountability of the three branches of government 
far outweighs anything the government seeks to do. As the Bush 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 57

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
administration ﬁ nishes its term with a Democratic Congress, civil 
liberty issues will continue to be debated.
Should the Nation Return to a National 
Draft or Retain a Voluntary Force?
President Richard Nixon ended mandatory military service in 
1973. Later that decade, President Jimmy Carter reinstituted reg-
istration for military obligation, but the United States has had an 
all-volunteer force for three and a half decades. Until the Iraq con-
ﬂ ict, this national choice has worked fairly well, depending on the 
particular context of any moment. However, the mounting con-
ﬂ ict in Iraq has affected military recruiting, raising concerns over 
the length of the conﬂ ict and the number of casualties. At several 
times in the past several years, Representative Charles Rangel (D-
NY) has suggested that the nation return to a mandatory draft 
to make the national service commitment uniform. Rangel and 
others have long believed military service has become too often 
a function of those not linked to government decision making. 
He also fears that military service increasingly falls to those at 
the lower socio-economic ranges of society, disproportionately 
involving the Hispanic and African American populations. Ran-
gel is concerned that the nation’s leadership is asking other young 
men and women to go to war when their own children are not 
among those who are potentially giving their lives for the nation; 
thus, a return to a draft would make everyone more cognizant of 
the sacriﬁ ce the young are making. Few people seriously support 
Rangel’s suggestion, but his concerns illustrate a sense of frustra-
tion on the part of many about how the United States engages in 
national security decision making.
The constant strain on ground forces—primarily the Marine 
Corps and Army—in Iraq and Afghanistan, along with small 
deployments across the globe, still raises the question about the 
sustainability of the current force. Reenlistments have been less 
predictable than in nonconﬂ ict periods, and the National Guard 
and the Reserves, in particular, show major stress. The likely 
response will be a major increase in the congressionally estab-
lished levels for the armed forces, but that will be neither cheap 
nor all that easy to ﬁ ll in an era of relatively strong economic 
expansion and continuing long tours away from loved ones in 
places far away.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Should Those Seized During Conﬂ ict Be 
Treated as Prisoners of War 
or as Nontraditional Combatants?
One of the issues that has generated the most international and 
domestic controversy about the post-9/11 world is how the 
United States treats the nontraditional military combatants it cap-
tures. In the aftermath of the Afghan campaign in late 2001, the 
Bush administration decided to consider the Taliban supporters 
that it captured as nontraditional combatants on the grounds that 
the war on terrorism is a new form of warfare, thus not subject 
to the Geneva Conventions, a series of agreements forming the 
basis to the global norms for humanitarian treatment of captured 
individuals. The normal rules of the Geneva Conventions (1949), 
for example, were not invoked when men were incarcerated in 
Guantánamo Bay or other facilities around the world. Men were 
not publicly charged nor were they given representation in court, 
on the grounds that this endangered national security. The men 
were often held indeﬁ nitely and based on suspicion rather than 
the habeas corpus rules of law enshrined in the Constitution. 
These actions have been highly controversial.
The 2004 revelation, through numerous photographs, that the 
incarceration procedures being used in Iraq were in direct opposi-
tion to many tenets of Islam, the faith of the overwhelming major-
ity of the prisoners, inﬂ amed the already heightened anti-U.S. 
sentiments around the world, but especially in the Islamic world 
from Indonesia to Morocco and to Great Britain as well. Many 
critics at home and abroad charged that the procedures violated 
the 1949 Geneva Conventions. The photographs illustrated men 
being humiliated by women, by animals, and by being forced into 
degrading activities. Apologies and comments by administration 
ofﬁ cials only reinforced the sense that the United States not only 
did not understand Islamic populations but also sought to engage 
in a crusade against Islam rather than terrorism.
Administration ofﬁ cials argued strongly that these interro-
gation and incarceration techniques were essential to getting the 
intelligence needed to ﬁ ght the global war on terrorism. Critics 
asked whether the war on terrorism outweighed basic U.S. values 
and whether the actions were not creating more terrorists than 
curbing them. The July 2005 underground and bus bombings in 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 59

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
London were cited as evidence of the failure of the policies. It is 
not clear whether all or any of the individuals who have been 
in custody for questioning held for several years offer any valu-
able intelligence at this point, but holding these people clearly 
sends a signal around the world that the United States is serious 
about stalking and capturing terrorists. Six years into the war in 
Afghanistan and four years into Iraq, the United States retains 
its interrogation and incarceration facilities in Guantánamo Bay, 
Cuba, and various other locations.
How Much Is National Security Worth 
if Faced with a Massive Budget Deﬁ cit?
The massive costs of enhancing national security over the past sev-
eral years have created a burgeoning budget deﬁ cit. This situation 
has not been exclusively caused by national security, as Congress 
has spent much on pork-barrel projects, and President Bush has 
rarely vetoed any bills coming across his desk, but the escalation 
of security expenditures and the rapidly growing and apparently 
unanticipated economic toll for Iraq have led to budget- breaking 
expenditures. Critics of the administration ask whether the enhance-
ments are worth the costs. As the goal of creating a larger perma-
nent armed force for the nation becomes clearer after late 2006, the 
expense involved is also clearer. The larger military will require 
a much higher expenditure as well as more women, men, and 
weapons. Getting and retaining a quality military requires edu-
cation and training, materiel, family beneﬁ ts, post-conﬂ ict health 
care and assistance, and various other costs that are often hidden. 
As the Bush administration closes out its second term, the debate 
appears likely to grow as Congress and potential presidential can-
didates question these decisions.
How Does the Nation Balance National 
Security in the Private and Public Sectors?
One of the more interesting aspects of warfare in the new millen-
nium is the use of private-sector employees to accomplish much 
of what used to be military activities. The outsourcing ranges from 
privatizing janitorial services in the Pentagon, to providing food 
to troops in northern Afghanistan, and to providing security for 
the leadership of Iraq in the Green Zone. This has reduced stafﬁ ng 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
levels for the Department of Defense and other federal agencies 
but has created a host of unintended consequences.
Contractors are not governed by the same Uniform Code of 
Military Justice that establishes rules for their behavior in the ﬁ eld. 
In the Abu Ghraib scandal, one of the more sensitive issues was the 
accounts of interrogations by civilian contractors, who went much 
further in their sordid techniques than did the young soldiers who 
were ultimately court-martialed and jailed. For some, this contra-
diction of civilians seemingly ungoverned in their actions, poten-
tially unpunished, was profoundly unhelpful to the U.S. national 
security goals of forwarding the rule of law, not rule of an individ-
ual, in the Middle East. In other cases, private contractors appear 
to get in the way of the traditional forces in the ﬁ eld and these 
contractors have no willingness to get out of the military’s way. 
Accounts of this challenge have been rife from Iraq.
Still others raise the question of whether a nation wants to 
hire out its most fundamental obligation to a segment of the pop-
ulation over which it has virtually no control. Private contractors 
may be more concerned about costs than safety, which can affect 
the level of security, or they may not feel obligated to meet all of 
the stringent requirements to protect civil rights or civil liberties 
that government strictures require. Alternatively, private contrac-
tors might be more expensive in the long term than the costs of 
continued government stafﬁ ng for all obligations, as contractors 
probably pay a premium for their workers that the traditional 
national security paid by the government would not require.
Finally, for many in the United States, the idea of bearing arms 
is purely a governmental activity rather than one of private citizens, 
even when they are working for a contractor. People who hold this 
view are uncomfortable with the idea of leaving the business of 
warfare in the hands of any single private group within society.
Should the Nation Be Preparing 
for Traditional Warfare or for 
Counterinsurgency and Other Types of 
Nontraditional Conﬂ ict?
One of the most challenging issues for the nation is what prepara-
tion is best for the men and women of the U.S. armed forces. The 
traditional U.S. view of warfare is that it is abnormal and once it 
is ended, the international system and nation return to the status 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 61

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
quo ante. This leads to a large buildup of forces for a traditional 
conﬂ ict, often described as “force on force conﬂ ict,” as occurred in 
World War I or II.
Back to at least the Korean War of the early 1950s, however, a 
different type of warfare has arisen. In this latter form, large battles 
are less relevant as the nation confronts more irregular conﬂ ict. 
This irregular conﬂ ict is often known as “asymmetrical” warfare, 
as the weaker adversary seeks to ﬁ nd a technological niche by 
which it can defeat the stronger force. In this latter case, conﬂ ict is 
less military but more psychological and political. Counterinsur-
gency, as practiced in Vietnam and increasingly in Iraq, addresses 
less predictable attacks against larger, slower massive forces of a 
military superpower like the United States.
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld assumed his ofﬁ ce 
with a promise to wean U.S. forces from their dependence on units 
that were too big and too slow to move with the agility required of 
the twenty-ﬁ rst-century battleﬁ eld. Not only would this enhance 
war-ﬁ ghting skills by making the armed services better able to 
confront problems more quickly, but this would create cost sav-
ings that could be used for other military responses, particularly 
national missile defense.
Before the March 2003 Iraq invasion, Army Chief of Staff 
General Eric Shinseki predicted it would take “several hundred 
thousand men” to invade and stabilize Iraq. Deputy Secretary of 
Defense Paul Wolfowitz and others roundly dismissed Shinseki’s 
professional assessment, resulting in the deployment of fewer 
than 150,000 troops, a relatively small number by many military 
estimates, to Iraq. These forces were led to believe their tours of 
duty would be relatively short—some estimated as low as a few 
months’ duration, by which time Iraqi forces were anticipated to 
take control of the security situation.
Instead, over the ﬁ ve years since the invasion, the need for 
much more heavy military protection and a signiﬁ cantly higher 
number of troops to accomplish the stabilization mission became 
apparent. Along with this troop strength argument was the ques-
tion of what these forces should be prepared to do once in country. 
Nation building is generally seen as a radically different mission 
from traditional war ﬁ ghting, but U.S. forces have typically not 
seen the two as compatible, and presidential candidate George W. 
Bush, in his 2000 campaign remarks (Bush 2000), cited the need to 
decrease nontraditional military tasks in favor of highlighting those 
activities the U.S. armed services did best: traditional war ﬁ ghting.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Some ﬁ ve years into the conﬂ ict, fundamental debate about 
the types of forces needed remains one of the cornerstones of U.S. 
debate about national security. Military men and women often 
cite the need for what is referred to as the Powell/Weinberger 
Doctrine, which advocated massive force before going to war, as 
occurred in the ﬁ rst Gulf War (1990–1991). Others besides Secre-
tary Rumsfeld have argued that technology and absolute U.S. mil-
itary dominance make overwhelming force less important than 
responding swiftly and decisively to problems around the world.
With the shift from a Republican to a Democratic Congress in 
2007, the overall discussion of whether the conﬂ icts on the hori-
zon will be traditional or new types became a much more heated 
one. The military released a new Counter-Insurgency Manual, 
FM3–24, in December 2006, which recognized the need for a new 
study and focus on the particular form of conﬂ ict represented by 
Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia in the 1990s, and several other more 
recent conﬂ icts. Lieutenant General David Petraeus, the man Pres-
ident Bush appointed as head of forces in Iraq in early 2006, had 
primary responsibility for redrafting this manual. His emphasis 
on gaining a more personal, close knowledge of the small areas of 
cities and villages in hopes of winning the “hearts and minds” of 
local populations has been a resounding cry for many who look at 
the conditions faced in these new theaters.
At the same time, many senior ofﬁ cials in all services continue 
to fear a more traditional conﬂ ict as they assess the growing mili-
tary modernization program of the PRC. Believing a conﬂ ict with 
the PRC might erupt over the island of Taiwan, the need to make 
certain of the U.S. capabilities in case of a major military exchange 
with a powerful, large Chinese PLA is paramount. Trying to bal-
ance these concerns with adequate preparation for the future is one 
of the greatest challenges facing the nation in national security.
Is the United States Safer by Creating 
Governance in States around the World or 
by Allowing Others to Determine 
Their Governments and Fates?
One of the self-assessments characterizing citizens of the United 
States is a sense of exceptionalism in the world. The United States 
has always believed it held the strongest, if not a unique, com-
mitment to democracy as a form of the government along with 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 63

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
attendant values and ethics. This sense of a national ethos, which 
differs from other states and cultures, is seen as providing the 
nation with a greater responsibility and right to help the rest of the 
world ﬁ nd this obvious option as a “better” way in the world.
In today’s post-9/11 world, the United States has taken an 
aggressive stance to advocate democratic governments over any 
other. As a democratic republic, the United States has always had 
an afﬁ nity for democracy but it has also, albeit uncomfortably at 
times, always recognized that citizens in a sovereign state have 
the option of choosing their forms of government
The attitude and strategy after 9/11 altered that traditional 
view. President Bush adopted an approach to mold the world 
aggressively into one of democratic states in a global arena. This 
was a shift from the historic experience and one that made many 
of our allies uncomfortable. The move to impose democracies 
seemed in stark contrast to the U.S. unwillingness to entertain 
calls from citizens at home and abroad to give Iraq more time 
to answer adequately the world’s doubts regarding weapons of 
mass destruction before launching an invasion. 
Many ask whether any outside state can impose a form of 
government on a people. This debate goes to the heart of how 
any population governs itself or what sovereignty means. In this 
instance, the questions are all the more important because the 
U.S goal of imposing democratic governance has been vital to 
the administration’s attempts to maintain an international politi-
cal consensus. Whether the assumption behind the goal is correct 
remains unclear because the goal implies that democratically gov-
erned states cannot threaten the United States. This assumption is 
not obviously true but nor is it demonstrably false.
Is the United States More Susceptible 
to Threat by Engaging in Conﬂ icts 
in Iraq and Afghanistan?
In the early days of 2007, President Bush ﬁ ne-tuned his new mili-
tary strategy for Iraq and, by extension, possibly for Afghani-
stan. In neither conﬂ ict is the U.S. victory—which once seemed 
so obviously likely if determined exclusively by size and military 
prowess of its force in invading these relatively weakened states—
completely ensured. Thus, President Bush decided to “surge” U.S. 
forces into Iraq to increase the troop strength for a relatively ﬁ xed 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
period of time, to stabilize conditions on the ground in the hopes 
that Iraqi forces can then take over to create a stable, democratic 
government and a peaceful environment.
Embedded in the debate about surging troops is the condem-
nation that the Iraq and Afghan conﬂ icts, which have both turned 
out to be considerably more military force–intensive than envi-
sioned earlier, are breaking the resilience and strength of the U.S. 
military. Concerns revolve around the frequency of troop deploy-
ments in the theater (many Army and Marine units are in Iraq 
for their third deployment in four years); the inability to recruit 
highly skilled and better educated forces; the severe ﬁ nancial 
strains on the armed services, which will not only require signiﬁ -
cant recapitalization but will require that the country forgo fur-
ther defense research and development at the levels desired; and 
the real probability that enlistments for the Reserves and National 
Guard, neither of which has ever faced during the all-volunteer-
force era the frequency of deployments that each confronts today, 
will tumble. In short, many fear, as former Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff General Colin Powell said in mid-December 2006, 
that the Army (and Marines) are nearly broken.
For President Bush, this is an irrelevant argument because he 
believes that the threats posed by the Taliban in Afghanistan and 
the Saddam Hussein regime in Baghdad were utterly and com-
pletely consuming to the nation’s security. For those who viewed 
this war as not a war of necessity but one of choice, the long-term 
threat to reduce the quality of the armed forces at a time of other 
possible concerns around the world (North Korea and Iran with 
nuclear weapons, an increasingly dictatorial Russia, and a grow-
ing might in China) is a bigger concern to be remembered.
Is the United States Better Off 
Waging a “War of Choice” than 
a “War of Necessity”?
Many critics of the Bush administration charge that it waged a 
“war of choice” in Iraq instead of following the traditional U.S. 
view that war is conducted only when it cannot be avoided. World 
wars I and II were considered wars of necessity, particularly after 
Pearl Harbor. Indeed, most analysts view the war in Afghanistan, 
which began in October 2001, as a war of necessity after the 9/11 
attacks.
Questions on the Issue of National Security 65

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
66 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
The situation in Iraq, however, was less clear cut. President 
Bush opposed Saddam Hussein but the threat to the United States 
was not as clearly true, the timing was not as compelling, the goal 
was somewhat undeﬁ ned, and the overall goals beyond “major 
combat operations” ousting Saddam were unsettling.
As the United States looks at other possible conﬂ icts around 
the world, such as a nuclear-armed Iran, the debate about war 
of necessity versus war of choice will continue. Each president, 
as commander-in-chief, has to make decisions based on his best 
understanding and analysis, as did President Bush. The president 
rarely has unanimous support in a democracy; it is the nature of 
the system. But this absolutely fundamental concern frames the 
heart of the national security issues that confront a superpower in 
its sole position as able to ﬁ ght any war it so chooses.
Does the United States Still Recoil 
from Service Personnel’s Deaths 
or Has the Nation Overcome 
the “Vietnam Syndrome”?
The Bush administration has been cautious about reporting body 
counts, releasing information about deaths, showing pictures of 
caskets arriving at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware, and many 
of the public images that had undercut public support in Viet-
nam. At the same time, the globalized world provides images and 
reports of events going on regardless how hard the administration 
may try to spare the nation the angst of addressing its dead and, 
particularly in this war, severely wounded. As the United States 
has come to grips with more deaths in Iraq than were accumu-
lated on September 11, public support has sagged dramatically. 
What is not clear is whether this is a new version of the Vietnam 
syndrome, where people do not support a war that sacriﬁ ces U.S. 
human or ﬁ nancial resources, or whether U.S. citizens simply do 
not see Iraq as central to the war on terrorism as President Bush 
does. Has the administration not adequately spelled out its goals 
and elucidated support for those goals? Is the nation tired of ﬁ ght-
ing a war that appears to have no relevance to the Iraqi people’s 
desires? Is the United States losing its sons and daughters as 
Iraqis engage in civil war? These are unanswered but growing 
questions about the current involvement in Iraq, reminding many 
of the debates about body counts in Vietnam.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Is Traditional National Security 
No Longer Relevant?
For many in the national security ﬁ eld, this is the broadest, most 
overarching question. Each analyst’s perspective on the interna-
tional community will determine the likely outcome of the question. 
As the nation debates what it wants to spend, what type of military 
it wants to ﬁ eld, which path is the correct one for cooperating or 
confronting the international community, and various other asso-
ciated concerns, the issue of whether traditional views of national 
security are relevant remains central to the debate. National security, 
if deﬁ ned as purely defensive actions for protecting the homeland 
and the physical safety of citizens, is relatively straightforward. Once 
more complex deﬁ nitions are applied, however, the debate becomes 
much more complicated, more enduring, and harder to afford.
Clearly, the events of 2001 indicated that the United States is 
not immune from terrorism. But that was true as early as April 19, 
1995, when a U.S. citizen, Timothy McVeigh, blew up the Alfred P. 
Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City. Terrorism has never 
been exclusively a foreign-born phenomenon.
The question of whether conventional national security is out 
of date, however, depends on the analyst’s orientation and deﬁ ni-
tion. To many, national security will always mean protecting the 
physical attributes of the country and its citizens, nothing more, 
nothing less. For others, terrorism and that arbitrary, unexpecting 
sense of national danger far outweigh the old view, thus requir-
ing the vigilance be transformed into an aggressive preemptive 
defense. This question has no absolute answer, nor is one ever 
likely to emerge through national consensus.
Have Discoveries of Poor-Quality 
Veterans’ Care Standards Altered 
the Debate about National Security?
Early in 2007, the Washington Post published a series of highly 
critical stories on conditions for veterans at the Walter Reed Army 
Medical Center, and by extension the entire army medical structure 
nationally (“Walter Reed and Beyond” 2007). The stories of mold-
plagued rooms, the need for massive rehabilitation, and unreliable 
predictions of how long veterans can anticipate care ignited a ﬁ re-
storm within the armed forces as well as on Capitol Hill.  Eventually, 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 67

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
68 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
the secretary of the army and the surgeon general of the army 
both retired under pressure from the new secretary of defense, Rob-
ert Gates.
The questions of commitments to those who have been injured 
while serving the nation have become more public and less com-
fortable for society as a whole. With the tremendous advances in 
medical care in the ﬁ eld, soldiers are surviving many wounds that 
would have been fatal a generation ago, but many are left with 
injuries and disabilities that will plague them for the rest of their 
lives. How the country treats these people’s sacriﬁ ce will resonate 
with the veterans for the rest of their lives.
Is the Whole Nation Sacriﬁ cing for This 
War or Are Only Those in the Armed 
Forces Affected?
Historically, one result of universal military service was that all 
citizens were involved in wars the nation was ﬁ ghting overseas. 
During World War II, for example, the sacriﬁ ces of the public at 
home were embodied in the campaigns to create Victory Gardens 
and buy war bonds. U.S. personnel returning from war went to 
school on the G.I. bill almost as an entire generation. Veterans’ 
beneﬁ ts were an important part of the nation’s debate, and every-
one was part of the war effort.
With changes in national commitment after the war in South-
east Asia, the United States ultimately chose to abandon the idea 
of universal military service in the early 1970s. One reason for that 
change was that, increasingly, those who were wealthier appeared 
to have the options to withdraw from this universal national com-
mitment by staying in school through education deferments. The 
overwhelming majority of political ﬁ gures in the United States in 
their ﬁ fties and sixties today did not serve in uniform in Vietnam, 
for instance. Senators John Kerry and John McCain, both Navy 
veterans, are exceptions.
When the Nixon administration chose to take the path of an 
all-volunteer force, people were able to choose their commitment 
to the military. The idea, still well-supported, was that those who 
were more highly committed to service would provide a much 
more effective, less controversial force. Military incomes rose, 
beneﬁ ts increased, and the idea of a career in the armed services 
took on wide appeal for some in society.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
With the war on terrorism, however, a conﬂ uence of issues 
has led those sending their young to war to question this national 
commitment. The war in Iraq has proven that signing up for a 
tour in the National Guard or the Reserves is not just a “weekend 
warrior” job as many had thought in the 1970s and 1980s. Mul-
tiple tours in the military theater are taking people away from 
their regular civilian jobs and separating them from their families 
for far longer than anticipated. Even those who are regular-duty 
forces are facing multiple and extended deployments in a military 
environment that is stagnant, rather than improving dramatically 
as anticipated in the early days of the conﬂ ict when many believed 
the U.S. deployment of troops to Iraq would be brief.
More irritating and of concern to many in uniform and their 
families is a sense that they alone are ﬁ ghting this war, not the 
nation. The nation appears able to carry on its traditional lifestyle 
without the sacriﬁ ce that is being asked of those who are sending 
their daughters and sons to war. This raises questions about the 
nobility of the patriotic mission as well as the nation’s ability to 
assume these soldiers are merely “hired guns.”
As the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq continue, reenlistment 
and retention concerns continue within the active-duty and 
reserve components and the National Guard. It begs the question 
whether these young men and women will be willing to continue 
this personal commitment unless they have no options, which 
is not the basis upon which the all-volunteer force began. The 
creators of the all-volunteer force never intended it to be a place 
of “last resort” but a military force where people joined because 
they believed in its missions, ethics, and goals. Those in uniform 
want to believe their ﬁ ght is noble and sanctioned by their friends 
and neighbors as a whole, and not that they are merely part of a 
hired force operating while the remainder of the country looks the 
other way.
Are the Disagreements on National 
Security Priorities between the President 
and Congress Threatening Troops in the 
Field and the Nation’s Security?
Upon taking control of Congress in early 2007, House and Senate 
Democrats made clear their absolute determination to force the 
return of U.S. service personnel from a highly unpopular conﬂ ict 
Questions on the Issue of National Security 69

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
70 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
in Iraq. The ﬁ rst three months of their control over the Congress 
largely focused on crafting a military budget that would give a 
speciﬁ c date for the initial withdrawal of combat forces.
President Bush and several senior ﬁ gures in his administra-
tion made clear their belief not only that this was not the best 
strategy for the nation but that this was inappropriate behavior 
on the part of one branch of government. This argument centered 
on the premise that the commander-in-chief has the constitutional 
responsibility to make decisions about the use of force while the 
role of Congress is to fund these decisions.
The debate underlying this constitutional point is an impor-
tant one for national security. When the president believes it 
his sole responsibility and right to make decisions relating to use 
of force, force deployments, and overall orientation of national 
security strategy, it puts the power in a single hand, albeit one 
elected by the nation. Under the premise that Congress is an 
equal player to the president, the decision making becomes the 
purview of as many as 535 individuals representing smaller dis-
trict concerns around the nation. This creates factions and coali-
tions, and it is virtually impossible to orchestrate through any 
single voice.
Some see this issue as merely a political, partisan debate 
between the Democratic Congress and the Republican White 
House. President Bush and Vice President Cheney have made 
this point repeatedly as they argue that the “surge” policy should 
have an adequate time to work in Iraq. Alternatively, the question 
of constitutional responsibility as the basis to the debate raises 
broader issues of popular participation, links to other constitu-
tional responsibilities, and various other aspects of the fundamen-
tal struggle characterizing the U.S. political system. It also raises 
issues about the need to maintain the checks and balances so fun-
damental to the U.S. political ethos.
Should the United States Be the Global 
Police, Keeping the World in Line 
with U.S. Goals?
U.S. exceptionalism has always made citizens believe it has had 
and always will have a special role in the world, especially in 
national security. Historically, the United States has approached 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
many of its relationships with the goal of projecting its goals and 
values in what many ﬁ nd an almost naive eagerness. The arrival 
of U.S. Protestant missionaries in China or various Middle East 
countries exempliﬁ ed this strain of beliefs.
In the ﬁ fteen years since the breakup of the Soviet Union, 
the United States has had a unique opportunity to carry out the 
mission it has long seen for itself and its citizens. This has been an 
era of great involvement in countries around the world through 
all aspects of national security strategy: Somalia, Haiti, Bosnia 
and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Colombia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Taiwan, 
Yemen, Liberia, and more. Some of these involvements have been 
military interventions (Iraq and Afghanistan) while others have 
provided humanitarian aide (Somalia, Haiti, Liberia) or military 
assistance (Colombia and Taiwan). The United States has been 
attacked on the homeland in 2001 and its citizens have been the 
victims of terrorism in Indonesia as have been the citizens of its 
allies from Australia, Spain, and Britain. In short, violence has 
certainly continued and increased around the world, indicating 
that the international scene is not purely a benign place where a 
series of individual threats may affect citizens, but is a complex 
place where the goals of individuals, groups, or states may lead 
them to violent action to achieve their goals. Whether a single 
nation can control that environment as a policing agent is open 
to debate.
An issue that underlies much of the debate about inter-
ventions in Iraq and Afghanistan is the gradual recognition 
that, under the current global conﬁ guration, the United States 
is likely to be the major state called upon to solve problems no 
matter where or what they are or what they cost into the fore -
seeable future. If this is true, have citizens or only the govern-
ment signed up for this awesome responsibility? Is the United 
States willing to carry this ﬁ nancial responsibility? Does the 
nation want to send its daughters and sons to ﬁ ght all of the 
world’s battles? Is the world willing to take on permanent 
responsibilities for national security problems such as Taiwan, 
Colombia, or Israel? Each of these countries has a commitment 
to protect itself but requires a major, sustained responsibility 
on the part of the United States to make ﬁ nancial and other assis-
tance virtually permanent. It is unclear whether the nation as 
a whole has made the commitment to engage in this sustained 
support.
Questions on the Issue of National Security 71

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
72 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Should the United States Carry Burdens 
of National Security Alone or Work with 
Greater Numbers of Allies and Partners?
The United States has long been skeptical of the institutions that 
have populated the international system during the twentieth and 
twenty-ﬁ rst centuries. As a society the United States has largely 
adopted a “realist” view of the international system. This view 
emphasizes the role of both states and power, the desire for states 
to achieve their national interests regardless of the needs or inter-
ests of others, and the desire to prevent any state from achieving 
a dominance of the international system that would allow those 
states to overwhelm the international system. And as a result 
of this realist view, the United States did not trust international 
organizations to protect our nation’s interests in the face of other 
states’ concerns.
In particular, the United States has had little true use for the 
United Nations (UN) over its sixty years’ existence. Washington 
wanted the organization to be headquartered in the United States 
to ensure that Washington could weigh in on its activities, but over 
time, the United States proved less willing to pay its fair share of 
operational and maintenance costs. In the 1990s, at precisely the 
time the UN appeared to overcome the many enduring criticisms 
of its lack of accomplishments, the United States withdrew even 
further from the organization by arguing it would only pay its fair 
share (seen by most in the United States as too high) when the UN 
underwent serious management reform. This was ironic as many 
of the international civil servants operating the organization were 
from the United States but did not operate under Washington’s 
direct control.
In the lead-up to the Iraq war in 2003, the United States 
turned its back on the UN on the grounds that it was not ade-
quately protecting the international system against Saddam Hus-
sein’s weapons of mass destruction because Washington felt the 
UN-sponsored inspectors were being duped (or allowing them-
selves to be duped) by Saddam. The UN clearly did not support 
the action in Iraq but was unable to dissuade Washington and 
London from involvement.
After it became clear that Iraq would be a more enduring 
reconstruction effort than originally envisioned, many in the 
United States expected the UN to assist with the reconstruction 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
tasks. The UN had much experience with these activities around 
the world, but the body had withdrawn from Baghdad after the 
August 2003 suicide bombing that killed the secretary general’s 
personal envoy.
As the Iraq and Afghan efforts continued, Washington began 
looking for assistance. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
became involved with small troop deployments to Afghanistan 
but fewer troops from allies went to Iraq. With the withdrawal of 
British forces later in 2007, Washington will be even more isolated 
in its role in Iraq.
The question at hand is what other options are available in an 
intervention that is highly unpopular outside the United States. It 
remains unclear who will assist Washington for the long haul.
References
Bush, George W., 2000. “The Second Gore-Bush Presidential Debate,” 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, October 11, 2000, www.debates.org/
pages/trans2000b/html (accessed August 4, 2007).
Geneva Conventions. 1949. www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/92.htm 
(accessed April 30, 2007).
“Hearing Set for Choice to Head Joint Chiefs,” Morning Edition, 
interview by Steve Inskeep of Tom Bowman, National Public Radio, aired 
July 31, 2007.
Huntington, Samuel. “The Clash of Civilizations?” Foreign Affairs, 
summer 1993.
LeTreut, Hervé, and Richard Somerville, “Historic Overview of Climate 
Change Science.” In Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: The 
Physical Basis of Climate Change. United Nations Environmental Panel, 
April 27, 2007, at http://ipcc-wg1.ucar.edu/wg1/Reports/AR$WG1_
Print_Ch1.pdf (accessed October 1, 2007). 
Ofﬁ ce of the Press Secretary. 2003. “Commander in Chief Lands on USS 
Lincoln.” www.cnn.com/2003/ALLPOLITICS/05/01/bush.carrier
.landing (accessed August 13, 2007).
Petraeus D. H. 2007. March 8. Remarks to the press. 
Powell, C. L., and J. Persico. 1995. My American Journey: An 
Autobiography. New York: Random House.
“Walter Reed and Beyond: The Wounded Warrior at Home.” 2007. 
Washington Post. www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/nation/walter-
reed/index.html (accessed April 30, 2007).
References 73

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
74 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
Zoellick, R. 2005. September 21. “Whither China? From Membership 
to Responsibility” (speech before National Committee on U.S.-China 
Relations). www.ncuscr.org/articlesandspeeches/Zoellick.htm 
(accessed April 30, 2007).

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
75
3
Worldwide Perspective
T
he U.S. perspective on national security is unique in the global 
environment for several reasons. The discussion in this chap-
ter will focus on these unique characteristics and how they 
affect security and U.S. options around the world. It is drawn from 
observations and reactions gathered over a long period of time 
rather than speciﬁ c articles or statements. While virtually any of 
these individual points could tolerate much expanded discussion, 
the focus of this volume is on U.S. national security, so the chapter 
is relatively brief in its discussion of the differences.
Geographic Imperative
The United States has a radically different view of national security 
than the rest of the world because of certain advantages the nation 
has. The major and enduring advantage the United States has over 
virtually any other country in the world is its geographic location. 
The People’s Republic of China (PRC), for example, has borders with 
more than a dozen states, one of those borders being thousands of 
miles long with few natural inhibitions to the easy movement back 
and forth of anyone who seeks access to Chinese territory. People 
frequently forget that the Great Wall, which spans much of northern 
China, was not built as a tourist curiosity, but to prevent the incur-
sions of outsiders threatening the Chinese state at various points in 
history. Russia, with whom the Chinese share such a long border, 
has had a historic animosity over much of the last millennium that 
has forced many Chinese dynasties to worry about their ability to 
maintain national control or keep out marauding invaders.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
76 Worldwide Perspective
Similarly, one of the reasons for the fragile and seemingly 
dysfunctional state of affairs in much of Africa is the lack of 
respected or even clearly deﬁ ned borders. Constant and ongo-
ing fears that these borders must be protected redirect national 
energies in a substantive manner that can be highly disruptive to 
other national priorities. Even in Europe the need to protect the 
nation against others who sought to redress an existing “wrong” 
in borders has led to many wars, such as the long-running dispute 
between France and Germany over the area of Alsace-Lorraine.
The United States has had a geographic advantage shared by 
few other areas of the world. With two vast oceans on the east and 
west, the nation developed a strong sea service to facilitate ship-
ping and defense, but the centrality of the oceans to protecting the 
nation against outside intervention has been obvious. Similarly, 
having two neighbors with relatively weak and benevolent inten-
tions has given the United States a cushion that people appreci-
ate in today’s world where geography is infrequently studied or 
appreciated. The United States could hardly have created two 
more favorable neighbors than Mexico and Canada, even though 
many critics of the Mexican immigrant phenomenon would argue 
that this cross-border trafﬁ cking is a major threat.
Canada, with its wide territorial expanses and relatively 
calm, measured political tradition, shares the longest unarmed 
border in the world with the United States. While some Canadi-
ans would argue that they have been threatened by the United 
States and its goals over the years, the relationship between the 
two states is a relatively strong one and has led to Canada being 
one of the three closest allies with the United States (along with 
Great Britain and Australia). Tensions exist between the states 
over trade and other issues at times, but the overall shared beliefs 
are high and sustained.
Although Mexico’s history, culture, religious experiences, 
and world view have been somewhat different from that of the 
United States, Mexico is still a relatively benign neighbor, despite 
the fact that a substantial portion of the Mexican territory was 
ceded to the United States after the War of 1848. Mexico’s Catholic 
culture stood in stark contrast to the U.S. Protestant experience, 
which was heavily weighted toward accepting new immigrants 
who would become ingrained in the new culture instead of retain-
ing their home views of the world.
The United States has periodically worried about the border 
with Mexico, fearing that individuals could bring “trouble”—often 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
meaning different views or a different standard of living—over the 
boundary or that the general instability that so often characterized 
the Mexican political system in the decades after independence in 
the 1820s would bring chaos to the orderly expansion occurring 
in the vast region west of the Mississippi River. For instance, dur-
ing World War I (1914–1918), which overlapped with the Mexi-
can Revolution (1910–1927), the greatest social upheaval in Latin 
America in the twentieth century, the United States sent troops 
to buttress the U.S. defenses, but that was the rare instance when 
the nation needed to use force to ensure its physical border secu-
rity. Other tensions developed as a result of the statist activities 
of the Mexican regimes under the Partido Revolucionario Institucio-
nal (Institutional Party of the Revolution), such as nationalizing 
foreign petroleum ﬁ rms in 1938 or perpetuating the single-party 
rule between 1927 and 2000, but Mexico’s stability was a rela-
tively sure condition upon which U.S. security analysts could rely. 
While immigration and illicit drug trafﬁ cking have been periodic 
concerns for the United States over the years, the depth of wor-
ries about Mexico has never been anywhere as deep as they were 
about the Soviet Union and the threat posed by nuclear weapons 
in the Cold War, even though the relationship between Mexico 
and the United States is arguably the most important for either 
state on a daily basis.
With this imperative, or state of affairs, the United States 
occupies a position unparalleled in the international system. This 
creates a different view of what is required to achieve national 
security. For the United States, the seemingly easy relationship 
between it and its neighbors allows for the U.S. view that peace 
is the norm but war is an aberration to be addressed and quelled, 
and then the norm of peace renewed.
Other states are always aware that conﬂ ict is a continuation 
of politics by other means, to paraphrase the great Prussian strate-
gist Karl von Clausewitz from his perennial wisdom in Von Kriege 
or On War, reﬂ ections from the Napoleonic wars of the early nine-
teenth century (Klinger 2006).
Economic Imperative
The United States also views national security differently from 
other states because it has the economic wherewithal to do so. No 
state in the world spends nearly as much on defense as does the 
Economic Imperative 77

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
78 Worldwide Perspective
United States. The United States has the vast resources available 
through its multi-trillion dollar economy, unparalleled by any 
other state in history.
Secretary of Defense Robert Gates oversaw the submission 
of a budget request for an aggregate $716.5 billion for ﬁ scal year 
2008, including anticipated spending of $141.7 billion for Afghan-
istan and Iraq as well as more than $90 billion to ﬁ nish off 2007 
spending for these theaters. The regular defense budget for ﬁ scal 
2008 amounted to $481.4, an increase of more than 11 percent over 
the 2007 allocation (Matthews 2007).
In ﬁ scal year 2007, the U.S. defense budget allocation was 
$471.5 billion, exclusive of the supplemental submissions for Iraq 
and Afghanistan (Department of Defense 2006, 5). By compari-
son, China, thought to be the second-highest spending nation in 
defense terms, announced a defense budget increase of 17.8 per-
cent for 2007 over its acknowledged outlays equivalent to $36.6 
billion in 2006 (“China’s Defense Budget” 2007).
A frequently cited statistic is that the United States spends 
more on its defense than do the next fourteen states combined, 
including the PRC, Russia, the United Kingdom, Japan, France, 
Germany, India, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Italy, 
Australia, Brazil, Canada, and Turkey (Shah 2007). While many in 
the United States and abroad question whether the Chinese num-
bers are accurate for the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) expen-
ditures, few question that it still represents only a small portion of 
the U.S. outlays. The Chinese admit PLA expenditures are rapidly 
growing but note that early expenditures for the PLA were a pit-
tance compared with what the United States spent on the military 
at the end of the Cold War, roughly the period that coincided with 
PLA modernization.
The reason the United States can spend as much as it does 
on defense is its economic strength; the U.S. economy has long 
been the dominant economy in the world. The U.S. economy has 
proven resilient in instances of exogenous crisis, such as the Sep-
tember 11 terrorist attacks, and in instances of economic downturn, 
such as the October 1929 or 1987 massive stock market sell-offs. 
The United States has been able to spend a signiﬁ cant amount of 
money on defense because it is still a relatively small portion of 
the federal budget and of the gross domestic product.
Historically, U.S. defense expenditures have been high when 
the threat was accepted as worth that level of national commit-
ment, such as the 1945 defense budget of 34.5 percent of the gross 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
national product. During the Cold War, which many national 
security specialists viewed as the single most threatening period 
in the nation’s history, the U.S. defense budget amounted to 11.7 
percent in 1953 and 8.9 percent in 1968, both “war years,” while in 
the Reagan administration the budget decreased to 6.0 percent in 
1986. In 2005, defense accounted for 3.9 percent of gross domes-
tic product (Baker 2006). By contrast, the European Union’s (EU) 
military arm, the European Defense Agency, spent 1.8 percent of 
the states’ gross domestic product on defense in 2005, amounting 
to less than 4 percent of governmental expenditures by EU states 
that year (Bitzinger 2007). In short, the United States outspends 
Europe on defense by three to one.
Spending on Defense versus Nonmilitary 
Tools of Statecraft
The United States has the single largest budget and economy in 
the world; thus, it is not surprising that it spends the most on 
national security. The spending is far from balanced, however, 
because the overwhelming majority goes to a single tool of state-
craft, the military. At the same time, the United States has a decid-
edly lower view of the value of the nonmilitary tools, such as 
foreign assistance for development purposes. While the United 
States certainly contributes a substantial amount to foreign assis-
tance in gross terms, as a percentage of the gross domestic prod-
uct or of its budget expenditures the United States spends far less 
than, say, Japan or Norway, for comparison.
Part of this comparative approach indicates the U.S. propensity 
to engage in an odd view of the world: a view that conﬂ ict is not the 
norm yet armed solutions are frequently the desirable approach. 
Part of this is because the military, particularly in the two genera-
tions since the conﬂ ict in Vietnam, has the reputation of being more 
efﬁ cient than other tools of statecraft. This probably relates to the 
fact that the U.S. armed services retain an autonomy, strictly adher-
ing to U.S. direction rather than being put under the control of for-
eign commanders, much to the irritation of U.S. allies.
Foreign aid has long been controversial in the United States 
because it does not go to U.S. hands but into the control of oth-
ers. Long-standing critics of U.S. foreign assistance in national 
security, such as former Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina 
Republican who ran the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in 
the 1990s, argued that assistance often went to corrupt foreign 
Economic Imperative 79

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
80 Worldwide Perspective
bureaucrats who were more interested in enriching their own 
pockets than helping their people. The United States, especially 
in the past quarter of a century, has decreased its foreign assis-
tance dramatically as skepticism about the utility of such aid has 
increased.
Similarly, all spending on tools other than the military has 
remained low. The military, in the era of the all-volunteer force 
after 1973, has been viewed as an efﬁ cient, competent, and pro-
fessional force that has utility in virtually all instances where 
applied. Instances where the military has been used for purposes 
beyond traditional military operations include domestic disaster 
relief (e.g., southern Florida after Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and 
the Gulf Coast after Hurricane Katrina in 2005) and international 
relief efforts (e.g., Operation Provide Comfort for the Kurdish 
areas of northern Iraq in 1991 and in the Indian Ocean basin after 
the December 26, 2004, tsunami). Beyond disaster relief activities, 
the military has become the major instrument of stability, secu-
rity, reconstruction, and transition operations, as noted by the 
Pentagon in a Department of Defense order of 2005 (Department 
of Defense 2005). The lack of resource allocation to these efforts 
made any other instrument of power exceptionally challenged to 
accomplish what repeated U.S. administrations believe the armed 
forces are best able to do.
The PLA has a similar role in domestic national security 
efforts in China because of its historic links to the people of China. 
The PLA, as a politicized arm of the Chinese Communist Party, 
views itself as a tool of the people, an instrument of achieving 
and responding to the goals and needs of the people. The view, 
however, is somewhat different from that of the U.S. professional 
military. The U.S. military is an instrument of achieving national 
security, while the PLA is a mechanism by which the Communist 
Party stays in power, theoretically for the beneﬁ t of the people.
In many states of the former third world, the role for the mil-
itary revolves heavily around border enforcement, a role that is 
not a normal obligation for the U.S. national security community. 
National security for these other states often relates to protecting 
the security and integrity of the physical area of the country, largely 
because the neighbors and the borders of these states come under 
frequent assault, which does not happen in the United States.
Latin America has historically had a peculiar variation on 
national security with its self-arrogated role in defending the 
patria. Patria, historically, has meant more than the territory; it 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
encompasses the soul, history, culture, values, soil, blood, and 
absolute essence of these societies, as deﬁ ned by the military, 
which did not believe civilians could be trusted to defend the 
society. Some believed the militaries were thus engaging in a 
form of nation building that could be done by no one else but was 
required to keep these states safe from Communism and associ-
ated stains. The “national security states” of the 1960s through 
1989—Brazil, Uruguay, Chile, and Argentina, which had brutal 
dictatorships that seized power with the full intention of remold-
ing their societies to achieve a sound, uncorrupted nation—were 
quite different from the national security understandings of the 
rest of the world. The post-1989 world, devoid of any monolithic 
Communist entity, appears to have erased this view of the mili-
tary tool in these countries, but the possibility of national secu-
rity deﬁ ned by the bearers of arms in those countries will always 
remain a background issue.
Unilateralism versus Multilateralism
An area that strongly differentiates the U.S. view of national 
security from that of the rest of the world is the role of unilateral-
ism versus international organizations and multilateral activity. 
Ironically, one of the greatest proponents of multilateralism in the 
world, Scottish-born Andrew Carnegie, made his wealth in the 
United States and tried to use that wealth to enhance multilat-
eral activities around the world to prevent war. But in the United 
States itself, the citizenry has tremendous suspicions of spend-
ing on multilateral institutions on the grounds that these might 
lead to the creation of a world government imposing its views 
on top of the individual rights guaranteed by the Bill of Rights 
or because people fear the institutions have highly bloated, inef-
ﬁ cient bureaucracies. National security in the United States is the 
responsibility and the right of the nation on its own, not outsid-
ers who might compromise the nation’s values for the ideas and 
goals of others. Yet, people in the United States often say, when 
asked, that multilateral approaches in the abstract are good for 
our national security.
As a result, the United States has a love-hate relationship with 
the multilateral organizations while much of the rest of the world, 
especially Western Europe, prefers multilateralism to balance the 
overwhelming power of a single large state. The United States has 
Unilateralism versus Multilateralism 81

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
82 Worldwide Perspective
long paid to have a signiﬁ cant role in international organizations; 
for example, it funded the creation of the Pan-American Union 
and the subsequent Organization of American States and funded 
their headquarters in the United States. While many critics of 
international organizations accuse non-U.S. members of being 
less willing to carry their ﬁ nancial weight than the United States, 
evidence suggests that Washington prefers these groups to have 
their headquarters in locations where the United States can exer-
cise considerable inﬂ uence.
In the 1990s, The U.S. refusal to pay its full United Nations 
(UN) dues was a perfect example of a lackadaisical, if not hos-
tile, view toward the organization while the other member states 
were somewhat bafﬂ ed by U.S. foot-dragging. With such a large 
budget and ability to contribute to this international effort, many 
around the world dismiss U.S. assertions of its willingness to 
pay for an efﬁ cient organization. Too often other states of the UN 
note that the United States bullies the organization and ignores 
it at will. Arguing that the UN was full of extreme mismanage-
ment and gross waste, the United States, particularly Congress, 
would not pay its full dues assessment until Secretary General 
Koﬁ  Annan implemented major management reform. Without a 
doubt, the UN had a tremendous mismanagement problem as is 
true of many governments and organizations around the world. 
However, the irony of the situation was that much of the upper 
management of the UN throughout this period was led by U.S. 
citizens who were on loan to or direct employees of the organiza-
tion. Rather than seeing the UN as a tool of statecraft, the United 
States preferred to ignore it in many instances when it could have 
been used more readily.
As a subset of multilateralism, the United States has a par-
ticularly strong view regarding the national willingness to have 
U.S. military forces serve under a foreign commander. The United 
States, in the current era of alliances and multilateral operations, 
requires U.S. forces to be in a chain of command exclusively headed 
by a U.S. ofﬁ cer. Even as the United States has sought to broaden 
and strengthen those alliances and operations, it has maintained 
the need for U.S. armed forces to be under a U.S. chain of com-
mand. In practice, however, U.S. forces have not exclusively been 
in a chain of command under U.S. ofﬁ cers. After NATO assumed 
responsibility for stabilization efforts in Afghanistan under the 
International Security Assistance Force mission in October 2006, 
the commanding ofﬁ cer was a European. Since the United States 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
has forces in NATO, he commanded U.S. troops on the ground in 
Afghanistan (ISAF 2007). 
The rest of the world often shares that goal of wanting to 
maintain control over its national troops but typically cannot keep 
control as easily as the United States can because of the latter’s size 
and military prowess. The United States is the senior partner in all 
alliances, providing the greatest portion of the ﬁ nancing, materiel, 
and often both troop strength and transportation requirements. 
Other states frequently receive beneﬁ ts from the national security 
relationships with the United States, but trade-offs are involved.
Sovereignty: The United States 
versus the World
One of the most important differences between the views of 
national security in the United States and the rest of the world 
is the respect and centrality of sovereignty to their assessments 
of national security. The United States has rarely seen its sover-
eignty clearly violated, a notable exception being the September 
11 attacks. For the geographic and economic reasons discussed 
earlier in this chapter, the United States has been relatively iso-
lated and thus sovereign, able to control its own destiny as an 
independent nation for nearly all of its history..
For the overwhelming majority of states around the world, sov-
ereignty has not been as attainable. Instead, many states—includ-
ing Mexico, Canada, China, Iraq, Afghanistan, Egypt, and South 
Africa—and peoples—such as the Palestinians, the Jews, and the 
Kurds—believe they have not been able to control their destinies.
To the Chinese, the most fundamental need of national 
security is retaining the ability to control its future without the 
inﬂ uence of others who seek to keep China in a subservient role. 
Rarely does one ever hold a conversation, even in today’s emer-
gent, excited, increasingly conﬁ dent, and aggressively involved 
China, where the term “century of humiliation” does not appear. 
This period was characterized by China’s inability to determine 
its own future through policies and self-governance. It extends 
from the signing of the Treaty of Nanking in 1842, which gave 
Hong Kong to the British, through the creation of the People’s 
Republic on October 1, 1949, when China believed its future was 
invariably determined by outsiders who were bent on depriving 
Sovereignty: The United States versus the World 83

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
84 Worldwide Perspective
the Middle Kingdom of its rightful role as a central state in world 
affairs. This period of humiliation actually ended in 1997 when 
Hong Kong formally reverted from a British Crown colony to a 
Special Administrative Region within China. The reversion agree-
ment speciﬁ es that the special status will continue until 2047. 
Today, rare is the instance in which China does not adhere 
ﬁ rmly to a principle of not intervening in the affairs of another 
state (with the notable exception of Taiwan, which it does not 
deem a sovereign state but an internal Chinese issue). This policy 
equally precludes outside involvement in the case of humani-
tarian crisis (such as the Darfur region of Sudan) or absolutely 
appalling government (such as Saddam Hussein’s pre-2003 gov-
ernment in Iraq).
Similarly, the former states of the third world have seen their 
borders and rights to self-determination violated for centuries; 
thus they are hypersensitive to sovereignty questions. These states 
frequently resent, if not outright reject, the idea that the United 
States can bring some sort of outside “wisdom” to their particular 
and peculiar problems and concerns. Many states in Africa, Asia, 
and Latin America are distinctly uncomfortable with the paternal-
ism and outside involvement Washington brings to the table, yet 
are also too weak, in most occasions, to prevent these ideas from 
being imposed on their development agenda. This means that 
these states, fearing the power of a single state in Washington that 
does not seem willing or able to listen to their views, are more 
open to the alternative leadership that Beijing or New Delhi or Pre-
toria offers in contrast to Washington’s lecturing tone, as the other 
capitals at least imply that they will listen to the needs of others.
Unipolarity versus Multipolarity 
after Bipolarity
The world view that the United States and Soviet Union had 
between 1947 and 1989 was known as bipolarity, the concept that 
the nations of the world fell into one of two camps, supporting 
either the United States or the Soviet Union. After 1955’s Band-
ung Conference of nonaligned states, many of the states in Latin 
America, Africa, and Asia sought to take a “third” position that 
was neither Eastern (Soviet) nor Western (U.S.) in orientation, but 
the two superpowers still viewed these other states as supporting 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
one camp or the other. Thus, scholars began to describe the politi-
cal conﬁ guration of the world as bipolar.
The demolition of the Berlin Wall on November 9, 1989, ended 
this bipolarity. No longer were East Germans segregated behind 
the Iron Curtain under pro-Soviet governments aligned with 
Moscow’s view. This monumental shift in the world’s structure 
continued until the dissolution of the Soviet Union on December 
31, 1991. This series of events marked a remarkable, once-in-a-
generation opportunity to rebuild the international system.
China, the largest state still retaining a somewhat Commu-
nist view of the world, believed the end of the Soviet Union and 
demise of the Cold War could only result in forcing the world—
including the United States—into a much more multipolar envi-
ronment. This would allow multiple centers of power to develop, 
one of which might be China, thus dispersing power across the 
international community. India and the European community, to 
a lesser extent, had similar hopes for greater power dispersion.
The United States itself had various assessments of what 
would result in the post–Cold War environment. Some ana-
lysts believed multiple power centers would result while oth-
ers believed peace, instead of conﬂ ict, would be the norm in the 
international system, and power would essentially melt away all 
together. One prominent view that attracted much attention was 
the one that said the United States would become the dominant 
state, based on its vast economic power and overwhelming mili-
tary prowess, and it must not allow the development of alterna-
tive power centers to challenge the U.S. dominance. Known to 
some as the Wolfowitz doctrine, this idea allowed that a single 
state, with its superior moral, economic, military, and political 
stances, could be the dominant state of the world so that no one 
could threaten the nation (Gellman 1992).
The Balance-of-Power World
The Wolfowitz doctrine differed dramatically from the view of 
most of the world for several fundamental reasons. While politi-
cal scientists around the world discuss alternative approaches to 
explaining the global political system, probably the most common 
one was what is referred to as “balance of power” or realpolitik 
thinking. Balance of power is a view that says the international 
system operates to preclude the creation of a single overwhelming 
The Balance-of-Power World 85

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
86 Worldwide Perspective
state that can exercise virtually unrestrained power or hegemony 
over the remaining states. The measure of power that matters most 
to those espousing this world view is military power, although 
economic power is nearly as important. The reason the world view 
is also called realpolitik is that states will pursue their national 
interests with whatever power is available to them, often military 
but occasionally other types of power. For this reason, measuring 
power in terms of bullets, ships, and missiles became a crucial 
measure of a state’s role in the international system.
Under the balance-of-power view of the world, the creation 
of a single superpower is not desirable; thus, states will come 
together in alliances to prevent that single superpower from 
occurring. These balancing actions, based on military and other 
forms of power, are only temporary but are used to prevent any 
single state from doing precisely what some in the United States 
sought to do in the immediate post–Cold War world.
The need to prevent such a single dominant state became 
apparent to many in the international community after the Gulf 
War of 1991 when the United States, although nominally leading 
a coalition to reverse Saddam Hussein’s August 1990 seizure of 
Kuwait, clearly had an overwhelming military superiority over 
any other state in the world. The emergence of a single state with 
such economic, military, and political power relative to any other 
state on the planet made many around the world highly uncom-
fortable. This state of affairs made many states adopt pro-U.S. 
democratic regimes and free market economic models but for oth-
ers these moves went against fundamental cultural and historic 
norms, such as in Latin America where the role of the government 
in society and economics had been a historical reality even before 
the Spanish colonial experience.
For other states with large populations or signiﬁ cant econo-
mies, such as India, China, and the European Union, the over-
whelming U.S. superiority was uncomfortable and undesirable. 
These states began expanding their relations with each other 
without shutting the door on U.S. connections. A common mis-
understanding about balance of power is that it must be swift 
and initially successful to achieve its goals. However, balance-of-
power responses to the international system may be slow, system-
atic, and gradual to achieve the overarching goal of preventing a 
single supreme state.
In the two decades since the end of the Cold War, more states 
have come to fear that a single superpower would try to eliminate 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
regimes with which it differed. President George W. Bush’s 2002 
State of the Union speech, with its reference to the “axis of evil,” 
bred unease abroad (Bush 2002). The subsequent invasion of Iraq 
in March 2003 proved further to these observers that the United 
States did not respect sovereignty in principle but would over-
throw regimes that Washington did not want to continue. Cuba’s 
long-running Castro government had to be expecting to be in the 
queue for U.S. actions.
Under the balance-of-power perspective of the world, the 
natural state of affairs is one of conﬂ ict and violence, a view that is 
frequently associated with the early seventeenth-century English 
political theorist Thomas Hobbes. Hobbes’s experience during the 
English Civil War led him to argue that man lived in a natural 
state that was violent, harsh, and aggressive. This natural state of 
affairs was, thus, a pessimistic one in which man needed to have 
the strength to defend himself, as outlined in Leviathan (Hobbes 
1651).
Most of the measures of power discussed in the balance-
of-power view of the international community include military, 
economic, and other tangible or measurable indicators. The tre-
mendous shock for the global population resulted from those who 
argued that the real danger posed by the United States was to cul-
tural or religious systems across the world. The war that al Qaeda 
wages is speciﬁ cally against the cultural norms that the United 
States holds most dear and is attempting to export around the 
world: democracy, tolerance, and religious diversity. The al Qaeda 
view of the world is a shift from Western tolerance for diversity, 
where ecumenicalism and discussion are more expected than the 
orthodoxy al Qaeda seeks to impose on adherents to Islam as well 
as apparently for the entire world that does not currently embrace 
Islam. This lack of common language or genuine exchange of ideas 
that the al Qaeda view requires is fundamentally at odds with the 
basic U.S. perspective of the world, even though the United States 
has its own advocates for orthodoxy and reversing the diversity 
so characteristic of U.S. society.
The United States is far from a monolithic entity, in any sense 
of the word. The national unity resulting from the September 11 
attacks may have been the closest the nation has ever come to una-
nimity. The political measurements of the nation’s unity, national 
elections for Congress or the presidency, have shown remarkable 
results since the end of the Cold War. As a society, the United States 
clearly does not like the overwhelming single-party supremacy 
The Balance-of-Power World 87

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
88 Worldwide Perspective
in its domestic political system that makes the rest of the world 
uncomfortable at the nation-state level in the world system. A 
minority Democratic president had only two years of a friendly 
(that is, Democrat governed) Congress before his adversaries took 
over in 1994, even though Clinton won reelection to the White 
House two years after the massive defeat of his party in congres-
sional elections. The 2000 presidential election had the narrow-
est margin in U.S. history with the Republican victor, George W. 
Bush, losing the Senate to the Democrats when a fellow Republi-
can sought refuge as an independent. President Bush won a simi-
larly razor-thin victory in his reelection effort in 2004, only to see 
his party lose Congress two years later, at least to a great extent 
because of the public’s doubts about the efﬁ cacy of war in Iraq. In 
short, the United States is a country where its public is not com-
fortable giving power to a single party or branch of government, 
much like the rest of the world is not comfortable with a hegemony 
by any nation at the global level.
A Concrete Example of Differences: 
The United States and Asia
Asia, during the ﬁ rst decade of the twenty-ﬁ rst century, offers 
three distinct areas of possible concern that illustrate why Wash-
ington’s views are so different from the international perspec-
tive: the China-Taiwan dispute, the India-Pakistan question, and 
nuclear developments in North Korea and Iran. The three issues 
are quite different from one another but have a common thread: a 
major threat to the peace of the international system, with Wash-
ington believing it can manage a situation that could easily spin 
out of control. In some ways, Washington appears condemned 
if it does and condemned if it doesn’t, to paraphrase a popular 
phrase, on these highly sensitive questions.
China-Taiwan: Three Different 
Interpretations of the Status Quo Ante
Many international security specialists believe the only situation 
on earth where two highly armed nuclear states could get into 
conﬂ ict is over the question of Taiwan and its status with regard 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
to the PRC. Taiwan offers a conundrum for U.S. strategists, one 
where the position Washington takes is almost alone in the global 
community. Taiwan has an elected, democratic government that 
has maintained the position for more than ﬁ fty years that Taiwan 
is not a part of the PRC, although its status is not entirely clear or 
agreed upon by its citizens.
Originally inhabited by aborigines, then traders from the 
mainland, but only loosely under Beijing’s control until the Qing 
Dynasty’s arrival in the seventeenth century, Taiwan fell under 
Japanese political control between 1895 and 1945. At that point 
China was in the terminal stages of a long civil war, and Taiwan 
became the refuge for the remnants of the Guomingtang (GMD), 
the Chinese Nationalist Party that ruled between 1927 and 1949, 
albeit with ﬁ ts and starts. The GMD waged a campaign to retain 
power against the Chinese Communist Party under Mao Zedong 
but the vast corruption and poor governance record of the GMD 
made the Communist victory possible. In 1949, GMD President 
Chiang Kai-shek declared the Republic of China relocated from 
its headquarters on the mainland to the island, beginning a myth 
that the Republic of China would eventually reclaim the main-
land as an anti-Communist regime.
The United States chose to back the GMD in the civil war, 
thus recognizing the Taiwan government as the only one for China 
until President Richard Nixon’s historic February 1972 visit to 
Beijing, which opened the door to U.S. relations with long-stand-
ing Communist adversaries. The 1972 visit, followed by President 
Jimmy Carter’s decision to “normalize” (meaning “recognize,” in 
diplomatic parlance) China on January 1, 1979, complicated the 
situation for the United States in east Asia because Beijing would 
only accept formal U.S. diplomatic relations with “one China,” 
a position to which Washington acceded. But Washington was 
exceptionally uncomfortable completely abandoning an anti-
Communist ally of more than thirty years’ standing, so Washing-
ton set up a parallel, nonformal diplomatic system to maintain a 
ﬁ ction that Washington respected Taiwan as an entity and it was 
not succumbing to Beijing’s position that it was a part of China 
only awaiting further reintegration into the motherland. Neither 
Beijing nor Taipei was happy, nor were countless U.S. supporters 
of Taiwan. As long as Taiwan had virtual military superiority over 
the mainland’s PLA, however, the ﬁ ction was an uncomfortable 
but acceptable one.
A Concrete Example of Differences: The United States and Asia 89

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
90 Worldwide Perspective
With the end of the “century of humiliation,” marked by sig-
niﬁ cant PLA modernization and vast Chinese economic advance-
ment, the context had shifted in important ways. The PLA began 
modernizing in the 1980s but accelerated that process after the Chi-
nese economy began growing substantially in the 1990s and even 
faster the following decade. More money in the system allowed 
the PLA to receive a bigger budget slice consistently over the past 
two decades. At the same time, the Taiwan defense community 
saw its expenditures decrease signiﬁ cantly, partially because the 
Taiwan economy went into recession in the late 1990s when its 
economic expansion of the post–World War II period slowed dra-
matically. Thus, the PLA was increasing its capabilities for China 
at the same time Taiwan’s defensive military edge was stagnating 
and eventually declining from the status it had maintained since 
the 1950s when the United States had begun taking a major role in 
helping Taiwan with its defense needs. 
Additionally, a major shift in the Taiwan political scene pro-
duced unintended consequences. From Chiang Kai-shek’s arrival 
on the island in 1949 until his son was about to leave power in the 
mid-1980s, Taiwan was far from a democracy—it was a hard author-
itarian regime that brooked little political opposition or debate. 
The United States conveniently looked away from the repressive 
system on the grounds that it was anti-Communist and had to be 
tolerated. Chiang Ching-kuo (1910–1988) began removing many of 
the antidemocratic conditions in Taiwan, resulting in a truly open, 
democratic presidential election in 1996 and a non-GMD president 
four years later. This change in political landscape meant a much 
freer, open debate that did not guarantee that national priorities 
for spending would result in the defense community receiving all 
of the funding it believed necessary. Instead, the political debate 
during the two-term presidency of Chen Shui-bian became a much 
more fragmented one that resulted in stalemate instead of overall 
agreement on national priorities. As a result, Taiwan, with a sup-
portive U.S. Congress and White House, did not purchase the long 
list of military modernization programs that both Washington and 
Taiwan military ofﬁ cials had argued were necessary.
Finally, Chen’s government, based on the Democratic Progres-
sive Party’s strong independence stance, seriously unnerved Bei-
jing for much of the ﬁ rst decade of the century. The Communists 
had hoped he would not win in 2000, and certainly not in 2004, 
fearing that his actions would force armed action against what 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
the mainland refers to as their “Taiwan brothers,” thus threaten-
ing Beijing’s growing modernization and economic progress. The 
Communist government in Beijing values its survival as the ruling 
party above any other goal but has long believed that the Taiwan 
reuniﬁ cation problem remains the last unsolved issue from the 
Chinese civil war, thus an item about which the Chinese people 
might blame the Communists and threaten their control over the 
society. So for Beijing, the minimum tolerable condition through 
Chen’s tenure is that Taiwan not try to alter the status quo ante that 
Beijing deﬁ nes as a Taiwan that has not formally declared indepen-
dence, is not recognized by most other states around the world, 
and is ultimately—at some unspeciﬁ ed but expected date—going 
to return to the historic Chinese Middle Kingdom.
The difﬁ culty is that both Washington and Taipei deﬁ ne sta-
tus quo differently. For Taipei, the Chen government deﬁ nes sta-
tus quo as meaning it is a de facto sovereign state merely awaiting 
the recognition by the rest of the world, one not to be threatened 
or manipulated by their Chinese “cousins” across the strait. Thus, 
Taiwan’s desire is a codiﬁ cation of a radically different view of the 
world than that of Beijing.
Yet a third deﬁ nition is that held by Washington: a “single 
China” policy but with an understanding that the views of the 
Taiwan people will be taken into consideration in what the United 
States hopes will be a peaceful resolution to the disagreement. In 
fact, the United States is obligated to help provide Taiwan with 
defensive articles, under the Taiwan Relations Act of 1979, but 
it is not required to intervene in any potential conﬂ ict between 
the two. But many analysts wonder whether the president of the 
United States, particularly after George W. Bush, will be able to 
deny military assistance to a Taiwan subjected to direct Chinese 
aggression as Taiwan is a democratic government. Precedent was 
set when President Bill Clinton decided to send two carrier battle 
groups to the Taiwan Strait area in 1996 when Beijing shot missiles 
across the north and south shores of the island.
In sum, Taiwan is a complicating factor in a growing Sino-U.S. 
relationship in east Asia. Many argue that Taiwan represents the 
only likely ﬂ ashpoint over which the United States and another 
nuclear-armed state could enter military conﬂ ict. Others believe 
cool, rational thinking would preclude warfare. In any case, the 
Taiwan question remains one where views are quite split and 
seemingly irreconcilable at present.
A Concrete Example of Differences: The United States and Asia 91

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
92 Worldwide Perspective
The India-Pakistan Nuclear Standoff
India and Pakistan are the two highly populous but polar oppo-
site states that resulted from the partition of the British Raj in 1947. 
India tends to have highly educated Hindu and other populations, 
whereas neighboring West and East Pakistan (the latter of which 
evolved into Bangladesh in 1971) have a mostly Muslim population 
facing staggering poverty and hopelessness. Many conﬂ icts remain 
between the religious groups in both states, and the territorial dis-
pute over Kashmir, a largely Muslim population governed by India, 
remains highly tense. For most of the sixty years of these states’ 
existence, the United States was satisﬁ ed to see tensions and conﬂ ict 
between the two remain relatively contained on the subcontinent.
The Indian detonation of a “peaceful nuclear device” on May 
18, 1974, loosened that comfortable situation a bit, but the May 
1998 nuclear weapons tests by each state changed that relative 
complacency. The reality that New Delhi was building nuclear 
weapons was disquieting, particularly as the United States began 
pushing states to focus on governance and raising the status of the 
populations rather than allowing the fomentation of radicalized 
groups in society.
U.S. concerns about a Pakistani nuclear bomb were more pro-
found. Pakistan has a markedly smaller population but since the 
1970s has felt the need to produce an “Islamic bomb” to counter 
India and, by extension, protect Islamic interests (Weissman and 
Krosney 1981).
Even more important for a longer period of time, U.S. lead-
ership began to realize that Pakistan had become a fundamental 
battleground in the war of ideas between Islam and the non-
Islamic west. President Pervez Musharraf, formerly a general, 
offered a serious test to the U.S. goal of promoting good gover-
nance and democracy since he had seized power but he was seen 
as a desirable option to the Islamic hardliners, often referred to 
as Islamists or Islamic fundamentalists, who had growing ties to 
the Taliban in Afghanistan and al Qaeda and clearly sought to 
erase the secular trends at work in Pakistan’s governance. India, 
in turn, perceived itself to be the target of such Muslim extrem-
ism. In one such conﬂ ict, Indians charged that Kashmiri militants 
masterminded the December 2001 terrorist attack inside India’s 
parliament that killed a dozen people. In short, both India and 
Pakistan seemed more important to U.S. national interests in 2001 
than they had almost thirty years earlier.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The December 2001 attack on the Indian Parliament was argu-
ably an even more ﬂ agrant reason for an Indian national response 
than the 9/11 attacks in the United States as it was an attack on 
a seat of national power. Everyone around the globe recognized 
that the passions involved in the India-Pakistan tensions, along 
with the accusations involved, could have generated a nuclear 
response between the two states. For the ﬁ rst half of 2002, the 
international community held its collective breath for fear that 
India would attack Pakistan and a catastrophic war would result. 
By the second half of the year, the two sides began tentative talks 
but the reality that two highly volatile national entities had the 
military capability to inﬂ ict signiﬁ cant damages on each other 
was not lost on anyone.
Washington has close ties to the Musharraf government but 
also notes that the two governments have differences over sev-
eral major issues, such as arms proliferation and especially how 
closely the Pakistanis are pursuing the Taliban across the border 
in Afghanistan. Washington fears pushing too hard on Musharraf, 
however, for fear his government will fall and an anti-U.S./pro-
Taliban government will result. Similarly, Washington would like 
to see India play a bigger role in balancing Chinese growth in Asia 
as well as opening the economy to U.S. products. But at the core of 
the south Asian concern is the reality that these two states—both 
allies and both possible adversaries, depending upon the con-
text—offer an exceedingly dangerous border tension with other 
states because they have proven nuclear weapons stockpiles, 
albeit small by U.S. and European standards. How the tensions 
will be resolved in the long term is not clear, but in 2002 the two 
states appeared intent on going to war, with or without nuclear 
weapons. Only the power of time softened the tensions. Wash-
ington recognizes only too well that the nationalism of 2002 could 
easily rise again and that cooler heads might not prevail, yet in 
the increasingly interdependent world, the United States cannot 
simply return to a position that this part of the world is no longer 
of interest.
New Nuclear Players: 
Iran and North Korea
The United States has shown serious concern about the prolif-
eration of nuclear materials to potential new nuclear states as far 
back as the Indian blast of 1974. In particular, the United States 
A Concrete Example of Differences: The United States and Asia 93

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
94 Worldwide Perspective
has worried about nuclear weapons falling into the hands of those 
states whose objective is to hurt U.S. national interests in a mean-
ingful way. The September 11 attacks brought this possibility to 
the forefront of national concerns, as it became clear that threats 
to the United States are proliferating and that weapons of mass 
destruction may be as small as airplanes.
President George W. Bush highlighted his concerns about 
North Korea and Iran threatening the United States in his second 
State of the Union address in 2002. In those remarks, the presi-
dent talked of an “axis of evil” that included Saddam Hussein’s 
Iraq, the Islamic Republic of Iran, and the Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea. The president noted his fear that the axis states 
sought to threaten the United States in many ways, but his great-
est concerns were over states with weapons of mass destruction 
such as biological, chemical, or nuclear weapons.
In the autumn of 2002, some analysts were surprised when 
the United States acknowledged that it feared the advancement 
of North Korea’s nuclear program. The United States had worked 
to thwart a nuclear program in the remote North Korean system 
in 1993 when the Clinton administration pushed for the “agreed 
framework” in exchange for a “cease and desist” in North Korea’s 
goal of achieving a thriving nuclear system. Clinton’s Republican 
opponents and others criticized the agreement on the grounds 
that the North Koreans had no intention (or track record) of adher-
ing to their promises. While the efﬁ cacy of the agreed framework 
was controversial, U.S. government ofﬁ cials did not accuse the 
North Korean government of pursuing nuclear weapons until the 
autumn of 2002.
The North Koreans, extraordinarily closed and withdrawn 
as a society, have had a range of responses on the nuclear con-
cerns, according to press accounts. At times their negotiators have 
agreed with the U.S. diagnosis of their behavior, while at other 
times they have ﬁ ercely denied the accusations. In the years since 
2002, the United States, in conjunction with the PRC, Japan, the 
Republic of China, and Russia, have negotiated in the Six-Party 
Talks, hosted by the Beijing government. The process has been 
tedious, plagued by ﬁ ts and starts, and often discussions were 
not convened for months at a time. In early 2007, however, the 
Bush administration announced a breakthrough thought to signal 
North Korea’s intention to scale back its program after receiving 
ﬁ nancial, technical, and food assistance from the Six-Party part-
ners. Critics in the United States, frequently former Bush adminis-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
tration ofﬁ cials such as former Ambassador to the United Nations 
John Bolton and Ambassador Bob Joseph, have argued that this 
agreement is no better than the one made more than ten years 
ago. Many critics believe North Korea will continue its nuclear 
program and that the United States can only guarantee security 
in the region through regime change in North Korea, a move that 
Washington is clearly unable and uninterested in orchestrating at 
present.
The concerns among Asian participants raised about North 
Korea during the Six-Party Talks are quite different from those 
raised by Washington. While the nonproliferation agenda is 
an important one in Washington, partners in Asia are far more 
concerned with the possibility of a forced collapse of the Pyong-
yang government than they are of nuclear weapons. The nearby 
states, particularly the PRC and South Korea, worry a great deal 
about the potential crush of refugees from a starving North Korea 
should the Communist government fall. Northeast China, where 
the refugees would ﬂ ood into the PRC, already faces unemploy-
ment problems, so this possibility would be quite unwelcome. 
And although the South Koreans would like to see the reuniﬁ -
cation of the many families separated since the 1950s, they have 
evidence of the vast expenses that the two Germanies incurred in 
their reuniﬁ cation process more than a decade ago. The economic 
levels of North and South Korea are far more varied than were 
the two Germanies, meaning even greater costs for any potential 
reuniﬁ cation. And in the case of a Pyongyang collapse, those costs 
might be even higher. Furthermore, the capital of South Korea, 
Seoul, is within artillery range of North Korea, meaning South 
Koreans do not want to see the North Koreans pushed into a posi-
tion of acting desperately.
The endgame for North Korea’s nuclear program remains 
unclear. For the United States, the goal remains keeping that gov-
ernment from ever getting nuclear weapons, but Washington’s 
single-minded approach to the problem is at odds with the views 
of other states in the region, which may push those states to differ 
from the United States on policy options in the future.
Iran also represents a signiﬁ cant challenge for the United 
States because the Iranian Republic is the largest population in the 
region and a major petroleum repository. Its possession of nuclear 
technology would threaten many allies in the region yet many 
in the Gulf region believe that U.S. actions in Iraq have made 
Tehran stronger, not weaker, to the disappointment of Sunni-led 
A Concrete Example of Differences: The United States and Asia 95

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
96 Worldwide Perspective
 neighbors. Washington’s wearing involvement in Iraq has tied its 
hands, lessening its options to address Iran’s threat. Additionally, 
some abroad were slow to abandon hopes for greater economic 
relations with Iran, thus impeding attempts to pressure the Irani-
ans to abandon their nuclear efforts. Beijing, in particular, needs to 
continue importing petroleum to fuel its economic growth yet pres-
suring Teheran might threaten one of the Chinese sources. China 
is reluctant to threaten its primary goal of economic growth by 
pushing Teheran on nuclear activities; Beijing believes its interests 
at home outweigh the international threat at present. The United 
States broke diplomatic relations with the Iranian government 
in the late 1970s when the U.S. ally, Shah Reza Pahlavi, fell from 
power at the hands of the Ayatollah Khomeini and his Iranian Rev-
olutionary Guard. The November 1979 seizure of hostages at the 
U.S. embassy in Iran, a crisis that lasted for 444 days, reduced the 
possibility of some sort of improvement of ties between the states.
Iran has long desired nuclear weapons, beginning in the 
1970s when the Shah took preliminary steps to develop a nuclear 
weapons program before his ouster. It remains unclear when the 
Revolutionary government resurrected the idea, but it had become 
evident by 2002, which earned Iran and its radical government a 
place in President Bush’s axis of evil. The Bush administration 
also had to deal with Iranian President Ahmadinejad’s volatile 
government. President Ahmadinejad has questioned whether the 
Holocaust actually happened, and has proclaimed that the state 
of Israel should be wiped out. These statements have upset non-
Iranian governments around the world and made many people 
question his basic sanity.
The United States is not alone in its concern about Iran’s 
behavior but few states feel the urgency Washington feels. Many 
states are uncomfortable with U.S. intelligence claims about nuclear 
weapons in Iran because of botched intelligence claims in Iraq. 
Critics wonder if Washington is more interested in regime change 
than stopping nuclear weapons. Additionally, many states around 
the world need the vital petroleum that Iran has in vast quantities. 
These states, especially China, appear less willing to lean on the 
Iranian regime about its nuclear program than the United States 
would like to see. These states fear that pressuring Teheran would 
further constrain their access to petroleum, which is crucial to 
economic growth. Finally, some states are simply not comfortable 
with Washington’s willingness to violate sovereignty to satisfy its 
concerns.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
What Do These Cases Mean?
These three Asian cases represent concrete examples of differ-
ences in perspective between Washington and much of the rest 
of the world. They are neither clear-cut nor easy to resolve; each 
of them presents a series of complex effects on other U.S. and 
foreign national interests. These cases also show that each state 
has its national security interests, which it will protect, often con-
trasting and conﬂ icting with the interests, of others around the 
world. National security strategy attempts to resolve these differ-
ences without conﬂ ict but this is not always possible. But the cases 
exemplify how Washington prioritizes national security concerns 
differently from many of its allies and major interlocutors.
Conclusion
The United States is different from the rest of the world because of 
its power, values, and approach to the international system. Yet it 
values national security in a manner similar to other states because 
protecting a nation’s citizens is arguably the highest requirement 
for any government to meet, and failing to do so can hardly char-
acterize a successful regime or state. The United States has an 
unparalleled set of conditions, physical and economic, to produce 
the national security spending vital to the post-9/11 world. At the 
same time, the United States is operating in a world without radi-
cally different views of national security, views being acted upon 
by adversaries who seek to thwart the United States along with 
allies who simply evidence discomfort with U.S. actions.
The nature of national security for the United States in today’s 
world, however, is learning to react to those different approaches 
to the world that may threaten the nation or slow down its achieve-
ment of national interests. The bigger question is how long the 
United States can afford to answer each and every one of these 
challenges. At no point in world history has any state had unend-
ing patience and political will or inexhaustible resources. The 
United States appears likely to see those issues arise.
References
Baker, S. 2006. “Defense Spending.” Issues 2006. The Heritage 
Foundation. Washington DC: Heritage. www.heritage.org/Research/
features/issues/issuearea/Defense.cfm (accessed May 4, 2007).
References 97

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
98 Worldwide Perspective
Bitzinger, R. 2007. May 4. “European Defense’s Never-Ending Death 
Spiral.” ISN Security Watch. www.isn.ethz.ch/news/sw/details
.cfm?id=17457 (accessed May 4, 2007).
Bush, George W., “State of the Union Address,” January 29, 2002. www
.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2001/01/20020129–11.html (accessed 
August 5, 2007).
“China’s Defense Budget to Rise 17.8 Percent in 2007.” 2007. March 
4. People’s Daily Online. http://english.people.com.cn/200703/04/
eng20070304_354130.html (accessed August 13, 2007).
Department of Defense. 2005. “Military Support for Stability, Security, 
Transition, and Reconstruction Operations,” Directive 3000.5, issued  
November 28, 2005. www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/300005
.pdf (accessed August 13, 2007).
Department of Defense. 2006. National Defense Budget Estimates for 
FY2007. www.defenselink.mil/comptroller/defbudget/fy2007/
fy2007_greenbook.pdf (accessed May 4, 2007).
Gellman, B. 1992. “Keeping the U.S. First; Pentagon Would Preclude a 
Rival Superpower.” Washington Post, March 11.
Hobbes, T. 1651. Leviathan. http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/phl302/
texts/hobbes/leviathan-contents.html (accessed May 4, 2007).
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), “NATO in Afghanistan,” 
www.nato.int/issues/afghanistan/index.html (accessed 13 August 
2007).
Klinger, J. “The Social Science of Carl von Clausewitz,” Parameters 
Spring 2006: 78–89.
Matthews, W. 2007. April 29. “The GDP Argument.” Armed Forces 
Journal. www.armedforcesjournal.com/2007/03/2545232 (accessed May 
4, 2007).
Shah, A. 2007. February 25. “World Military Spending.” www
.globalissues.org/geopolitics/armstrade/spending.asp (accessed 
May 4, 2007).
Weissman, S., and H. Krosney. 1981. The Islamic Bomb. New York: Times 
Books.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
99
4
Chronology
A
lthough it is artiﬁ cial simply to choose a date for this chronol-
ogy’s starting point, space does not allow any other course of 
action. Therefore, 1978 has been chosen because at that point, 
a new generation of leaders around the world brought funda-
mental changes to the international system and the threat to U.S. 
national security, such as Ayatollah Khomeini preparing to return 
to Iran from a prolonged exile and Deng Xiaoping returning from 
the internal exile of the Great Proletariat Cultural Revolution. Both 
proved crucial to today’s national security concerns for the United 
States. This is not an ideal arrangement, but it is unavoidable. Start-
ing earlier would put too much focus on the Cold War, which is but 
a distant, if not entirely unknown, memory for many alive today.
1978 
In consolidating power at the Eleventh Communist 
Party Congress, Chinese Communist Party Chairman 
Deng Xiaoping reiterates Zhou Enlai’s 1973 theme of 
“Four Modernizations” to reverse Mao Zedong central 
control over many aspects of Chinese society, espe-
cially the economy by introducing economic reforms 
to achieve “Strong Country, Strong Army.” The Four 
Modernizations are intended to bring China out of the 
Cultural Revolution and improve its shaky position in 
the world. These modernizations, in order of priority, 
are agriculture, industry, science and technology, and 
the military.
 
 
A non-European cardinal, Karol Wojtyla, becomes 
Pope John Paul II, and he has a virulently anti-
 Communist context for viewing the world.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
100 Chronology
1978 
 
Massive protests begin in Tehran, Iran, in the fall, 
(cont.) 
leading to calls for the shah, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, 
to give up the Peacock Throne.
1979  
On the ﬁ rst day of the year, the United States reverses 
its thirty-year recognition of Taipei as the govern-
ment of China in favor of Beijing. The status of Taiwan 
becomes a complicated issue in U.S. national security 
because Congress passes the Taiwan Relations Act 
later in the year. Washington appears to promise its 
support to both sides.
 
 
Iran’s long-standing strongman, the shah, ﬂ ees 
the Iranian Revolution orchestrated by Shiite Ayatol-
lah Khomeni. Upon his return later in the year from 
many years in exile, Khomeni declares Iran an Islamic 
republic with what the West labels “fundamentalist” 
Islamic governance, based on the sharia.
 
 
In July, the Frente Sandinista de Liberación Nacional 
(FSLN) removes long-term U.S. supporter Anastasio 
Samoza Debayle from power in Nicaragua. Many in 
the United States see this as a threat to national secu-
rity because of FSLN ties with Cuba. 
 
 
In November, Iranian students seize the U.S. 
Embassy in Tehran, taking the employees and Marine 
guards hostage. While a number escape with the help 
of the Canadian Embassy, most are held for 444 days—
they are released on the day Ronald Reagan succeeds 
Jimmy Carter as U.S. president in 2001.
 
 
In November, Islamic radicals take hundreds of 
hostages at the Grand Mosque in Mecca during the 
Hajj, threatening the global pilgrimage to the holiest 
spot in Islam. The rescue efforts by Saudi and French 
commandos are bloody—250 are believed killed and 
600 injured.
 
 
In December, the Soviet Union invades Afghani-
stan, beginning a disastrous eight-year involvement 
there. Almost immediately, Islamic men ﬂ ock to Paki-
stan to arm in an attempt to oust the inﬁ del Commu-
nist force. To U.S. strategists, the involvement of the 
Islamic ﬁ ghters means the United States can avoid 
direct confrontation with Soviet troops while still mak-
ing progress toward the crucial goal of stopping Soviet 
expansionism. The long-term effects prove somewhat 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 101
different, however, because the Islamic ﬁ ghters become 
the basis to the Islamic radical Taliban movement in 
the 1990s.
1980 
An obscure but motivated Polish worker in the Gdansk 
shipyards, Lech Walesa, becomes one of the founders 
of the ﬁ rst independent labor union, known as Soli-
darity, in Communist-controlled Poland.
 
 
A young Seattle entrepreneur, Bill Gates, nego-
tiates with IBM to provide the code or software for 
its anticipated new product. His company, Microsoft, 
becomes a global behemoth through the creation of 
the MS-DOS operating system. Microsoft’s product 
makes the newly created personal computers acces-
sible to many by allowing nontechnical people to use 
a relatively sophisticated instrument with virtually 
no training. This in turn moves many companies to 
think about computerizing activities—particularly 
with the parallel development of the “World Wide 
Web”—that had traditionally been done manually, 
allowing for the ultimate advent of globalization and 
instant communications that affects national security 
today. 
 
 
In September, Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein 
attacks Iran, leading to an eight-year war that will kill 
at least 600,000 in the two states.
 
 
In December, four Roman Catholic laywomen are 
murdered in El Salvador. Suspicions center on El Sal-
vadoran soldiers as the culprits.
1981 
In January, Ronald Reagan assumes the presidency, 
promising to return pride to the nation while address-
ing what he believes to be a growing threat to U.S. 
security from the Soviet Union.
 
 
An inexplicable new disease, appearing over-
whelmingly in gay men, earns the title “human im-
munodeﬁ ciency virus/acquired immunodeﬁ ciency syn-
drome,” or HIV/AIDS. A quarter of a century later, it 
remains a potent, unsolved medical problem confront-
ing some of the poorest nations of the world and rep-
resenting a signiﬁ cant health security challenge to all 
societies, including the United States. Since then, mil-
lions have died around the globe and tens of millions 
remain carriers, often undiagnosed. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
102 Chronology
1981 
 
Israel attacks the Osiraq nuclear power plant in 
(cont.)  
Iraq to stop a feared nuclear weapons program.
 
 
IBM introduces the personal computer, or PC. 
The following year, rival Compaq begins to provide 
competition in this commodity. Smaller, less expensive 
computers open the door to greater use by average cit-
izens, increasing the communications and virtually all 
other forms of interaction around the world. This has 
positive effects on speeding up many processes but 
also adversely affects national security by allowing 
illegal activities and dangerous linkages, such as drug 
trafﬁ cking or terrorism planning, to ﬂ ourish in a more 
stealthy manner that is harder for security specialists 
to control.
 
 
In October, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat, 
presiding over a military parade, is the target of 
an Islamist assassination. Experts would later recog-
nize that this was a key event in the rise of Islamic 
militancy. 
 
 
The Soviet-inspired government of Poland, under 
Wojciech Jaruzelski, declares martial law by sending 
tanks into the streets to prevent the Solidarity move-
ment from spreading. Pope John Paul II endorses the 
movement’s actions.
1982 
Argentina launches an invasion of the Islas Malvinas, 
better known as the Falkland Islands by their British 
administrators, in the south Atlantic. Over a two-month 
period, Britain launches a tremendous armada to prove 
its commitment to the islanders, getting much covert 
U.S. assistance in the effort. Argentine military rulers 
are stunned that the Reagan administration chooses to 
support Britain, even though at the time the Argentines 
are engaged in secretly training contrarevolucionarios, or 
“contras” as they are popularly known, to oust the U.S.-
opposed Nicaraguan Sandinista regime. The virulently 
anti-Communist government in Buenos Aires was train-
ing the contras because Washington faced opposition 
at home in supporting forces trying to overthrow the 
leftist Nicaraguan government that had itself ousted a 
decades-long U.S. ally, Anastasio Somoza Debayle. The 
Sandinistas were viewed by some in the United States 
as far less threatening than the Reagan administration 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 103
feared, creating a highly charged atmosphere in the 
United States. Additionally, many in the United States 
feared that the contras were learning from a military in 
Argentina that had engaged in massive human rights 
violations against its own population, where thousands 
of Argentine citizens were being made to “disappear” 
by their government for their ideological beliefs. U.S. 
critics feared the contras would import the same sort of 
ideological purity to Central America.
 
 
The Israelis, led militarily by Ariel Sharon, move 
north of their traditional operating space within 
southern Lebanon into the capital, Beirut, to oust the 
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and prevent 
further attacks on Israel. This becomes a much more 
difﬁ cult operation than advertised, causing serious 
political debate within Israel and considerable interna-
tional disapproval. The newly elected Lebanese presi-
dent and head of the Christian forces, Bashir Gemayel, 
dies from a bomb blast in the captial. Israel allows 
its Christian Lebanese allies, the Phalangists, to root 
out any remaining Palestinian “terrorists” at the Sha-
tilla and Sabra Palestinian refugee camps. A massacre 
ensures in retaliation for Gemayel’s assassination, and 
an estimated 700 to 3,500 people die in the two refugee 
camps. 
 
 
The Reagan administration decides to deploy 
Marine Corps forces to Lebanon to stem the civil war 
by helping international peacekeepers evacuate PLO 
forces from Beirut.
 
 
Leonid Brezhnev, long-serving chairman of the 
Communist Party in the Soviet Union, dies. Yuri 
Andropov, head of the KGB, the State Security Com-
mittee, succeeds him.
1983 
In a single remarkable speech, President Reagan notes 
the concerns his administration has with Cuban involve-
ment in the Caribbean island of Grenada and advocates 
the Strategic Defense Initiative to alter the nuclear con-
dition known as “mutually assured destruction.” The 
Initiative immediately becomes known as the “Star 
Wars” plan after the George Lucas–produced movie.
 
 
In August, the unarmed civilian ﬂ ight, Korean 
Air Lines 007, en route from the United States to South

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
104 Chronology
1983 
Korea, is the target of a Soviet missile because the ﬂ ight 
(cont.)  
crossed into Soviet airspace. The international com-
munity expresses outrage at the unprovoked action.
 
 
Two crucial events occur within a few days of each 
other in October. First, the U.S. Marine barracks in Bei-
rut, Lebanon, is the target of a massive truck bomb, 
which many analysts call the ﬁ rst suicide bombing. 
Then, President Reagan sends U.S. troops into Gre-
nada to rescue medical students believed threatened 
in a chaotic political situation that the administra-
tion thought was orchestrated by Soviet and Cuban 
forces.
1984 
Apple Computer introduces the Macintosh computer, 
working off a non-Microsoft operating system. This 
icon-based operating system made computers more 
accessible to use for virtually anyone who could 
get onto one since the technological impediments 
were gone. This greatly increased the proliferation of 
computers around the world, including putting them 
into the hands of disreputable ﬁ gures and outright 
terrorists. 
 
 
Andropov’s short-lived regime ends with his 
death in February; Konstantin Chernenko succeeds 
him as chairman of the Communist Party in the Soviet 
Union.
 
 
A massive poison gas leak at a Union Carbide 
plant in Bhopal, India leads to tens of thousands of 
deaths and perhaps 120,000 injuries.
1985 
Konstantin Chernenko dies after a short period in 
ofﬁ ce. Mikhail Gorbachev succeeds him as chairman 
of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union. Gor-
bachev begins introducing small steps that he notes 
will modernize the Soviet system. In the autumn, Gor-
bachev holds a summit in Geneva, Switzerland, with 
U.S. President Ronald Reagan. 
 
 
The cruise liner Achille Lauro becomes victim of 
a Palestinian hijacking, culminating in murder of a 
wheelchair-bound American Jewish passenger. The 
introduction of terrorism to the high seas of the Medi-
terranean is further evidence of the growing anti-U.S. 
sentiments as well as actions against U.S. citizens at 
seemingly innocent locations abroad.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 105
1986 
As Gorbachev consolidates power in the Soviet Union, 
he advocates a glasnost, or opening, of the society, espe-
cially in politics. In conjunction with the restructuring 
known as perestroika, he begins economic and political 
changes that ultimately lead to the end of the Soviet 
Union three years later.
 
 
An accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant 
in the Ukraine causes widespread radioactive fallout, 
resulting in global concerns about nuclear radiation 
and questions about how well the Soviet bureaucracy 
is functioning since it proved poor at coping with this 
problem.
 
 
The Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense 
Reorganization Act fundamentally alters the relation-
ships of the armed services as they provide national 
security to the nation. Goldwater-Nichols, as it was 
called, gives considerable power to the chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff as the primary advisor to the presi-
dent of the United States but also affected professional 
military education, the role of “jointness” in the U.S. 
armed forces, and various other wide-ranging issues.
 
 
Gorbachev and Reagan again meet, in Reykjavik, 
Iceland, for a summit, where Reagan’s spokesman says 
the presidents seriously discuss changing the nuclear 
balance to reduce risks.
 
 
Congress passes sanctions against the apartheid 
regime in the Republic of South Africa, trying to end 
the legal segregation in that nation.
 
 
Reports begin seeping out that the United States 
has been negotiating with Iran to release the hostages 
in Lebanon by selling arms to fund covert training and 
support to the contras in Nicaragua. This complicated 
relationship becomes known as the Iran-Contra scan-
dal as its details surface through congressional inves-
tigation.
1987 
President Reagan appeals to President Gorbachev to 
“tear down this wall” in Berlin, Germany.
1988  
In March, Saddam Hussein uses chemical weapons 
against the Kurds, who he sees as undermining his 
rule in the north of Iraq. The attacks kill at least 5,000.
 
 
Panamanian strongman and former U.S. ally Man-
uel Noriega comes under indictment on drug charges 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
106 Chronology
1988 
in the United States. After eighteen months of attempt-
(cont.)  
ing to convince him to leave power, the United States 
invades Panama in Operation Just Cause after a U.S. 
military person and his wife are harassed by Panama-
nian forces. Noriega evades capture only brieﬂ y and 
served a sentence in a U.S. federal prison.
 
 
The USS Vincennes mistakenly shoots down an 
Iranian airliner departing Bandar Abbas, identifying 
it as a warplane instead of a passenger ﬂ ight with 290 
aboard.
 
 
In August, the secretary general of the United 
Nations, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, convinces both Iraq 
and Iran to accept a cease-ﬁ re. The international orga-
nization’s role in ending the conﬂ ict heralds a renais-
sance for the concept of peacekeepers.
 
 
The Armenian Socialist Republic suffers a mas-
sive earthquake to which the Soviet government has 
extreme difﬁ culty in responding with aid. Humanitar-
ian help pours in from outside, but few seem to recog-
nize that this inability to provide aid is an indication of 
a failing Soviet empire.
1989 
On June 4, the People’s Liberation Army moves into 
Tiananmen Square under orders from the Chinese 
Communist Party to quell student protestors. The 
ﬁ nal death toll remains controversial, but the govern-
ment sentences many student leaders to serve time in 
jail for their actions, while others go into exile.
 
 
Eastern European states Hungary and Czechoslo-
vakia begin facing a growing number of East German 
citizens trying to cross the border into Austria rather 
than stay under a Communist regime.
 
 
After weeks of decaying conditions, the Soviet-
allied government in East Germany does not stop pro-
testors from bringing down the Berlin Wall, the symbol 
of division between East and West since its construc-
tion in 1961.
 
 
In the closing weeks of the year, Romanian strong-
man Nicolae Ceaucesçu and his wife, Elena, become 
the target of protests, and they are ultimately ousted 
and put to death.
 
 
Presidents George H. W. Bush and Mikhail Gor-
bachev hold a summit in Malta, against the inclination 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 107
of many in the new U.S. administration. They declare 
the Cold War to be “over.”
1990 
After more than twenty-ﬁ ve years in prison, African 
National Congress leader Nelson Mandela is released 
and becomes the most respected political ﬁ gure on the 
African continent. He negotiates with F. W. de Klerk, 
the Afrikaner president, to end the legal separation 
of races in South Africa and open the state to genu-
ine democracy. Mandela serves as president of South 
Africa for much of the 1990s.
 
 
The occupying powers of World War II—Britain, 
France, the Soviet Union, and the United States—agree 
to the reuniﬁ cation of East Germany and West Ger-
many, ending the most obvious sign of the Cold War.
 
 
In August, Iraqi President Saddam Hussein sends 
troops into Kuwait, ostensibly to regain a lost prov-
ince. President George H. W. Bush starts the campaign 
to create an international coalition to support action to 
oust Iraq from Kuwait.
1991 
The international coalition against the Iraqi invasion of 
Kuwait launches air strikes on Iraq in January, follow-
ing up in February with a ninety-six-hour ground inva-
sion that forces Iraq from Kuwait but does not remove 
Saddam from power. An uprising in the Shiite section 
of southern Iraq does not receive U.S. military support, 
but humanitarian operations help the Kurdish popula-
tion of northern Iraq, who need massive assistance.
 
 
In June, Croatia and Slovenia declare their inde-
pendence from Yugoslavia under a Serbian strong-
man, Slobodan Miloshevica. Independence movements 
gradually surface in the remaining non-Serbian por-
tions of the former Yugoslavia. The breakup of the for-
mer Yugoslavia takes the better part of a decade and 
results in over a hundred thousand deaths and thou-
sands displaced from their homes. 
 
 
On December 26, the Soviet Union ceases to exist; 
it is replaced by sovereign entities allied as the Com-
monwealth of Independent States, led by the most 
powerful state, Russia.
1992 
The United States sends humanitarian forces to Moga-
dishu, Somalia, to alleviate death and starvation result-
ing from tribal violence orchestrated by warlords.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
108 Chronology
1992 
 
Repeated allegations of Serbian attacks on Bosnia 
(cont.)  
and Herzegovina’s Muslim population reintroduce 
the concept of genocide into European debate.
1993 
Shootings outside the gates of the Central Intelligence 
Agency (CIA) in January, followed ﬁ ve weeks later by 
a partially failed bombing at the World Trade Center 
in New York City, indicate that Islamic extremism has 
arrived in the United States. Although six people die 
in the February incident, the possibility of tens of thou-
sands dying in the massive two-building structure is 
shocking to many in the national security community. 
Perpetrators of each incident have links with Pakistan. 
Mir Aimal Kasi attacks people outside the CIA to pro-
test bombing of Iraq by U.S. forces as well as interfer-
ence in Islamic states by outsiders bent on humiliating 
adherents to the faith. An al Qaeda operative, Ramzi 
Yousef, ultimately goes to jail for his terrorism after 
another spectacular attack on U.S. citizens fails in the 
Philippines.
 
 
The Clinton administration cancels the Strategic 
Defense Initiative, but the concept of ballistic missile 
defense continues to receive funding.
 
 
Israeli prime minister Yitzhak Rabin meets PLO 
head Yasir Arafat in the Rose Garden of the White 
House to sign the Oslo Accords, an initial step toward 
resolving the Israeli-Palestinian morass. Through the 
Palestinian Authority, the Palestinians ultimately get 
the ability to self-govern in portions of the West Bank 
and Gaza, and a Jewish student assassinates Rabin in 
1995 for giving away too much to the enemy.
 
 
The U.S. forces in Somalia take ﬁ re from warlords, 
bringing down two Blackhawk helicopters and allow-
ing marauding crowds to desecrate the bodies of dead 
soldiers in the streets of Mogadishu. The U.S. forces 
withdraw the following year.
1994 
The president of Rwanda, Juvenal Habyarimana, and 
his senior aides die in a suspicious helicopter crash in 
early April. Resulting ethnic violence leads to genocide 
and the death of more than a million Rwandans within 
weeks while the international community stands by.
 
 
The U.S. Congress ratiﬁ es the 1992 North American 
Free Trade Agreement with Mexico and Canada, even 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 109
though President Bill Clinton loses his party’s majority 
in the Congress in the November midterm elections.
1995 
In April, a former U.S. serviceman, Timothy McVeigh, 
detonates a massive bomb outside the Alfred P. Mur-
rah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
killing 168. The worst domestic-engineered act of ter-
rorism in U.S. history results in McVeigh’s execution 
under the death penalty in 2002.
 
 
Led by neoconservatives such as former U.S. Rep-
resentative to the United Nations Jeane Kirkpatrick, 
the cries for U.S. intervention to stop “ethnic cleans-
ing” in Bosnia push the Clinton administration to send 
air strikes against the Serbian regime in Belgrade. In 
November, the Clinton administration hosts negotia-
tions that result in the Dayton Accords, which form 
the basis of the Bosnia and Herzegovina peace.
1996 
The People’s Republic of China sends short-range mis-
siles over the northern and southern ports of Taiwan, 
Chi-lung, and Kao-hsiung in an attempt to intimidate 
the Taiwan presidential elections. President Clinton 
responds by sending two aircraft carrier battle groups 
to the region to indicate the level of U.S. concern over 
China’s actions. 
 
 
In June, a U.S. housing facility for Air Force per-
sonnel deployed in the eastern portion of Saudi Arabia 
becomes the target of a massive suicide truck bomb, 
killing nineteen servicemen.
1997 
The international community signs the Kyoto Proto-
col to begin restricting greenhouse gases, thus begin-
ning to control global warming. The George W. Bush 
administration’s subsequent decision to withdraw 
from this accord becomes a measure of much world 
distrust of U.S. intentions in the following decade.
1998 
India and Pakistan both test multiple nuclear devices, 
to the disappointment of the international community. 
 
 
Massive car bomb attacks on U.S. embassies in 
Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, begin 
awareness in the United States of an entity known as 
al Qaeda, along with its mysterious Saudi-born leader, 
Osama bin Laden. 
 
 
Former Army ofﬁ cer and coup instigator Hugo 
Chávez is the unlikely victor of the Venezuelan 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
110 Chronology
1998 
presidential election, winning on a platform of wiping 
(cont.)  
out the corruption plaguing the nation.
1999 
As part of its campaign against Serbian repression in 
Kosovo, the U.S. Air Force mistakenly bombs the Chinese 
embassy in central Belgrade, provoking strong protests 
by Chinese citizens, including attacks on U.S. diplo-
matic representatives in the People’s Republic of China.
 
 
In July, Taiwan President Lee Deng-hui declares to 
a German media outlet that Taiwan and the People’s 
Republic of China need to operate on a state-to-state 
basis. Beijing is unhappy because this alters the status 
quo across the Taiwan Strait. 
 
 
Destructive riots by antiglobalization mobs trans-
form Seattle into an armed camp during the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund meeting there.
 
 
The United States signs up to help Colombian 
president Andrés Pastrana Arango wipe out the in -
sur gency and violence plaguing his nation, offer-
ing funding for “Plan Colombia,” a multiyear pro-
gram designed to attack the difﬁ culties from multiple 
approaches. Critics charge that the U.S. funding pri-
orities are militarizing the solutions.
 
 
The Senate defeats the Comprehensive Nuclear 
Test Ban Treaty ratiﬁ cation, undercutting U.S. efforts 
to encourage nuclear nonproliferation.
2000 
In March, the Democratic Progressive Party candi-
date and former jailed lawyer Chen Shui-bian wins 
the close Taiwanese presidential election, even after 
Beijing’s Premier Zhu Rongji verbally intimidates Tai-
wanese citizens
 
 
In October, the USS Cole, a warship refueling in 
the Yemeni port of Aden, is the target of Islamists seek-
ing to sink it with a bomb brought alongside the ship 
on a small dinghy. Seventeen sailors die; more than 
three dozen are injured.
2001 
A Chinese ﬁ ghter collides with an EP-3 (a U.S. obser-
vation plane). The ﬁ ghter crashes into the South China 
Sea while the U.S. EP-3 crew is taken hostage for sev-
eral days after its pilot, Lieutenant Shane Osborn, 
heroically lands the wounded craft.
 
 
On September 11, suicidal hijackers dedicated 
to martyrdom as Islamists with links to Osama bin 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 111
Laden’s al Qaeda pilot four planes into infamy. Two 
fuel-laden commercial planes attack the World Trade 
Center in New York City; the resulting ﬁ re collapses 
both towers. Simultaneously, a plane attacks the Penta-
gon. A fourth plane crashes into a south-central Penn-
sylvania ﬁ eld after the hijackers are thwarted from 
hitting a national landmark by passengers’ efforts to 
stop the attack. The incidents kill 2,700 people on the 
ground and in the planes. Immediate results include 
grounding of all air trafﬁ c in the United States, includ-
ing all ﬂ ights to and from abroad, for several days. Air-
port security reaches a heightened level never before 
seen. Homeland security becomes synonymous with 
national security in the United States.
 
 
On October 7, President George W. Bush orders 
U.S. forces, in concert with British forces, to invade 
Afghanistan to pursue Osama bin Laden and penalize 
the Taliban government for sheltering him. 
 
 
Later in October, ﬁ ve citizens in Florida, subur-
ban Washington, D.C., Connecticut, and New York 
City die of anthrax contracted when they open letters 
laced with the bacterium. This act of domestic terror-
ism remains unsolved despite years of investigation. 
Because the Senate Democratic leadership received 
some of the letters, one of the Senate ofﬁ ce build-
ings remains closed for months as investigation and 
cleanup continues.
 
 
Planning for an invasion of Iraq begins, and major 
U.S. administration ofﬁ cials are determined to link 
Saddam Hussein with al Qaeda terrorism.
 
 
In December, U.S. forces believe they have found 
Osama bin Laden in the heavily mountainous Tora 
Bora region of Afghanistan near the Pakistan border. 
Despite the major goal of capturing him, bin Laden 
remains at large. 
2002 
In August, President Bush hears from his secretary of 
state and former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
Colin Powell, that invading Iraq will be problematic 
and that the president must remember the concept of 
“if you break it, you buy it” in this context.
 
 
In Nashville, Tennessee, at the Veterans of Foreign 
Wars convention, Vice President Dick Cheney asserts 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
112 Chronology
2002 
that little doubt exists that Saddam Hussein has weap-
(cont.)  
ons of mass destruction.
 
 
In October, Islamists attack popular foreign night-
spots on the Hindu island of Bali, Indonesia, killing 
more than 200 tourists, mainly Australians.
 
 
The United States accuses North Korea of try-
ing to build a nuclear weapon in violation of the 1993 
agreement to end such activities. This initiates a pro-
cess of attempting to bring the Pyongyang regime to a 
position of terminating the program, but discussions 
over more than ﬁ ve years result in little progress.
 
 
International pressure against invading Iraq 
grows, but none of the other ﬁ ve permanent Security 
Council members (China, France, and Russia) dis-
suades the United States and its partner, Great Britain, 
from pursuing an increasingly determined position to 
go after Saddam Hussein.
2003 
On February 5, at an appearance before the United 
Nations, Secretary of State Colin Powell argues that 
the regime of Saddam Hussein is a clear and present 
danger to the world because of its desire to achieve a 
successful weapons of mass destruction program.
 
 
Bush administration ofﬁ cials scoff at concerns 
that any invasion of Iraq will unleash destabilizing 
forces within that state and the Middle East, arguing 
that Iraqis will welcome the invaders as “liberators.” 
The chief of staff of the Army, General Eric Shinseki, 
receives administration condemnation for his observa-
tions that a force of “hundreds of thousands” would be 
necessary to secure Iraq. Deputy Secretary of Defense 
Paul Wolfowitz directly challenges this assertion in 
public a few days later.
 
 
A strange ﬂ u-like virus appears in Hong Kong, 
killing many who come into contact with it. Stories 
begin spreading of its appearance throughout eastern 
China, Taiwan, and Southeast Asia. It also strongly 
affects health care workers in Toronto, Canada. The 
virus is named severe acquired respiratory syndrome, 
or SARS. After the spread of the syndrome slows, the 
international health community realizes that the virus 
began in China but was covered up by the Beijing gov-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 113
ernment for several months rather than addressing it 
as a medical problem of the ﬁ rst degree.
 
 
On March 19, a coalition of forces, predominantly 
American in strength, launches an invasion of Iraq to 
oust Saddam Hussein. By April 9, Hussein’s govern-
ment is deemed destroyed. The image of U.S. soldiers 
helping Iraqis topple a massive statue of the former 
dictator in front of the international media comes to 
symbolize the end of that dictatorship but makes the 
U.S. nature of the new occupiers absolutely clear. At the 
same time, vast amounts of looting of antiquities and 
common thievery occurs in Iraq, while U.S. leadership 
appears completely unprepared for this turn of events. 
 
 
On April 15, the head of the Ofﬁ ce of Recon-
struction and Humanitarian Assistance, retired Army 
Lieutenant General Jay Garner, arrives in Baghdad, 
but ﬁ nds conditions worse and signiﬁ cantly more 
demanding than planning had anticipated. Garner 
serves less than four weeks in his position.
 
 
In May, Lieutenant General Garner departs as a 
successor, Ambassador L. Paul “Jerry” Bremer, arrives 
as the de facto governor of occupied Iraq. Bremer’s 
governance is under the Coalition Provisional Author-
ity through June 2004. Almost immediately upon 
arriving as “pro-consul,” Bremer issues two decrees 
that create massive unemployment and sow bitterness 
in post–Saddam Hussein Iraq. One decree encourages 
“de-Baathiﬁ cation” by disallowing former Baath Party 
members to serve in the new government, while the 
other virtually shuts down the Iraqi armed forces.
 
 
Deterioration of a long-simmering civil war in 
Liberia leads President Bush to send in a U.S. task force 
to help evacuate people from the country, while offer-
ing suggestions for a long-term peacekeeping force to 
help tame the situation
 
 
In August, a car bomb attack targets a popular 
Western hotel in Jakarta, Indonesia, highlighting the 
Islamic tension within that society and the animosity 
directed against the West.
2004 
A series of digital photographs begin circulating on the 
Internet showing interrogations of Iraqis incarcerated 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
114 Chronology
2004 
at Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad. These photographs 
(cont.)  
indicate ritualistic humiliation of Iraqi prisoners by 
U.S. military personnel, including women degrading 
men with obscene gestures and laughter, actions espe-
cially humiliating to Muslim men.
 
 
Two and a half years to the day after the Sep-
tember 11 terrorist attacks in the United States, mas-
sive bombs detonate on commuter trains going into 
Madrid, Spain, killing just under 200 and casting 
doubt on Spain’s support for the U.S. invasion of Iraq. 
Less than a week later, the conservative government in 
power loses the general election; the new prime minis-
ter is determined to withdraw Spanish forces in Iraq.
 
 
In a bizarre ending to the campaign, an assassi-
nation attempt is made on Taiwanese president Chen 
Shui-bian and his vice president, Annette Lu; each 
receives a grazing injury. The incident appears to 
tip the election the following day in their favor, and 
they win a 30,000-vote victory. The opposition does 
not accept the outcome for months. Beijing remains 
unhappy that Chen might, in his second term, revise 
the Constitution to declare independence.
 
 
The Abu Ghraib prison scandal escalates to con-
gressional hearings about the nature of U.S. interroga-
tion processes. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld 
takes responsibility but does not resign. An internal 
Army report names lower-level soldiers, but a single 
Army reservist brigadier general is the only senior 
leader cited for responsibility in this disgrace. Several 
junior Army personnel face court-martial and impris-
onment. The Islamic world erupts in fury as the feeling 
that the United States dishonors Islam begins to grow 
in Middle Eastern states and important allies such as 
Pakistan and Indonesia.
 
 
In November, PLO founder Yasir Arafat suc-
cumbs to an undisclosed illness, leaving the Palestin-
ian Authority struggling to address the needs of its 
people in the West Bank, Gaza Strip, and scattered 
around the world
 
 
President George W. Bush wins reelection in 
another extraordinarily thin margin over Massachu-
setts Democratic Senator John F. Kerry. The focus of the 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 115
election was whether the Bush or Kerry administrations 
would create a safer nation in the next four years.
 
 
On December 26, a massive earthquake off the 
coast of Aceh, Indonesia, sets off a tsunami of devas-
tating proportion, killing unknown numbers along the 
Indian Ocean coastlines in its path. Nearly a quarter of 
a million die in Indonesia, Thailand, India, Sri Lanka, 
and other countries. President Bush orders U.S. armed 
forces to respond swiftly to provide humanitarian 
assistance, proving again that national security for the 
United States now encompasses activities that were 
not traditionally deemed security.
2005 
A virulent strain of avian inﬂ uenza begins spreading 
from Southeast Asia and China through the rest of the 
world. Deaths initially remain closely correlated to 
those who have touched birds, but many fear a repeat 
of the 1918 Spanish ﬂ u, which took more lives than 
World War I.
 
 
In July, attacks on the London Underground and 
surface buses result in the deaths of 52 and injury of 
770. Two weeks later, additional attacks on a bus and 
a two Underground trains result in minor blasts. In 
all instances, the perpetrators are Islamic adherents, 
many of whom are British born (a major difference 
from the September 11 terrorist attacks).
2006 
In June, the U.S. Supreme Court rules that the Bush 
administration’s approach to incarcerating and inter-
rogating terrorist suspects is unconstitutional. The 
administration asks Congress to endorse its policies 
to satisfy the Court, but Republican senators John 
Warner, Lindsey Graham, and John McCain block the 
administration’s moves three months later.
 
 
In August, British ofﬁ cials stop trans-Atlantic air 
trafﬁ c upon suspicion of a pending attack on British-
originating airliners going to the United States, using 
ﬂ uids as weapons. British ofﬁ cials substantially cur-
tail in-cabin luggage while U.S. ofﬁ cials cite this as an 
example of the continuing threats and limit the types of 
materials that may be carried in the passenger cabins.
 
 
Iran announces that it will not bow to interna-
tional pressure to open its nuclear facilities to interna-
tional scrutiny. The United States, European allies, and 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
116 Chronology
2006 
Chinese governments each have a different approach 
(cont.)  
and level of concern about the depth of the threat. In his 
appearance at the United Nations General Assembly 
in September, Iranian leader Mahmoud Ahmadinejad 
mocks President Bush as a leader of the international 
system.
 
 
Less than a week before the ﬁ fth anniversary of 
the September 11 terrorist attacks, the Senate Select 
Committee on Intelligence releases a report indicat-
ing that there were no ties between Iraqi dictator Sad-
dam Hussein and the al Qaeda terrorist network in the 
years before the attacks. President Bush acknowledges 
the existence of long-reported CIA secret interrogation 
camps abroad. Although he argues that his admin-
istration must continue protecting the nation’s secu-
rity through these interrogations and through greater 
use of domestic wiretapping, both practices are quite 
controversial among civil rights advocates within the 
United States.
 
 
On September 11, the nation commemorates the 
ﬁ fth anniversary of the terrorist attacks, but there is 
signiﬁ cant political divisions about the path ahead.
 
 
The midterm election campaigns discuss the Iraq 
war as the central campaign theme in many parts of 
the country. Upon the Republicans’ inability to main-
tain control over either the House of Representatives 
or the Senate, President Bush substitutes former CIA 
Director Robert Gates for embattled Secretary of 
Defense Donald Rumsfeld. 
 
 
President Bush, anticipating the congressionally 
mandated bipartisan Iraqi Study Group recommen-
dations four weeks later, announces he will engage in 
considerable consultation across the nation about Iraqi 
policy but simultaneously announces he will not accept 
a military strategy for defeat in the Middle East. 
 
 
The ﬁ nal quarter of 2006 is a period of dramatic 
increases in combat deaths in Iraq as well as civilian 
casualties. December sees the highest level of casual-
ties since early 2005.
 
 
The United States ends 2006 with a stalemate 
with Iranian and North Korean diplomats over bud-
ding nuclear programs in their respective countries. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 117
North Korea remains the center of ongoing Six-Party 
Talks facilitated by the Chinese government in Beijing, 
but no movement is on the horizon. Various states try 
pressuring Tehran to allow inspections and abandon 
its positions, but the pressure is insufﬁ cient to achieve 
anything. 
2007 
During the initial week of 2007, President Bush ele-
vates his Iraq ground commander, General George 
Casey, to the position of chief of staff of the Army. He 
replaces Casey with a commander, Lieutenant General 
David Petraeus, who advocates a more clear-cut coun-
terinsurgency doctrine for the war-wracked country, 
based on his doctoral studies at Princeton University 
as well as prior tours in Iraq. Bush also surprises many 
by nominating a Naval aviator, Admiral William Fal-
lon, for the position of head of Central Command, a 
position long held by a “ground pounder” because 
of the nature of the theater of operations—ground 
troops instead of predominantly naval or air assets. 
The change to a naval ofﬁ cer indicates the decision to 
shift emphasis dramatically in the Central Command. 
Similarly, the president moves career ambassador 
Ryan C. Crocker, a senior diplomat with extensive Iraq 
experience, from his post as ambassador in Pakistan to 
Baghdad to replace Zalmay Khalilzad, who assumes 
the United Nations representation replacing the con-
troversial appointee John Bolton.
 
 
The People’s Republic of China accomplishes the 
goal of destroying an earth-orbiting satellite that leaves 
many defense analysts around the world worried 
about the militarization of space. Beijing denies such 
an intent, but proves uncoordinated in its response to 
these concerns, leading some to worry about the ris-
ing power of the People’s Liberation Army within the 
Chinese decision-making system. 
 
 
After ﬁ ts and starts, the Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea agrees to the Six-Party Talk negotia-
tions to shut down its nuclear program in exchange 
for desired assistance from the international commu-
nity. Critics such as John Bolton argue that the North 
Koreans will not adhere to their side of the agreement, 
but the leadership of the nations engaging with North 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
118 Chronology
2007 
Korea show obvious relief that the North Koreans 
(cont.)  
appear to have backed down from creating a massive 
weapons program.
 
 
Prime Minister Tony Blair announces that Britain 
will withdraw a signiﬁ cant portion of its 7,500 troops 
from their multinational coalition role in southern 
Iraq at Basra. A day later, the prime minister notes that 
British troops are likely to augment the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization forces deployed in Afghanistan in 
light of fears of a Taliban resurgence there.
 
 
Eight helicopters crash in Iraq in the ﬁ rst eight 
weeks of 2007, leading to questions whether the insur-
gents have found an ability to bring down U.S. forces 
or whether the law of averages is affecting U.S. mili-
tary efforts.
 
 
The Palestinian chaos long characterizing the Gaza 
area continues as Palestinian organizations Hamas 
and the Palestinian Authority differ on two counts: 
whether to recognize the legitimacy of Israel to exist 
and whether to decry the use of violence to achieve 
Palestinian goals. Cracks appear in the coalition 
between the United States and Europe on pressuring 
the Palestinians.
 
 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice announces 
a renewed commitment for U.S. engagement in the 
Israeli-Palestinian conﬂ ict, some six years after Presi-
dent Bush made clear his reluctance to have the United 
States place its credibility on the line as his predecessor 
President Clinton did during negotiations between the 
two parties at Camp David in the summer of 2000. 
 
 
The Bush administration charges that many of the 
attacks on U.S. forces in Iraq result from massive Ira-
nian intervention in the neighboring state. Critics voice 
concern about the accuracy of the charges because of 
intelligence failures preceding the 2003 intervention in 
Iraq, but the administration maintains its position that 
Iran is behind much of the unrest.
 
 
A series of investigative stories in the Washington 
Post highlights the failure of the military services to offer 
what most deem necessary post-conﬂ ict health care to 
returning veterans. In particular, the Walter Reed Army 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 119
Medical Center becomes the target of critics who cite 
its deteriorated physical conditions and unsatisfactory 
care. The secretary of the Army as well as the Army’s 
top physician are both forced from ofﬁ ce.
 
 
At the end of February, the United States decides 
to begin including Iran and Syria in regional discus-
sions about the future of Iraq. The Iraqi Study Group 
in Washington had advocated this move in its Decem-
ber 2006 recommendations, but the Bush administra-
tion had been reluctant to deal with a regime unwilling 
to adhere to international nonproliferation regime 
monitoring.
 
 
Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe throws 
himself a terriﬁ c birthday party and tells his critics 
around the world to stay out of Zimbabwe’s affairs. 
Political opponents of the long-ruling president con-
front physical intimidation by his government’s inter-
nal police, resulting in condemnation from Western 
governments such as the United States and Great Brit-
ain. A March meeting of the heads of state in southern 
Africa does nothing to condemn Mugabe for increas-
ing repression at home and does little to encourage 
Mugabe to alter his behavior even though the U.S. 
ambassador and Europeans argue that conditions are 
bound to deteriorate even further in Zimbabwe. Com-
mon people in Zimbabwe live in substandard condi-
tions with no prospect for improvement.
 
 
Weeks after the Six-Party Agreement with North 
Korea, U.S. intelligence ofﬁ cials soften their charges 
about the level of success in Pyongyang’s uranium 
enrichment program. North Korea claims it might still 
renege on the agreement if its ﬁ nancial accounts are 
not freed. The ﬁ nancial transaction problems between 
the states continue into April.
 
 
President Bush visits Latin America for a week, 
promising that the United States is indeed committed 
to the region. His nemesis, Hugo Chávez of Venezuela, 
taunts him and says the United States only exploits the 
region.
 
 
In March, Congress passes a funding bill for 
Iraq and Afghanistan that cites a speciﬁ c date for the 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
120 Chronology
2007 
withdrawal of U.S. combat forces from the theater. 
(cont.)  
President Bush vetoes the bill but the polarization of 
the nation on this topic is apparent.
 
 
In early April, an international commission of sci-
entists argues that deﬁ nitive data support the damn-
ing conclusion that global warming will create major 
national security concerns around the world within 
twenty to thirty years. Some members charge that the 
United States and China sought to water down the 
report, but the overall conclusion about the strongly 
adverse effects of humans on global climate is no lon-
ger in dispute.
 
 
New House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, a San Francisco 
Democrat, makes a foreign policy tour of the Middle 
East, including a stop in Syria. The Bush administra-
tion strongly criticizes her for undermining the presi-
dent’s strong stance on the authoritarian government 
of Bashir Assad in Damascus. Pelosi retorts that the 
Constitution calls for the legislature to work with the 
executive branch in foreign affairs, noting that her 
positions in the region did not undermine the presi-
dent but supported his positions.
 
 
The U.S. intelligence community acknowledges 
that the evidence of links between Saddam Hussein’s 
Iraq and al Qaeda before the 2003 invasion were ten-
tative at best and probably insigniﬁ cant in the overall 
equation of international affairs. Vice President Dick 
Cheney continues to assert the strength of al Qaeda ties 
with Iraq under the Saddam Hussein government.
 
 
On Easter Sunday, Pope Benedict XVI calls for the 
end of “slaughter” in Iraq, but truck bombs targeting 
Iraqis and targeted attacks on U.S. service personnel 
continue. The evidence for success of President Bush’s 
“surge” strategy, announced in January, remains open 
to interpretation.
 
 
Nicholas Sarkozy, son of a Hungarian immigrant, 
wins the French presidential election, meaning that 
one of President George W. Bush’s most vocal critics in 
the international scene, Jacques Chirac, will no longer 
be an obstacle to U.S.-European relations. 
 
 
A rash of public stories on pet food impurities, 
toys with lead paint, and other Chinese products raise 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Chronology 121
questions about quality control in China. Ofﬁ cials pro-
claim that they will redouble efforts to ensure quality 
of their exports but U.S. consumers begin asking ques-
tions about what they are buying. 
 
 
The number of deaths in Iraq increases over the 
spring and early summer months as a result of bomb-
ings. U.S. leaders note the successes of the “surge” 
probably increased local resistance, but suggest wait-
ing until General Petraeus reports back to Congress on 
the surge’s success in September. In early August, U.S. 
forces in country reach 162,000. Ofﬁ cials speak care-
fully of tactical successes resulting from the surge.
 
 
Prime Minister Tony Blair steps down in late June 
as planned. His successor, Gordon Brown, moves up 
from the Chancellorship of the Exchequer. In less than 
a week after taking the job, he confronts an attack on 
the Glasgow airport by Islamic terrorists and police 
ﬁ nd cars laden with explosives in central London.
 
 
Russian President Vladimir Putin visits President 
Bush at the family retreat in Maine but the meeting 
produces few solid results and illustrates the growing 
tension between the two leaders. Within weeks, Russia 
proclaims its navy has sailed below the Arctic icecap 
to claim natural resources on the seabed for Russia’s 
exclusive use.
 
 
Domestic protests that began with General Per-
vez Musharraf trying to oust the head of the Pakistani 
Supreme Court in March culminate in a bloody siege at 
the Red Mosque in Islamabad. Islamists seek to impose 
a greater Islamic lifestyle on Pakistan while General 
Musharraf and the Pakistani military want to maintain 
a secular state. Pakistani commandos ousted the 100 
militants holding the mosque but at a high cost in lives, 
further polarizing the already tenuous society.
 
 
As General Petraeus hopes for success from the 
surge, Sunni members of the Al-Maliki government 
resign, focusing attention on an increasingly dysfunc-
tional Iraqi state.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
123
5
Biographical Sketches
S
ome theorists of international affairs believe states alone 
affect relations, while others believe systems do. Still others 
believe individuals are the fundamental building blocks in 
international affairs. In any case, people are a crucial component 
to understanding national security. This chapter discusses some 
of the most prominent persons in the ﬁ eld. As is true with other 
materials in this volume, the choices here are based on the per-
son’s prominence and key decision-making roles, but the list is, 
regrettably, not exhaustive.
John Abizaid (1951–)
John Philip Abizaid, the Lebanese-American Army general head-
ing U.S. Central Command from 2003 to 2007, was crucial in 
waging the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Abizaid was born in 
California but attended the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. 
He studied at Princeton University and served as director of the 
Joint Staff, a powerful position in formulating the overall national 
military strategy for the nation. Abizaid replaced Army General 
Tommy Franks at U.S. Central Command. Abizaid voiced caution 
about increasing the troop strength in the Iraq enterprise at Decem-
ber 2006 congressional hearings and subsequently announced his 
intention to retire in March 2007. His replacement was a Naval 
aviator, Admiral William Fallon, a radically different leader for 
this traditional ground-oriented theater.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
124 Biographical Sketches
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad (1956–)
The president of Iran, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has proven a highly 
controversial ﬁ gure. Many believe he was one of the masterminds 
of the November 4, 1979, takeover of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, 
which ignited a 444-day hostage crisis for forty-four U.S. citizens. 
Ahmadinejad, a committed member of the revolutionary genera-
tion, is not a cleric but a highly devout Shiite. Much to the surprise 
of many, he became president through national elections in 2005. 
A strident nationalist, he earned a reputation as an anti-Semite 
almost immediately upon assuming ofﬁ ce when he gave several 
speeches that discussed his desire for a Middle East without Israel, 
either through moving or destroying the Jewish state, as well as 
publicly questioning the idea that the Holocaust occurred. 
Although Ahmadinejad served as the mayor of Tehran and in 
the Revolutionary Guards before he assumed the presidency, he 
has proven a poor governor of the Iranian economy, which is in a 
virtual standstill as the young population of the Islamic Republic 
grows and makes more demands. Ahmadinejad has proven able, 
however, to alarm the West as he has spoken repeatedly of Iran’s 
rights to enrich uranium, leading to fears of an Iranian nuclear 
weapon. The United States, under President George W. Bush and 
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, has warned the Iranian presi-
dent to stop the nuclear enrichment program while trying to rally 
European, Russian, and Chinese support to thwart him, but the 
rest of the world has been lukewarm to another potential conﬂ ict. 
Additionally, many of the nations that are potential U.S. partners 
in this effort have lucrative energy ties with Tehran. As the war 
in Iraq has deepened, U.S. ofﬁ cials in early 2007 argued that the 
deteriorating conditions were instigated by Iran. Washington also 
worries that Ahmadinejad is meddling in events in neighboring 
Iraq to create a pro-Iranian Shiite government in Baghdad.
Madeleine Korbel Albright (1937–)
Madeline Albright was the ﬁ rst female secretary of state, serving 
in the second Clinton administration between 1997 and 2001. The 
daughter of Czech diplomats who ﬁ rst ﬂ ed the Nazis, then the 
Communists, Madeleine Jana Korbelovà was raised a Roman Cath-
olic but learned later in life that her family hid her Jewish heritage 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 125
to survive during World War II. Albright became a U.S. citizen in 
1957 and did her undergraduate work at Wellesley College before 
marrying newspaper heir Joseph Albright in 1961 and raising three 
daughters. She later studied with Zbigniew Brzezinski at Columbia 
University, where she earned a doctorate in government. 
Albright taught at the Georgetown University School of For-
eign Service before moving to the National Security Council staff in 
the Carter administration and the staff of Maine Senator Edmund 
Muskie before he became secretary of state in 1980. Albright took 
on a foreign policy advisory role in the Democratic Party after she 
cofounded the Center for National Policy, a foreign affairs think 
tank. Albright was a primary foreign affairs adviser to the failed 
1988 presidential campaign of Massachusetts governor Michael 
Dukakis. In 1993, President Bill Clinton named Albright his ﬁ rst 
ambassador to the United Nations, where she earned the scorn of 
conservatives in the Clinton administration (who felt that military 
forces ought to ﬁ ght wars and exclusively defend the homeland) 
by asking then-chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Colin 
L. Powell, why the United States had such a superb military if it 
was not going to use it, implying that she would greatly enhance 
the use of military for foreign policy activities beyond traditional 
defense. Albright’s tenure at the United Nations coincided with 
U.S. frustration over involvement in Somalia and failure to act to 
thwart the Rwandan genocide of 1994. 
As secretary of state, Albright, so profoundly affected by the 
global unwillingness to stop Nazi atrocities in the 1930s, argued 
for greater U.S. actions to stop Serbian strongman Slobodan 
Miloshevica’s “ethnic cleansing” in Bosnia and Herzegovina, then 
Kosovo, in the 1990s. She also sought to moderate U.S. policy 
toward the reclusive, unpredictable regime of North Korea, trav-
eling there in the later months of the administration.
Grand Ayatollah Ali Husaini Sistani 
(1930–)
The spiritual leader of many Shiites in Iraq, Grand Ayatollah Ali 
Husaini Sistani has been a pivotal ﬁ gure in the years after Saddam 
Hussein’s ouster in 2003. Respected by the Shia community for 
his religious wisdom, Sistani has been pivotal in lowering sectar-
ian tensions. The Shiite community of Iraq suffered tremendous 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
126 Biographical Sketches
persecution under Saddam Hussein and his Baathist regime 
from roughly 1968 through 2003, but Sistani remained a ﬁ gure 
of immense calm and perseverance. In 2003, after the invasion of 
Iraq by U.S.-led forces, Sistani signaled his tolerance for the activ-
ity by not directly criticizing U.S. actions. A major ﬁ gure in the 
religious realm, he has proven a cagey politician, avoiding the tur-
moil created by many younger clerics, such as Moqtada al-Sadr, 
who would prefer to oust the United States and reach to the Shiite 
community abroad as Iraq rebuilds itself after the dictatorship.
Koﬁ  Annan (1938–)
A long-term United Nations (UN) employee who rose through 
the ranks, Koﬁ  Annan was the secretary general of the United 
Nations between 1996 and 2006, during some of the most chal-
lenging years for the international organization. A Ghanaian 
married to a Swede, Annan studied abroad, where he became a 
model for the type of international civil servant that he became 
within the UN bureaucracy. Heavily involved in refugee issues, 
Annan assumed the position of secretary general of the United 
Nations from the Egyptian Boutros Boutros-Ghali in 1996. Dur-
ing his decade as secretary general, Annan faced major pressure 
from the U.S. Congress—which preferred not to pay its UN dues 
until its demands for reform of the organization were met—along 
with growing tensions on use of force in places like Kosovo and 
Afghanistan. Before the 2003 Iraq War, Annan thinly veiled his 
skepticism about the need to oust Saddam Hussein over the issue 
of weapons of mass destruction. In August 2003, after Annan 
sent a UN delegation to Baghdad under his friend and personal 
envoy Sergio Vieira de Mello of Brazil, a truck bomb destroyed 
the UN complex and cost Vieira de Mello his life. The UN gradu-
ally pulled back from its work in Iraq. Annan fulﬁ lled his tenure 
as secretary general but left behind a wounded organization with 
many challenges facing it.
Osama bin Laden (1957–)
A tall, willowy character who roams the international Islamic 
world seeking to stay out of U.S. hands, Osama bin Laden is 
credited with being the architect of the attacks on Washington 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 127
and New York on September 11, 2001. Son of a Yemeni construc-
tion engineer with patrons in the Saudi royal family, bin Laden 
grew up a serious, religious child in the Saudi Kingdom. Drawn 
to Afghanistan in the late 1970s to ﬁ ght against Soviet imperial-
ism, he was seen by some as a major supporter of the mujahideen, 
Islamic Afghan ﬁ ghters who drove the Soviets out of the moun-
tainous state in the late 1980s. Others believed bin Laden was a 
dilettante who provided funding from his vast personal wealth 
but was not seriously engaged in the ﬁ ght against the Soviets. 
Regardless, by 1990 bin Laden was personally appalled by the 
al-Saud family welcoming Western soldiers into the Kingdom to 
ward off an Iraqi invasion as had occurred in Kuwait. At this time, 
bin Laden began moving from one Islamic state to another, wher-
ever he could ﬁ nd protection, as he advocated increasingly strong 
action against the West, speciﬁ cally the United States as purvey-
ors of a system to destroy Islam. 
In the 1990s bin Laden turned up in Pakistan and Sudan 
but he lost his citizenship in his native country when he vocally 
attacked the Saudi royal family. The United States ﬁ rst began 
discussing bin Laden after the August 1998 attacks on the U.S. 
embassies in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and Nairobi, Kenya, but he 
was not captured in follow-on raids. In the 2000s, bin Laden has 
been thought to operate in Afghanistan or the Waziristan section 
of Pakistan in the northwest frontier. He continues issuing state-
ments on his intentions to bring destruction to the West, but some 
wonder whether he has died in the attempts to capture him and 
most observers believe his personal role in al Qaeda has prob-
ably lessened as the organization has evolved to try to outlast the 
international pursuit brought about by the September 11, 2001, 
terrorist attacks and subsequent ouster of the Taliban government 
in Afghanistan.
Anthony “Tony” Charles Lynton Blair 
(1953–)
A charismatic leader who brought the Labour Party of Great 
Britain back to power after almost two decades of Tory power, 
Prime Minister Tony Blair served until 2007. Born to a middle-
class family, Blair attended Oxford University in the 1970s where 
he was known for his rock-and-roll band. Blair married a fellow 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
128 Biographical Sketches
barrister, Cherie, before becoming heavily active in politics. Blair 
won his initial seat in the House of Commons in the June 1983 
election, which was largely disastrous for the Labour Party. Mar-
garet Thatcher’s successful leadership in the South Atlantic War 
(1982), as well as public perception that Labour was too far to the 
left, helped the Tories resoundingly defeat Labour. Blair remolded 
Labour’s image by his personal commitment to social responsibil-
ity. In addition, he used the slogan “New Labour” to craft a party 
that looked more like Bill Clinton’s centrist Democratic Party than 
the traditional leftist party of the United Kingdom. Blair’s 1997 
and 2001 victories for Labour were historic in their scope. The 
BBC noted that Blair’s 2001 win was the ﬁ rst time a Labour gov-
ernment in Britain had ever governed for two full terms. 
Blair was a key ally for President Bill Clinton as the latter tried 
to achieve some unity with Europeans on how to address Slobo-
dan Miloshevica’s brutality in the former Yugoslavia in the1990s. 
In addition, Blair and Clinton had both brought their respective 
parties to power after “years in the wilderness,” and their per-
sonalities were somewhat similar. Surprisingly, Blair became an 
arguably closer ally to President George W. Bush, especially after 
the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. 
Blair ultimately alienated many at home as he increasingly 
supported the U.S.-proposed moves against Saddam Hussein. 
Blair and Bush argued that the weapons of mass destruction that 
they believed Saddam had were justiﬁ cation for ousting the dicta-
tor. The majority of the British population opposed Blair on this 
policy, but he remained ﬁ rm in supporting Bush and providing 
British forces for the coalition to defeat Saddam. As events subse-
quent to the March 2003 invasion began to sour the British public 
on British involvement, Blair’s popularity plummeted. He stood 
for a ﬁ nal term in 2004, but the Labour majority declined sub-
stantially. Blair remained Bush’s steadfast ally but shifted his pri-
orities from those of his Washington ally, strongly criticizing the 
U.S. decision to withdraw from the Kyoto environmental treaty, 
for instance. Blair himself pushed the international leadership 
to emphasize the needs of the poor, especially in Africa. Before 
the 2004 election, Blair declared that he would not run for a sub-
sequent term. Much of his ﬁ nal term centered around trying to 
get the international community to pay more attention to African 
issues, a pet interest on his part. In 2006 his government became 
the center of a scandal about political contributions for “honors” 
by Queen Elizabeth II but the main reason that Blair left ofﬁ ce in 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 129
late June 2007 was his low standing resulting from the Iraq War. 
Within days of surrendering 10 Downing Street and the prime 
ministership to Gordon Brown, Blair became a special envoy to 
the Middle East.
L. Paul “Jerry” Bremer III (1941–)
A career diplomat, Paul “Jerry” Bremer served as the head of the 
Coalition Provisional Authority in Baghdad, Iraq, from May 2003 
through June 2004. Before that, Bremer had served in the State 
Department in many positions, including deputy chief of mission 
in Oslo, Norway, and ambassador to the Netherlands. During the 
ﬁ nal years of his State Department tenure, however, Bremer began 
to concentrate on terrorism, which led Speaker of the House Den-
nis Hastert to name him to the National Commission on Terror-
ism in 1999. After retiring to the private sector, Bremer worked for 
Kissinger and Associates, a private consulting ﬁ rm founded by 
former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, and a crisis consulting 
company in the nation’s capital. A month after Saddam Hussein 
was forced from power as a result of the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq, 
Bremer succeeded former Lieutenant General Jay Garner as head 
of reconstruction. None of Bremer’s prior government jobs had 
been in reconstruction and nation-building areas, but he became 
the administration’s key ﬁ gure in reconstruction and humanitar-
ian activities. In his thirteen months of de facto governing of Iraq, 
Bremer introduced a number of controversial directives that some 
argue have fed the insurgency plaguing the country two years after 
Bremer’s departure. Bremer’s most controversial decision was to 
“de-Baathesize” the Iraqi Army: Any former members of the Baath 
movement were consciously excluded from the post-Saddam 
army. This created signiﬁ cant unemployment, which many critics 
argue generated a larger pool of insurgent recruits. Other criticisms 
against Bremer’s governance included his concentration on the 
petroleum industry to the advantage of the United States; too little 
attention to the power grid, which is not producing nearly what it 
did in the pre-conﬂ ict environment; not asking for sufﬁ cient troops 
to accomplish the U.S. mission; and the overall view that he created 
a weak regime to get the United States out of Iraq instead of engag-
ing in the nation building that the invasion had in fact required. 
Bremer left Iraq in the summer of 2004, after an agreement had 
been reached on how and when to conduct democratic elections in 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
130 Biographical Sketches
Iraq. Bremer wrote a memoir, My Year in Iraq: The Struggle to Build a 
Future of Hope (Simon and Schuster 2006).
George W. Bush (1946–)
The former governor of Texas won the presidency in two con-
troversial elections in 2000 and 2004 and has governed with an 
aggressive and controversial style. Born in Connecticut but raised 
in Midland, Texas, Bush received a bachelor’s degree in history 
from Yale and a master’s degree in business from Harvard Uni-
versity. He then returned to Texas to try his hand in a number 
of businesses. During the Vietnam War, Bush served in the Texas 
Air National Guard, but this service generated controversy dur-
ing the 2004 election when his participation was questioned. Bush 
became a co-owner of the Texas Rangers baseball team (baseball 
being one of his passions) before defeating incumbent Ann Rich-
ards in the 1994 gubernatorial election. Bush was reelected in 1998 
and then began his presidential campaign in earnest in the lead-
up to 2000. Bush won the 2000 election with the thinnest mar-
gin in history as the decision hinged on controversial ballots in 
Florida, where fewer than 600 votes separated Bush from his main 
challenger, Vice President Albert Gore, Jr. 
Eight months into his ﬁ rst term, Bush faced the most dra-
matic attack on the territory of the United States, the September 
11 terrorist attacks. He immediately declared a “war on terror-
ism,” and a month later the United States invaded Afghanistan to 
oust the Taliban government, which was thought to be protecting 
the masterminds of the terrorist plot. Simultaneously, the admin-
istration began quietly preparing for war to oust Saddam Hussein 
from Iraq, even though many specialists and the 9/11 investiga-
tion commission noted there was no evidence of a connection 
between Saddam Hussein and the terrorists. Bush gave two of 
the most famous speeches of the past ﬁ fty years on terrorism and 
U.S. strategy as he marshaled forces in these causes. In the ﬁ rst of 
these, his 2002 State of the Union address, he described Iraq, Iran, 
and North Korea as an “axis of evil.” In the second speech, at the 
commencement ceremony for the U.S. Military Academy at West 
Point, the president moved from advocating defensive responses 
to terrorism to advocating prevention of these terrorist activi-
ties; some foreign policy analysts were stunned by the perceived 
expansion in scope of actions and strategy. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 131
In the summer of 2002, the president’s administration began 
pushing forcefully for an invasion of Iraq, ostensibly because of 
Saddam’s weapons of mass destruction. As 2002 progressed, Bush 
retained the support of British Prime Minister Tony Blair, but few 
other world leaders, and he faced a divided population at home. 
Arguing that this was a war of necessity, not a war of choice, the 
administration’s pressure for the war grew through Secretary of 
State Colin Powell’s February 5, 2003, appearance before the UN 
Security Council to present evidence of the weapons. 
On March 19, 2003, with much of the world protesting, U.S. 
forces moved into Iraq. Bush’s administration appeared to have 
only thought through the war stage, however, relying on an abso-
lutely best-case scenario for post-conﬂ ict planning purposes. As 
Bush declared on May 1, 2003, that “major combat operations” were 
over in Iraq, in front of a banner saying “Mission Accomplished” on 
the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln, the administration funda-
mentally underestimated the difﬁ culties of post-conﬂ ict rebuilding 
while overestimating Iraqi desire for a non-Saddam regime. Bush’s 
national security governance has aroused considerable debate as he 
chose to ignore a number of laws to guarantee civil liberties on the 
grounds that he was chasing terrorists and that as commander-in-
chief, the Constitution authorized him whatever steps he deemed 
necessary to protect the nation against security threats. Critics, 
including some in his own party, strongly disagreed. 
In his national security approach, Bush has continued to push 
states toward democratic governance but this has not assuaged 
many concerns around the world that the United States is not pro-
tecting itself against terrorists, but is exploiting its military weight 
to remake the world to its beneﬁ t. Bush has paid scant attention 
to Latin America for most of his presidency except for his concern 
about the Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, but has increased 
visibility to the plight of Africa. He has pushed for democracy 
in the Middle East while alienating many around the world with 
his absolutely unwavering support for the government of Ariel 
Sharon in Israel, which many critics fear has cost the United States 
dearly in terms of popular support internationally. The wounds 
the European allies sustained as a result of the debates in the run-
up to the Iraq War have not healed, and Bush remains extremely 
unpopular in Western Europe, although less so in the states of the 
former Warsaw Pact. 
Bush’s views on Asia are somewhat unclear. He has pushed 
for closer ties with Japan, yet there appears to be a serious split 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
132 Biographical Sketches
within his administration about the future of Sino-U.S. relations. 
For instance, many believe China will threaten the United States, 
yet others see it as an unavoidable economic partner. As Bush 
reaches the middle of his second term, the futures of Iraq and 
Afghanistan are murky, even though he repeatedly vows that the 
United States will “stay the course” for “victory.” His other major 
intractable national security concerns are stopping nuclear pro-
grams in Iran and North Korea, although neither of these nations 
seem the least bit interested in seeing the position that the presi-
dent advocates.
George William Casey, Jr. (1948–)
A graduate of Georgetown University, General George Casey 
became Chief of Staff of the Army in 2007. Casey grew up in a 
military family, although his father, Major General George Casey, 
died in a helicopter accident in 1970. Casey earned a master’s 
degree in international relations from the University of Denver 
and he held a fellowship at the Atlantic Council of the United 
States. Casey is an Army Infantry ofﬁ cer who has served in 
assignments around the world but has not spent not much time 
in the Middle East. His prior jobs included working with stabi-
lization forces in Bosnia, director of the Joint Staff, and director 
of plans for the Joint Staff. Beginning in 2004, Casey replaced 
Lieutenant General Rick Sanchez as the head of multinational 
forces in Iraq. Sanchez and Ambassador L. Paul “Jerry” Bremer 
had not gotten along, and Casey was supposed to mend relations 
between civilians and uniformed ofﬁ cers in rebuilding efforts for 
Iraq. In that position, Casey tried to lead the United States out of 
the Abu Ghraib prison scandal, which had damaged U.S. pres-
tige and respect around the world. He has also had to address the 
persistent, violent insurgency that has led a number of coalition 
partners, such as Japan, to withdraw their forces. In June 2006, 
Casey announced a program for possible troop reductions in Iraq 
by late 2007, as long as the insurgency conditions have improved, 
but he will be overseeing the conditions from Washington, where 
President Bush named him Army chief of staff in early January 
2007. His ﬁ nal months in Baghdad were marked with a serious 
increase in sectarian violence. Casey’s successor, General David 
Petraeus, has seen some improvement in limiting violence as a 
result of the “surge” in troop strength up to 162,000 but the initial 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 133
months after Casey’s departure have been marked by a dramatic 
upturn in violence, resulting in increasingly vocal calls on the 
part of many in both houses of Congress for a withdrawal of U.S. 
forces.
Fidel Castro (1926–)
Fidel Castro has been arguably the greatest thorn in the side of 
the United States for the nearly half-century he has governed his 
nearby island nation. Castro was born to an upper-class farmer in 
the 1920s. He studied law in Havana and witnessed the periodic 
political upheavals that characterized post-1898 Cuba as it strug-
gled with its economic and political dependence on U.S. sugar 
companies. As a young activist student, Castro attended the April 
1948 founding meeting for the Organization of American States in 
Bogotá, Colombia, where the assassination of a domestic politi-
cian, Jorge Eliécer Gaitán, led to the outbreak of a tremendous 
violent period that lasted for ﬁ fteen years, La Violencia. 
In the 1950s, Castro gathered a band of armed activists to 
ﬁ ght for political change on the island. The group unsuccessfully 
attacked the Moncada Barracks in July 1953. Castro ﬂ ed to nearby 
Mexico to regroup. He brought his guerrillas back to the island 
three years later, challenging the rule of U.S. supporter Fulgencio 
Batista y Zaldívar. The increasingly unpopular Batista was heav-
ily corrupt and had direct ties to the interests of U.S. sugar com-
panies, which controlled virtually all aspects of industry on the 
island. Living in the hills, from which they raided government 
forces and tried to undermine the Havana regime, Castro and his 
group spent the years between 1956 and 1959 trying to bring down 
the Batista government. Castro’s younger brother Raúl and the 
Argentine doctor-turned-revolutionary Ernesto “Che” Guevara 
were part of the movement. A U.S. journalist with the New York 
Times, Herbert Matthews, traveled to the hills where he proﬁ led 
Castro, thus giving him credibility in the minds of some critics. 
In 1958, the Eisenhower administration indicated that it would 
not protect Batista, who fell from power on January 1, 1959, when 
Castro and his guerrillas marched into Havana, declaring them-
selves in charge. 
Whether Castro was originally a Communist, a manipulator, 
or an ardent nationalist has long been in dispute. The Eisenhower 
administration was not favorably inclined toward his actions, and 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
134 Biographical Sketches
the bilateral Cuban-U.S. relations were strained but not bro-
ken between 1959 and 1961. Castro, seeking to leverage Cuba’s 
position against U.S. dominance, increasingly turned to the dis-
tant Soviet Union for assistance. This coincided with the Soviet 
doctrine of supporting wars of national liberation, and Castro’s 
moves to prevent the United States from dominating Cuba again 
ﬁ t the bill. Castro took steps to nationalize the massive landhold-
ings of foreign sugar companies, which made most Cubans land-
less workers. His seizures were aimed largely at those who had 
ﬂ ed Castro’s government to the United States and abroad. 
Moscow was also interested in cultivating a relationship 
with a state so close (100 miles) to the U.S. coast, because a Soviet 
military presence on the island would mirror the U.S. forces 
based close to the Soviet Union in Turkey. The Kennedy admin-
istration destroyed any hopes for improved relations with Cuba 
by supporting the Eisenhower-inspired Bay of Pigs invasion 
in April 1961. The United States encouraged Cuban exiles who 
claimed that their arrival on the beaches of Cuba would inspire a 
massive uprising that would overthrow Castro and welcome the 
exiles with open arms. The operation almost immediately went 
wrong: it was revealed in newspapers, and the United States 
did not support the exiles. After their capture, Castro paraded 
the raiders in the international media to show how the United 
States sought to overthrow his increasingly Communist regime. 
The failed uprising was a major embarrassment for the Kennedy 
administration and caused it to restructure its domestic national 
security apparatus. 
Eighteen months later, the tension over Cuba grew once 
again as the Kennedy administration detected Soviet medium-
range ballistic missiles on the island. After a two-week give-and-
take, the Soviets removed the missiles, but not without creating 
more suspicion in Washington that Castro’s Cuba was a danger to 
reckon with, if not destroy. Over the following forty years, Wash-
ington has made clear it would like to see Castro ousted, but he 
has survived assassination attempts, domestic political intrigue, 
and the cutoff of Soviet aid under Mikhail Gorbachev in the late 
1980s. The opposition to Castro, largely concentrated in southern 
Florida, where exiles ﬂ ed after he assumed power in 1959, is a 
powerful political force in the United States, making Cuba virtu-
ally a hands-off topic. While the United States retains an economic 
embargo that went into effect in the early 1960s, the overwhelm-
ing majority of the world has normal relations with Havana.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 135
The basis to the U.S.-Cuban disagreements is Castro him-
self, who is rapidly approaching his ninth decade of life, but 
there are legal disputes between the U.S.-based companies 
whose lands were expropriated by Castro (“nationalized” in his 
parlance) in the early 1960s. As Castro ages, he is more marginal-
ized in the changing global community but still a tremendous 
irritant to Washington, which fears he will offer Chinese or Ven-
ezuelan interests, among others, access to his island to harm 
the United States and/or its interests. In August 2006, when he 
developed a serious medical problem, Fidel transferred power to 
his brother, Defense Minister Raúl Castro. A year later, the elder 
Castro brother remained in convalescence, but the stories of 
impending death appear to have been overstated as were expec-
tations that without him the Cuban Communist regime would 
easily collapse.
Ahmed Chalabi (1945–)
Ahmed Chalabi was a major conduit to U.S. Defense Department 
ofﬁ cials before the 2003 invasion of Iraq. A nonobservant Shiite 
from a long-standing, politically active family, Chalabi left Iraq 
in the 1950s, landing at times in Great Britain with other periods 
in the United States. He helped organize antigovernment activi-
ties in the Kurdish section of the country in the north, then from 
outside. Chalabi studied mathematics at the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology and University of Chicago, ultimately earn-
ing a doctorate. Chalabi then moved to Beirut, Lebanon, where 
he taught mathematics until 1977 and was increasingly involved 
in banking operations. Questions have arisen about his role in the 
collapse of a Jordanian bank in the 1980s. 
Chalabi is now a British citizen, based in London, where he 
has had an important role in the Iraqi National Congress, one of a 
number of exile groups raising money and working to overthrow 
Saddam Hussein before 2003. Chalabi was not trusted by a signiﬁ -
cant portion of the U.S. government, however, especially the State 
Department, because they believed he had virtually no political 
support within Iraq, but was widely trusted in other elements 
including the Defense Department. Chalabi argued that there was 
wide support for an overthrow of Saddam Hussein, which would 
occur once U.S. forces supported an invasion, and he claimed his 
supporters would be the core of a new, pro-Western, anti-Baathist 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
136 Biographical Sketches
society. Despite concerns about his credibility, Chalabi’s views 
were widely circulated in the U.S. government and led to opti-
mism that U.S. forces would be welcomed with open arms. From 
this set of assumptions about Iraq spread the view that the recon-
struction of a democratic, pro-Western government in Baghdad 
would be a relatively simple process. 
Chalabi has operated in the post-Saddam Iraq but has not 
attracted much support. With his credibility under attack, Chalabi 
broke with Washington and is now aligned with one of the many 
factions trying to establish itself as legitimate within the chaotic 
Iraqi political landscape. He does not appear to have popular 
support, however, because many Iraqis fear he is a proxy for the 
United States and because he was gone from the country for so 
many years.
Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías 
(1954–)
The son of two teachers, Hugo Chávez has been the president of 
Venezuela since December 1998. Chávez graduated from the Ven-
ezuelan Military Academy in 1975, trained as an engineer. Chávez 
had a relatively conventional military career until February 1992, 
when he was an organizer of the coup attempt against the dem-
ocratically elected government of Venezuela. The coup was the 
ﬁ rst in Venezuela since it had embraced democracy in 1958, yet 
the problems within the government were obvious. The regime 
in Caracas had been pressed to respond to international demands 
that the government raise subsidized prices to undercut burgeon-
ing budget deﬁ cits. In addition, the democratic governments of 
post-1958 Venezuela had suffered from tremendous corruption 
and political manipulation at the highest levels of society. 
Chávez and the other coup plotters argued that they would 
ensure that Venezuela would respond to the needs of its citizens. 
The plotters argued, as did those attempting a later coup in 1992, 
that Venezuelan politicians were giving the resources of the nation, 
including its vast petroleum reserves and revenues, to imperialist 
outsiders who were seeking to exploit the patria, that exquisitely 
Latin American sense of nationhood built upon the soil, blood, 
culture, history, and unique aggregate experience that the military 
pledged to protect. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 137
Chávez served jail time from 1992 to 1994 for his antigov-
ernment activities, but he returned to society as a civilian with a 
cause and a following. Chávez declared himself a candidate for 
the 1998 presidential election, running on a platform of strident 
nationalism and anti-U.S. sentiment. Upon his election, Chávez 
almost immediately suggested a national referendum on rewrit-
ing the national constitution with an eye toward protecting the 
Bolivarian character of the nation (named after El Gran Libertador 
of northern South America, Simón Bolívar). In December 1999, the 
referendum passed, and it included provisions allowing Chávez a 
second term as president. 
In subsequent years, Chávez has taken more stridently anti-
U.S. positions, such as advocating cutting off petroleum to the 
United States, visiting ostracized Iraqi president Saddam Hussein 
in Baghdad before his overthrow, publicly supporting the anti-U.S. 
sentiment of Cuban president Fidel Castro, and advocating for the 
leftist guerrillas in neighboring Colombia. In 2006, U.S. Ambassador 
William Brownﬁ eld and Chávez became more publicly estranged 
as Washington believed the Venezuelan’s actions were destabiliz-
ing not only his nation but also nations in the northern tier of Latin 
America. While Chávez has acquired a number of neighbors with 
relatively similar political outlooks, such as President Evo Morales 
in Bolivia, he is noticeably ignored by many in South America. 
Chávez won reelection in December 2006, but with a token amount 
of opposition. During President George W. Bush’s March 2007 
swing through six Latin American states, Chávez dogged him with 
taunts about the lack of serious U.S. commitment to the region. 
Bush, uncharacteristically, ignored his Venezuelan counterpart.
Chen Shui-bian (1950–)
A minority president in two elections, Taiwan President Chen 
Shui-bian is the ﬁ rst Taiwanese-born president of the island 
nation. Born in southern Taiwan after the Guomingdang (Nation-
alist) Party arrived to rule Taiwan in the aftermath of losing the 
civil war on mainland China, Chen grew up relatively poor in a 
society where native-born Taiwanese were signiﬁ cantly disadvan-
taged. He studied law and became a prominent civil rights law-
yer. He eventually became more involved in a political party and 
had aspirations to govern Taiwan as well as to achieve Taiwan’s 
independence from mainland China. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
138 Biographical Sketches
In 1980, Chen defended a number of Taiwan nationalists who 
fought against the dictatorial political system under Guoming-
dang rule in Taiwan. He joined the process through his election 
to the Taipei City Council. Through the remainder of the 1980s, 
he became more involved in politics while seeing his personal 
freedom curtailed: he was imprisoned on libel charges and his 
wife was permanently handicapped when his political adversar-
ies attacked her. Chen went on to serve in the Legislative Yuan as 
a member of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and then as 
the mayor of Taipei. 
In 2000, Chen ran for president as the DPP candidate. Because 
the DPP has an independence perspective, the mainland govern-
ment, which has claimed it will not tolerate any sort of movement 
toward independence in Taiwan, was severely critical of Chen 
running for the ofﬁ ce and threatened to take military action if he 
was elected. Nevertheless, in March 2000, in Taiwan’s ﬁ rst truly 
open political election, Chen won the presidency as a minority 
candidate because the Guomingdang was split between two rival 
factions. No military actions occurred, but Beijing has remained 
unhappy with the Chen regime, because Chen has ﬂ irted with 
openly declaring independence. 
Chen’s party was not successful in 2000 or subsequent elec-
tions at gathering enough support to take control over the Legisla-
tive Yuan, so he has governed as both a minority president (having 
won less than 40 percent of the popular vote for president) and 
without the support of the legislative branch. Chen’s party was ill-
prepared for governing, having been an opposition party through-
out its history, and his government has been relatively gridlocked. 
While Chen has raised the issue of Taiwanese independence sev-
eral times—in August 2002 when he discussed the concept at a 
party conference, in October 2003 when he advocated rewriting the 
Taiwan constitution, and in the spring of 2006 when he abolished 
the National Uniﬁ cation Guidelines—he has not actually taken the 
step that China has deemed unacceptable. Further, Chen’s DPP 
has moved away from some of its more stridently environmental 
positions, such as opposing importation of petroleum to establish a 
strategic reserve, that have left Taiwan more vulnerable to interna-
tional pressure, as it relies on the international system for its energy 
and many other needs. The DPP has not lessened its opposition to 
nuclear power for the resource-poor island, however.
Chen won reelection in 2004 by fewer than 30,000 votes after a 
controversial incident where he and his vocally pro-independence 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 139
vice president, Annette Lu, were shot a day before the balloting, 
while on the campaign trail in the south. Chen and Lu survived, 
but many in the Guomingdang believe this incident threw the 
election to Chen. Chen’s unpredictable actions have presented 
problems to the Bush administration. In April 2004, Bush stated 
that the United States would support Taiwan, as legally required 
by the Taiwan Relations Act of 1979. What President Bush did 
not say, however, was that the United States would give any gov-
ernment in Taiwan carte blanche to announce steps that would 
aggravate China to the point where it had to respond to Taiwan 
independence moves. 
Chen has ﬂ irted with declaring independence and has tried to 
raise Taiwan’s relations with the United States back to the position 
of a full nation, a condition eradicated by President Jimmy Carter’s 
decision to shift recognition from Taiwan to Beijing as the govern-
ment of China on January 1, 1979. While the Taiwan Relations Act 
requires the United States to help Taiwan defend itself, that is a 
far cry from requiring the United States to defend Taiwan. In late 
2006, Chen’s wife and others in his entourage went on trial for cor-
ruption, seriously undermining his rule, but Chen appears likely 
to ﬁ nish his second term before retiring from the political scene. 
His administration remains a target of multiple investigations but 
other politicians in Taiwan also face legal inquiries, indicating the 
vibrancy of “rule of law” in Taiwan, but appear highly unlikely to 
unseat the president before the March 2008 presidential vote. 
Richard “Dick” Bruce Cheney 
(1941–)
Vice President Dick Cheney is the most powerful person in that 
position in the history of the nation. Born in Nebraska but raised 
in Casper, Wyoming, Cheney attended college at Yale Univer-
sity, but ﬂ unked out. After returning to Wyoming, he enrolled in 
the University of Wyoming, where he graduated. He enrolled in 
graduate school in the mid-1960s at the University of Wisconsin, 
which took him to Washington DC to do research. He was mar-
ried by this point and had two daughters, exempting him from 
military service in Vietnam. 
Beginning in the late 1960s, Cheney held a long series of 
increasingly more important jobs in the executive and legislative 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
140 Biographical Sketches
branches. Cheney met Donald Rumsfeld in the late 1960s, a former 
congressman from northern Illinois, who took him to the Gerald 
Ford White House in 1974, where Cheney became the youngest 
chief of staff ever in the job. Subsequent to that, Cheney returned 
to Wyoming, where he won election as the state’s single represen-
tative in the House. In 1987, Cheney sat on the joint congressional 
committee to investigate the Iran-Contra scandal. 
In 1989, Cheney was appointed secretary of defense after 
President George H. W. Bush’s initial nominee, former Texas sena-
tor John Tower, was rejected by the Senate. Cheney served in this 
role through the administration, which included the ﬁ rst Gulf War. 
Cheney’s tenure was marked with a notable controversy over the 
policy paper written by an aide advocating that the United States 
did not want to see the rise of any sort of peer competitor, riling 
U.S. allies. 
In the mid-1990s, Cheney considered a presidential run, but 
decided against it, in part, because of his history of four heart attacks. 
Instead, Cheney became the head of Halliburton, a multinational 
corporation that became a crucial contractor in the reconstruction 
efforts in Iraq. In 2000, Cheney had the task of helping presidential 
candidate George W. Bush consider vice presidential candidates; 
Cheney’s search resulted in his own choice. The Bush-Cheney ticket 
won the closest electoral victory in U.S. history after a six-week chal-
lenge to the results in the Florida electorate, which was ultimately 
settled in their favor by a split U.S. Supreme Court decision. 
Eight months after assuming ofﬁ ce, the September 11 terror-
ist attacks occurred while Cheney was at the White House and 
Bush was in Florida visiting a school. Already seen as a powerful 
vice president in his ﬁ rst months in ofﬁ ce, the post–September 
11 White House gave Cheney an unprecedented role in decision 
making. By all accounts, Cheney’s positions were more hard line 
than those of the president, recalling the moves by the legislative 
branch, in Cheney’s view, to usurp presidential power. Cheney 
was also one of the ﬁ rst to be concerned about Iraq’s potential role 
in the September 11 attacks. Subsequent repeated analyses have 
never found any ties, but Cheney continued to worry that a con-
nection between Saddam Hussein and the terrorists had existed. 
Cheney became an increasingly controversial ﬁ gure in the 
Bush administration: He aggressively voiced the need to remove 
weapons of mass destruction from Iraq while also taking the hard-
est possible moves against the prisoners held at Guantánamo Bay 
in preparation for military tribunals. Others have argued that the 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 141
vice president pushed to have intelligence produce certain out-
comes that buttressed the administration’s position, but Cheney 
and the White House have adamantly rejected this charge. 
In 2005, Cheney’s aide, I. Lewis “Scooter” Libby, was indicted 
(and convicted in 2007) in a scandal about leaking the name of 
a covert Central Intelligence Agency ofﬁ cer whose husband had 
publicly disagreed with evidence the administration put forth 
in preparing the public for the Iraq invasion. Some of Cheney’s 
strongest critics believe he was the source of this classiﬁ ed infor-
mation, but this was never proven. Cheney remains an extraordi-
narily powerful but reclusive ﬁ gure in the administration, but one 
who has steadfastly retained a hard-line view on what best suits 
U.S. national security.
Hillary Rodham Clinton (1947–)
An extraordinarily polarizing ﬁ gure, although her critics and 
supporters alike acknowledge her capabilities, Hillary Rodham 
Clinton is the junior senator from New York even though she 
had never lived in the state before her 2000 election. Born into 
a Chicago-area Republican family, Clinton attended Wellesley 
College, where she embraced a more liberal philosophy, which 
was reﬂ ected in her 1969 graduation remarks advocating changes 
in the nation’s power structure as well as a greater role for new 
generations. 
Clinton met her future husband, Bill Clinton, while both stud-
ied law at Yale. Hillary served as a lawyer on the Watergate inves-
tigative staff in 1974, and then moved to Arkansas in 1975 to marry 
Bill Clinton and teach law. When her new spouse entered the 
Arkansas governor’s ofﬁ ce beginning in 1978, Hillary began prac-
ticing law at the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock. Upon Bill Clinton’s 
defeat for reelection to the governorship in 1980, Hillary took his 
name and became a somewhat more traditional political spouse. 
She was controversial during the 1992 presidential campaign when 
many traditionalists feared she would be too powerful and would 
act as an unofﬁ cial member of Clinton’s government. During Bill 
Clinton’s administration, Hillary endured public attacks over her 
role in developing a national health care plan, questions about her 
role in ﬁ nancing for Whitewater and the associated investigation, 
and ﬁ nally the humiliation of public discussion of an extramarital 
affair the president had with a young intern. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
142 Biographical Sketches
After Bill Clinton left ofﬁ ce in 2000, the Clintons relocated 
their formal residence to New York, where she ran to ﬁ ll the sena-
torial seat of retired Democrat Daniel Patrick Moynihan. Elected 
handily in 2000, Clinton took a relatively centrist position through 
much of the ﬁ rst Bush administration, including voting to autho-
rize his decision to invade Iraq in 2003. Among her accomplish-
ments as senator, she worked diligently to gain reconstruction 
funding after the September 11 terrorist attacks. Clinton also 
began laying the groundwork for a presidential run of her own. 
And despite the fact that she ran for reelection to the Senate in 
2006 with no formal intention of abandoning that seat for the 
White House, in 2007 she declared her intention to run in the 2008 
presidential election and has become a sharp critic of President 
Bush’s war in Iraq.
Karl Eikenberry (1951–)
An erudite graduate of the U.S. Miltary Academy who holds a 
translator’s certiﬁ cate in Mandarin, Lieutenant General Eikenberry 
commanded the U.S. forces in Afghanistan supporting the govern-
ment of Hamid Karzai. Eikenberry earned a graduate degree in 
east Asian studies from Harvard as well as a graduate degree in 
political science from Stanford. He has served as a foreign area ofﬁ -
cer in the Army and was posted multiple times to the embassy in 
Beijing before holding the job as senior country director for China, 
Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Mongolia in the Ofﬁ ce of the Secretary 
of Defense. Eikenberry also served in Army positions in Hawaii, 
Germany, Korea, and Afghanistan. Eikenberry took charge of Com-
bined Forces Command in Afghanistan in 2005, but conditions have 
been more challenging after the resurgence of the Taliban in 2006. 
He completed his Afghan command tour in early 2007 before being 
reassigned to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization headquarters.
Tommy Franks (1945–)
Franks was the combatant commander for U.S. Central Command 
in Tampa, Florida, when the Afghanistan and Iraq invasions 
occurred in 2001 and 2003, respectively. Franks is an Oklahoma-
born Army ofﬁ cer who grew up in Midland, Texas, before enter-
ing the service in the late 1960s. He assumed leadership of the 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 143
Central Command from Marine General Anthony Zinni before the 
September 11 attacks. When asked to provide an invasion plan for 
Afghanistan, and then one for Iraq eighteen months later, Franks 
answered with ambitious phase-one war plans. His subsequent 
planning for peace operations proved less successful in both places. 
President George W. Bush awarded Franks the Medal of Freedom, 
the highest civilian award, a year after his retirement in mid-2003, 
along with Ambassador Jerry Bremer, former CIA Director George 
Tenet, and others who were seen as architects of the Iraq War. 
Frank’s lack of post-conﬂ ict planning mystiﬁ ed some.
Peter W. Galbraith (1950–)
One of the children of the late ambassador and renowned econ-
omist John Kenneth Galbraith, Peter Galbraith was a long-time 
Senate staffer on foreign policy issues before President Bill Clin-
ton named him envoy to Croatia in the 1990s. Educated at Har-
vard and Oxford before entering Georgetown University Law 
School, Galbraith grew up in decision-making circles. Dating to 
his time on Capitol Hill, Galbraith had an abiding interest in the 
Kurdish minority of the Middle East and the brutal and repressive 
behavior of Saddam Hussein’s regime. After the 1991 ouster of 
Iraqi troops from Kuwait, the Shiite minority of southern Iraq led 
an ultimately unsuccessful revolt against the dictator, which Gal-
braith documented through personal travel through the country. 
After serving in Croatia during the period of Slobodan Miloshevica’s 
cruelties in the disintegrating former Yugoslavia, Galbraith taught 
for several years at the National War College in Washington DC. 
During that period, Galbraith went to serve as de facto foreign 
minister of the newly independent East Timor. In the aftermath of 
the U.S. invasion of Iraq, Galbraith left the War College to serve as 
an observer and advisor to the Kurdish section of northern Iraq. 
In 2006, he wrote a highly critical assessment of U.S. policy in Iraq 
in the ﬁ rst three years of the occupation.
Jay Garner (1938–)
Army Lieutenant General Jay Garner was tapped by President 
George W. Bush to conduct the reconstruction efforts of Iraq after 
Saddam Hussein’s ouster in April 2003. After graduating from 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
144 Biographical Sketches
Florida State University, Garner served in the Florida National 
Guard and Marine Corps before taking his Army commission in 
1962. Garner served in Vietnam, Germany, and Washington DC 
as he rose through the ranks. In 1991, Garner attracted attention 
in his capacity as commanding ofﬁ cer for the efforts to provide 
humanitarian assistance to Kurdish refugees in northern Iraq, 
which became known as Operation Provide Comfort. This work 
received much praise and led to Garner’s appointment by the 
second Bush administration to provide rebuilding efforts in post-
Saddam Iraq. Garner’s position was as head of the Ofﬁ ce of Recon-
struction and Humanitarian Assistance, beginning in January 
2003, less than three months before the invasion. Many subsequent 
reports indicate that Garner’s work received short shrift among 
Pentagon planners who believed the reconstruction efforts would 
prove unnecessary in the light of anticipated welcome on the part 
of Iraqis. Garner arrived in Iraq in April 2003, but conditions were 
signiﬁ cantly worse than anticipated in Baghdad. Because of con-
siderable confusion and an inability to provide the resources nec-
essary to address the problems, President Bush replaced Garner 
with former diplomat L. Paul “Jerry” Bremer in mid-May, less than 
six weeks after Garner got on the ground in country.
William “Bill” Henry Gates III 
(1955–)
One of the world’s richest persons, Bill Gates is the chairman of 
the computer software company Microsoft Corporation. Gates 
was one of three children born to a Seattle attorney and his wife, 
who was involved in the United Way. Gates attended Harvard, 
where he became interested in computer software and made 
friends with another computer aﬁ cionado, Steve Ballmer, down 
the hall . Gates dropped out of Harvard in the mid-1970s before 
completing his degree. 
Gates returned to the Paciﬁ c Northwest, where he and a 
childhood friend, Paul Allen, began a small company working on 
the code material that makes a computer run, calling it Micro-
soft. IBM had ﬁ rst released personal computers (PCs) in the early 
1980s, followed by Apple in 1984, and Microsoft began producing 
software to run on PCs, basing its philosophy on the belief that 
eventually computers would be on everyone’s desks, making the 
world a more productive place. By the 1990s, Microsoft reached 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 145
the position of global superiority in software, a state of affairs that 
made a number of regulators around the world, particularly in 
Europe, uncomfortable that the company was engaging in anti-
competitive, if not predatory, practices. 
By the time of his marriage to Melinda French in 1994, Gates’s 
personal worth was in the multimillions. His wealth ultimately 
reached more than $100 billion, although Microsoft’s stock value 
has declined since that high. The Gateses have three children 
but after founding the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, they 
decided they would not leave all of their money to their children. 
Instead, the Gates Foundation is altering the approach to answer-
ing health security around the world. The couple has donated bil-
lions of dollars to HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other research needs. 
In mid-2006, Gates announced his personal withdrawal from day-
to-day operations at Microsoft to work increasingly on Founda-
tion activities. Within weeks, Omaha investment magnate Warren 
Buffett announced he would donate 85 percent of his roughly 
$40 billion wealth to the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to 
help eradicate illnesses that the Gateses and Buffett believe can be 
ended. The work of the Gates Foundation, and by extension Bill 
Gates, has the possibility of altering the course of human health 
and security in large sections of the world.
Albert Gore, Jr. (1947–)
Son of a Democratic senator from Tennessee who lost his seat 
because of the turmoil of the Vietnam War, Gore also served as a 
congressman and senator from Tennessee before serving two terms 
as Clinton’s vice president from 1993 to 2001. An Army veteran 
who served in Vietnam as a military journalist, Gore spent most 
of his early professional career in Congress representing Tennessee. 
Gore served Clinton loyally through the tumultuous years of his 
presidency, and then ran for president on his own in 2000, where 
he lost to George W. Bush by the thinnest margin in U.S. history. 
The election outcome was in doubt for several weeks but Gore was 
ultimately defeated. In the immediate aftermath, Gore withdrew to 
reconsider his options but came out in the middle of the ﬁ rst decade 
of the century as a harsh critic of U.S. policies in Iraq and abroad. 
Over his years in ofﬁ ce, Gore developed an abiding interest 
in the environment, arguing that it is a growing national secu-
rity issue confronting the entire nation. In 2006, Gore’s crusade 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
146 Biographical Sketches
about climate deterioration was the focus of a movie, An Inconve-
nient Truth, challenging President Bush’s decision to abandon the 
Kyoto Protocol on global warming. Coming the year after serious 
questions about the harsh effects of Hurricane Katrina in 2005, 
Gore’s concerns led to passionate support and disputation about 
the movie’s goals and proof of the former vice president’s aspira-
tions and national security credentials. The ﬁ lm won an Academy 
Award in 2007, giving it and Gore much greater visibility, and 
sparking a revival of the public debate about global warming.
Alan C. Greenspan (1927–)
During his long tenure as chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank 
(“the Fed”) Board of Governors, many people labeled Alan 
Greenspan “the second most powerful man in the world” because 
of the power his word had over global stock markets. Born to a 
Jewish family in New York, Greenspan attended Julliard before 
earning bachelor’s and master’s degrees in economics from New 
York University. Although Greenspan studied for a doctorate in 
the 1950s, he never completed a dissertation; however, the univer-
sity awarded him the degree in 1977. Greenspan worked for the 
Conference Board for ﬁ ve years in the late 1940s and early 1950s 
before serving as a partner in an economic consulting company 
in New York. He held that position until he became the Federal 
Reserve chairman in 1987. Greenspan served in the Ford adminis-
tration as chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors, but was 
otherwise a private-sector economist. 
When Greenspan took over the Fed in 1987, he succeeded 
“inﬂ ation slayer” Paul Volcker, Fed chairman in the early 1980s, 
who managed to wring inﬂ ation out of the economy after the 
“stagﬂ ation” era of the 1970s. Greenspan took over the year that 
the New York Stock Exchange suffered a major correction during 
the Reagan administration. It took signiﬁ cant time to rebuild con-
ﬁ dence in the market, but Greenspan’s cool behavior helped settle 
the markets at home and abroad. Greenspan was also chairman 
during the late 1990s and early months of 2000 when the stock 
market went through what Greenspan himself labeled “irratio-
nal exuberance” to describe the inexplicable rise in stock prices. 
This situation produced unreasonable expectations and a market 
bubble. During this time, economists and politicians around the 
world listened carefully and entirely to Greenspan’s observations 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 147
on global expansion, which is what led to the belief that he had 
become the second most important man in the world behind the 
president of the United States. In particular, Greenspan warned of 
a property price bubble that had already begun to deﬂ ate when 
the September 11 attacks closed Wall Street for several days. 
Greenspan lowered interest rates to historic levels to stimulate the 
economy after the attacks but steadily raised those rates before his 
January 2006 retirement. After his retirement, critics have begun 
challenging the glowing interpretation of his rule at the Fed, as he 
did nothing to discourage federal spending but only addressed 
monetary policy. Without a doubt, however, Greenspan’s tenure 
at the Fed reinforced the view that the national security of the 
United States is intimately linked to economic security and condi-
tions in the world. In an autobiography, Greenspan was highly 
critical of Bush-era spending, but the former chairman himself 
has come under ﬁ re for loose credit in the early 2000s.
Hu Jintao (1942–)
A native of Anhui province in central China, Hu Jintao is consid-
ered the fourth-generation leadership in the People’s Republic of 
China. A career bureaucrat who trained as an engineer, Hu served 
the Communist Party in many jobs after achieving membership 
in 1964. Initially, his work was in the ﬁ eld of engineering but he 
increasingly became a Communist Party ﬁ gure, not an insigniﬁ -
cant accomplishment during the height of the Great Proletarian 
People’s Revolution (1966–1976) when all ties were dangerous in 
China. Hu served in Tibet before climbing to the top levels of the 
Communist Party in the late 1990s and early 2000s. 
In 2003, Hu assumed the presidency of China but also became 
the general secretary of the Communist Party (his primary base of 
power) and chairman of the Central Military Commission. Dur-
ing his presidency, China’s startling economic growth has contin-
ued, along with a tremendous amount of military modernization. 
Similarly, during his tenure as president, China has shown an 
increased willingness to engage in overseas ventures, both dip-
lomatic and economic. A culminating moment will likely be the 
August 2008 opening of the Beijing Olympic games in the nation’s 
capital. Presidents Hu and George W. Bush share relatively strong 
relations, although there are differences between the two on human 
rights, religious freedoms, and others issues.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
148 Biographical Sketches
Hamid Karzai (1957–)
Hamid Karzai, the U.S.-educated president of Afghanistan, hopes 
to transform his society and remains an anchor for U.S. efforts at 
democratization around the world. Karzai returned to his native 
country before the 2001 invasion but was a minor ﬁ gure in the 
panoply of Afghan factions. A relatively secular ﬁ gure in a soci-
ety with strong religious zeal, Karzai became the ﬁ rst president 
of post-Taliban Afghanistan once that group ﬂ ed in late 2001. He 
received many promises from the international community for 
ﬁ nancial support to sustain the efforts to rebuild the society along 
Western lines. Karzai walks a ﬁ ne line between appearing to be 
a Western puppet and a genuine Afghan leader. A Pashtun in a 
society of many tribal groups, he is a minority president in many 
senses. Karzai is seen as a legitimate democrat by some but others 
believe he is practically a prisoner in Kabul, the nation’s capital, 
and fear that he would be assassinated if he ventured far without 
his foreign bodyguards.
Zalmay Khalilzad (1951–)
A crucial player in the arc of crisis since 2001, Zalmay Khalilzad 
is an Afghan-born, University of Chicago–educated academic 
who has served in high levels of the George W. Bush adminis-
tration. Khalilzad worked at the Rand Corporation through the 
1980s and took a position on the National Security Council staff in 
the George H. W. Bush administration. After George H. W. Bush 
left ofﬁ ce, Khalilzad returned to the private sector but was called 
upon by President George W. Bush after the invasions of Afghani-
stan and Iraq. Khalilzad became ambassador to Afghanistan and 
then to Baghdad after these states had more pro-U.S. regimes. In 
2007, President Bush moved Khalilzad to the UN in an overall 
shift of personnel in the Iraq decision-making scheme.
Kim Jong Il (1942–)
Son of the ﬁ rst president of the Democratic People’s Republic of 
North Korea, Kim assumed the ofﬁ ce upon his father’s death in 
1994. Even after almost ﬁ fteen years in power, the details of his 
life are quite elusive. Leader of what has been long considered the 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 149
“hermit kingdom,” he ruled with the support of the North Korean 
military through a period of severe famine and drought. At roughly 
the time of his accession, U.S. negotiators tried to talk the North 
Koreans out of a nuclear weapons program. North Korea responded 
by withdrawing from the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty (1970) 
but proved unwilling to abide by the “Agreed Framework” between 
the signatories of the Korean talks. In 1999, North Korea discom-
ﬁ ted the Japanese and South Koreans by ﬁ ring medium-range 
ballistic missiles in the area. In 2002, the Bush administration pub-
licly accused North Korea of producing nuclear weapons. In July 
2006, the North Koreans announced that they had detonated a 
nuclear device, although many were skeptical of its success. After 
more than four years of stopping and starting talks, the North 
Koreans again agreed stop making nuclear weapons in exchange 
for humanitarian and energy assistance. As late as March 2007, 
Kim’s regime kept offering reasons why it might have to renege 
on its promise.
William Kristol (1952–)
Son of the prominent neoconservative writers Irving Kristol and 
Gertrude Himmelfarb, Bill Kristol is seen by many as the arche-
typical neoconservative power broker in the United States and a 
driving force for a strong national security posture. Educated at 
Harvard, Kristol ﬁ rst came to prominence in the 1980s when he 
worked ﬁ rst for Secretary of Education William Bennett, then as 
Vice President Dan Quayle’s chief of staff. Kristol became the editor 
for the Weekly Standard in the 1990s and cofounder of the Project for 
a New American Century, a think tank advocating a strong national 
security position along with a democratic push that the United 
States alone could provide the world. In the late 1990s, the Project 
publicly urged President Bill Clinton to overthrow Saddam Husse-
in’s government in Iraq because of the threat it posed to the world 
and to Israel, a key U.S. ally in the Middle East. With the advent of 
the Bush administration in 2000, Kristol pushed even harder. An 
avowed supporter of the invasion. Kristol also became a critic of 
the size of the armed forces, arguing they were being stretched too 
thinly. Kristol continued to argue that the United States, with its 
unique democratic values and power, had to project its willingness 
to lead for the world. In 2005, the Project closed its doors but Kristol 
remains a major thinker on national security issues.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
150 Biographical Sketches
Robert Mugabe (1927–)
The ﬁ rst head of an independent Zimbabwe after white Rhodesia 
collapsed in the late 1970s, Robert Mugabe has become the epitome 
of a dictator unwilling to bend to the international community. Ini-
tially hailed as a reformer who would lead the new state forward 
after the Lancaster House accord of 1980, Mugabe began amass-
ing power and shutting down his adversaries. In the 1990s, land 
owned by whites came under conﬁ scation rules, and the economy, 
already fragile, deteriorated further. In the 2000s, Mugabe’s dicta-
torial steps became even greater as all opponents were exiled or 
jailed. International sanctions made no difference to Mugabe, who 
continued to rule with an iron hand and spit in the face of his critics, 
at home and abroad. In a show of efforts to reach out to resource-
rich places, regardless of their political orientation, Mugabe became 
a client state of China in its growing African efforts.
Peter Pace (1946–)
One of the ﬁ nal chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to have 
served in Vietnam, Marine Corps General Peter Pace took over 
as the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 2005 after having 
been vice chairman for the prior four years. A graduate of the 
National War College, Pace also served in Somalia, as director of 
the Joint Staff, and in various other jobs. He was vice chairman 
of the Joint Chiefs during the Afghanistan and Iraq invasions but 
took over the top job during the period of serious deterioration 
of the U.S. position in both places. Pace became a visible face as 
the press wondered about the Abu Ghraib scandal, detentions at 
Guantánamo, recruiting and retention issues for the armed forces, 
and the overall campaign in Iraq. In 2007, Pace and others were 
thought to have disagreed with the president’s decision for a 
“surge” of 21,000 troops into Iraq. He also attracted public atten-
tion for his condemnation of homosexuality in March 2007. The 
chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff often serve two-year terms as 
Pace was expected to do. In June 2007, Secretary of Defense Bob 
Gates announced that he recognized Pace’s reappointment for a 
second term would be highly contentious; therefore, he was nam-
ing Admiral Michael Mullen, Chief of Naval Operations, to the 
position instead of renominating Pace for the second term.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 151
David H. Petraeus (1952–)
The commander in Iraq as of 2007, General David Petraeus is a 
graduate of the Military Academy and Princeton University. Well-
regarded by his soldiers, Petraeus studied counterinsurgency for 
his doctoral dissertation, making him the ideal person to go into 
Iraq after the 2003 invasion. His previous tours included train-
ing Iraqi military forces and working with the 82nd Airborne 
in northern Iraq. Petraeus served as the primary author of the 
Army and Marine Corps’ new counterinsurgency manual, FM 
3–24, which was issued in 2006 and highlighted the importance 
of direct contact with personnel on the ground in a possible insur-
gency. Petraeus returned to Iraq after conditions on the ground 
had deteriorated signiﬁ cantly by late 2006. He is charged with 
improving the security conditions on the ground while making 
strategic improvements for the country. Petraeus, in early state-
ments during his command, indicates that he believes U.S. troops 
will have to stay in country far longer than many politicians and 
voters appear willing to endorse, saying he anticipates with-
drawal no earlier than mid-2008 at the very earliest. By the end of 
the summer in 2007, Petraeus has become the centerpiece of U.S. 
strategy to achieve U.S. goals in Iraq. Politicians of all political 
stripes mention his assessments of successes and failures, prob-
lems and opportunities in Iraq as the measures of whether the 
United States is doing what it hopes to in the region.
Colin Luther Powell (1938–)
The ﬁ rst African American chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
and secretary of state, Powell personiﬁ ed the American dream. 
This son of Jamaican immigrants attended local college and rose 
through the ranks of the military to its leadership. An ofﬁ cer of 
junior rank during the Vietnam War, Powell recognized the bro-
ken condition that confronted the force as it left Southeast Asia. 
Powell became a consummate Washington insider after his posi-
tions as a White House Fellow and graduate of the National War 
College. He served as Secretary of Defense Casper Weinberger’s 
aide and on Ronald Reagan’s national security council staff before 
assuming the position of national security adviser toward the end 
of the latter’s administration. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
152 Biographical Sketches
President George H. W. Bush named him the chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff even though he was a relatively young four-
star general. Under Powell’s tenure as chairman, the United States 
began adjusting to the end of the Cold War but also faced the new 
threats of Islamic militancy and the expansionist Saddam Hussein. 
Powell oversaw the U.S. military effort when the latter invaded 
Kuwait in 2000 and was one of the nation’s most respected ﬁ gures 
when he retired as chairman in September 1993. Many people 
enthusiastically encouraged Powell to run for president in 1996 
but he demurred. In late 2000, he became a visible face for foreign 
policy in the aftermath of the contentious presidential election. 
General Powell was far more respected on foreign affairs than was 
the president-elect, George W. Bush, allowing many to wonder if 
the retired soldier would dominate the new Bush administration. 
As a result of other appointments, Powell’s role as secretary of 
state became somewhat circumscribed. With the 2001 attacks and 
U.S. responses in Afghanistan and Iraq, Powell took center state as 
a highly respected, credible ﬁ gure speaking for the United States. 
His February 5, 2003 speech at the United Nations assured some 
on the nature of the threat Saddam Hussein’s regime posed to the 
international community. With the progress of the war after its 
inception in March 2003, Powell began to show discomfort with 
the policies. Over the months, Powell’s disagreements with Secre-
tary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld became well known. At the end 
of George W. Bush’s ﬁ rst term, Powell tendered his resignation, 
which was accepted. Since his retirement from government, Pow-
ell has been relatively quiet on foreign affairs but has occasionally 
criticized the administration for its actions around the globe.
Vladimir Putin (1952–)
The ﬁ rst president of an entirely post-Soviet Russia, Vladimir Putin 
assumed the presidency of Russia in 2000 when serving as Boris 
Yeltsin’s deputy. Earlier in his career Putin served in the KGB, and 
much of his time during the 1980s was spent in Germany. Putin 
then returned to the Russian Federation and became a conﬁ dant of 
President Boris Yeltsin as the latter’s deteriorating health became 
public knowledge. When Yeltsin resigned in late 1999, he named 
Putin his successor; Putin later won election on his own. In 2001, 
President Bush spoke highly of Putin, noting that he “had seen 
into the [Russian] President’s soul” and forged a strong relation-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 153
ship with him, but those ties soured as Russia regained much of 
its international prestige as it beneﬁ ted from rising oil prices in 
the 2000s. Putin also proved unwilling to help with the invasion 
of Iraq, the desired sanctions against Iran, and other proposals for 
which President Bush sought Putin’s assistance. In February 2007, 
Putin gave a scathing speech where he attacked the United States 
for overstepping its bounds in the international system. This 
speech coincided with Putin’s consolidation of power and elimi-
nation of critics—a former KGB agent died of thallium poisoning 
in London and journalists in Moscow who had criticized the Putin 
government were assassinated. Putin has declared he will not run 
again for president in 2008, but many fear he will retain power 
behind the scenes because of his former KGB ties.
Condoleezza Rice (1954–)
Rice was the ﬁ rst African American woman to serve as the national 
security adviser and secretary of state. Born in the period of racial 
segregation in her hometown of Birmingham, Alabama, Rice was 
a single child who grew up as a concert pianist, ice skater, and 
academic prodigy. Rice studied international relations at the Uni-
versity of Denver with Josef Korbel, the father of Democratic Sec-
retary of State Madeleine Korbel Albright. Rice also studied at the 
University of Notre Dame before returning to the University of 
Denver to complete her doctoral work in Soviet studies. Rice then 
joined the faculty at Stanford University, where she gained much 
attention within the Republican Party as an African American 
Soviet scholar. Rice served on the National Security Council staff 
under President George H. W. Bush before returning to Stanford 
as the university provost in 1993. 
In early 2000, as Texas governor George W. Bush made his 
early moves toward the presidential primaries, Rice published 
what became an important article in Foreign Affairs magazine advo-
cating his positions on national security, such as arguing strongly 
that U.S. military forces ought not engage in nation-building 
activities. For many, this was an indicator that Rice would likely 
have a prominent role in an administration of the younger Bush. 
And indeed, the president-elect named Rice as his national secu-
rity adviser, a position that made her a crucial arbitrator between 
secretaries Donald Rumsfeld and Colin Powell, each of whom had 
a strong personality. Rice continued in this role through the ﬁ rst 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
154 Biographical Sketches
administration, keeping important public attention on the pres-
ident’s aims at going to war in Iraq and working toward accep-
tance of the concept of preemptive war. Rice was also the chief 
person to coordinate the administration’s role in the Arab-Israeli 
conﬂ ict in October 2003. Rice’s role in the intelligence evaluation 
that went to Bush became important as repeated questions arose 
about what was known about weapons of mass destruction in 
the lead-up to the 2003 invasion. Partially because Bush had such 
faith in her and partially because Secretary of State Powell had 
become expendable, Rice became the secretary of state upon the 
president’s inauguration for his second term. Rice has promoted 
the democracy agenda forcefully throughout the world, ensur-
ing that Middle Eastern states, east Asian states, and all others to 
understand how serious the United States is about this goal.
Donald Rumsfeld (1932–)
Donald Rumsfeld is the only man to serve as secretary of defense 
under two U.S. presidents, in tenures a quarter of a century apart. 
A Princeton student boxer and naval aviator, Rumsfeld was the 
congressional representative for a suburban Chicago district 
until the late 1960s, when he joined the Nixon administration 
and started a lifelong professional and personal friendship with 
Dick Cheney. In the Ford administration, Rumsfeld served ﬁ rst as 
chief of staff, then as secretary of defense in the mid-1970s while 
Cheney stepped up behind Rumsfeld as chief of staff in the White 
House. When the Ford administration ended in 1977, Rumsfeld 
went into the private sector as head of the pharmaceutical com-
pany Searle, but kept his hand in government as a possible presi-
dential candidate and as head of a blue ribbon commission on 
national missile defense. 
When George W. Bush assumed the presidency, he chose 
Rumsfeld to take over the largely unwieldy Defense Department. 
Rumsfeld took on the task with zeal and announced his inten-
tion to transform the national security community of the United 
States. After the September 11 attacks, Rumsfeld became a magnet 
for the press as he discussed U.S. options in Afghanistan in great 
detail. He locked horns with anyone not committed to transfor-
mation, including the Army Chief of Staff General Eric Shinseki, 
who Rumsfeld viewed as an obstacle to changing a service badly 
in need of major renovation. As the war in Iraq began to drag, 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Biographical Sketches 155
Rumsfeld became a more divisive ﬁ gure in the administration. 
He refused to acknowledge that mistakes had been made in plan-
ning or to admit that things were not going well. His seeming lack 
of concern about the Abu Ghraib prison scandal led to an offer 
to resign in 2006. Many critics lay the blame for the Republican 
failure to hold the House of Representatives and Senate in 2006 at 
Rumsfeld’s feet for misjudging the mood of the country on Iraq 
and beginning to institute changes in policy. Former CIA Director 
Robert Gates replaced Rumsfeld at the helm of the Department 
of Defense in 2007. Since his retirement, Rumsfeld has appeared 
rarely in public but remains the target of many critics who dis-
agree with the Bush administration decisions on war in Iraq.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
157
6
Data and Documents
T
his chapter is organized chronologically. The documents 
begin with the oldest, based on the date of release, and all the 
speeches are available as public documents. So much of the 
Bush administration has been focused on national security that 
this represents only a sample of the thousands of words on this 
vital issue.
Taiwan Relations Act of 1979, Public 
Law 96-8, 96th Congress
The Taiwan Relations Act serves as the basis of the U.S. relationship 
with Taiwan, but it is only one of a number of complicated pieces of the 
relationship with the People’s Republic of China. At present, this appears 
to be the only issue that could bring the United States into war with that 
nuclear-armed state.
To help maintain peace, security, and stability in the Western 
Paciﬁ c and to promote the foreign policy of the United States by autho-
rizing the continuation of commercial, cultural, and other relations 
between the people of the United States and the people on Taiwan, and 
for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled . . .
This Act may be cited as the “Taiwan Relations Act” . . .
The President—having terminated governmental relations between 
the United States and the governing authorities on Taiwan recognized 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
158 Data and Documents
by the United States as the Republic of China prior to January 1, 1979, 
the Congress ﬁ nds that the enactment of this Act is necessary—
    (1)  to help maintain peace, security, and stability in the West-
ern Paciﬁ c; and 
    (2)  to promote the foreign policy of the United States by autho-
rizing the continuation of commercial, cultural, and other 
relations between the people of the United States and the 
people on Taiwan.
 
  (b) It is the policy of the United States— 
    (1)  to preserve and promote extensive, close, and friendly com-
mercial, cultural, and other relations between the people of 
the United States and the people on Taiwan, as well as the 
people on the China mainland and all other peoples of the 
Western Paciﬁ c area;
   (2)  to declare that peace and stability in the area are in the 
political, security, and economic interests of the United 
States, and are matters of international concern;
   (3)  to make clear that the United States decision to establish 
diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic of China 
rests upon the expectation that the future of Taiwan will be 
determined by peaceful means;
   (4)  to consider any effort to determine the future of Taiwan 
by other than peaceful means, including by boycotts or 
embargoes, a threat to the peace and security of the Western 
Paciﬁ c area and of grave concern to the United States; 
   (5)  to provide Taiwan with arms of a defensive character; and 
   (6)  to maintain the capacity of the United States to resist any 
resort to force or other forms of coercion that would jeop-
ardize the security, or the social or economic system, of the 
people on Taiwan. 
 
  (c)  Nothing contained in this Act shall contravene the inter-
est of the United States in human rights, especially with 
respect to the human rights of all the approximately 
eighteen million inhabitants of Taiwan. The preserva-
tion and enhancement of the human rights of all the 
people on Taiwan are hereby reafﬁ rmed as objectives of 
the United States. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF UNITED STATES POLICY 
WITH REGARD TO TAIWAN
SEC. 3. (a) In furtherance of the policy set forth in section 2 of this 
Act, the United States will make available to Taiwan such defense arti-
cles and defense services in such quantity as may be necessary to enable 
Taiwan to maintain a sufﬁ cient self-defense capability.
(b) The President and the Congress shall determine the nature 
and quantity of such defense articles and services based solely upon 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
their judgment of the needs of Taiwan, in accordance with procedures 
established by law. Such determination of Taiwan’s defense needs shall 
include review by United States military authorities in connection with 
recommendations to the President and the Congress.
(c) The President is directed to inform the Congress promptly of 
any threat to the security or the social or economic system of the people 
on Taiwan and any danger to the interests of the United States arising 
therefrom. The President and the Congress shall determine, in accor-
dance with constitutional processes, appropriate action by the United 
States in response to any such danger.
APPLICATION OF LAWS; INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
SEC. 4. (a) The absence of diplomatic relations or recognition shall 
not affect the application of the laws of the United States with respect 
to Taiwan, and the laws of the United States shall apply with respect to 
Taiwan in the manner that the laws of the United States applied with 
respect to Taiwan prior to January 1, 1979. . . .
(5) Nothing in this Act, nor the facts of the President’s action in extend-
ing diplomatic recognition to the People’s Republic of China, the 
absence of diplomatic relations between the people on Taiwan and the 
United States, or the lack of recognition by the United States, and atten-
dant circumstances thereto, shall be construed in any administrative or 
judicial proceeding as a basis for any United States Government agency, 
commission, or department to make a ﬁ nding of fact or determination 
of law, under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 and the Nuclear Non-
Proliferation Act of 1978, to deny an export license application or to 
revoke an existing export license for nuclear exports to Taiwan. . . .
(d) Nothing in this Act may be construed as a basis for supporting 
the exclusion or expulsion of Taiwan from continued membership in 
any international ﬁ nancial institution or any other international 
organization . . .
George W. Bush’s State of the Union 
Address, January 29, 2002
President Bush’s 2002 State of the Union address was a marker for how 
his administration views the future threats against the United States. 
His use of the term “axis of evil” gives clear evidence of future U.S. 
moves against three perceived threats.
Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, mem-
bers of Congress, distinguished guests, fellow citizens: As we gather 
tonight, our nation is at war, our economy is in recession, and the civi-
lized world faces unprecedented dangers. Yet the state of our Union has 
never been stronger. 
George W. Bush’s State of the Union Address, January 29, 2002 159

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
160 Data and Documents
We last met in an hour of shock and suffering. In four short 
months, our nation has comforted the victims, begun to rebuild New 
York and the Pentagon, rallied a great coalition, captured, arrested, and 
rid the world of thousands of terrorists, destroyed Afghanistan’s terror-
ist training camps, saved a people from starvation, and freed a country 
from brutal oppression. 
The American ﬂ ag ﬂ ies again over our embassy in Kabul. Terror-
ists who once occupied Afghanistan now occupy cells at Guantanamo 
Bay. And terrorist leaders who urged followers to sacriﬁ ce their lives are 
running for their own. 
America and Afghanistan are now allies against terror. We’ll be 
partners in rebuilding that country. And this evening we welcome the 
distinguished interim leader of a liberated Afghanistan: Chairman 
Hamid Karzai. 
The last time we met in this chamber, the mothers and daughters of 
Afghanistan were captives in their own homes, forbidden from working 
or going to school. Today women are free, and are part of Afghanistan’s 
new government. And we welcome the new Minister of Women’s 
Affairs, Doctor Sima Samar. 
Our progress is a tribute to the spirit of the Afghan people, to the 
resolve of our coalition, and to the might of the United States military. 
When I called our troops into action, I did so with complete conﬁ dence 
in their courage and skill. And tonight, thanks to them, we are winning 
the war on terror. The men and women of our Armed Forces have deliv-
ered a message now clear to every enemy of the United States: Even 
7,000 miles away, across oceans and continents, on mountaintops and in 
caves—you will not escape the justice of this nation. . . .
Our cause is just, and it continues. Our discoveries in Afghanistan 
conﬁ rmed our worst fears, and showed us the true scope of the task 
ahead. We have seen the depth of our enemies’ hatred in videos, where 
they laugh about the loss of innocent life. And the depth of their hatred 
is equaled by the madness of the destruction they design. We have 
found diagrams of American nuclear power plants and public water 
facilities, detailed instructions for making chemical weapons, surveil-
lance maps of American cities, and thorough descriptions of landmarks 
in America and throughout the world. 
What we have found in Afghanistan conﬁ rms that, far from ending 
there, our war against terror is only beginning. Most of the 19 men who 
hijacked planes on September the 11th were trained in Afghanistan’s 
camps, and so were tens of thousands of others. Thousands of danger-
ous killers, schooled in the methods of murder, often supported by 
outlaw regimes, are now spread throughout the world like ticking time 
bombs, set to go off without warning. 
Thanks to the work of our law enforcement ofﬁ cials and coalition 
partners, hundreds of terrorists have been arrested. Yet, tens of thousands 
of trained terrorists are still at large. These enemies view the entire world 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
as a battleﬁ eld, and we must pursue them wherever they are. So long as 
training camps operate, so long as nations harbor terrorists, freedom is at 
risk. And America and our allies must not, and will not, allow it. 
Our nation will continue to be steadfast and patient and persistent 
in the pursuit of two great objectives. First, we will shut down terror-
ist camps, disrupt terrorist plans, and bring terrorists to justice. And, 
second, we must prevent the terrorists and regimes who seek chemical, 
biological or nuclear weapons from threatening the United States and 
the world. 
Our military has put the terror training camps of Afghanistan out 
of business, yet camps still exist in at least a dozen countries. A terrorist 
underworld—including groups like Hamas, Hezbollah, Islamic Jihad, 
Jaish-i-Mohammed—operates in remote jungles and deserts, and hides 
in the centers of large cities. 
While the most visible military action is in Afghanistan, America is 
acting elsewhere. We now have troops in the Philippines, helping to train 
that country’s armed forces to go after terrorist cells that have executed 
an American, and still hold hostages. Our soldiers, working with the 
Bosnian government, seized terrorists who were plotting to bomb our 
embassy. Our Navy is patrolling the coast of Africa to block the shipment 
of weapons and the establishment of terrorist camps in Somalia. 
My hope is that all nations will heed our call, and eliminate the ter-
rorist parasites who threaten their countries and our own. Many nations 
are acting forcefully. Pakistan is now cracking down on terror, and I 
admire the strong leadership of President Musharraf. 
But some governments will be timid in the face of terror. And make 
no mistake about it: If they do not act, America will. 
Our second goal is to prevent regimes that sponsor terror from 
threatening America or our friends and allies with weapons of mass 
destruction. Some of these regimes have been pretty quiet since Sep-
tember the 11th. But we know their true nature. North Korea is a regime 
arming with missiles and weapons of mass destruction, while starving 
its citizens. 
Iran aggressively pursues these weapons and exports terror, while 
an unelected few repress the Iranian people’s hope for freedom. 
Iraq continues to ﬂ aunt its hostility toward America and to support 
terror. The Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax, and nerve gas, 
and nuclear weapons for over a decade. This is a regime that has already 
used poison gas to murder thousands of its own citizens—leaving the 
bodies of mothers huddled over their dead children. This is a regime that 
agreed to international inspections—then kicked out the inspectors. This 
is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world. 
States like these, and their terrorist allies, constitute an axis of evil, 
arming to threaten the peace of the world. By seeking weapons of mass 
destruction, these regimes pose a grave and growing danger. They 
could provide these arms to terrorists, giving them the means to match 
George W. Bush’s State of the Union Address, January 29, 2002 161

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
162 Data and Documents
their hatred. They could attack our allies or attempt to blackmail the 
United States. In any of these cases, the price of indifference would be 
catastrophic. 
We will work closely with our coalition to deny terrorists and 
their state sponsors the materials, technology, and expertise to make 
and deliver weapons of mass destruction. We will develop and deploy 
effective missile defenses to protect America and our allies from sudden 
attack. And all nations should know: America will do what is necessary 
to ensure our nation’s security. 
We’ll be deliberate, yet time is not on our side. I will not wait on 
events, while dangers gather. I will not stand by, as peril draws closer and 
closer. The United States of America will not permit the world’s most dan-
gerous regimes to threaten us with the world’s most destructive weapons. 
Our war on terror is well begun, but it is only begun. This cam-
paign may not be ﬁ nished on our watch—yet it must be and it will be 
waged on our watch. 
We can’t stop short. If we stop now—leaving terror camps intact 
and terror states unchecked—our sense of security would be false and 
temporary. History has called America and our allies to action, and it is 
both our responsibility and our privilege to ﬁ ght freedom’s ﬁ ght. . . . 
It costs a lot to ﬁ ght this war. We have spent more than a billion 
dollars a month—over $30 million a day—and we must be prepared 
for future operations. Afghanistan proved that expensive precision 
weapons defeat the enemy and spare innocent lives, and we need more 
of them. We need to replace aging aircraft and make our military more 
agile, to put our troops anywhere in the world quickly and safely. Our 
men and women in uniform deserve the best weapons, the best equip-
ment, the best training—and they also deserve another pay raise. 
My budget includes the largest increase in defense spending in two 
decades—because while the price of freedom and security is high, it is 
never too high. Whatever it costs to defend our country, we will pay. . . . 
George W. Bush’s Graduation Speech 
at West Point, June 1, 2002
This speech featured the idea that the United States was acting on a pre-
emption rather than a prevention basis. Many international leaders have 
questioned how the United States would implement this policy shift, but 
the Bush administration does not believe it is a shift but rather a con-
tinuation of existing, long-term U.S. policy.
Thank you very much, General Lennox. Mr. Secretary, Governor 
Pataki, members of the United States Congress, Academy staff and 
faculty, distinguished guests, proud family members, and graduates: I 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
want to thank you for your welcome. Laura and I are especially honored 
to visit this great institution in your bicentennial year. 
In every corner of America, the words “West Point” command 
immediate respect. This place where the Hudson River bends is more 
than a ﬁ ne institution of learning. The United States Military Acad-
emy is the guardian of values that have shaped the soldiers who have 
shaped the history of the world. 
A few of you have followed in the path of the perfect West Point 
graduate, Robert E. Lee, who never received a single demerit in four 
years. Some of you followed in the path of the imperfect graduate, 
Ulysses S. Grant, who had his fair share of demerits, and said the hap-
piest day of his life was “the day I left West Point.” During my college 
years I guess you could say I was . . . a Grant man. 
You walk in the tradition of Eisenhower and MacArthur, Patton 
and Bradley—the commanders who saved a civilization. And you walk 
in the tradition of second lieutenants who did the same, by ﬁ ghting and 
dying on distant battleﬁ elds. 
Graduates of this academy have brought creativity and courage to 
every ﬁ eld of endeavor. West Point produced the chief engineer of the 
Panama Canal, the mind behind the Manhattan Project, the ﬁ rst Ameri-
can to walk in space. This ﬁ ne institution gave us the man they say 
invented baseball, and other young men over the years who perfected 
the game of football. 
You know this, but many in America don’t—George C. Marshall, 
a VMI [Virginia Military Institute] graduate, is said to have given this 
order: “I want an ofﬁ cer for a secret and dangerous mission. I want a 
West Point football player.” 
As you leave here today, I know there’s one thing you’ll never miss 
about this place: Being a plebe. But even a plebe at West Point is made 
to feel he or she has some standing in the world. I’m told that plebes, 
when asked whom they outrank, are required to answer this: “Sir, the 
Superintendent’s dog—the Commandant’s cat, and all the admirals in 
the whole damn Navy.” I probably won’t be sharing that with the 
Secretary of the Navy. 
West Point is guided by tradition, and in honor of the “Golden 
Children of the Corps,” I will observe one of the traditions you 
cherish most. As the Commander-in-Chief, I hereby grant amnesty 
to all cadets who are on restriction for minor conduct offenses. Those 
of you in the end zone might have cheered a little early. Because, 
you see, I’m going to let General Lennox deﬁ ne exactly what 
“minor” means. 
Every West Point class is commissioned to the Armed Forces. 
Some West Point classes are also commissioned by history, to take part 
in a great new calling for their country. Speaking here to the class of 
1942—six months after Pearl Harbor—General Marshall said, “We’re 
determined that before the sun sets on this terrible struggle, our ﬂ ag 
George W. Bush’s Graduation Speech at West Point, June 1, 2002 163

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
164 Data and Documents
will be recognized throughout the world as a symbol of freedom on the 
one hand, and of overwhelming power on the other.” 
Ofﬁ cers graduating that year helped fulﬁ ll that mission, defeating 
Japan and Germany, and then reconstructing those nations as allies. 
West Point graduates of the 1940s saw the rise of a deadly new chal-
lenge—the challenge of imperial communism—and opposed it from 
Korea to Berlin, to Vietnam, and in the Cold War, from beginning to end. 
And as the sun set on their struggle, many of those West Point ofﬁ cers 
lived to see a world transformed. 
History has also issued its call to your generation. In your last year, 
America was attacked by a ruthless and resourceful enemy. You gradu-
ate from this Academy in a time of war, taking your place in an Ameri-
can military that is powerful and is honorable. Our war on terror is only 
begun, but in Afghanistan it was begun well. 
I am proud of the men and women who have fought on my orders. 
America is profoundly grateful for all who serve the cause of freedom, 
and for all who have given their lives in its defense. This nation respects 
and trusts our military, and we are conﬁ dent in your victories to come. 
This war will take many turns we cannot predict. Yet I am certain 
of this: Wherever we carry it, the American ﬂ ag will stand not only 
for our power, but for freedom. Our nation’s cause has always been 
larger than our nation’s defense. We ﬁ ght, as we always ﬁ ght, for a just 
peace—a peace that favors human liberty. We will defend the peace 
against threats from terrorists and tyrants. We will preserve the peace 
by building good relations among the great powers. And we will extend 
the peace by encouraging free and open societies on every continent. 
Building this just peace is America’s opportunity, and America’s 
duty. From this day forward, it is your challenge, as well, and we will 
meet this challenge together. You will wear the uniform of a great and 
unique country. America has no empire to extend or utopia to establish. 
We wish for others only what we wish for ourselves—safety from vio-
lence, the rewards of liberty, and the hope for a better life. 
In defending the peace, we face a threat with no precedent. Ene-
mies in the past needed great armies and great industrial capabilities to 
endanger the American people and our nation. The attacks of Septem-
ber the 11th required a few hundred thousand dollars in the hands of 
a few dozen evil and deluded men. All of the chaos and suffering they 
caused came at much less than the cost of a single tank. The dangers 
have not passed. This government and the American people are on 
watch, we are ready, because we know the terrorists have more money 
and more men and more plans. 
The gravest danger to freedom lies at the perilous crossroads of 
radicalism and technology. When the spread of chemical and biological 
and nuclear weapons, along with ballistic missile technology—when 
that occurs, even weak states and small groups could attain a cata-
strophic power to strike great nations. Our enemies have declared this 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
very intention, and have been caught seeking these terrible weapons. 
They want the capability to blackmail us, or to harm us, or to harm our 
friends—and we will oppose them with all our power. 
For much of the last century, America’s defense relied on the Cold 
War doctrines of deterrence and containment. In some cases, those 
strategies still apply. But new threats also require new thinking. Deter-
rence—the promise of massive retaliation against nations—means noth-
ing against shadowy terrorist networks with no nation or citizens to 
defend. Containment is not possible when unbalanced dictators with 
weapons of mass destruction can deliver those weapons on missiles or 
secretly provide them to terrorist allies. 
We cannot defend America and our friends by hoping for the best. 
We cannot put our faith in the word of tyrants, who solemnly sign non-
proliferation treaties, and then systemically break them. If we wait for 
threats to fully materialize, we will have waited too long. 
Homeland defense and missile defense are part of stronger secu-
rity, and they’re essential priorities for America. Yet the war on terror 
will not be won on the defensive. We must take the battle to the enemy, 
disrupt his plans, and confront the worst threats before they emerge. In 
the world we have entered, the only path to safety is the path of action. 
And this nation will act. 
Our security will require the best intelligence, to reveal threats 
hidden in caves and growing in laboratories. Our security will require 
modernizing domestic agencies such as the FBI, so they’re prepared to 
act, and act quickly, against danger. Our security will require transform-
ing the military you will lead—a military that must be ready to strike 
at a moment’s notice in any dark corner of the world. And our security 
will require all Americans to be forward-looking and resolute, to be 
ready for preemptive action when necessary to defend our liberty and 
to defend our lives. 
The work ahead is difﬁ cult. The choices we will face are complex. 
We must uncover terror cells in 60 or more countries, using every tool of 
ﬁ nance, intelligence and law enforcement. Along with our friends and 
allies, we must oppose proliferation and confront regimes that sponsor 
terror, as each case requires. Some nations need military training to ﬁ ght 
terror, and we’ll provide it. Other nations oppose terror, but tolerate the 
hatred that leads to terror—and that must change. We will send diplo-
mats where they are needed, and we will send you, our soldiers, where 
you’re needed. 
All nations that decide for aggression and terror will pay a price. 
We will not leave the safety of America and the peace of the planet at 
the mercy of a few mad terrorists and tyrants. We will lift this dark 
threat from our country and from the world. 
Because the war on terror will require resolve and patience, it will 
also require ﬁ rm moral purpose. In this way our struggle is similar to 
the Cold War. Now, as then, our enemies are totalitarians, holding a 
George W. Bush’s Graduation Speech at West Point, June 1, 2002 165

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
166 Data and Documents
creed of power with no place for human dignity. Now, as then, they seek 
to impose a joyless conformity, to control every life and all of life. 
America confronted imperial communism in many different 
ways—diplomatic, economic, and military. Yet moral clarity was 
essential to our victory in the Cold War. When leaders like John F. Ken-
nedy and Ronald Reagan refused to gloss over the brutality of tyrants, 
they gave hope to prisoners and dissidents and exiles, and rallied free 
nations to a great cause. 
Some worry that it is somehow undiplomatic or impolite to speak 
the language of right and wrong. I disagree. Different circumstances 
require different methods, but not different moralities. Moral truth is 
the same in every culture, in every time, and in every place. Targeting 
innocent civilians for murder is always and everywhere wrong. Brutal-
ity against women is always and everywhere wrong. There can be no 
neutrality between justice and cruelty, between the innocent and the 
guilty. We are in a conﬂ ict between good and evil, and America will call 
evil by its name. By confronting evil and lawless regimes, we do not 
create a problem, we reveal a problem. And we will lead the world in 
opposing it. 
As we defend the peace, we also have an historic opportunity to 
preserve the peace. We have our best chance since the rise of the nation 
state in the 17th century to build a world where the great powers compete 
in peace instead of prepare for war. The history of the last century, in par-
ticular, was dominated by a series of destructive national rivalries that left 
battleﬁ elds and graveyards across the Earth. Germany fought France, the 
Axis fought the Allies, and then the East fought the West, in proxy wars 
and tense standoffs, against a backdrop of nuclear Armageddon. 
Competition between great nations is inevitable, but armed conﬂ ict 
in our world is not. More and more, civilized nations ﬁ nd ourselves on 
the same side—united by common dangers of terrorist violence and 
chaos. America has, and intends to keep, military strengths beyond 
challenge—thereby, making the destabilizing arms races of other eras 
pointless, and limiting rivalries to trade and other pursuits of peace. 
Today the great powers are also increasingly united by common 
values, instead of divided by conﬂ icting ideologies. The United States, 
Japan and our Paciﬁ c friends, and now all of Europe, share a deep 
commitment to human freedom, embodied in strong alliances such as 
NATO. And the tide of liberty is rising in many other nations. 
Generations of West Point ofﬁ cers planned and practiced for 
battles with Soviet Russia. I’ve just returned from a new Russia, now a 
country reaching toward democracy, and our partner in the war against 
terror. Even in China, leaders are discovering that economic freedom 
is the only lasting source of national wealth. In time, they will ﬁ nd that 
social and political freedom is the only true source of national greatness. 
When the great powers share common values, we are better able 
to confront serious regional conﬂ icts together, better able to cooperate 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
in preventing the spread of violence or economic chaos. In the past, 
great power rivals took sides in difﬁ cult regional problems, making 
divisions deeper and more complicated. Today, from the Middle East to 
South Asia, we are gathering broad international coalitions to increase 
the pressure for peace. We must build strong and great power relations 
when times are good; to help manage crisis when times are bad. Amer-
ica needs partners to preserve the peace, and we will work with every 
nation that shares this noble goal. 
And ﬁ nally, America stands for more than the absence of war. We 
have a great opportunity to extend a just peace, by replacing poverty, 
repression, and resentment around the world with hope of a better 
day. Through most of history, poverty was persistent, inescapable, and 
almost universal. In the last few decades, we’ve seen nations from Chile 
to South Korea build modern economies and freer societies, lifting mil-
lions of people out of despair and want. And there’s no mystery to this 
achievement. 
The 20th century ended with a single surviving model of human 
progress, based on non-negotiable demands of human dignity, the rule 
of law, limits on the power of the state, respect for women and private 
property and free speech and equal justice and religious tolerance. 
America cannot impose this vision—yet we can support and reward 
governments that make the right choices for their own people. In our 
development aid, in our diplomatic efforts, in our international broad-
casting, and in our educational assistance, the United States will pro-
mote moderation and tolerance and human rights. And we will defend 
the peace that makes all progress possible. 
When it comes to the common rights and needs of men and 
women, there is no clash of civilizations. The requirements of freedom 
apply fully to Africa and Latin America and the entire Islamic world. 
The peoples of the Islamic nations want and deserve the same freedoms 
and opportunities as people in every nation. And their governments 
should listen to their hopes. 
A truly strong nation will permit legal avenues of dissent for all 
groups that pursue their aspirations without violence. An advancing 
nation will pursue economic reform, to unleash the great entrepre-
neurial energy of its people. A thriving nation will respect the rights 
of women, because no society can prosper while denying opportunity 
to half its citizens. Mothers and fathers and children across the Islamic 
world, and all the world, share the same fears and aspirations. In pov-
erty, they struggle. In tyranny, they suffer. And as we saw in Afghani-
stan, in liberation they celebrate. 
America has a greater objective than controlling threats and con-
taining resentment. We will work for a just and peaceful world beyond 
the war on terror. 
The bicentennial class of West Point now enters this drama. With all 
in the United States Army, you will stand between your fellow citizens 
George W. Bush’s Graduation Speech at West Point, June 1, 2002 167

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
168 Data and Documents
and grave danger. You will help establish a peace that allows millions 
around the world to live in liberty and to grow in prosperity. You will 
face times of calm, and times of crisis. And every test will ﬁ nd you pre-
pared—because you’re the men and women of West Point. You leave 
here marked by the character of this Academy, carrying with you the 
highest ideals of our nation. 
Toward the end of his life, Dwight Eisenhower recalled the ﬁ rst 
day he stood on the plain at West Point. “The feeling came over me,” he 
said, “that the expression ‘the United States of America’ would now and 
henceforth mean something different than it had ever before. From here 
on, it would be the nation I would be serving, not myself.” 
Today, your last day at West Point, you begin a life of service in a 
career unlike any other. You’ve answered a calling to hardship and pur-
pose, to risk and honor. At the end of every day you will know that you 
have faithfully done your duty. May you always bring to that duty the 
high standards of this great American institution. May you always be 
worthy of the long gray line that stretches two centuries behind you. 
On behalf of the nation, I congratulate each one of you for the com-
mission you’ve earned and for the credit you bring to the United States 
of America. May God bless you all.
George W. Bush’s Remarks at the 
United Nations General Assembly, 
September 12, 2002
The United Nations (UN) speech gave the president the opportunity to 
lay out his views on why Iraq was such a threat to the United States 
under Saddam Hussein.
Mr. Secretary General, Mr. President, distinguished delegates, and 
ladies and gentlemen: We meet one year and one day after a terrorist 
attack brought grief to my country, and brought grief to many citizens 
of our world. Yesterday, we remembered the innocent lives taken that 
terrible morning. Today, we turn to the urgent duty of protecting other 
lives, without illusion and without fear. 
We’ve accomplished much in the last year—in Afghanistan and 
beyond. We have much yet to do—in Afghanistan and beyond. Many 
nations represented here have joined in the ﬁ ght against global terror, 
and the people of the United States are grateful. 
The United Nations was born in the hope that survived a world 
war—the hope of a world moving toward justice, escaping old patterns 
of conﬂ ict and fear. The founding members resolved that the peace of 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
the world must never again be destroyed by the will and wickedness 
of any man. We created the United Nations Security Council, so that, 
unlike the League of Nations, our deliberations would be more than 
talk, our resolutions would be more than wishes. After generations of 
deceitful dictators and broken treaties and squandered lives, we dedi-
cated ourselves to standards of human dignity shared by all, and to a 
system of security defended by all. 
Today, these standards, and this security, are challenged. Our com-
mitment to human dignity is challenged by persistent poverty and rag-
ing disease. The suffering is great, and our responsibilities are clear. The 
United States is joining with the world to supply aid where it reaches 
people and lifts up lives, to extend trade and the prosperity it brings, 
and to bring medical care where it is desperately needed. . . . 
Our common security is challenged by regional conﬂ icts—ethnic 
and religious strife that is ancient, but not inevitable. In the Middle East, 
there can be no peace for either side without freedom for both sides. 
America stands committed to an independent and democratic Palestine, 
living side by side with Israel in peace and security. Like all other peo-
ple, Palestinians deserve a government that serves their interests and 
listens to their voices. My nation will continue to encourage all parties 
to step up to their responsibilities as we seek a just and comprehensive 
settlement to the conﬂ ict. 
Above all, our principles and our security are challenged today by 
outlaw groups and regimes that accept no law of morality and have no 
limit to their violent ambitions. In the attacks on America a year ago, we 
saw the destructive intentions of our enemies. This threat hides within 
many nations, including my own. In cells and camps, terrorists are plot-
ting further destruction, and building new bases for their war against 
civilization. And our greatest fear is that terrorists will ﬁ nd a shortcut 
to their mad ambitions when an outlaw regime supplies them with the 
technologies to kill on a massive scale. 
In one place—in one regime—we ﬁ nd all these dangers, in their 
most lethal and aggressive forms, exactly the kind of aggressive threat 
the United Nations was born to confront. 
Twelve years ago, Iraq invaded Kuwait without provocation. And 
the regime’s forces were poised to continue their march to seize other 
countries and their resources. Had Saddam Hussein been appeased 
instead of stopped, he would have endangered the peace and stability 
of the world. Yet this aggression was stopped—by the might of coalition 
forces and the will of the United Nations. 
To suspend hostilities, to spare himself, Iraq’s dictator accepted a 
series of commitments. The terms were clear, to him and to all. And he 
agreed to prove he is complying with every one of those obligations. 
He has proven instead only his contempt for the United Nations, 
and for all his pledges. By breaking every pledge—by his deceptions, 
George W. Bush’s Remarks at the United Nations General Assembly 169

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
170 Data and Documents
and by his cruelties—Saddam Hussein has made the case against 
himself. 
In 1991, Security Council Resolution 688 demanded that the Iraqi 
regime cease at once the repression of its own people, including the 
systematic repression of minorities—which the Council said, threat-
ened international peace and security in the region. This demand goes 
ignored. 
Last year, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights found that Iraq 
continues to commit extremely grave violations of human rights, and 
that the regime’s repression is all pervasive. Tens of thousands of politi-
cal opponents and ordinary citizens have been subjected to arbitrary 
arrest and imprisonment, summary execution, and torture by beating 
and burning, electric shock, starvation, mutilation, and rape. Wives are 
tortured in front of their husbands, children in the presence of their par-
ents—and all of these horrors concealed from the world by the appara-
tus of a totalitarian state. 
In 1991, the U.N. Security Council, through Resolutions 686 and 
687, demanded that Iraq return all prisoners from Kuwait and other 
lands. Iraq’s regime agreed. It broke its promise. Last year the Secretary 
General’s high-level coordinator for this issue reported that Kuwait, 
Saudi, Indian, Syrian, Lebanese, Iranian, Egyptian, Bahraini, and Omani 
nationals remain unaccounted for—more than 600 people. One Ameri-
can pilot is among them. 
In 1991, the U.N. Security Council, through Resolution 687, 
demanded that Iraq renounce all involvement with terrorism, and per-
mit no terrorist organizations to operate in Iraq. Iraq’s regime agreed. 
It broke this promise. In violation of Security Council Resolution 1373, 
Iraq continues to shelter and support terrorist organizations that direct 
violence against Iran, Israel, and Western governments. Iraqi dissidents 
abroad are targeted for murder. In 1993, Iraq attempted to assassinate 
the Emir of Kuwait and a former American President. Iraq’s govern-
ment openly praised the attacks of September the 11th. And al Qaeda 
terrorists escaped from Afghanistan and are known to be in Iraq. 
In 1991, the Iraqi regime agreed to destroy and stop developing all 
weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles, and to prove to 
the world it has done so by complying with rigorous inspections. Iraq 
has broken every aspect of this fundamental pledge. 
From 1991 to 1995, the Iraqi regime said it had no biological weap-
ons. After a senior ofﬁ cial in its weapons program defected and exposed 
this lie, the regime admitted to producing tens of thousands of liters of 
anthrax and other deadly biological agents for use with Scud warheads, 
aerial bombs, and aircraft spray tanks. U.N. inspectors believe Iraq has 
produced two to four times the amount of biological agents it declared, 
and has failed to account for more than three metric tons of material 
that could be used to produce biological weapons. Right now, Iraq is 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
expanding and improving facilities that were used for the production of 
biological weapons. . . . 
Today, Iraq continues to withhold important information about 
its nuclear program—weapons design, procurement logs, experiment 
data, an accounting of nuclear materials and documentation of foreign 
assistance. Iraq employs capable nuclear scientists and technicians. It 
retains physical infrastructure needed to build a nuclear weapon. Iraq 
has made several attempts to buy high-strength aluminum tubes used 
to enrich uranium for a nuclear weapon. Should Iraq acquire ﬁ ssile 
material, it would be able to build a nuclear weapon within a year. And 
Iraq’s state-controlled media has reported numerous meetings between 
Saddam Hussein and his nuclear scientists, leaving little doubt about 
his continued appetite for these weapons. 
Iraq also possesses a force of Scud-type missiles with ranges 
beyond the 150 kilometers permitted by the U.N. Work at testing and 
production facilities shows that Iraq is building more long-range mis-
siles that it can inﬂ ict mass death throughout the region. 
In 1990, after Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, the world imposed eco-
nomic sanctions on Iraq. Those sanctions were maintained after the war 
to compel the regime’s compliance with Security Council resolutions. In 
time, Iraq was allowed to use oil revenues to buy food. Saddam Hussein 
has subverted this program, working around the sanctions to buy mis-
sile technology and military materials. He blames the suffering of Iraq’s 
people on the United Nations, even as he uses his oil wealth to build 
lavish palaces for himself, and to buy arms for his country. By refusing 
to comply with his own agreements, he bears full guilt for the hunger 
and misery of innocent Iraqi citizens. 
In 1991, Iraq promised U.N. inspectors immediate and unrestricted 
access to verify Iraq’s commitment to rid itself of weapons of mass 
destruction and long-range missiles. Iraq broke this promise, spending 
seven years deceiving, evading, and harassing U.N. inspectors before 
ceasing cooperation entirely. Just months after the 1991 cease-ﬁ re, the 
Security Council twice renewed its demand that the Iraqi regime coop-
erate fully with inspectors, condemning Iraq’s serious violations of its 
obligations. The Security Council again renewed that demand in 1994, 
and twice more in 1996, deploring Iraq’s clear violations of its obliga-
tions. The Security Council renewed its demand three more times in 
1997, citing ﬂ agrant violations; and three more times in 1998, calling 
Iraq’s behavior totally unacceptable. And in 1999, the demand was 
renewed yet again. . . . 
Delegates to the General Assembly, we have been more than 
patient. We’ve tried sanctions. We’ve tried the carrot of oil for food, and 
the stick of coalition military strikes. But Saddam Hussein has deﬁ ed 
all these efforts and continues to develop weapons of mass destruction. 
The ﬁ rst time we may be completely certain he has nuclear weapons is 
George W. Bush’s Remarks at the United Nations General Assembly 171

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
172 Data and Documents
when, God forbid, he uses one. We owe it to all our citizens to do every-
thing in our power to prevent that day from coming. 
The conduct of the Iraqi regime is a threat to the authority of the 
United Nations, and a threat to peace. Iraq has answered a decade of 
U.N. demands with a decade of deﬁ ance. All the world now faces a test, 
and the United Nations a difﬁ cult and deﬁ ning moment. Are Security 
Council resolutions to be honored and enforced, or cast aside without 
consequence? Will the United Nations serve the purpose of its founding, 
or will it be irrelevant? 
The United States helped found the United Nations. We want the 
United Nations to be effective, and respectful, and successful. We want 
the resolutions of the world’s most important multilateral body to be 
enforced. And right now those resolutions are being unilaterally sub-
verted by the Iraqi regime. Our partnership of nations can meet the test 
before us, by making clear what we now expect of the Iraqi regime. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately and uncondi-
tionally forswear, disclose, and remove or destroy all weapons of mass 
destruction, long-range missiles, and all related material. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately end all sup-
port for terrorism and act to suppress it, as all states are required to do 
by U.N. Security Council resolutions. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will cease persecution of its 
civilian population, including Shi’a, Sunnis, Kurds, Turkomans, and 
others, again as required by Security Council resolutions. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will release or account for 
all Gulf War personnel whose fate is still unknown. It will return the 
remains of any who are deceased, return stolen property, accept liability 
for losses resulting from the invasion of Kuwait, and fully cooperate 
with international efforts to resolve these issues, as required by Security 
Council resolutions. . . .
The United States has no quarrel with the Iraqi people; they’ve suf-
fered too long in silent captivity. Liberty for the Iraqi people is a great 
moral cause, and a great strategic goal. The people of Iraq deserve it; 
the security of all nations requires it. Free societies do not intimidate 
through cruelty and conquest, and open societies do not threaten the 
world with mass murder. The United States supports political and eco-
nomic liberty in a uniﬁ ed Iraq. 
We can harbor no illusions—and that’s important today to remem-
ber. Saddam Hussein attacked Iran in 1980 and Kuwait in 1990. He’s 
ﬁ red ballistic missiles at Iran and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and Israel. His 
regime once ordered the killing of every person between the ages of 15 
and 70 in certain Kurdish villages in northern Iraq. He has gassed many 
Iranians, and 40 Iraqi villages. 
My nation will work with the U.N. Security Council to meet our 
common challenge. If Iraq’s regime deﬁ es us again, the world must 
move deliberately, decisively to hold Iraq to account. We will work with 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
the U.N. Security Council for the necessary resolutions. But the pur-
poses of the United States should not be doubted. The Security Council 
resolutions will be enforced—the just demands of peace and security 
will be met—or action will be unavoidable. And a regime that has lost 
its legitimacy will also lose its power. 
Events can turn in one of two ways: If we fail to act in the face of 
danger, the people of Iraq will continue to live in brutal submission. 
The regime will have new power to bully and dominate and conquer its 
neighbors, condemning the Middle East to more years of bloodshed and 
fear. The regime will remain unstable—the region will remain unstable, 
with little hope of freedom, and isolated from the progress of our times. 
With every step the Iraqi regime takes toward gaining and deploying 
the most terrible weapons, our own options to confront that regime will 
narrow. And if an emboldened regime were to supply these weapons to 
terrorist allies, then the attacks of September the 11th would be a pre-
lude to far greater horrors. 
If we meet our responsibilities, if we overcome this danger, we can 
arrive at a very different future. The people of Iraq can shake off their 
captivity. They can one day join a democratic Afghanistan and a demo-
cratic Palestine, inspiring reforms throughout the Muslim world. These 
nations can show by their example that honest government, and respect 
for women, and the great Islamic tradition of learning can triumph in 
the Middle East and beyond. And we will show that the promise of the 
United Nations can be fulﬁ lled in our time. 
Neither of these outcomes is certain. Both have been set before us. 
We must choose between a world of fear and a world of progress. We 
cannot stand by and do nothing while dangers gather. We must stand 
up for our security, and for the permanent rights and the hopes of man-
kind. By heritage and by choice, the United States of America will make 
that stand. And, delegates to the United Nations, you have the power to 
make that stand, as well.
George W. Bush’s State of the Union 
Address, January 28, 2003
The president’s second State of the Union address, in the weeks imme-
diately before the invasion of Iraq, further showed the administration’s 
position on the weapons of mass destruction some believed were there. 
Subsequently, major questions have arisen about the quality of the intel-
ligence used in this speech.
Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress, distin-
guished citizens and fellow citizens: Every year, by law and by custom, 
George W. Bush’s State of the Union Address, January 28, 2003 173

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
174 Data and Documents
we meet here to consider the state of the union. This year, we gather in 
this chamber deeply aware of decisive days that lie ahead.
You and I serve our country in a time of great consequence. During 
this session of Congress, we have the duty to reform domestic programs 
vital to our country; we have the opportunity to save millions of lives 
abroad from a terrible disease. We will work for a prosperity that is 
broadly shared, and we will answer every danger and every enemy that 
threatens the American people.
In all these days of promise and days of reckoning, we can be con-
ﬁ dent. In a whirlwind of change and hope and peril, our faith is sure, 
our resolve is ﬁ rm, and our union is strong. . . .
During the last two years, we have seen what can be accomplished 
when we work together. To lift the standards of our public schools, we 
achieved historic education reform—which must now be carried out 
in every school and in every classroom, so that every child in America 
can read and learn and succeed in life. To protect our country, we reor-
ganized our government and created the Department of Homeland 
Security, which is mobilizing against the threats of a new era. To bring 
our economy out of recession, we delivered the largest tax relief in a 
generation. To insist on integrity in American business we passed tough 
reforms, and we are holding corporate criminals to account. . . .
The qualities of courage and compassion that we strive for in 
America also determine our conduct abroad. The American ﬂ ag stands 
for more than our power and our interests. Our founders dedicated this 
country to the cause of human dignity, the rights of every person, and 
the possibilities of every life. This conviction leads us into the world to 
help the afﬂ icted, and defend the peace, and confound the designs of 
evil men. 
In Afghanistan, we helped liberate an oppressed people. And we 
will continue helping them secure their country, rebuild their society, 
and educate all their children—boys and girls. In the Middle East, we 
will continue to seek peace between a secure Israel and a democratic 
Palestine. Across the Earth, America is feeding the hungry—more than 
60 percent of international food aid comes as a gift from the people of 
the United States. As our nation moves troops and builds alliances to 
make our world safer, we must also remember our calling as a blessed 
country is to make this world better . . . 
There are days when our fellow citizens do not hear news about 
the war on terror. There’s never a day when I do not learn of another 
threat, or receive reports of operations in progress, or give an order in 
this global war against a scattered network of killers. The war goes on, 
and we are winning. 
To date, we’ve arrested or otherwise dealt with many key com-
manders of al Qaeda. They include a man who directed logistics and 
funding for the September the 11th attacks; the chief of al Qaeda opera-
tions in the Persian Gulf, who planned the bombings of our embas-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
sies in East Africa and the USS Cole; an al Qaeda operations chief 
from Southeast Asia; a former director of al Qaeda’s training camps 
in Afghanistan; a key al Qaeda operative in Europe; a major al Qaeda 
leader in Yemen. All told, more than 3,000 suspected terrorists have 
been arrested in many countries. Many others have met a different fate. 
Let’s put it this way—they are no longer a problem to the United States 
and our friends and allies. 
We are working closely with other nations to prevent further 
attacks. America and coalition countries have uncovered and stopped 
terrorist conspiracies targeting the American embassy in Yemen, the 
American embassy in Singapore, a Saudi military base, ships in the 
Straits of Hormuz and the Straits the Gibraltar. We’ve broken al Qaeda 
cells in Hamburg, Milan, Madrid, London, Paris, as well as, Buffalo, 
New York. 
We have the terrorists on the run. We’re keeping them on the 
run. One by one, the terrorists are learning the meaning of American 
justice. . . .
Our war against terror is a contest of will in which perseverance is 
power. In the ruins of two towers, at the western wall of the Pentagon, 
on a ﬁ eld in Pennsylvania, this nation made a pledge, and we renew 
that pledge tonight: Whatever the duration of this struggle, and what-
ever the difﬁ culties, we will not permit the triumph of violence in the 
affairs of men—free people will set the course of history. 
Today, the gravest danger in the war on terror, the gravest danger 
facing America and the world, is outlaw regimes that seek and possess 
nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons. These regimes could use 
such weapons for blackmail, terror, and mass murder. They could also 
give or sell those weapons to terrorist allies, who would use them with-
out the least hesitation. . . . 
Different threats require different strategies. In Iran, we continue 
to see a government that represses its people, pursues weapons of mass 
destruction, and supports terror. We also see Iranian citizens risking 
intimidation and death as they speak out for liberty and human rights 
and democracy. Iranians, like all people, have a right to choose their 
own government and determine their own destiny—and the United 
States supports their aspirations to live in freedom. 
On the Korean Peninsula, an oppressive regime rules a people 
living in fear and starvation. Throughout the 1990s, the United States 
relied on a negotiated framework to keep North Korea from gaining 
nuclear weapons. We now know that that regime was deceiving the 
world, and developing those weapons all along. And today the North 
Korean regime is using its nuclear program to incite fear and seek con-
cessions. America and the world will not be blackmailed. 
America is working with the countries of the region—South 
Korea, Japan, China, and Russia—to ﬁ nd a peaceful solution, and to 
show the North Korean government that nuclear weapons will bring 
George W. Bush’s State of the Union Address, January 28, 2003 175

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
176 Data and Documents
only isolation, economic stagnation, and continued hardship. The North 
Korean regime will ﬁ nd respect in the world and revival for its people 
only when it turns away from its nuclear ambitions. 
Our nation and the world must learn the lessons of the Korean 
Peninsula and not allow an even greater threat to rise up in Iraq. A bru-
tal dictator, with a history of reckless aggression, with ties to terrorism, 
with great potential wealth, will not be permitted to dominate a vital 
region and threaten the United States. 
Twelve years ago, Saddam Hussein faced the prospect of being 
the last casualty in a war he had started and lost. To spare himself, he 
agreed to disarm of all weapons of mass destruction. For the next 12 
years, he systematically violated that agreement. He pursued chemi-
cal, biological, and nuclear weapons, even while inspectors were in his 
country. Nothing to date has restrained him from his pursuit of these 
weapons—not economic sanctions, not isolation from the civilized 
world, not even cruise missile strikes on his military facilities. 
Almost three months ago, the United Nations Security Council 
gave Saddam Hussein his ﬁ nal chance to disarm. He has shown instead 
utter contempt for the United Nations, and for the opinion of the world. 
The 108 U.N. inspectors were . . . not sent to conduct a scavenger hunt 
for hidden materials across a country the size of California. The job of 
the inspectors is to verify that Iraq’s regime is disarming. It is up to Iraq 
to show exactly where it is hiding its banned weapons, lay those weap-
ons out for the world to see, and destroy them as directed. Nothing like 
this has happened. 
The United Nations concluded in 1999 that Saddam Hussein had 
biological weapons sufﬁ cient to produce over 25,000 liters of anthrax—
enough doses to kill several million people. He hasn’t accounted for that 
material. He’s given no evidence that he has destroyed it. 
The United Nations concluded that Saddam Hussein had materi-
als sufﬁ cient to produce more than 38,000 liters of botulinum toxin—
enough to subject millions of people to death by respiratory failure. He 
hasn’t accounted for that material. He’s given no evidence that he has 
destroyed it. 
Our intelligence ofﬁ cials estimate that Saddam Hussein had the 
materials to produce as much as 500 tons of sarin, mustard and VX 
nerve agent. In such quantities, these chemical agents could also kill 
untold thousands. He’s not accounted for these materials. He has given 
no evidence that he has destroyed them. 
U.S. intelligence indicates that Saddam Hussein had upwards 
of 30,000 munitions capable of delivering chemical agents. Inspectors 
recently turned up 16 of them—despite Iraq’s recent declaration deny-
ing their existence. Saddam Hussein has not accounted for the remain-
ing 29,984 of these prohibited munitions. He’s given no evidence that he 
has destroyed them. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
From three Iraqi defectors we know that Iraq, in the late 1990s, had 
several mobile biological weapons labs. These are designed to produce 
germ warfare agents, and can be moved from place to a place to evade 
inspectors. Saddam Hussein has not disclosed these facilities. He’s 
given no evidence that he has destroyed them. 
The International Atomic Energy Agency conﬁ rmed in the 1990s 
that Saddam Hussein had an advanced nuclear weapons development 
program, had a design for a nuclear weapon and was working on ﬁ ve 
different methods of enriching uranium for a bomb. The British gov-
ernment has learned that Saddam Hussein recently sought signiﬁ cant 
quantities of uranium from Africa. Our intelligence sources tell us that 
he has attempted to purchase high-strength aluminum tubes suitable 
for nuclear weapons production. Saddam Hussein has not credibly 
explained these activities. He clearly has much to hide. 
The dictator of Iraq is not disarming. To the contrary; he is deceiv-
ing. From intelligence sources we know, for instance, that thousands of 
Iraqi security personnel are at work hiding documents and materials 
from the U.N. inspectors, sanitizing inspection sites and monitoring the 
inspectors themselves. Iraqi ofﬁ cials accompany the inspectors in order 
to intimidate witnesses. 
Iraq is blocking U-2 surveillance ﬂ ights requested by the United 
Nations. Iraqi intelligence ofﬁ cers are posing as the scientists inspectors 
are supposed to interview. Real scientists have been coached by Iraqi 
ofﬁ cials on what to say. Intelligence sources indicate that Saddam Hus-
sein has ordered that scientists who cooperate with U.N. inspectors in 
disarming Iraq will be killed, along with their families. 
Year after year, Saddam Hussein has gone to elaborate lengths, 
spent enormous sums, taken great risks to build and keep weapons of 
mass destruction. But why? The only possible explanation, the only 
possible use he could have for those weapons, is to dominate, intimi-
date, or attack. 
With nuclear arms or a full arsenal of chemical and biological 
weapons, Saddam Hussein could resume his ambitions of conquest in 
the Middle East and create deadly havoc in that region. And this Con-
gress and the America people must recognize another threat. Evidence 
from intelligence sources, secret communications, and statements by 
people now in custody reveal that Saddam Hussein aids and protects 
terrorists, including members of al Qaeda. Secretly, and without ﬁ nger-
prints, he could provide one of his hidden weapons to terrorists, or help 
them develop their own. 
Before September the 11th, many in the world believed that Sad-
dam Hussein could be contained. But chemical agents, lethal viruses 
and shadowy terrorist networks are not easily contained. Imagine those 
19 hijackers with other weapons and other plans—this time armed by 
Saddam Hussein. It would take one vial, one canister, one crate slipped 
George W. Bush’s State of the Union Address, January 28, 2003 177

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
178 Data and Documents
into this country to bring a day of horror like none we have ever known. 
We will do everything in our power to make sure that that day never 
comes. 
Some have said we must not act until the threat is imminent. Since 
when have terrorists and tyrants announced their intentions, politely 
putting us on notice before they strike? If this threat is permitted to 
fully and suddenly emerge, all actions, all words, and all recriminations 
would come too late. Trusting in the sanity and restraint of Saddam 
Hussein is not a strategy, and it is not an option. 
The dictator who is assembling the world’s most dangerous weap-
ons has already used them on whole villages—leaving thousands of his 
own citizens dead, blind, or disﬁ gured. Iraqi refugees tell us how forced 
confessions are obtained—by torturing children while their parents are 
made to watch. International human rights groups have catalogued 
other methods used in the torture chambers of Iraq: electric shock, burn-
ing with hot irons, dripping acid on the skin, mutilation with electric 
drills, cutting out tongues, and rape. If this is not evil, then evil has no 
meaning. 
And tonight I have a message for the brave and oppressed people 
of Iraq: Your enemy is not surrounding your country—your enemy is 
ruling your country. And the day he and his regime are removed from 
power will be the day of your liberation. 
The world has waited 12 years for Iraq to disarm. America will not 
accept a serious and mounting threat to our country, and our friends 
and our allies. The United States will ask the U.N. Security Council to 
convene on February the 5th to consider the facts of Iraq’s ongoing deﬁ -
ance of the world. Secretary of State Powell will present information 
and intelligence about Iraqi’s legal—Iraq’s illegal weapons programs, its 
attempt to hide those weapons from inspectors, and its links to terrorist 
groups. 
We will consult. But let there be no misunderstanding: If Saddam 
Hussein does not fully disarm, for the safety of our people and for the 
peace of the world, we will lead a coalition to disarm him. 
Tonight I have a message for the men and women who will keep 
the peace, members of the American Armed Forces: Many of you are 
assembling in or near the Middle East, and some crucial hours may lay 
[sic] ahead. In those hours, the success of our cause will depend on you. 
Your training has prepared you. Your honor will guide you. You believe 
in America, and America believes in you. . . . 
We seek peace. We strive for peace. And sometimes peace must 
be defended. A future lived at the mercy of terrible threats is no peace 
at all. If war is forced upon us, we will ﬁ ght in a just cause and by just 
means—sparing, in every way we can, the innocent. And if war is 
forced upon us, we will ﬁ ght with the full force and might of the United 
States military—and we will prevail. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
And as we and our coalition partners are doing in Afghanistan, we 
will bring to the Iraqi people food and medicines and supplies—and 
freedom. . . . 
Americans are a free people, who know that freedom is the right of 
every person and the future of every nation. The liberty we prize is not 
America’s gift to the world, it is God’s gift to humanity. . . .
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell 
Addresses the UN Security Council, 
February 5, 2003
Secretary of State Colin Powell’s remarks were viewed with seriousness 
because of his personal stature as a retired chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff and an international statesman. Subsequent debate about the sources 
of the intelligence used as the basis for his assertions has been heated.
Thank you, Mr. President. Mr. President, Mr. Secretary General, 
distinguished colleagues, I would like to begin by expressing my thanks 
for the special effort that each of you made to be here today. 
This is [an] important day for us all as we review the situation with 
respect to Iraq and its disarmament obligations under U.N. Security 
Council Resolution 1441. 
Last November 8, this council passed Resolution 1441 by a unani-
mous vote. The purpose of that resolution was to disarm Iraq of its 
weapons of mass destruction. Iraq had already been found guilty of 
material breach of its obligations, stretching back over 16 previous reso-
lutions and 12 years. 
Resolution 1441 was not dealing with an innocent party, but a 
regime this council has repeatedly convicted over the years. Resolution 
1441 gave Iraq one last chance, one last chance to come into compliance 
or to face serious consequences. No council member present in voting 
on that day had any illusions about the nature and intent of the resolu-
tion or what serious consequences meant if Iraq did not comply. . . .
We laid down tough standards for Iraq to meet to allow the inspec-
tors to do their job. . . . 
I asked for this session today for two purposes: First, to support 
the core assessments made by Dr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei. As Dr. Blix 
reported to this council on January 27th . . . “Iraq appears not to have 
come to a genuine acceptance, not even today, of the disarmament 
which was demanded of it.” . . . 
My second purpose today is to provide you with additional 
information, to share with you what the United States knows about 
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Addresses the UN Security Council 179

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
180 Data and Documents
Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction as well as Iraq’s involvement in 
terrorism, which is also the subject of Resolution 1441 and other earlier 
resolutions. . . . 
The material I will present to you comes from a variety of sources. 
Some are U.S. sources. And some are those of other countries. Some 
of the sources are technical, such as intercepted telephone conversa-
tions and photos taken by satellites. Other sources are people who have 
risked their lives to let the world know what Saddam Hussein is really 
up to. 
I cannot tell you everything that we know. But what I can share 
with you, when combined with what all of us have learned over the 
years, is deeply troubling. 
What you will see is an accumulation of facts and disturbing pat-
terns of behavior. The facts on Iraqis’ behavior . . . demonstrate that Sad-
dam Hussein and his regime have made no effort—no effort—to disarm 
as required by the international community. Indeed, the facts and Iraq’s 
behavior show that Saddam Hussein and his regime are concealing their 
efforts to produce more weapons of mass destruction. . . .
This effort to hide things from the inspectors is not one or two 
isolated events, quite the contrary. This is part and parcel of a policy of 
evasion and deception that goes back 12 years, a policy set at the highest 
levels of the Iraqi regime. 
We know that Saddam Hussein has what is called . . . “a higher 
committee for monitoring the inspections teams.” . . . Think about that. 
Iraq has a high-level committee to monitor the inspectors who were sent 
in to monitor Iraq’s disarmament. . . . 
Everything we have seen and heard indicates that, instead of coop-
erating actively with the inspectors to ensure the success of their mis-
sion, Saddam Hussein and his regime are busy doing all they possibly 
can to ensure that inspectors succeed in ﬁ nding absolutely nothing. 
My colleagues, every statement I make today is backed up by 
sources, solid sources. These are not assertions. What we’re giving you 
are facts and conclusions based on solid intelligence. I will cite some 
examples, and these are from human sources. . . . 
While we were here in this council chamber debating Resolution 
1441 last fall, we know . . . from sources that a missile brigade outside 
Baghdad was disbursing rocket launchers and warheads containing 
biological warfare agents to various locations, distributing them to vari-
ous locations in western Iraq. Most of the launchers and warheads have 
been hidden in large groves of palm trees and were to be moved every 
one to four weeks to escape detection. 
We also have satellite photos that indicate that banned materials 
have recently been moved from a number of Iraqi weapons of mass 
destruction facilities. . . .
Iraq did not meet its obligations under 1441 to provide a compre-
hensive list of scientists associated with its weapons of mass destruc-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
tion programs. Iraq’s list was out of date and contained only about 500 
names, despite the fact that UNSCOM [United Nations Special Commis-
sion] had earlier put together a list of about 3,500 names. . . . 
Ladies and gentlemen, these are not assertions. These are facts, 
corroborated by many sources, some of them sources of the intelligence 
services of other countries. 
For example, in mid-December weapons experts at one facility 
were replaced by Iraqi intelligence agents who were to deceive inspec-
tors about the work that was being done there. 
As the examples I have just presented show, the information and 
intelligence we have gathered point to an active and systematic effort on 
the part of the Iraqi regime to keep key materials and people from the 
inspectors in direct violation of Resolution 1441. The pattern is not just 
one of reluctant cooperation, nor is it merely a lack of cooperation. What 
we see is a deliberate campaign to prevent any meaningful inspection 
work. . . . 
Iraq has now placed itself in danger of the serious consequences 
called for in U.N. Resolution 1441. And this body places itself in dan-
ger of irrelevance if it allows Iraq to continue to defy its will without 
responding effectively and immediately. . . . 
Iraq declared 8,500 liters of anthrax, but UNSCOM estimates that 
Saddam Hussein could have produced 25,000 liters. If concentrated into 
this dry form, this amount would be enough to ﬁ ll tens upon tens upon 
tens of thousands of teaspoons. And Saddam Hussein has not veriﬁ ably 
accounted for even one teaspoon-full of this deadly material. 
And that is my third point. And it is key. The Iraqis have never 
accounted for all of the biological weapons they admitted they had and 
we know they had. They have never accounted for all the organic mate-
rial used to make them. And they have not accounted for many of the 
weapons ﬁ lled with these agents such as there are 400 bombs. This is 
evidence, not conjecture. This is true. This is all well-documented. . . . 
Ladies and gentlemen, these are sophisticated facilities. For exam-
ple, they can produce anthrax and botulinum toxin. In fact, they can 
produce enough dry biological agent in a single month to kill thousands 
upon thousands of people. And dry agent of this type is the most lethal 
form for human beings. . . . 
We know from Iraq’s past admissions that it has successfully wea-
ponized not only anthrax, but also other biological agents, including 
botulinum toxin, aﬂ atoxin and ricin. 
But Iraq’s research efforts did not stop there. Saddam Hussein has 
investigated dozens of biological agents causing diseases such as gas 
gangrene, plague, typhus, tetanus, cholera, camelpox and hemorrhagic 
fever, and he also has the wherewithal to develop smallpox. . . . 
There can be no doubt that Saddam Hussein has biological weap-
ons and the capability to rapidly produce more, many more. And he has 
the ability to dispense these lethal poisons and diseases in ways that can 
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Addresses the UN Security Council 181

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
182 Data and Documents
cause massive death and destruction. If biological weapons seem too 
terrible to contemplate, chemical weapons are equally chilling. . . . First, 
Saddam Hussein has used these horriﬁ c weapons on another country 
and on his own people. In fact, in the history of chemical warfare, no 
country has had more battleﬁ eld experience with chemical weapons 
since World War I than Saddam Hussein’s Iraq. 
Second, as with biological weapons, Saddam Hussein has never 
accounted for vast amounts of chemical weaponry: 550 artillery shells 
with mustard, 30,000 empty munitions and enough precursors to 
increase his stockpile to as much as 500 tons of chemical agents. If we 
consider just one category of missing weaponry—6,500 bombs from the 
Iran-Iraq war—UNMOVIC [United Nations Monitoring, Veriﬁ cation 
and Inspection Commission] says the amount of chemical agent in them 
would be in the order of 1,000 tons. These quantities of chemical weap-
ons are now unaccounted for. . . . 
Third point, Iraq’s record on chemical weapons is replete with lies. 
It took years for Iraq to ﬁ nally admit that it had produced four tons of 
the deadly nerve agent, VX. A single drop of VX on the skin will kill in 
minutes. . . .
We know that Iraq has embedded key portions of its illicit chemi-
cal weapons infrastructure within its legitimate civilian industry. To all 
outward appearances, even to experts, the infrastructure looks like an 
ordinary civilian operation. Illicit and legitimate production can go on 
simultaneously; or, on a dime, this dual-use infrastructure can turn from 
clandestine to commercial and then back again. . . . 
Under the guise of dual-use infrastructure, Iraq has undertaken an 
effort to reconstitute facilities that were closely associated with its past 
program to develop and produce chemical weapons. . . .
To support its deadly biological and chemical weapons programs, 
Iraq procures needed items from around the world using an extensive 
clandestine network. What we know comes largely from intercepted 
communications and human sources who are in a position to know 
the facts. 
Iraq’s procurement efforts include equipment that can ﬁ lter and 
separate micro-organisms and toxins involved in biological weapons, 
equipment that can be used to concentrate the agent, growth media that 
can be used to continue producing anthrax and botulinum toxin, ster-
ilization equipment for laboratories, glass-lined reactors and specialty 
pumps that can handle corrosive chemical weapons agents and precur-
sors, large amounts of vinyl chloride, a precursor for nerve and blister 
agents, and other chemicals such as sodium sulﬁ de, an important mus-
tard agent precursor. 
Now, of course, Iraq will argue that these items can also be used 
for legitimate purposes. But if that is true, why do we have to learn 
about them by intercepting communications and risking the lives of 
human agents? With Iraq’s well documented history on biological and 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
chemical weapons, why should any of us give Iraq the beneﬁ t of the 
doubt? I don’t, and I don’t think you will either after you hear this next 
intercept. . . . 
Saddam Hussein has chemical weapons. Saddam Hussein has used 
such weapons. And Saddam Hussein has no compunction about using 
them again, against his neighbors and against his own people. . . . 
Let me turn now to nuclear weapons. We have no indication that 
Saddam Hussein has ever abandoned his nuclear weapons program. 
On the contrary, we have more than a decade of proof that he remains 
determined to acquire nuclear weapons. . . . 
Nonetheless, Iraq continued to tell the IAEA [International Atomic 
Energy Agency] that it had no nuclear weapons program. If Saddam 
had not been stopped, Iraq could have produced a nuclear bomb by 
1993, years earlier than most worse-case assessments that had been 
made before the war. 
In 1995, as a result of another defector, we ﬁ nd out that, after his 
invasion of Kuwait, Saddam Hussein had initiated a crash program to 
build a crude nuclear weapon in violation of Iraq’s U.N. obligations. 
Saddam Hussein already possesses two out of the three key com-
ponents needed to build a nuclear bomb. He has a cadre of nuclear sci-
entists with the expertise, and he has a bomb design. 
Since 1998, his efforts to reconstitute his nuclear program have 
been focused on acquiring the third and last component, sufﬁ cient ﬁ s-
sile material to produce a nuclear explosion. To make the ﬁ ssile mate-
rial, he needs to develop an ability to enrich uranium. 
Saddam Hussein is determined to get his hands on a nuclear bomb. 
He is so determined that he has made repeated covert attempts to 
acquire high-speciﬁ cation aluminum tubes from 11 different countries, 
even after inspections resumed. 
These tubes are controlled by the Nuclear Suppliers Group pre-
cisely because they can be used as centrifuges for enriching uranium. By 
now, just about everyone has heard of these tubes, and we all know that 
there are differences of opinion. There is controversy about what these 
tubes are for. 
Most U.S. experts think they are intended to serve as rotors in 
centrifuges used to enrich uranium. Other experts, and the Iraqis them-
selves, argue that they are really to produce the rocket bodies for a con-
ventional weapon, a multiple rocket launcher. 
Let me tell you what is not controversial about these tubes. First, 
all the experts who have analyzed the tubes in our possession agree that 
they can be adapted for centrifuge use. Second, Iraq had no business 
buying them for any purpose. They are banned for Iraq. 
I am no expert on centrifuge tubes, but just as an old Army 
trooper, I can tell you a couple of things: First, it strikes me as quite odd 
that these tubes are manufactured to a tolerance that far exceeds U.S. 
requirements for comparable rockets. 
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Addresses the UN Security Council 183

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
184 Data and Documents
Maybe Iraqis just manufacture their conventional weapons to a 
higher standard than we do, but I don’t think so. . . . 
The high tolerance aluminum tubes are only part of the story. We 
also have intelligence from multiple sources that Iraq is attempting to 
acquire magnets and high-speed balancing machines; both items can be 
used in a gas centrifuge program to enrich uranium. 
In 1999 and 2000, Iraqi ofﬁ cials negotiated with ﬁ rms in Romania, 
India, Russia and Slovenia for the purchase of a magnet production plant. 
Iraq wanted the plant to produce magnets weighing 20 to 30 grams. 
That’s the same weight as the magnets used in Iraq’s gas centrifuge pro-
gram before the Gulf War. This incident linked with the tubes is another 
indicator of Iraq’s attempt to reconstitute its nuclear weapons program. 
Intercepted communications from mid-2000 through last summer 
show that Iraq front companies sought to buy machines that can be 
used to balance gas centrifuge rotors. One of these companies also had 
been involved in a failed effort in 2001 to smuggle aluminum tubes 
into Iraq. 
People will continue to debate this issue, but there is no doubt in 
my mind, these elicit procurement efforts show that Saddam Hussein is 
very much focused on putting in place the key missing piece from his 
nuclear weapons program, the ability to produce ﬁ ssile material. He 
also has been busy trying to maintain the other key parts of his nuclear 
program, particularly his cadre of key nuclear scientists. 
It is noteworthy that, over the last 18 months, Saddam Hussein 
has paid increasing personal attention to Iraqi’s top nuclear scientists, a 
group that the governmental-controlled press calls openly, his nuclear 
mujahedeen. He regularly exhorts them and praises their progress. 
Progress toward what end? . . .
Saddam Hussein’s intentions have never changed. He is not devel-
oping the missiles for self-defense. These are missiles that Iraq wants in 
order to project power, to threaten, and to deliver chemical, biological 
and, if we let him, nuclear warheads. . . .
But what I want to bring to your attention today is the potentially 
much more sinister nexus between Iraq and the Al Qaida terrorist net-
work, a nexus that combines classic terrorist organizations and mod-
ern methods of murder. Iraq today harbors a deadly terrorist network 
headed by Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi, an associated collaborator of Osama 
bin Laden and his Al Qaida lieutenants. 
Zarqawi, a Palestinian born in Jordan, fought in the Afghan war 
more than a decade ago. Returning to Afghanistan in 2000, he oversaw 
a terrorist training camp. One of his specialities and one of the special-
ties of this camp is poisons. When our coalition ousted the Taliban, the 
Zarqaqi network helped establish another poison and explosive training 
center camp. And this camp is located in northeastern Iraq. . . .

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
We, in the United States, all of us at the State Department, and the 
Agency for International Development—we all lost a dear friend with 
the cold-blooded murder of Mr. Lawrence Foley in Amman, Jordan, last 
October—a despicable act was committed that day. The assassination 
of an individual whose sole mission was to assist the people of Jordan. 
The captured assassin says his cell received money and weapons from 
Zarqawi for that murder. . . . 
And now let me add one other fact. We asked a friendly security 
service to approach Baghdad about extraditing Zarqawi and providing 
information about him and his close associates. This service contacted 
Iraqi ofﬁ cials twice, and we passed details that should have made it 
easy to ﬁ nd Zarqawi. The network remains in Baghdad. Zarqawi still 
remains at large to come and go. . . . 
Going back to the early and mid-1990s, when bin Laden was 
based in Sudan, an Al Qaida source tells us that Saddam and bin Laden 
reached an understanding that Al Qaida would no longer support activ-
ities against Baghdad. Early Al Qaida ties were forged by secret, high-
level intelligence service contacts with Al Qaida, secret Iraqi intelligence 
high-level contacts with Al Qaida. 
We know members of both organizations met repeatedly and have 
met at least eight times at very senior levels since the early 1990s. In 
1996, a foreign security service tells us, that bin Laden met with a senior 
Iraqi intelligence ofﬁ cial in Khartoum, and later met the director of the 
Iraqi intelligence service. 
Saddam became more interested as he saw Al Qaida’s appalling 
attacks. A detained Al Qaida member tells us that Saddam was more 
willing to assist Al Qaida after the 1998 bombings of our embassies in 
Kenya and Tanzania. Saddam was also impressed by Al Qaida’s attacks 
on the USS Cole in Yemen in October 2000. 
Iraqis continued to visit bin Laden in his new home in Afghanistan. 
A senior defector, one of Saddam’s former intelligence chiefs in Europe, 
says Saddam sent his agents to Afghanistan sometime in the mid-1990s 
to provide training to Al Qaida members on document forgery. 
From the late 1990s until 2001, the Iraqi embassy in Pakistan 
played the role of liaison to the Al Qaida organization. 
Some believe, some claim these contacts do not amount to much. 
They say Saddam Hussein’s secular tyranny and Al Qaida’s religious 
tyranny do not mix. I am not comforted by this thought. Ambition and 
hatred are enough to bring Iraq and Al Qaida together, enough so Al 
Qaida could learn how to build more sophisticated bombs and learn 
how to forge documents, and enough so that Al Qaida could turn to 
Iraq for help in acquiring expertise on weapons of mass destruction. 
And the record of Saddam Hussein’s cooperation with other 
Islamist terrorist organizations is clear. Hamas, for example, opened an 
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Addresses the UN Security Council 185

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
186 Data and Documents
ofﬁ ce in Baghdad in 1999, and Iraq has hosted conferences attended by 
Palestine Islamic Jihad. These groups are at the forefront of sponsoring 
suicide attacks against Israel. 
Al Qaida continues to have a deep interest in acquiring weapons 
of mass destruction. As with the story of Zarqawi and his network, I can 
trace the story of a senior terrorist operative telling how Iraq provided 
training in these weapons to Al Qaida. . . . 
[Saddam’s] campaign against the Kurds from 1987 to ‘89 included 
mass summary executions, disappearances, arbitrary jailing, ethnic 
cleansing and the destruction of some 2,000 villages. He has also con-
ducted ethnic cleansing against the Shi’a Iraqis and the Marsh Arabs 
whose culture has ﬂ ourished for more than a millennium. Saddam Hus-
sein’s police state ruthlessly eliminates anyone who dares to dissent. 
Iraq has more forced disappearance cases than any other country, tens 
of thousands of people reported missing in the past decade. 
Nothing points more clearly to Saddam Hussein’s dangerous 
intentions and the threat he poses to all of us than his calculated cruelty 
to his own citizens and to his neighbors. Clearly, Saddam Hussein and 
his regime will stop at nothing until something stops him. . . . 
We know that Saddam Hussein is determined to keep his weapons 
of mass destruction; he’s determined to make more. Given Saddam 
Hussein’s history of aggression, given what we know of his grandiose 
plans, given what we know of his terrorist associations and given his 
determination to exact revenge on those who oppose him, should we 
take the risk that he will not some day use these weapons at a time and 
the place and in the manner of his choosing at a time when the world is 
in a much weaker position to respond? 
The United States will not and cannot run that risk to the American 
people. Leaving Saddam Hussein in possession of weapons of mass 
destruction for a few more months or years is not an option, not in a 
post-September 11th world. 
My colleagues, over three months ago this council recognized that 
Iraq continued to pose a threat to international peace and security, and 
that Iraq had been and remained in material breach of its disarmament 
obligations. Today Iraq still poses a threat and Iraq still remains in mate-
rial breach. 
Indeed, by its failure to seize on its one last opportunity to come 
clean and disarm, Iraq has put itself in deeper material breach and 
closer to the day when it will face serious consequences for its contin-
ued deﬁ ance of this council. 
My colleagues, we have an obligation to our citizens, we have an 
obligation to this body to see that our resolutions are complied with. We 
wrote 1441 not in order to go to war[;] we wrote 1441 to try to preserve 
the peace. We wrote 1441 to give Iraq one last chance. Iraq is not so far 
taking that one last chance. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
We must not shrink from whatever is ahead of us. We must not fail 
in our duty and our responsibility to the citizens of the countries that 
are represented by this body.
George W. Bush’s Address to the 
Nation about the Iraq Invasion, 
March 19, 2003
This is the notiﬁ cation message the president gave to the public on the 
night the invasion of Iraq began. His goal was to establish why the inva-
sion was essential to U.S. national security.
My fellow citizens, at this hour, American and coalition forces 
are in the early stages of military operations to disarm Iraq, to free its 
people and to defend the world from grave danger. 
On my orders, coalition forces have begun striking selected targets 
of military importance to undermine Saddam Hussein’s ability to wage 
war. These are opening stages of what will be a broad and concerted 
campaign. More than 35 countries are giving crucial support—from the 
use of naval and air bases, to help with intelligence and logistics, to the 
deployment of combat units. Every nation in this coalition has chosen to 
bear the duty and share the honor of serving in our common defense. 
To all the men and women of the United States Armed Forces now 
in the Middle East, the peace of a troubled world and the hopes of an 
oppressed people now depend on you. That trust is well placed.
The enemies you confront will come to know your skill and brav-
ery. The people you liberate will witness the honorable and decent spirit 
of the American military. In this conﬂ ict, America faces an enemy who 
has no regard for conventions of war or rules of morality. Saddam Hus-
sein has placed Iraqi troops and equipment in civilian areas, attempting 
to use innocent men, women and children as shields for his own mili-
tary—a ﬁ nal atrocity against his people. 
I want Americans and all the world to know that coalition forces 
will make every effort to spare innocent civilians from harm. A cam-
paign on the harsh terrain of a nation as large as California could be lon-
ger and more difﬁ cult than some predict. And helping Iraqis achieve a 
united, stable and free country will require our sustained commitment. 
We come to Iraq with respect for its citizens, for their great civiliza-
tion and for the religious faiths they practice. We have no ambition in 
Iraq, except to remove a threat and restore control of that country to its 
own people. 
George W. Bush’s Address to the Nation about the Iraq Invasion 187

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
188 Data and Documents
I know that the families of our military are praying that all those 
who serve will return safely and soon. Millions of Americans are pray-
ing with you for the safety of your loved ones and for the protection of 
the innocent. For your sacriﬁ ce, you have the gratitude and respect of 
the American people. And you can know that our forces will be coming 
home as soon as their work is done. 
Our nation enters this conﬂ ict reluctantly—yet, our purpose is 
sure. The people of the United States and our friends and allies will 
not live at the mercy of an outlaw regime that threatens the peace with 
weapons of mass murder. We will meet that threat now, with our Army, 
Air Force, Navy, Coast Guard and Marines, so that we do not have to 
meet it later with armies of ﬁ re ﬁ ghters and police and doctors on the 
streets of our cities. 
Now that conﬂ ict has come, the only way to limit its duration is to 
apply decisive force. And I assure you, this will not be a campaign of 
half measures, and we will accept no outcome but victory. 
My fellow citizens, the dangers to our country and the world will 
be overcome. We will pass through this time of peril and carry on the 
work of peace. We will defend our freedom. We will bring freedom to 
others and we will prevail. 
May God bless our country and all who defend her.
George W. Bush Announces that 
Major Combat Operations in Iraq 
Have Ended, May 1, 2003
President Bush ﬂ ew to the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln to 
celebrate the end of the major combat operations. In hindsight, however, 
the speech appears somewhat premature.
Thank you all very much. Admiral Kelly, Captain Card, ofﬁ cers 
and sailors of the USS Abraham Lincoln, my fellow Americans: Major 
combat operations in Iraq have ended. In the battle of Iraq, the United 
States and our allies have prevailed. And now our coalition is engaged 
in securing and reconstructing that country. . . .
Operation Iraqi Freedom was carried out with a combination of 
precision and speed and boldness the enemy did not expect, and the 
world had not seen before. From distant bases or ships at sea, we sent 
planes and missiles that could destroy an enemy division, or strike a 
single bunker. Marines and soldiers charged to Baghdad across 350 
miles of hostile ground, in one of the swiftest advances of heavy arms in 
history. You have shown the world the skill and the might of the Ameri-
can Armed Forces. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
This nation thanks all the members of our coalition who joined in 
a noble cause. We thank the Armed Forces of the United Kingdom, Aus-
tralia, and Poland, who shared in the hardships of war. We thank all the 
citizens of Iraq who welcomed our troops and joined in the liberation 
of their own country. And tonight, I have a special word for Secretary 
Rumsfeld, for General Franks, and for all the men and women who 
wear the uniform of the United States: America is grateful for a job 
well done. 
The character of our military through history—the daring of Nor-
mandy, the ﬁ erce courage of Iwo Jima, the decency and idealism that 
turned enemies into allies—is fully present in this generation. When 
Iraqi civilians looked into the faces of our servicemen and women, they 
saw strength and kindness and goodwill. When I look at the members 
of the United States military, I see the best of our country, and I’m hon-
ored to be your Commander-in-Chief. 
In the images of falling statues, we have witnessed the arrival of a 
new era. For a hundred of years of war, culminating in the nuclear age, 
military technology was designed and deployed to inﬂ ict casualties on 
an ever-growing scale. In defeating Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan, 
Allied forces destroyed entire cities, while enemy leaders who started 
the conﬂ ict were safe until the ﬁ nal days. Military power was used to 
end a regime by breaking a nation. 
Today, we have the greater power to free a nation by breaking 
a dangerous and aggressive regime. With new tactics and precision 
weapons, we can achieve military objectives without directing violence 
against civilians. No device of man can remove the tragedy from war; 
yet it is a great moral advance when the guilty have far more to fear 
from war than the innocent. 
In the images of celebrating Iraqis, we have also seen the ageless 
appeal of human freedom. Decades of lies and intimidation could not 
make the Iraqi people love their oppressors or desire their own enslave-
ment. Men and women in every culture need liberty like they need food 
and water and air. Everywhere that freedom arrives, humanity rejoices; 
and everywhere that freedom stirs, let tyrants fear.
We have difﬁ cult work to do in Iraq. We’re bringing order to parts 
of that country that remain dangerous. We’re pursuing and ﬁ nding 
leaders of the old regime, who will be held to account for their crimes. 
We’ve begun the search for hidden chemical and biological weapons 
and already know of hundreds of sites that will be investigated. We’re 
helping to rebuild Iraq, where the dictator built palaces for himself, 
instead of hospitals and schools. And we will stand with the new 
leaders of Iraq as they establish a government of, by, and for the Iraqi 
people.
The transition from dictatorship to democracy will take time, but 
it is worth every effort. Our coalition will stay until our work is done. 
Then we will leave, and we will leave behind a free Iraq.
George W. Bush Announces that Combat Operations Have Ended 189

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
190 Data and Documents
The battle of Iraq is one victory in a war on terror that began on 
September the 11, 2001—and still goes on. That terrible morning, 19 
evil men—the shock troops of a hateful ideology—gave America and 
the civilized world a glimpse of their ambitions. They imagined, in the 
words of one terrorist, that September the 11th would be the “beginning 
of the end of America.” By seeking to turn our cities into killing ﬁ elds, 
terrorists and their allies believed that they could destroy this nation’s 
resolve, and force our retreat from the world. They have failed.
In the battle of Afghanistan, we destroyed the Taliban, many terror-
ists, and the camps where they trained. We continue to help the Afghan 
people lay roads, restore hospitals, and educate all of their children. Yet 
we also have dangerous work to complete. As I speak, a Special Opera-
tions task force, led by the 82nd Airborne, is on the trail of the terrorists 
and those who seek to undermine the free government of Afghanistan. 
America and our coalition will ﬁ nish what we have begun.
From Pakistan to the Philippines to the Horn of Africa, we are 
hunting down al Qaeda killers. Nineteen months ago, I pledged that the 
terrorists would not escape the patient justice of the United States. And 
as of tonight, nearly one-half of al Qaeda’s senior operatives have been 
captured or killed.
The liberation of Iraq is a crucial advance in the campaign against 
terror. We’ve removed an ally of al Qaeda, and cut off a source of ter-
rorist funding. And this much is certain: No terrorist network will gain 
weapons of mass destruction from the Iraqi regime, because the regime 
is no more. . . .
Any person, organization, or government that supports, protects, 
or harbors terrorists is complicit in the murder of the innocent, and 
equally guilty of terrorist crimes. 
Any outlaw regime that has ties to terrorist groups and seeks or 
possesses weapons of mass destruction is a grave danger to the civilized 
world—and will be confronted. 
And anyone in the world, including the Arab world, who works 
and sacriﬁ ces for freedom has a loyal friend in the United States of 
America.
Our commitment to liberty is America’s tradition—declared at our 
founding; afﬁ rmed in Franklin Roosevelt’s Four Freedoms; asserted 
in the Truman Doctrine and in Ronald Reagan’s challenge to an evil 
empire. We are committed to freedom in Afghanistan, in Iraq, and in 
a peaceful Palestine. The advance of freedom is the surest strategy to 
undermine the appeal of terror in the world. Where freedom takes hold, 
hatred gives way to hope. When freedom takes hold, men and women 
turn to the peaceful pursuit of a better life. American values and Ameri-
can interests lead in the same direction: We stand for human liberty. . . . 
Our mission continues. Al Qaeda is wounded, not destroyed. The 
scattered cells of the terrorist network still operate in many nations, and 
we know from daily intelligence that they continue to plot against free 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
people. The proliferation of deadly weapons remains a serious danger. 
The enemies of freedom are not idle, and neither are we. Our govern-
ment has taken unprecedented measures to defend the homeland. And 
we will continue to hunt down the enemy before he can strike. 
The war on terror is not over; yet it is not endless. We do not know 
the day of ﬁ nal victory, but we have seen the turning of the tide. No act 
of the terrorists will change our purpose, or weaken our resolve, or alter 
their fate. Their cause is lost. Free nations will press on to victory. 
Other nations in history have fought in foreign lands and remained 
to occupy and exploit. Americans, following a battle, want nothing 
more than to return home. And that is your direction tonight. After 
service in the Afghan—and Iraqi theaters of war—after 100,000 miles, 
on the longest carrier deployment in recent history, you are homeward 
bound. Some of you will see new family members for the ﬁ rst time—150 
babies were born while their fathers were on the Lincoln. Your families 
are proud of you, and your nation will welcome you. . . . 
Thank you for serving our country and our cause. May God bless 
you all, and may God continue to bless America.
Military Support for Stability, 
Security, Transition, and 
Reconstruction Operations, 
November 28, 2005
The military arm of the national security community of the United States 
has always prided itself on its expertise in conventional conﬂ ict. The 2005 
Department of Defense (DoD) directive elevates the more controversial 
aspects of military operations to an equal footing with conventional con-
ﬂ ict: security, stability, transition, and reconstruction (SSTR) operations.
1. PURPOSE
This Directive:
1.1 Provides guidance on stability operations that will evolve 
over time as joint operating concepts, mission sets, and lessons learned 
develop. Future DoD policy will address these areas and provide guid-
ance on the security, transition, and reconstruction operations compo-
nents of SSTR operations and DoD’s role in each.
1.2 Establishes DoD policy and assigns responsibilities within the 
Department of Defense for planning, training, and preparing to conduct 
and support stability operations pursuant to the authority vested in the 
Secretary of Defense under reference (a) and the guidance and responsi-
bilities assigned in reference (b). . . .
Military Support for Stability, Security, Transition, and Reconstruction 191

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
192 Data and Documents
2. APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE
This Directive applies to the Ofﬁ ce of the Secretary of Defense, 
the Military Departments, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
the Combatant Commands, the Ofﬁ ce of the Inspector General of the 
Department of Defense, the Defense Agencies, the DoD Field Activities, 
and all other organizational entities in the Department of Defense (here-
after referred to collectively as the “DoD Components”). 
3. DEFINITIONS
3.1. Stability Operations. Military and civilian activities conducted 
across the spectrum from peace to conﬂ ict to establish or maintain order 
in States and regions. 
3.2 Military support to Stability, Security, Transition and Reconstruction 
(SSTR). Department of Defense activities that support U.S. Government 
plans for stabilization, security, reconstruction and transition operations, 
which lead to sustainable peace while advancing U.S. interests.
4. POLICY
It is DoD policy that:
4.1. Stability operations are a core U.S. military mission that the 
Department of Defense shall be prepared to conduct and support. They 
shall be given priority comparable to combat operations and be explic-
itly addressed and integrated across all DoD activities including doc-
trine, organizations, training, education, exercises, materiel, leadership, 
personnel, facilities, and planning.
4.2. Stability operations are conducted to help establish order 
that advances U.S. interests and values. The immediate goal often is to 
provide the local populace with security, restore essential services, and 
meet humanitarian needs. The long-term goal is to help develop indig-
enous capacity for securing essential services, a viable market economy, 
rule of law, democratic institutions, and a robust civil society.
4.3. Many stability operations tasks are best performed by indig-
enous, foreign, or U.S. civilian professionals. Nonetheless, U.S. military 
forces shall be prepared to perform all tasks necessary to establish or 
maintain order when civilians cannot do so. Successfully performing such 
tasks can help secure a lasting peace and facilitate the timely withdrawal 
of U.S. and foreign forces. Stability operations tasks include helping: 
4.3.1. Rebuild indigenous institutions including various types of 
security forces, correctional facilities, and judicial systems necessary to 
secure and stabilize the environment;
4.3.2. Revive or build the private sector, including encouraging 
citizen-driven, bottom-up economic activity and constructing necessary 
infrastructure; and 
4.3.3. Develop representative governmental institutions. 
4.4. Integrated civilian and military efforts are key to successful 
stability operations. Whether conducting or supporting stability opera-
tions, the Department of Defense shall be prepared to work closely 
with relevant U.S. Departments and Agencies, foreign governments 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
and security forces, global and regional international organizations 
(hereafter referred to as “International Organizations”), U.S. and foreign 
nongovernmental organizations (hereafter referred to as “NGOs”), and 
private sector individuals and for-proﬁ t companies (hereafter referred to 
as “Private Sector”). 
4.5. Military-civilian teams are a critical U.S. Government stability 
operations tool. The Department of Defense shall continue to lead and 
support the development of military-civilian teams. 
4.5.1. Their functions shall include ensuring security, developing 
local governance structures, promoting bottom-up economic activity, 
rebuilding infrastructure, and building indigenous capacity for such tasks. 
4.5.2. Participation in such teams shall be open to representatives 
from other U.S. Departments and Agencies, foreign governments and 
security forces, International Organizations, NGOs, and members of the 
Private Sector with relevant skills and expertise. 
4.6. Assistance and advice shall be provided to and sought from 
the Department of State and other U.S. Departments and Agencies, as 
appropriate, for developing stability operations capabilities. 
4.7. The Department of Defense shall develop greater means to help 
build other countries’ security capacity quickly to ensure security in their 
own lands or to contribute forces to stability operations elsewhere. . . . 
4.9. The Department of Defense shall support indigenous persons 
or groups—political, religious, educational, and media—promoting 
freedom, the rule of law, and an entrepreneurial economy, who oppose 
extremism and the murder of civilians. 
4.10. DoD intelligence efforts shall be designed to provide the opti-
mal mix of capabilities to meet stability operations requirements, taking 
into account other priorities. 
4.11. Stability operations skills, such as foreign language capabili-
ties, regional area expertise, and experience with foreign governments 
and International Organizations, shall be developed and incorporated 
into Professional Military Education at all levels. . . . 
5.1.6. Develop a list of countries and areas with the potential for 
U.S. military engagement in stability operations in consultation with 
relevant DoD Components and U.S. Departments and Agencies. This 
list shall be submitted semiannually to the Secretary of Defense and the 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
George W. Bush’s State of the Union 
Address, January 31, 2006
President Bush’s 2006 State of the Union comments indicate the radical 
shift in national security concerns that have occurred since the end of 
George W. Bush’s State of the Union Address, January 31, 2006 193

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
194 Data and Documents
the Cold War and the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United 
States.
. . . Abroad, our nation is committed to an historic, long-term 
goal—we seek the end of tyranny in our world. Some dismiss that 
goal as misguided idealism. In reality, the future security of America 
depends on it. On September the 11th, 2001, we found that problems 
originating in a failed and oppressive state 7,000 miles away could bring 
murder and destruction to our country. Dictatorships shelter terrorists, 
and feed resentment and radicalism, and seek weapons of mass destruc-
tion. Democracies replace resentment with hope, respect the rights of 
their citizens and their neighbors, and join the ﬁ ght against terror. Every 
step toward freedom in the world makes our country safer—so we will 
act boldly in freedom’s cause. 
Far from being a hopeless dream, the advance of freedom is the 
great story of our time. In 1945, there were about two dozen lonely 
democracies in the world. Today, there are 122. And we’re writing a new 
chapter in the story of self-government—with women lining up to vote 
in Afghanistan, and millions of Iraqis marking their liberty with purple 
ink, and men and women from Lebanon to Egypt debating the rights of 
individuals and the necessity of freedom. At the start of 2006, more than 
half the people of our world live in democratic nations. And we do not 
forget the other half—in places like Syria and Burma, Zimbabwe, North 
Korea, and Iran—because the demands of justice, and the peace of this 
world, require their freedom, as well. 
No one can deny the success of freedom, but some men rage and 
ﬁ ght against it. And one of the main sources of reaction and opposition 
is radical Islam—the perversion by a few of a noble faith into an ideol-
ogy of terror and death. Terrorists like bin Laden are serious about mass 
murder—and all of us must take their declared intentions seriously. 
They seek to impose a heartless system of totalitarian control through-
out the Middle East, and arm themselves with weapons of mass murder. 
Their aim is to seize power in Iraq, and use it as a safe haven to 
launch attacks against America and the world. Lacking the military 
strength to challenge us directly, the terrorists have chosen the weapon 
of fear. When they murder children at a school in Beslan, or blow up 
commuters in London, or behead a bound captive, the terrorists hope 
these horrors will break our will, allowing the violent to inherit the 
Earth. But they have miscalculated: We love our freedom, and we will 
ﬁ ght to keep it. 
In a time of testing, we cannot ﬁ nd security by abandoning our com-
mitments and retreating within our borders. If we were to leave these 
vicious attackers alone, they would not leave us alone. They would sim-
ply move the battleﬁ eld to our own shores. There is no peace in retreat. 
And there is no honor in retreat. By allowing radical Islam to work its 
will—by leaving an assaulted world to fend for itself—we would signal 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
to all that we no longer believe in our own ideals, or even in our own 
courage. But our enemies and our friends can be certain: The United 
States will not retreat from the world, and we will never surrender to evil. 
America rejects the false comfort of isolationism. We are the nation 
that saved liberty in Europe, and liberated death camps, and helped 
raise up democracies, and faced down an evil empire. Once again, we 
accept the call of history to deliver the oppressed and move this world 
toward peace. We remain on the offensive against terror networks. We 
have killed or captured many of their leaders—and for the others, their 
day will come. 
We remain on the offensive in Afghanistan, where a ﬁ ne President 
and a National Assembly are ﬁ ghting terror while building the institu-
tions of a new democracy. We’re on the offensive in Iraq, with a clear 
plan for victory. First, we’re helping Iraqis build an inclusive govern-
ment, so that old resentments will be eased and the insurgency will be 
marginalized. 
Second, we’re continuing reconstruction efforts, and helping the 
Iraqi government to ﬁ ght corruption and build a modern economy, 
so all Iraqis can experience the beneﬁ ts of freedom. And, third, we’re 
striking terrorist targets while we train Iraqi forces that are increasingly 
capable of defeating the enemy. Iraqis are showing their courage every 
day, and we are proud to be their allies in the cause of freedom. 
Our work in Iraq is difﬁ cult because our enemy is brutal. But that 
brutality has not stopped the dramatic progress of a new democracy. In 
less than three years, the nation has gone from dictatorship to liberation, 
to sovereignty, to a constitution, to national elections. At the same time, 
our coalition has been relentless in shutting off terrorist inﬁ ltration, 
clearing out insurgent strongholds, and turning over territory to Iraqi 
security forces. I am conﬁ dent in our plan for victory; I am conﬁ dent in 
the will of the Iraqi people; I am conﬁ dent in the skill and spirit of our 
military. Fellow citizens, we are in this ﬁ ght to win, and we are winning. 
The road of victory is the road that will take our troops home. As 
we make progress on the ground, and Iraqi forces increasingly take the 
lead, we should be able to further decrease our troop levels—but those 
decisions will be made by our military commanders, not by politicians 
in Washington, D.C. 
Our coalition has learned from our experience in Iraq. We’ve 
adjusted our military tactics and changed our approach to reconstruc-
tion. Along the way, we have beneﬁ ted from responsible criticism and 
counsel offered by members of Congress of both parties. In the coming 
year, I will continue to reach out and seek your good advice. Yet, there 
is a difference between responsible criticism that aims for success, and 
defeatism that refuses to acknowledge anything but failure. Hindsight 
alone is not wisdom, and second-guessing is not a strategy. 
With so much in the balance, those of us in public ofﬁ ce have a 
duty to speak with candor. A sudden withdrawal of our forces from Iraq 
George W. Bush’s State of the Union Address, January 31, 2006 195

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
196 Data and Documents
would abandon our Iraqi allies to death and prison, would put men like 
bin Laden and Zarqawi in charge of a strategic country, and show that 
a pledge from America means little. Members of Congress, however we 
feel about the decisions and debates of the past, our nation has only one 
option: We must keep our word, defeat our enemies, and stand behind 
the American military in this vital mission. . . .
Our offensive against terror involves more than military action. 
Ultimately, the only way to defeat the terrorists is to defeat their dark 
vision of hatred and fear by offering the hopeful alternative of political 
freedom and peaceful change. So the United States of America supports 
democratic reform across the broader Middle East. Elections are vital, 
but they are only the beginning. Raising up a democracy requires the 
rule of law, and protection of minorities, and strong, accountable institu-
tions that last longer than a single vote. 
The great people of Egypt have voted in a multi-party presidential 
election—and now their government should open paths of peaceful 
opposition that will reduce the appeal of radicalism. The Palestinian 
people have voted in elections. And now the leaders of Hamas must rec-
ognize Israel, disarm, reject terrorism, and work for lasting peace. Saudi 
Arabia has taken the ﬁ rst steps of reform—now it can offer its people a 
better future by pressing forward with those efforts. Democracies in the 
Middle East will not look like our own, because they will reﬂ ect the tra-
ditions of their own citizens. Yet liberty is the future of every nation in 
the Middle East, because liberty is the right and hope of all humanity.
The same is true of Iran, a nation now held hostage by a small cler-
ical elite that is isolating and repressing its people. The regime in that 
country sponsors terrorists in the Palestinian territories and in Leba-
non—and that must come to an end. The Iranian government is defying 
the world with its nuclear ambitions, and the nations of the world must 
not permit the Iranian regime to gain nuclear weapons. America will 
continue to rally the world to confront these threats. 
Tonight, let me speak directly to the citizens of Iran: America 
respects you, and we respect your country. We respect your right to 
choose your own future and win your own freedom. And our nation 
hopes one day to be the closest of friends with a free and democratic Iran.
2006 Quadrennial Defense Review 
Report of the United States, 
February 6, 2005
The Quadrennial Defense Review resulted from a congressional 
mandate. Although the document is detailed, the chapter titles 
give a superb understanding of the topics the report considers in 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
detail. The entire Review appears at www.defenselink.mil/qdr/
report/Report20060203.pdf online. 
According to the document’s preface, “the United States is 
engaged in what will be a long war.” The following topics are 
covered in the full report:
Fighting the Long War
Operationalizing the Strategy
Reorienting Capabilities and Forces
Reshaping the Defense Enterprise
Developing a 21st Century Total Force 
Achieving Unity of Effort
The National Security Strategy of the 
United States, March 16, 2006
The federal government periodically publishes its national strategy. 
Excerpted below is the president’s strategy, as it appeared in March 
2006, almost ﬁ ve years after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
I. Overview of America’s National Security Strategy
It is the policy of the United States to seek and support demo-
cratic movements and institutions in every nation and culture, with the 
ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world. In the world today, the 
fundamental character of regimes matters as much as the distribution of 
power among them. The goal of our statecraft is to help create a world 
of democratic, well-governed states that can meet the needs of their 
citizens and conduct themselves responsibly in the international sys-
tem. This is the best way to provide enduring security for the American 
people.
Achieving this goal is the work of generations. The United States is 
in the early years of a long struggle, similar to what our country faced in 
the early years of the Cold War. The 20th century witnessed the triumph 
of freedom over the threats of fascism and communism. Yet a new totali-
tarian ideology now threatens, an ideology grounded not in secular 
philosophy but in the perversion of a proud religion. Its content may be 
different from the ideologies of the last century, but its means are simi-
lar: intolerance, murder, terror, enslavement, and repression.
Like those who came before us, we must lay the foundations and 
build the institutions that our country needs to meet the challenges we 
face. The chapters that follow will focus on several essential tasks. The 
United States must: 
The National Security Strategy of the United States 197

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
198 Data and Documents
Champion aspirations for human dignity; 
Strengthen alliances to defeat global terrorism and work to prevent 
attacks against us and our friends; 
Work with others to defuse regional conﬂ icts; 
Prevent our enemies from threatening us, our allies, and our 
friends with weapons of mass destruction (WMD); 
Ignite a new era of global economic growth through free markets 
and free trade; 
Expand the circle of development by opening societies and build-
ing the infrastructure of democracy; 
Develop agendas for cooperative action with other main centers of 
global power; 
Transform America’s national security institutions to meet the chal-
lenges and opportunities of the 21st century; and 
Engage the opportunities and confront the challenges of 
globalization.
George W. Bush’s State of the Union 
Address, January 23, 2007
(excerpted)
President Bush has offered his most trenchant ideas on national security 
frequently through his State of the Union messages. With public support 
for the war declining, the president has a number of concerns more than 
ﬁ ve years after the attacks.
. . . With the distance of time, we ﬁ nd ourselves debating the causes 
of conﬂ ict and the course we have followed. Such debates are essential 
when a great democracy faces great questions. Yet one question has 
surely been settled: that to win the war on terror we must take the ﬁ ght 
to the enemy. 
From the start, America and our allies have protected our people 
by staying on the offense. The enemy knows that the days of comfort-
able sanctuary, easy movement, steady ﬁ nancing, and free ﬂ owing com-
munications are long over. For the terrorists, life since 9/11 has never 
been the same. 
Our success in this war is often measured by the things that did 
not happen. We cannot know the full extent of the attacks that we and 
our allies have prevented, but here is some of what we do know: We 
stopped an al Qaeda plot to ﬂ y a hijacked airplane into the tallest build-
ing on the West Coast. We broke up a Southeast Asian terror cell groom-
ing operatives for attacks inside the United States. We uncovered an al 
Qaeda cell developing anthrax to be used in attacks against America. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
And just last August, British authorities uncovered a plot to blow up 
passenger planes bound for America over the Atlantic Ocean. For each 
life saved, we owe a debt of gratitude to the brave public servants who 
devote their lives to ﬁ nding the terrorists and stopping them. 
Every success against the terrorists is a reminder of the shoreless 
ambitions of this enemy. The evil that inspired and rejoiced in 9/11 is 
still at work in the world. And so long as that’s the case, America is still 
a nation at war. 
In the mind of the terrorist, this war began well before September 
the 11th, and will not end until their radical vision is fulﬁ lled. And these 
past ﬁ ve years have given us a much clearer view of the nature of this 
enemy. Al Qaeda and its followers are Sunni extremists, possessed by 
hatred and commanded by a harsh and narrow ideology. Take almost 
any principle of civilization, and their goal is the opposite. They preach 
with threats, instruct with bullets and bombs, and promise paradise for 
the murder of the innocent. 
Our enemies are quite explicit about their intentions. They want 
to overthrow moderate governments, and establish safe havens from 
which to plan and carry out new attacks on our country. By killing and 
terrorizing Americans, they want to force our country to retreat from 
the world and abandon the cause of liberty. They would then be free to 
impose their will and spread their totalitarian ideology. Listen to this 
warning from the late terrorist Zarqawi: “We will sacriﬁ ce our blood 
and bodies to put an end to your dreams, and what is coming is even 
worse.” Osama bin Laden declared: “Death is better than living on this 
Earth with the unbelievers among us.” 
These men are not given to idle words, and they are just one camp 
in the Islamist radical movement. In recent times, it has also become 
clear that we face an escalating danger from Shia extremists who are just 
as hostile to America, and are also determined to dominate the Middle 
East. Many are known to take direction from the regime in Iran, which 
is funding and arming terrorists like Hezbollah—a group second only 
to al Qaeda in the American lives it has taken. 
The Shia and Sunni extremists are different faces of the same totali-
tarian threat. Whatever slogans they chant, when they slaughter the 
innocent they have the same wicked purposes. They want to kill Ameri-
cans, kill democracy in the Middle East, and gain the weapons to kill on 
an even more horriﬁ c scale. 
In the sixth year since our nation was attacked, I wish I could 
report to you that the dangers had ended. They have not. And so it 
remains the policy of this government to use every lawful and proper 
tool of intelligence, diplomacy, law enforcement, and military action to 
do our duty, to ﬁ nd these enemies, and to protect the American people. 
This war is more than a clash of arms—it is a decisive ideological 
struggle, and the security of our nation is in the balance. To prevail, we 
must remove the conditions that inspire blind hatred, and drove 19 men 
George W. Bush’s State of the Union Message, January 23, 2007 199

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
200 Data and Documents
to get onto airplanes and to come and kill us. What every terrorist 
fears most is human freedom—societies where men and women 
make their own choices, answer to their own conscience, and live 
by their hopes instead of their resentments. Free people are not drawn 
to violent and malignant ideologies—and most will choose a better 
way when they’re given a chance. So we advance our own security 
interests by helping moderates and reformers and brave voices for 
democracy. The great question of our day is whether America will help 
men and women in the Middle East to build free societies and share in 
the rights of all humanity. And I say, for the sake of our own security, 
we must. 
In the last two years, we’ve seen the desire for liberty in the 
broader Middle East—and we have been sobered by the enemy’s ﬁ erce 
reaction. In 2005, the world watched as the citizens of Lebanon raised 
the banner of the Cedar Revolution, they drove out the Syrian occu-
piers and chose new leaders in free elections. In 2005, the people of 
Afghanistan deﬁ ed the terrorists and elected a democratic legislature. 
And in 2005, the Iraqi people held three national elections, choosing a 
transitional government, adopting the most progressive, democratic 
constitution in the Arab world, and then electing a government under 
that constitution. Despite endless threats from the killers in their midst, 
nearly 12 million Iraqi citizens came out to vote in a show of hope and 
solidarity that we should never forget. 
A thinking enemy watched all of these scenes, adjusted their tac-
tics, and in 2006 they struck back. In Lebanon, assassins took the life 
of Pierre Gemayel, a prominent participant in the Cedar Revolution. 
Hezbollah terrorists, with support from Syria and Iran, sowed conﬂ ict 
in the region and are seeking to undermine Lebanon’s legitimately 
elected government. In Afghanistan, Taliban and al Qaeda ﬁ ghters tried 
to regain power by regrouping and engaging Afghan and NATO forces. 
In Iraq, al Qaeda and other Sunni extremists blew up one of the most 
sacred places in Shia Islam—the Golden Mosque of Samarra. This 
atrocity, directed at a Muslim house of prayer, was designed to provoke 
retaliation from Iraqi Shia—and it succeeded. Radical Shia elements, 
some of whom receive support from Iran, formed death squads. The 
result was a tragic escalation of sectarian rage and reprisal that contin-
ues to this day. 
This is not the ﬁ ght we entered in Iraq, but it is the ﬁ ght we’re in. 
Every one of us wishes this war were over and won. Yet it would not be 
like us to leave our promises unkept, our friends abandoned, and our 
own security at risk. Ladies and gentlemen: On this day, at this hour, it 
is still within our power to shape the outcome of this battle. Let us ﬁ nd 
our resolve, and turn events toward victory. 
We’re carrying out a new strategy in Iraq—a plan that demands 
more from Iraq’s elected government, and gives our forces in Iraq the 
reinforcements they need to complete their mission. Our goal is a demo-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
cratic Iraq that upholds the rule of law, respects the rights of its people, 
provides them security, and is an ally in the war on terror. 
In order to make progress toward this goal, the Iraqi government 
must stop the sectarian violence in its capital. But the Iraqis are not 
yet ready to do this on their own. So we’re deploying reinforcements 
of more than 20,000 additional soldiers and Marines to Iraq. The vast 
majority will go to Baghdad, where they will help Iraqi forces to clear 
and secure neighborhoods, and serve as advisers embedded in Iraqi 
Army units. With Iraqis in the lead, our forces will help secure the city 
by chasing down the terrorists, insurgents, and the roaming death 
squads. And in Anbar Province, where al Qaeda terrorists have gath-
ered and local forces have begun showing a willingness to ﬁ ght them, 
we’re sending an additional 4,000 United States Marines, with orders to 
ﬁ nd the terrorists and clear them out. We didn’t drive al Qaeda out of 
their safe haven in Afghanistan only to let them set up a new safe haven 
in a free Iraq. 
The people of Iraq want to live in peace, and now it’s time for 
their government to act. Iraq’s leaders know that our commitment is 
not open-ended. They have promised to deploy more of their own 
troops to secure Baghdad—and they must do so. They pledged that 
they will confront violent radicals of any faction or political party—and 
they need to follow through, and lift needless restrictions on Iraqi and 
coalition forces, so these troops can achieve their mission of bringing 
security to all of the people of Baghdad. Iraq’s leaders have commit-
ted themselves to a series of benchmarks—to achieve reconciliation, to 
share oil revenues among all of Iraq’s citizens, to put the wealth of Iraq 
into the rebuilding of Iraq, to allow more Iraqis to re-enter their nation’s 
civic life, to hold local elections, and to take responsibility for security 
in every Iraqi province. But for all of this to happen, Baghdad must be 
secure. And our plan will help the Iraqi government take back its capital 
and make good on its commitments. 
My fellow citizens, our military commanders and I have carefully 
weighed the options. We discussed every possible approach. In the end, 
I chose this course of action because it provides the best chance for suc-
cess. Many in this chamber understand that America must not fail in 
Iraq, because you understand that the consequences of failure would be 
grievous and far-reaching. 
If American forces step back before Baghdad is secure, the Iraqi 
government would be overrun by extremists on all sides. We could 
expect an epic battle between Shia extremists backed by Iran, and Sunni 
extremists aided by al Qaeda and supporters of the old regime. A con-
tagion of violence could spill out across the country—and in time, the 
entire region could be drawn into the conﬂ ict. 
For America, this is a nightmare scenario. For the enemy, this is the 
objective. Chaos is the greatest ally—their greatest ally in this struggle. 
And out of chaos in Iraq would emerge an emboldened enemy with 
George W. Bush’s State of the Union Message, January 23, 2007 201

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
202 Data and Documents
new safe havens, new recruits, new resources, and an even greater 
determination to harm America. To allow this to happen would be to 
ignore the lessons of September the 11th and invite tragedy. Ladies and 
gentlemen, nothing is more important at this moment in our history 
than for America to succeed in the Middle East, to succeed in Iraq and 
to spare the American people from this danger. 
This is where matters stand tonight, in the here and now. I have 
spoken with many of you in person. I respect you and the arguments 
you’ve made. We went into this largely united, in our assumptions and 
in our convictions. And whatever you voted for, you did not vote for 
failure. Our country is pursuing a new strategy in Iraq, and I ask you 
to give it a chance to work. And I ask you to support our troops in the 
ﬁ eld, and those on their way. 
The war on terror we ﬁ ght today is a generational struggle that 
will continue long after you and I have turned our duties over to others. 
And that’s why it’s important to work together so our nation can see 
this great effort through. Both parties and both branches should work 
in close consultation. It’s why I propose to establish a special advisory 
council on the war on terror, made up of leaders in Congress from both 
political parties. We will share ideas for how to position America to 
meet every challenge that confronts us. We’ll show our enemies abroad 
that we are united in the goal of victory. 
And one of the ﬁ rst steps we can take together is to add to the 
ranks of our military so that the American Armed Forces are ready for 
all the challenges ahead. Tonight I ask the Congress to authorize an 
increase in the size of our active Army and Marine Corps by 92,000 in 
the next ﬁ ve years. A second task we can take on together is to design 
and establish a volunteer Civilian Reserve Corps. Such a corps would 
function much like our military reserve. It would ease the burden on the 
Armed Forces by allowing us to hire civilians with critical skills to serve 
on missions abroad when America needs them. It would give people 
across America who do not wear the uniform a chance to serve in the 
deﬁ ning struggle of our time. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
203
7
Organizations
T
his chapter is divided into several categories. The most 
important criterion for inclusion is direct linkage to national 
security, not merely foreign policy questions. The nongovern-
mental sector includes organizations qualifying as such under the 
U.S. Tax Code as 501 (c)(3) groups, frequently known as not-for-
proﬁ ts. Among other conditions, the 501 (c)(3) cannot spend more 
than about 10 percent of its time on any overtly political decisions. 
Some of these groups have parallel lobbying activities but those pri-
marily are listed as such. The nongovernmental sector also includes 
several prominent academic institutions but not each and every 
university center for foreign policy. Those included have a majority 
portion of their scholarship aimed at national security rather than 
simply foreign affairs. This section is more detailed than the federal 
sections because the nongovernmental organizations are less well 
known. Additionally, because of space limitations, only those orga-
nizations operating as of March 2007 appear so that highly inﬂ uen-
tial groups, such as the Project for a New American Century, that no 
longer operate will not merit discussion.
The Federally Funded Research and Development Centers 
(FFRDCs) engage in research for various agencies of the U.S. 
government, most often under contract. For federal institutions, 
each and every single educational institution under the broad 
term “professional military education” is not listed because of 
space limitations but those with a strategic level of education are 
included because they produce policymakers who can inﬂ uence 
national security. In a few instances, organizations asked by Con-
gress to evaluate policy options are included because of the effect 
they can have on national security.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
204 Organizations
Nongovernmental Sector
American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research
E-mail: webmaster@aei.org
Website: www.aei.org
The American Enterprise Institute (AEI) is one of the oldest, 
 widest-ranging think tanks in the nation, and a signiﬁ cant portion 
of its work is dedicated to national security issues. Vice President 
Richard B. Cheney, the late former United Nations Ambassador 
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich, 
former Tennessee Senator and actor Fred Thompson, former Rea-
gan administration Defense Department ofﬁ cial Richard Perle, 
former Ambassador to the People’s Republic of China and Repub-
lic of Korea James Lilley, and constitutional scholar John Woo 
have all operated as AEI specialists on defense and security con-
cerns. AEI began during World War II in 1943 as a public policy 
center. The three foci of the Institute are economic policy studies, 
defense and foreign policy studies, and social and political stud-
ies. The AEI website has a detailed explanation of its operating 
policies, including its 501 (c)(3) status as a not-for-proﬁ t organi-
zation as well as an overview of AEI’s efforts to avoid conﬂ ict of 
interest, a description of the outside activities of its fellows, and 
further information on the Institute’s work. AEI hosts many meet-
ings and occasional day-long conferences, often broadcasting the 
event in a webcast; the results of these sessions often appear on 
the AEI website as video and some are also posted as transcripts. 
AEI events cover vast subjects within the ﬁ eld of national security, 
ranging from military modernization questions on the People’s 
Liberation Army to how the U.S. Navy should proceed in devel-
oping the next generation of warships. AEI asks questions about 
regional studies and speciﬁ c public policy topics in the United 
States. The organization is large and is respected as a scholarly 
resource for national security concerns. The AEI Press publishes 
books, monographs, the AEI Newsletter, and numerous short pub-
lications and papers, including the AEI Policy Series and the AEI 
Working Paper Series. In addition, AEI often presents testimony 
on national security issues before Congress. 
American Foreign Policy Council
E-mail: afpc@afpc.org
Website: www.afpc.org

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Established in 1982, the American Foreign Policy Council (AFPC) 
is a not-for-proﬁ t organization with an intense interest in national 
security issues. AFPC has a relatively small staff but has four 
major, regionally based programs: China, Russia, Eurasia, and 
Iran. The Council publishes a number of bulletins, including Rus-
sia Reform Monitor, China Reform Monitor, Eurasia Security Watch, 
Asia Security Monitor, Missile Defense Brieﬁ ng Report, and two oth-
ers on foreign affairs. AFPC also encourages its staff to write op-
ed pieces and articles and to be available to Congress as regional 
and thematic specialists.
Arms Control Association
E-mail: aca@armscontrol.org
Website: www.armscontrol.org
On its website, the Arms Control Association (ACA) touts its role 
in the national debate on security as “the authoritative source on 
arms control.” The group dates to 1971 when it began working to 
lessen the use of nuclear weapons through veriﬁ able arms con-
trol. The Association accomplishes its work through conferences 
and publications (including its journal, Arms Control Today) and 
by providing basic, veriﬁ able expertise to the U.S. Congress and 
the media. ACA’s staff of ten is headquartered in Washington, but 
the Association also has an ofﬁ ce in Berlin, Germany. Although 
ACA receives individual donations, it receives most of its funding 
from major U.S. philanthropies, such as the John D. and Cathe-
rine T. MacArthur Foundation, the Ford Foundation, and the U.S. 
Institute for Peace. Many prominent arms control advocates, such 
as Randall Forsberg, Michael Klare, and John Steinbruner, serve 
on the ACA board of directors.
Atlantic Council of the United States
E-mail: info@acus.org
Website: www.acus.org
The Atlantic Council clearly reﬂ ects the shift that has occurred in 
the U.S. national security evaluation of the U.S. and the world in 
the past ﬁ fty years. Founded with an orientation toward Western 
Europe, the Atlantic Council began recognizing the importance of 
the Asia region in the 1990s and now describes itself as an orga-
nization to promote U.S. world leadership in international affairs. 
Created from the Atlantic Treaty Association of 1949, former sec-
retaries of state Dean Acheson and Christian Herter and others 
Nongovernmental Sector 205

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
206 Organizations
recrafted the Treaty Association into the Atlantic Council in 1961. 
In the early 1990s, the Council began broadening its concerns 
beyond the trans-Atlantic environment. The Council has many 
“establishment” members, individuals retired from their high 
policy-making positions, such as the late General Andrew Good-
paster who had been General Dwight Eisenhower’s aide as well 
as former commandant of the National War College, or Ambassa-
dor Rozanne Ridgway, formerly of the State Department. The staff 
is relatively small, a couple of people for each project the Council 
undertakes, and its National Councillors Program features a long 
list of impressive practitioners and scholars. The Council holds 
meetings and publishes studies on a range of topics, all at least 
indirectly aimed at the national security environment. The Coun-
cil accepts donations from the public but also applies for grant 
money from philanthropies to accomplish its work. Upon his 
retirement as Supreme Allied Commander Europe, the Council 
elected Marine General James Jones as chairman of its board of 
directors, keeping the link between policy and study. 
Brookings Institution
E-mail: inquiries@brookings.edu 
Website: www.brookings.edu
The Brookings Institution, created immediately before World War 
I in 1916 as the Institute for Government Research, is one of the 
most established think tanks in the United States. Reconstituted in 
1927 after a bequest by St. Louis native Robert Somer Brookings, 
the Institute for Government Research, the Brookings Graduate 
School, and the Institute of Economics were recast as the Brook-
ings Institution in his honor. Brookings has been inﬂ uential in 
public policy affairs since its inception. While often associated 
with the Democratic Party, Brookings is a not-for-proﬁ t, meaning 
it cannot have avowed political afﬁ liation. Brookings has a dozen 
full research areas, including defense, global economics, U.S. eco-
nomics, global politics, environment and energy, and governance. 
The Institution also has ﬁ ve research programs, including foreign 
policy studies, governance, and global economics. Within those 
are a number of specialized research centers and initiatives, such 
as the Northeast Asia Center, the China Initiative, the Saban Center 
for Middle East, and the Center on the United States and Europe. 
Brookings has an impressive array of scholars on national security 
and other topics, including Michael O’Hanlon, Kenneth Pollack, 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Richard Bush, Robert Leiken, Cheng Li, Shaul Bakhash, Stephen 
Cohen, William Quandt, and many others. The Brookings Insti-
tution press publishes books, policy briefs, and periodic journals 
and encourages scholars to provide Congressional testimony and 
to write op-ed pieces and letters to the editor on national secu-
rity issues. The Institution holds conferences and posts conference 
presentations on the Institution’s website. 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace
E-mail: info@CarnegieEndowment.org
Website: www.carnegieendowment.org
Steel magnate Andrew Carnegie donated a substantial endow-
ment to create the think tank that bears his name almost a century 
later. Carnegie has three major regional concentrations, the China 
Program, the Russian & Eurasian Program, and the Global Policy 
Program and established the nonproﬁ t Group of Fifty for global 
business leaders. Carnegie is known for its long-standing commit-
ment to nonproliferation questions, global governance, and issues 
relating to the U.S. role in the world. Its national security concerns 
are broad-ranging and feature the work of some of the most well-
known scholars in the ﬁ eld, including Jessica Tuchman Matthews, 
currently the Endowment’s president, Michael Swaine, Robert 
Kagan, Marina Ottaway, Martha Brill Olcott, Ashley Tellis, Rose 
Gottemoeller, and Minxin Pei. The Carnegie Endowment pub-
lishes books, reports, policy briefs, and Carnegie Papers, most of 
which are available for download or purchase from the website. 
The Endowment is particularly prominent in nuclear nonprolif-
eration studies, an increasingly important topic in national secu-
rity discussions. Additionally, the Carnegie Endowment has long 
published Foreign Policy, a bimonthly magazine on foreign affairs, 
including national security topics. The Endowment hosts many 
meetings, and presentations from the meetings are circulated on 
the Endowment website or in publications.
Cato Institute
E-mail: webmaster@cato.org
Website: www.cato.org
The Cato Institute, named after the Roman statesman, advocates 
individual liberty and responsibility and that the nation’s security 
commitment should largely involve the defense of the continental 
United States. Created as a not-for-proﬁ t think institution in 1977, 
Nongovernmental Sector 207

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
208 Organizations
Cato prefers a national security policy of limited engagements 
around the world instead of wide- ranging involvement in places 
Cato deems of only tangential interest to the nation. Ted Galen 
Carpenter, Cato’s vice president for foreign policy and defense 
studies, is perhaps the most prominent national security scholar 
on staff but is far from the only person in the ﬁ eld. Cato covers a 
range of public policy concerns, and its efforts on national secu-
rity are current and fairly encompassing, including the global war 
on terror (about which it held a September 2006 reconsideration 
on the ﬁ ve-year anniversary of the September 11 terrorist attacks), 
effects of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan on the United States, 
and the use of the U.S. military around the world. Cato holds fre-
quent conferences with speakers from across the political spec-
trum. These events are broadcast live on the web via RSS feeds or 
can be accessed from the Cato archive online. Cato also publishes 
conference transcripts, books, studies, and the Cato Journal and 
sends out a daily update of policy questions under consideration 
by the staff as well as e-updates of recent publications. Cato is 
one of the rare Washington institutions to offer its publications in 
Spanish on www.elcato.org, in Arabic at www.misbahalhurriyya.
org, and in Russian on cato.ru. A fourth website reaching out to 
the world, including material on national security, is www.lam-
poﬂ iberty.org.
Center for American Progress
E-mail: progress@americanprogress.org
Website: www.americanprogress.org
The Center for American Progress is the inspiration of John D. 
Podesta, the chief of staff to former President Bill Clinton. The 
center’s intent is to provide “progressive ideas for a strong, just, 
and free America.” Its website almost appears to be that of either 
a “shadow cabinet” or a blue print for a post-Bush administration. 
The Center for American Progress is a not-for-proﬁ t organization, 
which requires it to be nonpartisan. One of its three basic areas of 
concern is national security, speciﬁ cally Iraq, intelligence, human 
rights, strategy, international alliances, regions, homeland security, 
nuclear and biological weapons, global terrorism, and the U.S. mili-
tary. Four of the organization’s many projects focus on the national 
security ﬁ eld: Defense Review, Strategic Redeployment, Security 
and Peace, and Americas Project. The Center has a long list of 
specialists, including Morton Halperin (who served in the Nixon 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
administration; his nomination for the position of assistant secre-
tary of defense in the Clinton administration was not conﬁ rmed), 
Lawrence Korb (who served in Reagan’s Defense Department), 
and nonproliferation specialist Joseph Cirincione. The Center 
holds events on topics of interest and circulates its ideas through 
press releases, media packets, speeches, testimony, and other out-
lets. The Center reaches out to students, and its website has a long 
list of campus coordinators and internship opportunities.
Center for Defense Information
E-mail: info@cdi.org
Website: www.cdi.org
The Center for Defense Information (CDI) dates to the Nixon 
administration, when it began trying to provide a less militarized 
approach to national security. CDI is a member of the World Secu-
rity Institute, along with several other groups that are opposed 
to an overemphasis on a single tool of statecraft for policy. The 
CDI mission is somewhat different from any others in that it has 
never accepted federal funding to ensure that its conclusions are 
not affected by funding sources. As a result, it is highly reliant 
upon foundation grants and public donations. The CDI website 
provides hyperlinks to information in about two dozen research 
topic areas and has projects in nine speciﬁ c “hot spots”: the Mid-
dle East, space security, children and armed conﬂ ict, the arms 
trade, terrorism, nuclear proliferation, missile defense, the Straus 
military reform project, and small arms and light weapons. CDI 
publishes half a dozen newsletters, including the long-running 
The Defense Monitor, which updates readers on military programs 
and germane international security issues.
Center for International Policy
E-mail: cip@ciponline.org
Website: www.ciponline.org
The Center for International Policy (CIP) seeks to move the 
national security debate toward the demilitarized side of the 
spectrum. Its staff and membership include a number of former 
government analysts who are highly critical of the use of intel-
ligence in a political manner to skew public perceptions, such as 
former Ambassador Robert White and former Central Intelligence 
Agency Soviet specialist and National War College professor Mel-
vin A. Goodman. The Center is a not-for-proﬁ t organization that 
Nongovernmental Sector 209

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
210 Organizations
has programs in the areas of Asia, Colombia, Central America, 
Cuba, national security, and global ﬁ nancial integrity, and it 
participates in several joint programs with other organizations, 
including “Just the Facts,” which is a database of U.S. security 
assistance to Latin America and the Caribbean. Hard copies of 
CIP’s international policy reports may be purchased or down-
loaded from the Center’s website.
Center for the National Security Interest
E-mail: info@national-security.org
Website: www.national-security.org/
The Center for the National Security Interest (CNSI) is an avowedly 
pro-defense think tank that supports all steps to enhance national 
security while acknowledging that the nation ought only engage 
in wars that are just. CNSI strongly supports the war on terror-
ism and the war in Iraq while seeking to maintain the goals of the 
Monroe Doctrine in the Western hemisphere. The Center also sup-
ports an antimissile defense system. CNSI has published a num-
ber of op-ed pieces and reports and position papers to buttress its 
positions. The CNSI has an interesting web page link to national 
security organizations across the country. 
Center for Security Policy
E-mail: info@centerforsecuritypolicy.org
Website: www.centerforsecuritypolicy.org
The Center for Security Policy, which was created in 1988, is one 
of the most vigilant in the nation’s capital about the need to pro-
tect U.S. national security against threats new and old. Frank 
Gaffney, a ﬁ gure in President Reagan’s Department of Defense 
in the 1980s, is head of the Center, which he uses aggressively 
to remind the public of dangers that some of the world pursues 
to our detriment. Gaffney and the Center are keenly aware of 
growing Chinese power around the world, the dangers posed by 
nuclear nonproliferation failures in places like North Korea and 
Iran, and the possible spread of terrorism against U.S. assets. The 
Center holds meetings and publishes its materials on its website 
and through electronic mailings. The Center for Security Policy 
is a 501 (c)(3) not-for-proﬁ t organization that accepts donations 
from the public. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments
E-mail: info@csbaonline.org
Website: www.csbaonline.org
The Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessment (CSBA) web-
site notes that the organization seeks “thinking smarter about 
defense” and actively reaches out to do so. CSBA divides its work 
into two primary areas: strategic studies and defense studies. It 
is a nonpartisan, not-for-proﬁ t 501 (c)(3) organization seeking to 
enhance national debate and participation on defense issues. Its 
board of directors includes former Congressman Dave McCurdy, 
an Oklahoma Democrat, and former Senator Dan Coats, an Indi-
ana Republican. The Center has about eight staffers, providing 
written publications as well as appearing at conferences around 
the nation’s capital. These staffers include well-respected trans-
formation and counterinsurgency specialist and former Army 
ofﬁ cer Andrew Krepinevich, the Center’s president, and board 
of directors member General Jack Keane, a retired Army Vice 
Chief of Staff who comments frequently in the media on national 
security issues. The Center is frequently cited in the media and 
offers internships to younger scholars interested in getting into 
the ﬁ eld.
Center for Strategic and International Studies
E-mail: aschwartz@csis.org
Website: www.csis.org
The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) is perhaps 
the most frequently cited think tank in the national security ﬁ eld 
today. Founded by Admiral Arleigh Burke, USN, and Ambassador 
David Abshire in 1962 as an outgrowth of Georgetown University, 
the Center became an independent entity twenty-ﬁ ve years later. 
With Burke and Abshire’s natural interest in the issues of Cold War 
security, CSIS made its mark as an institution with a ﬁ rm commit-
ment to studying national security concerns. Today its efforts are 
broader; it is a genuine public policy institution studying a pano-
ply of subjects: defense and security policy, global challenges, and 
regional transformation. CSIS currently has more than two dozen 
programs, many of which are national security driven, such as 
the Freeman Program on China and the International Security 
Program. CSIS has a dazzling array of trustees, councillors, advis-
ers, corporate ofﬁ cers, and international afﬁ liates, such as former 
Nongovernmental Sector 211

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
212 Organizations
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, former Senator Sam Nunn, for-
mer Ambassador Anne Armstrong, and many more. The distin-
guished researchers and scholars at CSIS cover the areas of national 
security, global trends, regions of the world, and global strategy, and 
are among the most cited analysts in the world on national security. 
The long and distinguished list of CSIS researchers has included 
Anthony Cordesman, an expert on the Iraq conﬂ ict; former Clinton 
ofﬁ cial Kurt Campbell; the former Freeman Chair on China, Dr. 
Bates Gill; former diplomat Peter DeShazio on Latin America; and 
Theresita Schaffer, a South Asian scholar. CSIS also has a range of 
international advisers and a long list of signiﬁ cant business coun-
cillors from across the country. CSIS runs a long list of events, often 
several in a single day, ranging from small meetings to conferences 
for hundreds of participants. The CSIS invitation receives atten-
tion when it arrives because of the strong networking opportuni-
ties that CSIS events provide. The events transpire in Washington, 
for the most part, but CSIS also has afﬁ liations with organizations 
around the world. CSIS publishes a vast range of newsletters (elec-
tronically and in hard copy), the prestigious Washington Quarterly 
journal, conference reports, policy papers, and books. In addition, 
CSIS maintains a superb press ofﬁ ce to answer media requests. In 
the mid-1980s, a senior CSIS representative noted that the organi-
zation guaranteed that it would present a specialist on any national 
security issue within an hour of receiving a press inquiry. CSIS 
scholars are frequent talk show guests and are frequently called 
on to present congressional testimony. CSIS has a multimillion dol-
lar budget but remains a not-for-proﬁ t 501(c)(3) and accepts public 
contributions for its research.
Council on Foreign Relations
E-mail: communications@cfr.org
Website: www.cfr.org
The Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), founded in 1921, has long 
been known in the United States as the “establishment” organiza-
tion in national security and foreign affairs. Located in New York, 
CFR also hosts many meetings in Washington DC. The Council 
grew out of the aftermath of World War I as prominent citizens 
interested in national security decided they could make a differ-
ence if they rallied together under on institutional banner. CFR 
prides itself on being a focus for national debate and learning on 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
relevant issues. The membership is quite limited but considered 
quite prestigious. To ensure a wide range of inﬂ uential thinkers, 
the Council welcomes senior active-duty military ofﬁ cers, former 
policymakers, and traditional academics to its midst. The Council 
publishes the oft-cited journal Foreign Affairs, a bimonthly publica-
tion that has played an occasional role in serious national security 
debates over the years. The journal has published highly inﬂ uen-
tial articles, such as the famous 1947 “Mr. X” article, which ﬁ rst 
used the term “containment” to characterize U.S. policy toward 
the Soviet Union until the end of the Cold War. The Council also 
forms task forces on such issues as Chinese military power, and 
each task force publishes a ﬁ nal report with policy recommenda-
tions. The CFR website has many links to current research within 
the organization. In addition, CFR hosts myriad luncheons, din-
ners, speeches, and other public discussions on topics of current 
and future interest, such as avian ﬂ u, postconﬂ ict Iraq, Darfur, and 
Indonesia after the terrorist bombings in 2002 and 2005. 
Federation of American Scientists
E-mail: webmaster@fas.org
Website: www.fas.org
The Federation of American Scientists (FAS) was founded in 1945 
by former participants in the Manhattan Project, the government’s 
effort to ﬁ nd the technology to build an atomic bomb. These sci-
entists also included a group who believed they had an ethical 
responsibility to bring the implications of this work to the public 
and to warn them of the possibilities that lie ahead with these 
new weapons. The FAS has been one of the leading organiza-
tions to focus on explaining the science as well as public policy 
implications of the national security ﬁ eld. The FAS holds many 
conferences, press conferences, and media events on public policy 
questions. The staff includes many Nobel laureates and persons 
who have worked in scientiﬁ c laboratories, and the board of direc-
tors includes some of the most prominent scientists in the nation’s 
history. One of the most popular parts of the Federation’s out-
reach is the Strategic Security Project, which has a goal of reduc-
ing the threats to the nation and world. A 501 (c)(3) not-for-proﬁ t 
group that offers individual memberships and accepts donations, 
the Federation has a long list of major projects that receive fund-
ing from some of the most prominent philanthropic groups in the 
Nongovernmental Sector 213

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
214 Organizations
United States; these projects run the gamut of national security 
issues such as government secrecy, security studies, informa-
tion warfare, and energy and the environment. Security studies 
includes more than a dozen ﬁ elds, such as arms control, chain 
of command, weapons programs, intelligence, and terrorism. The 
FAS publishes an Occasional Paper Series on individual issues 
such as Chinese military modernization or space security. It also 
publishes the Public Interest Report and Secrecy News.
Foreign Policy Association
E-mail: info@fpa.org
Website: www.fpa.org
The Foreign Policy Association (FPA) is heavily involved with 
trying to educate the public on the range of public policy ques-
tions relating to foreign affairs; thus, there is a logical emphasis 
on national security within the Association’s agenda. The FPA, 
which was created in 1918, fosters public policy discussions in 
its individual chapters in a number of large and small U.S. cities; 
these local chapters often go by the name “Council on Foreign 
Relations,” even though they are not run by the New York–based 
Council. These local chapters hold frequent meetings at the local 
level to educate the public, particularly public school teachers, 
about the basics of national security. The FPA publishes books, 
pamphlets, and the like on overarching national security ques-
tions the United States is pondering, such as the role of the United 
Nations, the future of arms control, and the role the United States 
ought play in the international scene. The FPA’s best-known series 
is “Great Decisions,” which highlights the national security con-
cerns in various areas of the world. 
Foreign Policy Research Institute
E-mail: fpri@fpri.org
Website: www.fpri.org
In 1955, the Foreign Policy Research Institute (FPRI) started as a 
mechanism for applying scholarship on national security to the cre-
ation of national security strategy. The Institute, located in Philadel-
phia, conducts research and engages in massive outreach through 
its quarterly journal, Orbis, which reaches the academic commu-
nity around the world. Both the journal and the other online pub-
licaitons of FPRI reach a considerable number of interested people 
outside of the traditional decision-making circles. FPRI has six 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
primary research programs: Asia Program; Think Tanks and Civil 
Societies; Project on Democratic Transitions; Program on National 
Security; Center on Terrorism, Counter-Terrorism, and Home-
land Security; and Center for the Study of America and the West. 
Regarding education, FPRI operates the Marvin Wachman Fund 
for International Education and the History Institute for Teachers. 
FPRI also hosts six lecture series on questions of national security. 
One of the Institute’s major goals is to foster enhanced teaching in 
the security ﬁ eld. In addition to Orbis, FPRI publishes E-notes, FPRI 
Wire, Peacefacts, and Watch on the West online. The Institute hosts a 
signiﬁ cant number of conferences on security questions, and the 
proceedings are subsequently posted online. 
Friends Committee on National Legislation
Website: www.fcnl.org
The Friends Committee on National Legislation (FCNL), which 
was created in 1943 during World War II, has always been afﬁ li-
ated with the Religious Society of Friends, known as the Quakers, 
and considers itself the largest peace organization in the nation’s 
capital. The FCNL organizes for the range of peace and social 
justice under the representation of the oldest religious lobbying 
group in the United States. Unlike many other organizations in the 
national security ﬁ eld, the FCNL is not a 501 (c)(3) not-for-proﬁ t 
organization because it engages in lobbying, although the FCNL 
Education Fund does have not-for-proﬁ t status. Historically, the 
FCNL has campaigned to change the international distribution of 
justice by lobbying for the creation of the Peace Corps in the early 
1960s and the Arms Control Agency in the 1970s. More recently, 
the FCNL has been involved in trying to prevent genocide in Dar-
fur and orchestrate withdrawal from Iraq, and its eight primary 
issue areas for 2007 are Iraq, disarmament, civil liberties, conven-
tional weapons, the federal budget, the environment, torture, and 
Native Americans. Although the Committee prepares publications 
on issues of interest, a signiﬁ cant portion of its efforts go to get-
ting citizens involved in the public policy debate and pressuring 
ofﬁ cials. Iran has been an enduring concern for the FCNL since 
the United States has been in a position of conﬂ ict with the Middle 
Eastern state for almost three decades. Committee members often 
go to parts of the earth where the U.S. government is not welcome 
to make it clear that the U.S. people often differ from their politi-
cal leaders on individual issues; for example, Committee members 
Nongovernmental Sector 215

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
216 Organizations
met with Iranian ofﬁ cials in early 2007. The FCNL’s overarching, 
enduring goal is to create a more demilitarized U.S. national secu-
rity policy, and the group works assiduously to inﬂ uence congres-
sional representatives to ensure that occurs.
Globalsecurity.org
E-mail: info@globalsecurity.org
Website: www.globalsecurity.org
GlobalSecurity.org started in 2000 to provide information on 
the threats of the new millennium, focusing on military issues, 
intelligence, weapons of mass destruction, space, and homeland 
security. Its primary vehicle for reaching the public is its website, 
which is the ﬁ rst online destination for security data for many. 
GlobalSecurity.org’s website has both visual and text data on the 
questions most commonly arising on the world security scene 
today as well as hyperlinks to more information. The website is 
extremely up-to-date with materials directly out of the Pentagon 
and other government agencies on items such as current govern-
ment defense contracts or reports from agencies or Congress. The 
founder of GlobalSecurity.org, John Pike, appears frequently in 
media interviews to comment on the nature of threats in the orga-
nization’s ﬁ elds. Pike was a staffer at the Federation of American 
Scientists for many years and had a serious following on the topic 
of defense in space. The organization has a small staff and about 
half a dozen senior fellows pursuing work in GlobalSecurity.org’s 
key areas of focus; a few internships are available. GlobalSecurity.
org has an interesting approach to raising money: it sells space to 
advertisers on its website. 
Greenpeace, USA
E-mail: info@wdc.greenpeace.org
Website: www.greenpeace.org
Greenpeace, which dates to 1971, is the world’s best-known envi-
ronmental organization that has a distinctly antinuclear goal 
for national security. Greenpeace, with 250,000 members in the 
United States and 2.5 million worldwide, is an active organiza-
tion around the world, often known as the owner of the Rainbow 
Warrior, a ship that toured the world on an antinuclear campaign 
until the French intelligence service blew it up in Auckland, New 
Zealand, in 1985. Greenpeace works to raise consciousness about 
the environment and to motivate citizenry to work against envi-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
ronmentally destructive policies in areas such as toxins, global 
warming, nuclear issues, forests, oceans, and genetic engineering. 
Greenpeace solicits public contributions and does not accept gov-
ernment or corporate funding.
Henry L. Stimson Center
E-mail: info@stimson.org
Website: www.stimson.org
The Henry L. Stimson Center, named after the former Secretary of 
State Henry L. Stimson, is a think tank dedicated to international 
security issues. Founded in 1989, the Stimson Center is active in 
nonproliferation, regional issues, and international cooperation 
concerns, among others. Its researchers are divided into three 
tiers (senior fellows, fellows, and researchers) and often have sig-
niﬁ cant practical service, frequently in government service. They 
focus on building bridges with academic, government, think tank, 
and international actors. The Center publishes proceedings from 
its many conferences (in hard copy and electronic versions). The 
Center is nonpartisan and not-for-proﬁ t, accepting donations 
under its 501 (c)(3) tax status. Stimson is particularly strong on 
East Asian and nuclear nonproliferation concerns within the secu-
rity ﬁ eld.
Heritage Foundation
E-mail: info@heritage.org
Website: www.heritage.org
The Heritage Foundation resulted from the conservatives’ desire 
to counter what they believed was disproportionate liberal power 
in think tanks in Washington. Founded by Dr. Edwin Feulner and 
endowed with signiﬁ cant support from the Coors family of Colo-
rado, Heritage began in 1973. With the advent of Ronald Reagan’s 
conservative revolution in the 1980s, Heritage became a prominent 
institution, offering many rapid analyses of pressing public policy 
issues and publishing newsletters, reports, policy studies, and 
books. Because so much of the Reagan period saw discussion center 
on national security concerns, Heritage built a formidable group of 
scholars advocating a strong national defense and a sensible national 
security path. Heritage scholars have long supported strengthen-
ing defense through developing ballistic missiles, building stron-
ger ties with certain allies such as Taiwan, and reinforcing steps to 
prevent states like North Korea from becoming powers. Heritage 
Nongovernmental Sector 217

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
218 Organizations
receives considerable corporate funding but also welcomes indi-
vidual contributions. Heritage scholars past and present include 
a number of former and current government appointees, such as 
Kim Holmes and Peter Brookes. Heritage is an active organiza-
tion, hosting many meetings and book launches, for example. In 
many cases, attendance is open to the public as well as broadcast 
online so that those outside the nation’s capital can hear the dis-
cussion as it occurs. Heritage also maintains an extensive website 
with a bookstore for its publications and links to other websites 
covering national security issue. Heritage regularly publishes a 
range of other materials such as backgrounders, Heritage Memo-
randa, Heritage Reports, and Heritage Lectures.
Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace, 
Stanford University
Email: horaney@hoover.stanford.edu
Website: www.hoover.org
The Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace began in 
1919 shortly before its namesake, Herbert Hoover, became presi-
dent. In the initial years, the Institution focused on writing papers 
and conducting studies about World War I. The brutal war in 
Europe had sparked revolution in a number of countries while 
destroying empires, which tied to the organization’s primary goal 
of providing scholarship on revolution, peace, and war in the 
broad context of the international environment. Outsiders gen-
erally describe the Hoover Institution as conservative in orienta-
tion but the Institution says its interest is in “free societies” rather 
on a single ideology. Programmatic themes at Hoover include 
property rights and rule of law, individuals in societies, role of 
societies and cultures, economic growth and taxation, the role of 
governments in all aspects of society, and international rivalries 
and global cooperation. Hoover has about a hundred scholars and 
a large support staff that includes librarians. Some scholars, such 
as William Ratliff, are long term while others do a brief stint at 
the Stanford campus where the Institution is housed. Hoover is 
a 501 (c)(3) public charity but also has a signiﬁ cant endowment 
that ﬁ nances about 45 percent of the Institution’s activities; the 
remainder comes from foundation support. The organization has 
an extensive publishing and media operation that includes the 
Hoover Press; inﬂ uential periodicals such as the quarterly Hoover 
Digest, the bimonthly Policy Review, and the online China Leader-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
ship Monitor; and a television show targeted to those “outside the 
beltway,” called Uncommon Knowledge. The Institution also hosts 
conferences for scholars on a wide array of topics in national secu-
rity and associated ﬁ elds.
Hudson Institute
Email: info@hudson.org
Website: www.hudson.org
The Hudson Institute is one of the longer enduring national 
security think tanks in the United States, holding not-for-proﬁ t, 
501 (c)(3) status. Cofounded by one of the most prominent ﬁ g-
ures from the nuclear era, Herman Kahn, the Hudson Institute 
began operating in 1961 in Croton-upon-Hudson, New York, then 
moved to Indianapolis, Indiana, in the 1980s and 1990s, only to 
move to the nation’s capital after the new millennium in an effort 
to effect policy more directly. The Hudson Institute has a primary 
focus on national security but has also broadened its work to 
domestic issues. Its fourteen policy centers feature dozens of pol-
icy research programs, some focusing on functional areas, such as 
foreign policy and human rights, and others focusing on speciﬁ c 
regions, such as the Middle East, Korea, China, Eastern Europe, 
Africa, Western Europe, the former Soviet Union and Russia, and 
Japan. Today, Hudson hosts numerous meetings on contempo-
rary questions such as the future of Iraq, the U.S. relationship with 
Russia, and how to address terrorism. Along with its conferences, 
Hudson researchers provide strategic analysis on national secu-
rity issues, those confronting the nation today and those likely 
to be important in the future, through a range of traditional and 
online publications, including op-ed pieces, books, articles, and 
reports. The most prominent contemporary scholar associated 
with Hudson is retired Lieutenant General William Odom, former 
director of the National Security Agency.
Institute for Defense & Disarmament Studies
E-mail: info@idds.org 
Website: www.idds.org
Begun by Randall C. Forsberg in 1980, at the beginning of the 
antinuclear wave, the Institute for Defense & Disarmament Stud-
ies (IDDS) encourages a national security policy based on fewer 
military arms, greater democratic institutions, and a different 
view of security in the future—and has held true to these policy 
Nongovernmental Sector 219

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
220 Organizations
alternatives for more than a quarter of a century. IDDS is a not-
for-proﬁ t, 501 (c)(3) educational institution with board members 
from across the nation and the globe; it accepts individual dona-
tions. The IDDS holds conferences and publishes books and other 
materials (including some related to its vast database of arms) to 
encourage greater public debate about alternatives to militariza-
tion for conﬂ ict resolution. The Institute began its work with a 
decidedly antinuclear focus but has expanded to include the 
range of issues in conventional, nuclear, and space technologies 
that now appear in debates on national security. IDDS has sev-
eral ongoing projects, such as the Global Action to Prevent War, 
which mobilizes people around the world to act against military 
solutions to crises, and Urgentcall.org, which encourages people 
to lobby the United States to stop its current nuclear policies for 
allied states. More explicitly than some groups, the IDDS works 
on public education to alter the grassroots views of national secu-
rity policy, arms in space, missile technologies, and associated 
areas of concern.
Institute for Policy Studies
E-mail: scott@ips-dc.org
Website: www.ips-dc.org
Although the Institute for Policy Studies (IPS) is often considered 
a liberal national security think tank, its self-professed descrip-
tion is a “progressive think tank.” IPS is a 501 (c)(3), not-for-proﬁ t 
group located in the nation’s capital. The Institute originated in 
the civil rights era of 1963 and has long pursued national security 
openness and questions relating to surveillance and Latin Ameri-
can policy issues. The group still seeks to achieve peace, justice, 
and environmental sustainability. IPS studies a range of policy 
issues, but its national security concerns are the Middle East, drug 
policies, sustainable energy, nuclear policy, and foreign policy. In 
addition, IPS publishes many articles, op-ed piecess, and reports.
International Assessment and Strategy Center
E-mail: contact@strategycenter.net
Website: www.strategycenter.net
The International Assessment and Strategy Center (IASC) is a not-
for-proﬁ t 501 (c)(3) organization based in Washington, which has 
a nonpartisan emphasis on protecting the nation against medium- 
and long-term national security threats. The IASC’s general orien-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
tation is toward a robust national security posture, taking proper 
account of U.S. friends and foes. IASC has ﬁ ve distinct program 
areas: national security law and intelligence policy; Asian security 
and democracy; terrorism, homeland security, and government; 
the Eurasian sand table; and the military databases. The Center’s 
scholars write on these topics and the organization hosts confer-
ences on speciﬁ c issues such as Chinese involvement in Latin 
America. Several IASC scholars are prominent supporters of a 
policy that balances U.S. relations with Taiwan differently from 
the post-1979 diplomatic alignment with the People’s Republic of 
China. The scholars at IASC include Dr. Arthur Waldron of the 
University of Pennsylvania and Rick Fisher, both of whom spe-
cialize in security issues involving the People’s Republic of China. 
The IASC accepts public donations and works on government 
contracts to enhanced understanding of national security threats 
ahead for the United States. 
International Institute for Strategic Studies
Website: www.iiss.org
The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) was founded 
in the United Kingdom in 1958; it has ofﬁ ces in London, Wash-
ington DC (opened in 2001), and Singapore. The Institute is one 
of the most respected research centers, and it focuses exclusively 
on broad national security concerns such as military and political 
conﬂ ict. The organization has a global membership; new mem-
bers are nominated by existing members to participate in study-
ing and discussing issues such as nonproliferation, ballistic missile 
defense, and global energy challenges. The IISS holds an annual 
Global Strategy Review in Geneva, Switzerland, in the autumn. 
At those sessions, IISS convenes its membership and an array of 
international policymakers who can speak to the difﬁ culties and 
successes the international community sees in nations’ efforts 
to enhance stability. IISS holds periodic meetings on other top-
ics, including an annual May/June meeting in Singapore, known 
as the Shangri-La or Asian Dialogue, which frequently attracts 
statespersons from around the world to consider this burgeoning 
security environment. The Gulf Dialogue considers the signiﬁ cant 
issues confronting that region of the world. The ﬂ agship IISS pub-
lication is Survival, a quarterly published by Oxford University 
Press. In addition, the Adelphi Papers are short monographs pon-
dering pressing security issues such as potential disputes in the 
Nongovernmental Sector 221

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
222 Organizations
South China Sea or reorientation of information operations dur-
ing the era of the global war on terror. 
Jamestown Foundation
E-mail: pubs@jamestown.org
Website: www.jamestown.org
The Jamestown Foundation shows the role of a leader in deter-
mining shifts in an organization’s orientation. Since its founding 
in 1984, Jamestown has been one of the most conservative organi-
zations on national security in the United States, but in the early 
2000s, its leadership consciously decided to take a more centrist 
view to best understand global societal trends that could affect 
U.S. security. The 501 (c)(3) still has a focus on a traditional threat-
based approach to national security analysis, but its publications 
have begun to include a broader array of views than those of tra-
ditional hawks. Instead, Jamestown created a focus on terrorism 
issues, Russia and the former Soviet Union, and China as poten-
tial threats against the United States. It also studies contempo-
rary problems, such as Iraq. Jamestown holds a small number of 
conferences but is primarily known for its electronic newsletters 
and reports on its three foundational areas: terrorism, China, and 
Russia.
Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs
E-mail: info@jinsa.org
Website: www.jinsa.org
The Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs (JINSA) has 
reached out to educate people in the United States, regardless of 
their faith, about the threats to the United States from weak alli-
ances around the world as well as the crucial part Israel plays 
in promoting democracy and stability, especially in the Middle 
East. A stalwart supporter of Israel and a strong U.S.-Israeli rela-
tionship, JINSA arranges visits to the region for retired U.S. mili-
tary ofﬁ cers and policymakers. The Institute’s board of advisers 
contains a signiﬁ cant number of retired senior U.S. military and 
governmental ofﬁ cers, many of whom are not Jewish but who are 
worried about national security. JINSA’s programs offer clear-cut 
education about global threats to the United States, and its web-
site gives further indication of the risks ahead. Programs include 
the ﬂ ag and general ofﬁ cer visits; the Perry Military Institutes 
Program, which allows intensive exchanges between rising U.S. 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
military ofﬁ cers and their counterparts in Israel’s defense estab-
lishment; the Nathan Golden Lectures in Middle East Security; 
law enforcement exchanges; and the Gottesman Lecture Series 
about events in Israel. The Institute also publishes the semiannual 
Journal of International Security Affairs and various other periodic 
reports, such as Observer, Islamic Extremism Newswatch, and Pro-
ﬁ les in Terror. JINSA is a not-for-proﬁ t, 501 (c)(3) think tank.
The Lexington Institute
E-mail: mail@lexingtoninstitute.org
Website: www.lexingtoninstitute.org
The Lexington Institute specializes in educating the nation about 
the need for a limited government but one that promotes national 
security and other priorities that will protect the United States 
and beneﬁ t the world. Lexington promotes democracy and strong 
defense above anything else in the public policy realm. Lexington 
conducts studies and educates the public on a number of domes-
tic concerns, but its focus lies primarily in defense, homeland 
security, military logistics, and the navy. The specialists at Lex-
ington, such as the chairman, former New Jersey Representative 
James Courter; the chief operating ofﬁ cer Loren Thompson; and 
Dan Gouré, a well-cited military analyst, all write frequent op-ed 
pieces and appear at events. Lexington is a relatively small insti-
tute in staff size, but it has a notable presence in the discussion of 
national security issues.
National Institute for Public Policy
Email: amy.joseph@nipp.org
Website: www.nipp.org
Since 1981, the National Institute for Public Policy (NIPP) has 
educated the public about the range of international and national 
security concerns confronting the nation in the waning years 
and then the aftermath of the Cold War. NIPP is a not-for-proﬁ t 
501 (c)(3) that receives donations, receives charity and corporate 
grants, and works for government contracts. The Institute has two 
dozen staff members, most of whom are specialists in national 
security concerns around the world. NIPP publishes Comparative 
Strategy, which covers pressing issues in the security community. 
Keith Payne, the head of the Institute, is a noted specialist in mis-
sile defense questions, and European director Colin Gray is one 
of the world’s most cited specialists on strategy. Outside advisers 
Nongovernmental Sector 223

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
224 Organizations
to NIPP include William Van Cleave, a prominent member of the 
Reagan administration; Charles Kupperman, long a critic of under-
estimates of terrorism; and William Odom, former head of the 
National Security Agency. NIPP has its own press.
National Priorities Project
Email: info@nationalpriorities.org
Website: www.nationalpriorities.org
The National Priorities Project (NPP) seeks to help the public 
understand how spending and taxation choices affect society at 
the grassroots level. The NPP is a not-for-proﬁ t public policy insti-
tution that has no political orientation. The organization seeks 
to alter national security policy toward less military spending, 
greater port security, and broader use of instruments of national 
power beyond the armed forces. The NPP publishes a series of 
reports on how to shift the balance of spending on instruments 
of power toward a less militarized role. The website is full of 
graphics that provide basic information to the public at large. The 
NPP also considers economic policy, the budget, and associated 
issues that are set as national spending priorities and maintains 
an extensive database on spending and budgetary trade-offs. Its 
publications are available on the website.
National Security Network
E-mail: info@nationalsecurity.org
Website: www.nsnetwork.org
The National Security Network (NSN) is one of the more recent 
organizations analyzing national security and promoting “national 
security above partisan interests.” The NSN, which includes prac-
titioners of foreign policy and politicians among its thousand par-
ticipants, has major projects: the Security Principles Project focuses 
on what is required to return the United States to balance the 
threats to the nation against its resources and priorities. Regional 
programs to promote public policy debate outside the Beltway 
cover national security basic training, rapid response, and commu-
nity mapping and communications. The NSN also runs the Secu-
rity Framework Project, a link from its website to recommended 
readings on several topics in the national security ﬁ eld. The topics 
include Iraq, Iran, reconstruction efforts, and defense and military 
policy among others. The NSN describes itself as trying to cross 
partisan lines, as of 2006, but many of the group’s leadership had 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
served in the Clinton administration. The organization’s website, 
which is its major method of disseminating its views, lists half a 
dozen major national security concerns, such as Iraq, along with 
ideas it would pursue to change course on the issue. The Network 
accepts donations for its work.
National Strategy Forum
E-mail: nsf@nationalstrategy.com
Website: www.nationalstrategy.com
The National Strategy Forum (NSF), which is located in Chicago, 
is arguably the most inﬂ uential U.S. organization outside the 
Washington–New York nexus involved in education on national 
security issues. Established in 1983 by the late Morris Liebman, a 
prominent Chicago lawyer with good connections to the national 
security community, the NSF has hosted a superb range of speak-
ers, including President Ronald Reagan, who previewed the Mos-
cow summit in 1987; retired General Anthony Zinni, who reﬂ ected 
on the war on terror in 2006; and former Secretary of State Mad-
eleine Albright, who considered the role of religion in national 
security questions. A not-for-proﬁ t organization under Illinois tax 
registration, the NSF is nonpartisan in its efforts to raise important 
national security concerns to public attention. The NSF hosts con-
ferences, often in conjunction with other like-minded groups, on 
national security concerns such as preparing for catastrophic inci-
dents or using private security ﬁ rms. Conference proceedings are 
then published online. The NSF hosts a monthly luncheon with 
speakers from around the world. The Forum publishes a quar-
terly journal, National Strategy Forum Review, on current concerns 
and has a regular assessment of the current hot spots around the 
world called “Strategy Watch.” 
Natural Resources Defense Council
E-mail: nrdcinfo@nrdc.org
Website: www.nrdc.org
The Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) seeks to edu-
cate the public about the centrality of the environment in national 
security and other parts of the contemporary lifestyle. In addition 
to its New York headquarters, the NRDC has four regional ofﬁ ces 
in the United States and one in Beijing, China. The organization 
focuses on a series of environmental issues ranging from clean 
water to clean air, global warming, and ﬁ sh/wildlife. Prominent 
Nongovernmental Sector 225

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
226 Organizations
in its work is the issue of nuclear weapons, energy, and waste, 
which affects national security concerns. The section dedicated 
speciﬁ cally to nuclear weapons, for example, includes a report 
on whether the U.S. government is overestimating Chinese capa-
bilities, the role of nuclear material in Pakistan, and the role com-
mercial nuclear sales play in international politics. NRDC staff 
marry science with public policy in discussing national security 
concerns. The Council publishes long and short policy papers and 
tries to promote policy change. NRDC is a not-for-proﬁ t 501 (c)(3) 
but has a parallel lobbying group called Earth Action Center. 
New American Foundation
Website: www.newamerica.net
Email: Irvine@newamerica.net
Founded in 1999 by Ted Halstead, the New American Foundation 
(NAF) is a not-for-proﬁ t 501(c)(3) think tank with headquarters 
in Washington DC and an ofﬁ ce in Sacramento, California. The 
NAF is proud of its commitment to new thinking, new voices, 
and new ideas in public discouse, and foreign policy and associ-
ated national security issues are key concerns.. The NAF uses the 
Internet to provide an almost instantaneous link with its members 
and potential members by alerting them to NAF events as well 
as to announce the frequent opinion pieces its staff has written. 
The Foundation’s website notes its desire to engage with people 
through “a venture capital approach . . . [to invest] in outstanding 
individuals and policy solutions that transcend the conventional 
spectrum.” Prominent NAF senior fellows in national security 
include Peter Bergen, who also appears on CNN as a specialist on 
terrorism and al Qaeda; Flynt Leverett, an analyst on Middle East 
strategy; Michael Lind, who studies broad national security strat-
egy; and Anatol Lieven, who concentrates on Europe. The Founda-
tion hosts almost daily events on a range of topics, many of which 
concern national security: Iran, Iraq, terrorism, and changes in 
strategy are some of the topics on the Foundation’s event calendar. 
In September 2006, the NAF hosted a major event on policy toward 
Iran that featured The Looming Tower author Lawrence Wright, who 
engaged in an extended discussion of his research into al Qaeda. 
The NAF has launched a companion website, AmericasPurpose
.org, which began as an outgrowth of a September 2005 conference 
and operates to galvanize people to promote a broader national 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
debate on security. The NAF publishes policy papers under the 
Foundation’s moniker and presents its views in op-ed pieces in a 
number of prominent newspapers in the United States and abroad. 
In the summer of 2007, the Foundation announced that Steve Coll, 
formerly of the Washington Post and The New Yorker, would replace 
Halstead at this bi-coastal think tank.
Nuclear Control Institute
E-mail: mail@nci.org
Website: www.nci.org
The Nuclear Control Institute (NCI) began in 1981 to address 
nuclear nonproliferation and nuclear terrorism. It is a not-for-
proﬁ t under the U.S. Tax Code, accepting donations as a 501 (c)(3) 
to help educate the public about eradicating nuclear bombs and 
destroying nuclear materials. In 2003, the NCI took a novel step of 
abolishing its conferences and hard copies of material in favor of 
a web-based database and outreach to a greater number of people 
than would occur as a brick-and-mortar institution. The materi-
als from the Institute’s twenty years of operations in the nation’s 
capital went to the National Security Archive. Today NCI con-
centrates on plutonium and reprocessing, India-Pakistan, nuclear 
terrorism, nuclear material shipped around the world by sea or 
air, U.S.-China trade, and the role of plutonium and enriched ura-
nium in today’s world.
Peace Action
Website: www.peace-action.org
Peace Action began in the late 1990s when two long-standing, 
antinuclear, grassroots organizations merged after the 1996 sign-
ing of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. Peace Action 
is a national organization seeking to free the world from violence 
and war while crafting a national security strategy that reduces 
the use of nuclear weapons, opposes preemption, and keeps U.S. 
forces out of places such as Iraq. Peace Action has 100 chapters 
and numerous state afﬁ liates. Unlike the overwhelming majority 
of organizations in this category, Peace Action’s lobbying prohib-
its it from not-for-proﬁ t status. Peace Action has a national net-
work and a student network for its activities. Its publications are 
largely fact sheets on speciﬁ c issues such as Iraq.
Nongovernmental Sector 227

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
228 Organizations
Security Policy Working Group
E-mail: dmerz@proteusfund.org
Website: www.proteusfund.org/spwg
The Security Policy Working Group is an amalgam, created in Sep-
tember 2002, of nine organizations that are working to “fundamen-
tally reshape security policy in the United States and to broaden 
and deepen the public discourse on what constitutes true security 
in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001 terror attacks.” In addi-
tion they strive to lessen the use of military force. The organiza-
tions include the Center for Defense Information; the Arms Trade 
Resource Center; the Center for War, Peace and the News Media; 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Security Studies Pro-
gram; the Graduate Program in International Affairs at the New 
School University; the National Priorities Project (see a descrip-
tion of this organization elsewhere in the chapter); the Project 
on Defense Alternatives; Economists for Peace and Security; and 
the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments. These non-
governmental organizations and individual members believed 
contributing to this bigger coalition will be more effective in 
changing security deﬁ nitions. The Proteus Fund is an Amherst, 
Massachusetts–based philanthropy that was founded in 1994. The 
Proteus Fund focuses on democracy growing. The Security Policy 
Working Group has published a ﬁ ve-year appraisal of security 
after 9/11.
Union of Concerned Scientists
Website: www.ucsusa.org
The Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS) brings science and pub-
lic policy together as it has done since its inception at the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology in 1969. The UCS seeks to provide 
impartial, objective information to the public policy debate on 
such issues as nuclear weapons, nuclear power, global warming, 
and various other questions. The UCS’s global security program 
focuses on missile defense, space weapons, and terrorism, among 
other topics. The Union publishes much of its work online, and 
its members, many of whom are Nobel Prize laureates, testify 
frequently before Congress. The Union is a not-for-proﬁ t organi-
zation but also has a parallel lobbying group that does not have 
tax-deductible status.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
War Resisters League
E-mail: wrl@warresisters.org
Website: www.warresisters.org
The War Resisters League (WRL) is one of the oldest organiza-
tions seeking to keep the United States out of foreign wars; it has 
been promoting its goal of nonviolence since 1923. The League 
has chapters in several parts of the country and takes on a more 
active posture during times of major U.S. military involvements 
abroad such as the war in Iraq. The WRL organizes major ral-
lies and events to communicate their view that grassroots sup-
port does not endorse these foreign involvements with arms. The 
WRL publishes several pamphlets and materials on nonviolent 
response to problems and how to avoid paying war taxes. The 
WRL is also part of the international peace movement through its 
membership in War Resisters International and afﬁ liation with the 
International Peace Bureau. The WRL is able to engage in political 
lobbying because it is not a tax-deductible organization.
Washington Institute for Near East Policy
Website: www.washingtoninstitute.org
The Washington Institute for Near East Policy dates to 1985, when 
it embarked on a program of trying to provide balanced assess-
ments of U.S. national interests in the Middle East and support 
meaningful alliances and partnerships while eschewing ties for 
convenience. The Institute has a staff of more than a dozen experts, 
all with long-standing ties to the region, to offer immediate analy-
sis for the press and policy communities. The Institute has ties to 
both the Democratic and Republican leadership, including former 
Vice President Al Gore and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. 
Many consider the Institute’s ties to Israel to be stronger than aver-
age. The Institute has programs on virtually each state between 
Iran and Morocco and on functional topics such as energy policy 
in the Gulf, terrorism, proliferation, the Israeli-Palestinian peace 
process, energy and economics, Arab and Islamic politics, and 
military and defense concerns. The Institute has two continuing 
publications, Peace Watch and Policy Watch.
Women in International Security
E-mail: wiisinfo@georgetown.edu
Website: wiis.georgetown.edu
Nongovernmental Sector 229

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
230 Organizations
Women in International Security (WIIS), now located at George-
town University, began in 1987 through the efforts of a small num-
ber of women in the security studies ﬁ eld; its ﬁ rst home was at the 
University of Maryland. WIIS not only holds meetings and sym-
posia for discussions of prominent topics across the security ﬁ eld 
but it also reaches out to bring graduate women into the profes-
sional ﬁ eld. WIIS holds a major week-long international security 
symposium where those in attendance (men and women) hear 
some of the top people in the ﬁ eld discuss the aspects of the theme 
for the year. WIIS is a 501 (c)(3) membership organization, and it 
publishes an up-to-date database on jobs in the academic, private, 
and not-for-proﬁ t sectors. 
World Policy Institute
E-mail: wpi@newschool.edu
Website: www.worldpolicy.org
The New School of Social Research absorbed the World Policy 
Institute (WPI) in 1991, but the Institute’s history is a longer one. 
Its traditional emphasis has always been on ﬁ nding creative solu-
tions to pressing and emerging world problems, particularly 
those with security implications. The Institute conducts research 
and advocates solutions to these problems, circulating their ideas 
through a biannual membership letter. The Institute also pub-
lishes the quarterly World Policy Journal, which discusses a range 
of security research. Areas of research at the WPI include arms 
trade, counterterrorism, citizenship, Russia, Rwanda, post-9/11 
strategy, and several other areas. Along with its research and pub-
lications, the WPI offers panels for public discussion. 
World Security Institute
E-mail: info@worldsecurityinstitute.org
Website: www.worldsecurityinstitute.org
The World Security Institute (WSI) is a nonpartisan, not-for-proﬁ t 
research organization seeking to promote news and policy dis-
cussion at home and abroad. Its major goal is to promote security 
discussion globally. The Center for Defense Information is a divi-
sion of the Institute. The WSI publishes newsletters, periodic let-
ters, and other press accounts of security issues around the world. 
Topics discussed by WSI include space weapons, terrorism, small 
arms, nuclear weapons, and regional concerns such as Russia and 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
China. The Institute accepts public donations and receives grants 
from philanthropic groups.
Federally Funded Research 
and Development Centers
The descriptions of federally funded research and development 
centers (FFRDCs) are not as detailed as those for groups in the 
not-for-proﬁ t sector because many, if not all, of the organizations 
in this section have responsibilities in addition to security.
Center for Naval Analyses
E-mail: inquiries@cna.org
Website: www.cna.org
The Center for Naval Analyses (CNA) is a research institution 
with a strong naval heritage, headed by Dr. Christine Fox. Estab-
lished in 1942 as concerns about German U-boats accelerated, the 
Center does much of its work on contract from the U.S. Navy and 
the other military services but also has the authority to engage 
in self-generated operations; some of its work is classiﬁ ed while 
the rest is not. With nineteen areas of expertise, the Center is an 
innovator for navy strategy and capabilities, and national secu-
rity is one of its predominant concerns. CNA’s major ﬁ elds are 
advanced technology and systems analysis, operational research, 
the Center for Strategic Studies (including a highly active East 
Asia program), and resource analysis. CNA also conducts studies 
on speciﬁ c past navy activities. The Center has an international 
arena group, including a particularly strong analytical capability 
on East Asia, an area of obvious interest to the Navy. It also runs 
many conferences and publishes research studies. The Center is 
nonpartisan but is not a not-for-proﬁ t think thank.
Institute for Defense Analyses
Website: www.ida.org
Run by retired senior military commanders, such as Combatant 
Commander Admiral Dennis C. Blair (2003–2006) and former Air 
Force Chief of Staff General Larry Welch, the Institute for Defense 
Analyses (IDA) has been involved in national security since its 
Federally Funded Research and Development Centers 231

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
232 Organizations
founding by former Defense Secretary James Forrestal in an ear-
lier incarnation in 1947. The organization had ties to the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology in the 1950s and opened as the 
Institute for Defense Analyses in 1958. The IDA works in three 
FFRDCs and in the widest array of national security concerns, 
studying the current and future questions at the center of the pub-
lic policy debate. The studies are on technical issues, most often at 
the classiﬁ ed level, or on policy questions.
RAND Corporation
Website: www.rand.org
The RAND Corporation is probably the best known FFRDC in 
the country. Created in the late 1940s as a think tank for the newly 
created Department of the Air Force, the Research and Develop-
ment Corporation (RAND) became involved in national security 
studies in the early years of the Cold War. Sixty years later, RAND 
still proudly notes its role in the cutting-edge analysis of a wide 
array of public policy questions ranging from drug abuse and 
health care coverage to military readiness, nuclear weapons, and 
China’s role in Taiwan. RAND has a much more diverse ﬁ eld of 
study than security but security remains a primary focus. RAND 
has nine speciﬁ c research divisions, including national security, 
which subdivides into acquisition and technology policy; forces 
and resources; intelligence policy; international security and 
defense policy; and international programs. The research divi-
sions all produce a mammoth number of traditional and online 
publications. Additionally, much of RAND’s work is contracted 
by the federal and state governments, and a portion of it is classi-
ﬁ ed. RAND’s work in national security is absolutely crucial and is 
often the benchmark by which policies are measured. RAND also 
operates two ofﬁ ces overseas, in Germany and Qatar.
Federal Institutions
This section is shorter than the not-for-proﬁ t section as many of 
these organization have other responsibilities besides security.
Air University
Website: www.au.af.mil/ 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
The Air University is the center of the Air Force professional mili-
tary education system. Begun in 1946, the Air University educates 
senior Air Force ofﬁ cers and noncommissioned ofﬁ cers about the 
use of airpower and space power in national security strategy at 
myriad military education facilities. Its work includes producing 
studies on national security. Each of the courses is designed to 
produce higher-quality air ofﬁ cers for national service and subse-
quent work beyond government service.
Central Intelligence Agency
Website: www.cia.gov
The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) grew from the World War 
II organization called the Ofﬁ ce of Special Services, a euphemism 
for a spy and associated action repository. The CIA resulted from 
the Defense Reform Act of 1947, which also created the Air Force 
and substituted the Department of Defense for the Department 
of War. The Agency’s goals are to provide timely, solid resources 
about the plans and activities of U.S. adversaries, engage in covert 
action to promote national interests, and provide useful analy-
sis to policymakers at the highest level of the U.S. government 
as well as in those areas where Agency personnel participate in 
public policy debate. Few portions of the U.S. government have 
evoked as much distress and suspicion as the CIA, particularly 
when intelligence failures occur, but its role remains important 
as intelligence in the post-9/11 world is more highly desired than 
ever. The overwhelming majority of the CIA’s work is classiﬁ ed 
but it offers public assessments of its studies at various times. The 
Agency has long been the senior agency in the intelligence com-
munity but now the director of National Intelligence oversees all 
of the community after September 11.
Department of Defense
Website: www.defenselink.mil
The Pentagon, a vast complex on the banks of the Potomac 
River in Virginia overlooking the nation’s capital, employs thou-
sands of uniformed and civilian employees under the Depart-
ment of Defense (DoD). The DoD resulted from the 1947 Depart-
ment of Defense Reorganization, which also established the CIA 
and the Air Force. The DoD has a staggering list of divisions and 
Federal Institutions 233

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
234 Organizations
activities, ranging from defending U.S. citizens overseas to wag-
ing war against terrorists around the world. The DoD, under the 
secretary of defense, operates the vast security community that is 
in uniformed service for the United States; other security organi-
zations, such as Homeland Security, also operate in the nation. The 
DoD’s organization is a challenge for all administrations because 
it is such a large but vital bureaucracy. One of the biggest changes 
in the post–Cold War era is the privatizing of defense as the U.S. 
government sought to cut back on spending and use private-
sector efﬁ ciencies. As a result, in the Iraq conﬂ ict, for example, 
the DoD has combat and support troops in Iraq but it also pays 
contractors to accomplish many support missions. 
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Website: www.fbi.gov 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is the law enforcement 
agency charged with protecting the nation against national secu-
rity threats that can be stopped through using the law. Its job is 
to protect the country against national security threats as well as 
common crime. The Bureau headquarters are in Washington, but 
it also has ﬁ fty-six ﬁ eld ofﬁ cers in other cities and maintains con-
nections with civilian law enforcement and international bureaus. 
In recent years, the FBI has been the brunt of some concern as peo-
ple have raised questions about intelligence failures in the lead up 
to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks as well as the FBI’s role 
in domestic spying and infringing on domestic civil rights as it 
administers the provisions of the Patriot Act. The FBI has made a 
determined effort to maintain its overall goals in a rapidly chang-
ing security context. 
Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce
E-mail: webmaster@gao.gov
Website: www.gao.gov
Known as the government watchdog, the agency started as the 
General Accounting Ofﬁ ce, but in July 2004, it became the Govern-
ment Accountability Ofﬁ ce (GAO). The GAO is the investigative 
arm of the legislature. Established as a result of the Budget and 
Accounting Act of 1921, the GAO is Congress’s tool for checking 
the executive branch’s operations. The GAO has the reputation 
and responsibility of being an independent, nonpartisan source 
of analysis that can conduct management or ﬁ nancial audits. The 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
comptroller serves a single, ﬁ fteen-year term to ensure indepen-
dence. The GAO audits any expenditures Congress authorizes 
and conducts mandated audits of various programs as well as 
audits requested by Congress. A signiﬁ cant portion of the GAO’s 
work focuses on national security and/or defense issues. The 
GAO conducts its audits and then presents its ﬁ ndings as oral 
testimony and reports; all of the unclassiﬁ ed versions appear in 
open sources. The GAO maintains an extensive website with its 
publications. 
Industrial College of the Armed Forces
Website: www.ndu.edu/icaf
The Industrial College of the Armed Forces (ICAF) is the federal 
institution that addresses how the United States would provide the 
resources for ﬁ ghting its conﬂ icts. Recently, it added the speciﬁ c 
task of studying strategic acquisition within the context of the 
national security community. The ICAF, located at historic Fort 
Lesley J. McNair in southwest Washington DC, dates to the after-
math of World War I when the United States discovered it had sev-
eral major logistical difﬁ culties in providing the resources required 
in the European theater during World War I. The reforms that fol-
lowed the conﬂ ict in the interwar period included a much greater 
emphasis on asking the military’s logistics corps to ascertain how 
to get a comprehensive, strategic vision of the best way to provide 
adequate supplies and resources. The Army Industrial College, as 
it was originally known, began this process and made connections 
with one of the major industrialists of the twentieth century, Bernard 
Baruch. In the 1930s, a young Army ofﬁ cer, Dwight Eisenhower, 
served on the faculty as he learned about the logistical matters that 
would become so crucial to his work in Europe two decades later. 
The Industrial College took on its present, “joint” mission at the 
conclusion of World War II when generals George C. Marshall and 
Eisenhower decided to act on the lessons they had learned dur-
ing World War II. In the 1940s, the Industrial College of the Armed 
Forces emerged from the Army Industrial College with a mission of 
educating logistics specialists from across the armed services and 
civilian sector of the government. The Industrial College joined the 
National Defense University at the latter’s creation in 1976. The 
Industrial College educates students at the strategic level and is
a senior service college in the professional U.S. military educa-
tion system. It operates an accredited ten-month master’s degree 
Federal Institutions 235

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
236 Organizations
program in national resource strategy. In the 1990s, the Indus-
trial College broadened some of its activities by adding civilians 
from the private sector as well as civilians from other nations to 
complement the military ofﬁ cers who ﬁ rst joined the ICAF classes 
in the mid-1980s at the invitation of the various chairmen of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff. Army General John Vessey graduated from 
the Industrial College before his accession to the position of chair-
man of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the 1980s. 
Marine Corps University
Website: www.mcu.usmc.mil
The Marine Corps University (MCU) is located at Quantico Marine 
Base south of the nation’s capital. The MCU has several compo-
nents that provide the foundational courses in the Marine Corps’ 
professional military education program. These include degree 
programs at the Marine War College, Marine Command and Staff 
College, and School of Advanced Warﬁ ghting, as well as schools 
such as the Lejeune Leadership Institute, the Expeditionary War-
fare School, and others. Small in number of students and faculty, 
MCU teaches its students to grasp how the Marine Corps operates 
as an instrument of the military tool of statecraft and offers Marines 
the opportunity to understand how to better use statecraft in con-
junction with its fellow military services. Curricula concentrate 
on leadership within the Corps and other institutions, as well as 
the operational and war-ﬁ ghting aspects of the current environ-
ment. The MCU has several component parts designed to meet the 
needs of Marines who come to Quantico at various stages in their 
professional careers needing new skills and educational opportu-
nities. The University also hosts a fascinating Marine Corps Center 
on Small Wars, which ponders lessons learned about the evolving 
world in which the United States seeks security.
National Defense University
Website: www.ndu.edu
Predated by several of its component parts, the National Defense 
University (NDU) began during the Gerald R. Ford administra-
tion (1974–1977) as the umbrella organization for the National 
War College and the Industrial College of the Armed Forces. 
Today, the NDU also includes the Institute for National Strate-
gic Studies, the Information Resource Management College, the 
Center for Technology and National Security Strategy, the North 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Atlantic Treaty Organization Staff College, the School of National 
Security Executive Education, and several other smaller parts. 
NDU is in the process of transitioning from teaching, researching, 
and providing outreach in the ﬁ eld of national defense to doing 
the same in the area of national security under provisions being 
discussed in 2007. Headed by a three-star ofﬁ cer with a State 
Department ambassador as the senior vice president, the NDU 
has become an integral part of the professional military education 
system and a crucial aspect of U.S. engagement with other mili-
taries and civilian security ofﬁ cials globally. The NDU Press pub-
lishes the chairman of the Joint Chief of Staff’s journal, Joint Force 
Quarterly, which ponders readiness, jointness, and the evolution 
of the world around us.
National War College
Website: www.ndu.edu/nwc
Created at the behest of generals Dwight D. Eisenhower and 
George C. Marshall, among others, the National War College 
(NWC) educates the future leaders of national security—policy-
makers, civilians, and military—of the United States and invited 
states abroad. The institution began in 1946 as the national mili-
tary leadership evaluated the lessons of World War II. Marshall 
and Eisenhower, among others, hoped that the nation would 
enhance national security by promoting better discussion across 
the military community and between civilians and armed forces 
personnel, foretelling the advent of the term “jointness” enshrined 
in the Goldwater-Nichols Military Reorganization Act forty years 
later. The NWC encompasses relatively equal portions of the Sea 
Services (Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard), Air Force, and 
Army, and a quarter of the students and faculty are from the civil-
ian parts of the U.S. government that have a national security 
focus. From the beginning, the State Department has also been a 
partner in the enterprise. The NWC offers a ten-month master’s 
degree in national security strategy and teaches students to ana-
lyze and prepare national security strategy. Students take a com-
mon core curriculum constituting 70 percent of their experience, 
then select a region to study for the entire year and four elec-
tive courses. Students at the NWC take oral examinations twice 
a year. Graduates of the NWC include former chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff General and Secretary of State Colin L. Pow-
ell; former Ambassador J. Stapleton Roy; Admiral William “Fox” 
Federal Institutions 237

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
238 Organizations
Fallen, combatant commander of the Central Command; General 
Michael “Buzz” Moseley, Air Force chief of staff; lieutenant gen-
erals Peter W. Chiarelli, USA, and Martin Dempsey, USA, both 
important ﬁ gures in post-Saddam Iraq; and Marine Corps general 
and recent chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Peter Pace. Its pur-
pose is to educate leaders but it also studies and critiques the cur-
rent national security strategy, trends at work in the global arena, 
and obstacles to conducting an integrated approach to providing 
security to the nation. Roughly three dozen international ofﬁ cers 
attend each annual class for a year. The NWC offers students the 
opportunity to learn how to think but is careful not to push any 
particular idea of what to think.
Naval War College
Website: www.nwc.navy.mil
The Naval War College (NWC), located in Newport, Rhode Island, 
has a distinguished history as an institution of vision for the Navy. 
Founded in the 1880s, the NWC has had one extraordinarily 
famous faculty member, Arthur Thayer Mahan, who remains the 
most famous naval strategist in U.S. history. The NWC is proud of 
its war-gaming capability, which prepared the Navy for the ardu-
ous campaign against the Japanese in the Paciﬁ c theater during 
World War II. The NWC hosts its students, heavily Marine and 
Navy in composition, for a ten-month master’s degree program. 
It also has an extensive research facility and world-class faculty 
studying maritime issues, including potential threats from mari-
time forces such as the Chinese or Russians. 
U.S. Army War College
Website: www.carlisle.army.mil
The U.S. Army War College (USAWC) started in the ﬁ rst decade 
of the twentieth century as part of the reforms set into motion by 
War Secretary Elihu Root, who saw changes in the international 
system and the U.S. role in that system because of its growing 
power. The USAWC originally operated in Washington DC but 
moved to Carlisle Barracks during World War II. The USAWC 
focus is on ground forces and ground power for the U.S. national 
security establishment. It offers a ten-month master’s degree pro-
gram as well as a number of highly regarded activities, such as the 
Peacekeeping Institute, which studies the lessons learned from 
various peacekeeping operations where the United States has 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
operated in the past twenty years. The Strategic Studies Institute 
at the USAWC was also fundamental in creating new strategies 
and reconsidering current strategies of how to ﬁ ght wars in the 
post-9/11 environment, speciﬁ cally in Iraq. The Strategic Studies 
Institute publishes a wealth of short papers under different series, 
such as the LaTort Papers, on military issues ranging beyond just 
those of the ground forces. It also publishes the highly prized 
Parameters, a quarterly journal. USAWC graduates include gener-
als Barry McCaffrey and Norman Schwarzkopf, key commanders 
of the ﬁ rst Gulf War.
Federal Institutions 239

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
241
8
Resources
I
n many ways, this is the most challenging chapter in this 
volume because it ranges so broadly across literature, media, 
and new formats for exchanging information and opinion. 
Not only do these media proliferate almost daily but the out-
put of various sources appears on topics and up-to-date publi-
cations. The creativity allowed by the emerging personal tech-
nologies is making resources available almost instantaneously. 
Examples of this since the ﬁ rst edition of U. S. National Security in 
2001 include weblogs (“blogs”), podcasts, and webcasts, among 
other media.
At the same time, the resources cannot be simply thrown 
open for each and every thing to be listed. The chapter lists the 
major works in the ﬁ elds of research and reporting about national 
security. It also explores the new media that are making an impact 
on public policy discussion and creating impressions. Govern-
ment reports appear as a sample because the federal government 
issues innumerable studies almost daily. Finally, in the section on 
broadcast media, the list gives the names of various websites of 
major organizations covered in this volume.
One of the most important aspects of understanding national 
security is to have access to a range of materials that I prefer label-
ing “resources.” Traditionally, the majority of items would have 
been listed under “Articles and Chapters,” which I list together 
because of their length, and monographs or edited volumes 
(again, length leads to grouping together). This topic has a wealth 
of offerings in these areas, as would be expected.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
242 Resources
Resources available electronically—whether through broad-
cast media or on the World Wide Web—are increasingly central to 
our research and reference concerns. As has been true for a decade, 
radio and television outlets have proliferated with the rise of cable 
systems around the country. An effect is that the researcher may 
ﬁ nd these resources through multiple entry points for the same 
material. One might use the organization’s website for the overall 
work of the institution or one might look through a search engine 
such as www.google.com. In using the engine, the researcher may 
look for a broad category, a speciﬁ c term, or the type of work the 
organization engages in, just to name a few methods. The effect 
on this chapter is an imprecise categorization of material when 
they are electronic. Some may appear as reports or through the 
particular website but this is to show the various options as much 
as for any other reason.
Added to this volume has been the new category “weblog,” 
Internet-based publications on a website created by an author 
to proliferate his or her views while also providing an interac-
tive method by which the reader can respond on a topic. While 
blogs are highly subjective and have little, if any, editorial inter-
vention on content, they are increasingly important mechanisms 
for sharing views across the world, outside of the traditional 
methods such as voting or polling. Blogs based on ﬁ eld experi-
ences, such as those of soldiers or sailors who have been deployed 
in a particular theater in a conﬂ ict, provide important personal 
insights. Finally, I have also included professional reading lists 
of several major institutions and individuals in the national secu-
rity ﬁ eld.
Books that are aimed at a large commercial audience are 
often also available in audio format, albeit usually somewhat 
abridged in length and content. While I do not highlight that 
aspect in a separate category, I recommend that individuals inter-
ested in ﬁ nding commercially successful titles look at commercial 
book sites such as amazon.com or bn.com for the availability of 
audio copies of these titles. The category of audio books is grow-
ing rapidly.
I have selected materials with a humble grasp of the enor-
mous volume of the materials on U.S. national security. I have 
chosen those focused as directly as possible on national security, 
not on the broad issues of foreign policy.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Print Resources
Articles and Special Issues 
of a Single Journal
Aylwyn-Foster, Nigel. “Changing the Army for Counter-Insur-
gency Operations.” Military Review, November-December 
2005: 2–15.
In this startlingly candid article, a senior British Army ofﬁ cer 
reﬂ ects upon what he saw in the initial months of coalition oper-
ations in Iraq. It illustrates the U.S. military’s long-term need 
to learn counterinsurgency techniques in the face of more likely 
scenarios.
Bacevich, Andrew. “Warrior Politics.” The Atlantic, May 2007: 
25–26.
This short but pointed piece argues that the recent turn of events 
that has a small portion of the military advocating against the war 
in Iraq is not a good turn because it moves away from the tradi-
tional nonpartisanship of the armed forces.
Barno, David. “Challenges in Fighting a Global Insurgency.” 
Parameters, 36, No. 2 (2006): 15–29.
Insurgency has appeared again in the studies of the U.S. armed 
forces as the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan prove that military 
superiority does not guarantee easy victory.
Cook, Martin. “The Proper Role of Professional Military Advice in 
Contemporary Uses of Force.” Parameters, 32, No. 4 (2002): 21–33.
One portion of national security for the United States is the civil-
military balance that Cook addresses.
Dowd, Alan. “A Different Course? The United States and Europe 
in the 21st Century.” Parameters, 34, No. 3 (2004): 61–74.
It has long been assumed that the United States will stay in 
step with its major partners in Europe, but Dowd casts doubts 
on this premise because of shifting interests on both sides of the 
Atlantic.
Print Resources 243

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
244 Resources
Flavin, William. “Planning for Conﬂ ict Termination and Post-
Conﬂ ict Success.” Parameters, 33, No. 3 (2003): 95–112.
With an increasing emphasis on interventions in conﬂ icts in poorly 
governed environments, understanding how to terminate a war 
in a place far away becomes more important to avoid replicating 
the problems of Vietnam.
Gray, Colin. “How Has War Changed since the End of the Cold 
War?” Parameters, 35, No. 1 (2005): 14–26.
Gray is one of the foremost scholars on the theory and conduct of 
national security today. This is his assessment of the past genera-
tion of changes.
Gray, Colin. “Thinking Asymmetrically in Times of Terror.” 
Parameters, 32, No. 1 (2002): 5–14.
Gray, one of the great contemporary strategists in the West, 
ponders what options are available to a state in the post-9/11 
environment.
Henry, Ryan. “Defense Transformation and the 2005 Quadrennial 
Defense Review.” Parameters, 35, No. 4 (2005): 5–15.
A senior Pentagon ofﬁ cial comments on the role of transformation 
some four years into the global war on terrorism.
Hooker, R. D. “Beyond Vom Kriege: The Character and Conduct 
of Modern War.” Parameters, 35, No. 2 (2005): 4–17.
Baron Karl von Clausewitz’s work remains one of few strategic 
assessments of what a state faces in waging warfare, even two 
centuries after he wrote it.
Kibble, David. “The Attacks of 9/11: Evidence of a Clash of 
Religions?” Parameters, 32, No. 3 (2002): 34–45.
Samuel Huntington’s “clash of civilizations” argument in the 
1990s led some in 2001 to wonder if the true clash was between 
religions.
Lewis, Anthony. “Bush and the Lesser Evil.” New York Review 
of Books, May 27, 2004.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Lewis, a columnist for the New York Times, questions the balance 
between national security and civil rights and liberties. This theme 
has arisen repeatedly in the post-9/11 era as the Bush administra-
tion has found it necessary to curtail basic rights to protect against 
terrorism.
”The Long War: A Dedicated Issue.” Special Issue. Third World 
Quarterly, Winter 2007.
This dedicated issue has about two dozen assessments of the 
problem of the long war against terrorism, subversion, and chal-
lenges to world stability, especially for the United States.
Maloney, Sean. “Afghanistan Four Years On: An Assessment.” 
Parameters, 35, No. 3 (2005): 21–32.
The almost uniform view in the United States that Afghanistan’s 
Taliban regime allowed terrorism to ﬂ ourish makes it crucial to 
evaluate how this state is progressing.
O’Hanlon, Michael. “The Need to Increase the Size of the 
Deployable Army.” Parameters, 34, No. 3 (2004): 4–17.
O’Hanlon of the Brookings Institution considers the need to have 
a greater number of troops to meet the requirements the new war-
fare is imposing.
Pratt, Robert. “Invasive Threats to the American Homeland.” 
Parameters, 34, No. 1 (2004): 44–61.
Even after the 2001 attacks, some people prefer to believe in the 
inviolability of the homeland, which Pratt thinks is a bad analysis.
Record, Jeffrey. “The Bush Doctrine and War with Iraq.” 
Parameters, 33, No. 1 (2003): 4–21.
The question of whether Iraq ﬁ ts into the ideas President George 
W. Bush set forth in his 2002 speech at West Point requires a recon-
sideration of the positive and negative aspects of going to war in 
this manner.
Record, Jeffrey. “Why the Strong Lose.” Parameters, 35, No. 4 
(2005): 16–31.
Print Resources 245

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
246 Resources
Record is a professor at the Air War College, where he has often 
raised questions that made people uncomfortable as he does here. 
His questions include why the United States has done poorly in 
counterinsurgency operations while being more successful against 
larger adversaries such as the Soviet Union, as well as questioning 
the role of political will in these conﬂ icts.
Schnaubelt, Christopher. “After the Fight: Interagency Opera-
tions.” Parameters, 35, No. 4 (2005): 47–61.
One of the hardest lessons of the Iraq experience has been the real-
ity that the interagency battles for rebuilding, governance build-
ing, and stability requirements are often as difﬁ cult as the actual 
conﬂ ict.
Skelton, Ike. “The Constitutional Role of Congress: Lessons in 
Unpreparedness.” Military Review, July-August 1997: 1–15.
The Missouri congressman comments on congressional responsi-
bilities and rights in national security operations.
Skelton, Ike, and Jim Cooper. “You’re Not from Here, Are You?” 
Joint Force Quarterly, Spring 2004: 12–16.
One of the most common criticisms of U.S. forces in Iraq and 
Afghanistan has been that the troops in theater have inadequate 
cultural awareness. The Missouri congressman and his coauthor 
argue that this military preparedness—in education, situational 
awareness, and Middle Eastern culture, as examples—must be 
systematically improved upon.
Smith, Paul. “Transnational Terrorism and the Al Qaeda Model: 
Confronting New Realities.” Parameters, 32, No. 2 (2002): 33–46.
In the months after the 9/11 attacks, many different views of what 
the al Qaeda model told us about world terrorism appeared, such 
as Smith’s.
Snider, Don. “Jointness, Defense Transformation, and the Need 
for a New Joint Warfare Profession.” Parameters, 33, No. 3 
(2003): 17–30.
Much of the discussion after 9/11 has centered on the type of 
profession the armed forces should be along with its educational 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
requirements. Snider, a retired Army ofﬁ cer, has long studied the 
effects of poor “jointness” as it affects things like professional mil-
itary education and military professionalism.
Tomes, Robert. “Relearning Counterinsurgency Warfare.” Para-
meters, 34, No. 1 (2004): 16–28.
Some argue that the Army tried to forget counterinsurgency after 
the end of the war in Southeast Asia in the 1970s. Tomes discusses 
the lessons and overall analysis that must be reconsidered from 
that earlier conﬂ ict.
Wester, Franklin Eric. “Preemption and Just War: Considering 
the Case of Iraq.” Parameters, 34, No. 4 (2004): 20–39.
The Bush doctrine of “preemption” remains a major aspect of 
studying the war on terrorism and the new millennium. The mili-
tary has always been aware of the importance of a “just war” tra-
dition as this article explains.
Books and Monographs
Ballard, John. Fighting for Fallujah. Westport, CT: Praeger 
Security International, 2006.
The Marines had a tough battle in Fallujah, which Ballard recounts 
in detail. The book describes the challenges and overarching con-
cerns many see in Iraq and speculates about future nontraditional 
conﬂ icts for the post-9/11, globalized world.
Bamford, James. Body of Secrets: Anatomy of the Ultra-Secret 
National Security Agency. New York: Anchor, 2002.
Perhaps the least known of the major intelligence agencies, the 
National Security Agency concerns itself with signals intelli-
gence. Bamford has written extensively about its role in protect-
ing national security.
Boot, Max. The Savage Wars of Peace: Small Wars and the Rise of 
American Power. New York: Basic Books, 2003.
Boot is a scholar at the Council on Foreign Relations, where he 
strongly advocates the use of U.S. military power for appropriate 
Print Resources 247

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
248 Resources
missions, dispelling traditional arguments that the United States 
is isolationist in nature and prefers to project its power to protect 
its security.
Brzezinski, Zbigniew. Second Chance: Three Presidents and the 
Crisis of American Superpower. New York: Basic Books, 2007.
President Jimmy Carter’s national security adviser argues force-
fully against the George W. Bush administration’s moves in most 
of the world. He is less critical of other administrations but not 
entirely. He believes the situation can be turned around but can-
not continue as is.
Cohen, Eliot A. Supreme Command: Soldiers, Statesmen, and 
Leadership in Wartime. New York: Anchor, 2003.
Cohen is a scholar at the Johns Hopkins University Foreign Policy 
Institute in Washington DC, but his respect within the ﬁ elds of 
practitioners and scholars ranges far beyond the nation’s capi-
tal. Cohen is a strategist and high-level thinker who applies his 
analysis to national security leadership. In this volume he looks at 
how statesmen Abraham Lincoln, Georges Clemenceau, Winston 
Churchill, and David Ben-Gurion interacted with their military in 
times of war.
Cordesman, Anthony. Salvaging American Defense: The Chal-
lenge of Strategic Overreach. Westport, CT: Praeger Security 
International, 2007.
One of the most respected analysts of national security affairs con-
siders what the options will be for the national security commu-
nity in light of the Iraq experience.
Darmer, M. Katherine, Robert Baird, and Stuart Rosenbaum. 
Civil Rights versus National Security in a Post-9/11 World. 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2004.
The growing discussion of whether national security is more 
important than civil rights and liberties is the focus of this book, 
coming in the aftermath of 9/11 and the global war on terrorism.
DeYoung, Karen. Soldier: The Life of Colin Powell. New York: 
Knopf, 2006.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
A Washington Post reporter studies Powell’s life before and during 
public service with heavy emphasis on his service as chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff (1989–1993) and as secretary of state at the 
beginning of the war against Iraq.
Durch, William J. Twenty-First Century Peace Operations. 
Washington DC: U.S. Institute for Peace, 2006.
The U.S. Institute for Peace, in conjunction with the Henry Stim-
son Center, discusses the experiences of peace operators in try-
ing to establish national security around the world, speciﬁ cally in 
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, East Timor, Sierra Leone, 
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Kosovo.
Dycus, Stephen, Arthur Berney, William Banks, and Peter 
Raven-Hansen. National Security Law. New York: Aspen, 2006.
This book takes a standard legal approach, including case stud-
ies, to various U.S. national security involvements in places like 
Colombia and Afghanistan.
Fair, C. Christine, and Peter Chalk. Fortifying Pakistan: The 
Role of U.S. Internal Security Assistance. Washington DC: U.S. 
Institute for Peace, 2006.
Few, if any, states are more important than Pakistan in trying to 
implement national security for the United States. President Mush-
arraf’s need for foreign help is emblematic of the danger posed by 
fragile states, especially with volatile fractures in their societies, 
but the United States will provide it willingly and repeatedly.
Fallows, James. Blind into Baghdad: America’s War in Iraq. New 
York: Random House, 2006.
Fallows, the national correspondent for the Atlantic Monthly, 
wrote several extensive essays in his magazine in the months pre-
ceding and during the war’s unfolding in Iraq. They pull together 
in a haunting manner to show that the United States had evi-
dence available of many of the problems that have subsequently 
appeared in country.
Fisher, Louis. In the Name of National Security: Unchecked 
Presidential Power and the Reynolds Case. Lawrence: University 
of Kansas Press, 2006.
Print Resources 249

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
250 Resources
Fisher is a long-time scholar at the Congressional Research Ser-
vice. He goes back to the 1953 U.S. v. Reynolds case about presi-
dential power to ignore the separation of powers in considering 
President Bush’s approach to the post-9/11 world.
Fisk, William. The Great War for Civilisation: The Conquest for 
the Middle East. New York: Vintage, 2006.
Fisk, who has been writing about Middle Eastern affairs for British 
publications for more than thirty years, offers a scathing critique 
of why U.S. desires to enhance national security in the region are 
futile and counterproductive. Painful to read at times, it offers a 
more comprehensive view of the region than is provided by many 
U.S. sources over the same period instead of focusing on a series 
of isolated events.
Flynn, Stephen. The Edge of Disaster: Rebuilding a Resilient 
Nation. New York: Random House, 2007.
Flynn, a former Coast Guard ofﬁ cer with extensive interagency 
experience, argues that our focus on the national security threat is 
not properly placed on situations outside the United States, and 
that we need focus on domestic threats, such as natural disasters 
or an avian ﬂ u outbreak. Flynn is one of a number of specialists 
fearing that domestic concerns have disproportionately taken a 
back seat to our homeland security threats from overseas. 
Fouskas, Vassilis, and Błent Gökay, The New American 
Imperalism: Bush’s War on Terror and Blood for Oil. Westport, 
CT: Praeger Security International, 2005.
A review of the effects on the international system by having a 
single superpower—the United States—and how it affects the 
way the United States approaches the global war on terrorism in 
the Middle East.
Franks, Tommy R. American Soldier. New York: HarperCollins, 
2004.
The autobiography of the commanding general at Central Com-
mand through the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq illustrates 
the wide array of national security conditions that have changed 
since the end of the Cold War in 1989.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Garrett, Laurie. The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in 
a World Out of Balance. London: Penguin, 1995.
This most respected author on health threats around the world 
wades into the national security implications of disease in the glo-
balized world.
George, Roger, and Robert D. Kline, eds. Intelligence and the 
National Security Strategist: Enduring Issues and Challenges. 
London: Rowman & Littleman, 2005.
This long-term analyst and former professor at the National War 
College offers a solid set of essays on the bureaucratic and opera-
tional issues confronting the intelligence community as the com-
plications of national security expand.
Gerstein, Daniel. Securing America’s Future: National Security 
in the Information Age. Westport, CT: Praeger Security Inter-
national, 2005.
Gerstein, an Army ofﬁ cer, discusses the importance of the infor-
mation tools available to the United States in the current national 
security environment. Many scholars believe the truly greatest 
threat to the United States is the ubiquitous nature of information 
in the current world. Examples include taking steps to protect the 
computer systems of the military and remainder of the govern-
ment as well as ensuring the ﬁ delity of the banking system.
Gordon, Michael, and Bernard Trainor. Cobra II: The Inside Story 
of the Invasion and Occupation of Iraq. New York: Pantheon, 
2006.
Gordon is the foremost New York Times reporter on national secu-
rity and military affairs, and his coauthor is a retired Marine 
Corps lieutenant general. Their work illustrates the many risks 
and adverse events that can occur when a superpower invades 
another state.
Kagan, Robert. Dangerous Nation. New York: Knopf, 2006.
Kagan is a scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for Inter-
national Peace and is often touted, by both his critics and support-
ers, as a major architect of the decision to remold the Middle East 
through Saddam Hussein’s ouster. This book is a critique of how 
Print Resources 251

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
252 Resources
U.S. interests changed along with the nation’s growing prowess and 
capacity of the past 200 years. An advocate of U.S. leadership in the 
world, Kagan offers a sobering view of the effects of that power.
LeMay, Michael. Immigration and National Security. Westport, 
CT: Praeger Security International, 2006.
The debate about immigration is taking a more central role in pub-
lic policy over this decade. Its role in national security is the focus 
of this volume’s appraisal of current and future developments.
Lord, Carnes. Losing Hearts and Minds: Public Diplomacy and 
Strategic Inﬂ uence in the Age of Terror. Westport, CT: Praeger 
Security International, 2006.
A long-term analyst at the Naval War College considers how U.S. 
approaches to potential allies or adversaries around the world 
affect our security.
Mueller, John. Overblown: How Politicians and the Terrorism 
Industry Inﬂ ate National Security Threats, and Why We Believe 
Them. New York: Free Press, 2006.
As the initial shock of the September 11 terrorist attacks has worn 
off, a small number of books such as Mueller’s have appeared 
questioning how widespread and real the threat is versus the 
costs the nation is asked to bear in combating such a threat.
Murtha, John. From Vietnam to Iraq: On the Front Lines of 
National Security. 2nd ed. State College: Pennsylvania State 
University Press, 2006.
Congressman Murtha’s strong criticism of President Bush’s Iraq 
policy ignited a ﬁ restorm in 2005 and may have contributed to 
the Democrats’ victory in the 2006 congressional elections. His 
own experience as a Marine in Vietnam helped form his views. 
He recounts that experience and the more than thirty years he 
spent in Congress.
Perry, John. Torture: Religious Ethics and National Security. 
Boston: Novalis, 2005.
The revelations about Abu Ghraib and questions about other 
interrogation facilities during the global war on terrorism have 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
raised considerable debate about the ethics and morality of using 
torture, even for the sake of national security. Perry explores this 
overwhelming concern.
Powell, Colin L., with Joseph Persico. My American Journey. 
New York: Ballantine Books, 2003.
Written after he retired as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
and as he was pondering a presidential run, General Colin Powell 
describes the national security challenges he faced in a variety of 
positions over his military career.
Priest, Dana. The Mission: Waging War and Keeping Peace with 
America’s Military. New York: W. W. Norton, 2004.
Priest writes for the Washington Post, where she has covered a 
number of major security stories. This appraisal of the role of the 
military in missions beyond traditional warfare shows the meth-
ods the United States takes to achieve security.
Raddatz, Martha. The Long Road Home: A Story of War and 
Family. New York: Putnam, 2007.
The White House correspondent for ABC News also spends much 
time reporting on the war in Iraq. This recounting and consider-
ation of the Sadr City campaigns in Baghdad tries to get at the 
personal experience for the Army men and women waging war 
there.
Ricks, Thomas. Fiasco: The American Military Adventure in Iraq. 
New York: Penguin Press, 2006.
Long a nationally respected military correspondent, Ricks con-
sidered the lessons, mistakes, and misassumptions about the Iraq 
campaign in its initial stages and the activities of the ﬁ rst three 
years. It is a powerful criticism of the war in Iraq.
Schlesinger, James, and John Deutch. National Security 
Consequences of Oil Dependency: Report of an Independent Task 
Force. New York: Council on Foreign Relations, 2007.
This special report on oil dependency, a topic President Bush rec-
ognized in his 2006 State of the Union message, has become one of 
the most worrisome for many in the national security community.
Print Resources 253

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
254 Resources
Snow, Donald. National Security for a New Era. 2nd ed. London: 
Longman, 2006.
The author, long a scholar of national security affairs, contem-
plates the role that globalization plays in the approach to national 
security today, especially after the 2001 attacks and years’ involve-
ment in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Tenet, George. At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA. 
New York: HarperCollins, 2007.
Released to signiﬁ cant controversy over its timing and contents, 
the former CIA director makes serious charges about the process 
the George W. Bush administration followed in deciding to go to 
war in Iraq in 2003. Tenet won the National Medal of Freedom but 
believes himself the victim of political retribution as the war drags 
into its fourth year.
Watson, Cynthia. U.S. Military Service. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-
CLIO, 2007.
This book discusses the role of national service, especially mili-
tary service, in national security and national life. It emphasizes 
the current climate in the aftermath of greater U.S. involvement 
around the world after 9/11.
Watson, Cynthia. National Security. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-
CLIO, 2002.
Written prior to 9/11, the ﬁ rst edition of this volume shows a con-
siderably different interpretation of the world, as views of national 
security have changed signiﬁ cantly in the last six years since its 
publication. The ﬁ rst was mainly concerned with the challenges 
of the post–Cold War world as states and organizations sought 
to regain their understanding of the global system, in contrast to 
the current edition, which focuses on the period where Iraq and 
global terrorism are paramount.
Watson, Cynthia. Stability, Security, Reconstruction and Tran-
sition Operations. Westport, CT: Praeger Security International, 
2007.
The issues facing the national security community increasingly 
include things beyond traditional conﬂ ict. This makes prepara-
tion much harder than before.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Wright, Lawrence. The Looming Tower: Al-Qaeda and the Road 
to 9/11. New York: Knopf, 2006.
A carefully detailed discussion of the trends that led to the indi-
viduals who became the heart of the mujahideen in Afghanistan, 
then al Qaeda. It has a superb explanation of the environment in 
which the members operate as well as a portion on the bureau-
cratic limits on U.S. responses to the threats.
Zinni, Tony. The Battle for Peace. London: Palgrave McMillan, 
2006.
The former Central Command leader and long-serving Marine 
comments on the ways he would enhance national security in a way 
that is quite different from the current administration’s choices.
Reports
Human Security Centre. Human Security Report 2005 War and 
Peace in the Twenty-First Century. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2005.
The beginning page of the report, commissioned for Canadian 
and European scholars, notes that the “traditional goal of ‘national 
security’ has been defending the state against foreign threats while 
human security defends the individual.” This is a different view 
but has the possibility of taking the ﬁ eld into another direction.
National Security Council. The National Security Strategy of the 
United States of America. Washington DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Ofﬁ ce, 2002. 35 pp. (available online at www.white-
house.gov/nsc/nss.html).
This strategy was the initial one following the 9/11 attacks, thus 
has a substantially greater sense of urgency and concern about 
addressing the terrorist threat than had been seen earlier.
National Security Council. The National Security Strategy of the 
United States of America. Washington DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Ofﬁ ce, 2006. 54 pp. (available at www.whitehouse.gov/
nsc/nss/2006).
Five years into the global war on terrorism, this strategy is more 
reﬁ ned in its assessment of the threats but more detailed in the 
steps necessary to accomplish it.
Print Resources 255

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
256 Resources
U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce. “Stabilizing Iraq: Pre-
liminary Observations on Budget and Management Challenges 
of Iraq’s Security Ministries.” Washington DC: U.S. Govern-
ment Printing Ofﬁ ce, 2007.
This is one of a series of many U.S. government analyses of 
the evolving situation in Iraq. This particular report contains 
testimony before Congress on the needs of Iraq’s crucial public 
security areas.
 In addition to the speciﬁ c reports above, The Council on Foreign 
Relations, being one of the most proliﬁ c and well-staffed research 
institutions in the nation, publishes a range of reports at its web-
site, www.cfr.org. Some examples include the following:
Hills, Carla, and Dennis C. Blair. U.S.-China Relations: An Afﬁ rma-
tive Agenda, A Responsible Course. Task Force Report No. 59, 
April 2007 (also available in hard copy from Council on For-
eign Relations Press).
Larson, Alan, and David Marchick. “Foreign Investment and 
National Security: Getting the Balance Right.” July 25, 2006.
Levi, Michael, and Charles Ferguson. “U.S.-India Nuclear Coop-
eration.” Special Report, June 20, 2006.
Nonprint Resources
Think-Tank Websites and Products
Think-tank publications are crucial to the resource base on national 
security. This section highlights the websites for these groups and 
highlights the subject matter they publish.
Such resources are virtually unlimited because some organi-
zations, such as the American Enterprise Institute (www.aie.org) 
or the Project for the New American Century (www.newameri-
cancentury.org/), hold multiple events daily, a signiﬁ cant portion 
of which are national security events. This listing offers a sample of 
the events one can ﬁ nd, increasingly available as webcasts online. 
The organization GlobalSecurity.org (www.globalsecurity
.org) operates primarily on the Internet and through public appear-
ances, providing one of the strongest databases and explanatory 
websites on various national security topics. It is run by John Pike, 
a long-time public-sector monitor of national military technolo-
gies in space, and it offers a wide range of considerations, includ-

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
ing the technological challenges offered by other states around the 
world such as the People’s Republic of China or India.
Similarly, the Federation of American Scientists, a not-for-
proﬁ t of scientists interested in security issues, maintains an active 
database on its website at www.fas.org.
The Global Chicago Center of the Chicago Council on 
Global Affairs maintains a detailed website (www.globalchicago
.org/about/website.asp) with hyperlinks to organizations associ-
ated with national security across the nation. 
The Heritage Foundation maintains a website at www
.NationalSecurity.org that offers blogs, studies, opinions, and pol-
icy statements. The regular Heritage website is www.heritage.org; 
it too has links to many national security thoughts, studies, and 
reports.
The Atlantic Council (www.acus.org) has a range of policy 
briefs on questions of pressing interest to those studying national 
security, including such studies as “Russia’s Shrinking Popula-
tion and the Russian Military’s HIV/AIDS Problem,” “China’s 
Rise and U.S. Inﬂ uence in Asia: A Report form the Region,” and 
“Whither the European Union?”
The Center for Defense Information (www.cdi.org) pub-
lishes a raft of topics in a variety of formats. Perhaps its most ven-
erable work is The Defense Monitor, which considers about two 
dozen broad topics in national security. The Center also puts out a 
range of reports and maintains blogs.
One of the more innovative sets of views appears from For-
eign Policy in Focus (www.fpif.org), a website produced through 
the International Relations Center in conjunction with the Insti-
tute for Policy Studies. Some of the more recent publications on 
its site include “Reconstructing Iraq,” “Anti-Americanism or Stra-
tegic Communication,” “China: What’s the Big Mystery?” and 
“Wrangling over Arms Sales to China.”
Timely reports on topics of interest to U.S. national security 
students include the International Crisis Group, whose work 
appears at www.icg.org. The organization produces a weekly 
report, Crisis Watch, which maintains an ongoing assessment of 
the state of affairs in the places of turmoil around the world. The 
Center’s website also indicates special concerns about known 
conﬂ ict zones including Darfur, Iran and its nuclear program, 
the Congo conﬂ ict, Zimbabwe, Afghanistan, and the role of Islam 
and violence. Finally, the website also publishes more immediate 
assessments on military coups or other key changes in a nation, as 
Nonprint Resources 257

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
258 Resources
occurred with the September 2006 coup ousting Thai Prime Min-
ister Thaksin. With its truly global ties, many of the assessments 
offer a completely different view than that on a topic held in the 
United States.
The New America Foundation maintains an extensive web-
site at www.naf.org with a range of domestic and foreign issues.
Blogs
The most signiﬁ cant change to the public debate over the past 
ﬁ ve years has been the proliferation of blogs, a site maintained 
by an author or “blogger” who posts on a subject of interest to 
him or her. The website may contain text, pictures, or other mate-
rial available to anyone who accesses that particular URL but also 
offers the opportunity for readers to respond to the views or mate-
rial posted by the blogger. There is absolutely no control over the 
quality or accuracy of the material on any blog.
Blogs are so common that maintaining an up-to-date listing 
is almost impossible but the Internet Public Library site (www
.ipl.org), maintained at Drexel University, is a good starting point
. Additionally, http://About.com, Wikipedia.com, and Deepblog
.com are useful starting points.
Many think tanks maintain blogs for their scholars as exem-
pliﬁ ed at a couple of organizations. The Heritage Foundation 
(www.heritage.org) maintains an active blog on national security 
as do a number of other organizations and individuals.
The Center for Defense Information (www.cdi.org) has 
links to blogs on several topics in the national security ﬁ eld. These 
include a range of opinions in various regional programs the Cen-
ter follows, such as the Middle East. Blog entries on the Middle 
East include “UN Security Council Responds Again to Iranian 
Nuclear Crisis” (March 30, 2007), “East of the Middle East: The 
Shanghai Cooperative Organization and Security Implications” 
(December 21, 2006), and “The Perfect Storm: International Reac-
tion to the Bush National Space Policy” (March 27, 2007). The 
blogs appear in a range of more than thirty programs.
Many blogs advocate extending the commitment of U.S. 
forces abroad (in Iraq and elsewhere) while many others push to 
withdraw U.S. forces. The number of examples are almost lim-
itless because the process of creating blogs is open to virtually 
anyone with an Internet connection. The blog American Ranger 
discusses the downside of war but notes that leaving the United 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
States vulnerable to terrorists in Iraq would be worse, shown at 
http://americanranger.blogspot.com . The blog at http://alternet
.org is a liberal blog advocating movement out of Iraq and criticiz-
ing the Congress for not doing so.
Blogs will be especially prominent in the 2008 general elec-
tion, as they offer an opportunity to access an exceptional number 
of people with no intervening voices. 
Blogs can address the broadest national security concerns 
within a single site such as Blogs of War (http://blogsofwar.com), 
which has hyperlinks to opinions on several topics such as Afghan-
istan, China, Europe, intelligence, Iran, Iraq, Islam, Israel, Lebanon, 
the military, North Korea, Syria, terrorism, and Venezuela.
Some of the most frequently visited types of blogs are those 
that discuss the experiences U.S. forces face in their deploy-
ments around the world. The blog AmericanSoldier.com (www
.soldierlife.com) is an example, as is Army Girl (www.desert
phoenix.blogspot.com); and another (http://bootsinbaghdad
.blogspot.com) discusses deployments in Iraq while offering a 
wide set of hyperlinks to other websites and blogs.
Radio and Television
Literally thousands of outlets cover the national security ﬁ eld in 
the broadcast media on national security but several outlets spe-
cialize in a relatively systematic study of national security issues. 
Another innovation available from virtually all media today is the 
podcast, digitized ﬁ les that maintain transcripts from media that 
can be replayed. Http://www.podcast.net is a relatively accessi-
ble source of podcasts that appear in radio, television, or through 
a think tank or another organization. The best method of tracking 
down podcasts, however, is to check the individual website of an 
organization to see about podcast availability. 
The television and radio outlets below merit emphasis in the 
national security ﬁ eld and have exposure to audiences around the 
nation, not isolated to single cities or markets. Included in this 
chapter are programs that offer at least a modicum of both con-
servative and liberal views either in a particular show or in a pro 
and con format on a topic over a period of time.
Conservative Talk Radio: Rush Limbaugh
Over the past twenty years, “talk radio” has been called the 
purview of those advertising conservative political positions. 
Nonprint Resources 259

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
260 Resources
Probably best known has been Rush Limbaugh, who appears in 
markets across the country on radio. Limbaugh’s prior shows up 
to four weeks earlier, including stories on national security con-
cerns, are available at http://www.rushlimbaugh.com/archives. 
Limbaugh has had shows on terrorism, national security strategy, 
and al Qaeda. Limbaugh often examines security from a liberal-
conservative axis.
Other commentators and hosts air in local markets across the 
nation.
C-Span
This is an amazing effort that began nearly three decades ago and 
runs 24 hours daily year round on public policy issues. Much of 
the C-Span programming is national security in nature, a portion 
of which can be purchased at the C-Span store on the website. 
Http://inside.C-spanarchives.org gives an archival listing of var-
ious C-Span programming, including national security.
“Brian Lamb interviews Eliot Cohen on Iraq,” originally aired 
July 21, 2005.
“Foreign Policy Realists and Idealists with former Secretary of 
State James A. Baker,” originally aired February 27, 2007.
Stephen Flynn, “The Edge of Disaster: Rebuilding a Resilient 
Nation,” aired April 8, 2007.
“Bomb Scare with Joseph Cirincione and Dafna Linzer,” originally 
aired March 9, 2007.
“U.S.–Latin American Relations with Peter Hakim and Roger 
Noriega,” March 11, 2007.
Five services that C-Span provides—“Booknotes” (and “Booknotes 
Encore”), “After Words,” “In Depth,” “History,” and “Public 
Lives”—are shows surveying new books and earlier books where 
an interviewer has an extended conversation with the author on 
his or her topic or philosophy, or interviews prominent ﬁ gures 
who are at the center of public attention at the time.
Grandin, Greg, “Empire’s Workshop: Latin America, the United 
States, and the New Imperialism,” aired on March 10, 2007.
Lance, Peter, “Triple Cross: How Bin Laden’s Master Spy Pene-
trated the CIA, the Green Berets, and the FBI—and How Pat-
rick Fitzgerald Failed to Stop Him,” aired on March 11, 2007.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
“Bernard Lewis delivering the AEI Irving Kristol Lecture 2007,” 
aired March 10, 2007.
Padma Desai, Conversations on Russia: Reform from Yeltsin to Putin, 
aired February 17, 2007.
The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer
The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer has been a staple on the Corporation 
of Public Broadcasting’s Public Broadcasting System for decades. 
Originally a two-man effort under Robin McNeill and Jim Lehrer, 
the latter inherited the effort upon McNeill’s retirement. It brings 
interviews and special reports on topics of interest from at home 
and abroad and covers national security issues on an almost daily 
basis. The NewsHour also maintains reports online (www.pbs.
org/newshour), and is updated quickly to achieve relevance.
The website has a marvelous range of national security top-
ics. One can browse based on the region or topic of interest. Along 
with an extensive archive access back to 1996, the site features 
podcasts and RSS feeds. This list is only a small number of items 
that the NewsHour has covered in recent years. Some are in-
depth reports available online while others are reports aired on 
television.
“Climate Change Report,” April 6, 2007.
“Tracking Nuclear Proliferation,” March 26, 2007.
“President Bush Seeks Patience as Iraq War Enters 5th Year,” 
March 20, 2007.
 “Verifying and Monitoring States,” May 5, 2006.
“Heart of Darkness,” May 11, 2004.
“Missile Defense,” December 16, 2003.
“Dangerous Cargo,” December 11, 2002.
 “Fighting War,” November 25, 2002.
 “Deadly Incident,” July 2, 2002.
“Artillery Battle,” June 19, 2002.
“Photo Fallout,” May 5, 2002.
“Newsmaker: Condoleezza Rice,” March 11, 2002.
“Prisoners of War,” January 22, 2002.
Network News
The three major U.S. networks also maintain news commitments 
to national security. The networks multiply their output of news 
by loading many reports on their websites. These are available at 
Nonprint Resources 261

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
262 Resources
www.ABCNews.com, www.CBSnews.com, and www.NBCnews
.com. Many of their stories focus on national security.
British Broadcasting Corporation
The BBC has the most wide-ranging foreign reporting in the world, 
in the majority of cases reporters speak the languages of the region, 
including obscure languages such as Pashtun or various dialects 
in Arabic. This gives them a wealth of information about parts of 
the world that far too few in the United States ever consider yet 
U.S. national security may depend on. Two premier BBC radio 
broadcasts available from many stations are “BBC Newshour” 
and “World Update,” which cover many U.S. national security 
topics. Similarly, the BBC also has extensive television coverage 
that appears in the United States on “BBC America,” which is 
available in many cable outlets across the nation.
The BBC has an active website that covers many national 
security concerns. It is accessible in English, Spanish, Arabic, and 
other languages at www.bbcnews.org. There is also an amazing 
array of resources available on radio on national security. These 
are live broadcasts that can be “streamed” online on computer or 
heard on traditional radio formats.
National Public Radio
National Public Radio (NPR) stations transmit to local networks 
from sites across the nation, although some major markets such 
as Los Angeles or New York have multiple NPR afﬁ liates. Many 
of these afﬁ liates use only National Public Radio–created stories 
for the national market but some of the afﬁ liates broadcast their 
own shows through a franchising system across the nation. Sev-
eral of the shows have considerable national security content and 
are highlighted below.
“To the Point” appears from KCRW Public Radio in Los 
Angeles and Public Radio International with Warren Olney as 
the show’s host. The show’s website is www.kcrw.com/news/
programs/tp, which includes descriptions of various shows as well 
as the ability to hear them online. A sample of its national security 
shows, shown on the www.kcrw.com/archive website, include
“Diplomacy and the Promises of Democracy in the Middle East,” 
March 28, 2007.
“New Controversy over the So-Called Israel Lobby,” March 26, 
2007.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
“All Eyes on Congress as House Votes on War Funding Bill,” 
March 23, 2007.
“The U.S. and India: Nuclear Power and Atomic Weapons,” 
December 13, 2006.
“When is National Security News Unﬁ t to Print?,” June 30, 2006.
“Civil Liberties, National Security, and Domestic Surveillance,” 
December 19, 2005.
“John Bolton, Politics, and Iraq Intel,” May 11, 2005.
“America and Islam, Four Years Later,” March 19, 2007.
 “9/11 Commission Report Urgent Action Needed,” July 22, 
2004.
“The CIA, the White House, and American Security,” November 
16, 2004.
 “American Preparations for Shock and Awe in Iraq,” March 18, 
2003.
“Missile Defense,” May 2, 2001.
“On Point with Tom Ashbrook” broadcasts from WGBH in 
Boston to discuss current activities in a range of ﬁ elds, including 
national security. Its website is www.onpointradio.org and sev-
eral of its relevant programs include
“Tom Ricks on How Progress is Going in Iraq Several Months 
after Publishing Fiasco,” aired update April 2, 2007.
“Showdown between Presidents Chávez Frías and Bush,” aired 
March 8, 2007.
“Terror Threat Overblown,” aired March 5, 2007.
“North Korea’s Nuclear Test,” aired October 10, 2006.
“‘Islamo-Fascism’,” aired September 6, 2006.
”The Looming Tower with Lawrence Wright,” aired September 5, 
2006.
“Strategizing a Solution in the Middle East,” aired August 31, 
2006.
“Sarah Chayes on Afghanistan,” aired August 26, 2006.
 “Russia and the United States,” aired July 17, 2006.
“The Pentagon Papers Thirty-Five Years Later,” aired June 13, 
2006.
“Seymour Hersh and Target Iran,” aired April 11, 2006.
“Solutions to Global Warming Crisis,” aired March 30, 2006.
“The Diane Rehm Show” is from WAMU in Washington DC. 
The complete archive of the show is available on the station’s 
Nonprint Resources 263

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
264 Resources
website at www.wamu.org/programs/dr. A partial listing of top-
ics she has covered in recent years includes
“Climate Change and Security,” March 21, 2007.
“President Bush in Latin America,” March 8, 2007.
“U.S. Policy on Iraq,” February 29, 2007.
“U.S.-Russia,” February 22, 2007.
“U.S. Role in Security in the Middle East,” February 19, 
2007.
“North Korea and diplomacy,” February 15, 2007.
“Presidential Powers in Time of War,” February 1, 2007.
“Congressional Oversight on Iraq,” January 9, 2007.
“Guantánamo Bay Interrogations,” January 18, 2007.
“Iraq Study Group,” December 7, 2006.
“Dialogue with Syria and Iran,” November 21, 2006.
“North Korea and Nuclear Weapons,” October 18, 2006.
“National Intelligence Estimate on Iraq,” September 28, 
2006.
“Military Commissions,” September 14, 2006.
“September 11th Five Years Later,” September 11, 2006.
“Middle East and U.N. diplomacy,” August 14, 2006.
“Cuba,” originally aired August 2, 2006.
“Lebanon,” July 26, 2006. 
“Middle East Crisis,” July 20, 2006.
“Global War on Terrorism and External Power,” July 12, 2006.
“Israel’s Inﬂ uence,” June 21, 2006.
“Global Politics of Oil,” June 15, 2006.
“Africa,” June 20, 2006
“National Investigations of Haditha Deaths,” June 1, 2006.
“National Security Agency and Domestic Phone Records,” May 
17, 2006.
“Hu Jintao’s Visit,” April 20, 2006.
“Iran and Nuclear Weapons,” April 13, 2006.
“General James Jones and NATO,” March 20, 2006.
“U.S. Strategy in Iraq,” March 14, 2006.
“Congressman John Murtha and War Debate,” February 13, 
2006.
“Palestinian elections,” January 26, 2006.
“Iran,” January 19, 2006.
“Canada’s Elections,” January 24, 2006.
“Weapons of Mass Destruction in Iraq,” June 27, 2004.

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
DVD, Video, Film, and Other Visual Media
“Letter to America; How Arabs View the United States,” (2001) 
45 minutes. An orginial BBC broadcast, available in DVD and 
VHS from Films for Humanities & Sciences. Phone: 800/257-5126 
or www.ﬁ lms.com ($129.95).
”NAFTA and the New Economic Frontier: Life Along the U.S./
Mexico Border,” (2001) 23 minutes. Available in DVD and VHS 
from Films for Humanities & Sciences. Phone: 800/257-5126 or 
www.ﬁ lms.com ($89.95).
”9/11 through Saudi Eyes,” (2002) 53 minutes. Available in DVD 
and VHS from Films for Humanities & Sciences. Phone: 800/257-
5126 or www.ﬁ lms.com ($149.95).
”Powerplay: End of an Empire,” (no date) 50 minutes. Available 
in DVD and VHS from Films for Humanities & Sciences. Phone: 
800/257-5126 or www.ﬁ lms.com ($149.95).
”The Battle for Islam,” an original BBCW production. (2005) 63 
minutes. Available in DVD and VHS from Films for Humanities & 
Sciences. Phone: 800/257-5126 or www.ﬁ lms.com ($149.95).
”Thomas L. Friedman Reporting: Does Europe Hate Us?,” A Dis-
covery Channel Production (2005) 45 minutes. Available in DVD 
and VHS from Films for Humanities & Sciences. Phone: 800/257-
5126 or www.ﬁ lms.com ($149.95).
”Waging War against the New Terrorism,” (2002) 23 minutes. 
Available in DVD and VHS from Films for Humanities & Sciences. 
Phone: 800/257-5126 or www.ﬁ lms.com ($89.95).
”Why the Hate? America, from a Muslim Point of View,” (2001) 
44 minutes. Available in DVD and VHS from Films for Humanities 
& Sciences. Phone: 800/257-5126 or www.ﬁ lms.com ($149.95).
”China on the Rise: Paul Solman Reports,” (2007) 77 minutes. 
Item 35882 available in VHS, DVD and DVD/Computer Rom 
from Films for Humanities & Sciences. Phone: 800/257-5126 or 
www.ﬁ lms.com ($159.95).
”Frontline: Return of the Taliban,” (2006) 60 minutes. Available 
for online viewing at www.pbs.org/wgbh//pages/frontline/
taliban/view or available for purchase at www.shoppbs.org/
product/index.jsp?productID=2477755 for $29.95 in VHS or DVD.
Nonprint Resources 265

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
266 Resources
Reading Lists
The national security reading lists here are highly visible within 
the government professional organizations. Any university 
course on national security would have a reading list for a par-
ticular semester or year but the lists here are often provided to 
civilian agency personnel or uniformed military as they ponder 
their work in national security. The authors regularly update their 
lists.
Congressman Ike Skelton, Democrat, 4th District, Missouri, 
Professional Reading List
www.house.gov/skelton/book_list.pdf
Congressman Skelton has had a keen interest in national security 
issues for virtually his entire career. His is an inﬂ uential voice in 
national security and military affairs.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Reading List
www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/jcs/reading-list.htm
The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is the highest statutory 
ofﬁ cer in the chain of command from the lowest enlistee to the 
president of the United States. His views can be highly inﬂ uential 
in national security affairs.
National Defense University President’s Reading List
www.ndu.edu/Library/ReadingList/NDUPReading.pdf
The National Defense University (NDU) prides itself on being the 
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff’s personal school for advanc-
ing professional military education. The readings cited by any 
NDU president are bound to become considered classics.
U.S. Army Chief of Staff’s Professional Reading List
www.army.mil/cmh-pg/reference/CSAList/CSAList.htm
The chief of staff of the Army is the senior Army ofﬁ cer. As such, 
he guides the future of the ground forces and their concerns. 
His orientation has a greater emphasis on ground operations by 
nature of the threat posed to his forces.
U.S. Navy Professional Reading List
www.navyreading.navy.mil
The Navy as a service often accentuates the importance of being 
“at sea with the ﬂ eet,” which is a hands-on orientation, but the 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
chief of naval operations and Navy bureaucracy increasingly also 
appreciate “book learning” in their efforts to modernize into the 
new millennium. Topics emphasize maritime operations, new 
technologies at sea, and other sea issues.
U.S. Marine Corps Reading List
https://www.marcent.usmc.mil/nipr/NIPR_Web_Reading_List.xls
The Marine Corps highly values education of its Corps. The read-
ings noted here will be discussed and remembered by the ﬁ nest 
of Marine Corps ofﬁ cers. The Marine emphasis is on amphibious 
operations and its links to the sea services.
Chief of Staff of the Air Force Reading List
www.af.mil/library/csafreading 
This list offers an overall approach to air operations, missile con-
cerns, and anti-missile works. The Air Force also puts a high pre-
mium on the use of technology in its education as do the other 
services.
U.S. Coast Guard Commandant’s Reading List
http://www.uscg.mil/LEADERSHIP/lead/reading.htm
The Coast Guard is now part of the Department of Homeland 
Security and is an increasingly important part of the nation’s 
national security community. The Coast Guard concentrates on 
border issues, coastal defense, and ties with other Coast Guard 
equivalent agencies around the world.
Industrial College of the Armed Forces Reading List
www.ndu.edu/info/icaf_reading_list.cfm
The Industrial College of the Armed Forces is the premier institu-
tion for considering the resource requirements to wage war and 
provide for peace. Their readings concentrate on acquisition, stra-
tegic resources, strategic leadership, and the links between mili-
tary and civilian defense contractors.
Joint Forces Staff College Reading List
www.jfsc.ndu.edu/current_students/documents_policies/documents/
reading_list/default.asp
The Joint Forces Staff College studies the operational aspects of 
jointness within the United States. Its mission includes preparing 
junior ofﬁ cers for operating at the theater level and to work in 
Joint assignments at the operational level.
Nonprint Resources 267

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
269
Glossary
In addition to the terms listed in the text, this glossary includes a 
number of terms crucial to understanding national security.
Africa Command The newest uniﬁ ed geographic command to 
operate for U.S. interests in Africa
AIDS acquired immunodeﬁ ciency syndrome
AQI al Qaeda in Iraq, the term for al Qaeda groups operating 
speciﬁ cally in Iraq
AWOL Absent without leave
baathists Members of the Baath Party who were arguably 
strongly behind the anti-U.S. insurgency in post–Saddam Hus-
sein Iraq in hopes of regaining political power 
bird ﬂ u avian inﬂ uenza
C3I Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence
C4ISR Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intel-
ligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaisance
CentCom U.S. Central Command, headquartered in Tampa; it is 
responsibile for the U.S. interests in the theater from Kazakhstan 
and Pakistan westward to Kenya and Somalia
CJCS chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
combatant command A joint military command composed of 
two or more services
counterinsurgency operations Activities falling into the cate-
gories of civil-military operations, combat operations, and 

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
270 Glossary
information operations that are aimed at thwarting all aspects of 
rebels’ moves to weaken a national regime
crystal meth A form of methamphetamines
cyberterrorism Terrorism that occurs online or across the Internet
deployable army The portion of the armed forces available to 
be sent for a task away from their bases of operations
deployments Assignments, generally away from their bases or 
posts, that military ofﬁ cers take when assigned a certain ordered 
task
DHS Department of Homeland Security
DNI Director of National Intelligence
DoD Department of Defense
DoS Department of State
ECP entry control point, a checkpoint for a closed area in a mili-
tary theater
EFPs explosive force penetrators; weapons being used in Iraq 
that the Bush administration believes are being supplied by Iran 
to further confound the conditions in Iraq
EUCOM U.S. European Command, the theater charged with 
interests in Europe
exceptionalism The idea that the United States operates with 
different values or mores in its interactions with other states or as 
a comment on its historic experience
Four Modernizations The modernization priorities set forth by 
the Communist Party of China, initially by Zhou Enlai in 1973 but 
also by Deng Xiaoping in 1978, to lead China toward the major 
modernization and economic growth characterizing emergent 
China today; these modernizations, in order of priority, are agri-
culture, industry, science and technology, and the military
Geneva Conventions Four conventions and three protocols 
forming the basis of international humanitarian law through their 
widely respected use since the 1860s, although they were substan-
tially rewritten in 1949
glasnost The term Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev used for 
his gradual opening of the political and economic system

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Glossary 271
globalization A historical process that has led to a much greater 
integration of economies and states around world, with much 
more immediate effects on all economies involved
Golden Triangle The region of northern Burma, Thailand, and 
Laos that supplies much of the heroin in the world
governance building The moves to help a state strengthen its 
capability to govern effectively 
global war on terrorism President Bush’s term for the ﬁ ght against 
al Qaeda and associated groups in the international system
H1N1 virus The current strain of avian inﬂ uenza making its 
way around the globe, arousing fears of a pandemic ﬂ u
Hamas The largest and arguably most signiﬁ cant political move-
ment in the Palestinian territories; it won a signiﬁ cant portion of the 
2006 election but the United States, Israel, and the European Union 
see it as a violent organization; thus, it is not a negotiating partner
HIV human immunodeﬁ ciency virus
IEDs improvised explosive devices, roadside bombs; these have 
been particularly devastating in Iraq
insurgency An organized action using subversion and antigov-
ernment armed conﬂ ict to undermine a regime
Islamists The term for those Islamic adherents who want to 
return to a much more traditional, orthodox Islam of the prior 
millennium, often associated with Wahhabism of Saudi Arabia
ISR intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
JCS Joint Chiefs of Staff
jihadists Those ﬁ ghting against non-Islamic civilizations as they 
ﬁ nd advocated in the Koran
just war theory A long-standing philosophical test, dating to St. 
Thomas Aquinas, of how, when, and why states wage war
Kurds A Sunni Islamic population that is stateless and spread 
across Iraq, Turkey, Syria, Iran, and a few other states; the Kurds 
do not want to be part of the post–Saddam Hussein Iraq
LOC lines of communication in a military threater
long war The term for the prolonged anticipated conﬂ ict in the 
Middle East and elsewhere against terrorism and in trying to pro-
vide democratic stability in Iraq

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
272 Glossary
Manhattan Project The Roosevelt administration’s effort to win 
the race to build an atomic weapon. Named after the borough of 
Manhattan, it operated in many laboratories across the nation but 
the ﬁ nal stages were concentrated in a secret compound in New 
Mexico. The Project’s work culminated in the ﬁ rst atomic blast on 
July 16, 1945
methamphetamines Highly addictive, artiﬁ cially created drugs 
that have resulted in a national epidemic; also called meth 
MFN most favored nation, a trading condition granted between 
partners
MNF multinational forces, the coalitions formed as in Iraq to 
address a broad-ranging threat around the world
mujahideen The Islamic ﬁ ghters in Afghanistan who waged an 
insurgency against Soviet invaders in the 1980s, receiving help 
from the Central Intelligence Agency and Osama bin Laden in 
their efforts
NAFTA The North American Free Trade Agreement, signed by 
Mexico, the United States, and Canada, went into effect in 1994; it 
promotes free trade between the partners
nation building The activities, conducted by militaries or civil-
ians, intended to create a stronger state, including humanitar-
ian assistance, conﬂ ict resolution, peacekeeping, and institution 
building
National Guard The men and women who sign up on behalf of 
defending their states as generations past signed up for their state 
militias, which the Guard replaced in 1903 under the Dick Act
National Reserve The men and women who sign up to be a 
“waiting” force for deployment in a national security scenario, as 
is occurring regularly to the Guard and Reserve ofﬁ cers in today’s 
force with multiple deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan
neoconservatives People who often were former leftists (includ-
ing former Communists), who have moved to the political right, 
often advocating stronger defense spending; this group is believed 
to be the prime movers toward war against Iraq, such as former 
Department of Defense ofﬁ cials Paul Wolfowitz, Douglas Feith, 
and Richard Perle, as well as writers William Kristol and Robert 
Kagan. 
NGO nongovernmental organization

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Glossary 273
NorthCom U.S. Northern Command, which encompasses U.S. 
national interests in the homeland and Canada
NSA National Security Agency, which monitors signals intelli-
gence for the United States
NSS The National Security Strategy of the United States
PACOM U.S. Paciﬁ c Command, which is responsible for the U.S. 
national security issues of the Paciﬁ c basin westward to India
perestroika The term President Mikhail Gorbachev used for the 
restructuring of Soviet society, working hand in hand with glas-
nost
PLA People’s Liberation Army of China
PLO Palestine Liberation Organization
POTUS president of the United States
PRC People’s Republic of China
preemption The doctrine stressed, if not introduced, by Presi-
dent George W. Bush to authorize the United States to attack pos-
sible adversaries before attacks on the United States or its assets
ROE rules of engagement, the rules governing the military’s use 
of force
RPG rocket-propelled grenade
SARS severe acute respiratory syndrome
SecDef Secretary of Defense
SecState Secretary of State
sharia Islamic law, based on the Koran, that Islamic believers 
would have govern human behavior
Shiites The minority sect of Islam that is largely associated with 
Iran, Iraq, and eastern Saudi Arabia; this sect believes Moham-
med’s son-in-law, Ali, was the legitimate inheritor of the power 
of Islam
SOCOM U.S. Special Operations Command
SOUTHCOM U.S. Southern Command, responsible for Latin 
American interests of the United States
Sunnis The larger branch of Islam, which is spread through-
out the world except for Iran, Iraq, and small pockets around the 
world

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
274 Glossary
splittism The Chinese term for independence advocacy in 
Taiwan
surge President George W. Bush’s strategy to send a higher con-
centration of troops into Baghdad for a brief period to stabilize the 
situation and give time to the Iraqi government to gain credibility
UAV unmanned aerial vehicle
Vietnam syndrome The fear that the U.S. military will be drawn 
into another unwinnable conﬂ ict overseas
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) weapons that can kill 
large numbers of people in a single strike; these generally 
include weapons from nuclear, radiological, biological, or chemi-
cal sources

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
275
Index
9/11 (September 11, 2001), 1, 2, 32
 shock of, 4
 See also National security, post-9/11
9/11 Commission (Kean-Hamilton 
Commission), 12, 28–29
Abizaid, John, 123
Abu Ghraib prison, 27, 51, 61
Afghanistan, 4, 8, 9–10, 11, 47, 58, 60, 
64–65, 71, 73, 83
 drug trafﬁ cking in, 21
 See also Taliban, the
Africa, 6, 46, 76, 84. See also AIDS, in 
Africa; See also individually listed 
African countries
Agenda for Peace, 3–4
Ahmadinejad, Mahmoud, 16, 96, 124
AIDS, 32
 in Africa, 20
Air University, 232–233
al Qaeda, 4, 10, 34, 35, 38–40, 48–49, 
87, 92
Albright, Madeleine K., 53, 124–125
Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, 
bombing of, 4, 27, 67
American Enterprise Institute for 
Public Policy Research, 204
American Foreign Policy Council, 
204–205
Annan, Koﬁ , 82, 126
Arafat, Yasir, 16
Aral Sea, 6
Argentina, 81
Arms Control Association, 205
Ashcroft, John, 56
Asia, 6, 46, 84, 88–96. See also individu-
ally listed Asian countries
Atlantic Council of the United States, 
205–206
Australia, 44, 71
Avian ﬂ u, 20–21
“Balance of power” (realpolitik) global 
political system, 85–88
Bali. See Indonesia
Bangladesh, 50
bin Laden, Osama, 4, 8, 38–40, 126–127
Blair, Tony, 127–129
Bolivia, 21
Bolton, John, 95
Bosnia, 4, 71
Boxer, Barbara, 13
Brazil, 81
Bremer, Paul L., 129–130
Brookings Institution, 206–207
Brown, Harold, 5
Bush, George H. W., 39, 52, 64
Bush, George W., 1, 5, 7, 10, 13, 24, 26, 
34, 38, 62, 130–132
 address to the nation concerning the 
invasion of Iraq (2003), 187–188
 announcement by, concerning end 
of combat operations in Iraq 
(2003), 9, 188–191
 attitude of, toward global warming, 
41, 46
 and the “axis of evil,” 17, 87, 94, 96
 commitment of, to spreading 
democracy, 12, 35
 and First Amendment rights, 56–57

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
276 Index
Bush, George W. (continued)
 and the invasion of Iraq, 8–9, 44–45, 
65
 national security debates of, with 
Congress, 69–70
 policy of, toward Islam, 47
 policy of, toward Latin America, 
45–46
 policy of, toward the Middle East, 
11, 15–16
 policy of, toward North Korea, 94–95
 reelection of (2004), 13
 relations of, with Australia and 
Japan, 44
 relationship with Putin, 36
 State of the Union Address (2002), 
159–162
 State of the Union Address (2003), 
173–179
 State of the Union Address (2006), 
193–196
 State of the Union Address (2007), 
198–202
 United Nations General Assembly 
address (2002), 168–173
 West Point Graduation speech 
(2002), 162–168
 See also Iraq War (2003–)
Cambone, Steven, 25
Canada, 4, 20, 76, 83
Carnegie, Andrew, 81
Carter, Jimmy, 58, 89
Casey, William, 132–133
Castro, Fidel, 133–135
Cato Institute, 207–208
Center for American Progress, 208–209
Center for Defense Information, 209
Center for International Policy, 
209–210
Center for the National Security 
Interest, 210
Center for Naval Analyses, 231
Center for Security Policy, 210
Center for Strategic and Budgetary 
Assessments, 211
Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, 211–212
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 25, 
26–27, 28–29, 233
Chalabi, Ahmed, 135–136
Chávez, Hugo. See Frías, Hugo Rafael 
Chávez
Chen Shui-bian, 18, 42, 90–91, 137–139
Cheney, Dick, 11, 48, 69, 139–141
Chiang Ching-kuo, 90
Chiang Kai-shek, 89, 90
Chile, 23, 81
China. See People’s Republic of China 
(PRC)
Chinese Communist Party (CCP), 43, 
55, 80, 89
Chinese National Party. See Guom-
ingtang (GMD [Chinese National 
Party])
“Clash of civilizations,” 47
Clinton, Bill, 13, 38, 50, 53, 88, 91
 and the “Agreed Framework” 
policy toward North Korea, 
17, 94
Clinton, Hillary Rodham, 141–142
Cobra II (Gordon and Trainor), 8
Cold War/Cold War era (1947–1989), 
2, 3, 4, 5–6, 7, 18, 31–32, 36, 49
 defense budgets of the United States 
during, 79
 post–Cold War military spending 
and the “peace dividend,” 3, 
52–53
Colombia, 2, 21, 22–23, 38, 71
Council on Foreign Relations, 212–213
Cuba, 87
Defense Reorganization Act (1947), 25
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea 
(DPRK), 17
 nuclear weapons program of, 17, 
93–95
 See also Clinton, Bill, and the 
“Agreed Framework” policy 
toward North Korea
Democratic Progressive Party 
(Taiwan), 90
Deng Xiaoping, 42, 43
Desert Shield, 3
Desert Storm, 3
East Timor, 4
Egypt, 15, 25, 35, 47, 83
Eikenberry, Karl, 142

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Index 277
European Defense Agency, 79
European Union (EU), 79, 86
Federation of American Scientists, 
213–214
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
28–29, 234
Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (FEMA), 56
Federation of American Scientists, 
213–214
Fiasco (Ricks), 8
Foreign Policy Association, 214
Foreign Policy Research Institute, 
214–215
Franks, Tommy, 142–143
Frías, Hugo Rafael Chávez, 39, 
136–137
Friends Committee on National 
Legislation, 215–216
Future of Iraq Project, 24
Gadhaﬁ , Muammar, 39
Galbraith, Peter W., 143
Gandhi, Indira, 49
Garner, Jay, 143–144
Gates, Bill, 144–145
Gates, Robert, 68, 78
Geneva Conference (1949), 59
Ghali, Boutros Boutros, 3
Gingrich, Newt, 52
Global warming, 41, 46
Globalization, 6–7, 21, 54
Globalsecurity.org, 216
Gonzalez, Alberto, 56
Gorbachev, 39
Gore, Al, 33, 145–146
Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce 
(GAO), 24, 234–235
Great Britain, 59, 60, 71, 83–84
Greenpeace, USA, 216–217
Greenspan, Alan C., 146–147
Guantánamo Bay detention center, 
27, 51
Gulf War (1990–1991), 53, 63, 86
Guomingtang (GMD [Chinese 
National Party]), 89
Haiti, 53
Hamas, 16
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld (2006), 29
Hastert, Dennis, 13
Hatch, Orin, 13
Helms, Jesse, 79
Henry L. Stimson Center, 217
Heritage Foundation, 217–218
Herzegovina, 4, 71
Hobbes, Thomas, 87
Hong Kong, 83–84
Hoover Institution on War, Revolution 
and Peace (Stanford University), 
218–219
Hu Jintao, 147
Hudson Institute, 219
Huntington, Samuel, 47
Hurricane Katrina, 6, 28, 56
Hussein, Saddam, 3, 4, 8, 10, 34, 38, 86
 execution of, 39, 51
Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 33
An Inconvenient Truth (2006), 33
India, 15, 41, 46, 86
 attack on the Indian Parliament 
(2001), 93
 relationship of, with the United 
States, 49–50
India-Pakistan nuclear standoff, 
92–93
Indonesia, 19, 20
Industrial College of the Armed 
Forces, 235–236
Institute for Defense Analyses, 
231–232
Institute for Defense and Disarmament 
Studies, 219–220
Institute for Policy Studies, 220
International Assessment and Strategy 
Center, 220–221
International Institute for Strategic 
Studies, 221–222
Interrogation techniques and facilities, 
51, 60
Iran, 14, 45
 nuclear weapons program of, 
95–96
Iraq, 2, 4, 8–9, 14, 34–35, 47, 58, 71, 83
 attempt to form democratic political 
system in, 10–12
Iraq Study Group, 12

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
278 Index
Iraq War (2003–), 8–9, 44–46, 68–69, 73
 criticism of, 48–49, 53, 66
 debates concerning troop levels in, 
62–63
 economic toll of, 60
 and the “surge” policy, 14, 64–65
 as “war of choice” opposed to a 
“war of necessity,” 65–66
Islam, 59
 as a threat to the security of the 
United States, 47–48
Israel, 15–16, 71
Jamestown Foundation, 222
Japan, 16, 19, 44, 55
Jewish Institute for National Security 
Affairs, 222–223
Joseph, Bob, 95
Junichiro Koizumi, 19
Kagan, Robert, 10
Karzai, Hamid, 8, 21, 148
Kashmir, 92
Kean-Hamilton Commission. See 9/11 
Commission
Kerry, John, 68
Khalilzad, Zalmay, 148
Khomeini, Ruhollah (Ayatollah 
Khomeini), 39, 96
Kim Jong Il, 39, 148–149
Kosovo, 4, 12, 37, 71
Kristol, William, 10, 149
Kuwait, 3, 52
Latin America, 21, 45–46, 53, 77, 84, 86
 national security in and the patria, 
80–81
 See also individually listed Latin 
American  countries
Lebanon, 35, 47
Leviathan (Hobbes), 87
The Lexington Institute, 223
Liberia, 4, 71
Manifest Destiny, 2
Mao Zedong, 41, 89
Marine Corps University, 236
McCain, John, 68
McNamara, Robert, 25
McVeigh, Timothy, 67
Mexican Revolution (1914–1918), 77
Mexico, 4, 21, 76–77, 83
Middle East, 44, 45. See also individually 
listed Middle Eastern countries
Military service, voluntary enlistment 
versus a national draft, 58
Miloˆsevica, Slobodan, 39
Monroe Doctrine, 2
Mubarak, Hosni, 15
Mugabe, Robert, 150
Mullen, Michael, 45
Multilateralism, 81–83
Musharraf, Pervez, 15, 92, 93
Myanmar, 21
Nation building, 12, 35, 63–64
National Defense University, 
236–237
National Guard, 25, 58, 69
National Institute for Public Policy, 
223–224
National Priorities Project, 224
National security, 1–4, 97
 and budget deﬁ cits, 60
 changing nature of, 12
 difference of from homeland 
security, 55–56
 difﬁ culty of deﬁ ning, 2, 4–5
 and economic security, 6
 effect of debates concerning, on the 
armed forces, 69–70
 environmental and medical issues 
of, 6, 20–21
 as fundamental responsibility of 
government, 2
 funding for speciﬁ c national security 
tools, 51–54
 and globalization, 6–7, 54
 new issues concerning, 5–7
 overview of national security 
strategy (2006), 197–198
 “personalization” of, 38–40
 as a political or societal concern, 40
 and preparation for traditional and 
nontraditional warfare, 61–63
 in the private and public sectors, 
60–61
 and the protection of civil rights/
liberties, 57–58
 as public policy, 1

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Index 279
 relevancy of traditional national 
security, 67
 role of military in, 33–34
 security issues beyond Iraq, 14–16
 unilateralism/multilateralism 
debate concerning, 81–83
 and working with allies, 72–73
 See also National security, govern-
ment involvement in; National 
security, nontraditional threats to; 
National security, post-9/11
National security, government 
involvement in, 23–29
 Agency for International Develop-
ment, 52
 Coast Guard, 28
 Congressional Research Service, 
23–24
 Department of Defense (DoD), 
25–26, 61
 Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS), 27–28, 55–56
 Department of Justice (DoJ), 28–29
 Department of State, 24–25, 52
 executive branch, 24
 Government Accountability Ofﬁ ce 
(GAO), 24, 234–235
 legislative branch, 23, 40
 National Security Agency (NSA), 29
 role of the judiciary in, 29
National security, nontraditional 
threats to, 20–23
 computer crime, 7, 32
 drug trafﬁ cking, 21–22
 global warming, 41, 46
 immigration, 22
 international trade, 22–23
 medical security, 20–21, 32–33
 U.S. debt, 54–55
National security, post-9/11, 7–12, 
25–26, 97
 and the intelligence community, 
26–27
 and the national legislative institu-
tions, 13–14
 and the preemption versus preven-
tion debate, 7
National Security Network, 224–225
National Strategy Forum, 225
National War College, 237–238
Natural Resources Defense Council, 
225–226
Naval War College, 238
Neoconservatives, 10–11
New American Foundation, 226–227
Nixon, Richard, 58
 and an all-volunteer armed 
forces, 68
 and the opening of China, 89
Non-Aligned Movement, 49
North American Free Trade Agree-
ment (NAFTA), 23
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO), 9–10, 73, 82–83
 expansion of into Eastern Europe, 36
North Korea. See Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea (DPRK)
Nuclear Control Institute, 227
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
(NPT), 50
Nuclear weapons, 6, 15, 16, 34, 49, 65
 in Iran, 95–96
 in North Korea, 17, 93–95
 in the Soviet Union, 31
 and terrorism, 32
On War (von Clausewitz), 77
Operation Desert Storm, 52
Pace, Peter, 150
Pahlavi, Reza (Shah of Iran), 96
Pakistan, 15, 47, 49–50. See also 
India-Pakistan nuclear standoff
Palestine, 15–16
Pandemics, 6, 20–21, 27
Partido Revolucionario Institucional 
(Institutional Party of the 
Revolution [Mexico]), 77
Peace Action, 227
“Peace dividend,” 3, 52–53
Pelosi, Nancy, 13, 14
People’s Liberation Army (PLA), 18, 
63, 80
 expenditures for, 78
 modernization of, 42, 43–44, 49, 90
People’s Republic of China (PRC), 
12, 16, 17–19, 20, 21, 51, 55, 63, 
71, 86
 Chinese-European relations, 46
 concerns of, over North Korea, 95

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
280 Index
People’s Republic of China (PRC) 
(continued)
 economic growth of as a threat to 
the United States, 41–44, 49
 geographical borders of, 75
 interest of, in Africa, 46
 as the Middle Kingdom, 43, 91
 military budget of (2007), 78
 and national sovereignty, 83–84
 policy of, toward Iran, 96
 primary security goal of, 42
 and Taiwan, 88–91
 See also Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP)
Peru, 21
Petraeus, David, 34, 53, 63, 151
Philippines, 20
Powell, Colin, 24–25, 53, 151–152
 United Nations Security Council 
address (2003), 179–187
Powell/Weinberger Doctrine, 63
Putin, Vladimir, 36, 38, 152–153
Quadrennial Defense Review Report of 
the United States (2005), 196–197
RAND Corporation, 232
Rangel, Charles, 58
Rankin, Jeannette, 3
Reagan, Ronald, 39, 52
Reid, Harry, 14
Rice, Condoleezza, 16, 25, 35, 57, 
153–154
Ridge, Tom, 27
Rumsfeld, Donald, 14, 24, 25, 26–27, 
57, 62, 154–155
Russia
 antidemocratic tendencies in, 
36–37, 46
 and Chechnyan rebels, 37
 intolerance of pro-Western regimes, 
37–38
 military failures of, 37
 nuclear capability of, 37
 as a security threat to the United 
States, 35–38
Sadat, Anwar, 15
Saudi Arabia, 15, 25, 35, 47
Security Policy Working Group, 228
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 
(SARS), 6, 20
Shiite Muslims, 35, 45
Shinseki, Eric, 11, 62
Shinzo Abe, 19
Sistani, Ali Husaini (Grand Ayatollah), 
125–126
Six-Party Talks, 17, 94–95
Somalia, 4, 11, 53
South Africa, 83
South Korea, 95
Sovereignty, 83–84
Soviet Union, 3, 31, 84
 breakup of, 35–36, 52, 71
Spain, 71
Spann, Johnny Michael, 27
Sunni Muslims, 35, 45
Suskind, Ron, 8
Taiwan, 20, 42, 43, 46, 71
 lack of global allies, 19
 post–World War II recession in, 90
 relationship of, with China, 88–91
and Sino-U.S. relations, 18–19
“status quo” deﬁ nitions of, 91
under Chen Shui-bian, 90–91
Taiwan Relations Act (1979), 18, 91, 
157–159
Taliban, the, 4, 8, 15, 59, 65, 92, 93
Terrorism, 27, 33
 and the national character of the 
United States, 56–57
 threat of compared to Cold War 
threats, 31–32
 treatment of captured terrorists by 
the United States, 59–60
 See also al-Qaeda; bin Laden, Osama
Thailand, 21
 and the Thai baht crisis, 54
Truman, Harry S., 5
Turkey, 21
Uniform Code of Military Justice, 61
Unilateralism, 81–83
Union of Concerned Scientists, 228
Unipolarity/multipolarity/bipolarity, 
84–85
United Arab Emirates, 47
United Nations, 36, 72–73, 82
United States, 2, 41, 84, 85

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
Index 281
 concern of over Mexico, 76–77
 and the creation of democratic gov-
ernance in other nations, 35, 63–64
 debt of, 55, 60
 economic imperative of, 77–79
 “exceptionalism” of, 63–64, 70
 foreign aid of, 79–80
 geographical imperative of, 75–77
 as the “global” police, 70–71
 involvement of, in the Iraq War and 
its role in world leadership, 44–46
 military budgets of (1945, 2007, 
2008), 78–79
 military spending versus nonmili-
tary statecraft spending, 79–81
 national character of, 56–57
 perception of, as anti-Islamic, 19
 resiliency of the economy in, 78
 sacriﬁ ces made by, because of the 
Iraq War, 68–69
 security of, after the invasion of Iraq, 
34–35
 sovereignty of, 83–84
 spending of, on natural disasters, 80
 support of, for Taiwan, 89, 90–91
 See also 9/11 (September 11, 2001); 
“Balance of power” (realpolitik) 
global political system; India, rela-
tionship of with the United States; 
Islam, as a threat to the security of 
the United States; National secu-
rity; People’s Republic of China 
(PRC), economic growth of as a 
threat to the United States; Russia, 
as a security threat to the United 
States
Uruguay, 81
U.S. Army War College, 238–239
U.S. Congress, 3, 13–14, 40, 54, 70
U.S. Department of Defense (DoD), 
25–26, 61, 233–234
 directive of concerning SSTR 
(security, stability, transition, 
reconstruction) operations (2005), 
26, 191–193
U.S. Information Agency (USIA), 53
U.S. Senate, 13
U.S. Supreme Court, 29
Vélez, Álvaro Uribe, 23, 38
Venezuela, 12
Veterans, care of, 67–68
Vietnam, 20
“Vietnam Syndrome,” 66
Vietnam War (1960–1975), 52, 66,  68
von Clausewitz, Karl, 77
Walter Reed Army Medical Center, 67
War Powers Act (1973), 29
War Resisters League, 229
Warfare, traditional and nontradi-
tional, 61–63
 “asymmetrical” warfare, 62
 and Counter-Insurgency Manual 
FM3–24, 63
 “force on force conﬂ ict,” 62
Washington, George, 2–3
Washington Institute for Near East 
Policy, 229
Wolfowitz, Paul D., 10–11, 62
Wolfowitz doctrine, 85
Women in International Security, 
229–230
World Policy Institute, 230
World Security Institute, 230–231
World Trade Center, bombing of 
(1993), 27
World War I, 2, 65, 77
World War II, 3, 65, 68
Yeltsin, Boris, 36, 38
Yemen, 71

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com                              ABC-CLIO                              1-800-368-6868
About the Author
Cynthia Watson is chair of the department of Security Studies 
and has taught at the National War College since 1992, having 
also been associate dean and director of the Electives Program. 
Currently, Dr. Watson teaches courses on China, east Asia, and the 
politics of humiliation. Her previous works include National Secu-
rity (2002), Nation-Building (2004), and U.S. Military Service (2006), 
all published by ABC-CLIO. She has also published Military Edu-
cation (2006) under the Praeger Security International Series. Dr. 
Watson is a popular speaker and serves on the boards of a number 
of professional societies.

